

WAITING FOR RAIN
ELIOT was always a careful listener.
Some phrases lay in his mind for years.
Others were more quickly put to use.
On 29 October 1914, he heard Collingwood, lecturing on Aristotle's de Anima , talk of how the soul might be supposed to leave the body and return to it later.
Eliot scribbled a reference to Frazer's treatment of such experiences in The Golden Bough .
By February 1915, he was sending Aiken ‘Suppressed Complex’, a poem about a soul-like shadow dancing in the firelight of a woman's room, before passing out of the window.
In 1916 Eliot recalled ‘Tylor's dreaming aborigine who finds that his soul in sleep can part company with his body and roam the forests…
‘. In ‘The Hollow Men’, the concept of wandering souls would link anthropology and the romantic world of Dowson with his
hollow lands
Where the poor, dead people stray,
Ghostly, pitiful and gray.
The transfer of souls in reincarnation would be important for The Waste Land , but in 1915 the ‘revitalizing of the classics’, as Eliot later described one of the effects of anthropology, seems most apparent in ‘Mr. Apollinax’ where we are made very aware of the primitive, and particularly sexual aspects of classical mythology.
In the few years that followed, Eliot adopted various strategies to keep his poetry flowing.
In each the primitive, sometimes bestial is joined obdurately to the modern and sophisticated.
City men walk by the Thames like wolves in ‘Le Directeur’; ‘Mélange Adultère de Tout’ links London banker and giraffe-headed African.
part of the reason for this is no doubt Eliot's hostility to ideas about ‘social progress’ one aspect of which was the eugenics movement.
Reviewing  McBride, Eliot quoted from that writer's conclusion that, given proper education of mind and body, ‘the next generation may start at a very slightly higher level of capacity than their fathers’.
The quatrain poems give the lie to that.
Also important is his sympathy for ‘the classicist point of view’ which, he stated in 1916 ‘has been defined as essentially a belief in Original Sin’.
The quatrain poems bind up such sympathies with a way of thinking which owed much to anthropology and Eliot's growing wish to include in his work the worlds of both the savage and the city.
In 1918 Eliot wrote of the need for artists to be at once very primitive and very sophisticated; he praised Lewis's Tarr as being ‘like our civilization criticized, our acrobatics animadverted upon adversely, by an orang-outang of genius, Tarzan of the Apes’.
Eliot's Sweeney fulfilled this function.
A caricature of Dr Sweeny's ‘manly’ man, he is a modern troglodyte, but one with a rich ancestry.
Book IX was by far the most thumbed section of Eliot's Odyssey , and it was the story of the Cyclops that ‘savage man’ which he read most attentively.
Though he found the passionate irresponsibility of the Homeric world ‘shocking’, preferring its Virgilian successor ‘because it was a more civilized world of dignity, reason and order’, Eliot also realized that the all-important ‘mind of Europe’ was one ‘which changes, and that this change is a development which abandons nothing en route , which does not superannuate either Shakespeare, or Homer, or the rock drawing of the Magdalenian draughtsmen’.
It contained not only the Homeric, Cyclops and all, but also the troglodytic itself with its own representations, the dawn of the mind.
The Cyclops enters Eliot's poetry after a line which seems to mock the rising of the formulaic Homeric ‘rosy-fingered dawn’ in the poem ‘Sweeney Erect’when:
Morning stirs the feet and hands
(Nausicaa and polypheme).
It dawns on us that we are back at temporal beginnings and slipping down the evolutionary tree.
Refusing to let even this distorted version  of myth lie still, the next lines confirm the evolutionary idea, lowering its level while at the same time raising the domestic temperature to the tropical:
Gesture of orang-outang
Rises from the sheets in steam.
Seedy modern guest house or brothel becomes primitive jungle.
Somewhere in between is a meeting on a Greek island.
Sweeney's encounter with ‘the epileptic on the bed’ parallels that of Nausicaa not with Odysseus but, more shockingly, with ‘Polypheme’.
Sweeney's name pronounces him of the lineage of a man who sold human flesh for butchermeat, a ‘demon barber’.
Eliot traces the line further back into primitive prehistory by an explicatory aligning of his protagonist and a putative ancestor, the Cyclops, who devoured Odysseus's comrades.
When Nausicaa meets Polypheme beauty meets the beast.
It is also the meeting of the cultured city dweller, who led Odysseus from undergrowth to city palace, with the savage Cyclops who wished to eat the hero in a cave.
The absurd encounter represented in Eliot's parenthesis is erotic, but also cannibal, each aspect reinforcing the outrageous horror-comedy of the other.
The situation and its elements foreshadow the later confrontation of Sweeney and Doris on their ‘cannibal isle’.
The paralleling of Sweeney and the Cyclops here does on a small scale the work of the anthropologists' comparative method, ‘to make manifest the similarities and identities underlying the customs of races very remote in every way from each other’, though both are part of the ‘mind of Europe’.
The artifice of the opening stanzas with their
paint me…
paint me…
Display me…
sets us at a painterly remove from decorously observed suffering and does little to prepare us for the replacement of the distant tangled hair of Ariadne by immediate presence of the directly primitive
This withered root of knots of hair
Slitted below and gashed with eyes…
The Classical gives way to the savage and language grows hyperactive.
As the poem progresses it is beast, not beauty, which meets beast.
‘Root’ is normally associated with a single hair, not ‘knots’of it.
‘Root’ here links the figure in the sheets to a tree from which life has drained, yet soon it will come alive with galvanic motion.
The resurrection of dead life through the repetition of supposed past actions will be a theme of the poem, and the poem will also be about suggesting a ‘root’ for primitive (which here includes apelike primitive) behaviour through mythological explanation which involves the merciless demystification of myth.
Eliot has learned from his anthropology.
Stanza three's shockingly different mythology prepares us for ‘This withered root’.
When Nausicaa meets Polypheme mythology is cut up and reassembled to offer a shocking explanation of what underlies it, a parenthetical explanation which throws a provoking light on the relations between men and women, between civilization and savagery, between present and past.
The second half of the verse, ‘Gesture of orang-outang/ Rises from the sheets in steam’ simultaneously forces us back into human prehistory, before even polyphemus, and forward into the present of Doris and Mrs Turner, since monkey evolves into human where ‘orang-outang’becomes homo erectus ; yet ‘knots of hair’makes the modern return to the ape, and shaving Sweeney, for all his performing the action of his namesake, the demon barber, seems as crude and brutal as the Cyclops — such is the grotesquely comic evolutionary irony of the loss of hair.
The poem lets us posit an evolutionary series, Orang-outang  Cyclops  Sweeney but the way in which these three are introduced and relate to one another upsets any simple progressive development by raising questions about what evolutionists and anthropologists discussed as ‘reversion’ and ‘degeneration’, countering all optimistic ideas about the growth of humanity.
Sweeney has no sooner stood up and shaved than he appears in a vision of reversion taking the form of the second parenthesis, the importance of whose material strains against the parenthetical format, guiding our reading of the poem:
(The lengthened shadow of a man
Is history, said Emerson
Who had not seen the silhouette
Of Sweeney straddled in the sun.)
Sweeney is a weapon against a too hopeful view of history.
Emerson's essay on ‘history’ begins, ‘There is one mind common to all individual men’, whereas Eliot's anthropological reading had taught him to be wary of the nineteenth-century assumption of what was ‘in the words of M. Lévy-Bruhl, the uniformity of mind’.
As poet, Eliot makes devastating use of such an assumed uniformity.
Inverting the ‘savage philosopher’— a savage who attempts to reason like a modern — Eliot produces a modern who behaves like a savage, shockingly contradicting the idea of progress and modern ‘self-reliance’.
Emerson wrote that he could find ‘the primeval world…in myself, but his thinking self is seen as confident master of that world.
As a commentary on such sentiments Eliot's poem reads with a vengeance.
His criticism of Lévy-Bruhl for overstressing the distance between the savage and the modern mind shows that for Eliot the two were linked, but Lévy-Bruhl's stress on the different, apparently unreasonable nature of the savage leads to the modern Sweeney whose world is far removed from the sweet reason of Emerson.
Sweeney shocks because he shows so clearly the effect of lack of themis .
Harrison had written of such a lack among the Cyclopes.
In Themis she stressed the need for group rather than individual values in conducting life and saw them as the foundation of religion.
Sweeney cannot be outgrowm, but must be controlled.
Eliot, however, is content to show this here without curbing Sweeney's activities; they are too useful as violently funny weapons against the high priests of the progressive individualism of Eliot's youth, whom he saw as false prophets of a rigid pseudo-themis, ‘Matthew and Waldo, guardians of the faith, /The army of unalterable law.’
Sweeney stands against those whose personal taste is too closely linked to morality in a falsely genteel way.
Himself unspeaking, armed with his razor he reduces life to the level of a primitive ‘shriek’ with which ‘the ladies of the corridor’, despite the way in which they ‘Call witness to their principles/ And deprecate the lack of taste’, find themselves inescapably ‘involved’.
just as there is a tension between the  evolutionary ups and downs of the hairy epileptic on the bed who ‘Jacknifes upward’, and the shaving ‘Sweeney Erect’, so there is set against the prostrate unreason indicated by ‘The epileptic on the bed [who]/Curves backward, clutching at her sides, another woman who later walks upright:
But Doris, towelled from the bath,
Enters padding on broad feet,
Bringing sal volatile
And a glass of brandy neat.
Arriving like a final dea ex machina , Doris's condition makes her like an ironic version of that goddess in Tennyson's ‘oenone’, ‘Idalian Aphrodite beautiful, /Fresh as the foam, new-bathed in paphian wells.’
Certainly there is more mythology behind the poem.
Moody thinks that ‘the final stanza may allude to a variant of Ariadne's tale, which has it that she did not die of a broken heart but was loved by Bacchus’.
The relevance of this variant comes earlier in the poem whose opening stanzas call for a painting of Ariadne deserted on Naxos.
What follows connects Sweeney both with his mate, an ‘orang-outang’, and with a god, ‘polypheme’ being Poseidon's son.
Moreover, Sweeney is an ironic Bacchus to his own Ariadne.
Eliot had written an earlier ‘Debate between Body and Soul’, entitled ‘Bacchus and Ariadne’, and probably inspired by Titian's painting in the National Gallery.
He ticked this picture in his London Baedeker whose commentary singles it out for its great ‘exuberance’.
The ‘exuberance’ of Sweeney forms a disturbing parallel to that of the god, since it so obviously belongs to what Aspatia in The Maid's Tragedy (from which Eliot's epigraph comes) calls ‘that beast man’.
Anthropology for Eliot did not remake the myths, but showed how they had, while becoming the possessions of high culture, transmitted and not entirely transmuted primitive origins.
By purporting to de-interpret them by removing the excrescences of later interpretations it made possible a reinterpretation which allowed mythology to be seen again as something that while still existing on the level of the  most civilized and polished communication kept speaking of what it had sprung from — men's basic needs and desires.
Yet the very study of mythology from a scientific attitude distanced modern man at the same time as it seemed to bring him closer.
The size of the gap between students and studied fluctuated.
In ‘Sweeney Erect’ the modern seems closer to the savage Polyphemus than to Emerson, and the delight in attacking the nineteenth century is obvious; but so is the tension between modern and ancient.
It is not just that high myth looks down towards low present reality.
If Sweeney is a Bacchus, the god himself is nowhere present in the poem.
Theseus's ship, Aeolus, and the abandoned Ariadne — these too are absent, or at least they are present only in some later wish for an imaginative reconstruction,
paint me…
paint me…
Display me…
‘Sweeney Erect’ is a poem about sexuality; that sort of erection clearly links at the most basic level the different planes of history in the poem.
But it is also about the unstable evolution both of homo erectus and his culture, all of which may be a vast illusion if what man does is simply continue his savagery while trying to repeat faint echoes of some suspect original grandeur.
The movement from the initial grandly imperative wish for a creative act, reviving an older myth, to the final mundane narrative of the beginning of another, much less magnificent revival of potential creativity promised by ‘sal volatile/ And a glass of brandy neat’ is a movement away from a first situation (that of Ariadne on Naxos) which we never see in itself; the painting conjured up and the other parallels to this first situation are interpretations not just of each other, but also of that first situation which, because a ‘myth’and so subject to constant reinterpretation, may never have happened in any of the ways presented, if indeed it ever took place at all .
Eliot had hinted in his primitive ritual paper that grand structures of belief might be founded on something false or grotesquely crude or even meaningless.
This idea grows in the poems leading up to‘The Hollow Men’, finding full expression in 1923 when he looks back to his seminar paper, speculating that ‘primitive man’ may have
acted in a certain way and then found a reason for it.
An unoccupied person, finding a drum, may be seized with a desire to beat it; but unless he is an  imbecile he will be unable to continue beating it, and thereby satisfying a need (rather than a ‘desire’), without finding a reason for so doing.
The reason may be the long continued drought.
The next generation or the next civilization will find a more plausible reason for beating a drum.
Shakespeare and Racine — or rather the developments which led up to them — each found his own reason.
The reasons may be divided into tragedy and comedy.
We still have similar reasons, but we have lost the drum.
Here Shakespearian splendour, and indeed all art, is seen as springing from something beyond reason, and possibly senseless.
The Eliot who underlined Plotinus's  (finding the same exhortation to ‘return to the beloved fatherland’ in an essay which he translated in 1927) and who wrote Wanna Go Home ,Baby ? was always concerned with returning to sources.
But in this return he sometimes found something as horribly inane as the tedium of the city clerk's world.
The quatrain poems identify in man lowest common denominators operating below the level of any ‘savage philosopher's’ thought.
Their characters, like those of Jonson's comedies, are grotesquely stripped down and caricatured.
‘This stripping’, Eliot wrote, ‘is essential to the art.’
We recognize in the quatrain poems what Eliot occasionally found in Davidson: that though his ‘dwelling-place’ alters, the human ‘tenant…is the same through all ages’, but Eliot's linking factors, though they may be comic and self-mocking, are scarcely reassuring.
The various sexual liaisons which parallel one another in ‘Sweeney Erect’ are like Jane Harrison's ritual dromena : things re-done and pre-done.
In ‘Burbank with a Baedeker: Bleistein with a Cigar’ we have another central situation whose repetition makes it analogous to one of Harrison's rituals.
The situation is that of the outsider meeting the pleasures of a different, reputedly splendid civilization.
In the central dromenon these pleasures take an explicitly sexual form, represented by Burbank's encounter with Princess Volupine.
But such a situation is also presented as a thing pre-done, interpreted by being seen in terms of Antony's meeting with Cleopatra as portrayed by  Shakespeare, and as a thing re-done, since the third meeting, that of Princess Volupine with Sir Ferdinand Klein presents us again with a similar situation.
So we have the basic pattern of mutual interpretation, each performance of the ritual interpreting the others, which Eliot had examined in 1913.
It is convenient to relate the three meetings in terms of a diagram similar to that used by Eliot in his paper.
(See figure 3.)
We are not told that these are part of a continuing ritual, but we are encouraged to treat them as such by the similarity present in the three meetings which are connected with  each other further by the Shakespearian language applied to each.
It is a poem about cultural change.
By using such phrases as
the God Hercules
Had left him, that had loved him well.
and
Her shuttered barge
Burned on the water all the day.
and
On the Rialto once.
and
Lights, lights,
Eliot is able to recall Shakespeare closely enough to suggest at first sight that an ironic contrast is aimed at, but also to present the possibility that the allusion functions as the poetic equivalent of a legal fiction.
The words stay the same, but we are forced to ask awkward questions about how much their meaning has altered.
The simple ironic reading is based on the assumption that the high Shakespearian allusions are really inapposite.
The other, more disturbing reading is that the Shakespearian phrases are made appropriate because the present situation reinterprets them in such a way that we are forced to wonder if a Burbank-Volupine situation was not just the sort of thing they were talking about all along.
This use of Shakespeare, the central figure of Anglo-Saxon culture, stresses that the poem is not only about the cultural change in Venice, but about that at the heart of our own language and culture also.
Again the evolution of the mind of Europe is under scrutiny.
There is another side to this use of allusion.
Those lines
Defunctive music under sea
passed seaward with the passing bell
Slowly:
refer to a stage direction, not to life.
As Antony and Cleopatra has it, ‘Music of the hautboys is under the stage’.
Similarly, the reference to the barge really refers to an account in a play of a scene which we do not and in some ways could not witness, a scene which may never have taken place in those terms.
Eliot was well aware it was all a business of transmission and reinterpretation of past interpretations as he shows in writing that ‘Shakespeare acquired more essential history from Plutarch than most men could from the whole British Museum.’
Reading this poem urges us to ask what ‘essential history’ is and wonder if it has some ritual pattern.
As ‘literary allusions’ the Shakespearian references point us back to previous dramatic interpretations of events rather than directly to ‘real events’.
These are always lost under interpretation.
We are caught in a series of mimeses which push Burbank into the focus of ritual, his actions sliding imperceptibly into reactions to and reenactments of a past rite whose origins we can never witness.
A movement downwards towards origins is, though, perceptible in the poem.
Burbank's ‘descending’ leads to ‘fell’and passes ‘under sea’to a divine explanation of events and then to the mythological splendour of the ascent of the horses of the dawn (a little sabotaged by the questionable diction of ‘Beat up’).
But such an explanation is surely ridiculous to the modern reader forced to realize how far he stands from an age when mythological explanations were permissible.
He is tempted to reinterpret the past in a way that makes it fit in more readily with the rendezvous at the small hotel.
A parallel descent to first causes in the latter half of the poem locates a different underlying prime mover:
On the Rialto once.
The rats are underneath the piles.
The Jew is underneath the lot.
This leads to the rather less splendid ascent of Princess Volupine ‘To climb the waterstair’ and to entertain
Sir Ferdinand
Klein.
the sound of whose surname and its positioning at the start of the final stanza aurally and visually rhymes with ‘Declines’ which similarly ends a sentence as the first word of stanza six.
Climbing the waterstair, Princess Volupine moves on to the piles to meet the Jew who ‘is underneath the lot’.
Ascent and descent are alarmingly confused.
Fittingly, at the poem's centre is the evolutionary joke,
A lustreless protrusive eye
Stares from the protozoic slime
At a perspective of Canaletto.
The way the poem is ordered allows us momentarily to read it as if the juxtaposition was just that of eye and Canaletto, for the eye appears at first as an independent entity.
But when we realize that the eye is most probably Bleistein's, we realize that it represents a degeneration from the expected human eye.
The eye which seems able physically to perceive as it ‘stares’ but unable to appreciate what it sees links the modern hybrid, a world of complex cross-breeding inhabited by ‘Chicago Semite Viennese’, with the most primitive, ‘protozoic’level of life.
Again we are faced with a shift in cultural values.
The Canaletto presumably has not altered, and men still come to look at it just as they repeat Shakespeare's words.
Ritual observances continue awkwardly as in the clumsy Hakagawa-like  genuflexion, ‘A saggy bending of the knees’, but the original sense of the ritual, as in so many of the cases described by Harrison and Frazer, seems lost.
This poem hints that we can go beyond the form of the ritual only.to be horrified by the realization that there is nothing there, or there is only some petty squalor, meaning having receded out of sight if it was ever present in the first place.
Evolution has given us the Canaletto whose complex city perspectives recede infinitely away and now it is itself seen regressing as
The smoky candle end of time
Declines.
Falling as decadent decline, degeneration, and as the sense of the result of Original Sin is ubiquitous.
‘They were together, and he fell.’
This is again a borrowing — from Tennyson, another staple of a cultural tradition.
The realization of that fact is awkward since Eliot's virtual repetition of Tennyson's line (which in ‘The Sisters,, reads ‘They were together, and she fell’) in another context constitutes an act of reinterpretation.
Again the notions of legal fictions and of rituals whose meaning may alter despite continuity of formal behaviour are useful.
Tennyson's poem, though, is about a woman who lures a man to his doom, a man apparently of another race, so that this allusion in turn provides a further interpretation of the fates of Antony and Burbank.
It may flesh-out Burbank's story, and it may strip away some of the glory from the Shakespearian version of Antony's.
It does seem to strengthen the ritualistic patterning of history.
Life as ritual and art is a belief we associate very much with those ‘long-forgotten’ Nineties when sins were still scarlet against which Eliot professed to be reacting in 1917 when he declared that their ‘aesthetic eccentricities may now be ignored’.
But it seems that his interest in primitive ritual had led him to place his own stress on life as a ritual.
For Eliot, though, this concern with ritual was to have the sanction of the anthropologists' ‘collective representation’, being generated like a dromenon by a group, a chorus across history.
Not Eliot alone, but Eliot, Shakespeare, and Tennyson produce the poem.
The combination seems to point to some underlying form of ‘essential history’ of which each individual provides his variant but which can only be hinted at, not revealed, because when the voices  join across time they never quite marry, though their coming together is an attempt to generate something which like a collective emotion is necessarily felt as something more than the experience of the individual, as something dominant and external'.
It might seem that the primeval Fall underlies this poem's events as surely as Venice underlies its epigraph, standing as the reality which underlies various writers' interpretations.
Yet even the meaning of that city seems doubtful.
Its bridges and canals are intact, but its meaning may have altered.
The final question,
Who clipped the lion's wings
And flea'd his rump and pared his claws?
Thought Burbank, meditating on
Time's ruins, and the seven laws
assumes a glorious past.
Following the poem's ritualistic treatment of history and treating it in accord with Eliot's method for ritual's interpretation, if we take ‘enough cross-sections to interpret a process’, and the poem invites us to do so, then we must be aware of a general downward movement.
The falling of Burbank, taking us down the moral ladder, and the ‘saggy bending of the knees’ of Bleistein, taking us down the evolutionary ladder, lead to the declining ‘smoky candle end of time’which prepares Burbank and the reader to ponder over ‘Time's ruins’, the etymology of ‘ruins’being important.
Royce's seminars had acquainted Eliot with the second law of thermodynamics if he had not known it before.
All time in this poem seems to be a running-down.
But the way in which present and past mutually interpreting falls are linked together suggests that the idea of the Fall itself may be illusory, a lost first cause.
Burbank falls; Hercules's departure marks Antony's decline.
We see only what is falling, never any Edenic first position fallen from.
A glance over the shoulder abolishes Eden.
For though Burbank's fall, that mere matter of crossing ‘a little bridge’ to a ‘small hotel’(my italics) is a shrunken affair, lacking the panoramic mythological grandeur of the Shakespearian Antony's, it none the less offers a stripped-down representation of that event.
We are invited to read back destructively.
If the previous state was really as fallen as this, is the whole idea of a Fall illusory?
If the unfallen state is being pushed further and further out of sight, it may eventually vanish  into unreality.
If the continuing ritual represents a progressive pruning away of the trappings of mythology, then it would follow that no one has clipped the lion's wings or fleaed his rump or pared his claws since all these things, like classical-cum-Shakespearian mythology, are the ritual entrappings of the culture from which our own is descended, preserved among us as ‘survivals’.
But while externally unchanged they have ceased to be our central ‘collective representations’.
So that in a sense we have all been clipping, fleaing, and paring.
The poem is funny, but at everyone's expense.
The effect of Eliot's reading about primitive religion is clear in ‘Mr. Eliot's Sunday Morning Service’ where, as in his Wundt reviews, he is concerned to stress the importance of the sexual element in religion.
Coming from the reading of Frazer, Durkheim, and others, he does this by linking Christian rituals to sex and the continuance of vegetation.
Along the garden-wall the bees
With hairy bellies pass between
The staminate and pistillate,
Blest office of the epicene.
From the opening word, ‘Polyphiloprogenitive’, the stress on religion as sexually oriented is evident.
There is a conflict of languages within the poem.
The overarticulate ‘Superfetation’ and the physically direct ‘hairy bellies’both point in the direction of sex.
Formal games too consciously played increase the sense of unease.
Language flaunts itself, embroidering ritual in alliterative use of s and p through stanzas five and six.
But the linguistic oddness is deliberate.
Language itself, word following Word, is giving birth to new forms —‘piaculative’ is listed in the OED as ‘rare’, this poem being its only cited occurrence.
Most likely it derives from Durkheim whose penultimate chapter in The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life is entitled ‘Piacular Rites and the Ambiguity of the Notion of Sacredness’.
The new word achieves mutant birth in a poem about fertility and birth, stressing the sexual element in religion.
For Durkheim part of the ambiguity of the sacredness involved in the aboriginal fertility rites was that
The same results are obtained by fasts, abstinences and self-mutilations as by communions, oblations and commemorations…
However complex  the outward manifestations of the religious life may be, at bottom it is one and simple.
It responds everywhere to one and the same need, and is everywhere derived from one and the same mental state.
In all its forms, its object is to raise man above himself and to make him lead a life superior to that which he would lead, if he followed only his own individual whims: beliefs express this life in representations; rites organize it and regulate its working.
This passage sheds much light on the method of ‘Mr. Eliot's Sunday Morning Service’ where the self-mutilation of ‘enervate Origen’is placed in the same lineage as the sexual origin of ‘the Word’, and where the initial ‘sapient sutlers of the Lord’who ‘Drift across the window-panes’is a passage with an ambiguous, or better ambivalent, reference, since it holds together in one term both the ‘sable presbyters’who bring offerings to church and ‘the bees’who bring pollen from one part of the plant to another and so perform the ‘Blest office of the epicene’.
Religion is presented as a response ‘everywhere to one and the same need’: the need for rituals of fertility.
Durkheim commented on the difficulty of regarding ‘an enlightened Catholic of to-day as a sort of retarded savage’, but he provided the reminder that ‘the most primitive religions are not the only ones which have attributed this power of propagation to the sacred character’.
As in ‘Burbank’ mythology was presented as painting, so here we have ‘Designed…
The nimbus of the Baptized God’— perhaps based on ‘The Baptism of Christ’ by Piero della Francesca whose work hung in the National Gallery's Umbrian School room marked in Eliot's Baedeker .
The word ‘nimbus’ meaning both halo and rain-cloud is carefully deployed.
The primitive ceremony which came soonest to Eliot's mind, whether in his ‘Beating of a Drum’ or in 1926 when he spoke of savages who ‘believe that the ritual is performed in order to induce a fall of rain', was rain-making, probably because he had read about it for his 1913 seminar paper.
Frazer's Dying God describes rituals where drums are beaten to beg rain from heaven.
Themis describes various rain-making rites, including a Christianized one which involves entreating ‘S. John Baptist to baptize the Holy Child’.
Lévy-Bruhl links rain-making with Christian practice; writing of the aboriginal intichiuma ceremonies he points out that ‘Nothing  is more widespread than practices having as their object the cessation of drought, and the assurance of rain:(we see this even yet in our own Rogations)…
’ Durkheim, following Spencer and Gillen, described the aboriginal ‘Intichiuma of rain'.
‘The object of the whole rite is to represent the formation and ascension of clouds, the bringers of rain.’
The whole direction and tone of Durkheim's investigation was ‘to find a means of discerning the ever-present causes upon which the most essential forms of religious thought and practice depend’.
In a poem continually relating Christian religion to fertility ritual Eliot's painted annunciation hints at the most primitive rites not only in its ‘nimbus’ but also in its drought-stricken landscape, where ‘The wilderness is cracked and browned.,
The coming of God is linked with the making of rain both through the ‘nimbus’ and in what follows.
But through the water pale and thin
Still shine the unoffending feet
And there above the painter set
The Father and the Paraclete.
This presentation allows the hint of primitive ritual to remain in the background, just as later Eliot was to imply with deliberate provocation that behind the High Mass lay, if one went back far enough, ‘the Australian ceremonies described by Spencer and Gillen and Hewett [sic]’.
This poem foreshadows the method of the later, greater poetry of The Waste Land in trying to hold the most primitive and most developed in one by letting the former show through the latter and the development of one out of the other be seen.
Just how strongly Eliot was spurred on to emphasize the connections between sex and religion at this time is seen in ‘The Hippopotamus’(1917) which contains one of his most shocking jokes:
At mating time the hippo's voice
Betrays inflexions hoarse and odd,
But every week we hear rejoice
The Church, at being one with God.
Throughout these quatrain poems sex and religion mix, so that always ‘The nightingales are singing near /The Convent of the  Sacred Heart., Whether there is anything beyond the sexual is uncertain.
Christ's feet in ‘Mr. Eliot's Sunday Morning Service, are ‘unoffending’ which may mean without sin, but might also mean just harmless or inoffensive, devoid of power in a way paralleling Origen's sexual impotence; the apparent presence of God need not guarantee Christ's power.
Jane Harrison had seen the Olympians as moving from fertility daimones to objets d'art .
In Eliot's poem the status of God as objet d'art is stressed (‘And there above the painter set /The Father and the Paraclete’) so that for all that we may penetrate beyond that either to gesso ground or vestiges of primitive fertility ceremony, the ultimate point of origin, the postulated God, is to be explained simply in terms of sexuality, or else remains unreachable and inexplicable.
Eliot, who was interested in mana and orenda , worried that Durkheim's theory of totemism in terms of religious force might prove only ‘an admission of the inexplicable’.
The learned gloss, ‘Superfetation of  is deliberately awkward.
It shows how the Word could give birth to commentators’ words, as could the castrated Origen, but gives no acceptable explanation of how it could produce Origen.
The poem enacts various creations as parts of an apparently continuing ritual pattern; it is polyphiloprogenitive in detailing the creation of the Word, Origen, the painting, and flowers; we seem able to trace all back to their cause, yet ultimately the cause is only a formal utterance, ‘In the beginning was the Word’, whose repetition takes us no further.
We are back with the problem which Eliot had considered in March 1914 when one of his seminar colleagues, Sen Gupta, had read a paper that Eliot had written dealing with the work of Lévy-Bruhl ‘on primitive race-psychology’ and the ‘law of participation’, a paper in which it was stated that, ‘Causality is something which can be explained away but not explained.
Perhaps it is due to superstition, but can we do without such superstitions?’
The question of whether or not‘In the beginning…’ is superstition is forced on us by the poem but left unanswered though it appears that to go back beyond Origen would be immensely difficult.
For Eliot in this poem the only way to banish endless debate lies not in accepting dogma, but in fleeing from speculation to Sweeney  in his bath.
With the comic appearance of this modern barbarian the resolutely physical takes over; we move back to the level of the naked man with no interest in the ‘polymath’.
Yet Sweeney, found in the essential element of fertility for both aborigine and Christian, is also a mover of waters.
Ironically, though Sweeney appears to promise a way out, he may only lead the sensitive reader back into the circle of sexual-religious speculations.
Neither the religious nor the sexual anxiety in Eliot's poems came simply from his reading, but that reading allowed him to give supra-individual expression to his personal pain; he clothed his own cry in the language and mythology of great traditions and their interpretations, making it ‘impersonal’.
Eliot was doing this before he had articulated a theory about it.
His reading also helped him articulate his theory.
Durkheim wrote that, ‘there is something impersonal in us because there is something social in all of us, and since social life embraces at once both representations and practices, this impersonality naturally extends to ideas as well as to acts.’
It was as a possession of society that mythology and the great art of the past was of use to the poet, since as such its strength and currency was established and purged of personal intrusions.
Eliot wrote in 1916 that mythology was ‘dangerous literary material’ and had to be either a mythology in which the writer believed or else one in which a people had once believed.
‘A mythology cannot be created for literary purposes out of whole cloth; it must be the work of a race.’
Admiring Durkheim's stress on the need for community, Eliot wrote that, ‘For the savage or the civilized man, a solely individual existence would be intolerable: he feels the need of recreating and sustaining his strength by periodic refuge in another consciousness which is supra-individual.
So the poet recreates his strength in the tradition, which can provide a refuge and a strength, yet which can also appear founded on emptiness.
In voicing his theory of impersonality, and in searching for terms of extreme yet impersonal expression anthropology was important in terms of the ideas and structures which it provided, but also in terms of its vocabulary again often used for the communication of deep distress.
So Eliot, in ‘ode’, a poem dealing with a tortured wedding night, has a protagonist apparently lacking in all inspiration except that coming from the ‘bubbling’ of a river described as ‘mephitic’.
In Adonis Attis Osiris , Frazer saw the goddess Mefitis as personifying ‘mephitic vapours’ and described her temple ‘where the exhalations…were of so deadly a character that all who set foot on the spot died’.
Mefitis's lethal pool ‘continually bubbles up with an explosion like distant thunder’.
But it could also serve for the purposes of inspiration.
The sick left there ‘sometimes…were favoured with revelations in dreams…
To all but the sick the place was unapproachable and fatal.’
Frazer also mentions a sanctuary whose mephitic area contains only ‘the eunuch priests of the Great Mother Goddess’, who have ‘a look on their faces as if they were being choked’.
Sleeping with the succuba who may be disembowelled but also disembowelling, Eliot's speaker is in a position analogous to that of the eunuch priest; poetry like sex here points to horrible death and finds expression for that concept in the language of the rituals of primitive religion and mythology.
Except that the meaning of these has waned.
The rituals are repeated, the mephitic river risked, but only to find it finally uninspired.
Anthropology both masked and revealed Eliot's own concerns.
It was a lens through which he could view life, literature, and history, often with mischievous irony.
In view of all his interest in connections between worship of totemic plants, rain ceremonies, and modern life, it becomes clear why ‘Gerontion’ is sparked off by a passage from Benson's Fitzgerald where Benson is quoting Fitzgerald.
‘Don't you love the Oleander?
So clean in its leaves and stem, as so beautiful in its flower; loving to stand in water, which it drinks up so fast.
I rather worship mine.’
Here he sits, in a dry month, old and blind, being read to by a country boy, longing for rain…
Fitzgerald's oleander-worship and longing for rain are like those ‘survivals’ Eliot discussed in 1917.
Fitzgerald's brain was also haunted by survivals of past literature, ‘The old music of bygone singers, rich haunting sentences of old leisurely authors, rang in his brain, and came unbidden to his pen.
‘Gerontion’ presents a little old man, whose speech is riddled with other men's words, waiting ‘in a dry season, for rain.
We appear to be in the cosmopolitan city world of the uprooted.
My house is a decayed house,
And the Jew squats on the window sill, the owner,
Spawned in some estaminet of Antwerp,
Blistered in Brussels, patched and peeled in London.
Mr Silvero, Hakagawa, and the other figures stress this up-rootedness.
Yet, ironically, ‘waiting for rain,, we are rooted in the most primitive situation.
The communion ceremony is seen in terms stressing the physicality of Frazer's ‘Eating the God’.
Rendel Harris's gods were originally plants.
Discussing the sacrificial meal, Durkheim, Harrison, and others saw eating totemic animals or plants as a primitive communion, as Eliot knew.
Eliot noted that in Australian religion Durkheim found the essential elements of all religion, and that for Durkheim communion , not worship, was the essential sentiment.
Eliot's ‘word, /Swaddled’, with its suggestion of Christ's ‘swaddling clothes’(Luke 2: 12) places us firmly within the area of fertility and birth, but Christ in ‘Gerontion’ comes not as baby but as frightening beast, associated, like totemic animals, with fertility.
Reviving vegetation is emphasized, being bound up in ‘judas’ with the Christian (and New England) story.
But the gap between Christ and the eating not only emphasizes the vegetation, but makes it seem for a moment that it is the plants which are devoured:
In the juvescence of the year
Came Christ the tiger
In depraved May, dogwood and chestnut, flowering judas,
To be eaten, to be divided, to be drunk
Gerontion, in the barren wilderness of modern life, the world of Antwerp, Brussels, and London, is terrified of the cycle of fertility which also traps him.
For him ‘The tiger springs in the new year.’
His years are not modern calendar years, but governed by the rebirth  of vegetation — new year comes in ‘depraved May’.
Rebirth for him would be fatal, in the word of a later poem ‘like Death, our death’.
Both Christ and the fertility cycle seem terrifying.
Yet when he seeks refuge in history, other men's deeds and words, Gerontion finds nothing with which he can connect, only vacancy, vanity, and inane deception: the emptiness of the uninspiring, fragment-bearing wind that blows through much of Eliot's poetry.
The shrunken personal emptiness in an arid landscape, the hungering after other men's experience, and the combined fear and fascination which Gerontion feels for threatening rebirth seem to grow, partly at least, from Eliot's own situation.
In London he found himself chronically overworked, unhappily married, and a failure in his parents' eyes.
‘Gerontion’ looks much towards death; Eliot's father died in January 1919.
To him Eliot dedicated The Sacred Wood .
Unable even to enlist because of ill health, Eliot had found work as a bank clerk while others fought in the warm rain.
He found the bank's routine congenial, keeping greater worries at bay.
Concentrating attention on tasks before him avoided the resuscitation of more painful parts of his life.
Such resuscitations, though, were inescapable.
Reviewing Henry Adams's Autobiography in 1919 he attacked the Bostonian world and, covertly, himself, as he savaged Boston Unitarianism along with Adams who ‘abandoned lecturing at Harvard’, and whose researches into primitive mythology ‘turned to ashes in his mouth’.
Doubt choked Adams.
Like Gerontion, ‘there is nothing to indicate that [his]senses either flowered or fruited.’
In 1919 Eliot felt himself to be in a similar position.
This seems ironic, but letters and later statements show how little faith Eliot had in his own literary output, however confident he might sound in verse, or in the ex cathedra pronouncements of ‘Tradition and the Individual Talent’.
In.1922 he threatened to give up literature.
His fascination with religious ideas brought no peace.
He was confronted with the failure of his personal life (impersonalized in ‘ode’ and elsewhere) and, it seemed, of his public life.
His reading of Henry Adams was not the only painful revival of memory or confrontation with his own apparent failure which he had to endure in 1919.
In June of that year Eliot met a figure from what must now have seemed to the London banker a remote part of his life.
At Harvard, another friend recalled, Eliot's
really closest friend was Harold peters, and they were an odd pair.
It was Peters who chided him about his frail physique, which led to his regular attendance at August's Gymnasium, which was in the basement of Apley Hall.
He took this work seriously and developed into quite a muscular specimen.
It also led to some boxing lessons somewhere in Boston's South End.
He took up rowing in a wherry, and finally worked up to a single shell.
peters also introduced him to small-boat cruising and they made many cruises between Marblehead and the Canadian border.
On one of these trips, in a 19-foot knockabout, before the days of power, they rounded Mt.
Desert Rock in a dungeon of fog, a rough sea and a two-reef breeze.
Such voyages would reappear in Eliot's poetry, and not only in the hunt for lost childhood and youth that fills ‘Marina’.
In late June 1919 Eliot went to Garsington, but cut short his visit to stay with Peters who was about to be demobbed from the US Navy.
Vivienne found Peters extremely boring, but the next day, Sunday, Peters and Eliot, who was looking very ill, went off to Greenwich, a choice of venue which suggests that the two men talked about sailing for much of the time.
Certainly they would have had much to talk about, recalling voyages up the New England coast; how they had dared storms together and mixed with tough Maine characters at the Jonesport summer ball, or how one of Peters's cruises had been christened after the four B's which constituted their provisions: beans, bacon, bread, and bananas.
Peters would have had much else to tell Eliot.
In 1915 he had sailed to South America on one of the last square-riggers.
In the war he had sailed to Cuba and between the east coast of America and Scotland.
Now he was about to return to America, a bachelor who would sail round the world on various cutters and schooners.
The next day, Monday 23 June, Peters left for America leaving Eliot an unhappily married London bank clerk on the fringes of a circle which he described as a ‘Bloomsburial’.
Eliot's meeting with Peters brought a painful revival of past good times.
By 1 June ‘Gerontion’ had been half finished.
It seems to have been completed by the start of July.
In the last stages of composition, after the destruction of the ‘society’ names, ‘De Bailhache, Fresca, Mrs. Cammel’, Eliot amended his original version, adding some lines which surely came as a result of his meeting with Peters:
…
Gull against the wind, in the windy straits
Of Belle Isle, or running on the Horn.
White feathers in the snow, the Gulf claims,
And an old man driven by the Trades
To a sleepy corner.
In late 1919 Eliot resolved to begin a long poem.
His meeting with Peters also seems to have sparked off the long voyaging section of ‘Death by Water’ in the Waste Land manuscripts, which would be united with the fate of the ancient Phoenician sailor, Phlebas, and details of which would find their way into ‘Marina’and ‘The Dry Salvages’.
This section, describing in accurate seamen's language a voyage past The Dry Salvages in a fishing boat loaded with ‘canned baked beans’ combined Eliot's own sea knowledge with that of the Gloucester dory fishermen, and bound these up with the ‘well-told seaman's yarn’of Dante's Ulysses and with Tennyson's Ulysses (who may be related to Gerontion).
The eventual dropping of this passage, retaining only the Phlebas section, makes Part IV of The Waste Land entirely impersonal, but underlying it was a resuscitation of personal memories.
Further memories were revived by a visit from his mother in the summer of 1921 which brought ‘another anxiety as well as a joy’ when Eliot was working on what would become The Waste Land .
Eliot's 1921 meeting with Dr Roger Vittoz in Lausanne must have once more forced him to confront his own history and ambitions.
He also found peace there and renewed an old pleasure, by boating at Lugano where he met Hesse.
In Switzerland, though he met ‘people of many nationalities, which I always like’, Eliot felt  that he had released Vivienne from the strain of being with him.
He too had time to think and to write.
In the Waste Land which Eliot eventually produced, the pain of personal resuscitations persists, but that pain is bodied forth using a structure of ideas that results from the coming together in Eliot's mind of various views of the savage and city.
We now know that around 1922 Eliot was close to becoming a Buddhist.
His own studies in Japanese Buddhism, his attending Oxford's Buddhist Society, and his reviewing of Oriental books are indicators of such interests.
But they are present, too, in his literary theorizings.
‘Tradition and the Individual Talent’ is grounded on the idea that ‘not only the best, but the most individual parts of his [an author's]work may be those in which the dead poets, his ancestors, assert their immortality most vigorously’.
In the same year, writing of how as good writers ‘we have not borrowed, we have been quickened, and we become bearers of a tradition’, Eliot complains (before quoting a revoicing of Seneca by Chapman which would be used in ‘Gerontion’) that in contemporary poetry, ‘No dead voices speak through the living voice; no reincarnation, no re-creation.’
Reincarnation and re-creation would be crucial to The Waste Land where Buddhist ideas would have an important place and where various voices of the dead, from that of Dante to that of Mayne Reid, would play their part in a sort of literary metempsychosis, not entirely unlike that used by Joyce in Ulysses , which Eliot was reading at the time.
For Eliot, though, such ideas of tradition and reincarnation would be bound up with heredity at the most basic evolutionary level and with the continuing cycle of renewal and death which he found in the pages of the anthropologists.
These pages revealed rituals which, Jessie Weston informed him, had survived the passage From Ritual to Romance , remaining hidden in modern literary forms in the world of Tennyson and Wagner.
When Eliot became a Christian in 1927 he declared that he found in reading Paul Elmer More, with whose Shelburne Essays he had  shown familiarity in 1916, the work of someone who had travelled by almost the same route, to virtually the same conclusions.
From More Eliot seems to have taken the word ‘anfractuous,, and read that the poet undergoes ‘a partial dissolution of his own personality’.
Like Eliot, More had been interested not only in the classics and Christianity, but also in the East.
The More who was interested in a religious ‘bridge between the Orient and the Occident’, and who juxtaposed Augustine and Buddha paralleled the Eliot of The Waste Land .
But More also linked eastern thought about reincarnation to Darwinism, since both stressed the presence of the past and the idea that the most primitive forms persisted in the modern.
More feels this presence of the past when ‘we look into the eyes of love’ and obtain ‘for one supercelestial moment — the glimpse of a reality never before imagined, and never again to be revealed’.
He was fascinated by Lafcadio Hearn's having
brought together into indissoluble union our Western theory of Darwin and that strange doctrine of metempsychosis which was carried to Japan with Buddhism…
To understand the tremendous realism of horror and gloom connected with this doctrine of everlasting birth and death, and re-birth, one must go to the burning valley of the Ganges…
In The Waste Land Eliot would go there, armed with anthropological ideas gained from Frazer and others.
More wondered if Hearn had
introduced a new element of psychology into literature?
We are indeed living in the past, we who foolishly cry out that the past is dead…
Mr. Hearn shows how even the very beasts whom we despise as unreasoning and unremembering are filled with an inarticulate sense of this dark backward and abysm of time…
By reason of this terror the savage trembled before the magician who seemed to have penetrated the mysteries of nature about him.
For Eliot, Frazer's work was of an importance paralleling the psychology of ‘the complimentary [sic]work of Freud — throwing  its light on the obscurities of the soul from a different angle’.
Frazer ‘has extended the consciousness of the human mind into as dark a backward and abysm of time as has yet been explored’.
Ideas from Buddhism, evolutionary theory, and anthropology combined in The Waste Land .
I have already remarked on the poem's opening where Mendel and Rendel Harris combine to reincarnate past voices, plant breeding and anthropology shedding a new light on the dead — from the Chaucer of the ‘Prologue’ to James Thomson and the Fitzgerald whose stanza More had quoted when writing about the growth of trees and flowers in an essay of ‘Saint Augustine’:.
Now the New Year reviving Old Desires,
The thoughtful Soul to Solitude retires
Where the White Hand of Moses on the Bough
puts out, and Jesus from the Ground suspires.
Eliot's Bough was The Golden Bough which had plenty to say about the rebirth of gods accompanying vegetation.
In the final version of the poem Buddha meets St Augustine, while Christ and Buddha merge in the ‘I’ of the abandoned ‘I am the Resurrection and the Life’fragment.
The anthropological elements in the final poem are also present in the collection of manuscripts from which it emerged.
We see there how Eliot indulged his sense of irony by resuscitating the voices of older poets through his anthropological interests and satirizing ‘a time, barren of myths’ and a world of those ‘illimitable suburbs’which he saw in 1921 as filled with the public school's ‘petrified product’.
‘Exequy’ uses the essentially Frazerian structure of ‘a man-god’.
Its ‘sacred grove’ is a phrase straight from The Golden Bough .
Frazer's evocative and often imaginative description of Nemi's grove under ‘the dreamy blue of Italian skies’ ensures that Eliot's poem takes place in ‘that Italian air’.
Yet we are uncertain of a temporal context for the poem.
If we are dealing with a ‘suburban tomb’, then the word suburban suggests, though it need not mean, the life of the modern city.
Later, the ‘Austrian waltz’ will also suggest this.
As the anthropologists whom he had read had used poetry to exemplify  various rituals, so Eliot does the same with an ironic bite.
In the second stanza we find him still in the classical world, though this time it is the Greek rather than the Italian, and it begins by being the Greek seen not through the eyes of Frazer, but through the eyes of Keats.
Eliot's second stanza opens:
When my athletic marble form
Forever lithe, forever young,
With grateful garlands shall be hung…
There are quite sufficient echoes here to direct the reader to Keats's ‘ode on a Grecian Urn’ where he finds the urn ‘With brede/ Of marble men and maidens overwrought, /With forest branches…‘and finds too scenes of love ‘For ever warm and still to be enjoyed, /For ever panting, and for ever young —’as well as the heifer approaching the altar ‘with garlands dressed’.
Eliot, though, is determined, like the anthropological writers he had been reading, to make plain the root of the custom, which he does in the next line, ‘And flowers of deflowered maids’.
As in the Frazer of ‘The Influence of the Sexes on Vegetation’, the strong links between sex and religion are revealed.
This is also in line with Eliot's own criticism of the lack of such relationships in Wundt's work.
But if Eliot in the poem has adopted the personality of a fertility god, this god is a peculiarly Prufrockian one in the sense that for all ‘The constant flame shall keep me warm,’ he remains not simply a minor divinity, neither being nor meant to be Prince Hamlet, but also, for all the lovers' attentions, an impotent ghost, ‘A bloodless shade among the shades/ Doing no good, but not much harm’.
The poem is an undermining of traditional notions of love, through repeating love's rites in such a way as to show them as meaningless.
The Passionate Shepherd, Marlowe, invoked his pastoral love to be with him ‘By shallow rivers, to whose falls/ Melodious birds sing madrigals’.
In Eliot's poem it is ‘While the melodious fountain falls’ that love is made, but we are forced to be conscious of an artifice ‘(Carved by the cunning Bolognese)’which suggests that the apparently primitive fertility ritual where ‘The Adepts twine beneath the trees/ The sacrificial exercise’has become a decadent pleasure, rather than a genuine ritual.
It is ritual decayed into spectacle where not continuity but surprise has  become the ultimate consideration, tradition and originality having their horns uncomfortably locked in the phrase ‘invariable surprise’:
They terminate the festivals
With some invariable surprise
Of fireworks, or an Austrian waltz.
In 1921,The Waste Land clearly on his mind, Eliot complained that the anti-Georgian poets were ‘mostly such as could imagine the Last Judgment only as a lavish display of Bengal lights, Roman candles, catherine-wheels, and inflammable fire-balloons.
Vous, hypocrite lecteur …’
The last stanza of ‘Exequy’ is a summing-up of the kind of rituals described by Frazer in Adonis Attis Osiris where in the declining year the representative of the year-spirit was put to death, often by burning.
This ritual suicide is seen as something deeper than the sexual rituals described in earlier stanzas, yet in Frazerian terms, it is itself a ritual performed in connection with the revival of vegetation in spring.
The visitor of the last stanza comes ‘more violent, more profound, /One soul, disdainful or disdained,’ and in the condition of the year-spirit or , ‘his shadowed beauty stained /The colour of the withered year’, to go to a death which places him in the position of savage sacrifice and, for he is surely related to the saints of Eliot's other early poems, martyr ‘Self-immolating on the Mound’.
This visitor is himself unable to escape from the sexuality found to permeate even the most intense religious belief.
Eliot was, of course, familiar with the association of death and sexual climax, having played with the idea in that murder of ‘Nocturne, which calls forth the explanation
‘The perfect climax all true lovers seek!’
but the nervous mark of this humorous poem's immature irony has been replaced by the much more horrific denial of the meaning of the action of the ritual
Upon the crisis, he shall hear
A breathless chuckle underground.
SOVEGNA VOS AL TEMPS DE MON DOLOR
In his draft Eliot has replaced this last cry with 
Consiros vei la passade folor.
—‘in thought I see my past madness’; these two cries are from the Arnaut Daniel speech ending Purgatorio XXVI , where the poet condemned to the circle of lust prays for the hearer's consideration and looks forward to the release from the to tortures meted out to the lustful.
This passage haunted Eliot who was to quote from it in the original title of Poems , 1920, as well as in Ash-Wednesday .
As it is used in the draft poem it seems to imply that not only are the decadent versions of primitive sexual rituals inane, the god dead and impotent, however passionate the rituals of his worship, but that even the ultimate act of martyrdom is a sexual indulgence.
Though the poetic richness of ‘Exequy’ would be surpassed in The Waste Land , a far subtler piece of writing, the emptiness of the lesser work and its pained despair would be repeated in the masterpiece.
The Waste Land is not a Christian poem.
By the time when he began to work most intensively on what would become The Waste Land , Eliot was neither god nor martyr.
Instead, he was living in a north London flat and working weekdays in a City bank, returning home at night to a difficult marriage.
London itself, however, may have furnished encouragement for the lines Eliot's thought was taking.
Visiting the Notting Hill Victorian mansion of Ford Madox Ford, Eliot saw not quite a sacred grove, but a patch of grass surmounted by Gaudier-Brzeska's ‘Hieratic Head of Ezra Pound’ which Wyndham Lewis described as ‘Ezra in the form of a marble phallus’.
While in 1920–1 Eliot admired both Edward Wadsworth's drawings of industrial landscapes and Picasso's primitivism, he found himself living the life of Thomson or of the city clerks he had read about in Conan Doyle, Davidson, Conrad, and elsewhere.
Haunted by the voices of the past, Eliot had come to inhabit the landscape of his earlier reading.
From that landscape, masking the real London around him, grew The Waste Land .
What appears to be one of the earliest sections of the manuscripts the section beginning ‘So through the evening, through the violet air’(dating from c.1914) contains an arresting image which would find its way into the final poem.
A woman drew her long black hair out tight
And fiddled whisper music on those strings.
This image conflates two images from Kipling's short stories, images which Eliot would again juxtapose in 1941.
Compare the description of the agony in In the Same boat (a story the end of which is truer to the experience than i– the end of The Brushwood Boy ): ‘Suppose you were a violin string — vibrating — and someone put his finger on you’ with the image of the ‘banjo string drawn tight’for the breaking wave in The finest Story in the World .
‘In the Same Boat’ has Kipling's Conroy exclaim just before he meets the hysterical, drug-taking woman, Miss Henschil,
‘I'm no musician, but suppose you were a violin-string — vibrating — and some one put his finger on you?
as if a finger were put on the naked soul!
Awful!'
Eliot transfers this, yet another image of terrible pain, to an almost surreal context in his poem, but the woman who draws her long black hair out tight is related to that other hysterical woman of ‘A Game of Chess’, since she too is seen brushing her hair.
Eliot's youthful familiarity with Kipling's stories was clear in his 1 909 student essay on that author's prose.
Eliot was particularly interested in Kipling's use of the supernatural, ‘one of his most effective tools,, and saw him as roaming ‘from Greenland to the South Seas in search of effects’.
Stories which Eliot knew then such as‘They’ and ‘The End of the Passage’, ‘one of the most striking tales of fear that I have ever read’, would haunt his poetry.
The younger Eliot tried to revolt against Kipling, as against the Nineties, but the older had a ‘feeling of destiny’ that he was linked to Kipling.
Certainly ‘The  Finest Story in the World’ with its hero who emerges as the unlikely reincarnation of a Norseman from Greenland and a galley slave was to have considerable repercussions.
The hero of Kipling's story is a London bank clerk who is also an ambitious poet.
‘His name was Charlie Mears; he was the only son of his mother who was a widow, and he lived in the north of London, coming into the City every day to work in a bank.’
The widowed mother, the residence in north London, and the daily travel to work in the London bank were all pad of Eliot's own experience at the time of the composition of most of The Waste Land .
Charlie's ‘Business took him over London Bridge.’
His poetic efforts are mocked by the narrator of the story, who is none the less fascinated by what stimulates Charlie's writing.
Like Eliot, this narrator goes to the British Museum, and like Eliot he has an interest in metempsychosis.
He introduces Charlie to ‘Mortimer Collins's ‘Transmigration’, and gave him a sketch of the plot before he opened the pages.’
Certainly Eliot's studies in Sanskrit and Pali at Harvard under Lanman and Woods had given him a thorough knowledge of Indian thought, but it is probable that Kipling's version of metempsychosis had at least an equally important effect.
Kipling's story presents, through the consciousness of Charlie, extreme historical juxtapositions.
Charlie Mears emerges as the reincarnation not only of a galley slave from ancient Egypt, but also of a seaman from the Vinland Sagas.
These past lives are confused with the life of a modern bank clerk.
So, just before speaking of the Skroelings (that is, Skraelings of The Vinland Sagas ) Charlie is walking through London.
Business took him over London Bridge, and I accompanied him.
He was very full of the importance of that book [a bill-book]and magnified it.
As we passed over the Thames we paused to look at a steamer unloading great slabs of white and brown marble.
A barge drifted under the steamer's stern and a lonely ship's cow in the barge bellowed.
Charlie's face changed from the face of the bank-clerk to that of an unknown and — though he would not have believed this — a much shrewder man.
He flung out his arm  across the parapet of the bridge and laughing very loudly, said:—
‘When they heard our bulls bellow the Skroelings ran away!'
Eliot, like Charlie, was preoccupied with bill books, so that a ‘Bill of Lading’ even finds its way into his note on ‘C.i.f.
London: documents at sight’.
In The Waste Land we move where ‘The barges drift/ With the turning tide’ where, just before, the ‘white and gold’marble of the Church of St Magnus Martyr is admired.
Crossing London Bridge among the crowd of clerks, Eliot too has a most curious shift from a modern scene to an ancient seaman's cry.
There I saw one I knew, and stopped him, crying: ‘Stetson!
You who were with me in the ships at Mylae!'
Charlie is unaware of the spirits alive in him, so that the narrator of the story is frustrated in his attempt to come at the uncluttered account of past lives.
It remained now only to encourage Charlie to talk, and here there was no difficulty.
But I had forgotten those accursed books of poetry.
He came to me time after time, as useless as a surcharged phonograph — drunk on Byron, Shelley, or Keats.
Yet Charlie's method also hints at the method which Eliot would use in The Waste Land :
The plastic mind of the bank-clerk had been overlaid, coloured, and distorted by that which he had read, and the result as delivered was a confused tangle of other voices most like the mutter and hum through a City telephone in the busiest part of the day.
It is not only that Charlie's lives, like those of Tiresias, grow confused; his expression, speaking out of modern London about remote and contemporary affairs, all in ‘a confused tangle of other voices’, like a poetic ventriloquist, points in the direction of
London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down
Poi s'ascose net foco che gli affina
Quando fiam uti chelidon — O swallow swallow
Le Prince d'Aguitaine à la tour abolie
These fragments I have shored against my ruins 
Why then Ile fit you.
Hieronymo's mad againe.
Datta.
Dayadhvam.
Damyata.
Shantih shantih shantih
Charlie Mears does not express himself in Sanskrit, but the narrator of the text knows who will most appreciate Charlie's story.
He tells it to an Indian friend, and soon ceases to speak the tale in his own language, substituting instead the Indian's.
‘After all, it could never have been told in English.’
The narrator dreams of how Charlie's tales of his reincarnations will be spread, as ‘the finest story in the world’ until the point when, ‘Every Orientalist in Europe would patronize it discursively with Sanskrit and Pali texts.’
The narrator dreams of founding a new religion.
The Waste Land seems at times to be attempting to piece together some new religion out of fragments of the old.
It also follows Kipling's story in its juxtaposition of seamen.
Eliot may not have in his poem Kipling's Greek slave on a galley out of Egypt, but he does give us a slightly earlier seafarer who sailed out of the Middle East and whose story might be thought to be specially appropriate to those clerks who work in the city —
Phlebas the Phoenician, a fort night dead,
Forgot the cry of gulls, and the deep sea swell
And the profit and loss.
Overwhelmed by water, Charlie Mears, the London bank-clerkcum-Greek-galley-slave met his death by water more than once.
‘I had an awful dream about that galley of ours.
I dreamed I was drowned…
I could hear the water sizzle, and we spun round like a cockchafer…
’ A little later Kipling presents the description of a breaking wave as a ‘banjo string drawn tight’which so impressed Eliot.
The manner of Charlie's death in this particular incarnation, coupled with the way in which he is able to look back over his earlier experiences no doubt contributed a lot to the fate of Eliot's Phlebas,
A current under sea
Picked his bones in whispers.
As he rose and fell
He passed the stages of his age and youth
Entering the whirlpool.
Similarly, Charlie's incarnation as a Norse explorer among the Skroelings, ending when a man who seems to be Erik the Red took his crew and ‘steered them for three days among floating ice, each floe crowded with strange beasts that ‘tried to sail with us,’ said Charlie, ‘and we beat them back with the handles of the oars’surely relates to the long sea voyage, an account of which originally formed the bulk of the ‘Death by Water’section.
In this passage, as in the Kipling story, food runs out and three ghosts haunt the seamen.
Norwegian pine is mentioned, and Eliot's voyagers also end among the ice-floes, among polar bears.
Charlie Mears, the bank clerk, however, is more usually a secondrate poet who does not understand the value of his ‘dreams’, scorning to think of them in terms of actual reincarnations, though these dreams are so vivid that reality and unreality seem mixed.
Here was another aspect of the Kipling story which must have appealed to the student of F. H. Bradley, the Eliot who himself wrote on ‘Degrees of Reality’.
Small wonder that his dreaming had seemed real to Charlie.
The Fates that are so careful to shut the doors of each successive life behind us had, in this case, been neglectful, and Charlie was looking, though that he did not know, where never man had been permitted to look with full knowledge since Time began.
This vision, what Eliot called Kipling's knowledge ‘of the things which are underneath, and of the things which are beyond the frontier,, was what made some of Kipling's short stories so important to the writer of The Waste Land .
It was like Frazer's looking into the ‘abysm of time’, but it was a vision only imperfectly appreciated by Charlie Mears, as the narrator of ‘The Finest Story in the World’ emphasizes: ‘Above all, he was absolutely ignorant of the knowledge sold to me for five pounds; and he would retain that ignorance, for bank-clerks do not understand metempsychosis, and a sound commercial education does not include Greek.’
To find its most lasting realization, Charlie's vision would have to wait for a bank clerk who did understand metempsychosis, and who had not only a commercial education gained in an underground room at Lloyds Bank, but also a knowledge of Greek.
The Waste Land's tone would be grimmer, ‘throbbing between two lives’.
But when such a bank clerk followed Charlie, Rudyard Kipling entered The Waste Land .
Kipling provided links between life in the modern city and ideas of incarnation, but Eliot further bound up these two elements with primitive ritual.
Again, Eliot found artistic incitements for doing this.
His 1923 review of Ulysses ends by stating that a combination of psychology, ethnology, and Frazer's Golden Bough has made possible a new method of artistic construction.
‘Instead of narrative method, we may now use the mythical method.’
But it would be wrong to see The Waste Land as ‘controlling…ordering…giving a shape and a significance to the immense panorama of futility and anarchy which is contemporary history’ in the way that Eliot believed Ulysses did.
For The Waste Land , while it does unite the themes which Eliot sees as paramount in ‘contemporary history’ and history as a whole, gives to those themes no firm significance which raises them above futility.
The tribes of Todas and Veddahs stuck in Eliot's mind for at least fifteen years because both had little sense of the meaning of their religious ceremonies.
At Harvard he read how apart from gods useful for economic purposes, ‘All the myths about their gods are otherwise hazy, and their names persist in a meaningless way in the Todas’ prayers.’
Such a state of affairs is related to that of ‘The Kafirs of South Africa’ who have, we are told, ‘no definite social structure’and whose ‘notion of Umkulunkulu, one of their chief divinities,[is]…extremely hazy, and there is little agreement as to who he really is.’
Eliot mentioned Umkulunkulu in his 1913 paper.
Ideas of the relationship between developed drama and primitive rites and of the loss of meaningful mythologies continued to haunt Eliot.
In spring 1921, when ‘the English myth is pitiably diminished’ he discussed ‘the chief myth which the Englishman has built about himself, that of the fat country squire.
The language used to describe this is reminiscent of Harrison, as well as clearly relating to the technique of Charlie Mears, Tiresias, and the dromenon- like patterning with which Eliot had been experimenting in the quatrain poems.
The myth that a man makes has transformations according as he sees himself as hero or villain, as young or old, but it is essentially the same myth; Tom  Jones is not the same person, but he is the same myth as Squire Western; Midshipman Easy is part of the same myth; Falstaff is elevated above the myth to dwell on Olympus, more than a national character.
As in ‘Exequy’, Eliot ends with a ridiculous man-god.
His piece, appearing in Tyro beside Lewis's totem-pole-like modern figures and John Adams's ‘Cafe Cannibale’, was part of a contemporary interest in primitive roots.
Ulysses was for Eliot in 1921 ‘the greatest work of the age’.
Probably the most important effect of his reading of Joyce was to make him all the more aware of the possibilities of his anthropological reading, especially when applied to modern city life in the context of inanity or death: city life was filled with fatal torpor and Eliot described London as shrivelling, like an aged little bookkeeper.
In November 1921 Eliot expressed a dread of London, longing for sea or mountains.
In his discussion of the decay of English myth, he holds out only the slender hope of the music hall and laments that in general modern dramatists and probably modern audiences are ‘terrified of the myth’.
Eliot at this period was searching amongst myths and rituals.
Weston's 1920 From Ritual to Romance gave him the tarot pack and backed up Frazer's emphasis on links between sexuality and religion.
She furnished Eliot with the title and central concept of his poem, but was otherwise more important for summarizing and reminding him of other people's ideas, such as those of E. K. Chambers speaking of literary forms encompassing ‘fragments of forgotten cults’.
Through quotation and allusion Weston reminded Eliot of his reading in Cornford, Frazer, Harrison, Spencer and Gillen, and Gilbert Murray, and discussed many of the questions which Eliot had explored in their pages.
His mind filled with primitive lore and with a sense of awkwardness at the numerous exhausting social roles he had to play in addition to that of the London banker, Eliot wrote to Mary Hutchinson in 1920 worrying about his inherited characteristics and suggesting that he might be a savage himself.
At  home, he read in Weston's book that
In the Rig-Veda …
Indra, while still retaining traces of his ‘weather’ origin, is no longer, to borrow Miss Harrison's descriptive phrase, ‘an automatic explosive thunder-storm,’he wields the thunderbolt certainly, but he appears in heroic form to receive the offerings made to him, and to celebrate his victory in a solemn ritual dance.
Given the various elements present in Eliot's mind, it is hardly surprising that he found in the thundering drums of Stravinsky's ballet,Le Sacre du printemps , the equivalent of the myth he sought.
Attending the ballet, Eliot sought to use the point of an umbrella in order to stop his neighbours laughing.
The city man's rolled umbrella could easily become a spear.
For Eliot Stravinsky's piece itself united city and savage, seeming to metamorphose ‘the rhythm of the steppes into the scream of the motor horn, the rattle of machinery, the grind of wheels, the beating of iron and steel, the roar of the underground railway, and the other barbaric cries of modern life; and to transform these despairing noises into music’.
This is hardly an average reaction to the piece, but the despairing Eliot was using Stravinsky's music to underpin his own endeavours in The Waste Land .
A member of Diaghilev's company had become Grishkin, uniting jungle and ‘maisonette’, in ‘Whispers of Immortality’.
Eliot's reading of Heart of Darkness whose Buddha-like clerk, Marlow, saw London as ‘one of the dark places of the earth’ further blended savage and ‘sepulchral city’.
Eliot returned to the Russian Ballet in 1919, and in 1921 saw their dancing in terms of vegetation rites and primitive ceremonies, but that dancing contained only marginal interest because not linked to the modernity of Stravinsky's music.
It was, however, of interest to those who had read The Golden Bough and related works.
‘In art there should be interpenetration and metamorphosis.
Even The Golden Bough can be read in two ways: as a collection of entertaining myths, or as a revelation of that vanished mind of which our mind is a  continuation.’
That last phrase, presenting the savage mind as ‘vanished’, yet suggesting that it continues in our own, is in line with Eliot's refusal when discussing Lévy-Bruhl, to pin down just how the savage mind is related to the modern.
In his poem it seems related to modern city life by both ‘interpenetration and metamorphosis’.
Weston emphasized to Eliot that not only dramas, but poetry also derived from primitive rites.
By adopting the Waste Land theme, Eliot made himself the performer of the latest enactment of a repeated rite, just as in his poem clerk and typist (like the earlier Burbank and Volupine) enact their own sexual ritual.
Though doubtless partly motivated by a desire to draw the reader away from his own personal life, Eliot was serious in pointing out that, ‘Anyone who is acquainted with these works [of Weston and Frazer]will immediately recognize in the poem certain references to vegetation ceremonies’, which, as in the quatrain poems, were associated with religion and human sexuality.
But in the same way that the sexual act is losing its meaning, in pub scene, or baroque interior, or city flat, with the result that we are brought to question whatever meaning it once may seem to have possessed, so in The Waste Land the rituals of religion appear also to be failing.
Eliot had recounted in 1916 how in the excitement of the Australian aboriginal corroboree ‘with every stimulant of noise, torchlight, strange masks, and drink, the savage seems to himself to have become a new being’.
Eliot was relying on Durkheim's account of intichiuma ceremonies with ‘all sorts of processions, dances and songs…by torchlight…a…savage scene’.
Durkheim went on to link aboriginal with Christian practices.
Eliot's earlier poetry had endowed scenes of Christian martyrdom with a savage violence and primitive overtones.
Now he linked corroboree,intichiuma of spring, and Crucifixion, as if to find beneath the ‘stony places’ of the Bible the ‘stony places’of the Australian desert photographed by Spencer and Gillen and presented in The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life .
After the torchlight red on sweaty faces
After the frosty silence in the gardens
After the agony in stony places


The shouting and the crying
Prison and palace and reverberation
Of thunder of spring over distant mountains
He who was living is now dead
We who were living are now dying
With a little patience
‘Dying’ because the sustaining myths seem to be fading away.
There is deliberate incongruity in the cry to Stetson.
In The Waste Land the idea of a fertility cult in City or suburb is made to seem not irrelevant, but horribly absurd as in the scenes overheard in the pub or observed by Tiresias.
Primitive religion interpenetrates other material throughout a poem which opens with roots, plant life, the stuff of heredity and apparently the basis of the most elementary religion.
In a work so concerned with the transmission of cultural values this is appropriate.
Roots and branches speak of plant-life and of the gods which anthropology stressed were totemically associated with it.
They introduce the ‘Son of man’, and the relationships between Christianity and other religions whose heaps of broken images strew the anthropologists' pages and the sites of the world's past cultures.
Other themes, such as the importance of the shadow to primitive man, flicker through these lines.
That memorable ‘handful of dust’ belongs to the religion of ‘ashes to ashes, dust to dust’in this burial of the dead, but also to more primitive rites.
As April, ‘the cruellest month’, brings renewed life, which is a renewal of pain and memories of destruction, so antithetically, this dust looks not only towards the grave, but also towards birth as the handful of fecundating dust sprinkled over those red rocks of Durkheim's desert tribes.
…the grains of dust which the Australian detaches from the sacred rock are so many sacred principles which he scatters into space, so that they may go to animate the totemic species and assure its renewal.
The Waste Land itself functions as a primitive ritual.
Cries, Eliot knew, were vital to the most basic corroboree when ‘on every side one sees nothing but violent gestures, cries, veritable howls, and deafening noises or every sort.
ln religious ceremony, ‘the same manifestations are to be observed in each case: cries, songs, music, violent movements, dances, the search for exciteants which raise the vital level’.
Such  musical cries ‘raise the vital level’ in Eliot's poem, bursting strangely into the texture of the English:
The peal of bells
White towers
Weialala leia
Wallala leialala
But other cries are also present.
Spencer and Gillen photographed and detailed aborigines dressed as animals, emitting animal cries to promote fertility.
We may have a glimpse of sympathetic magic in ‘when we came back, late, from the hyacinth garden, /Your arms full, and your hair wet…
‘. Jessie Weston reinforced Frazer in stressing that ‘Throwing into, or drenching with, water is a well-known part of ‘Fertility’ ritual; it is a case of sympathetic magic, acting as a rain charm.’
But The Waste Land's sounds, rather than sights, come closest to enacting savage ritual, as we might expect of Eliot's ‘auditory imagination’.
Writing of human imitation of totemic creatures, Durkheim stressed that ‘In a large number of tribes, the Intichiuma of rain consists essentially in imitative rites.’
Among the Arunta ‘in the Intichiuma of water, the men of the totem utter the characteristic cry of the plover, a cry which is naturally associated in the mind with the rainy season.’
Eliot gives us not plovers' sympathetic magic but that of the Turdus aonalaschkae pallasii whose ‘waterdripping song’ is justly celebrated'.
Drip drop drip drop drop drop drop
But there is no water
The ritual now is powerless.
The magic fails.
The Waste Land's bestiary is a full one; other creatures such as bats and crickets were associated with rainmaking.
As Lévy-Bruhl pointed out, primitive men saw the chirping of crickets and crying of birds in spring as appeals for rain.
Such cries traditionally used to promote fertility occur ironically in The Waste Land , punctuating its infertile or sexually perverted world where previous rituals and beliefs seem to be lapsing into futility.
Twit twit twit
Jug jug jug jug jug jug
…
Co co rico co co rico
The first cry is associated with ‘The change of Philomel, by the barbarous king/ So rudely forced’.
Eliot's interest in human animals, seen in the quatrain poems, intensifies in The Waste Land .
It is hardly surprising that a passage of Ovid is described in his Notes as ‘of great anthropological interest’.
The poem's most crucial cry is that of the cock.
It comes from Rostand's Chantecler , a play which Eliot recalled in 1919, probably having seen it in Paris where it had been a hit in the winter of 1910.
This play which was in Boston in 1911 is set in a farmyard.
The actors dress in animal or bird costumes.
A nightingale is one of the chief characters.
The play must have struck Eliot as fitting in perfectly with intichiuma ceremonies and with the general idea of drama evolving from primitive ritual.
Vain Chantecler refuses to recognize that it is not his own crying of ‘Cocorico’ which causes the sun to rise.
His description of that cry is, to anyone interested in anthropology, heavy with overt ones of fertility ritual: ‘La Terre parle en moi comme dans une conque.’
Chantecler must have fuelled Eliot's convictions about the origins of drama in primitive ceremony, as well as dealing with problems of religious decay and with mystical versus rational belief.
Watching actors in animal costume making their sophisticated jokes was like proof of anthropologists' statements, as typified by Frazer in that same conclusion to The Dying God , where he stated that serious rites had become idle amusement, mummeries, and childish games.
Eliot, who occasionally attended Ouspensky's seances in London in 1920 and who used the Tarot and Madam Sosostris in the London of The Waste Land , was familiar with the decay of magic; but the man who attacked Back to Methuselah in 1921 hardly shared Frazer's  Comtian, progressive tone.
Shaw's book, however, did encourage Eliot to think of the modern in terms of the ancient, of ‘creative evolution’, of ‘Darwin', ‘biology’, and the ‘ultimate questions’ raised by ‘the attempt to expose a panorama of human history ‘as far as thought can reach’.
‘Social evolution’ and its application to modern English society were already in Eliot's mind.
He attacked contemporary literature's taste for which all things were either too hot or too cold, and complained that it contained no culture.
He lamented the extinction of the music hall, home of the vestiges of the English myth.
The Waste Land , in presenting extreme emotional states, would encompass the extremes of city and savage.
Durkheim and others had emphasized to Eliot connections between primitive rituals like the intichiuma and more developed religions such as Christianity.
For Durkheim and his associates such ceremonies did not represent, as they did for Frazer, magic as some separate predecessor of religion, but were themselves elementary forms of the religious life.
The Waste Land hardly suggests that the inhabitants of the twentieth-century city are conscious actors in fertility rites, but since these, long forgotten, underlie our behaviour, since the ‘sexual instinct’ plays a role in ‘the religion and mythology of primitive peoples (indeed in all religion)’, and since Christianity and primitive ritual are linked, the poem expresses despair at the change and decay not only of city churches which Eliot visited at this time, but of all belief.
Yet under all the various forms, the sexual act and natural fertility cycles persist.
In cities, where the seasons' impact is dulled, the rituals of fertility seem to lose their meaning, but they continue, processing like scenes in a play before Tiresias, epitome of the sexual process, male and female trapped together, who has ‘foresuffered all’.
These modern performances interpret all earlier performances and interpretations, casting doubt on their total significance, just as, on a smaller scale, Eliot's reworking of the Enobarbus speech casts doubt on the validity of Shakespeare's interpretation of Cleopatra.
Whether Carthage or London, the poem's cities are seen as horrible, life-denying.
Jerusalem Athens Alexandria
Vienna London
Unreal
Yet the primitive pattern of sexual ‘burning’ underlying their inhabitants' actions and beneath religious belief is scarcely more attractive.
If the poem goes back to the origins of religion, it also goes back to the origins of society and language.
The old order has been destroyed.
The Waste Land begins a new poetry, or seeks to, but also marks the reborn post-war society.
The lines which read in draft
Who are those hooded hordes swarming
Over polish plains, stumbling in cracked earth
became in the final version universalized through the substitution of ‘endless’ for ‘Polish’.
The constant ‘hordes’ is significant.
Eliot knew the technical sense of this word: ‘The horde …is the protoplasm of the social domain…’
Wundt wrote that about ‘horde , meaning…an unorganized, in contrast to an organized, tribe of people…
The Tartars called a division of warriors a horda .’
The horde, ‘Characteristic of primitive times’, was the basic social unit.
Eliot, who was putting ‘Tartar horsemen’ in his poetry in 1924, seems to have been impressed by this passage.
The Waste Land returns to all sources, including the sources of human society.
What it brings back seems little, in terms of hope at least.
Religious hope flickers, as at Magnus Martyr, but the city crowds out the city churches, and going to the apparent sources of the religious life which seemed to hold promise in Lower Thames Street, Eliot found himself unable to sustain hope.
‘Eastern and western asceticism’ merge.
Christian Burial of the Dead combines with Buddha's Fire Sermon, but both are shot through with the sort of primitive fertility cycle hinted at in ‘Death by Water’.
The poem's exploration reveals all religions combined.
We are deliberately led on towards what Eliot knew was one of the phenomena found most universally in religions ranging from the most primitive to the most developed: thunder.
The veneration of thunder was mentioned continually in Eliot's anthropological reading: thunder as the terrifying voice of a god, commanding respect and faith.
Such a voice was necessary also, as bringing the rain so essential to life's continuation.
Among the Australians, Harrison wrote, sounds of thunder were simulated.
The roaring, boys and women are told, represents the muttering of thunder, and the thunder — this is the important point — is the voice of Dhuramoolan.
‘Thunder,’ said Umbara headman of the Ywin tribe, ‘is the voice of Him (and he pointed upwards to the sky) calling on the rain to fall and everything to grow up new.'
Thunder was associated with the Revelation story of death and rebirth (see, for example, Rev. 8: 5), with Australian rainmaking, with the Grail story lightning, and with the origin of drama.
Concerning thunder rites, Harrison even went so far as to quote Durkheim's ‘Le sacré, c'est le père du dieu .’
From sacred thunder the voice of a god might be born, a desert might be transformed, and man, savage man and even modern City man, might live again.
Ideas of the juxtaposition of the arid and the flowering desert were familiar to Eliot from the time when he had read Mayne Reid.
They grew with his reading of Frazer who described the ‘Burnt Land of Lydia’ contrasting with the surrounding verdure and marvelled (in the conclusion of The Dying God ) at ‘what may be called the Australian spring’where ‘the sandy and stony wilderness, over which the silence and desolation of death appear to brood, is suddenly, after a few days of torrential rain, transformed into a landscape smiling with verdure’.
Thunder, bringing rain, God's saving word, made possible ‘a new start’.
To find this, Eliot goes from the city to the savage beginnings of religion, from literature and drama to their ritual origins, and from his present as a London clerk to his earlier life.
There he found fragments uniting the personal and anthropological, whether in the ‘memory and desire’ of the Thomsonian buried corpse about which he had read at Harvard, in the Frazerian Mayne Reid deserts of his childhood, in Kipling's metempsychosis, Rostand, or Jacobean dramatists, or a passage recommended to him by his Harvard Sanskrit teacher, Charles Lanman, who had laid special emphasis on the advice which the Hindu ‘Lord of Creatures’gives to men in  thunder.
In a letter preserved in Eliot's copy of the Upanishads , Janman mentions this as an important passage.
But in Eliot's poem the response to these commands is uncertain and generally one of failure.
The ‘awful daring of a moment's surrender’ is an experience intense, but imprudent.
All there is in this thunder is not relief but a revival of ‘aethereal rumours’ which ‘only at nightfall…/Revive for a moment a broken Coriolanus.’
Hope is fleeting (‘for a moment’) and lost (‘broken’).
‘Your heart would have responded’, but did not (my italics).
The thunderword appears as the solution, the rain, a new beginning.
It looks back to Lanman as well as to Eliot's other Sanskrit teacher, the ex-anthropologist, Woods, who had written that to the Hindu, ‘Logically and temporally, the word seems to precede its idea and its meaning: a man thinks, the Hindu would say, because he is talking.
The benefactor of the race would be, not a Prometheus who brings a few sparks from above, but he who releases among men the most finished of all forces, an irresistible word.’
It is not difficult to relate such an idea both to Eliot's general preoccupation with articulation in his poetry, and in particular to The Waste Land where Eliot includes Lanman's explanatory gloss, ‘da — da — da = damyata datta dayadhuam ’, in his text.
After exhausting the gamut of expression from Cockney pub-talk to Dante, and running across the broad acres of comparative religion from intichiuma to St Magnus Martyr, Eliot seems to be generating the commands of a new religion reborn from the old, by returning in his rainmaking to the origin of religious rites.
He also appears to be physically generating a new language, having gone back to the simplest animal and natural cries.
We hear the words being formed from nature:
DA
Datta
…
DA
Dayadhvam
…
DA
Damyata
This would seem very close to the ‘bow-wow’ theory of linguistic evolution, one of the theories much discussed in Eliot's youth, which saw language as deriving from the imitation of natural sounds.
Such a theory had been largely abandoned.
Certainly to derive the polysyllabic Dayadhuam from the monosyllable DA is a precarious process.
Particularly associated with the discussion of theories of the linguistic origins of divinities was Max Müller, whose views Eliot saw as outdated.
Praising Durkheim, Eliot had written about and summarized Max Müller's attitude (largely based on Sanskrit philology), which looked at primitive religion chiefly through its myths, finding in primitive deities personifications of larger forces of nature and seeing in the primitive mind a sentiment of wonder at such forces, a basic intuition of the ‘infinite’.
But Durkheim, Eliot noted, did not attribute the origin of religion to wonder or to speculation, but saw in mythology only the savage's attempt to rationalize and justify his religious practices, ‘in regard to the true origin of which he is as much in the dark as the scientific investigator’.
The Waste Land is a poem which leaves its readers in darkness.
The rituals of the past are perverted and decayed.
Savage and city alike reduce to childishness in the final babel-like collapse, ‘London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down.’
The thunder ritual, which might offer salvation, is deeply suspect, potentially inane.
It is yet another part of the cycle of fertility which is seen in The Waste Land as a torturing cage.
The poem is not structureless.
Themes discussed above clearly unite the diverse materials.
If the poem were a formal mess, reordering the five sections would make no difference; in fact, such a reordering would destroy the cyclic form.
Even if the awaited rain fell at the poem's end, it would only lead back to that beginning, ‘breeding /Lilacs out of the dead land,’ with all its attendant suffering.
Eliot in his July 1921 ‘London Letter’ saw the result of a hot rainless spring simply as a ‘poor’‘crop of murders and divorces’in a ‘vacant term’.
Whitman's sentiments
When lilacs last in the dooryard bloom'd,
…
I mourn'd, and yet shall mourn with ever-returning spring.
have been taken over with a vengeance and put into the anthropological perspective which in the poem Eliot has applied to so much past literature.
Life is painful throughout, with only the briefest moments of relief — the hyacinth garden, the fishmen at Magnus Martyr, boating — all of which only lead back into the cycle of further (often sexual) pain.
The ‘Shantih’ at the poem's end may be simply a way of stopping, a ‘formal ending’; or it may be comparable to the exhausted collapse after the destruction at the end of ‘Gerontion’(Eliot considered ‘Gerontion’as preface to The Waste Land ).
Savage and city, bound together in a world fundamentally meaningless and hurtful, furnish expression for Eliot's private torment.
If there was to be an escape, it was to lie not in the ‘damp gust bringing rain’ but in ‘Shantih’as the Buddhist's passing beyond the cycles of creation.
Eliot was unable to renounce the world he knew.
He remained with Vivienne, the bank, and years of exhaustion in which he came close to death.
He decided eventually that to embrace Buddhism would be to plunge into a world too culturally alien.
In the time following The Waste Land he saw the world despairingly, in terms of inane, savage horror.
Run-down primitive rituals stalk ‘The Hollow Men’; in Sweeney Agonistes they overpower jazz-age London.
That play has as an epigraph a Christian equivalent of the escape through ‘Shantih’ from the cycles of creation: ‘Hence the soul cannot be possessed of the divine union, until it has divested itself of the love of created beings .’
But Sweeney Agonistes follows The Waste Land in presenting a world where fertility, renewing painful, inane life, is inescapable.
To see more deeply is only to see what Eliot found in the epigraph from Heart of Darkness which he thought might have been ‘somewhat elucidative’ for The Waste Land .
Conrad too found the primitive and metropolitan uniting to hint at something underlying and awful, ‘The horror! the horror!’
Tortured between the city and the savage, Eliot's was a nightmare world.
THAT'S ALL, THAT'S ALL, THAT'S ALL, THAT'S ALL
IN any marshalling of detailed evidence the dangers of forensic tedium are present.
They must always be risked.
Clues, however remote, may be crucial.
The argument for preserving Shakespeare's laundry bills is that, eventually, they may find their Sherlock Holmes.
The reader should bear in mind Eliot's exasperation at the graduate student who ‘identifies Corbière's ‘Rhapsode Foraine’ as an exploration ‘of folk-religion’.
Nevertheless, in the early twenties Eliot's mind was clearly full of not only ‘Frazer…
Durkheim…
Lévy-Bruhl’, but also of folklorists and anthropologists such as Sir E. B. Tylor, Robertson Smith, Miss Harrison, Miss Weston, A. B. Cook, F. M. Cornford, le Dr. Rendel Harris, Hartland, Elliot Smith, Gilbert Murray, et d'autres encore,— pour ne rien dire d'observateurs tels que Codrington, Spencer et Gillan [sic ]Hewett,[sic ]qui ont étudié les races primitives aux quatre coins de l'Empire.’
Eliot's spelling of ‘Gillen’ and his misremembering of Howitt's surname show that he was recalling material from his past.
In ‘The Hollow Men’ and Sweeney Agonistes we see that such material had not lain gathering dust.
It had germinated.
‘The Perfect Critic’(1920) discusses Arnold in the context of English criticism as dead or dying.
In a letter of that autumn Eliot confessed to using Arnold as a scarecrow — apparently lifeless, but having under his arm a real gun to be fired against the old guard.
Later he saw Arnold as initiating ‘the degradation of philosophy and religion’.
Associations of the scarecrow with powerlessness and religious degeneration resurface in ‘The Hollow Men’, where the scarecrow is again camouflage, but this time hopelessly unarmed:
Let me also wear
Such deliberate disguises
Rat's coat, crowskin, crossed staves
In a field
Behaving as the wind behaves
The crossed staves of Christian iconography become a place for hanging vermin.
Dressing in animal skins for ritual purposes and making divine effigies from straw are favourite Frazerian topics, as is ‘The Propitiation of Vermin by Farmers’.
The epigraph, ‘A penny for the Old Guy ’, stresses that Eliot's poem relates to ceremonial effigies.
Here, as in The Waste Land, Heart of Darkness is important.
‘Mistah Kurtz — he dead ’ emphasizes a connection between savage ritual and Eliot's crossed staves.
To obtain power by embracing darkness, Kurtz deified himself in line with primitive belief; ironically, Eliot's speaker dresses in relics of forgotten ritual out of a sense of total impotence, wishing to avoid a horrid dusk: ‘Not that final meeting/ In the twilight kingdom.’
It is landscape like Dowson's, ‘Hollow Lands’ where, in ‘the twilight of the year’, ‘dead people with pale hands/ Beckon’by a ‘weary river’, ‘where pale stars shine’where, at passion's enactment, ‘There fell thy shadow’.
But the poem's world, lit by the half-light of inaction, was a transmutation of Eliot's own suffering.
Vivienne, who had felt The Waste Land to be a part of herself, saw ‘The Hollow Men’ as a fitting follow-on, and related it to her own nightmares.
But, as before, the personal world and that of late nineteenth-century poetry are sieved through anthropological ideas, emotion distributed among unsettled voices, narrative, optative, and choral.
The poem is typographically complex.
The first section's ‘Kingdom’ may not be section three's ‘kingdom’.
Certainly ‘death's other kingdom’(my italics) suggests that the speakers' inane life is only another form of death.
So, for Sweeney Agonistes ‘Death or life or life or death /Death is life and life is death.’
Cornford had quoted the Euripidean question, ‘who knows if to be living be not death ?
Through anthropology Eliot  resuscitates the idea of the living dead, so common in late romantic poetry, where Death-in-Life is the eternal king.
Eliot's Hollow Men share their hopelessness with the inhabitants of the City of Dreadful Night.
Though partaking of classical underworlds, Eliot's kingdoms draw heavily on other kingdoms of the dead.
Lévy-Bruhl, citing Ellis's description of West African wandering spirits, used the phrase ‘dead land’(le pays des morts ).
His ‘desert soul’ points to Eliot's ‘cactus land’.
For Lévy-Bruhl's savage the ‘invisible…is most real’ and the dead ‘occasionally…heard in the wind’when, ghostly, they blow straws in the air; ‘the murmuring of the wind betrayed the presence of the dead’.
Eliot's ‘voices…
In the wind's singing’ signal a dreaded presence:
Eyes I dare not meet in dreams
In death's dream kingdom
These do not appear:
There, the eyes are
Sunlight on a broken column
There, is a tree swinging
Oesterley's The Sacred Dance , read by Eliot in 1923, discussed a savage who was awestruck when ‘a tree, swayed by the wind, moved’.
The ‘broken column’ may relate to the traditional graveyard image of premature death, as well as to the ‘broken stone’of section three where ‘stone images/ Are raised’.
In W. J. Perry's The Origin of Magic and Religion which he reviewed in July 1924, four months before these lines appeared, Eliot read of ‘old stone images’ of the Melanesians, of mana, of the handing down of rituals, and of W. H. R. Rivers's work on ‘an extensive literature in which attempts are made to bring the symbolism of myth and ritual into relation with modern views concerning its rôle in the dream and disease’.
For Eliot in 1922, Rivers had been ‘the great  psychologist’.
But, in Perry, he also read how the worship of stones fed off an earlier civilization and was dying out.
Such reading must have recalled Eliot's Harvard reading in anthropology and psychology of religion when he had noted, amongst other things Jevons's stress that ‘the worship of stones is a degradation of a higher form of worship’.
Jevons also stated that ‘ceremonies may continue to be performed as a matter of custom and tradition long after their original purpose and object have been forgotten’.
Eliot's stone images which ‘receive/ The supplication of a dead man's hand’ epitomize the dying embers of rites reduced to meaninglessness.
Such ritual brings no hope, and it diverts to barrenness emotions which might otherwise have been fruitful.
Is it like this
In death's other kingdom
Waking alone
At the hour when we are
Trembling with tenderness
Lips that would kiss
Form prayers to broken stone.
Again sex and religion combine through anthropological images invested with pain.
‘Art and religion’, Harrison had stated, ‘alike spring from unsatisfied desire.’
The poem concerns degradation of language and ritual, failings of word and Word.
Eliot's witty 1918 truncation of an Arnoldian phrase prefigures the Hollow Men's predicament; Clive Bell, ‘lingering between two worlds, one dead’, has the vice of inane mediocrity, incapable of ‘icy inviolability, or violent fury’.
His being ‘the Matthew Arnold of his time’ again connects, through the scarecrow image, with the Hollow Men who, like so many of Eliot's literary adversaries, are afflicted with a stuffed language, emptily ‘poetic’, the degradation of great poetry —
Leaning together
Headpiece filled with straw.
Alas!
After the starkly factual ‘Headpiece filled with straw’ comes that most absurdly poetic word of all, indicating the speaker's weakness.
Such  childish poeticizing is reinforced, in directing us to the level of the infant, by the ‘penny for the Old Guy ’ epigraph, by the dressing up as a scarecrow, and by the nursery rhyme, ‘Twinkle twinkle little star’, which inescapably underlies the line ‘Under the twinkle of a fading star’.
This use of nursery rhyme looks back to The Waste Land with its ‘London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down’ and anticipates another explicit nursery rhyme which, in slightly distorted form, opens section V of ‘The Hollow Men’.
Other forms of words instilled into the young are also present.
The Lord's Prayer is quoted in the repeated fragment ‘For Thine is the Kingdom ’ but the earlier uses of the word kingdom, particularly when it has a capital ‘K’, must already have prompted questions about allusion to this fundamental Christian rite, and about how it relates to those ‘prayers to broken stone’.
It is hard to avoid thinking that the hope of ‘Thy Kingdom come’ finds its opposite in
Let me be no nearer
In death's dream kingdom
which becomes an anti-Lord's Prayer, addressed to an unnamed hearer who may be the god of a universe of barrenness and death.
‘The Hollow Men’, not ‘The Hippopotamus’, is Eliot's most blasphemous poem.
Ideas of childishness, linguistic degeneration, and confusion support the central theme of the degradation of essential ritual.
The barely glimpsed possibility of Christian hope plunges to crazy childishness.
Here we go round the prickly pear
Prickly pear prickly pear
Here we go round the prickly pear
At five o'clock in the morning.
‘Ritual,’ Eliot wrote in 1923, ‘consisting of a set of repeated movements, is essentially a dance.’
He called The Sacred Dance ‘an excellent study of primitive religious dances’, and read how these were performed round sacred trees, but also ‘how often with the decay of old faiths the serious rites and pageants…have degenerated into the sports of children’.
It was ten years since Eliot had been  interested in Ecstasy and Dance Hypnosis among the American Indians , and had read in King about the lively ‘moonlight dances’ of Bushmen.
These would resurface, bereft of fun, in the childish dance of ‘The Hollow Men’, as later, much more lightly in the Jellicle Cats' ‘Reserving their terpsichorean powers/ To dance by the light of the Jellicle Moon.’
Though anthropological theories of religious degeneration were becoming outdated, Eliot was familiar with the version propounded by, for instance, Andrew Lang in his Making of Religion .
Tylor, about whose theories Eliot had been sceptical, was particularly strong on connecting the mental processes of savages with those of children, connections emphasized by Cornford, Frazer, Oesterley, Webb, Wundt, and others.
Cornford's book on some of the greatest Greek drama had as its frontispiece a Punch and Judy show.
Eliot was fascinated by the idea which Cornford had put forward ‘in ‘The Origin of Attic Comedy’,[that]this [medicine-man]Doctor may be identical with the Doctor who is called in to assist Punch after he has been thrown by his horse'.
Though primitive man may be something of a mystic, the distant voices and fading star in Eliot's poem show no ‘prelogical mentality’ from a golden age of childlike innocence.
The distant fading signals a run-down age of degenerate belief.
That it had paradisal origins is a simplistic assumption.
His criticism of Oesterley's work makes it clear that for Eliot a ritual's origins may be as meaningless as is its present form.
He attacks Oesterley for falling into ‘the common trap of interpretation’ by formulating intelligible reasons for the dancing of a primitive.
Eliot asserts that it is perfectly possible to claim ‘that primitive man acted in a certain way and then found a reason for it’.
The last section of ‘The Hollow Men’ in particular places its rituals in a crazy emptiness.
The verve of the nursery rhyme spins us round in a sinister way, since it is disturbing to see the familiar ‘mulberry bush’ of the children's rhyme replaced with the arid ‘prickly pear’, making the rhyme like some distorted survival of a primitive chant.
Eliot's substitution makes this seem an infertility dance.
As an American plant, ‘prickly pear’ also connects with his own childhood in a society whose religious values seemed atrophied.
Section V's voices are the most complex.
First comes the choral nursery rhyme, linked typographically with the italicized passages placed against the right-hand margin to differentiate them from the rest of the text.
These appear to be parts of the Lord's Prayer, but are confused by the addition of the complaint in the same typographical form, ‘Life is very long' , appropriately enough from the more primitive world of An Outcast of the Islands .
A third voice, represented by normal type and placed in the conventional part of the page, is itself like another ritual, a fact emphasized by the incantatory effect of semantic and lexical patterning in the repeated, only slightly varied form,
Between the a 
And the b 
Between the c 
And the d 
Falls the Shadow
This tripartite distinction, easy to uphold on the grounds of typography, is complicated, however, by the fact that fragments of the italicized Lord's Prayer passage find themselves brought in from the right-hand margin to form part of the body of the text when, further truncated, they make up the liturgical stutter of
For Thine is
Life is
For Thine is the
before a final all-embracing italicized section, looking back in its typography, placing, and, most importantly, its rhythm, recalls the opening nursery rhyme chorus, but gives it a universal voice which seems to include all that we have heard before in what is now a ritual chant ending with an appropriately childlike sound,
This is the way the world ends
This is the way the world ends
This is the way the world ends
Not with a bang but a whimper.
This combination of various voices, including the choric, makes the fifth section distinctly dramatic in its fragmentation, and, clearly deriving from the techniques employed in The Waste Land , also paves the way for the fragmentary drama of Sweeney Agonistes .
The final complexities and confusions of ‘The Hollow Men’ are deliberate.
Eliot's preoccupations with the ‘historical sense’ and cultural transmission grew from his own upbringing, but the particular stress on language was an important theme in the anthropology he read.
Language preserved a culture's essential social values.
Mallarmé's line which Eliot quoted in 1926, discussing ‘l'halluciné ’ and ‘un élément d'incantation ’in poetry, ‘Donner un sens plus pur aux mots de la tribu’, was reinforced by those anthropologists who found that the fundamental mentality of the tribesmen they studied ‘no doubt…is transmitted socially by means of language and concepts without which it could not be exercised.
It also implies work which has been previously accomplished, an inheritance handed down from one generation to another.’
In ‘The Hollow Men’ we see the corruption of such an inheritance.
Shockingly juxtaposed with an apparently childish survival of a primitive chant, the Lord's Prayer grows increasingly fragmented, corruptly incorporating the complaint, ‘Life is very long’, while being broken up and having its utterance prevented by ‘the Shadow’ in the long passages which are partly like a new ritual, usurping the old, and partly like a long gloss which dominates the original text of the prayer.
Vital patterns become distorted and lost in the sort of fragmentation and change with which Eliot's textual studies in a battery of languages and his reading of works like Cornford's had made him particularly familiar.
The mixture of religious vocabulary with philosophical ‘idea/ reality’, and sexual vocabulary (‘desire/ spasm’) hopelessly rearrange the elements discovered at the roots of religion.
Such confusions may draw, too, on Eliot's fears about the barrenness of his own life and about losing his own creativity.
Middleton Murry had stated that Eliot would never pass beyond ‘the point where discrepancy ceases between intention and achievement’.
The poem's ‘Shadow’, though, is made widely impersonal.
It falls to stifle creative enterprise, with the result that all that remain are dying echoes
For Thine is
Life is
For Thine is the
fading away to the final ‘whimper ’.
These echoes are the verbal  equivalent of degenerating survivals of primitive rituals whose juxtaposition with Christian liturgy recalls The Waste Land and Eliot's earlier interest in a possible universality of certain forms.
The anthropological scholars' emphasis on ‘Survival in Culture, is paralleled by one of the dominant motifs of romantic poetry: the fading, echoing voice.
So Wordsworthian romanticism gives way to Tennyson's ‘And answer, echoes, answer, dying, dying, dying’ and the Arnoldian ‘infinitely distant land,[from which]/Come airs, and floating echoes’(‘The Buried Life’).
Whether or not we accept Eliot's note that the title of ‘The Hollow Men’ draws on both Kipling's ‘The Broken Men’and Morris's ‘The Hollow Land’, there is little doubt that this ‘valley of dying stars’is not so far from the landscapes of Victorian romanticism.
as if to confirm this, Eliot's earlier draft of section II used the phrase ‘waking echo’.
In its dying echoes of both phrases and rituals, ‘The Hollow Men’ again shows romanticism and anthropology going hand in hand.
The confusion in the world of ‘The Hollow Men’ is furthered by a sense of confused identity.
Words come to the reader with little traditional sense of an author.
The use of nursery rhyme, prayer, and the splitting of the poem in section V, confirm this ‘authorlessness,, and the one time when the first person singular is employed, in section II, the reader senses a fear localized in the images used, more than in their beholder.
There are, of course, precise images employed and identifiable resonances.
‘The Hollow Men’ is about failures in creation, as well as about ‘the way the world ends’.
So the line, ‘Shape without form, shade without colour’, is reminiscent of the essential beginning when ‘the earth was without form, and void,’ but what follows is not a creation and a bringing of light, but only an impotence, ‘Paralysed force, gesture without motion’, bringing a twilight.
Memories of Genesis, chapter 1 are identifiable here.
Elsewhere, though, Eliot deliberately pruned away details so as to universalize his imagery.
The final version omits the ‘Tartar horsemen’ who were, Perry taught him, a degenerate form of a higher civilization; but their ‘furious force’makes them inappropriate company for those who will on no account be remembered as ‘lost/  Violent souls’.
Beyond a certain stage it becomes pointless to indicate what went into the landscape of ‘The Hollow Men’.
Suffice it to say that the desert landscape was no doubt encouraged by his enthusiasm in 1922 and 1923 for the work of an author whom he placed with James and Conrad — C. M. Doughty, whose ‘great work Travels in Arabia Deserta ’ he recommended, mentioning also that a good essay on Doughty's prose, including quotations from it, was contained in Middleton Murry's recent book Countries of the Mind .
The landscape of ‘The Hollow Men’ is very much a country of the mind, drawing on many of the ideas found in the pages of the anthropologists whom he catalogued as folklore experts in 1924.
Almost any of these writers might have supplied, for instance, details of the importance of the wind in primitive supernatural beliefs, but the idea of ‘the wind's singing’ is also a prime romantic conceit, as seen in the ‘gentle breeze’which wafts through The Prelude , or in the notion of the Aeolian harp.
The latter occurs as a trick used to fool the natives in Stevenson's ‘The Beach of Falesá’, where ‘the sound of singing in the wind’ caused by an Aeolian harp is mistaken for spirit voices near a mock-temple of imitation gods, ‘idols or scarecrows, or what not’.
The ‘voices…in the wind's singing’ and the ‘dried voices…quiet and meaningless /As wind in dry grass’are again transformations of romanticism linked with anthropology.
Other themes, too, such as boredom, the wish to present poetry in an ‘authorless’ way, often through impersonal ritual, and a concern with the degeneration of culture, grew from The Waste Land and are shared with Sweeney Agonistes .
‘The Hollow Men’ develops simpler diction.
The move to the stage was a logical one for Eliot, so many of whose poems have dramatic qualities.
In 1920, considering ‘the impotence of contemporary drama’, he had concluded that ‘The natural evolution, for us, would be to proceed in the direction indicated by Browning; to distil the dramatic essences, if we can, and infuse them into some other liquor.’
This The Waste Land did, but when Eliot writes elsewhere that any modern poet who applied himself to the drama would be an extremely conscious poet, using  the historical imagination, it is clear that around the time of The Waste Land he was also considering writing plays.
If Le Sacre du Printemps was important for the poem, significantly in 1924 he was thinking of a new ‘strict form’ of drama, akin to the Russian Ballet.
His ‘Fragments of an Aristophanic Melodrama’ began as The Waste Land reached conclusion.
Around 1920 when Eliot, with anthropological ideas in the forefront of his mind, had attacked Gilbert Murray's translations of Euripides, Pound tried to persuade him to translate Aeschylus' Agamemnon , but Eliot ‘sat on it for eight months or some longer period’.
Pound then made his own attempt, ‘having the watchman talk nigger’, and the project was still on the go in December 1921.
In early 1922 Eliot told Pound that he was trying to read Aristophanes, apparently on Pound's recommendation.
Pound replied that Aristophanes might be depressing, and that to raise the heavy phallus to its desired height Dixie folk melodies might be more effective.
This reveals a mutual awareness of theories of the origin of Attic comedy in fertility ritual.
It also shows Pound relating such ritual (and Greek drama) to jazz.
He was not the first to do this.
Popular American poetry of the period encouraged not only ‘the coming together of East and West’, but also Vachel Lindsay's attempts ‘to carry…vaudeville form back towards the old Greek precedent of the half-chanted lyric’.
Harriet Monroe looked to ‘the wonderful song-dances of the Hopis and other of our aboriginal tribes’ to ‘revitalize’literature.
One of the best known of Lindsay's pieces of ‘Higher Vaudeville’ was ‘The Congo’, which linked savage chants and jazz rhythms in a rather bathetically facile way that just misses being electrifying.
BOOM, steal the pygmies,
BOOM, kill the Arabs,
BOOM, kill the white men,
HOO, HOO, HOO.


Listen to the yell of Leopold's ghost
Burning in Hell for his hand-maimed host.
Hear how the demons chuckle and yell
Cutting his hands off, down in Hell.
Though Eliot did not like Lindsay's work, he did think that it might have paved the way for better things.
One of these, surely, is Sweeney Agonistes where the worlds of jazz, primitive ritual, and Greek drama again combine in an anthropological perspective.
If ‘The Hollow Men’ presents the degeneration of ritual, then Sweeney Agonistes while remaining aware of the decline attempts a reconstruction, but that reconstruction, like The Waste Land , sees humanity as trapped in the torturing cycle of sexual fertility.
According to Moody, this play was in draft form by April 1923.
But Eliot continued to work on it, and it was not published until 1926–7.
This period is, if we except the years at Harvard, the period in which his interest in anthropology was strongest.
‘The Beating of a Drum’, whose very title relates to Eliot's ideas in Sweeney Agonistes , appeared in October 1923, listing Cornford and a host of anthropological writers.
Earlier that year, at around the time of the drafting of the play, Eliot had invited Jane Harrison to contribute to the Criterion .
In 1924 he was describing Lewis's anthropologically influenced ‘Mr Zagreus and the Split-Man’ as ‘a masterpiece’; the following year Eliot and Lewis discussed Perry and Harrison.
In August 1923 Eliot had written to Alfred Kreymborg (who published ‘Portrait of a Lady’ in 1915), responding enthusiastically to Kreymborg's Puppet Plays , and asking for advice on manufacturing of puppets.
He told Kreymborg that he was planning puppet plays of his own.
Already we have seen Eliot's interest in the connection between the medicine men and Punch and Judy, as suggested by Cornford in The Origin of Attic Comedy .
Eliot's work was never performed by puppets, but Cornford's influence remained central, and a 1933 letter shows that other ideas expressed in ‘The Beating of a Drum’ played their part in Eliot's concept of his play.
In ‘Sweeney Agonistes’ the action should be stylized as in the Noh drama — see Ezra Pound's book and Yeats' preface and notes to ‘The Hawk's Well.’
Characters ought to wear masks; the ones wearing old masks ought to give the impression of being young persons (as actors) and vice versa.
Diction should not have too much expression.
I had intended the whole play to be accompanied by light drum taps to accentuate the beats (esp.
the chorus, which ought to have a noise like a street drill).
The characters should be in a shabby flat, seated at a refectory table, facing the audience; Sweeney in the middle with a chafing dish, scrambling eggs.
(See ‘you see this egg.’)
(See also F. M. Cornford: ‘Origins of Attic Comedy’, which is import ant to read before you do the play)
Several points are significant about this passage.
First, Eliot's stress on a ritualistic presentation.
He was familiar with Pound's writing on Japanese drama, and had been impressed by the first performance of At the Hawk's Well when he had seen a well-known Japanese dancer take the role of the hawk.
Moreover, he had emphasized to Kreymborg his wish to preordain every move and gesture and grouping.
Such a notion of ‘preordaining’ strongly suggests Jane Harrison's concept of the dromenon — the rite pre-done and re-done .
The drum taps seek to restore the drum whose loss in modern drama is stated at the end of ‘The Beating of a Drum’, while the striking suggestion that the choral passages ‘to have a noise like a street drill’ corresponds to Eliot's praise of Le Sacre du Printemps for its uniting the noises of primitive and metropolitan life.
Like The Waste Land ,Sweeney Agonistes explicitly unites the savage and the city.
Events in a modern flat follow the schema according to which Cornford analyses Aristophanic comedy, relating it to fertility ritual.
Comford's analysis divided the plays initially into two sections.
Of these two pads, the first normally consists of the Prologue , or exposition scenes; the Entrance of the Chorus (Parodos ): and what is now generally called the Agon , a fierce ‘contest’ between the representatives of two parties or principles, which are in effect the hero and villain of the whole piece.
The other main part of the plays was the Parabasis , normally split  into two parts and accompanied by one or more Scenes and a Chorikon , before a finale often involving a feast or rejuvenation, and leading to a final Exodos .
As well as outlining this structure in the body of his text, Cornford supplied summary outlines of the plays in a ‘Synopsis of the Extant Plays’.
The Birds , for instance, follows the pattern
PROLOGUE
PARODOS
AGON
PARABASIS
SCENE
PARABASIS II
Two Messenger announcements
CHORIKON
CHORIKON
SCENE
Another messenger announcement
EXODOS
Cornford's synopses emphasize such ritual elements as a ‘FIGHT’, ‘COOKING’, leading to a revival of life, the ‘FEAST’ and the ‘SACRIFICE’, and, as in The Birds , the ‘Invocation of the Muse’.
Certain parts of the play, frequently the Parabasis , would contain material relating to contemporary events, originally theological, but later political.
Interruptions of the action by figures of the Alazon (Impostor) type, marked ‘AL.’
by Cornford, were also common.
Those buffoon figures (related by Cornford to incidents in Punch and Judy plays) were often figures from contemporary life who are eventually driven from the stage.
Eliot's pencilled plan for Sweeney Agonistes follows remarkably closely the format of Cornford's ‘Synopses.’
The numbers on the left are proposed numbers of lines.
Eliot is here making use of the most modern anthropologically based classical scholarship in order to construct his own primitive play.
The artist is being at once more primitive as well as more civilized, than his contemporaries.
The figure written to the right of ‘Parabasis II ’ appears to be ‘P. 124’.
In The Origin of Attic Comedy , page 124 is the beginning of the section entitled ‘The Second Part of the Parabasis’.
As the rite is planned, the London bank clerk adds up correctly the figures in the left-hand column.
One of Cornford's most important implications for Eliot was his redefinition of what ‘comedy’ meant in terms of Greek and more primitive drama.
The concluding chapter of his Origin was entitled ‘Comedy and Tragedy’, and stressed ‘the derivation of Comedy and Tragedy from similar ritual performances’, differing only ‘as emphasis were thrown on the conflict and death of the hero, or on the joyful resurrection and marriage that followed’.
For Eliot in 1923 all  primitive or savage art contained comic and tragic elements, comedy and tragedy being not just late but maybe also ‘impermanent intellectual abstractions’.
Eliot stressed that his own opinion was that once these abstractions had developed in the course of several generations within a civilization they required either renewal or else replacement.
A concern to return to such primitive roots no doubt explains why in his draft synopsis he originally used the word ‘Melocomic’ of what would later become his ‘Fragments of an Aristophanic Melodrama’.
Melodrama, perched on the uneasy edge between tragedy and the horribly grotesque, points also to the music hall, where Eliot had found those last vestiges of English myth.
Now, through anthropology, he renewed them.
Eliot's synopsis included the murder of Mrs Porter.
Cornford's ‘Resurrection Motive ’ showed that the aspect of physical violence in Old Comedy extended beyond ‘horseplay’to the killing of a principal adversary, sometimes a villain.
Yet sometimes, as in the English Mummers' Play, ‘it is the representative of the good principle that is killed by the evil, and afterwards brought back to life’.
It is not hard to fit Mrs Porter's death and resurrection into Cornford's schemes.
Nor is the final planned dispensation of eggs out of place in a ‘basic ritual scheme in which ‘the cooking and eating of a Feast’ are ‘canonical’, part of a ‘sacramental meal…through which the God passes to his resurrection’.
In the first London stage production, Sweeney pursued Doris with a razor, and her screams were heard offstage.
Eliot, who invited his friends to this performance, who attended some of the rehearsals, and who expressed his full confidence in the director Rupert Doone, continued to follow in his text the original impetus which Cornford had given him.
Eliot's irony produced
SWEENEY.
I'll be the cannibal.
DORIS.
I'll be the missionary.
I'll convert you!
SWEENEY.
I'll convert you !
Into a stew.
A nice little, white little, missionary stew.
I have already cited in relation to‘The Hollow Men’ Cornford's idea of the degeneration of ritual into debased formats.
Concerning masks in the drama, he writes how at first the characters who wore them took part in ‘A certain unvarying ritual action,…a religious mystery’ which became ‘grotesque’.
All Eliot's characters in Sweeney Agonistes are grotesque.
Their actions are part of his reconstruction and interpretation of a once potent ritual, part of his own ‘Vitalizing of the Classics ’.
Yet the question arises whether the ritual performed in the London flat has any validity.
Can the fundamentally religious ritual be the new foundation of a piece of modern art, to be evaluated according to purely aesthetic criteria?
Such questions preoccupied Eliot at the time.
He wondered if art could continue to exist or be justified if it left behind its primitive purposes with the result that aesthetic objects became direct objects of attention.
Sweeney Agonistes , as much as the later prose of Arnold, is an attempt to come to terms with this situation and to react against it.
Eliot's solution was to attempt to revive what anthropology had revealed to him as the very oldest form of ritual and express it through the phenomena of stylized contemporary life, uniting the savage and the city.
That he thought this possible is suggested by his comments on Frazer whom he saw not as an investigator of a remote and hence irrelevant past, but as someone whose researches are like Freud's, of apparently universal application, applying not to a particular historical period but to ‘the soul’.
Frazer, through setting out to study an essential ritual of the primitive dead, had done what Eliot hoped modern literature, including Sweeney Agonistes would do.
He had become a ‘vitalizing’ force.
Compared with Freud's, Frazer's work was ‘of perhaps greater permanence,, because for Eliot it was neither a collection of data nor a theory.
The absence of speculation is a conscious and deliberate scrupulousness, a positive point of view.
And it is just that: a point of view, a vision, put forward through a fine prose style, that gives the work of Frazer a position above that of other scholars of equal erudition and perhaps greater ingenuity, and which gives him an inevitable and growing influence over the contemporary mind.
Along with other scholars Frazer had produced a new view of classical studies which would, in Eliot's view, have a deep effect on future literature.
Eliot had long been accumulating the anthropological knowledge which would affect the literature of his own future.
As we have seen, it was not just the anthropology which he read at the time of composition which played its part in the great works of the early 1920s.
In 1926, for instance, he returned to Westermarck (whom he had read eleven years before) attacking his ideas that the origin and development of the ideas of good and evil were caused merely by economic, genetic, and hygienic factors.
Yet if Eliot continued to remember his anthropological reading, this does not mean that his view of it remained unchanged.
In 1913 he had attacked Frazer for attempting to explain the savage using the ideas of modern life, offering interpretation rather than fact.
In 1924, though, Eliot has come to perceive The Golden Bough as a ‘stupendous compendium of human superstition and folly’, seeing in it increasingly less ‘interpretation’, so that it has become ‘a statement of fact’ which is not involved in the maintenance or fall of any theory of Frazer's.
Yet to present the deeds of savages as ‘folly’ is a crucial act of theoretical interpretation which undermines all claims to be presenting mere ‘fact’.
Eliot in rereading Frazer omits to apply his own frequently used ‘difference between an interpretation and a fact’; his blindness to the Frazerian interpretation which equates savage fact with folly comes about surely because Eliot himself sees the two as one.
He was quite prepared to argue the case that savage practices might be integral to a culture: ‘We may not like the notion of cannibalism or head-hunting, but that it formed part of a distinct and tenable form of culture in Melanesia is indisputable.’
But this does not mean that he is advocating head-hunting.
Here, as more explicitly in ‘Marie Lloyd’, he uses the word ‘culture’ in an anthropological sense which stresses its general inclusiveness.
It would be absurd for Eliot to advocate that head-hunting would reinvigorate British society, just as it is absurdly funny to listen to the description of Sweeney's ‘missionary stew’.
Yet when such an absurdity threatens to become literal, its ‘folly’ becomes horrific.
Compelled to re-enact  rituals which appear only as stupid, trapped within the cyclic world of ‘the love of created beings ’, Eliot's characters lead ‘preord’ lives of deep horror.
A passage from Notes Towards the Definition of Culture , relying on ideas from 1913, hints how the poet was using his anthropological reading when discussing in an anthropological context the difference between imaginative understanding and lived experience.
Understanding involves an area more extensive than that of which one can be conscious; one cannot be outside and inside at the same time…
The man who, in order to understand the inner world of a cannibal tribe, has partaken of the practice of cannibalism, has probably gone too far: he can never quite be one of his own folk again.
* * Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness gives a hint of something similar.
Nowhere in Eliot's anthropological reading had he come across an example of a student of primitive civilization who had himself turned cannibal.
But his mind naturally associates anthropology with artistic works dealing with primitive life, since these are the ultimate attempts at ‘imaginative understanding’.
Heart of Darkness mattered not for giving Eliot the anthropological reader a better idea of how primitive society worked, but for showing Eliot the poet that the life of the savage and that of the modern urban clerk intersected on the deepest level, the level of ‘The Horror’ which was, essentially for him, the realization of evil within man.
The work of art was especially fitted to reveal this, since its audience may both criticize, yet at the same time be involved in, its enactment.
The ritual nature of Sweeney Agonistes emphasizes and encourages the notion of participation in a ritual process, through its use of those aspects of culture in which the people of the period participated most: jazz, music-hall songs, melodrama.
Eliot's use of primitive ritual to reveal the horror of Sweeney's existence relates to his connection of Conrad and James as writers who involve their audience in the apprehension of deepseated levels of evil.
The great affair not to relate, but to make the reader supply,cooperate .
Preface to Turn of Screw .
How to suggest Evil.
This not weakness.
I speak of T. of S. and H. of D. together because both attempt to present Evil…
Evil is rare, bad is common…
Real Evil is to Bad just as Saintliness and Heroism to Decent Behaviour.
Nothing  frightful in Kudz participating in native rites — or in Miles using vile language to schoolboys.
These notes date from 1932–3, but they make explicit what is implicit in the use of primitivism in Sweeney Agonistes .
Eliot's play aimed to penetrate beyond the ‘frightful’ to a deeper sense of universal evil —‘Any man might do a girl in’(my italics).
This is manifested through the unity of supposedly civilized life and the most elementary barbarity on a level which appears to be that of the basic ‘need’ which Eliot had accused the anthropologists of ignoring.
This need seems caused partly by Original Sin closely bound up with sexuality.
Eliot was tormented, like Orestes.
Locked in a marriage with a wife who showed increasing signs of mental instability and whose health constantly brought her to the point of death, exhausted in his work and fearing for his own life and sanity, Eliot's view of relations between the sexes is at its bleakest, as is shown not least in the epigraphs, which were originally further universalized by including (in the draft synopsis),
Casey Jones was a fireman's name;
In the red light district he won his fame.
OLD BALLAD.
In Sweeney Agonistes it is not mere action which matters.
As the fragments stand, Doris is not actually murdered.
What matters is the effect of basic instinct which Eliot had earlier presented as the result of actual murder in a simpler urban context when he described in ‘Eeldrop and Appleplex’ the living death experienced by a man who has murdered his mistress.
Such a man is already living in a different world.
He has ‘crossed the frontier’.
In Sweeney Agonistes , the crossing of the frontier is more explicit.
Not only is it a move into a realm where the distinction between life and death seems, as in ‘The Hollow Men’, to have broken down, it is also a crossing to the world of the ‘cannibal isle’ which is revealed as only another version of the life left behind, and where the realization that ‘Life is very long ’is not escaped from, but reinforced.
That phrase from An Outcast of the Islands is a reminder that Heart of Darkness was not the only Conrad novel in Eliot's mind during this period.
Willems in Conrad's story, is another one of the  clerks whose lives so fascinated Eliot.
‘A confidential clerk’ in Macassar, Willems finds his marriage going wrong and himself, obsessed with an Arab woman with whom he flies to a remote tropical island, becoming a savage.
In its ‘threatening twilight’ over a ‘dead land’, this work of fiction meshed with Eliot's anthropological reading to provide the means of expression for his personal agony in ‘The Hollow Men’, and in The Waste Land .
Few men other than Eliot have read through the lengthy catalogues of ritual in Frazer's volumes and found those volumes to be ‘throbbing at a higher rate of vibration with the agony of spiritual life’.
Much of this agony Eliot imported from his own sufferings, though, as usual, these are transmuted through his reading.
The agony of An Outcast of the Islands is heightened by several occasions when the meeting of eyes between those who have been in love is one of terrifying intensity.
Eyes ‘moving no more than the eyes of a corpse…follow me like a pair of jailers…
They are big, menacing — and empty.
The eyes of a savage…
’ At the same time as this Conrad work was in his head, Eliot received anthropological proof that ‘Life is very long ’for ‘civilized’people and for ‘savages’alike in an age of degeneration, and that if the savage revealed a level of horror hidden in city life, then similarly civilized man might corrupt the savage.
A passage from Eliot's 1923 ‘London Letter’ in appreciation of Marie Lloyd, shows several of the ideas discussed above: fatal degeneration of the necessary participation in cultural actions, the inanity of modern life, and the uniting of city and savage.
Eliot describes how working men who went to the music hall to see Marie Lloyd and who joined in the chorus were performing part of the business of acting, collaborating with the artist in a manner essential in all art, most obviously (for Eliot) in dramatic art.
The cinema lulls such working men into an apathy similar to that shown towards art by the bourgeoisie and upper classes, Eliot argues.
Then, from discussing modern urban life, Eliot makes a remarkable leap.
In a most interesting essay in the recent volume of Essays on the Depopulation of Melanesia the great psychologist W. H. R. Rivers adduces evidence which has led him to believe that the natives of that unfortunate archipelago are dying out principally for the reason that the ‘Civilization’ forced  upon them has deprived them of all interest in life.
They are dying from pure boredom.
Eliot goes on to envisage a future in which applied science replaces each theatre by a hundred cinemas, each musical instrument by one hundred gramophones, each horse by one hundred cheap motor cars, with the result that the population of the whole civilized world speedily follows the lot of the Melanesians.
The relationship between this passage and the ‘There's no telephones’ passage of ‘Fragment of an Agon’is clear, and has often been indicated.
Though Rivers gave some slight encouragement to Eliot in suggesting that even in our own society, religious changes have unforeseen and far-reaching effects parallel to those caused by the abolition of head-hunting in Melanesia, Eliot's linking of ‘cannibal isle’ and that ‘slick place’London goes directly against the main thrust of the book which stresses ‘the almost immeasurable difference between Melanesian and European cultures, and the sharpness of the line which still divides them where they come in contact’.
Fictional stressing of deep connections between primitive and developed man, as well as the connections between primitive ritual and modern dramatic and religious practice stressed by Cornford, Harrison, Frazer, and the others encouraged Eliot to interpret the Rivers book in a way which let him see in it a reflection of his personal crisis.
In the Marie Lloyd piece there are hints at Eliot's childhood linking of ‘civilized and uninteresting’, as he laments the destruction of primitive South Sea life.
Certainly the author of ‘The Man Who Was King’ for whom savages were interesting, if rather silly, became the reader of the romantically tinged Frazer, but essentially Eliot's view of ‘civilization’went deeper than gramophones.
There was, though, a sometimes subliminally romantic tinge to much of the anthropology Eliot read, not least in Frazer.
The criticism of anthropology, from Lévy-Bruhl's attack on the nineteenth century to Lévi-Strauss's critique of Lévy-Bruhl, followed by Derrida's deconstructions of Lévi-Strauss, has largely been an expulsion of perceived romanticism.
Sweeney Agonistes also recalls Eliot's childhood when he wrote of the ‘South Pacific’.
Eliot at twenty-one recalled reading The Ebb-Tide .
The theme of the importation to the South Seas of disease and decadence which opens Stevenson's novel would be the theme of Essays on the Depopulation of Melanesia .
In The Ebb-Tide , also, the exiled American and two Englishmen, one of whom is a ‘London clerk’, initially rot on the beach with ‘memoirs of the music-hall’.
Later, confronted with the ambiguously dominating Attwater who kings it over the natives on his atoll, one of them ‘broke into a piece of the chorus of a comic song which he must have heard twenty years before in London: meaningless gibberish that, in that hour and place’, seemed hateful as a blasphemy: ‘Hikey, pikey, crikey, fikey, chillinga — wallaba dory.’
Other music-hall songs punctuate the text.
The action takes place thousands of miles from ‘the perennial roar of London’, but the reader remains very much aware of London and the civilization it stands for as moral standards crumble; ‘savage’ and ‘white man’become confused until the conduct of the whites, intent on mutual destruction, seems worse than that of ‘these poor souls — and even Sally Day, the child of cannibals, in all likelihood a cannibal himself — so faithful to what they knew of good’.
At one stage the story of the white man transported miraculously from Paumotuan beach to central London brings the mo worlds immediately together.
‘At first I was dazzled, and covered my eyes, and there didn't seem the smallest change; the roar of the Strand and the roar of the reef were like the same: hark to it now, and you can near the cabs and buses rolling and the streets resound.’
The idea of the traffic as waves is a traditional romantic conceit, uniting elemental nature and man-made metropolis.
Eliot's linking of noises from the Steppes with those of the London Underground is an extreme version of this conceit.
In the late romanticism of Stevenson's tale of corruption in the South Seas, the islanders are not seen as virtuous noble savages, but certainly appear no worse than the white men who take advantage of them.
Stevenson, like Tylor, sees his islanders as childlike.
Behind Sweeney Agonistes lies Rivers, but Eliot's interpretation and use of Rivers owes much to the Stevensonian world of his childhood reading, where white men seek paradise with island  wives arrayed in ‘the scarlet flowers of the hibiscus’, only to find too often that they are condemned to a life of soul-destroying boredom where ‘Night on the Beach’ is followed monotonously by ‘Morning on the Beach’.
Eliot refocuses his island world for ‘the Age of Jazz’, in a piece not entirely dissimilar to, but more bitter than, his earlier vaudeville experiment in ‘Suite Clownesque’.
SONG BY KLIPSTEIN AND KRUMPACKER
SNOW AND SWARTS AS BEFORE
My little island girl
My little island girl
I'm going to stay with you
And we won't worry what to do
We won't have to catch any trains
And we won't go home when it rains
We'll gather hibiscus flowers
for it won't be minutes but hours
for it won't be hours but years
And the morning
And the evening
And noontide
And night
Morning
Evening
Noontide
Night
The emptiness of life reduced to mere sex and death is as awful on the island as in the flat.
Rituals of divination in the flat produce a combination of these which mirrors the elements of island life.
So Doris and Dusty in the flat read their cards and discover boredom in monotonously cyclical jazz rhythms and rhymes, while on the supposed ‘cannibal isle’ Doris discovers a similar tedium.
SWEENEY.
Nothing to see but the palmtrees one way And the sea the other way, Nothing to hear but the sound of the surf.
Nothing at all but three things
DORIS.
What things?
SWEENY.
Birth, and copulation and death.
That's all, that's all, that's all, that's all, Birth, and copulation, and death.
The twin emphases on the deaths of islanders and the need to repopulate produced many statistical tables in Rivers's book which stressed that
That's all the facts when you come to brass tacks:
Birth, and copulation, and death.
While the theme of loss of interest in life, linked to Cornford's pointing to the continual presence of phallic songs and rituals in the comedies he studied, combine in the crude punning that ensues.
DORIS.
I'd be bored.
SWEENEY.
You'd be bored.
Birth, and copulation, and death.
DORIS.
I'd be bored.
SWEENEY.
You'd be bored.
Eliot deliberately presents his South Sea life in crude terms.
Partly this involves his audience in material which seems at first sight the familiar stuff of the music-hall chorus.
Partly, though, it shows the degeneration of a world view according to which the conventionally ‘romantic’ tropics, strangely remote world of the ‘breadfruit, banyan, palmleaf ’have become a place
Where the Gauguin maids
In the banyan shades
Wear palmleaf drapery
Under the bam
Under the boo
Under the bamboo tree.
Cliché imagery reveals the banality of the vision.
Life under the bamboo is just as trite as life in the city where Doris, Klipstein, and Krumpacker exchange their polite, meaningless words.
DORIS.
You like London, Mr. Klipstein?
KRUMPACKER.
Do we like London? do we like London!
Do we like London!!
Eh what Klip?
KLIPSTEIN.
Say, Miss — er — uh — London's swell.
We like London fine.
KRUMPACKER.
Perfectly slick.
Essentially, in the world of ‘brass tacks’ what connects the kingdom of the bamboo and the city of London are eggs.
Sweeney scrambling eggs in his London flat is also the Sweeney of the fertility ceremonies  described by Cornford, as Eliot's conjunction of notes ‘(See ‘you see this egg’)(See also F. M. Cornford…)’ reminds us.
You see this egg
You see this egg
Well that's life on a crocodile isle.
The human egg as centre of fertility is at the heart of Sweeney Agonistes and of the rites on which it is patterned.
Yet the very value of that fertility is questioned.
If Eliot seeks to draw on the power of an ancient ritual, he also aims at the horrifying frisson obtained by re-enacting the ritual with the opposite of its traditional meaning.
Speaking of the cinema in the Marie Lloyd piece, he accuses it of being ‘rapid-breeding’ and reducing its audience to a ‘state of amorphous protoplasm’.
The generation of life and its source are both here seen as bad.
As source of fertility, Doris dislikes the very essence of life just as much as Sweeney finds it tedious to ‘drink this booze’ and ‘have a tune’,
DORIS.
I don't like eggs; I never liked eggs; And I don't like life on your crocodile isle.
Life is where girls are murdered ‘with a gallon of lysol in a bath,, and where the tedious business of words only elicits the answer that there is no point to speech.
The play's action is zany and at times hilarious, full of mockery and tricks of speech.
Like the quatrain poems it is funny at the same time as serious.
One of Eliot's great strengths is his continuing sense of humour; even The Waste Land has Mr Eugenides and the pseudo-gentility of Madame Sosostris's ‘dear Mrs. Equitone’.
Yet through the sometimes bitter humour of Sweeney Agonistes the horror is apparent.
At the first performance Vivienne was terrified by Sweeney, seeing him as a homicidal madman.
Sex in the play is grotesquely comic and horrible at the same time.
The age-old idea of the sexual union as a death comes literally true in the impulse to kill which thrusts a man into a new world of horror.
The murderous instincts of the sex war lead not to union but to a fragmentation which destroys the ability to comprehend life on any normal level,
There wasn't any joint
There wasn't any joint
after which horror one can only return to the banalities of modern city life which protect the individual from the terror of the deep insight.
The movement of Conrad's Marlow back to Brussels and London is the movement back from the realization that death and life are one to the simple considerations of drinking, having a tune, and paying the rent, however much these may be ‘nothing to me and nothing to you’.
This matches darkly the closing of the gates of vision in ‘Burnt Norton’ where ‘human kind/ Cannot bear very much reality’.
What seems to be about to be a tour of London given by ‘a real live Britisher,—
Sam of course is at home in London,
And he's promised to show us around.
becomes at its most intense moments a journey, through distinctly modern music-hall conventions, to the most savage level of behaviour.
London transforms; the ‘real live Britisher’ seems to know all too much about death.
That original title,Wanna Go Home, Baby ?, is casually jazzy, but the baby's essential home is not London but the primitive roots of civilization and, specifically, the womb.
Sweeney Agonistes takes its audience back not simply to what was seen as the childhood, even babyhood of ritual and civilization, but further down the evolutionary ladder to the most primitive level of that ‘amorphous protoplasm’ which makes up the human egg.
And this homecoming is seen as futile, nightmarish.
If ‘The Hollow Men’ traces the degeneration of ritual to a final babyish ‘whimper ’, then Sweeney Agonistes attempts to reconstruct the most basic rituals only to end in a bang.
The play tails off into the cries and inarticulate exclamations where, escaping the situation in which ‘I gotta use words’ in their normal sense, language becomes a cry of despair and horror as primal as the ‘Wah!
Wah!
Wah! wa-a-ah !’ which Oesterley had quoted from Spencer and Gillen's account of aborigines dancing around the destroyed home of a dead man.
And perhaps you're alive
And perhaps you're dead
Hoo ha ha
Hoo ha ha
Hoo
Hoo
Hoo


KNOCK KNOCK KNOCK
KNOCK KNOCK KNOCK
KNOCK
KNOCK
KNOCK
The connections in Sweeney Agonistes between the ‘going home’ to primitive life and the ‘going home’to childhood relates to Eliot's linking of anthropological material with psychological studies.
We have already seen him comparing Frazer with Freud.
His personal troubles sent him in search of analysts for both himself and his wife, sometimes with disastrous consequences.
Clearly Eliot was fascinated by the relationships posited between art and ritual, so that he stressed in 1923 that ‘all art emulates the condition of ritual.
That is what it comes from and to that it must always return for nourishment.’
As editor of the Criterion , Eliot at this period often used anthropological material, himself selecting books for review and reading every word of what would appear in print.
So, in 1923, he printed Yeats's ‘Biographical Fragment’ giving the poet's dreams with learned notes on tree worship, dying gods, and falling stars (which we may be tempted to relate to ‘The Hollow Men’).
In 1924, as well as a contribution from Lévy-Bruhl on ‘Primitive Mentality and Gambling’, the Criterion carried Lewis's ‘Mr. Zagreus and the Split-Man’ where, as in Tarr , modern civilization is constantly punctured by a deeper, often clearly anthropological element in a strange world of lustrations, masked figures, and phallic hands.
To encourage Lewis in this direction, Eliot gave him to review in the next year Egyptian Mummies and Essays on the Evolution of Man by Elliot Smith, as well as Medicine, Magic and Religion by W. H. R. Rivers.
In 1923 he had himself mentioned Smith's work, and in 1925 he published Smith's long essay on ‘The Glamour of Gold’.
Lewis's review of these books makes clear the nature of  their importance.
He points out how for Smith, ‘The similarity between the average Londoner or Berliner to-day, and the average ‘primitive man’…is insisted on', and quotes from Smith's text sentiments which reverberate throughout Eliot's own work: ‘There is no innate tendency in man to be progressive.’
Here were studies emphasizing the fragility of culture and producing a ‘doctrine…infinitely more pessimistic than Darwin's’.
Reading Rivers and Smith a couple of years earlier, Eliot had appreciated this to the full, as his relating contemporary life to Melanesian death in ‘Marie Lloyd’ shows.
He was only too pleased to print, and to read, other men's views which strengthened his own position.
Though he quarrelled sharply with I. A. Richards's statement that Eliot had effected ‘a complete severance between his poetry and all beliefs’, the editor of the Criterion did not dissent from Richards's hostile analysis of Lawrence's ‘reversion to primitive mentality’.
To make the point clear, Eliot printed Richards's criticisms immediately before Lawrence's short story, ‘The Woman Who Rode Away’, in the July 1925 Criterion .
As the story of a white woman who rides into the Mexican mountains to be sacrificed, naked and unprotesting, to the god of the Indians in order to maintain for them ‘The mastery that man must hold, and that passes from race to race’, this piece, particularly when contrasted with Sweeney Agonistes , makes clear the essential difference between Eliot's interest in the savage and that of Lawrence.
For Lawrence, the savage world was authentic and admirable.
For Eliot in 1925 it was horribly inescapable.
Primitive sexual rituals pursue Sweeney and Doris even into the heart of London, pursue them like Furies.
What, for Lawrence, was to be embraced, was for Eliot a torment.
But it was a torment which had to be seen and analysed.
As Lawrence witch-doctored to the century's ills, Eliot too had his ‘craving for ritual’.
He was also concerned with primitive ritual as underlying developed ritual.
For the proper ‘return’ it seemed essential to go to the earliest known sources.
In 1925, considering a book by Cecil Sharp on the history of dancing, Eliot made the criticism that though Sharp was a historian, he was neither a philosopher nor an anthropologist, and so his brief notes were not just insufficient, but actually conducive to error.
Eliot suggested that whoever studied dancing had not only to include its highest forms — ballet and the Mass — but also primitive dances such as the Australian ceremonies detailed by Spencer and Gillen and Howitt (whom Eliot misnamed Hewett).
Sharp's book is broken under Eliot's imaginative obsession.
Eliot goes on to wish for a combination of religious, anthropological, and neurological knowledge as exemplified by Rome, Cambridge, and Harley Street.
Harley Street was also the business premises of some of London's leading psychoanalysts.
Writing about the novel in 1 927, Eliot stated that ‘nearly every contemporary novel known to me is either directly affected by a study of psycho-analysis, or affected by the atmosphere created by psycho-analysis, or inspired by a desire to escape from psycho-analysis…
’ Eliot emphasized the dangers of this and drew attention to the importance of the Jamesian stress on ‘the whole deep mystery of man's soul and conscience’.
But there seems little doubt that the psychoanalysts' stress on the childhood roots of adult problems played its part in the general investigation of primitive roots which fills Sweeney Agonistes .
Eliot's original design was abandoned.
The carefully conceived ‘return for nourishment’ to the rituals exposed by Cornford exhausted itself after two fragments.
That of the ‘Agon’, was, as Eliot knew, the better.
In it the whole idea of the fertility rite is exploded, using the very forms and devices of the traditional ritual.
The original conception of ‘the return of Mrs. Porter’ would be pointless, or at least only a prolongation of horror, since life itself and the regeneration of it are seen, at bottom, as hideous.
Those concepts of the legal fiction and the ritual whose interpretation may change from age to age are essential to the understanding of Sweeney Agonistes in Eliot's own development as an artist.
Sweeney Agonistes reperforms a ritual, encouraging the participation of its audience — through  rhythms and songs, but distancing them in performance by its extreme stylization.
Yet, the work's direction is quite the opposite of that conventionally assigned to the fertility rite.
That rite is turned against itself in the way that the Lord's Prayer of ‘The Hollow Men’ is involved in an anti-Lord's Prayer.
The ‘Agon’ having demonstrated with such force that the core of the rite is not glorious but hideous, there is no point in continuing with the play.
This ‘return to the sources’ discovers either that such primitive celebrations are entirely divorced from modern sexuality, or that they always concealed a deathly horror.
Since the ‘history of belief and feeling’ cannot be traced, it is impossible to conclude which alternative is the true one.
All that becomes apparent is that the ritual, once exposed as deathly, is dead.
The basing of art on such a ritual is pointless, as Eliot indicated when writing of the medium about which some of his most important remarks of this period were passed.
He wrote that no new ballet could be founded on a dead ritual.
Revivals of quaint customs were mere amusements, ‘For you cannot revive a ritual without reviving a faith.
You can continue a ritual after the faith is dead — that is not a conscious, ‘pretty’ piece of archaeology — but you cannot revive it.’
Eliot draws a distinction between fertile ‘borrowing’ from remote cultural sources and ‘founding’art on a dead ritual.
In its attempt to unite the worlds of city and savage,Sweeney Agonistes had been all too clearly founded on the fertility rite as presented by Comford's investigation.
This did not mean that the play itself was not exciting as drama, but it meant that for Eliot, intent on his search for a vital relation between ritual and art, this play would not suffice.
All his probing to the roots of religion had discovered simply the bankruptcy of those roots, or at least their apparent irrelevance to the job of finding a meaning in modern life.
The union of the savage and the city confirmed the hopelessness of both and of the means of life, and brought a sharp reaction in Eliot against the continuation of such attempts.
Yet, as we have seen, the need in Eliot to relate art to ritual and to religious emotion continued unabated.
The themes of savage and city in his work would continue to be important to the moulding of his thought, but would for the moment grow less prominent.
His own failure in Sweeney Agonistes to find anything worthwhile to his personal salvation in all the elaborate investigation of primitive  cults resulted in an apparent about-turn in the direction of his thought.
Eliot's preface to his mother's Savonarola is a defence of nonrealistic drama of the sort that Sweeney Agonistes embodied.
But a new note has surfaced, a note which points out that while philosophical scepticism may have nourished and stimulated the mind of Greeks trained in civic religious observances, it was not nourishing to modern minds trained on nothing at all.
For Eliot, the search for liturgy and ritual has continued.
The intense reading in mysticism emphasized by Gordon and Hay and so prominent in the 1926 Clark Lectures no doubt played its part in his 1927 conversion, but so did his allied interest in primitive civilizations.
For this convinced him of how essential was religious practice to all civilizations.
His exposing of the inanity and hideousness for his own time of the rites which underlay Sweeney Agonistes only helped confirm his choice of the only religion whose rituals seemed open and potent to him.
This choice went hand in hand with his artistic development.
‘The play, like a religious service, should be a stimulant to make life more tolerable and augment our ability to live…
’ This conclusion is contemporary with the abandonment of Sweeney Agonistes and with Eliot's' being received into the Church of England.
Sweeney Agonistes and ‘The Hollow Men’ seem blasphemous in their despair.
Tormented, Eliot was searching for some sort of salvation.
He could countenance violence and killing, if only they might provide a way out of the taedium vitae which formed his spiritual landscape.
Irony was to the fore when in 1925 he wrote of the Russian Revolution, but behind it was a more important urge leading him to the poem ‘Le Voyage’ of his favourite Baudelaire.
Eliot wrote of the huge scale of the Russian Revolution and of the huge scale of its violence, pointing out that only one result could justify such huge and terrible expense: ‘Such a cataclysm is justified if it produces something really new : Un [sic ]oasis d'horreur dans un désert d'ennui’.
Such an oasis Sweeney had discovered, when he penetrated beyond the ‘material, literal-minded and visionless’.
This discrepancy between the illusory surface of life and what lies beyond, between Bradley's appearance and reality, is a perennial theme of Eliot's poetry.
He was fascinated by those deepest drives  which were as he put it in 1919 ‘canalizations of something…simple, terrible and unknown’.
Those ‘indestructible barriers’ which in the Clark lectures he saw as characterizing post-Cartesian society are all too apparent in The Waste Land where in Bradley's words, quoted by Eliot, ‘regarded as an existence which appears in a soul, the whole world for each is peculiar and private to that soul’.
At the same time, Eliot saw men and women, whether aware of it or not, as bound to the cycle of manifold yet meaningless ‘Birth, and copulation, and death’, perception of which yielded only ‘The horror’.
Those who comprehend this see the noblest feelings frustrated or distorted.
From ‘Gerontion’ to Sweeney Agonistes , Eliot's work examined obsessively in various ways ‘the awful separation between potential passion and any actualization possible in life’.
Whether in Kipling or Chapman or other authors, Eliot was attracted to glimpses of a world beyond.
‘Beneath all the declamations there is another tone, and behind all the illusions there is another vision.’
These words were used specifically of Whitman's writing about lilacs or the mocking-bird, and revealing that at such moments his theories and beliefs dropped away like needless pretexts.
So Eliot wrote in 1926 when for him the poet whose ‘horrified eyes’ saw most clearly the ‘chasm between the real and the ideal’was Baudelaire.
He complained in 1927 of living in an age ‘so deficient in devotion and so feeble in blasphemy’.
Baudelaire was much in Eliot's mind in 1927.
Marlowe in that year was for Eliot positively either a major atheist or a major Christian, but the enchantments of Faustus were Baudelaire's paradis artificiels .
Understandably for Eliot at this time ‘the relation of Belief to Ritual’ was an ‘immense problem’.
In 1927, treating of the fascination with ritual on the part of a Baudelaire who was vitally relevant to the present Eliot seeks to rescue Baudelaire from ‘the Swinbumian violet-coloured London fog of the ‘nineties’.
Eliot's Baudelaire is opposed to the ‘childishness’ of the decadent poets who enjoyed ‘dressing up’in religious ritual and ‘a religion of Evil, or Vice, or Sin…
But to Baudelaire, alone, these things were real.’
Baudelaire's perception of terrible depths when surrounded by shallower figures sets him beside Sweeney.
But Baudelaire's perception also sets him beside Eliot himself.
The import ant fact about Baudelaire is that he was essentially a Christian, born out of his due time, and a classicist, born out of his due time…his tendency to ‘ritual’…springs from no attachment to the outward forms of Christianity, but from the instincts of a soul that was naturaliter Christian.
This seems to tie in closely with the Eliot who pronounced himself in 1928 ‘to refute any accusation of playing’ possum…classicist in literature, royalist in politics, and anglo-catholic in religion, The similarities are made more comprehensible in the 1930 essay, ‘Baudelaire’, where he sees Baudelaire's Satanism as ‘an attempt to get into Christianity by the back door.
Genuine blasphemy…as impossible to the complete atheist as to the perfect Christian…is a way of affirming belief.’
In his perception of the horror of fertility cycle and sexuality, Eliot saw himself as following Baudelaire.
Sex on Sweeney's cannibal isle is said to be a business of being ‘bored’, but the horror of the perception takes it out of mere ‘boredom’, which was killing the Melanesians and, Eliot thought, the modern world.
So, for Eliot, Baudelaire ‘was at least able to understand that the sexual act as evil is more dignified, less boring, than as the natural, ‘life-giving’, cheery automatism of the modern world'.
If blasphemy was ‘a way of affirming belief, then it is possible to see how Eliot's most blasphemously despairing poem, ‘The Hollow Men’, led up to his conversion.
Eliot's Baudelaire, too, as Moody points out, was capable of ‘looking into the Shadow’.
Though it may never be possible fully to understand what converts a man to a religion, Eliot's view of Baudelaire gives us one of the best guides to his own conversion to Christianity.
It came about through a negative way more extreme than has yet been suggested.
The perception that a cruel savage cycle of fertility underlay all the trappings of modem life only served to emphasize for Eliot that there was a higher life, though one infinitely difficult to attain.
Eliot came to Christianity through a sophisticated decadence which he was able  to see as going hand in hand with the most primitive life.
In coming to terms with both he wished to pass beyond them.
The Baudelaire in whose work he had found at Harvard both the city and the savage now acted as his guide; blasphemy led to and joined belief.
So Boloisms accompany discussions of theology in Eliot's letters to Dobrée.
In few places are the results of the explorations of Sweeney Agonistes clearer than in his 1927 attack on Lawrence whom he sees as fatally humourless.
Mr. Lawrence is a demoniac, a natural and unsophisticated demoniac with a gospel.
When his characters make love — or perform Mr. Lawrence's equivalent for love-making — and they do nothing else — they not only lose all the amenities, refinements and graces which many centuries have built up in order to make love-making tolerable; they seem to reascend the metamorphoses of evolution, passing backward beyond ape and fish to some hideous coitus of protoplasm.
This search for an explanation of the civilised by the primitive, of the advanced by the retrograde, of the surface by the ‘depths’ is a modern phenomenon…
But it remains questionable whether the civilised man, the order of truth.
Mr. Lawrence, it is true, has neither faith nor interest in the civilised man, you do not have him there; he has proceeded many paces beyond Rousseau.
But even if one is not antagonised by the appalling monotony of Mr. Lawrence's theme, under all its splendid variations, one still turns away with the judgement: ‘this is not my world, either as it is or as I should wish it to be.’
In 1927 Eliot turned sharply against the sort of ‘love of created beings ’ seen in Sweeney Agonistes and against its world.
In ‘Charleston, Hey!
Hey!’ of 1927, Eliot judged John Rodker ‘up-to-the-minute, if anyone is; we feel sure that he knows all about hormones, W. H. R. Rivers, and the Mongol in our midst’.
But Eliot appears to be turning his back on both savage and decadent city life.
Speaking of hearing in Gertrude Stein's prose the ‘hypnotic’‘rhythms’ of ‘the saxophone’he concluded that if this were of the future, then the future was ‘of the barbarians’.
But such a future, Eliot wrote, was not one in which he or his readers ought to be interested.
In the Criterion generally, after 1927 when he sent Frederic Manning the latest works of Frazer, Eliot kept anthropology away from creative writers, with the exception of Charles Madge, who was a trained  sociologist.
Apart from pieces by Lawrence, he did not print further creative work which linked the primitive and the modern; he himself no longer reviewed anthropological books.
Noticeably, Graves's 1927 review of Malinowski and Rivers is immediately followed by a review written by Eliot and dealing exclusively with Christian books.
In 1927 Eliot was in correspondence with William Force Stead, the Anglican priest to whom he expressed his deeply anxious spiritual commitment and who had baptized him.
He admired a point which Stead had made about Polynesians and Christianity, but worried that he could not think of a Christian anthropologist.
Yet, ironically, Stead's recollection of Eliot's walking in the woods, in true Frazerian style, after his baptism at Finstock in Oxfordshire on 29 June 1927, perceives just the unusual link of savage and city which Eliot might appear to have renounced: ‘…after dinner we went for a twilight walk through Wychwood, an ancient haunted forest, ‘savage and enchanted’.
I can see Eliot pacing under the mighty oaks and pushing his way through hazel thickets in a smart suit, a bowler hat, and grey spats.’
‘Journey of the Magi’, written in 1927, contains not only material quoted in Eliot's 1926 survey, ‘Lancelot Andrewes’, and recollections from Eliot's own life (some of which he catalogued when reminiscing in The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism ).
It also looks back towards his engagement with the primitive.
Like ‘The Hollow Men’ and parts of The Waste Land , this poem's setting is a desert one.
The traditional landscape, however, is never mentioned, being involved indirectly through the details of ‘the camels galled, sorefooted, refractory’.
The poem is deliberately unconventional: no mention of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
But it is conventional in terms of Eliot's earlier poetry; though less dramatic, its conclusion is as apocalyptic as before.
The reader becomes aware that, Nemi-like, the birth of the new priest-king means the end of ‘the old dispensation’— an entire world order — as ‘this Birth was/ Hard and bitter agony for us, like Death, our death’.
The ‘Kingdoms’ mentioned are perfectly sensible in the poem's context, but remind readers of Eliot's work of ‘death's other Kingdom’and ‘death's dream kingdom’.
Though explicitly Christian, ‘Journey of the Magi’ forms between the earlier and later work a bridge over which the reader (with access to the gospel word) may cross into the release of Christianity, the new birth; but, denied that access, the speaker of the poem can only seek relief in death to escape from having to return to the old way in which he is ‘no longer at ease’.
This old way, ‘With an alien people clutching their gods’, looks back to the savage world which Eliot had been exploring, the world trapped in the ritual of ‘birth, and copulation, and death’.
The word ‘clutch’ has particularly strong sexual connotations in Eliot's work, as when Saint Narcissus writhes ‘in his own clutch’.
Eliot had criticized Wundt for ignoring sexuality's part in religion.
By ‘Journey of the Magi’, however, we have birth and death but not copulation.
The reader is faced with a renunciation both of the sexuality bound up with primitive rites and, for the moment at least, of modern sexuality.
Vickery overemphasizes vegetation references by relating the ‘temperate valley…smelling of vegetation’ with its ‘running stream’to a particular scene in The Golden Bough , and by insisting that the ‘water-mill’is that ‘in which Tammuz was ground’and thus functions as ‘a reminder that death is the price of rebirth’.
General hints at fertility ceremonies may be present, demonstrating another continuity in theme between this and earlier poetry; but it is important to see that, though its death and rebirth are also related, Christianity is presented by Eliot as an escape from Frazerian cycles of fertility (in the way that the Buddhist ‘Shantih shantih shantih’ hinted at such an escape), not as its mere continuation.
Ariel Poems , like Coriolan , look back to the world of Eliot's childhood and youth, whether to his reading of Mayne Reid's novels or to his sailing off the coast of New England.
They present us continually with death,
I should be glad of another death


I am dying in my own death and the deaths of those after me.
and birth or rebirth,
Living first in the silence after the viaticum.
‘Issues from the hand of God, the simple soul’
Living to live in a world of time beyond me; let me
Resign my life for this life, my speech for that unspoken,
The awakened, lips parted, the hope, the new ships.
Copulation surfaces once, only to be transformed immediately into a more familiar element:
Those who suffer the ecstasy of the animals, meaning
Death
As the worlds of savage and sexuality had gone together in the earlier poetry, now, together, they seem banished.
The apocalyptic Eliot gravitated in 1926 to Dekker's ‘heapes of dead mens bones’, and the ‘very pleasing’ cannibalism of Wanley's ‘The Resurrection’, which he quoted in extenso in a review.
Entering again, after ‘The Hollow Men’, his valley of the dry bones, Eliot dismembered himself with scarcely less thoroughness in the new Christian poetry of Part II of Ash-Wednesday , published in 1927.
He tears his past life to pieces with the ferocity of the convert.
He wrote to Stead in April 1928 that he felt that for reasons of compensation he required the most ascetic and violent form of discipline, and discussed having to come to terms with celibacy as a Christian.
Ash-Wednesday , dedicated, originally, ‘To My Wife’, deals, amongst other things, with the resignation of sex, which goes hand in hand with the abandoning of primitive ceremony, the link between such primitivism and the erotic being preserved.
In July 1927 the Criterion published ‘Land's End’ by Archibald MacLeish, a poem celebrating the sea and an ‘ancient people’who had lived by it with gods ‘carved with the muzzles of jackals’.
Looking back to this primitive folk, MacLeish uses the invocation ‘o my people’(which would form the conclusion of section V of ‘Ash-Wednesday’), and, after vividly conjuring up a seaboard landscape, recalls details of ‘real things’, including 
love, the weed smell of it,
Front against front, not hair blown
Dark over eyes in a dream and the mouth gone…
Eliot's renunciation of primitivism and sexuality recalls this phrasing while pulling away from the world which had fascinated him earlier; he sees from the fertile ‘slotted window bellied like the fig's fruit’ how
The broadbacked figure drest in blue and green
Enchanted the maytime with an antique flute.
Blown hair is sweet, brown hair over the mouth blown,
Lilac and brown hair;
Distraction, music of the flute, stops and steps of the mind
over the third stair,
Fading, fading; strength beyond hope and despair
Climbing the third stair.
Ash-Wednesday's rejection of the erotic ‘garden god, /Whose flute is breathless’ is another move away from the preoccupation with primitive fertility and infertility in the earlier poetry with its ‘Priapus in the shrubbery’, and its following out of‘vegetation ceremonies’.
There remain, though, links with that poetry.
Simeon's ‘Wait for the wind that chills towards the dead land’ recalls ‘The Hollow Men’with its ‘wind in dry grass’and ‘dead land’.
‘The Hollow Men’ is a hidden presence in Ash-Wednesday , not only with its desert landscape, but also with its ‘twilight kingdom’and
Eyes I dare not meet in dreams
In death's dark kingdom
foreshadowing the later poem's ‘dreamcrossed twilight between birth and dying’.
Ash-Wednesday's ‘dry rock’ is seen in a way which makes possible a spiritual pilgrimage apparently impossible in The Waste Land .
Yet Ash-Wednesday maintains a connection with the fertility symbols of the savage world.
These lead now not to mere eternal recurrence, but, redeemed, to spiritual content and the possibility of a peace beyond time in the search for the word which is both the word of God's grace, healing, and the ‘cry’ of the poet aspiring.
The valley of the dry bones and the life-giving water of baptism are traditional Christian symbols, but Eliot remains aware of other similar more primitive traditions which lead him to invoke the Virgin in unusual terms:
Sister, mother
And spirit of the river, spirit of the sea,
Suffer me not to be separated.
Such language glances back to nature worship.
It also looks forward to the later poetry, where the ‘spirit of the river’ Mississippi becomes ‘a strong brown god’, while the ‘spirit of the sea’is that of the Atlantic of the New England coast of Eliot's childhood.
Ash-Wednesday , for all its renunciation, does at times look towards the childhood of the race, but more strongly it looks back to the poet's own childhood with which this primitivism is associated, as Eliot looks back, in language mixing ‘Gerontion’, Virgil, and a new interest in his own childhood.
And the lost head stiffens and rejoices
In the lost lilac and the lost sea voices
And the weak spirit quickens to rebel
For the bent golden-rod and the lost sea smell
Quickens to recover
The cry of quail and the whirling plover
And the blind eye creates
The empty forms between the ivory gates
And smell renews the salt savour of the sandy earth
Such reminiscence of childhood presented at once as reality and illusion came frequently to Eliot around the time of his conversion.
In the very year when, after taking British citizenship and joining the Church of England, he wrote the famous ‘Preface’ to For Lancelot Andrewes (dedicated to Eliot's mother), Eliot was recalling his own childhood in his introductory remarks to This American World , and his days at Fishermen's Corner in Gloucester.
Yet, as much as reversion to primitivism, so settling back into childhood enjoyment and innocence was undesirable to Eliot.
Salvation comes not from attachment to one's own past, but from controlling it in favour of a higher goal.
Teach us to care and not to care
Teach us to sit still
Even among these rocks,
Our peace in His will
Coriolan presents even more strongly the rejection of mere ‘infantilism’ as a trap.
Combining elements from his childhood reading with his reading about recent political thought and events, Eliot shows the man-child who has not evolved a cry, and so for whom ‘the lost word is lost’, as trapped in a corner, paralysed for all his magnificence and that of his City.
O mother
What shall I cry?
We demand a committee, a representative committee,
a committee of investigation
RESIGN RESIGN RESIGN
If Eliot largely renounced his interest in childhood and in anthropology during the few years that followed, he gave up neither entirely.
Just as he maintained an interest in psychological theories of childhood, such as those of Iovetz-Tereshchenko, so he continued to take an interest in some of the anthropological material which came his way.
In March 1928 he wrote on a theme which relates to that of Ash-Wednesday (Part 11), hoping that Hardy's burial in more than one site would not establish a precedent and that future great men would not be ‘dismembered’ as if the nation were ‘given over to idolatry of relics and fetishes’.
Eliot's linking of the savage and the city would never again be as prominent as in Sweeney Agonistes , but it would not be abandoned.
Though less dominant it persists and is modified throughout his later work.
THE SAVAGE AND THE CITY IN THE LATER WORK
EVOLUTION and the transmission of cultural forms, topics much discussed in Eliot's youth, continued to concern him in much of his later work, and he retained a profound distrust of the idea of evolution as progress.
Anthropology reinforced, rather than dispelled, his scepticism about the notion that humanity might be improving.
Sweeney still howled down Emerson.
In 1929 Eliot's important article, ‘Experiment in Criticism’, began by discussing the work of Herbert Read.
He centred on Read's phrase ‘evolution of poetry’ and was particularly interested in the statement that ‘the beginning of this study belongs to anthropology’.
Sceptical about over-simple uses of the word ‘evolution’, Eliot wishes reader and writer to be aware of the detailed work of philologists and anthropologists in relation to literature.
He exposes the vague way in which Read deploys scientific vocabulary, pointing out how much work had had to be done by a great many people and already popularized, before a literary critic could talk in this way.
Eliot points to the work of Bastian, Tylor, Mannhardt, Durkheim, Lévy-Bruhl, Frazer, Miss Harrison, and many other anthropological writers.
He is suspicious not because Read uses too much anthropological material, but because he uses too little.
By this time his own anthropological reading was tailing off.
It seems, for instance, that he never read Malinowski, though he did read Graves's 1927 Criterion review of Malinowski's work and referred in 1933 to the Trobriand Islands, site of some of that anthropologist's famous field-work.
Again,contra Lawrence, it is obvious that for Eliot the idea that modern western society should adopt savage customs is seen as ludicrous and reprehensible, since he believed that not even the lowest of civilized people could adapt themselves to such society without deteriorating and frequently also  corrupting the natives.
But for Eliot now the choice was not between civilized and primitive society but between Christian, non-Christian, and anti-Christian orders.a Anthropology links with Conrad to counter the optimistic vision of a modern noble savagery, but the whole is seen in a new, explicitly Christian framework.
In the five years after 1928, the Criterion printed little anthropological writing.
Instead, we see among contributors and books reviewed a gradual move towards some writers whom Eliot later would explicitly acknowledge as influential in the development of his own social thought — men such as Christopher Dawson and V. A. Demant.
Meanwhile (as in his treatment of Westermarck in 1926), Eliot began to dismiss some anthropologists who had earlier interested him.
Turning from savage to city, specifically to London and its ‘City Churches’, he did not hope to turn again.
Yet the peculiar link of primitive and sophisticated, as displayed in ‘Marie Lloyd’, still accompanied him.
Just as he reacted strongly against Richards's suggestion that The Waste Land had severed poetry from belief, which carried the implication that the poem was a cultural museum, so Eliot campaigned now for the preservation of London's churches not as museum pieces, but as centres of religion.
Art was not the criterion of civilization.
Nor was religious development alone.
Eliot drew attention to the view that cars, gramophones, and central heating are inessential to civilization, but pointed to a more subtle fallacy which equated art with civilization and so saw ‘Alaskan or Solomon Island wood carvers were more ‘civilized’ than the workmen and workwomen who turn out the bibelots of Woolworth's.’
Such a process of reasoning would result in an affirmation that the times of highest religious development were thus more ‘civilized’ than Eliot's own.
Religion had to be integrated with its surrounding society, not in a subservient position, but forming the vital heart of the culture.
This Eliot had taken from his reading of anthropology, as would become clear from his later social writings, and he sought to preserve the physical and spiritual bonds of his culture in the city of London.
In The Waste Land's ‘Notes’, Eliot the admirer of Wren had drawn attention (referring to St Magnus Martyr) to what was to his mind one of the finest among Wren's interiors.
By 1926, however, the  secular beauty had become distinctly secondary.
Recalling St Magnus Martyr and speaking again of the need to preserve the fabric of the church, Eliot declared he would cease to appeal in the name of Christopher Wren and his school, and appeal instead ‘in the name of Laud and the beauty of holiness ’.
London and its churches became the initial battle in his campaign for a Christian society.
An only somewhat reformed Bolo followed him.
In 1927 (when Eliot mentioned ‘the Mongol in our midst’) he told Bonamy Dobrée that he was preparing a small book,The Bolovian in Our Midst , proving that there was Bolovian blood in some of the leading figures of the day.
The tone here mocks both anthropology and the related theories of racial purity (as seen in the work of Frobenius) which were coming to the fore at that time.
Frequent Bolovian references (drawings, some rhymes, and much Bolovian dogma) show that in the period 1927–30 Eliot found this a valuable way of letting off some of the emotional steam generated by his conversion; serious discussions of theology are juxtaposed in this correspondence with ridiculous accounts of Bolovian religious practice, one letter dated according to the day of St Cecilia, another according to that of St Gumbolumbo.
The bowler-hatted (not entirely un-Bolovian) city gent photographed by his brother outside the offices of Faber and Gwyer in 1926 was determined that his new faith should be brought to the fore on his home, city ground with an emphasis on basic religious values, rather than those of sophisticated aesthetes.
Returning to ‘Ancient Buildings: And the City Churches’, he stressed the need to preserve the Church's role in society, particularly where it was threatened by urban secularization.
In 1928 he returned to the ‘Stones of London’, emphasizing that even when approaching a church building (here Westminster Abbey) as a historical monument of major symbolic value and aesthetic interest, the fact could not be ignored that, poets' corner or no, ‘the Abbey was not originally designed primarily as a Pantheon, but as a Church; and a Church  it remains until it is ‘disaffected’.
Eliot was concerned with the physical conditions of city life.
That same year he worried over ‘Slum Areas’ concerned about overcrowding and the possible creation of new slums.
But it was the city's spiritual health which most preoccupied him, though he realized spiritual and economic were not always inseparable.
In a paragraph whose subtitle, ‘City, City’, harks back to The Waste Land , he expressed astonishment that in an economic slump the City was pulling down buildings to erect ever more splendid banks.
Eliot was fond of familiar details of a London which, in a sense, he had known all his life, ever since the childhood reading of Sherlock Holmes which he recalled in 1929.
It was his own spiritual change which made possible after the poems of the early twenties a more affectionate view of London, but we should not assume that the owner of Down the Silver Stream of Thames had ever been totally blind to the beauty of the city.
In 1929, he had again returned to a familiar theme, stressing that, while the establishment of a ‘National Preservation’ body was worthwhile, it was especially important that its attention be directed not merely to the countryside.
‘St. Magnus Martyr was not as important as Stonehenge, but still it was not insignificant.’
It was useless preserving relics of the primitive past while the living spiritual heart of London perished.
Eliot's concerns were to make him a natural contributor to The Rock where the theme of the city would again be combined with a new modification of the theme of the savage.
Meanwhile, though, his interests in much of his prose gravitated towards the city and the consideration of social order.
Introducing Johnson's London , he lauded its poet as ‘the most alien figure’ writing ‘in this rural, pastoral, meditative age…a townsman…with no tolerance of swains and milkmaids’.
With Johnsonian vigour, Eliot discussed the way to run a society; he surveyed with distanced irony ‘The Literature of Fascism’, also printing MacDiarmid's ‘Second Hymn to Lenin'.
His classical and monarchist position led him to couple admiration for urbane, urban eighteenth-century verse with  more general wishes for social order, helping to develop his interest in the ideas of Maurras.
Yet Coriolan seems to criticize such ideas when they produce an external show (‘5,800,000 rifles and carbines’) which may demonstrate force and flourish, yet has no central Word behind it.
For Lancelot Andrewes (1928) was subtitled Essays on Style and Order .
In 1930, though, Eliot wrote to Dobrée that he thought order and authority dangerous catchwords and was horrified at the modern scorning of democracy; he worried about the way national and racial characteristics were becoming contested issues.
Thinking it possible that London's streets would contain martyrs cudgelled to death, he wondered if that might be no bad thing.
This wish for martyrdom would be a temptation dealt with in Murder in the Cathedral .
Eliot's vision of London as a potential savage battleground is confirmed by Spender's memory of a lunchtime conversation in London during 1930: ‘…
I asked him what future he foresaw for our civilization.
‘Internecine fighting…
People killing one another in the streets…
’ Eliot's relationship with London at this time is a mixture of love and hate.
Through the summer of 1929 he complained to Dobrée of roasting in the modern city's horrors (yet wondered if he would find the country any more bearable).
The next year he wrote to Stead of having lived almost entirely in towns and, though not lacking in a feeling for nature, tending to go back to his memories of Missouri and New England for natural images.
In the early 1930s, from his city desk at Faber and Faber, Eliot was busy paying tribute to other cities which had educated him in his way of life and to city writers who had aided his way of writing.
Introducing Baudelaire's Intimate Journals , he praised the Frenchman's skill in elevating ‘imagery of the sordid life of a great metropolis…to the first intensity ’ and creating ‘a mode of release and expression for other men’.
In 1932 he returned to Bubu de Montparnasse , a novel of Parisian low life which underlay passages in his urban poetry.
But now Eliot sounded a new note: ‘an intense pity for the humble and oppressed.’
To make his tributes to earlier cities complete, before returning to Cambridge and  Boston in 1932 he wrote to a correspondent in St Louis in 1930, telling him how much his poetry owed to his childhood there.
If Eliot had been formed by St Louis, then we should remember that for him St Louis had been not simply a city, but also ‘the beginning of the Wild West’.
Though the city seems to dominate much of his thought at this time, in 1930 appeared his translation of St-John Perse's Anabase where Christianity and mysticism often have a distinctly tribal feeling.
Men, dusty people and folk of diverse devices, people of business and of leisure, folk of the frontiers and foreign men…trackers of beasts and of seasons, breakers of camp in the little dawn wind, seekers of water and watercourses over the wrinkled rind of the world, O seekers, O finders of reasons to be up and be gone…
Such a feeling would be incorporated into Eliot's own later work.
Return to America refuelled him.
Before leaving England he had been hankering after his American roots, not only in those sections of Ash-Wednesday which recall the New England coast, but also in his prose, invoking, for instance, his old master Josiah Royce, who was now mostly forgotten, ‘but a great philosopher in his day’.
He was also expanding his social thought in general considerations on how ‘the word ‘civilisation’ comes to mean more and more: because it means all the things that we have gained, and want to keep and also all the good things that we have lost, and want to regain'.
Such thoughts were not purely abstract, but directed towards Eliot's own values and to London.
In his wish for a healthy city he was becoming more and more aware of rural virtues and leaning towards the sort of suspect organicism which would be developed with a vengeance by Leavis.
Defending the family as the centre of human life and the village as the basic social unit Eliot expresses his preference for London over other cities since it remains characteristically made up of a collection of villages whose borders touch, each maintaining its own local character.
But he worries grimly about ‘what sort of organic city can be left…
‘. Eliot's thoughts on civilization would be developed in America, where his longing for the scenes of his youth would also be satisfied and would  enable him to return to London to minister, witch-doctor-like, to his civilization, to purify the dialect of his adopted tribe.
In The Use of Poetry we see how by a reworking of his earlier, anthropologically inspired stress on poets as connected to the primitive man, Eliot adapted nineteenth-century views of the poet's task and brought them into his own later poetry.
The Norton Lectures do not simply look back sadly.
They also perfect a poetic reorientation and a restatement of poetic and cultural aims which leads Eliot to fare forward.
In his introductory lecture, Eliot quotes W. P. Ker's praise of Browning and nineteenth-century poets whose ‘themes are taken from all the ages and countries; the poets are eclectic students and critics, and they are justified, as explorers are justified; they sacrifice what explorers sacrifice when they leave their native home.’
'. Doubtless, the relevance of these remarks to Eliot's view of his own time attracted him to them.
His work had taken him from London to the Arunta, from Boston Brahmins to Buddhist scriptures; he too was an explorer who had left his native home.
‘East Coker’ states ‘old men ought to be explorers.’
Later, in The Use of Poetry , he links in one sentence Fitzgerald and Buddhism: ‘I am not a Buddhist, but some of the early Buddhist scriptures affect me as parts of the Old Testament do; I can still enjoy Fitzgerald's Omar , though I do not hold that rather smart and shallow view of life.’
This connection hints again that Fitzgerald led Eliot to the East, and that his reading in the history of religion affected his view of nineteenth-century poetry.
Against Arnold's ‘educator's view’ of poetry, he reacted strongly.
Feeling that ‘Arnold's notion of ‘life’, in his account of poetry, does not perhaps go deep enough', Eliot presented his own essential requirement of poetry: that it possess ‘auditory imagination,.
Once again in this phrase reaction against the nineteenth century is bound to a standpoint which relies on anthropology.
The notion of ‘auditory imagination’ relates to the poles of city and savage.
It refers not simply to the sound of a poem's words, but has wider reverberations relating to Eliot's own explorations in anthropology, and to the sort of combination of primitive ritual and civilized world explored in The Waste Land and Sweeney Agonistes :
What I call the ‘auditory imagination’ is the feeling for syllable and rhythm, penetrating far below the conscious levels of thought and feeling, invigorating  every word; sinking to the most primitive and forgotten, returning to the origin and bringing something back, seeking the beginning and the end.
It works through meanings, certainly, or not without meanings in the ordinary sense, and fuses the old and obliterated and the trite, the current, and the new and surprising, the most ancient and the most civilised mentality.
Such a theory was scarcely new in Eliot's mind.
It reformulates the 1918 statement that ‘The artist, I believe, is more primitive , as well as more civilized, than his contemporaries.’
Ranging from London to Melanesia, Eliot's artist's vision is wider than Arnold's.
It is also deeper, seeing Melanesia in London, London in Melanesia.
Discovery of Conradian horror beneath polite society, rediscovery of an Original Sin which burdened savage and citizen equally, connecting them however much the latter might politely protest, left unredeemed modern humanity at a level as terrible as that of primitives trapped in their cycle of fertility rites.
Christianity was a redeeming force, making possible escape from the cycle, yet it did not cut man off entirely from the primitive.
On the contrary, Eliot saw his poet as able to travel deeper down into ‘the most primitive and forgotten’ far beyond Arnold for whom ritual meant little, the ‘inner light’being all.
Such descents, according to a view which Eliot found ‘very interesting’, allowed the poet privileged access to a primitive mentality.
This attitude may seem intensely romantic, but was acceptable to Eliot because sanctified through the anthropological eye.
Highly charged personal reminiscence is bound up with the anthropological perspective which gives it an impersonal respectability.
After wondering why out of a lifetime ‘certain images recur, charged with emotion, rather than others’, Eliot sees these as symbolic,
but of what we cannot tell, for they come to represent the depths of feeling into which we cannot peer.
We might just as well ask why, when we try to recall visually some period in the past, we find in our memory just the few meagre arbitrarily chosen set of snapshots that we do find there, the faded poor souvenirs of passionate moments.
Eliot's note to this reads:
In chapter xxii of Principles of Literary Criticism Mr. Richards discusses these matters in his own way.
As evidence that there are other approaches as well, see a very interesting article Le symbolisme et l'âme primitive by E. Cailliet and J. A. Bédé in the Revue de littérature comparée for April-June 1932.
The authors, who have done field-work in Madagascar, apply the theories of Lévy-Bruhl: the pre-logical mentality persists in civilised man, but becomes available only to or through the poet.
These ‘depths of feeling’ again look back to Eliot's 1920 ‘canalizations of something again simple, terrible and unknown’, but now are linked directly to ‘l'âme primitive’.
Cailliet and Bédé focused attention on the Symbolist poets and Lévy-Bruhl, a connection familiar to Eliot who at Harvard had read these poets and the anthropologist.
References to Bergson, Ribot, and Durkheim plunged Eliot once more into his earlier concerns, offering him academic confirmation of his own stress on the poet's combining civilized and primitive.
Stressing the crucial importance of rhythm in poetry and primitive life, while emphasizing how both primitive thought and symbolist poetry appeared to move outside Lévy-Bruhl's principle of noncontradiction, the authors stated that ‘Le symbolisme institue la vaste expérience de la résurrection du primitif.’
Such theories must have attracted the Eliot who so often had connected modern and savage life and whose own poetry had been attacked for its apparently illogical movements from one image to the next.
Cailliet and Bédé also discussed Laforgue's ‘Afrique intérieure’.
In Symbolist poetry and primitive life, they found a sort of rapturous vision where living and dead appeared to unite.
The thoughts of Cailliet and Bédé point forward to the importance of communion with the dead in Four Quartets , with their intense, visionary moments; more immediately the Frenchmen's stress that, like primitive thought, ‘Le symbolisme, en effet, requiert tout d'abord une détente de l'attention’, is paralleled in The Use of Poetry by Eliot's presentation of poetic creation not as an act of concentrated attention, but as a relaxation, or removal of a normal barrier.
Certainly mention of Cailliet and Bédé brings back Eliot to a familiar uniting of primitive and urban as, after stating that ‘I myself would like an audience which could neither read nor write’, he recalls Sweeney Agonistes (published in book form in December 1932) and speaks of the poet as ‘something of a popular entertainer…having a part to play in society as worthy as that of the music-hall comedian’.
The tone is abject, but Eliot approaches  a climax.
Though it does not end ‘on this sort of flourish’, the book's hope for the future comes in the one ‘flourish’ in its dejected concluding lines.
Typically, for Eliot, this hope for the future, following the French anthropologists' piece, looks towards the distant past.
‘Poetry begins, I dare say, with a savage beating a drum in a jungle, and it retains that essential of percussion and rhythm; hyperbolically one might say that the poet is older than other human beings…
‘Having said of the poet in The Use of Poetry that ‘I do not mean that he should meddle with the tasks of the theologian, the preacher, the economist, the sociologist or anybody else’, that was just what Eliot went on to do.
He felt his Christian faith impelled him to it.
In addition, his setting out the poet's connection with the primitive gave him the status of a societal elder, one who, lecturing in America, would pronounce on literature and society as Arnold had done less than fifty years before him.
Eliot's vision of the urbane savage was very different from Arnold's, but gave him the same privileges as his Romantic predecessor.
The poet who against Romantic diction forged a new contemporary language for a poetry which had been able to deal with the modern city face to face, had, to a considerable extent, reinstated Romanticism through anthropology.
The theory that the poet had access to deep and primitive levels put him awkwardly alongside the Romantic ‘explorers’.
Eliot, in The Use of Poetry , quoted Jacques Rivière: ‘It is only with the advent of Romanticism that the literary act came to be conceived as a sort of raid on the absolute and its results as a revelation.’
The poet who would go on in ‘East Coker’ to write of poetry as ‘a raid on the inarticulate’now pulls back from his earlier position in his wish ‘to avoid employing the terms Romanticism and Classicism’, and concludes that ‘we are still in the Arnold period’.
The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism showed Eliot again considering poetry's primitive roots and to some extent consciously reorienting himself towards romanticism.
In After Strange Gods he continued his investigation, but with an attitude far from simple romantic primitivism.
He revealed that the poet's connection with and knowledge of the primitive were only beginnings and not ends in themselves.
Though savage rites might be interesting and even valuable, their greatest value was that, in showing the importance  of ritual in a society, they pointed towards the place which the higher Christian rituals should have in his own society.
He saw this society as increasingly menaced by industrialization which, particularly in the cities, where power was now centralized, was cutting off the population from its roots.
Eliot was more hopeful about the ‘re-establishment of a native culture’ in Virginia than in New England, he told a Virginian audience, since ‘You are farther away from New York; you have been less industrialised and less invaded by foreign races; and you have a more opulent soil.’
The city, traditional centre of civilization, is here seen as its enemy: partly because too cosmopolitan, partly because too industrialized.
Eliot's sympathies lie not with urban industrialism of ‘half-dead mill towns of southern New Hampshire and Massachusetts’ but with humanized rural landscape which ‘has been moulded by numerous generations of one race, and…which…in turn has modified the race to its own character.
And those New England mountains seemed to me to give evidence of a human success so meagre and transitory as to be more desperate than the desert.’
That mention of the desert takes us back to the territory traversed in The Waste Land , ‘The Hollow Men’, and Ash-Wednesday .
The poet has emerged, wishing to save the city, ultimately presenting his true saving oasis as a version of pastoral.
Not, however, a personal or directly romantic pastoral.
Eliot's vision, which gives him his sympathies with ‘neo-agrarians’, however ‘quixotic,, is a vision to counter the modern paganism of economic determinists whose theory has become ‘a god before whom we fall down and worship with all kinds of music’.
He sees his own vision not as personal, but rooted in tradition.
This tradition is presented through an anthropological definition.
What I mean by tradition involves all those habitual actions, habits and customs, from the most significant religious rite to our conventional way of greeting a stranger, which represent the blood kinship of ‘the same people living in the same place’.
It involves a good deal which can be called taboo …
This ‘tradition’ anticipates Notes towards the Definition of Culture , but also recalls the Eliot who had read Marett's ‘Is Taboo a Negative  Magic?’
It is characteristic of Eliot to move in After Strange Gods from the savage notion of taboo , which he sees as having decayed in our time so that it has become ‘used…in an exclusively derogatory sense’, to the Christian notion of ‘heresy’ as being vital to the interpretation of the modern world and to the health of the (mainly Christian-based)‘tradition’.
On a small scale, this shift mirrors that in Eliot's poetry from ‘vegetation ceremonies’ to the Christian rituals of Ash-Wednesday .
His use of ‘traditional’ and ‘heretical’allows him to sidestep the terms ‘classical’and ‘romantic,, so incorporating elements otherwise labelled ‘romantic’into the structure of his tradition which had been sanctified with an anthropological definition.
The process is helped by Eliot's reading of and reference to the works of Demant and Dawson (see below).
Eliot sees himself as an orthodox writer, trying to make his audience aware of the need to contribute to their own living tradition.
He makes explicit that he is not writing as some individual Messianic figure propounding an individualistic gospel deriving from ‘the ineffable wisdom of primitive peoples’.
In After Strange Gods his own view of savage and city is defined against that of Lawrence.
Eliot was engaged in a clarification of his boundaries.
Mention of ‘the dark gods of Mexico’ signals that we are about to move on to the writer for whom his strongest opprobrium is reserved.
Eliot had known Lawrence's work for some time, but in 1931–2 he had grown particularly interested in that writer, whose ‘travels to more primitive lands’ and use of Mexican divinities in The Plumed Serpent were physical embodiment of Eliot's anthropological reading and a likely reason for that title,After Strange Gods .
In 1931 Eliot reviewed Middleton Murry's biographical study of Lawrence and went on to read Lawrence's letters, to which he referred in 1933.
Between 1931 and 1933 he also read Fantasia of the Unconscious .
Probably some personal connections both attracted and disturbed Eliot.
For instance, he had been particularly close  to his mother.
Lawrence's ‘emotional dislocation of a ‘mothercomplex’, discussed by Murry, was picked up by Eliot in 1931, shortly after he had resisted return to childhood at the end of Ash-Wednesday ; in the same year he analysed Coriolanus's infantilism and his ‘Mother mother’.
For Eliot and Lawrence sex was a constant source of anxiety.
Most important was the fact that personal circumstances and creative needs of each man had impelled him to be, in a phrase which Eliot applies to Lawrence in After Strange Gods but which applies equally well to himself, a ‘restless seeker for myths’.
The similarities between Lawrence and Eliot, combined with the differences, made Eliot's attack on Lawrence particularly strong.
For the man who had written the song ‘My little island girl’ Lawrence's blend of the sophisticated with savage sexuality was particularly disturbing.
Attacking Lady Chatterley's Lover (which he was later prepared to defend), Eliot wrote of a ‘morbidity which makes other of his female characters bestow their favours upon savages.
The author of that book seems to me to have been a very sick man indeed.’
Consideration of Lawrence prepares for the climax of After Strange Gods .
Parts of Mornings in Mexico had appeared in the Criterion , and in mentioning them, Eliot returned explicitly to the theme of city and savage.
Against the living death of modern material civilisation he spoke again and again, and even if these dead could speak, what he said is unanswerable.
As a criticism of the modern world,Fantasia of the Unconscious is a book to keep at hand and re-read.
In contrast to Nottingham, London or industrial America, his capering redskins of Mornings in Mexico seem to represent Life.
So they do; but that is not the last word, only the first.
Eliot saw the savage here as simply a base from which to start in the critique of the modern.
His own critique of Lawrence leads to his climactic denunciation of his own generation when he turns himself prophet of the most orthodox sort, quoting a long passage from Ezekiel also used in The Waste Land .
It was after this critique of Lawrence's attitude to the modern industrial civilization and the savage world, joined to his own prophetic Christian stance towards his own time, that Eliot returned to London and the writing of The Rock .
Though lacking its crackling intensity,The Rock looks back towards Sweeney Agonistes and Eliot's earlier work.
The themes of the climax of After Strange Gods now emerge further as we are presented with industrial London, its unemployment, and those collapsing City Churches which had previously claimed his attention.
The Rock opens with the seasonal fertility cycle which had horrified the trapped Eliot of the earlier poetry and the dramatic fragments.
O perpetual recurrence of determined seasons,
O world of spring and autumn, birth and dying!
We move as in The Waste Land into the financial heart of the ‘timekept City’.
That City is attacked in The Rock , but ‘this London of ours’ is also celebrated as a city to be worked for and redeemed by a Christianity sometimes remarkably primitive, a pared-down Christianity among the wild men, as a London church is seen as a ‘House’built of
brick laid upon brick;
While encompassed with enemies armed with the spears
of mistaken ideals;
The inhabitants of this city are savages without Christianity:
Men! polish your teeth on rising and retiring;
Women! polish your fingernails:
You polish the tooth of the dog and the talon of the cat.
Occasionally the City's dilemma seems more like the problems of the Wild West:
Remembering the words of Nehemiah the prophet:
‘The trowel in hand, and the gun rather loose in the holster.'
Eliot's creation story, in thin verse, presents the movement from savage religions to the proper religion of his City.
Beginning with the making of the world, he guides his audience through the pageant of primitive man (‘worshipping snakes or trees’) with an urgency that for flickering moments recalls The Waste Land .
Sometimes biblical chant sounds too much like adaptation from simple anthropological textbooks, but we can see at any rate the exemplification of the way  in which Lawrence's ‘capering redskins’ had to be for Eliot now ‘Life’but ‘not the last word, only the first’.
And men who turned towards the light and were known of the light Invented the Higher Religions; and the Higher Religions were good
Here, among ‘Prayer wheels, worship of the dead, denial of this world, affirmation of rites with forgotten meanings’, some of the stuff of Eliot's earlier poetry and his anthropological researches, there comes a visionary instant of incarnation forming a link between God and man and, in Eliot's own poetry, between Ash-Wednesday and Four Quartets : ‘A moment not out of time, but in time, in what we call history; transecting, bisecting the world of time, a moment in time but not like a moment of time.’
Religious development is counterpointed with the development of London.
Desert and city were negatively linked in the earlier poetry; they are positively linked in the play.
Primitive worlds or pagan savage and Old Testament prophet must not be forgotten: they are essential to the struggle between good and evil.
The chorus exhorts the audience to be aware that ‘The desert is not remote in southern tropics,…
The desert is squeezed in the tube-train next to you.’
To forget this brings about the destruction of the values of civilization.
Eliot's apocalyptic imagination again hints at those glimpses of street violence which he had revealed to Dobrée and Spender:
It is hard for those who live near a police Station,
To believe in the triumph of violence.
Convinced that the danger of the end of Christian society was at hand and that this would lead to the collapse of civilization, Eliot viewed London more in terms that contemporary Christians used to view Africa.
Christian work in places, urban and suburban, must be missionary work', the work of ‘imperial expansion’ having exported the gospel like just another sort of industrial export, leaving ‘much at home unsure’.
Eliot continued to see the danger of London reduced to a waste land where (with a momentary glance at Gerontion's coughing goat) debris lies
In a street of scattered brick where the goat climbs,
Where My Word is unspoken.
The Rock picks up several points made in earlier Criterion commentaries.
Thus, churches are not like theatres, nor to be valued primarily as works of art.
They must contribute towards constructing genuine communities, family values generating City values.
The City is again a place of insect-like life, drab scenes and rats, unless there is present what Eliot had earlier described as an ‘organic’, a sort of tribal, community sense.
To bring about this sense of community, Eliot includes historical and contemporary Londoners of various social classes.
The workmen's dialogue, which he co-authored, though filled with pieces of carefully observed slang, is none the less stilted and sometimes too obviously theatrical.
More interestingly, Eliot returns to employing music-hall techniques at times reminiscent of Sweeney Agonistes and the ‘Marie Lloyd’ essay which had pointed out how music hall encouraged sympathetic collaboration between performer and audience.
He makes a point of mentioning in The Rock one of his music-hall favourites, George Robey.
Eliot made clear that his Pageant Play made no pretence of being a contribution to the dramatic literature of England.
‘It is a revue .’
It was this aspect, along with the play's closeness to liturgy and ritual (two linked methods of securing a sense of community), which most excited critics.
Even those hostile found the play's closeness to music hall to be its strength.
One of the most carefully observed pieces of vaudeville comes in the song whose female part begins,
When I was a delicate slip of a maid
What could eat nothin' more than a couple o' chops…
Pound, though hostile to Eliot's Christianity, admired the song, classing it with ‘Bolo’; clearly Eliot revelled in this composition drawing on a pleasure in music hall which dated back to his St Louis childhood, and his youth in Boston.
He was gleeful about the idea of a Faber ‘Vaudeville’ production in 1929 where he starred as a baritone singing Bolovian Ballads and a song about a blue baboon.
Yet probably The Rock relies on a form too close to extinction at the time for it to bring the whole revue to life.
The later play's music-hall element seems strongest when closest to the  more daring Sweeney Agonistes , bringing to this distinctly urban form some of the ironic bite which Brecht and Weill had brought to Berlin stages in 1929.
This is seen most clearly in the song of Eliot's Blackshirts, whose bitter irony should be set against remarks concerning the undesirability of too many free-thinking Jews in After Strange Gods .
Eliot has been accused of making racist remarks, yet for him ‘All men are equal before God.’
He had grown accustomed, even in the work of supposedly enlightened anthropologists, to terms such as‘savage’, ‘lower races’, and ‘inferior races’, so that when he speaks of ‘inequality’, he may well be thinking of a vertical model, though he may mean simply ‘difference’ when he writes that
There will probably always remain a real inequality of races, as there is always inequality of individuals.
But the fundamental identity in humanity must always be asserted; as must the equal sanctity of moral obligation to people of every race.
It is unlikely that Eliot would have taken the trouble to defend Kipling against the charge of race superiority if he had believed in it himself.
While publishing Dawson on ‘Religion and the Totalitarian State’, he selected for notice in the 1934 Criterion a book highlighting persecution of European Jews; he wrote to Pound speaking of his offence at Pound's antisemitic remarks; with regard to the Vichy government in 1941 he wrote in The Christian News-Letter of his ‘greatest anxiety’ at news ‘that ‘Jews have been given a special status, based on the laws of Nuremberg, which makes their condition little better than that of bondsmen.’
Eliot may have experienced displeasure at racial mixing in After Strange Gods , which he later withdrew from print as ‘a bad book’, but it was no coincidence that in the same year as the performance of The Rock he defended Frazer, but attacked Ezra Pound's favourite, Leo Frobenius, whose anthropological doctrines of racial purity he found particularly distasteful.
‘How you gwine ter keep deh Possum in  his feedbox when I brings in deh Chinas and blackmen?’
Pound wrote to Frank Morley in 1937, but for all his growing concentration on European civilization, Eliot saw more clearly than Pound the dangers of Fascism.
Moving from the elements of primitive worship to the rituals of Christianity and the chants of the London music hall, Eliot tried to strengthen his city against dangers of contemporary politics.
The Rock transformed the motifs of city and savage found in Sweeney Agonistes , but they are preserved because essential to Eliot's thought.
His interest in them is confirmed by his return to the earlier play for the production by The Group Theatre Company in the same year as the performing and publication of The Rock.
Sweeney Agonistes was performed by Doone's company with an appropriate mixture of anthropologically induced masked characters in hieratic postures and music-hall routines.
At its centre, the plain-suited figure of Sweeney looks like a city clerk, surely linked to the Eliot who jokily signed himself F. [rancis?
]X. [avier?
]Sweeney in 1933 when he talked of coming over all of a hoo-hah.
From the condition of being Agonistes , Sweeney points forward to the later ritualistic conception of Eliot's Christian drama.
Production and publication of The Rock led directly to Eliot's being invited to write Murder in the Cathedral , which took further his idea of committed Christian drama and his warnings about the dangers of a society cut off from its religious roots.
It also developed his implicit warnings against the dangers of political extremism.
Bishop Bell, who commissioned the play, was an influential British churchman who had consistently supported the German Confessing Church in its opposition to National Socialism.
Eliot's Murder demonstrates his agreement with that opposition.
It is a play which, again, has not entirely abandoned the traditions of the music hall.
As in The Rock , these are invoked in one of the most bitter moments, with the parody-hymn not unlike a ferocious music-hall song as the chorus of knights sings
Are you washed in the blood of the Lamb?
Are you marked with the mark of the beast?
Come down Daniel to the lions' den,
Come down Daniel and join in the feast.
Music hall had shown Eliot that the chorus of the Greek drama in whose primitive origins he had exhibited such interest, could still work on the modern stage.
There are signs at times of a reversion to a more primitive level of superstition in the play, a slipping beneath Christianity to Frazerian rituals half hinted at, but suppressed beneath normal life.
We have seen the young man mutilated,
The torn girl trembling by the
mill-stream-And meanwhile we have gone on living.
Horror brings Eliot's chorus a sense of unnatural reversion which earlier he had found associated with anthropological discussions and had detected behind Lawrence's ‘explanation of the civilised by the primitive’ sending his characters back ‘to reascend the metamorphoses of evolution’.
I have lain on the floor of the sea and breathed with the breathing
of the sea-anemone, swallowed with ingurgitation of the
sponge…
…
I have seen
Rings of light coiling downwards, descending
To the horror of the ape.
A similar horror sends back the chorus far from their supposedly civilized city into a desert past where April would be again the cruellest month, as they pray ‘let the spring not come.
4 One problem with many passages in Eliot's plays is that they send us to similar but stronger passages in the poetry.
The essential thing which the plays carry on from Eliot's earlier anthropologically concerned work is a fascination with ritual.
The line of dramatic form running from primitive arrow dance to Pinero is worth bearing in mind.
Music hall was the living form closest to the liturgical extreme.
In The Rock Eliot included song and dance.
Song persists in Murder in the Cathedral , but Christian liturgy takes over almost entirely.
Yet Eliot seems to have been attracted even to the most unlikely sources, including even Conan Doyle's ‘The Musgrave Ritual’.
In 1934, the year of Murder in the Cathedral's commissioning, he  wrote, ‘one of the reasons why the Morte Darthur is a permanent source of refreshment, is the degree to which the primitive ‘ritual’ stories are and are not integrated into the narrative.’
Eliot returned to familiar themes in suggesting that the morality of the Morte Darthur was of that primitive type which was essential, whereas modern manners were things of the surface only.
‘This primitive morality was refined by Christianity; but the passing of Christianity has left only the refinement without the morality…
’ The Morte Darthur interpreted by Weston had contributed to The Waste Land .
Two other works with which Eliot linked Malory's ‘profound, tribal, Sophoclean morality’ were to form starting points for his own plays; Aeschylus' Tragedy of the House of Atreus and Sophocles' Oedipus at Colonus underlie respectively The Family Reunion and The Elder Statesman .
If in Murder in the Cathedral he had chosen a particular martyrdom which functioned as a bloody, savage ritual, then in the plays which followed, connections with primitive ritual would be clearer — if anything, as Eliot later feared when thinking of The Family Reunion , too clear, the primitive outline getting in the way of the Christian story.
Harry experiences
The sudden solitude in a crowded desert
In a thick smoke, many creatures moving
Without direction,…
As in The Waste Land , spring appears ‘an evil time’.
Harry's return to the sources at wishwood seems very much a return to the Frazenan wood, when
Spring is an issue of blood…
Do not the ghosts of the drowned
Return to land in the spring?
Momentarily it seems Harry will escape by ‘going away — to become a missionary’ in ‘a tropical climate’and getting to know ‘the natives’.
This hint of physical as well as psychological confrontation with primitivism predictably gives rise to the corresponding image of city apocalypse, presented by Charles, the character with whom as Eliot told Martin Browne he most closely identified.
as if the earth should open
Right to the centre, as I was about to cross pall Mall.
Primitive terrors remain dormant, continually erupting in ‘various spells and enchantments’, or anxious questions, ‘What ambush lies beyond the heather/ And behind the Standing Stones?’
The modern world is juxtaposed against and involved with a world very definitely presented in terms of primitive rite — nowhere more clearly than in the ritual expiation of the curse.
The laying of ghosts by moving ‘Round and round the circle /Completing the charm’ is like a rite rescued from ‘The Hollow Men’, presumably in Eliot's terms sanctified by the Christian connotations also present in the play.
Yet the play's overall effect is not necessarily Christian.
It simply communicates something of that ‘profound, tribal’ morality which Eliot associated with Greek drama and its ritual.
It is questionable if this play fulfils Eliot's new vision as powerfully as those Fragments of an Aristophanic Melodrama fulfilled his old.
Relations between The Family Reunion and Sweeney Agonistes have often been remarked on.
Carol H. Smith's fine study details thoroughly connections between Eliot's late plays and the earlier dramas and primitive motifs which underlie them.
Having indicated such links, I shall not discuss each one, but concentrate on particular instances when the themes of savage and city come together.
This conjunction is particularly important in The Cocktail Party .
While Eliot might mock Pound's concerns with primitive society, it continued to interest him as is indicated by allusions in his correspondence to devil doctors, Bali, and Trobriand Islanders.
To a degree Eliot is just reassuring his correspondent that he has not changed absolutely.
Though a churchwarden, he can still tell stories of his American youth, use four letter words, or quote Bolovian rhymes and customs.
Looking back towards his study of Cornford and Harrison, he approves of Johnson's view that for the modern the distinctions between tragedy and comedy were superficial.
But Eliot emphasized that Johnson, unaware that such distinctions grew out of a difference  in ritual, had been ignorant of their importance for the Greeks.
Eliot's next sentence has a familiar ring: ‘In the end, horror and laughter may be one — only when horror and laughter have become as horrible and laughable as they can be…
‘. Here again is Sweeney Agonistes .
Eliot's concern that his own urban society be well founded on a necessary myth was accentuated by the realization that this society was now annihilating other very different forms of civilization.
This led him in 1935 to discuss a newly ‘discovered’ agricultural Papuan tribe, the description of whose civilization Eliot utilized to criticize what he saw as some of the indulgences of his own inorganic civilization during the unemployment of the thirties.
The case of the Tari Furora paralleled that of the Melanesians in ‘Marie Lloyd’, but it is to his ideal City, and his actual urban Western civilization that Eliot relates this Papuan discovery: ‘…if we are so helpless in the hands of our ‘civilization’ that we admit our inability to prevent it from ruining Papuans, what hope have we of saving ourselves?’
He makes it clear that he believes ‘that there are higher civilizations and lower ones’; the notion of Empire is ‘not necessarily an ignoble one’ when it is founded on ‘the notion of extending law, justice, humanity and civilization — with no other interest than glory, and no other motive than a sense of vocation’.
It seems to him more likely though that Empire is working in tandem with exploitation.
This piece is intensely pessimistic and is a forerunner of his later ‘doubt of the validity of a civilization’ on the eve of the Second World War.
Civilization had to be more than a mere confluence of economic interests: ‘And until we set in order our own crazy economic and financial systems, to say nothing of our philosophy of life, can we be sure that our helping hands to the barbarian and the savage will be any more desirable than the embrace of the leper?’
The Tari Furora greatly disturbed him.
A year later, they were still in his mind when thinking simply of western civilization; the Papuans came into his memory only to be cursorily dismissed as ‘weak inaudible voices’.
Yet the mention of these voices leads Eliot on to wider questioning of what civilization is.
He does not try to pretend there would be any viable alternative in a ‘noble  savage’ existence.
But the realization that his own civilization is extinguishing cultures of ‘savages’ possessed of coherent ways of living prompts him to demand that civilization be considered in no narrow perspective.
He emphasized that peace had to be preserved for the entire human race and not for particular sections of it, pointing out that the word ‘civilization’ could be applied to a wide diversity of values.
Murder in the Cathedral addressed such matters, posed in a different way.
They would be taken up in Eliot's later prose.
Though apparently divorced from ‘Cultural Progress’ as related to the Basutu, which Eliot was also considering in 1936, his idea of poetic drama was part of the same concern with embodying and strengthening what he had always associated with ideas of culture and community and which his dealings with the ‘lower races’had helped to teach him: the need for art linked to religious ritual as a central value summing up and sustaining the social values of a culture.
He was appalled at the thought of turning into a pub at five-thirty for a quiet drink and finding that it had been converted into a Poets' Pub, ‘reverberating, like an African village, with the roll of ‘Drake's Drum.’.
Yet he emphasized that, unlike some other societies, his own was vitiated by a lack of connection between ritual, drama, religion, and the centre of the culture: London.
In a consideration of religious drama which clearly descends from the theorizing about anthropology and literature in ‘The Beating of a Drum’, and from the 1923 conviction that ‘the stage — not only in its remote origins, but always — is a ritual,’ he writes in favour of a closer union between ritual and metropolitan drama, seeing an essentially religious craving as latent in all serious patrons of drama, as opposed to cinema audiences seeking mere distraction.
Eliot stressed that there should be no maintaining of different attitudes for cathedral drama and for West End theatre.
He perceived instead a need to reintegrate both these types of drama and a parallel need to ‘strive towards a reintegration of life’.
Clearly these ideas relate to Eliot's plays and to ‘Burnt Norton’ where dangers of being ‘Distracted from distraction by distraction’seem connected with the spectre of a metropolis seen as the antithesis of religious values.
London, however organically composed of
Hampstead and Clerkenwell, Campden and Putney,
Highgate, Primrose and Ludgate
leads to a ‘twittering world’, close to that of The Waste Land's London or the ‘timekept city’ of The Rock .
‘Burnt Norton’ retains many links with Eliot's earlier poetry.
For a moment balanced against London's distracting inanity are the equally distracting primitive rituals now seen as inane because sundered from the Word:
The crying shadow in the funeral dance,
The loud lament of the disconsolate chimera.
The funeral dance is part of that turning world which, like the remorselessly and vapidly revolving seasons of The Waste Land (or the circles of the London underground in ‘Burnt Norton’) threatens to trap its inhabitants in a cycle which is, eventually, empty.
So timeless Love is distinguished from temporal desire which,
Caught in the form of limitation
Between un-being and being
reminds the reader of that moment when the shadow falls ‘Between the potency/ And the existence’, or of Tiresias's being trapped unfulfilled in sexual desire, bearing witness to all the ritualistically patterned couplings of history, ‘throbbing between two lives’.
The themes of city and savage are marginally present in ‘Burnt Norton’.
As the Four Quartets develop, their importance increases.
The idea of ‘distraction’, so strongly linked with London in ‘Burnt Norton’ was one which Eliot saw in this period as politically as well as spiritually dangerous.
For him spiritual and political ideas were becoming more and more inseparable in his concern with ‘culture’ as a whole.
His considerations of political distraction and its dangers were panoramic in scope.
The modern ‘dictator,’ a Hitler or Mussolini, must be thought of…as a highly paid leading actor , whose business is to divert his people (individually, from the spectacle of their own littleness as well as from more useful business)…
The ruler as dramatic star — with illustrations from the customs of African tribes — is one subject of Mr. Lewis's attention.
At the same period, though, Eliot continued to worry about ‘urbanization of mind ’.
In 1940 he wrote of an almost sanctified rural life as something vitally different from the separately developing urban culture which so disturbed him and pleaded that agriculture should be regarded as a vocation, rather than merely an industry, though he pointed out that such a view involved the whole orientation and scheme of values of a future society.
In The Idea of a Christian Society , published just before war, Eliot saw ‘our choice’ as being ‘between a pagan, and necessarily stunted culture, and a religious, and necessarily imperfect culture’.
Unlimited industrialism is particularly dangerous, tending ‘to create bodies of men and women — of all classes — detached from tradition, alienated from religion, and susceptible to mass suggestion’.
Though, that last phrase seems to point to Germany and Italy, Eliot also draws attention to dangerous mass ‘cults’ in Britain, which ‘has been highly industrialized longer than any other country’.
Claiming that he is not ‘presenting any idyllic picture of the rural parish’, Eliot takes as his ‘norm, the ideal of a small and mostly self-contained group attached to the soil…with a kind of unity which may be designed, but which also has to grow through generations’.
He was clearly attracted to rural religious communities, such as that at Kelham where he himself participated or that seventeenth-century community of Little Gidding which he was later to celebrate.
Yet he saw the danger in making these communities an ideal, as he turned an anthropological eye on Christianity and perceived that such examples seem to proffer no solution to industrial urban and suburban existence — the way most people live.
Such a religious patterning of small communities reveals a ‘Christendom fixed at the state of development suitable to a simple agricultural and piscatorial society’, and so imperfectly suited to the more complicated organization of modern society.
Eliot's solution of a widespread Christian community hierarchically organized, related both to the state and individual parishes and containing intellectual leaders, owes much to Benda's notion of clercs , as well as to the anthropologists' stress on the connection of religion with society.
As in After Strange Gods , he is concerned in his conclusion with a return to sources, that is with going back to the savage and working forwards towards his solution to the problem– of modern industrial life; again such a movement is presented in terms of a familiar encounter.
The struggle to recover the sense of relation to nature and to God, the recognition that even the most primitive feelings should be part of our heritage, seems to me to be the explanation and justification of the life of
D. H. Lawrence, and the excuse for his aberrations.
But we need not only to learn how to look at the world with the eyes of a Mexican Indian — and I hardly think that Lawrence succeeded — and we certainly cannot afford to stop there.
We need to know how to see the world as the Christian Fathers saw it; and the purpose of reascending to origins is that we should be able to return, with greater spiritual knowledge, to our own situation.
Eliot does not see primitive religion as a necessary basis for Christianity, ‘I do not believe that Christianity germinates out of natural religion, but that it is given by revelation.’
Though his ‘City’ is put forward as a remedy for secular, increasingly industrial-urban values, he does conceive of it as including non-Christians, though these he hopes would be a minority.
This period of Eliot's development is often seen as one of increasing narrowing, so that it is useful to emphasize that while it certainly represents a concentration of energy on Christian themes, it also represents a continuing openness to other elements and a drawing on resources whose foundations were laid in Eliot's studies at Harvard.
Discussing ‘Education in a Christian Society’ in 1940, Eliot cites eastern ideas of ‘sadhu , or mahatma ’in a demonstration that ‘In the East, and in pre-Christian Europe, the sage and the saint have been hardly distinguishable from each other.
We must recognize the truth in both the Oriental and the Christian views.’
Such an openness would be seen increasingly in Four Quartets .
Elsewhere, he criticizes Mannheim's definition of charismatic education in the consideration of the awakening of religious feeling; since it seems neither to include the whole of the education of so-called ‘primitive races’ any more than of the higher races in their religious stage.
Eliot instances the co-ordination of different types of education in ‘the highly organized societies of Polynesia’.
The breadth of this review, which goes on to discuss Sir Thomas Elyot's The Governour and to conclude by looking at immediate reforms applicable in a modern world of  ‘industrial exploitation…’ where ‘local community does not exist’relates clearly to ‘East Coker’.
This poem shows how Eliot's increasing interest in ruralism had at its heart his earlier interest in the savage.
As in The Waste Land , this is combined with the city.
‘East Coker’ is concerned with civilization at its beginning and end, as well as with purely individual values.
The poem's beginning is certainly biblical, drawing on Ecclesiastes, but it also involves the modern world (‘factory…bypass’), and deliberately seems to draw on the biblical passage closest to Frazerian fertility rites, the dead being reborn through the seasonal cycle.
Old stone to new building, old timber to new fires,
Old fires to ashes, and ashes to the earth
Which is already flesh, fur and faeces,
Bone of man and beast, cornstalk and leaf.
Eliot celebrates English pastoral rhythms.
In ‘East Coker’, though, we seem to watch ghosts from the past, though the countryside itself may be little changed:
In that open field
If you do not come too close, if you do not come too close,
On a summer midnight, you can hear the music
Of the weak pipe and the little drum
And see them dancing around the bonfire
The association of man and woman
This vision is like that which Eliot praised in his childhood favourite, Kipling, whose Puck of Pook's Hill and Rewards and Fairies particularly ‘give at once a sense of the antiquity of England, of the number of generations and peoples who have labored the soil and in turn been buried beneath it, and of the contemporaneity of the past’.
‘They’, one of Kipling's ‘most other-worldly stories’ was important for the opening of ‘Burnt Norton’.
Kipling's historical and contemporary tales of the English countryside, stories such as‘An Habitation Enforced’, ‘My Son's Wife’, and ‘The Wish House’, are important to the start of ‘East Coker’.
The earlier Kipling brought about an ‘introduction of India and the Colonies into the sphere of consciousness  of the inhabitants of the London suburb’; the later was ‘discovering and reclaiming a lost inheritance’.
Both were crucial to Eliot.
When he maintains the old spellings, ‘daunsinge’ and ‘matrimonie’, Eliot links himself with his East Coker ancestor Thomas Elyot.
The poet chose burial under East Coker earth, completing a circle of ends and beginnings.
The attraction of the stately dance in ‘East Coker’ is strong.
The association of man and woman
In daunsinge, signifying matrimonie —
A dignified and commodious sacrament.
Two and two, necessarye coniunction,
Holding eche other by the hand or the arm
Whiche betokeneth concorde.
This is, however, mixed in with a more primitive element relating rustic to savage through fertility rituals.
Eliot changed ‘May midnight’,(recalling Gerontion's ‘depraved May’ and ceremonies of spring) to ‘summer midnight’, maintaining a primitive connection with ‘Midsummer Fires’, ceremonies copiously described by Frazer, while looking back, too, to the Hollow Men's circular dance.
As in his remarks on Lawrence in After Strange Gods and The Idea of a Christian Society , Eliot indicates the importance of contact with the savage as a beginning, while stressing its limitations.
He makes apparent both his sympathies with rural life and the fact that mere retreat to the tradition of the countryside is not enough.
He has respect for the almost tribal traditional wisdom of those whom he later called the ‘quiet-voiced elders’ and their ‘dead secrets,, but in the end these are to be renounced or incorporated in a higher Christian scheme and vision.
Though attractive and lyrical, the essentially primitive associations of the country dance in ‘East Coker’ lead it to be classed with the ‘folly’of Frazerian savages; its fertility rhythm, ‘Nourishing the corn’like that of the inescapably cyclic fertility ceremonies of Sweeney Agonistes and The Waste Land , points towards ‘Dung and death’.
Admired and rejected, the primitive rite is also linked with the city; the isolated last line of the poem's second section summons up the field and its dancing, leading to a juxtaposition with the urban world which follows.
The dancers are all gone under the hill.
III
O dark dark dark.
They all go into the dark,
The vacant interstellar spaces, the vacant into the vacant,
The captains, merchant bankers, eminent men of letters.
…
Distinguished civil servants, chairmen of many committees,…
As with the living dead of The Waste Land's London and the inane savages of its ‘mudcracked houses’, so in ‘East Coker’ the primitive rituals of the countryside and the (essentially commercial) life of the city and City both point only towards death.
But now Eliot clearly finds aspects of London life and country life congenial.
Having sympathetically implicated elements of his East Coker ancestry and private ‘mirth’ in the opening section, here the poet, himself content to sit on ‘many committees’and regarded as one of the ‘eminent men of letters’, is implicated in the world he attacks.
The circles of the dance are as invalid as the circles of the Underground.
Their form or pattern, dead in itself, may hint at something higher, but unless that higher truth is realized, they remain meaningless and deathly.
Both East Coker and London were in a sense ‘home’ for Eliot, but, as he reminds us ‘Home is where one starts from’.
One of the uses of understanding how this transform of the city and savage theme continues in Eliot's work is that in seeing how this primitive countryside (like the animistic rose-garden) connects with London's metropolitan world, it becomes apparent that there is a political aspect to the Four Quartets .
The politics are closely related to Eliot's prose writing of the period.
He recalls how, seeing England from his own urban American background he has always been aware that the natural habitat of the Englishman was the little rural community and that industrial and large towns were accepted with reluctance.
Eliot sees London as unusual among big cities in having grown up gradually out of a grouping of villages and concludes that ‘there is something about England which remains stubbornly attached to the parochial’.
As the very titles of the Quartets remind us, Eliot is stressing the importance of this parochial tradition.
Significantly, it is here that he locates ‘mirth’.
Yet the overt ruralism of the prose is more strongly qualified in the verse, where country, primitive, with  its ‘daemonic, chthonic/ Powers’ is seen as ultimately no better than city unless-redeemed by the Christian vision.
And in poems which make use of primitive ceremony, several foreign literatures, and much Buddhist thought, Eliot's parish is no Little England.
The Quartets are all the more impressive for having this political dimension worked into them, yet still subordinated beneath the religious scheme.
Their homecoming, going to earth and returning to sources, reaches, in a sense, its furthest point in ‘The Dry Salvages’, where Eliot returns to his own St Louis and Massachusetts childhood, to ‘The life of significant soil’, and to the savage meanings associated with such beginnings.
The poem stresses throughout the elemental qualities of the landscape and seascape which it describes, leading Eliot to a particularly bare group of rocks which he had known from the sailing days of his childhood.
But the three rocks also attract him because of their name (see p. 34 above).
It is with this savage, primitive element that the poem begins:
I do not know much about gods; but I think that the river
Is a strong brown god
Eliot's familiar theme that the savage exists even below the urban world on a forgotten, yet still potent and often dangerous level is here reiterated:
The problem once solved, the brown god is almost forgotten
By the dwellers in cities — ever, however, implacable,
Keeping his seasons and rages, destroyer, reminder
Of what men choose to forget.
‘Within us’ the Mississippi in St Louis, like the voices in the rose garden in ‘Burnt Norton’, or the dancers in the field of ‘East Coker’, or the village concealed in the shape of modern London, or the savage elements in modern man, maintains a secret presence, ‘waiting, watching and waiting’.
It has been present from the beginning as a primitive rhythm, that element associated with the ‘auditory imagination’ of poetry, and so with the savage in the jungle and his gods, ‘His rhythm was present in the nursery bedroom…
‘. Primitive and child are again linked, but not as the second childhood of ‘The Hollow Men’.
The primitivism of the ‘strong brown god’ is healthier: a childhood promising growth.
Prefacing Huckleberry Finn (first read ‘a few years ago’) in 1950, Eliot recalled his own boyhood.
His words suggest that Twain's book brought back Eliot's childhood not merely  by functioning as an aide-mémoire .
It enabled Eliot to look not to the detested Unitarianism of his family, but towards a deeper, wider, yet also more personal ‘rhythm’ present, though scarcely recognized at the time.
Eliot, thanks to Twain, is able to see his childhood as containing, in Durkheim's phrase,The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life .
…the River makes the book a great book.
/As with Conrad, we are continually reminded of the power and terror of Nature, and the isolation and feebleness of Man.
Conrad remains always the European observer of the tropics, the white man's eye contemplating the Congo and its black gods.
But Mark Twain is a native, and the River God is his God.
It is as a native that he accepts the River God, and it is the subjection of Man that gives to Man his dignity.
For without some kind of God, Man is not even very interesting.
So accustomed to using Conrad's eyes, Eliot is able to see through Twain's the native emotion of his own nativity and childhood in the nursery bedroom, seeing that childhood in terms of a fundamental primitivism from which his religious consciousness has grown.
Here again, anthropology and romanticism have coalesced.
The experience represented by river and sea is the experience of tradition's endurance, and a tradition, even in its full development, has no truck with ‘superficial notions of evolution [as]a means of disowning the past’.
Rather, the tradition includes and is aware of its primitive origins: this reminds the tradition of its vulnerability and need to look for higher guidance, while keeping it aware of crude root emotions which cannot be avoided.
The fear of savage ‘folly’ links with the fear of God.
I have said before
That the past experience revived in the meaning
Is not the experience of one life only
But of many generations — not forgetting
Something that is probably quite ineffable:
The backward look behind the assurance
Of recorded history, the backward half-look
Over the shoulder, towards the primitive terror.
EIiot's intense sympathy with the fishermen of the Massachusetts coast transforms them into figures of endurance, secular saints, whose course is one of earthly failure which the toughest faith transforms into gain.
This daily confronting of the ‘primitive terror’ as represented by the sea is held up for our admiration.
There may be an eastern quality to such reverence for long, ancestral tradition; this section is followed by the episode of Krishna and Arjuna which is related to the business of the fishermen by the concluding ‘Not fare well, /But fare forward, voyagers.’
All this contrasts sharply with the flimsy world of divination, of Madame Sosostris, which lands us unsurprisingly in the heart of London as we hear how all this ‘fiddle’ will always be found ‘When there is distress of nations and perplexity/ Whether on the shores of Asia, or in the Edgware Road’.
What raises Eliot above the entrapping circles of city and savage is what for him has continually to raise words towards the Word, something made available in partial revelations.
‘The hint half guessed, the gift half understood, is Incarnation.’
Here city and savage are united and transcended.
We are left with a verdict which sees the savage as fatally limited because cut off from God's Word which passes understanding; similarly,The Waste Lands fertility cults were cut off from the peace of ‘Shantih shantih shantih’.
Eliot's leavetaking of the city comes in ‘Little Gidding’.
In ‘The Dry Salvages’ he salutes and passes the ‘daemonic, chthonic/ Powers’of the savage.
Charles I, Christ, and Frazer's monarchs coalesce in the ‘broken king’ of ‘Little Gidding’whose ‘May, with voluptuary sweetness’, recalling Gerontion's ‘depraved May’, perhaps follows an urge to juxtapose spring's arrival with the breaking of the king.
What matters more is the poem's preoccupation with the city and its destruction.
If a savage element persists, it is the modern savagery of the Blitz which, physically, as a firewatcher, Eliot attempted to assuage.
The sight triggered deeply his apocalyptic imagination.
What had happened in verse at the conclusion of The Waste Land was actually happening: London was being destroyed.
At first in ‘Little Gidding’, the bombing and the burning seem to be happening in the countryside, part of that cycle of death and rebirth opening ‘East Coker’, explicitly recalled.
Dust inbreathed was a house —
The wall, the wainscot and the mouse.
The death of hope and despair,
This is the death of air.
The cycle of death leads us on towards the urban landscape that  follows.
The ‘Dust in the air suspended’ seems to present us with a barren desert of death.
Eliot had again used the traditionally romantic similar alternatives ‘a desert or a city’.
Yet, as one of his prose pieces of the period reveals, the desert remained for him not only a place of death, but also a place of Christian triumph.
He gave high praise to the biography of a French priest killed in North Africa.
Charles de Foucauld travelled disguised, the first explorer ‘in unexplored and unsubdued territory’.
He gave aid to the tribesmen and aimed primarily not to convert by teaching, ‘but to live the Christian life, alone among the natives’.
Finally, Foucauld was killed by a marauding band which was unaware of his name and reputation.
‘There is no higher glory of a Christian empire than that which was here brought into being by a death in a desert.’
This piece relates to the ‘explorers’ of ‘East Coker’, and to the poem on ‘the Indians who Died in Africa’.
It is the revision of the theme of cannibal and missionaries in Sweeney Agonistes which makes possible the fate of Celia in The Cocktail Party .
It also relates to Eliot's sense of the poet's mission in ‘Little Gidding’ when the streets of London become simply a tribal homeland.
In the city, ‘In the uncertain hour before the morning’, Eliot meets his ‘familiar compound ghost’.
The use of Dante is encouraged by The Waste Land and by The City of Dreadful Night .
The time for Eliot is just after the passing of ‘the dark dove with the flickering tongue’, a German plane which has left behind a city every bit as much of a waste land as the earlier poem's London, though now the ‘crowd’ has gone, leaving only the speaker who, ‘before the urban dawn wind’, communicates with the ghost.
Since our concern was speech, and speech impelled us
To purify the dialect of the tribe…
Typically, the second line is not Eliot's own but is selected deliberately.
The English language, to which Eliot had dedicated (vainly, he worried) so much of his life is here reduced merely to ‘the dialect’ of a ‘tribe’.
As dialect, it is all the more vulnerable to disintegration and collapse.
Similarly as a ‘tribe’, rather than a nation, the English (and humanity) are revealed as more vulnerable.
The effect also forges a link with those primitive origins of poetry, which ‘begins, I dare say, with a savage beating a drum in a jungle’.
This conversation  at the threatened end of a city and a civilization links its poet with the primitive, savage beginnings.
The speech is filled with self-reproach, yet it ends with what was promised at its start: dawn.
Day rises over the broken city.
The day was breaking.
In the disfigured street
He left me, with a kind of valediction,
And faded on the blowing of the horn.
All is clear.
The final, Jericho-like sound may be frightening, but is at least an escape from
The sound of horns and motors, which shall bring
Sweeney to Mrs. Porter in the spring.
The saving of the poet demands ‘that refining fire/ Where you must move in measure, like a dancer’.
Similarly, the saving of the city seems to demand its destruction.
Eliot's apocalyptic urban imagination had destroyed London before.
Now it must be done again.
There is both an exultant and a suffering note in the return of the destructive dove which is also the Christian bird of Incarnation whose message for both individual and society, parish and city, is driven home in the famous anthem passage when ‘The dove descending breaks the air.’
The God behind this love is a savage God as well as a redeeming, loving one.
After this passage, there is no more city, no more savage in the Quartets .
Only the return through poetry and childhood images to the final home which lies in the blank page following the moment when ‘the fire and the rose are one,.
In Eliot's next prose book and in his next play, the combined themes of city and savage were important.
Notes towards the Definition of Culture supplements Arnold's definition not by abandoning it, but by setting it beside a wider, basically anthropological definition of culture.
The essentially anthropological basis of Eliot's most crucial definition of culture is clear in the published book, as Bantock indicates, but the earlier (1943) version of the first section reveals the intellectual movement even more clearly.
Eliot sets aside Arnold's notion of culture, stating that his own main interest is ‘with the culture that a whole society may develop and transmit’.
Yet the first definition of culture which he now supplies, ‘that of a refinement of living, including appreciation of philosophy and the arts, among the upper levels of society’, is in many ways close to Amold's ideal.
In Eliot's own life such an idea seems to have been associated particularly with artistic movements of the big cities.
Against this first idea of culture he sets a second definition at once wider and ‘more fundamental’.
…it is what we imply when we speak of Primitive Culture .
It is the whole complex of behaviour, thought and feeling, expressing itself in custom, in art, in political and social organisation, in religious structure and religious thought, which we can perceive most clearly as a whole in the less advanced societies, but which is equally present as the peculiar character of the most highly developed people or nation.
There is not detailed remembering of the book, but even the full title,Primitive Culture: Researches into the Development of Mythology ,Philosophy, Religion, Language, Art, and Custom , shows that Tylor's conception of culture as all embracing is one of the keys to Eliot's work.
From the start, his two definitions of culture, that of a class and that of the whole people, ‘have to be kept distinct but always in relation’.
Particularly in the music-hall connections of his plays (which later became their West End connections) we can see that he was attempting to do this in his own creative work at the time.
Notes towards the Definition of Culture takes the ‘savage’ as a base.
Though Eliot refuses to treat the uneducated merely as ‘savages’, his essential ideas about the indispensable contribution of religion to culture are presented as being derived from the study of a less complex model.
The original article shows clearly his move from primitive to sophisticated, as he demonstrates the way in which amongst primitive communities various parts of culture are inextricably interlaced.
Eliot instances the activities of Dyak headhunters the production of whose carvings is at once a task utilitarian and sacred.
As civilization develops, though, occupational specializations proliferate, and eventually there appears a capacity for abstracting religion, science, politics, and art from one another.
Eliot moves from such a primitive organization to discussing Greek drama, following the movement of Harrison, Cornford, and the other anthropologically influenced classical scholars whom he had read.
He sees that conflict between various elements in highly developed society can be creative, but that eventually deterioration will follow if connections are not preserved between the various areas of life which, in the primitive model, are integrated.
Without naming names, he goes on to outline the situations which had so interested him in the cases of the Melanesians and the Tari Furora, as he points out that to tamper with the pattern of primitive culture at one point is to endanger the whole structure.
He relates this to the state of culture of his own age, facing dangers of over-specialization, which impoverishes both the religious and artistic sensibilities by separating each from the other, so that only ‘the vestige of manners may be left for those who, having their sensibility uninformed either by religion or by art,…have nothing left but an inherited behaviour which ceases to have meaning’.
Eliot had written of and against such a milieu when he combined the elements of the savage and the city, from the beating tom-tom of ‘Portrait of a Lady’ through the rituals of The Waste Land and Sweeney Agonistes to the cocktail chatter and jungle martyrdom of the play,The Cocktail Party , yet to come.
Revising the original articles for Notes towards the Definition of Culture , he complicated his argument's texture by involving more material relevant to his personal history and to the history of his work, such as that mention of Heart of Darkness which looks back to The Waste Land .
The first article in the series which became the book demonstrated that Eliot's definition of culture begins with the savage.
The second showed that at the other pole is the city.
Eliot discussed the shrunken sense in which ‘culture’ was applied to the arts, culture centring on Paris, London, and more recently New York.
While the city is kept within bounds he sees that this can be healthy, though in both culture and industry a balance between town and country is necessary.
As in Four Quartets , it is the country which has inherited the virtues of primitive community, the savage's integrated civilization being reflected in what Eliot, following fashion of the day, praises as organicism. ‘organicism’ suggests close-knit near-to-the-soil values of rural communities whose established tradition and integrated value-system are threatened by the sophisticated metropolitan.
Eliot's thinking here sometimes relies on romantic clichés insufficiently analysed in Russell Square, yet it could also produce provocative  insights.
The urge to preserve these rural communities led him from examination of dying primitive societies to sympathy with developing regionalism as a political force to preserve cultural values under threat.
Such regional movements, whether in Scotland or America, tended to be associated with agrarian, traditional integrated societies beyond the ‘wholly urban-minded’ capital.
Eliot made clear in Notes that his true concern was ‘a problem of the first importance…that of the transmission of culture ’.
The book's scope extends far beyond consideration of Karl Mannheim's stress on a need for ‘elites’.
Eliot's third article again stressed that linkage of primitive and sophisticated, first linked explicitly in the review of Wyndham Lewis's ‘cave-man’ novel in 1917.
Eliot did not want ‘a romanticized folk-culture’.
Rather, ‘the censure of this essay must be on a somewhat different ground — that of my wishing to have all at once what can only be had in succession in an historical process, a co-existence of the primitive and the most highly sophisticated’.
Here it seems Eliot's artistic practice is clearly carrying over into his social thought.
His reply to the expected criticism is that ideals must be striven for particularly now since ‘in a position in which old peoples and old cultures are likely to be supplanted by new — we are in a common danger to all races over the whole circumference of the globe’.
This global stance and anthropological imagination continue to guide him in his consideration of the relation between religion and culture, and his fascination with ‘more primitive and self-contained peoples, where the culture and the religion are co-terminous’.
Wishing for ‘much the same unity on a higher plane’, he presents himself as a kind of agriculturalist, concerned with ‘our relation to the spiritual soil’.
Against those iconoclasts who would rid life of all images in the name of religion, he sees repudiation of art as acceptable for the extreme ascetic, but, if universally applied, as starving the spiritual soil of nourishment.
Yet he insists that if the arts are a necessary element in culture and if culture is essential to develop a people's highest spiritual capacities, then it must not be  forgotten that without religion no culture can exist.
This is the main message of these ‘Notes’.
Whether the reader disagrees with that message or not, Eliot cannot be accused of suddenly presenting it or of bringing it to the fore simply because of his Christian faith.
Certainly it accords with and draws on that faith, but also and explicitly it comes from Eliot's long concern with the meeting extremes of savage and city.
I have concentrated on the articles, ‘Notes towards a Definition of Culture’, rather than the less tentatively titled Notes towards the Definition of Culture because the book, while refining and adding to the argument, occludes that argument's clarity through continual divagation and a tendency to over-engage in discussion with Eliot's own contemporaries, many now forgotten.
A similar tendency vitiates The Idea of a Christian Society , with its many and lengthy endnotes.
The defence of the format of these books is that they were written as part of a struggle.
Now that details of that struggle in the later 1930s and 1940s have faded, the books have been weakened, though their central argument can still engage and provoke.
In various articles of the forties Eliot refined his material, whether in relating poetry to religious ritual in ‘The Social Function of Poetry’ or returning to Primitive Culture and John Layard's studies ‘in the ‘stone age’New Hebrides' in ‘Cultural Forces in the Human Order’which reworks many of the points in the earlier ‘Notes’series.
Simultaneously, he concerned himself with the idea that cities were necessary, not evil, but that ‘without the life of the soil from which to draw its strength, the urban culture must lose its source of strength and rejuvenescence’.
He did not always side with the city, though he did concern himself with urban and industrial problems.
Writing on ‘Full Employment and the Responsibility of Christians’(1945) in a response to a correspondent signed ‘Civis’, Eliot signed himself ‘Metoikos’— resident alien.
He continued to set out ideas on  cultural issues in a piece on ‘The War and the Blitz’ also incorporated into the Notes .
Again he pointed out ‘more marked differentiation of function’ in higher types of primitive society.
Writing about UNESCO in 1947, he repeated that he ‘had always understood culture to comprehend education and science, as well as other interests’.
Prefacing Notes towards the Definition of Culture , Eliot acknowledged particular debts to V. A. Demant, Christopher Dawson, and Karl Mannheim.
Mannheim, whose work Eliot read after 1937 and whom he frequently met, has been discussed by Kojecky.
For the themes of savage and city it is Demant and Dawson who are important, though neither writer is gripping.
Dawson, the more significant figure, had featured in the Criterion since the late 1920s, Demant since the early 30s.
Dawson's first book,The Age of the Gods (1928), subtitled A Study in the Origins of Culture in Prehistoric Europe and the Ancient East , began by noting that ‘During the last thirty years the great development of archaeological and anthropological studies has prepared the way for a new conception of history.’
Dawson was interested in history ‘not as an inorganic mass of isolated events, but as the manifestation of the growth and mutual interaction of living cultural wholes’.
For Dawson, organic connections were good.
He emphasized what is summed up in the title of Simone Weil's book which Eliot would later preface,The Need for Roots .
…the earliest agriculture must have grown up round the shrines of the Mother Goddess, which thus became social and economic centres, as well as holy places, and were the germs of the future cities.
Dawson emphasized the importance of combining agricultural and urban for building a strong society.
He also discussed ‘savages’, referring to figures such as Frazer, Tyler [sic ], Rivers, Elliot Smith, Marett, and Durkheim.
Often Dawson's ideas are remarkably similar to those of Eliot.
A culture can only be understood from within.
It is a spiritual community which owes its unity to common beliefs and a common attitude to life, far more than to any uniformity of physical type.
Hence the study of primitive culture is intimately bound up with that of primitive religion.
Dawson's 1932 book,The Making of Europe , drew his work into a more specifically European context, emphasizing classical tradition, the importance of tribal as well as urban culture, and the significance of asceticism, particularly as shown by the desert saints.
Carol Smith has pointed to the importance of this book for the primitive ritual elements in Eliot's drama.
It contributed also to his stress on ‘The Unity of European Culture’, though ever since ‘Tradition and the Individual Talent’ Eliot had been preoccupied with ‘the mind of Europe’.
Dawson underlined the importance of the family, a concept which became more and more explicit not only in Eliot's later social writings but also in his plays.
Like Eliot, Dawson emphasized the ‘two Englands’ created in the nineteenth century —‘the England of the fields and the England of the factories’— and wished to build on a common ‘English tradition’which with some sort of religious sanction would take people Beyond Politics .
In many ways on the outbreak of war this was, of course, a naïve position.
It was also profoundly necessary to understand roots and strengths of the culture so that what was best might be salvaged from carnage, and worries like Eliot's — that the war might be fought only to preserve financial interests — could be assuaged.
The positions of Dawson and Eliot moved closer and closer together, influencing one another.
The two men conversed.
Dawson's Religion and Culture stressing Tylor's importance and relating theories of primitive religion to Christianity was selected by Eliot as one of his ‘Books of the Year’ in 1950.
V. A. Demant, a parish priest as well as a Fellow of the Royal Anthropological Society, also stressed ‘The Importance of Christopher Dawson’.
Demant too combined interest in savage and city.
He cites Malinowski's Sex and Repression in Primitive Society , criticizing  the way in which ‘the fashionable psycho-analytic school of Sigmund Freud deduces the processes of the human psyche from the particular problems of the modem urbanized European’.
Demant's ‘Christian Sociology’ was important not just in itself; it threw up names from Eliot's past, such as those of Maine and Durkheim, which maintained the importance of such figures within an explicitly Christian context.
The third section of Demant's 1936 Christian Polity (Faber & Faber) is given over to anthropological essays, such as‘Idols: Their Place and Influence in Religious History’ where again we meet the names of Elliot Smith, Tylor, Ellis, Frazer, McDougall, Robertson Smith, and others.
Eliot now tended to be interested in anthropology mainly when it contributed to a Christian perspective, so that while he would maintain that ‘the actual religion of no European people has ever been purely Christian, or purely anything else’ since ‘There are always bits and traces of more primitive faiths, more or less absorbed’, he became more and more interested in relating such faiths to Christian problems.
So he was attracted to Evans-Pritchard's contention that ‘the sociologist should also be a moral philosopher and that, as such, he should have a set of definite beliefs and values in terms of which he evaluates the facts he studies as a sociologist’.
Evans-Pritchard's ‘Social Anthropology’ devotes much attention to the Victorian anthropologists, Tylor and Frazer, then passes on to their critics, ‘Durkheim and the Année Sociologique group of writers’, thus recapitulating Eliot's own interests; some ‘features may be found to exist in all human societies, primitive and civilized alike’; the paper relates anthropology to religious belief, ‘with special reference to Catholic apologetics’.
This concurrence of anthropology and Christian belief was, similarly, what attracted Eliot to Demant, who was editor of the 1944 lectures,Our Culture: Its Christian Roots and Present Crisis .
Demant's own chapter would have been all the more attractive to Eliot because of its wide-ranging view which combined the primitive and the sophisticated.
As we might speak of the culture of the Hebrides, or as W. H. Rivers wrote of the culture of Melanesia, so we speak of the culture of the European West  to describe a set of outlooks, aims and ways of life, which has a history in the past of Europe and has spread to other parts of the world.
Again, there seems to have been cross-fertilization between Demant's work and that of Eliot.
The Cocktail Party , whose first draft of three scenes was completed by June 1948, more than any other of Eliot's later plays unites the themes of savage and city.
This is hardly surprising, since its gestation period comprised the years in which Eliot was working on the Notes .
The sharp combination of savage and city along with ritual and music-hall elements do much to make this the most powerful of Eliot's comedies.
‘The scene is laid in London ,’ in the tinkling, surfacy cocktail world of sophisticated chiming dialogue more realistic than that of Sweeney Agonistes , but still reminiscent of the earlier play in the chinking rhythms of its conversation.
The Cocktail Party presents again a world whose moral base has been eroded, though surface conventions remain.
Into it comes the shamanic figure of ‘An Unidentified Guest’ who is in control of potent and primitive forces, which the other characters do not seem to understand.
Reilly's knowledge seems to surpass the barriers of the natural.
Associated with the Devil by Celia (I. ii), he is a sod of devil doctor.
UNIDENTIFIED GUEST.
…to approach the stranger Is to invite the unexpected, release a new force, Or let the genie out of the bottle.
It is to start a train of events Beyond your control.
Straddling naturalistic setting and ritual drama, Reilly is the only character who sings.
His song seems like a recollection of one of Eliot's music-hall favourites and heightens the unusual, ritual element of his drinking.
The play's strength is that it draws on Eliot's earlier work and makes that earlier work transferable to the West End, a triumph in itself; its weakness, like that of most of the plays, is that it offers us little we cannot find more concisely and intensely expressed in the poetry.
Edward's speech, for instance, presented  ‘Contre Sartre’, and stating that ‘Hell is oneself’, recalls ‘Thinking of the key, each confirms a prison’, and Bradley on ‘the whole world for each’ as ‘peculiar and private to that soul’.
Other earlier themes resurface.
As in ‘Marie Lloyd’ the growth of the cinema was juxtaposed against the primitive Melanesian life, so in the play the interest of Peter Quilpe and Celia Coplestone in Hollywood contrasts with the reality of the primitive world for which, eventually, Celia abandons the Hollywood dream.
Unreality and reality continue to cross and recross throughout the play, as do the savage and the sophisticated.
London chatter, beginning with tigers in India, involves themes such as Montenegro peasants, primitive Guardians, libation rituals, and unrest among natives as well as more expected Hampstead material.
The matter of the drama continues to be eclectic as Eliot pokes beneath the glossy city surface to hidden depths of feeling, and as so often looks to Buddhism as well as Christianity.
Those last words of the Buddha, which are also contrived as Reilly's last words to Celia —‘Work out your salvation with diligence’— look back to Eliot's 1914/ 15 essay discussing the supremely attainable good.
But the final juxtaposition, and the final breakthrough to illumination and an absolute religious certainty, comes about through a direct confrontation between the savage and the city, which proved shocking to the original audiences and retains some of its power to shock today.
Celia's death is the equivalent of the death in the desert undergone by Foucauld.
It shows Christianity beside the most primitive of humanity and slashes a raw strength into the London lounge.
The confrontation is introduced by being absurdly dismissed, in a West End version of Sweeney Agonistes , with a small side glance at Lévy-Bruhl's prelogical mentality thrown in as ‘The native is not, I fear, very logical.’
From slick dialogue about eating Christians, the play moves back to the world of the cinema.
Peter has just come from California to make ‘a film of English life’ which will involve the reconstruction of an English residence in Hollywood.
He wished Celia to star in his film, but the unreality of this world is punctured by the stark reality of the ritual slaughter.
Celia perished trying to help some natives dying of pestilence.
Only traces of her body have been found.
ALEX.
It was difficult to tell.
But from what we know of local practices It would seem that she must have been crucified Very near an ant-hill.
Initially the description of Celia's death had been more savagely horrifying, describing the body's ‘decomposition’ and the way in which the tribesmen ‘smear the victims/ With a juice that is attractive to the ants’.
Because of shock caused among audiences by this last line, Eliot was persuaded to alter the passage, so that it is clear that shock is only a part of a deeper message which shows how contact with the primitive can renew values of faith, self-sacrifice, and idealism which seem to have become totally atrophied in the world of London cocktail party and Hollywood film.
The play's message then is fundamentally religious.
The London socialites come to seem no more important than the savages.
REILLY.
Who knows, Mrs. Chamberlayne, The differences that made to the natives who were dying Or the state of mind in which they died?
Christianity is largely defined against the savage world, though the savage world is seen as an essential base and background.
Eliot has been careful to avoid any sort of sentimental religiosity, and this strengthens greatly the play's climax.
Yet it is interesting to read another speech, reluctantly dropped very late in the play's completion, which both showed Christianity in some ways working with the savage world, and looked back with a different point of view to the earlier worship of a human god in the unpublished ‘Exequy’ poem in the Waste Land manuscripts.
LAVINIA.
…Yet I thought your expression was one of…satisfaction!
Interest, yes, but not in the details.
ALEX.
There's one detail which is rather interesting And rather touching, too.
We found that the natives, After we'd reoccupied the village, Had erected a sort of shrine for Celia Where they brought offerings of fruit and flowers, Fowls, and even sucking pigs.
They seemed to think that by propitiating Celia They might insure themselves against further misfortune.
We left that problem for the Bishop to wrestle with.
Martin Browne's question, ‘Do we hear echoes of ‘the glittering, jewelled shrine’ of Thomas Becket?’may be a little too direct.
But certainly here, for the clearest moment in Eliot's later plays the savage and the Christian are joined in reproach of the oversophisticated city;, though it is essential, too, to remember that that city also contains Sir Henry Harcourt-Reilly whom Eliot once described as possibly ‘a god in the machine’.
It is possible to see faint remnants of the city/ savage confrontation in the later plays, and Carol Smith continues to track the ritual elements in these, but the feeling in them seems to me increasingly one of whimsy and, eventually, gentle pastoral.
The confidential world of the city clerk persists in Eliot's poorest play which looks again to Victorian melodrama.
Generally, though we may have the background threat of Gomez's South American violence or past humiliation (Maisie Mountjoy brings back the music hall again), the late plays are too conventional to take us again immediately from London to Kinkanja.
When they return to sources they do so in an increasingly normal, quietly acceptable manner that brings a more domestic way of ending.
I feel utterly secure
In you; I am a part of you.
Now take me to my father.
This is in keeping with the conclusion of Eliot's own life.
These late plays show a continuing interest in moments when ‘life is elevated to the dignity of dance or liturgy, with a gaiety’, which Eliot (perhaps with a glance at Yeats's ‘Lapis Lazuli’) now sees as ‘in all great poetry, and the greater seriousness behind the gaiety.
It is in fact the privilege of dramatic poetry to be able to show us several planes of reality at once.’
In the distance, still, is Sweeney Agonistes .
The late prose shows occasional glimpses of themes discussed earlier.
But these later pieces are of most use for the light they shed  on the earlier development.
Sometimes perhaps unlikely sources of influence are revealed, as when Eliot quotes with interest Gordon Craig's statement that ‘The father of the dramatist was the dancer,’ or continues to admire the combination of ‘art, ritual and music’now seen as ‘always the handmaid of the beauty of holiness’.
Though he now said that he was ‘no longer very much interested in my own theories about poetic drama, especially those put forward before 1934’, the old interests which had fascinated him from his first dramatic Fragments continued to grip him, leading to the fact that each of his dramas had as its ‘sort of springboard’ a ‘Greek myth’.
In 1955 he wrote to Philip Mairet, to whom he had dedicated Notes towards the Definition of Culture , stressing that he saw ritual as an essential element in life.
Eliot had not altogether left behind his earlier anthropological interests.
1956 saw him complaining that the author of an article on ‘Christian Social Thought’ had used the word ‘sociology’so that‘unless my memory is greatly at fault, Durkheim and Lévy-Bruhl’would be excluded from its province.
In these years he remembered, too, his early concern with the city, recording his debts to Thomson and Davidson.
In 1958, Eliot was still pointing out the horror of a civilization whose materialism is ‘simply boredom’.
A people without religion will in the end find that it has nothing to live for.
I did touch on this problem a good many years ago in an essay I wrote on the death of a great music-hall artist, Marie Lloyd.
He was musing that the synthetic religions of Stalin and Hitler should neither of them ‘properly be called pagan, but if you do call them pagan then we must say that they're inferior as religions to genuine primitive pagan religion’.
Proof that the themes of savage and city stayed in Eliot's mind to the end is furnished by one of the last pieces which he published.
In his ‘Preface’ to Edwin Muir's Selected Poems , he gives high praise to a poet whose work is very different from his own.
Finally, he is drawn to the essence of Muir's genius  which he sees as that of ‘the sensibility of the remote islander’, and the words that follow give one final transformation of the savage and city motif, when he describes Muir as ‘the boy from a simple primitive offshore community who then was plunged into the sordid horror of industrialism in Glasgow, who struggled to understand the modern world of the metropolis in London…
’ Like Muir, Eliot had won through to a vision of final acceptance, which allowed him to look back even to Sweeney and to call him, at Columbia in 1958, ‘friend’.
This informal remark shows an inescapable attachment to a character epitomizing one of the most fascinating, longest-lasting, and most potent aspects of Eliot's work: its binding together of the savage and the city.