

PART 7 Beleaguered Norms and Perverse Dynamics 
Homophobia (1): Sexual/Political Deviance
Part 5 considered two contending theories of perversion and homosexuality, one deriving from psychoanalysis, the other from anthropological, sociological, and historical perspectives, in which Foucault's History of Sexuality was both a culmination and a new departure.
Henceforth, primarily for convenience of reference (and so provisionally), I shall designate the second account materialist.
This post-Freudian, materialist reinterpretation of sexual deviance diverges so considerably from the sexological/psychoanalytic tradition that perversion comes to signify quite differently.
This becomes even more so when deviance is regarded in the light of the pre-Freudian, pre-sexological histories of perversion.
Two points made before are thereby worth reiterating: first, that the meaning of perversion is crucially context dependent; second that one objective of this book is to restore to the concept dimensions which were obscured within the sexological/psychoanalytic traditions, though remaining inscribed within them, especially in Freud's texts.
The reiteration is necessary partly because conventional sexological and psychoanalytic assumptions prove so difficult to dislodge.
In response to my attempts to historicize perversion it has been said: ‘OK, we see how you might want to rescue homosexuality from the pejorative category of a perversion, but surely not incest or bestiality?’
This response misses the point on several counts.
First because a recovery of the histories of perversion precisely disarticulates the sexological and psychoanalytic classifications which would lump together as perversions homosexuality, incest, bestiality, etc.
Second, because those histories eventually facilitate a reversal in the object of analysis: at a certain stage it is no longer homosexuality, or the perversions as ordinarily understood, which need explaining, but (among other things) the classification of heterosexuality as the norm with homosexuality as its perverse other, and the splitting, displacements, and paranoia which accompany that division.
It is through the only recently developed concept of homophobia that this reversal proceeds.
Indeed, the charge of homophobia is itself a kind of reverse discourse facilitated by the dynamic of perversion itself.
As  Ken Plummer observes, whereas once it was the homosexual who was viewed as sick, now it might be the heterosexual who is charged with pathology: ‘Whereas once the homosexual was identified by a long series of character traits, it is now possible to identify the traits of the homophobe: authoritarian, cognitively restricted, with gender anxieties,(Plummer, ‘Homosexual Categories’, 62).
Most provocatively, those gender anxieties are found to harbour a repressed homosexuality.
As we shall see, the reversal remains inadequate in that it conceives of homophobia in mainly psychosexual terms, and phobic ones at that.
However I do not propose that we too quickly problematize the concept out of existence, since some of the questions it begs, even in its inadequate form, are just the sort which need to be asked.
The broad sense in which I shall be using homophobia is loosely descriptive of a manifest phenomenon: the hatred, fear, and persecution of, the raging at, homosexuality and homosexuals.
Man-holes
In the UK in 1983 there was a by-election in Bermondsey, London.
Its run-up included a homophobic attack on one of the candidates, Peter Tatchell, whose political ‘extremism’ was regarded as inseparable from his sexual ‘deviance’.
It was largely mobilized by sections of the press, to a degree then unprecedented, but which heralded the onset of the intensified homophobia which has characterized that country ever since.
Taking only the period in which this book has been written, and limiting the location to the UK, there have been numerous similar press-provoked scandals in which the homosexual has kept turning up where he or she should not, especially at the ‘respectable’ centre of things: in MI5, the Houses of Parliament, as parliamentary candidate, schoolteacher, council employee, prison chaplain, vicar, guard to the Queen Mother, film star, circuit judge, to cite only some (and some whose lives have been destroyed by homophobic media harassment).
The same press represents homosexuals as the corrupters of public morals, of children, the family, and even the armed forces; or as deviants conveying  to other aliens (their external counterpart) the state's innermost secrets.
As Simon Watney indicates in Policing Desire , hysteria over AIDS has fuelled press hate-campaigns, virtually fascist in their vindictiveness.
One end result has been an increase in the extent to which gays and lesbians have been subjected to physical violence, including murder and mutilation.
In many instances this homophobia is crude.
But it is none the less effective for that, and it would be wrong to see it, as do some liberals, as a superstitious remnant from a blighted past.
That contemporary homophobia, even or especially in its crudest forms, is not a residual superstition, can be seen in that initiating attack on Peter Tatchell.
It may well have been rooted in a repressed homosexuality according to the psychoanalytic model.
Indeed Tatchell, in his book on the events of those months, surveys the hate mail sent to him and concludes as much (Battle , 72).
More significant though was a displacement into, a condensation within, the homosexual of a whole range of political fears and anxieties made possible by existing and long established representations of homosexuality:
Dear Mr Tatchell When I lived in Bermondsey, until my family were bombed out while I was fighting to protect my country from outside evils, we had a saying, Bermondsey was a place where men were men and women counted as ‘manholes’ and members of the ‘Middlesex Regiment’would not be tolerated.
So why don't you piss off back to where you come from and leave the decent people of that once great borough alone.
This country is in enough trouble without the likes of you, and Tariq Ali etc, stirring it up.
Anyway what is wrong with that land of sunshine Australia, that you want to leave it, is it because you have to work for your living there?(quoted from Tatchell,Battle , 72)
In this letter, masculinity —‘when men were men’— is vigilant against ‘outside evils’, especially racial infiltration and homosexuality, the latter conceived as sexual ambiguity (‘Middlesex Regiment’).
Each provokes fears of a social decline which in turn evokes imperial decline: ‘that once great borough’ where men were men, women were ‘manholes’, and queers were given short shrift.
It is a letter which indicates several things about homophobia, and three in particular.
First and most obviously perhaps, it shows how homophobia is often integral to a conventional kind of masculine identity.
But already more is going on than first appears.
I have already  had several occasions to remark that binary oppositions are, in Derrida's phrase, violent hierarchies.
From this letter we can see how the opposition masculine/homosexual is a conflation of two other classic binaries: masculine/feminine; hetero/homosexual.
It is often observed that misogyny and homophobia go together.
One reason is that this conflation of binaries enables a merging of misogyny and homophobia, each of which then potentially expresses the violence of the other.
Second then, homophobia often intersects with other kinds of phobia and hatred: in this case, and rather economically, not only misogyny but also racism and xenophobia.
While different kinds of discrimination are not to be conflated, I believe there is something to be learned from homophobia about other kinds.
Third, the analysis of homophobia demands both the psychoanalytic and materialist perspectives, not least because, as this letter suggests, it is so obviously and inseparably both a psychic and social phenomenon.
I remarked earlier my interest in a cultural critique situated at the points where these two perspectives converge without ever becoming compatible; at the points of overlap which are also gaps.
This is nowhere more necessary than in the analysis of homophobia.
I believe too that this analysis must proceed historically, which is why I approach it via the now familiar historical detour.
It is customary to frame the history of homosexuality with reference to the essentialist/constructionist debate (homosexuality as essential human given versus homosexuality as socio-historical construct).
Important as this is, it tends to ignore other histories.
Here I focus on the genealogy of two aspects of discrimination already addressed by this study, namely displacement between the political and the sexual, and the idea of perversion as an inimical absence.
Political and Sexual Subversions
The mythology which, as in the Tatchell affair, connects sexual deviation and political subversion is very old.
It is typically inflected by other kinds of fears, especially religious and racial ones.
A case in point is those forms of nationalism committed to policing not only actual geographic borders and literal or legally defined aliens, but symbolic and ideological boundaries (both internal and external) between the normal and the abnormal, the healthy and sick, the conforming and the deviant.
Himmler launched his attack on homo/sexuals on the basis that they, like the Jews, were involved in a conspiracy to undermine the German race.
Such associations of sexual deviance and political threat  have a long history sedimented into our language and culture.
The term ‘buggery’, for example, derives from the religious as well as sexual nonconformity of an eleventh-century Bulgarian sect which practised the Manichaean heresy and refused to propagate the species; the OED tells us that it was later applied to other heretics, to whom abominable practices were also ascribed.
Arthur N. Gilbert has written about a particular instance of the way social and political crisis provokes renewed urgency in the policing of sexual deviance.
During the Napoleonic wars the number of prosecutions for sodomy increased.
To understand why, argues Gilbert, we need to understand the construction of the sodomite, his association at that time with evil, rebellion, and insurrection, and the belief that to tolerate his sin was to court the possibility of divine revenge (as with Sodom and Gomorrah).
This mythology found an immediate focus: the sodomite was perceived as an internal deviant who refigured a foreign threat, in this case the threat from the French.
Gilbert refers to a dissertation by Richard Allen Soloway which shows contemporary fears of Christianity falling before the atheistical, licentious, and immoral foreigner (‘Sexual Deviance and Disaster’, 98, 99, 100–1, 110–11).
The sodomite becomes a virulent image of this threat, embodying a foreign infection which in turn is linked to social disorder and economic collapse at home.
A violent, enduring mythology is activated to make sense of immediate socio-political crisis and fear.
This analysis suggests that if, in periods of intensified conflict, crisis is displaced on to the deviant, the process only succeeds because of the paranoid instabilities at the heart of dominant cultural identities.
Further, such displacements of non-sexual fears on to the sexual deviant, be he or she actual, imagined, or constituted in and by the displacement, are made possible because other kinds of transgression — political, religious — are not only loosely associated with the sexual deviant, but ‘condensed’ in the very definition of deviance.
It is a process especially apparent in early modern England, not least because of the differences between its categories of sexual deviance and ours.
At that time sodomy was associated with a whole range of evils, including insurrection and heresy; all such evils could be, and often were, ‘imagined’ in the form of, or at least in relation to, the sodomite.
Recent studies emphasize the different ways homo/sexuality was conceptualized in early modern England — a difference so considerable in fact that ‘homosexuality’ becomes anachronistic, since at that time there was neither the concept nor, exactly, the identity it signifies.
Briefly, the argument is as follows: the homosexual is a creation of modern discourse, medical, sexological, and psychological, as evidenced  by the fact that the word ‘homosexual’ was coined in 1869: neither it nor the sexual sense of perversion appeared in the OED until its 1933 Supplement.
The nearest concepts to it in early modern England were probably sodomy and buggery.
As we saw in Chapter 14, Michel Foucault argues that before the nineteenth century the sodomite was someone who performed a certain kind of act ; no specific identity was attributed to, or assumed by, the sodomite.
The attribution or assumption of this identity marks the creation of the homosexual.
Alan Bray and Jeffrey Weeks have given historical support to this view, though not without qualification; I remarked in Part 1 some further reservations.
Additionally, we should recall that, before the nineteenth century, the meanings of terms like sodomy and buggery might have been even wider than is suggested by Foucault's argument.
Sodomy was associated with witches, demons, werewolves, basilisks, foreigners, and (of course) papists; and it apparently signified a wide range of practices including prostitution, under-age sex, coitus interruptus, and female transvestism.
Socially, sodomy was repeatedly equated with heresy and political treason; metaphysically, it was conceived as ‘sexual contusion in whatever form’, a ‘force of anarchic disorder set against divine Creation’, not a part of the created order but an aspect of its dissolution.
As such it potentially functioned as a perverse dynamic — neither a part of created nature, nor a sexuality in its own right, but rather ‘a potential for confusion and disorder in one undivided sexuality’.
Imaged in such terms, the sodomite indeed became the supreme instance of the demonized other.
But so extreme was the sodomite's construction that most of those actually engaging in ‘homo/sexuality, did not identify themselves with it; not only did they not have our modern categories, but the prevailing categories were so tar removed from how they saw themselves, that apparently the connection was not made.
Nor was it made by the authorities — except, apparently, in times of political and social crisis, the eruption of class hatred, religious and political persecution.
Certainly then in early modern England the ways of conceptualizing  sexuality and sexual deviance were fundamentally different from ours, as were the perceived relations between sexuality and subjectivity.
That individuals prosecuted for sodomy did not necessarily identify themselves with the demonized sodomite of official discourse also lends credence to Foucault's distinction between sodomy as a kind of behaviour, and homosexuality as a modern identity.
But we should not rely too heavily on that distinction.
There remain certain continuities which should give us pause.
Laura Levine has pointed to an interesting relationship in early modern England between fears of sodomy and fears of the theatre.
She observes that the frequent indictments of theatre for encouraging sodomy are symptomatic of the anti-theatricalists’ fear that gender difference is ever under threat of breakdown and, more generally, their fear that ‘under the costume there is really nothing there or, alternatively, that what is there is something foreign, something terrifying and essentially other’(‘Men in Women's Clothing’, 135; see also Chapter 17 below).
Such arguments suggest that the perception of the sodomite was already implicated in the constructions of gender and sexual difference, and, through them, of identity, subjectivity, and social ordering more generally, and the anxieties attendant upon all these things.
Moreover, it is not true that prior to the nineteenth century (or eighteenth, depending on when the change was said to occur) sexual deviance was conceptualized only as a form of behaviour.
I suggest that in early modern England the sodomite, though not an identity in the modern sense, could and did denote subject positions or types; ‘he’ precisely characterized deviant subject positions as well as denoting the behaviour of individuals.
Sodomy was not thought to originate in a pathological subjectivity (the modern pervert); rather, the sexual deviant was the vehicle of a confusion never only sexual, and sexual in a way different from the sexological and psychoanalytic accounts.
As such the deviant was the point of entry into civilization for the unnatural, the aberrant, and the abhorrent, the wilderness of disorder which beleaguered all civilization; a disorder in part, but rarely only ever, sexual.
And it sodomy signified diverse types of evil, so too might evil itself infiltrate civilization through diverse subject types.
Both forms of diversity were subject to either displacement or condensation.
Displacement might involve a sliding along the signifying chain which connects the ditferent manifestations of evil and subject types, conflating two or more of them; thus the sexual deviant may also ‘be’ a witch, an  insurrectionary, or a papist.
Condensation might entail the one kind of subject and/or manifestation standing in for the whole domain of evil, incurring responsibility for the whole in the process of being made to signify it.
Hence condensation and displacement were, and are still, related ways of identifying the deviant.
It is in these terms that we find sodomy lurking in the cultural histories of the deviants in early modern England, and in a way which throws light on the persistence today of the connection between political and sexual subversion, and the condensation/displacement of social crisis into sexuality.
Wilde: The Pernicious Absence
As we saw with the pre-sexological theories of perversion, condensation and displacement are strangely enabled by the view of perversion as an inimical threatening absence.
What is not often recognized is the extent to which this theological sense of perversion as the negative agency at the heart of privation, hence an inverted positivity, survives into the ‘modern’ sense of perversion/homosexuality as a profoundly inimical, vitiating lack (of normality, of truth).
Increasingly the fate of Oscar Wilde has been analysed in relation to the construction of the modern homosexual along lines suggested by Michel Foucault.
Again, this is important and relevant, but so too is this older history.
After he had been found guilty of homosexual offences and sentenced to two years' imprisonment with hard labour, the press subjected Oscar Wilde to vicious attack.
As we saw in Chapter 4, the London Evening News accused him of trying to subvert the ‘wholesome, manly, simple ideals of English life’, and connected his sexual perversion with intellectual and moral subversion.
He possessed, as the Daily Telegraph conceded on 27 May 1895, ‘considerable intellectual powers’.
It advocates ‘a reaction towards simpler ideas…for fear of national contamination and decay’.
Queensberry, in a letter published in the Star on 25 April 1895, expresses the connection clearly enough when he describes Wilde as ‘a sexual pervert of an utterly diseased mind’(Goodman,The Oscar Wilde File , 133–4, 99).
Reading through the press comment on Wilde we find the same fear of cross-over between sexual perversion and intellectual and moral subversion.
On the one hand the world of normality and conformity is stridently affirmed.
It is variously described as ‘health and right reason’, the ‘wholesome’, the ‘healthy and unvitiated’, and characterized by ‘unalterable standards of right and wrong’(Goodman,The Oscar Wilde File , 78, 1 33, 1 34).
By contrast Wilde and his art are described as ‘false’, ‘cheap’, ‘shallow and specious’, ‘nerveless and effeminate’, marked by an ‘unreality’ and ‘essential emptiness and frivolity’(pp. 75, 78, 1 33, 1 34).
The oppositions invoked in these descriptions — the substantial versus the insubstantial, depth versus shallowness — are just the ones Wilde inverted and subverted.
Here they are reinvoked to discredit Wilde, yet in a way which still acknowledged him as a threat.
But why?
In the terms of the binaries invoked, and reinstalled rightway-around, he should have been perceived as only shallow, specious, ineffectual.
Not so: these editorials identify Wilde as very evil.
His falsity and hollowness are not just the opposite of the true and the wholesome, but threaten to undermine it.
He is not only spurious but also ‘diseased’, the two being inseparable.
Something informing these descriptions of Wilde and his art is a fear of degeneration as conceived by writers of the time.
It was not just that degenerates were thought to be intelligent and gifted; their intelligence manifested one of the most disturbing paradoxes of the perverse: a vitiating regression to the primitive from within an advanced cultural sophistication.
For these commentators Wilde represents both a cultural ‘decay’ and a resurrection of ‘pagan viciousness’and ‘primal errors’(pp. 98, 134).
Recall that for Robert Burton in 1621 it was not our bestial qualities that were the most dangerous, but our civilized ones perverted (above, Chapter 8); now, the civilized in perverted form is also the primitive and bestial.
Here is the Telegraph again:
opinions and principles like [Wilde's]have from time to time manifested themselves all down the course of history, generally in over-ripe civilisations wavering on the brink of decay.
In the next place they are found side by side with great intellectual brilliance, and…clothed in glamour which hides the hollowness within.
(Goodman,The Oscar Wilde File , 134)
Decline, brilliance, hollowness: such things, essentially empty in themselves, nevertheless undermine the nation.
Again, sexual perversion echoes attributes of Augustinian privation: evil lacks authentic being itself (‘the hollowness within') and because, rather than in spite of, that tact is utterly inimical to true being.
What is simultaneously acknowledged and denied is that ‘wholesomeness’ is not invaded from without so much as corrupted from within.
Its own strength is turned against it.
Thus while Wilde is merely ‘a parasite, an excrescence, an aberration,(p. 78), those allegedly most susceptible to his perversion are quite  otherwise: the family in general, young men at university, sometimes even their tutors, boys at public school, maidens, and novelists (p. 133).
This might plausibly be dismissed as ‘Victorian stupidity’ were it not for the tact that in Britain in 1988 a similar view was actually inscribed in law.
Here too the emphasis was on the susceptibility of the ‘innocent’ to the specious; section 28 of the Local Government Act 1987 — 8 states that a local authority shall not
(a)
intentionally promote homosexuality or publish material with the intention of promoting homosexuality,;
(b)
promote the teaching in any maintained school of the acceptability of homosexuality as a pretended family relationship.
(my emphasis)
How could anything so demonstrably inferior to the real thing ever pretend to be it, and with such potential (or feared) success that the parliament of an ‘advanced western democracy’ must legislate against it?
Because still in 1988, under the pressure of social instability and political crises, homosexuality could be regarded as a kind of privation or error, an ‘inverted positivity’, an inimical, pernicious, inauthenticity always threatening to return from within the true and the authentic.
The Return of Homosexuality
It the trouble with the materialist view of perversion is its tendency to functionalist reduction (above, Chapter 14), the Freudian position faces equally intractable problems, though of a ditferent kind.
Considered from a materialist perspective it has at least three damaging limitations: first it tends to construe sexuality in terms of an original pre-social plenitude, an initially unstructured natural energy; second (and consequently) sexuality is conceived in certain of Freud's central texts as a drive with hydraulic characteristics; third, a phenomenon like homophobia, when it is not being blatantly disregarded, is explained too much in terms of the subjective, psychic repressions of its agents.
The consequences of this last point can be pernicious, actually encouraging a way of thinking whereby the aggressor in homophobic violence is somehow identified with his or her victim: both are homosexual, the one repressed, the other overt.
Or, as it is sometimes switched round in  homophobic (or just careless) thought: the victim is somehow the same as the aggressor and hence in some vague sense complicit with the aggression.
But it would be wrong to hold psychoanalysis entirely responsible tor this slippage.
It stems also from the inherent violence of sexual subordination and the (mis) representation which (re) produces it, especially in and through the category of the sexual deviant.
We saw in Chapter 7 how the enemy is ‘homosexualized’, with the result that, even while homosexuals were being imprisoned and murdered by the Nazis, it could be said that to eliminate homosexuality would be to get rid of fascism.
A further vicious twist in this kind of representation, again remarked by Richard Plant in The Pink Triangle , concerns the way that in the Nazi concentration camps homosexual inmates were held responsible by non-homosexual inmates for crimes committed by homosexual guards: ‘homosexual guards, however hostile, were seen by non-gay prisoners as belonging to the homosexual underclass.
Thus, homosexual prisoners were often tainted by the crimes of homosexual guards — even though they themselves were often the victims,(pp. 166–7).
A related problem with the psychoanalytic account is the implication that so many different kinds of close relationship between heterosexually identified men, be they complicated or simple, conflicted or supportive, brutally vindictive or discerningly tender, are really rooted in repressed homosexuality.
This way of thinking has to be one of the blinder alleys that we have been led up by psychoanalysis.
Hence the importance of Eve Sedgwick's category of the homosocial: we must insist that there are different kinds of masculine heterosexual alliance that are not necessarily (though may be) homosexual, repressed or overt; but we also need to make this point in a way which does not then privilege this distinction between the sexual and the non-sexual since this is to re-establish the primacy of the sexual, something partly responsible for the original misrepresentation.
Having said all that, the Freudian model stands as an indispensable starting-point for identifying a certain kind of homophobia, namely that conjunction of hatred, paranoia, and desire (repressed, ambivalent, or overt) which characterizes some of those same heterosexually identified men in their relationships with lesbian and gay people.
Misleading as it often is, the notion of the repressed homosexual does accurately describe some people.
More revealing than their obvious differences are those points of overlap between the materialist and the psychoanalytic accounts.
First, both theories suggest an eventual return of homosexuality: in the one (psychoanalytic) it is a psychic return of the repressed from within, in  the other (materialist) a social or cultural return from without; either an inner resurgence of desire through the breakdown of psychic repression, or the oppositional approach via the proximate of the demonized other from beyond, from the social margins where he or she has been discovered, constructed, displaced.
Either way he or she returns to disturb the heterosexual norm, especially in its masculine form, and does so according to a psychic and/or social dynamic which is intrinsically perverse: deviance emerges from the terms of its exclusion, eventually undermining that of which it was initially an effect, and which depended upon its exclusion.
We have already seen how the psychic return of homosexuality is central to Freud's account of neurosis, possibly becoming, in Hocquenghem's phrase, the ‘killer of civilised egos’ because such egos are rooted in and conditional upon the repression of that same homosexual desire which returns.
Meanwhile its social and cultural return has been explored in the literature of Wilde, Gide, and others, as well as in reverse-discourse theory of which the very concept of homophobia is an instance.
It is probably the case that we live in a time when the cultural return of homosexuality exacerbates, even intensifies, the psychic return of repressed homosexuality.
This suggests a second and related sense in which the psychoanalytic and the materialist perspectives converge: both suggest that identity — individual and cultural — involves a process of disavowal, exclusion, and negation.
In the first it is the negation of desire, in the second, of the culturally defined other of cultural difference.
The following remark of Dennis Altman's, even if not strictly correct historically, rightly implies how the negation of desire and the negation of difference are in practice often inseparable: ‘the original purpose of the categorization of homosexuals as people apart was to project the homosexuality in everyone onto a defined minority as a way of externalizing forbidden desires and reassuring the majority that homosexuality is something that happens to other people’(Homosexualization , 72).
A yet further, intriguingly perverse, aspect of this convergence involves the phenomenon whereby the culturally negated other becomes the focus of the very desire which is being policed within the dominant culture: the other, in the very process of being identified, displaced, and negated, becomes the object of — indeed may actually incite — desire.
Such desire for the other may be less the result of a desublimation of repressed desire than a consequence of desire itself being structured by social repression generally: thus the other may be cathected as (an) other beyond repression.
Romantics know about this.
Divergence
These two areas of convergence also direct us to the main area of divergence and the reason why, though in actuality inextricably related, the psychic and the cultural return of homosexuality still need to be distinguished.
On the Freudian model it is the repression and sublimation of homosexual desire that helps secure identity and social organization.
Conversely, on the materialist model it is much more homophobia itself, as an aspect of the construction of homosexuality and independently of the question of the actual subjective repression of desire, which helps secure a coerced identity and social organization; homophobia enforces the heterosexual norm by policing its boundaries: ‘Homophobia is only incidentally directed against homosexuals — its more common use is against the 49% of the population which is male…
The taunt ‘What are you, a fag? '’ is used in many ways to encourage certain types of male behaviour and to define the limits of ‘‘acceptable'’masculinity.’
So, whereas in the psychoanalytic account, homophobia might well signal the precariousness and instability of identity, even of sexual difference itself, in the materialist socio-political account it typically signals the reverse, namely that sexual difference is being secured, homophobia being ‘a mechanism for regulating the behaviour of the many by the specific oppression of a few’(Sedgwick,Between Men , 88).
Even in the first case, where homophobia is the expression of repressed desire, we should neither overestimate its destabilizing effects, nor regard its homophobic projection as an always ultimately futile effort to avoid the crippling effects of repression and/or neurosis.
Indeed, even where homophobia is directly connected with a disturbing repression and/or neurosis, the actual psychic dislocation involved may be very effectively offset by the political and cultural gains of homophobic displacement.
Such displacement may be a symptom of a continuously destructive semi-repression, but it may also be an effective way of minimizing within oneself, or a group, disabling complications within identity.
Also, even if a subject is never directly or completely ‘freed’ trom repression by its displacement, he or she may be empowered in other ways — for example, by being seen to be homophobic in a homophobic culture.
Relatedly, as a means of securing sexual difference, homophobia may also be a displacement of homosocial anger — resentment at coerced identification and the persistent intimidation to conform.
If so, then there is a sense in which homophobia may feed itself, securing the framework (sexual difference) which promotes and intensifies its displacement as anger.
So while homophobia may sometimes originate in and, as it circulates socially, reconnect with repressed desire, the latter cannot be homophobia's necessary condition since it often circulates without it, and in a socio-political form which is more rapid, more widespread, more economical, and possibly more destructive.
Instead of positing psychically repressed homosexuality as the necessary and/or sufficient cause of homophobia, we might better regard socially proscribed homosexuality as one of homophobia's several interconnected and enabling conditions, none of which is independently either necessary or sufficient.
It is often difficult in retrospect, or even contemporaneously for that matter, to discern the part that psychic repression plays in any instance of homophobia.
But, for the reason just given, it is hardly imperative that we should.
But even this important distinction between the psychoanalytic and the materialist account is complicated by another equally important convergence: since, in cultural terms, desiring the normal is inseparable from and conditional upon not desiring the abnormal, repression remains central to identity, individual and cultural, even — or indeed especially — for the materialist view of homophobia as a strategy of social control.
Initially this appears not to be so, since while the Freudian model posits a repression within the subject, the materialist model posits a repression outside the subject in the form of its other.
But the latter still involves psychic repression: the identity of the normal is inseparable from, rooted in, what it is not, what is socially excluded.
In principle, of course, whether the repressed constituent of identity is outside or inside the subject makes a difference.
But in practice how exactly might that difference be discerned?
In both cases the repressed/ excluded remains subjectively/socially central.
Or rather, the distinctions between the repressed and the excluded, the subjective and the social, break down, especially when we recall that the other is often constructed via, or in terms of, the proximate.
So, for instance, while it may be that specific instances of homophobic panic are provoked by repressed homosexuals (in the Freudian sense), the panic may only ‘take’ socially, because of the other kind of repression — exclusive identity formation — as it affects a tar greater number.
Desire and Disgust
In their remarkable study, Stallybrass and White argue that ‘the bourgeois subject continuously defined and re-defined itself through the exclusion of what it marked out as ‘low'’— as dirty, repulsive, noisy, contaminating.
Yet that very act of exclusion was constitutive of its identity.
The low was internalized under the sign of negation and disgust.’
But, they add, ‘disgust always bears the imprint of desire .
These low domains, apparently expelled as ‘Other'’, return as the object of nostalgia, longing and fascination' (Politics and Poetics , 191, my emphasis).
Conversely, desire bears the imprint of disgust: even as the low other becomes an object of longing, it is simultaneously that on to which is displaced a self-disgust that inheres at the centre of bourgeois desire, and for that matter other forms of desire.
The difference of the other becomes a displaced and intensified facet of the same, the object of desire and disgust.
The disgust which inheres in desire is not, as the Freudian analysis might suggest, necessarily generated by or focused upon the repressed constituent of the self; it may be, but what I am pointing to here is an additional structural interdependence of desire and disgust.
So even when homophobia is not obviously a projection of repressed desire, being more a hostile response to the intolerably different, even then, the homosexual, through condensed association, may be one on whom is projected the repressed disgust inherent in desire.
The convergence I have been exploring does not suggest that we should collapse materialism and psychoanalysis into each other.
Rather a theoretical conflict indicates that we need to pluralize the notion of repression, as we need to pluralize that of homophobia, and even that of desire itself.
There are different kinds and the differences are crucial, helping to mark the otherwise indistinguishable overlaps in historical actuality,and the crucial differences made by historical factors.
Let us finally return to that letter written to Peter Tatchell in 1983.
Many interrelated fears and phobias are suggested by that image of women as ‘manholes’.
Anal phobia perhaps, or fear of sexual engulfment, maybe even castration itself.
Either way, in this masculine imaginary the vagina signifies a most disturbing absence, a hole which is also privation, deficiency, lack, a negativity which engulfs and vitiates what is full.
‘Either way’: maybe in this imaginary, or at least in its unconscious, the homosexual is also a vagina.
But isn't this ‘manhole’ also a condensed image which, like the letter generally, fearfully anticipates engulfment in the return of those actual others (‘outside evils’) whose subordination, persecution, or exclusion has hitherto seemed to guarantee a sexual, racial, and national purity — women, homosexuals, foreigners?
I am reminded that with the literal manhole — the actual thing in the street — we can indeed walk all over it.
But don't we also know, if only in our dreams, that even as we do so we will one day just as surely tall down it?
Homophobia (2): Theories of Sexual Difference
The criminal classes are so close to us that even the policeman can see them.
They are so far away from us that only the poet can understand them.
(Wilde, ‘Maxims’)
The way we see the other is connected to the way we see ourselves.
The other is ourselves as the stranger.
(Ben Okri discussing Othello and race, ‘Leaping Out’)
‘Difference’ is a fashionable concept.
So too is ‘the other’, that highly charged embodiment of difference.
I propose a distrust of both concepts.
Several kinds of difference figure in contemporary cultural theory but two especially: sexual difference (deriving usually though not invariably from psychoanalysis) and cultural difference, with each of these complicated by a third kind of difference which construes meaning and identity in terms of difference or, more exactly, differential relations.
I shall call this third kind ‘semiotic difference’.
The homosexual is significantly implicated in both sexual and cultural difference, and for two main reasons.
First because he or she has been regarded (especially in psychoanalytic theory) as one who fears the difference of the ‘other’ or opposite sex, and, in flight from it, narcissistically embraces the same sex instead.
Difference and heterogeneity are sanctified, homogeneity is distrusted.
The eminent Kleinian psychoanalyst, Hanna Segal, has recently declared the adult homosexual structure to be inherently pathological, disturbed, and perverse, and this because of an inbuilt, narcissistic desire for the same: ‘homosexuality is of necessity a narcissistic condition, as the name itself betrays.
Loving homo — the same as me not hetero — the other, ditferent….
Heterosexuality can be more or less narcissistic, it can be very disturbed or not so.
In homosexuality it's inbuilt’(‘Interviewed, 212).
In some instances ‘sameness’ comes to signify the tyranny of Western patriarchal metaphysics, and homosexuality its practice or, more vaguely, its metaphor.
Luce Irigaray speaks of a dominant philosophic logos with a  ‘power to reduce all others to the economy of the Same [and]eradicate the difference between the sexes ’.
It is manifested as a ‘dominant phallic economy’ which is described as hom(m)osexual (sometimes hom(m)o-sexual) and rooted in singularity —‘The one of form, of the individual, of the (male) sexual organ, of the proper name, of the proper meaning…’— and characterized by censure and repression.
Conversely woman's pleasure is ‘more diversified, more multiple in its differences’.
Metaphorically sameness is associated with perversion in an almost Augustinian sense: ‘the artifice of sameness’ involves a process of ‘turning away, of deviation, and of reduction’.
Irigaray goes further, exalting the metaphor of homosexuality as a kind of anti-difference into nothing less than a far-reaching theory of patriarchal society.
She contends that ‘the exchanges upon which patriarchal societies are based take place exclusively among men’ and that ‘this means that the very possibility of a sociocultural order requires homosexuality as its organizing principle…all economic organization is homosexual’.
But such homosexuality must in some sense be repressed; overt ‘masculine’ homosexuality is subversive, says Irigaray, because it openly interprets the law according to which society operates and in so doing threatens it: ‘once the penis itself becomes merely a means to pleasure, pleasure among men,the phallus loses its power ’(This Sex , 74, 24 — 8, 128, 171, 192 — 3; her emphases).
The second reason why the homosexual is involved with difference is because, contrary to what the foregoing theory implies, she or he has, in historical actuality, embraced both cultural and racial difference.
The relationship to these other kinds of difference has, for some homosexuals, constituted a crucial dimension of their culture.
Sexually exiled trom the repressiveness of the home culture (to which psychoanalytic theory has contributed in no small part with theories like the one just mentioned), homosexuals have searched instead for fulfilment in the realm of the foreign.
Not necessarily as a second best: over and again in the culture of homosexuality, differences of race and class are intensely cathected.
That this has also occurred in exploitative, sentimental, and/ or racist forms does not diminish its significance; it anything it increases it.
Those who move too hastily to denounce homosexuality across race and class as essentially or only exploitative, sentimental, or racist betray their own homophobic ignorance.
This crossing constitutes a complex, difficult history, one from which we can learn.
I shall argue for the importance of this history for all three kinds of difference — sexual, cultural, and semiotic — as they figure in current theory.
Although I concentrate in this chapter on sexual difference and on cultural and racial differences in the last chapter, it is worth remembering that in some contexts they interrelate.
First a by now familiar digression via the early modern, where we find rather different conceptions of sameness and sexual difference.
Turning into a Woman
Does not lassitude succeed intercourse because of the quantity of seed lost?
‘For a man is formed and torn out of a man’.
See how much harm is done.
A whole man is torn out when the seed is lost in intercourse.
(Clement of Alexandria,Christ the Educator , 172 — 3)
In an influential it controversial essay, Thomas Laqueur has proposed that relatively recently in our history there occurred a radical reinterpretation of the female body.
An old and enduring model of sexual difference, developed most powerfully and resiliently by Galen in the second century AD, had stressed the homologous nature of male and female reproductive organs; women were said to have the same genitals as men, only inside rather than outside.
To be sure there were important differences: the male was more perfectly developed than the female because hotter; but these were differences conceived on a hierarchical, teleological model of sexual development.
In the eighteenth century this model gave way to another based on absolute differences of kind:
A biology of hierarchy grounded in a metaphysically prior ‘great chain of being’ gave way to a biology of incommensurability in which the relationship of men to women, like that of apples to oranges, was not given as one of equality or inequality but rather as a difference whose meaning required interpretation and struggle.
Laqueur finds in the political, cultural, and economic transformations of the eighteenth century a context in which ‘the articulation of radical differences between the sexes became culturally imperative’.
Further, in a world in which science
was increasingly viewed as providing insight into the fundamental truths of creation, in which nature as manifested in the unassailable reality of bones and organs was taken to be the only foundation of the moral order, a biology of incommensurability became the means by which such differences could be authoritatively represented.
(Laqueur, ‘Orgasm’, 24, 35).
In the earlier theory man is separated from woman as different stages in a teleological development.
Here is a most revealing instance of the way a difference within the same, teleologically construed, can make a great deal of difference: in effect a difference of degree can be as real as  a difference of kind but in a different way: the lesser is inferior and thereby inimical in a way the antithetical cannot be, and the same becomes more ditferent than difference itself.
But never utterly — i.e. securely —other .
Perhaps this helps explain something noted by Laura Levine: in the numerous tracts attacking the Elizabethan and Jacobean theatre and its dress and gender transgressions, there is a fear that men dressing as women will lead to an erosion of masculinity itself.
Levine contends that these tracts, even as they confidently sermonize on the fixed nature of identity, especially gender identity as prescribed by God and signified through dress difference, display a deep anxiety that identity is not fixed; that, underneath, the self is really nothing at all(‘Men in Women's Clothing’, 126 and 128).
Further, they feared that ‘doing’ what a woman does (on the stage and in women's clothes) leads to ‘being’what a woman is; the most unmanageable anxiety is that there is no essentially masculine self (p. 1 36), and cross-dressing in women's clothes can lead to a man ‘turning into’a woman.
Stephen Orgel discerns in the theatre of this time the fear that man's superior development could be reversed —‘that men can turn into — or be turned into — women; or perhaps more exactly, can be turned back into woman, losing the strength that enabled the male potential to be realized in the first place.’
Perhaps what is at work here is a fear of the other as same not unlike the fascinated fear of the primitive in the notion of ‘going native’: a metamorphosis into the radically other which is no more than an all too easily imagined regression into one's own ‘primitive’ past.
So we begin to understand the masculine fear in the early modern period of being effeminized —not , as might be the case today, by erotic contact with other men, but by excessive contact with women.
This too seems to have involved the fear of regression; in social terms the inferior who stands opposite one in the world, thereby confirming one's superiority,also stands behind one .
Man regresses into his other (his same), who says: frailty, thy name is man, thy same is woman.
In a bizarre and disavowed way this antiquated pseudo-scientific theory of male and female sexuality might usefully recall something remarked more recently by Gayle Rubin, namely that modern sexual difference theory, far from being an expression of natural differences, actually involves the suppression of natural similarities (‘Traffic in Women’, 179 — 80).
But it is not my intention to rehabilitate this theory, or to suggest that it is allegorically preferable to current theories of sexual difference.
My argument does not even assume that it was a dominant way of thinking in earlier periods.
Rather I cite it here as a historical antecedent whose very strangeness alerts us to several facts relevant to what follows: first, and most obviously, that sexual difference is not a biological given so much as a complex ideological history; second, that current theories of sexual difference are of relatively recent origin, and quite probably still haunted by older views, including this one; third, it suggests that ‘before’ sexual difference the woman was once (and may still be) feared in a way in which the homosexual now is — feared, that is, not so much, or only, because of a radical otherness, as because of an interior resemblance presupposing a certain proximity; the woman then, as the homosexual in modern psychoanalytic discourse, is marked in terms of lesser or retarded development.
Sexual Difference, Homosexuality and Psychoanalysis
As Mandy Merck points out at the beginning of an acute and informative summary, in recent times the theory of sexual difference has exerted a profound influence on psychoanalytically inspired cultural analysis (‘Difference and its Discontents’, 2).
Recently the theoretical tide has turned against it.
Colin MacCabe puts it thus:
What is really problematic is that psychoanalysis produces a theory of identity [i.e. sexual difference]which does not allow for a genuine heterogeneity and contradiction in our diverse identifications.
It does not simply make the claim that one difference is more important than all the others but articulates all further identifications in terms of a primary sexual identification.
(Theoretical Essays , 10)
It we further remark the way sexual difference is oft en presented within psychoanalysis as unavoidable and ineluctably fraught with pain, so much so in some cases that it warrants description as a tragic ontology, it becomes tempting to dismiss it as an expression of existential Angst suitably dressed in pretentious intellectual rigour and elegant abstraction, and, as such (some might add), the epitome of psychoanalysis itself.
In fact, sexual difference theory is informed by, and responsive to, more than that; it intersects with other notions central to the psychoanalytic project.
Such notions impart to sexual difference theory its distinctive intellectual and existential charge.
I have in mind two  especially: the first involves what might be called the impossibility of desire, the second the notion of desire and/or identity as involving an ineluctable splitting.
Like other key notions in psychoanalysis, the sense of desire as a quest for an always impossible self-completion in or through the other has a long though oft en unrecognized history.
In this case Kaja Silverman has usefully remarked the importance, for Jacques Lacan's version of this argument, of Aristophanes' conception of the person as an original androgynous whole (in Plato's Symposium ).
The human subject is conceived in terms of an essential, intrinsic lack; it is a fragment of something larger and more primordial, whose existence is dominated by the desire to recover its missing complement (The Subject of Semiotics , 152).
But the complement remains forever out of reach and desire thereby becomes, for Lacan, a kind of ‘derangement’, with the subject ‘caught in the rails — eternally stretching forth towards the desire for something else — of metonymy’(Écrits , 167).
But the subject is not only split in the sense of needing the other to complete itself; it is also split because its identity is actually informed by the other, by what it is not:
If the unconscious means anything whatsoever, it is that the relation of self and others, inner and outer, cannot be grasped as an interval between Polar and opposites but rather as an irreducible dislocation of the subject in which the other inhabits the self as its condition of possibility.
(Weber,The Legend of Freud , 32 — 3, his emphasis)
For Lacan desire itself becomes a splitting within the subject: ‘desire is neither the appetite for satisfaction, nor the demand for love, but the difference resulting from the subtraction of the first from the second, the very phenomenon of their splitting’(Lacan,Feminine Sexuality , 81).
Recall that Lacan regards homosexuality as a definitive manifestation of this tragic ontology (above, Chapter 12).
As Lacan's invocation of metonymy suggests, such formulations are evidently influenced by the semiotic model, sometimes called the linguistic or, later, the deconstructive, turn to difference.
It sees meaning as always fundamentally incomplete because dependent on a potentially infinite relationship to what is ditferent or absent; completion of meaning is always thereby deferred.
Hence Jacques Derrida's influential concept of ‘différance’(translated in English as at once difference and deferral), a concept enabling us to ‘reconsider all the pairs of opposites  on which philosophy is constructed and on which our discourse lives, not in order to see opposition erase itself but to see what indicates that each of the terms must appear as the différance of the other, as the other different and deferred in the economy of the same’.
Of ‘all the oppositions that furrow Freudian thought’ it can be said that ‘one is but the other different and deferred, one differing and deferring the other’(Margins of Philosophy , 17 — 18).
The potential of this conceptual theory for the psychoanalytic account of desire is nicely remarked by Gayatri Spivak: desire, she says, is a deconstructive structure, one that ‘forever differs from (we only desire what is not ourselves) and deters (desire is never fulfilled)’(Grammatology , p. ixxviii).
The influence of the semiotic model within psychoanalysis is important but, as we shall see, it is often incorporated into sexual difference theory in a form which manages to exclude what the model is especially sensitive to, namely the way oppositions which constitute meaning are fundamentally binary, yet cannot ultimately be contained in and by binary closure even as, in practice, the binary remains a fundamental principle of social and psychic ordering.
In Juliet Mitchell's account sexual difference becomes the archetypal split, and castration its symbol:
because human subjectivity cannot ultimately exist outside a division into one of two sexes, then it is castration that finally comes to symbolise this split….
The trauma captured in splitting is that one isn't there; the same trauma that castration comes to symbolise is that one is incomplete; the trauma that can be lived over and over again in the endless by-ways of life's failures and imperfections.
(Revolution, 307)
Mitchell adds, ‘Bisexuality is a movement across a line, it is not androgyny’(p. 308, her emphasis).
Perhaps this tenet of psychoanalytic thought derives from the fact that, for Freud, ‘bisexuality is the coincidence of two heterosexual desires within a single psyche …within Freud's thesis of primary bisexuality, there is no homosexuality, and only opposites attract’(Butler,Gender Trouble , 61, her emphasis).
Whatever, Mitchell's remark suggests how, even when recognized as a fact of culture rather than biology, sexual difference remains fairly absolute within psychoanalytic theory.
As in the Fall narrative, which it  resembles in more ways than one, there seems to be no going back; our original innocence, the wholeness of an original bisexuality, is never retrievable.
Sexuality is the Fall into desire as lack.
This leads some adherents of psychoanalysis, especially those of a Lacanian disposition, to regard sexual difference — or rather hetero/sexual difference as it should really be called — as both tragic and heroic.
Once again the psychoanalytic narrative echoes a theological one.
For Judith Butler this renders the Lacanian narrative ‘ideologically suspect’ in that it remains rooted in ‘a romanticization or, indeed, a religious idealization of ‘failure'’, humility and limitation before the Law' (Gender Trouble , 56).
This dimension of Lacan also finds a precedent in Freud: ‘the programme of becoming happy, which the pleasure principle imposes on us, cannot be fulfilled; yet we must not — indeed, we cannot — give up our efforts to bring it nearer to fulfilment by some means or other,(xii.271).
So the related notions of desire as lack, the impossibility of desire, and the desiring subject as ineluctably split have a history in Western thought older than psychoanalysis.
As I have argued in previous chapters, reconsidering that history helps us to reconsider psychoanalysis, especially the way it incorporates yet obscures the perverse dynamic.
Post-Freudian forms of sexual difference theory are not only largely ignorant of that pre-sexological, pre-psychoanalytic history; they even tend to obscure the significance and scope of Freud's own emphasis on the significance of perversion within sexual difference.
Thus the Lacanian account of the impossibility of desire often cites the following passage from Freud's ‘On the Universal Tendency to Debasement in the Sphere of Love’: ‘It is my belief that, however strange it may sound, we must reckon with the possibility that something in the nature of the sexual instinct itself is unfavourable to the realization of complete satisfaction,(vii.
258).
But while Lacanian critics frequently invoke this passage, they less often consider Freud's extraordinary and provocative remarks in this same essay as to why he thinks desire and satisfaction have become incommensurable.
He gives two possible reasons, both of which involve the repression of the perversions.
Because of the barrier against incest, the final object of the sexual instinct ‘is never any longer the original object but only a surrogate for it….
When the original object of a wishful impulse has been lost as a result of repression, it is frequently represented by an endless series of substitute objects none of which, however, brings full satisfaction’(vii.
258).
And, of the instinctual components necessarily repressed and sublimated in the service of culture, the coprophilic is one of the most significant, says Freud: ‘the  excremental is all too intimately and inseparably bound up with the sexual; the position of the genitals —inter urinas et faeces — remains the decisive and unchangeable factor’(vii.
258 — 9).
Freud singles out sadistic desires as a further group incompatible with civilization and requiring renunciation.
Yet the effect of the repression of such perversions always remains, and ‘can be detected in sexual activity in the form of nonsatisfaction ’, even while their sublimation leads, says Freud once again, ‘to the noblest cultural achievements’(vii.
259, my emphasis).
So for Freud the lack inherent in normalized desire, its impossibility of satisfaction, is structured into sexual difference, and is a direct consequence of the repression of perverse desire.
And it perversion is, as we have argued (and in Freud's own terms), what potentially subverts sexual difference (Chapter 11), the silence of psychoanalytic advocates of sexual difference theory on this topic is both significant and damaging to their project.
The two interrelated psychoanalytic tenets just outlined suggest a radical instability in both identity and desire.
In an article arguing tor the importance of psychoanalysis for feminism, Jacqueline Rose cautions against a political appropriation of psychoanalysis which would leave behind some of its most challenging discoveries, especially of the disruptive power of the unconscious vis-à-vis identity and sexual difference.
Here is Rose's own summary of a position persuasively argued throughout her work:
The unconscious constantly reveals the ‘failure’ of identity.
Because there is no continuity of psychic life, so there is no stability of sexual identity, no position for women (or for men) which is ever simply achieved.
Nor does psychoanalysis see such ‘failure’ as a special-case inability or an individual deviancy from the norm.
‘Failure’ is not a moment to be regretted in a process of adaption, or development into normality, which ideally takes its course….
Instead ‘failure’ is something endlessly repeated and relived moment by moment throughout our individual histories…. feminism's affinity with psychoanalysis rests above all, I would argue, with this recognition that there is a resistance to identity at the very heart of psychic life.
(Sexuality in the Field of Vision , 90 — 1)
But again, what is often left out of such accounts of the unconscious, even as it is invoked as the prime destabilizer, is the importance of the perversions in precisely this respect: Freud insisted that what is operative from within the unconscious, producing this very instability, is repressed perversion.
Crucially, the psychoanalytic rationalization of sexual difference as a tragic split which in turn effects the failure of identity often goes along with an account of the alleged narcissistic limitations and failures of  homosexuality.
This returns us to the association of homosexuality with sameness remarked at the outset.
As we saw there, Segal and Irigaray have recently elaborated this view, but its origins are clearly in Freud whose early case-studies, as Mitchell observes, originate the idea that ‘the homosexual was choosing not another of the same sex, but himself in the guise of another’(Psychoanalysis and Feminism , 34; see e.g. Freud, ix.
198).
Irigaray's work is nuanced in ways oft en ignored not only by her critics but by those who appropriate it, especially those who consider her to have demonstrated that homosexuality represents the true nature of patriarchy; who believes that, as a sexual practice between the same, homosexuality becomes indicative of patriarchy's fundamental refusal or fear of difference.
As Jane Gallop puts it:
Irigaray has discovered that phallic sexual theory, male sexual science, is homosexual, a sexuality of sames, of identities, excluding otherness.
Heterosexuality, once it is exposed as an exchange of women between men, reveals itself as a mediated form of homosexuality.
All penetration…is thought according to the model of anal penetration.
The dry anus suffers pain; the penetrated is a humiliated man.
In short, Irigaray had allegedly discovered ‘the homosexual closed circuit…which underlies our supposed heterosexual culture’(Gallop,Feminism and Psychoanalysis , 84 — 5).
One path of enquiry leads Gallop to repudiate this ‘homosexual economy’ and speculate thus: ‘I wish to speak of radical heterosexuality, a true openness and love for the heteros , the other, an intercourse between two modalities….
And any relation between members of the same sex which allowed their difference, did not assimilate both to one fantasy, would be heterosexual.’
But Gallop had doubts, or rather confesses an ambivalence: ‘But we cannot be sure that this radical notion of ‘heterosexuality'’ is not just an alibi for the comforting norm' (pp. 127 — 8).
More recently Gallop has remarked her suspicion of the wish to deny sexual difference because it ‘might be but another mode of denying women’, adding: ‘I distrust male homosexuals because they choose men over women just as do our social and political institutions, but they too share in the struggle against bipolar gender constraints, against the compulsory choice of masculine or feminine’(Thinking through the Body , 1 13).
It is a testimony to the pervasiveness and tenacity of the homophobic tendencies of the psychoanalytic tradition that, despite the acute awareness on the part of feminists appropriating both Freud and Lacan that the writing of both contains anti-feminist tendencies, its homophobic dimensions are sometimes actively perpetuated in feminist accounts of  sexual difference theory.
This is acutely ironic in the light of Kenneth Lewes's recent argument to the effect that the psychoanalytic bias against male homosexuals derives from an initial gynaecophobic stance in psychoanalysis whereby ‘the fear and denigration of women which hover at the perimeter of analytic discourse become displaced onto the theory of male homosexuality’.
Lewes contends that, whereas these gynaecophobic tendencies were from the start challenged by women analysts, the same could not occur in relation to the homophobia of the discipline since homosexuals were systematically excluded from it, with the result that ‘the psychoanalytic discourse on homosexuality has been and still is formulated by non-homosexuals about homosexuals’(The Psychoanalytic Theory of Male Homosexuality , 21, 237 — 8).
At the same time, and as we have already seen, ‘homophobia’ is an inadequate term to describe all this since what is at issue is not personal phobia so much as the recurrence in mutated form of structures integral to cultural identity and social formation.
That much is apparent from one further and final instance of the negative construction of homosexuality within a psychoanalytically informed account of sexual difference.
I refer to Julia Kristeva's somewhat obscure remarks about ‘the role that the pervert, with his invincible belief in the maternal phallus and his obstinate refusal to recognise the existence of the other sex , has been able to play in anti-semitism and the totalitarian movements that embrace it,.
Who exactly Kristeva means becomes even less clear as she adds: ‘Let us recall the fascist or social-fascist homosexual community (and all homosexual communities for whom there is no ‘other race'’), and the fact that it is inevitably flanked by a community of viragos who have forgotten the war of the sexes and identity with the paternal Word or its serpent.’
Problematic as sexual difference may be, there is no alternative: we must, continues Kristeva, ‘go on waging the war between the two races without respite, without a perverse denial of the abyss that marks sexual difference or a disillusioned mortification of the  division’.
In her fuller and discerning reading of Kristeva, Judith Butler finds that lesbianism comes off pretty badly too; by implication Kristeva's theory ‘designates female homosexuality as a culturally unintelligible practice, inherently psychotic’.
What Butler says of this account — namely that it ‘tells us more about the fantasies that a fearful heterosexual culture produces to defend against its own homosexual possibilities, than about lesbian experience itself’(Gender Trouble , 86 — 7)— might also be said more generally of the way homosexuality is conceptualized in sexual difference theory.
But it, as I have suggested, the structures of identity formation at work here are fundamental to our existing cultural forms, they cannot be considered as stemming only from the psychoanalytic tradition.
The concepts of difference and otherness, and the belief that sexual deviance leads to undifferentiation, have a philosophical and theological history, both of which antecede and influence psychoanalysis.
Otherness Philosophically Speaking: Roger Scruton
It is from an avowedly philosophical perspective that Roger Scruton announces ‘the major structural feature of perversion’ to be ‘the habit of finding a sexual release that avoids or abolishes the other , obliterating his embodiment with the obscene perception of his body’; as such, believes Scruton, it is narcissistic and often solipsistic (Sexual Desire , 289,343).
Scruton seeks to build an explicitly conservative sexual ethic on the Hegelian proposition that ‘the final end of every rational being is the building of the self — of a recognisable personal entity, which flourishes according to its own autonomous nature’(p. 299).
This involves the recognition of the other as an end in himself (p. 301).
In gender terms this means that it is ‘precisely when most compelled to see yourself as a woman or as a man,[that]you are confronted with the mystery of the other [sex]who faces you from across an impassable moral divide’(p. 306).
In this confrontation across the divide of gender one is compelled to put one's whole being at risk (p. 307).
Desire directed  across sexual difference, towards the other gender, elicits not its simulacrum (as in homosexuality) but its complement: ‘Male desire evokes the loyalty which neutralises its vagrant impulses; female desire evokes the conquering urge which overcomes its hesitations’(p. 309).
Homosexuality is included as a perversion because it is denied this ‘fundamental experience’ of otherness-across-gender.
The homosexual ‘knows intimately in himself the generality that he finds in the other’: ‘in the homosexual act I remain locked within my body, narcissistically contemplating in the other an excitement that is the mirror of my own’(pp. 307, 310).
In normal or right sexuality, argues Scruton, we not only give recognition to the other's person in and through our desire tor him or her, we also accord them accountability and care in the process.
Among many possible objections, I shall note in passing just three, chosen because each indicates limitations which Scruton shares with other advocates of sexual difference theory.
It is ironic that by privileging sexual difference Scruton shows himself the victim of precisely the modern intensification of sexuality which in other ways he might regard as contributing to a legitimation of the perversions he repudiates.
This is further apparent from the way he makes broad social and ethical dimensions of human relations (accountability and care) the necessary condition for normal or right sexuality.
In fact, there is no reason why (e.g.) homosexuals should not afford accountability and care to their partners, in the course of either a long relationship or a very short one.
But accountability and care no more have to be the absolute precondition, the ever-present animating ethic, of sexual relations, homosexual or otherwise, than they do of any other kind except in the obvious sense that care of some kind is the precondition of almost any shared social activity.
That such care may well characterize those activities which Scruton declares cannot possess it is suggested by Andrew Lumsden's appropriately passing remark on the casual, anonymous sexual encounter: ‘for now I can only generalize: as I've known it, men are never so peaceful, so unviolent (physically and emotionally), so graceful with each other(no matter how ‘crude'’ the act) as they are — as we are — when content to take each other without the addition of names, or beds, or flats, or even of any clear impression of one-another's looks' (Gay News , 235 (Mar. 1982), 17).
Second, simply in what Scruton classifies as perversions — masturbation, bestiality, necrophilia, paedophilia, sado-masochism, homosexuality, incest, fetishism — he shows himself to have accepted uncritically the sexological/Freudian classification of perversions as developed in the  nineteenth century.’
Again he is taking over precisely the ‘modern’ definitions and oppositions, between the normal and pathological, the natural and unnatural, etc., which have been shown to be both confused and ideological in the narrow sense.
Third, Scruton reanimates the deep self as the defining principle of a normal sexuality.
His argument deploys the old jargon of authenticity, now combined with the jargon of otherness; despite his Hegelian framework, Scruton deploys this jargon as an exalted metaphor which does little more than bestow a spurious profundity on a normative sexual politics which is at heart timid, conservative, and deeply ignorant.
Mailer on Lawrence and Sexual Difference, or The ‘Full Rigours of the Fuck’
The feminized male has always been suspect, be he the advocate of unisex, androgyny, or, now, the play of the post-modern.
Why so?
One reason might be that androgyny typically envisages a unity ostensibly beyond sexual difference, but in fact inseparable from it; androgyny especially has too often been a genderless transcendent which leaves sexual difference in place.
But conversely, as I have already remarked, when Juliet Mitchell insists that ‘bisexuality is a movement across a line, it is not androgyny’, she also leaves too much of sexual difference in place.
Both the androgynous evasion of sexual difference, and the psychoanalytic insistence on it, disavow the homoerotic knowledge of its other side (s ) and the perverse dynamic which so radically implicates masculine and feminine not only within each other but, much more disturbingly, with what each excludes.
This knowledge lurks around the feminized male, which is one reason why he tends to be rendered either safely fashionable, or denigrated.
Freud thought ‘the essentially repressed element is always what is feminine.
What men essentially repress is the paederastic element’(Mitchell,Revolution , 304).
It all depends of course on what is meant by ‘the feminine’.
Surely this of all concepts, and especially in the context of the homoerotic, must not be essentialized.
Because they are so pervasive, and because their subordinate terms remain so powerfully denigrated, the erotics of active/passive should not be identified as coextensive with masculine/feminine, and should not be thought identical across the hetero/homosexual divide.
However, the association between homosexuality and femininity is not necessarily insulting to either; on the contrary, as Kaja Silverman shows, there are ways in which it might be just the reverse, especially when we contest the stereotypes of both.
This is what Silverman does, finding femininity centrally within male homosexuality, but in the process insisting that ‘we have barely begun to understand the full complexity of ‘femininity'’, whether we locate that signifier at the site of woman, or at that of the homosexual man'.
Undoubtedly the perception of the homosexual as feminized remains strangely disturbing — the supreme symbol, in the eyes of those like Norman Mailer, of a range of deep failures including the demise of masculinity, the abdication of masculine power, the desire for self-destruction, and, beyond that, the loss of difference.
Exploring heterosexist fears of homoerotic passivity, Leo Bersani remarks some similarities between the contemporary representation of homosexuals in relation to AIDS, and the nineteenth-century representation of prostitutes in relation to venereal disease.
Both kinds of representation betray fears and fantasies about sexual passivity and sexual promiscuity: women then, and gay men now, are imagined to engage in a passive promiscuity which is really an unquenchable appetite for destruction; AIDS has ‘reinforced the heterosexual association of anal sex with a self-annihilation originally and primarily identified with the fantasmatic mystery of an insatiable, unstoppable female sexuality’.
Bersani discerns in such associations the possibility of a seductive yet intolerable (i.e. unconscious) image of the male ‘unable to refuse the suicidal ecstasy of being a woman’.
He further remarks how, even in cultures which do not regard sexual relations between men as unnatural or sinful, male sexual ‘passivity’ may be associated with inferiority, inadequacy, and even pathology.
Summarizing Foucault's account in volume ii of The History of Sexuality of how in ancient Greece homosexual passivity was regarded with suspicion, even though homosexuality as such was accepted and even glorified, Bersani concludes: ‘To be penetrated is to abdicate power ’(‘Is the Rectum a Grave?, 222, 211 — 12, his emphasis).
For all its brilliant rhetoric and endearingly dishonest struggle to regain a masculine integrity, Norman Mailer's defence of D. H. Lawrence in The Prisoner of Sex conveys finally a certain desperation in the face of apprehensions similar to those which Bersani explores.
But this desperation is not to be stereotyped; it is not so much the result of being a man, not even of being a ‘real’ man, but rather of being psychically and sexually locked into the fantasies and fears of sexual difference.
I shall be turning to Lawrence shortly; here it is Mailer's account of him which is intriguing.
For Mailer, Lawrence's greatness lies in part in his heroic struggle against his destiny, which was to be homosexual: ‘he had become a man by an act of will, he was bone and blood of the classic family stuff out of which homosexuals are made, he had lifted himself out of his natural destiny which was probably to have the sexual life of a woman’(p. 154).
To repeat, the association between homosexuality and the sexual lite of a woman is not necessarily insulting to either; it is only that Mailer's denigrating version of it forewarns of the crassness of the version of sexual difference which constitutes both the origin and horizon of his vision, and once again indicates an intense apprehensiveness in the face of imagined male passivity, and the way it is oft en conceived in terms of a denigrated and denigrating femininity at once utterly alien to yet strangely inherent within the male.
Mailer apparently concurs with the belief he attributes to Lawrence, that ‘men and women can survive only it they reach the depths of their own sex down within themselves’(p. 147).
Androgyny, or what he calls the ‘liberal supposition’ that it is good for men and women to become more and more alike, creates in Mailer an aversion, ‘a species of aesthetic nausea’(pp. 134 — 5).
Relatedly, for him, the evils of our times are indicated in the way that, allegedly, the polymorphous perverse has come to prevail over procreation, contraception over conception, and the anus over the vagina —‘as if the mark of a civilization dying should be a mountainous sense of excitement for the hole which presides over waste’(p. 162).
Also definitive of that decline is the loss of sexual difference as epitomized in — no surprise — homosexuality:
Where a man can become more male and a woman more female by coming together in the full rigors of the fuck…homosexuals, it can be suggested, tend to pass their qualities over to one another, for there is no womb to mirror and return what is most forceful or attractive in each of them.
So the male gets more womanly and the queer absorbs the masculinity of the other.
(pp. 171 — 2; cf. p. 162)
Whereas prior to 1954 the male homosexual was for Mailer a rather facile symbol of evil (above, Chapter 3), now he epitomizes a more insidious and actual kind of evil: the undoing of otherness, and a drive towards undifferentiation echoing biblical ‘confusion’.
The Masculine Dilemma: Wanting to Be What the Other Is
In The Masculine Dilemma (1980), subtitled ‘A Psychology of Masculinity’, Gregory Rochlin offers a different version of the homosexual male, but one which is once again in the service of defending an updated heterosexual masculinity, and its primacy within a sexual difference metaphysic.
Drawing on psychoanalysis, Rochlin ‘rewrites’ masculinity in a way which makes a virtue of what was hitherto thought of as, or experienced as, a defect: its much remarked insecurity.
His argument is as follows: a man's masculinity is indeed insecure; it is an endless trial, a ‘precariously held, endlessly tested, unstable condition’(p. 91).
In this it is almost tragic: ‘the unique vulnerability to tailed expectations is the fatal flaw in the masculine ego…the testing of masculinity knows no bounds…to prove oneself remains a lifelong necessity….
It gives rise to many of man's anxieties and failures as well as to his often extraordinary achievements’(pp. x, xi).
The critique of masculinity which says, ‘for all your confidence you as man are insecure and afraid’, is not repudiated but incorporated; man's insecurity is embraced as an enhancing vulnerability.
Rochlin appropriates for masculinity, albeit in a form so highly selective it might hardly be recognized, that sense of the inherent instability of identity which Lacanians and others have taken from psychoanalysis for feminism.
Rochlin ‘feminizes’ masculinity to just the degree required to rehabilitate it as the dominant term in the masculine/feminine binary, and he does this through the by now familiar move of positing homosexuality as the inadequate yet threatening third term.
Masculinity can be problematized, even feminized, so long as homosexuality remains as its defining other.
So, for Rochlin, the homosexual is a sexual coward who will not risk the competitiveness of male rivalry.
He quotes approvingly an anonymous ‘youth’ who believes that gay men have given up the battle between men: ‘they've submitted to men….
They can't meet the  standards of manhood.
That takes incredibly high performance, competitiveness, winning all.
Being ‘gay'’ gets you out of the competition of manhood' (pp. 84 — 5).
So the confession of vulnerability does not involve a more thoughtful relationship to homosexuality; rather the reverse.
In fact Rochlin's theory of heterosexual masculinity remains dependent on a precise and hostile positioning of the homosexual vis-à-vis the heterosexual male.
Once again, the male homosexual is someone who refuses to risk himself in relation to the other, but now the risk is not in relation to the opposite sex (as in Scruton and Mailer), but to the same sex as rival.
In this account homosexuals are essentially failed men, and the arbiters of what it takes to be a successful male are of course not women but other males.
It might be said that Rochlin is not to be taken seriously, being merely a popularizing psychologist.
From my point of view that is exactly why he should be taken seriously, and not only because of his apparent prestige.
However, it necessary, his argument can easily be traced back to Freud.
In ‘The Psychogenesis of a Case of Homosexuality in a Woman’ Freud announces a newly discovered ‘cause’of homosexuality, what he calls ‘retiring in favour of someone else’.
The idea is that the person turns homosexual as a way of avoiding competition, conflict, or tension with a significant other.
Freud cites one young man in relation to his father and another in relation to his twin, as well as the main case, a young woman in relation to her mother: ‘It, then, the girl became homosexual and left men to her mother (in other words ‘retired in favour of'’ her mother), she would hitherto remove something which had hitherto been partly responsible for her mother's dislike' (ix.
385; cf.
Tripp,Homosexual Matrix , 78 — 9, cited above, Chapter 1 2).
Perhaps the manifest intrinsic contusions which surface in each of the foregoing theories are enough to write them oft, and to show how the same/different metaphysic is nothing more than a potently confused, highly discriminating mixed metaphor.
But there is more to be discovered by thinking their confusions and discriminations to the surface, and to that end I consider one further ‘explanation’ of homosexuality along similar lines.
This one is cited in the text of a discussion printed in Girard's Things Hidden and, though not by him, is offered in support of his general thesis that culture is organized in terms of mimesis and desire.
It is a thesis which includes the proposition that all sexual rivalry  is structurally homosexual'.
We are told the story of a man (unidentified, so for convenience I shall refer to him as X ) who, though ‘exclusively heterosexual’ had become interested in another younger man on the occasion of finding himself in a triangular relationship with him and his (i.e. the younger man's) fiancée at a dinner party.
When the younger man eventually left his fiancée for X , the latter completely lost interest in him.
The older man explains why: ‘Take my word for it — homosexuality is wanting to be what the other is’(p. 337).
Apparently, for the ‘exclusively heterosexual’X , homosexuality is not a submitting to another man but a competition with, a displacing of, him.
‘I want to be in your place’ collapses temporarily into ‘I want you’; identification merges with desire, which is then a desire to be/displace the male as other.
But only temporarily: once he has displaced the other vis-à-vis the desired object, he loses interest.
So here is a contrast: whereas for Rochlin homosexuality is an opting out of masculine competition, for X it is a direct expression of it; or, more exactly, homosexual desire is inseparable from and dependent upon mimetic rivalry between males.
But there are revealing similarities between the two explanations, quite apart from the tact that in both cases the ‘authority’ on homosexuality is an avowed heterosexual male, and one cited anonymously at that.
More significantly, in each case what is primary is the male — male rivalry.
Homosexuality is invoked to ‘explain' or ratify (rather than question) aspects of the male homosocial relationship.
The sexuality of Rochlin's youth is clearly governed — one might say overdetermined — by his relation to other males.
And when X says homosexuality is wanting to be what the other is, the other is now not the other (opposite) sex, but the same sex, and X , as avowed heterosexual, has described his desire to displace the male.
To consider the rationale of such explanations is to suspect that, rather than homosexuality being a fear of the other (sex), heterosexual masculinity involves at least intense anxieties about, and probably fears of, the same (sex), and constructs/explains homosexuality in terms which project, disavow, and legitimate those anxieties.
This fear of the same, or of the proximity of the same, or of the threat of the same, structures the violence not only of the homosocial, but of sexual difference itself.
Kinds of Hating
I have outlined a handful of sexual difference theories wherein homosexuality is associated with, or is seen to be expressive of:(1) the true, negative, nature of patriarchy,(2) a negation of what is truly vital and creative in (heterosexual) desire,(3) anti-Semitism, totalitarianism, and  fascism,(4) an obliteration of the autonomy of the other,(5) anal negativity, solipsism, and sterility and de-creation,(6) the undifferentiation of a dying culture,(7) a cowardly refusal of homosocial rivalry,(8) the definitive expression of homosocial rivalry.
These accounts derive from diverse current perspectives which should not be conflated — psychoanalysis, philosophy, and what might be called the metaphysical vision of the cultural critic and creative writer.
But this very diversity renders their shared tendency to demonize homosexuality as a fear of difference, or, more actively, as a drive towards undifferentiation and de-creation, the more remarkable.
And in all of them homosexuality echoes Augustinian privation — the more pernicious for being deeply, inherently inadequate, a kind of non-being and inauthenticity: an inimical absence which provokes paranoia and on to which is projected the fear of difference inherent within sexual difference.
D. H. Lawrence and the Metaphysics of sexual Difference
All neurotics, and many others besides, take exception to the fact that ‘inter urinas et faeces nascimur [we are born between urine and faeces]’.
(freud, xii.
296)
Once again, via a somewhat backward chronology, I have left Lawrence's account of sexual difference until last.
This increasingly disregarded and often despised writer proves rather revealing of how the perverse dynamic disrupts theories of sexual difference like those just examined.
In three respects at least D. H. Lawrence's attitude to homosexuality was typical: first, he seems to have been able to accept it only in an idealized and spiritual form; as Paul Delany puts it, he wanted not a lover but a spiritual brother.
Second, in his writing he tends to present actual homosexuals (e.g. Loerke in Women in Love ) as decadent others who draw off that which for Lawrence complicates the ideal homoerotic brotherhood.
Third, his anxieties about homosexuality were conjoined with class antagonism.
His well-known hostility to the Bloomsbury group included a homophobic preoccupation with the sexuality of some of its members; in a letter to Bertrand Russell on 12 February 1915 he said: ‘The ordinary Englishman of the educated class goes to a woman now to masterbate [sic]himself.
Because he is not going for discovery or new connection or progression, but only to repeat upon himself a  known reaction.
When this condition arrives, there is always Sodomy’(Letters , 285).
Again, homosexuality is thought of as a narcissistic repudiation of sexual difference.
From his study of Lawrence at that time, Paul Delany concludes that the writer had ‘strong homosexual impulses which he felt morally bound to repress’(Nightmare , 50).
The same letter also indicates how certain heterosexual anxieties structured in and by sexual difference are projected by Lawrence on to the homosexual, a move which his critics sometimes follow in trying to save him from the taint of homosexual desire.
Eugene Goodheart, tor instance, describes Birkin as suffering from a homosexual fear oft women.
This is quoted and endorsed by Meyers (Homosexuality and Literature , 148), who goes on to describe Lawrence's Aaron's Rod as possessing many components of ‘a homosexual novel’ including ‘an intense hatred and fear of women, who are characterised in two male gatherings as threatening, frightening and repulsive’, and ‘a symbolically castrated hero who is afraid to let himself go in heterosexual love and runs away from his three women’(p. 154).
Once more a misogyny produced internally to and largely by hetero/sexual difference is projected on to homosexuality.
But there is more to be said about Lawrence; much more than was usually said in the days when he was celebrated as a prophet of straight liberation, and more than is oft en said when he is castigated from the vantage point of contemporary sexual politics.
Lawrence audaciously sexualizes Western metaphysics.
His theories are well enough known for me to sketch them only briefly.
The emphasis falls repeatedly on the individual, the self which is a law unto itself.
Essentially, ‘the soul wishes to keep clean and whole.
The soul's deepest will is to preserve its own integrity, against the mind and the whole mass of disintegrating forces’(Studies in Classic American Literature , 185).
Lawrence also celebrates the ‘other’, but often as a foil for the integrity of self; affirmation of one's own pure self is presented as the precondition for recognizing the other.
Especially the other of sexual difference.
Lawrence placed enormous emphasis on the duality of, and opposition between, the male and female principles: ‘except in infinity, everything of life is male or female, distinct’(Phoenix , 443).
In this broad sense, sexual difference was the fundamental principle of his  entire metaphysic, the terms in which its main absolutes, selfhood and wholeness, were realized.
If ‘the final aim of every living thing, creature, or being is the full achievement of itself’(Phoenix , 403) it can only do this through another — typically the other of sexual difference.
Ideally the theory encompasses the desire for both an integrity of self, and an integration with another.
But for Lawrence the two conflict and in ways which echo the psychoanalytic account of desire:
Why were we crucified into sex?
Why were we not left rounded off, and finished in ourselves,
As we began,
As he certainly began, so perfectly alone?…
The Cross,
The Wheel on which our silence first is broken,
Sex, which breaks up our integrity, our single inviolability, our deep silence,
Tearing a cry from us….
That which is whole, torn asunder,
That which is in part, finding its whole again throughout the universe.
One resolution to the problem was for the other to submit to the one, the woman to the man, the weaker man to the stronger man.
For Lawrence submission to the integrity/mastery of another is an erotically charged solution to a primary metaphysical conflict which was always more than sexual.
The intensity of this erotic charge is only slightly less remarkable than its investment, a kind of reverse sublimation whereby neurosis is fantasized sexually as a potent purity inviting submission: ‘What do I care if he kills people?
His flame is young and clean’(The Plumed Serpent , 410).
But precisely because purity is invested with such a tremendous erotic charge, fears of ‘impurity’ remained insistent and corrosive, and in a perversely dynamic proximity disavowed along lines suggested by Freud's remarks at the beginning of this section, and in a passage from ‘Repression’(191 5) worth citing again in this context:
the objects to which men give most preference, their ideals, proceed from the same perceptions and experiences as the objects which they most abhor, and…they were originally only distinguished from one another through slight modifications…
Indeed…it is possible for the original instinctual representative to be split in two, one part undergoing repression, while the remainder,Precisely on account of this intimate connection , undergoes idealization (xi.
150, my emphasis).
In his essay ‘Pornography and Obscenity’ Lawrence invokes this idealization/abhorrence distinction between the sex functions and the excrementory functions:
[they]work so close together, yet they are, so to speak, utterly different in direction.
Sex is a creative flow, the excrementory flow is towards dissolution, de-creation….
In the really healthy human being the distinction between the two is instant, our profoundest instincts are perhaps our instincts of opposition between the two flows.
But in the degraded human being the deep instincts have gone dead, and the two flows become identical.
(pp. 313–14)
As harmful as a mixing of the flows is masturbation.
Producing shame, anger, and futility, it is masturbation which, for Lawrence, constitutes the most pernicious evasion of otherness, becoming ‘perhaps the deepest and most dangerous cancer of our civilization’, and ‘certainly the most dangerous sexual vice that a society can be afflicted with, in the long run’(‘Pornography’, 3 17).
Masturbation symbolizes a wider social malaise rooted in solipsistic self-regard.
In a review essay written two years before ‘Pornography and Obscenity’, Lawrence attacks the way we have (allegedly) come to think of ourselves in modern civilization.
He finds the masses obsessed by an abysmal social insanity, an aspect of which is the tendency of the individual to see himself as ‘a little absolute unto himself’.
Whereas ‘the true self, in sex, would seek a meeting , would seek to meet the other’, this being the ‘true flow’, sexuality today is merely greedy, blind, selfseeking, and ‘therefore, since the thing sought is the same, the self, the mode of seeking is not very important.
Heterosexual, homosexual, narcissistic, normal, or incest, it is all the same thing….
Every man, every woman just seeks his own self, her own self, in the sexual experience.’
Such self-regard is the wider evil which masturbation epitomizes.
The solution is for people to get back into touch, to ‘utterly break the present great picture of a normal humanity…and fall again into true relatedness’(‘Review’, 470 — 2).
In ‘Pornography and Obscenity’ Lawrence does not precisely equate homosexuality with the twin evils of masturbation and the excremental flow.
In tact, he allows that ‘even in homosexual intercourse’ there is a ‘give and take’quite absent from the real evil, masturbation.
But elsewhere, as in Lawrence's attacks on the Bloomsbury group, homosexuality becomes symptomatic of cultural malaise rather as does masturbation here.
In particular it is seen to share masturbation's refusal of the other in favour of the self.
And via a now explicit association with anality, especially sodomy, homosexuality becomes a  paradigm of sterility and solipsism, while heterosexuality is regarded as the way back to a dynamic, creative encounter with the other: in the woman the man embraces ‘all that is not himself’ and from that embrace ‘comes every new action’(quoted in Delany,Nightmare , 79).
Here is a valorization of the different/same binary similar to that already encountered in Gallop, Scruton, Mailer, and others.
In Lawrence's essays it goes along with that familiar stance of hard-earned adjustment whereby sickness is always someone else's problem — the masses, the modern world, women, homosexuals, whoever.
In his introduction to the privately printed edition of Pansies , for instance, Lawrence castigates Swift for his ‘gnashing insanity’, his ‘insolent and sickly squeamish mind’, at the thought that ‘Celia shits’.
Lawrence feels like going back and saying to her ‘It's all right, don't take any notice of that mental lunatic’(p. 304), thereby offering a new inflection of the erotic triangle: intervening between Swift and Celia, Lawrence displaces his own anal neurosis on to Swift while offering his healthy ideal self to Celia — or rather he seeks to become his ideal self in her eyes .
At such moments the narcissistic dimension of relating to otherness becomes apparent.
But for its full significance, and a rather more liberating version of it, we might recall Wilde's wonderful anecdote about Narcissus and the river as related by Gide:
When Narcissus died, the flowers of the field asked the river for some drops of water to weep for him.
‘Oh!’ answered the river, ‘if all my drops of water were tears, I should not have enough to weep for Narcissus myself.
I loved him!’
‘Oh!’ replied the flowers of the field, ‘how could you not have loved Narcissus?
He was beautiful’.
‘Was he beautiful?’ said the river.
‘And who could know better than you?
Each day, leaning over your bank, he beheld his beauty in your water…,
Wilde paused for a moment…
‘If I loved him, replied the river, ‘it was because, when he leaned over my water, I saw the reflection of my waters in his eyes.’
(Oscar Wilde , 2)
Lawrence's masquerade of adjustment involves a projection of his own fears, anxieties, and neurosis which, in the Swift/Celia case, is especially revealing because in the same breath he consciously repudiates the scapegoating process which partly comprises that projection (pp. 303 — 4).
But Lawrence dramatizes something else: if, within the construction of homosexuality as a fear or refusal of otherness, there may be a projection by the male heterosexual on to the homosexual of his fear of the woman as other , there may also be a disavowal of the heterosexual's fear of the homosexual as the same —that is, a fear of those gender proximities and interconnections, including Lawrence's  opposed energy ‘flows’, whose feared mutual implication compromises not only the ideology of sexual difference, but the cultural formations which it underwrites.
It is in this complicated sense that misogyny and homophobia once more interconnect, and otherness may be said to inhere within the same.
Lawrence remained too preoccupied with what in his adjusted mind he projected, disavowed, or consciously repudiated; homosexuality especially remained too fascinating for either his strenuous vision of psychic adjustment or his banal view of sexual difference as unity in opposition to remain unharassed by it.
In a letter to Henry Savage on 2 December 1913 he writes: ‘I should like to know why nearly every man that approaches greatness tends to homosexuality, whether he admits it or not’(Letters , 1 15).
This fascination with, and obvious susceptibility to, homosexual desire occasionally contributes to some brilliantly perverse writing wherein the idealization/abhorrence splitting described by Freud is reversed, and a metaphysic of absolute difference is desublimated into the cathected, dialectic proximity of the perverse dynamic.
The obvious way of approaching those moments in which this occurs is via Lawrence's astonishing description of intense, concealed homosexual desire in the suppressed prologue to Women in Love :
it was for men that he felt the hot, flushing, roused attraction which a man is supposed to feel for the other sex…the male physique had a fascination for him, and for the female physique he felt only a fondness…
In the street it was the men who roused him by their flesh and their manly, vigorous movement…
He love his friend, the beauty of whose manly limbs made him tremble with pleasure.
He wanted to caress him.
And then in his soul would succeed a sort of despair, because this passion for a man had recurred in him.
It was a deep misery to him.
And it would seem as if he had always loved men, always and only loved men.
And this was the greatest suffering to him.
This was the one and only secret he kept to himself, this secret of his passionate and sudden, spasmodic affinity for men he saw.
He kept this secret even from himself.
He knew what he felt, but he always kept the knowledge at bay.
(Phoenix II, 103–4, 107)
Lawrence also remained fascinated by anality, and in Women in Love (ch. 23, ‘Excurse’) there is that celebration of the potency of heterosexual anal intercourse where desire would, at the very least, seem to confuse his distinction between anality and sexuality proper:
It was a dark flood of electric passion she released from him, drew into herself.
She had established…a new current of passional electric energy….
It was a  perfect passing away for both of them, and at the same time the most intolerable accession into being, the marvellous fullness of immediate gratification, overwhelming, outflooding from the source of the deepest life-force, the darkest, deepest, strangest life-source of the human body, at the back and base of the loins.
(pp. 353 — 4)
Meyers finds ‘The equation of the anus with the life source…an obscene and outrageous idea’(Homosexuality and Literature , 148) and concludes that Birkin is using Ursula as a homosexual substitute — this being even more perverse than homosexuality proper because (according to Clifford Allen in a book ominously titled Homosexuality: Its Nature, Causation and Treatment ) the anus in homosexual love symbolizes the vagina and ‘anal intercourse is only unconscious incestuous behaviour’(p. 50, quoted by Meyers,Homosexuality and Literature , 178).
In so far as I understand the logic here, heterosexual sodomy is surrogate homosexuality and homosexual sodomy is surrogate heterosexuality — or rather surrogate heterosexual incestuous genital intercourse.
Perhaps such interpretations are intriguing not so much because of their rather desperate commitment to the metaphysical primacy of heterosexual genital intercourse — that is merely banal — but because they reveal the tortured cultural and psychic logic which that commitment entails.
The anal intercourse in chapter 16 of Lady Chatterley's Lover , though once ignored, has become even more notorious than that in Women in Love :
Though a little frightened, she let him have his way, and the reckless, shameless sensuality shook her to her foundations…
It was not really love….
It was sensuality sharp and searing as fire, burning the soul to tinder.
Burning out the shames, the deepest, oldest shames, in the most secret places.
It cost her an effort to let him have his way and his will of her.
She had to be a passive, consenting thing, like a slave, a physical slave….
She would have thought a woman would have died of shame.
Instead of which the shame died….
There was nothing left to disguise or be ashamed of….
But it took some getting at, the core of the physical jungle, the dark and deepest recess of organic shame.
The phallus alone could explore it.
And how he had pressed it on her!(pp. 258 — 9)
Should such passages lead us to say that Lawrence was a heterosexual sodomite or ‘repressed homosexual’?
Neither: let us say rather that what is most significant about such passages is the way so much is  fantasized from the position of the woman (including anal ecstasy and, elsewhere, Lawrence's almost as notorious worship of the phallus), and in a voice which is at once blindingly heterosexist and desperately homoerotic .
At such moments he may be most culpable vis-à-vis a responsible sexual politics (lesbian, gay, and feminist), but most revealing about the ‘nature’ of sexual desire.
Further, if Lawrence's celebration of heterosexuality is dependent upon a repression of, a disavowal of, and a displacement on to, homosexuality, such passages are animated by a homoerotic desire consciously and artistically sublimated into heterosexuality .
By sublimation I mean here not the conversion of sexuality per se into a higher, non-sexual aim, but the displacement of one kind of sexuality into another — or, more exactly (and this is the sense in which I still subscribe to Freud's notion), the contamination of a higher (i.e. socially approved) sexuality by a lower (i.e. proscribed) one.
And such displacement and contamination are made possible by that radical interconnectedness between the two which the lower knows and the higher disavows.
In short, Lawrence finds ecstasy not in heterosexuality per se but its radical perversion, and he does so by reactivating the perverse dynamic at the heart of desire.
We might say that the narrator is being fucked by the same in the position of the other — a formulation intentionally ambiguous as to who exactly is in the position of the other, since it is both: the narrator is in the position of the woman being fucked by the other of woman (man).
PART 8 Transgressive Reinscriptions, Early Modern and Post-Modern 
Subjectivity and Transgression
Part 1 explored how, in the post/modern period, issues of transgression and subjectivity are inextricably bound together.
The same is true of the earlier period, but with important differences which are oft en disregarded.
In English studies especially the modern and the early modern have been erroneously conflated.
In particular, essentialist conceptions of the self which took effective hold only in the Enlightenment, then to be subsequently developed within (for instance ) Romanticism and modernism, have been retrospectively read into the early modern period.
Nosce Teipsum
Consider that great imperative of this period,nosce teipsum , know thyself.
Today, for critical theories as ditferent as Marxism and post/ modernism, know thy discursive formations:
In acquiring one's conception of the world one always belongs to a particular grouping which is that of all the social elements which share the same mode of thinking and acting….
The starting-point of critical elaboration is the consciousness of what one really is, and is ‘knowing thyself’ as a product of the historical process to date which has deposited in you an infinity of traces, without leaving an inventory.
(Gramsci,Cultural Writings , 423)
But surely for the early moderns also: terminology apart, did not nosce teipsum only ever mean something like that?
Is that not why Montaigne could say ‘the more I frequent and know myselfe…the less I understand myselfe’; why also he discovers that ‘I have nothing to say entirely, simply, and with soliditie of my selfe without contusion, disorder, blending, mingling…
’(Essays , trans.
Florio, iii.
282, ii.
12)
Though generally appropriated by humanist criticism as a recognizable origin of itself,nosce teipsum may nevertheless have something  crucial in common with the formulations of post-structuralism.
Of the few central beliefs uniting the various post-structuralisms (and connecting them with post/modernism) this is one of the most important: human identity is to be seen as constituted as well as constitutive; constituted (not determined) by, for example, the pre-existing structures of language and ideology, and by the material conditions of human existence.
Thus is the subject decentred, and subjectivity revealed as a kind of subjection — not the antithesis of social process but its focus.
In the early modern period also the individual was seen as constituted by and in relation to— even the effect of — a pre-existing order.
To know oneself was to know that order.
Consider Richard Hooker's declaration: ‘God hath his influence into the very essence of all things, without which influence of Deity supporting them their utter annihilation could not choose but follow’(Laws , ii.
226).
Or the commonplace with which Sir John Davies begins his Nosce Teipsum : God wrote the law directly into the hearts of our first parents.
Hooker concurs: the law of Reason, the universal law of mankind, is ‘imprinted’ in men's souls and ‘written in their hearts’(i. 166, 228).
The biblical source is Jeremiah: ‘saith the Lord, I will put my law [Torah]in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts’(31: 33).
Heart [leb]here signifies the seat of thought, not emotion, so is more akin to ‘mind’; hence, to labour the analogy somewhat, law is written into identity and consciousness rather than heart in the modern sense.
When Montaigne and Bacon stress the determining power of social custom they are developing the same idea of an order prior to and determining of consciousness, though now of course with the crucial difference that it is a non-teleological order, historical rather than divine, material rather than metaphysical.
Obviously there are far-reaching differences between early modern metaphysics and post-structuralism.
For one thing the early modern view of identity as constituted (metaphysically) was also, and quite explicitly, a powerful metaphysic of social integration.
In other words, to be metaphysically identified was simultaneously to be socially positioned — the subject in relation to the prince, the woman in relation to the man, and so on.
Metaphysics here underpins a discursive formation of the subject, of subjection.
This link between subjectivity and subjection, which for the (political) post/modernist has to be disclosed before it can be disarticulated, is, by comparison, both assumed and manifestly endorsed in the Renaissance.
Another difference: within Renaissance metaphysics a constituted identity might nevertheless be essentially fixed  (e.g. the soul as divine creation) in a way the post/modernist would probably reject (identity is not only constructed but contingently so).
The Cognito: Augustine, Descartes, and Lacan
Would Hamlet have felt the delicious fascination of suicide if he hadn't had an audience, and lines to speak?
(Jean Genet,Prisoner of Love )
The Cartesian cogito — cogito ergo sum (I think therefore I am)— conventionally if somewhat simplistically marks a major point in the emergence of Western individualism.
More exactly, it is seen to mark a point in a process of transition from the idea of self as metaphysically constituted to the idea of self as an individuated, autonomous essence; self-consciousness rather than divine or natural law becomes constitutive of subjective identity.
As we saw in Chapter 9, Augustine gives a memorable earlier version of the Cartesian cogito : ‘Si enim fallor sum’— if I am deceived, then I exist.
In contrast to Descartes's emphasis on a self-constituting autonomy born of certitude, Augustine's formulation registered man's uncertainty, and that inseparably from dependency upon a prior ordering of selfhood.
As part of his project of recasting psychoanalysis in post-structuralist terms, Jacques Lacan has rewritten the Cartesian cogito in a way that might be seen as approximating more to Augustine's formulation than Descartes's: ‘I think where I am not, therefore I am where I do not think’.
Augustine might have grasped the point of this formulation quickly enough, if only because of what he and Lacan share in common: a sense of identity as constituted rather than constitutive, an effect of the pre-existing.
Augustine would also have understood Lacan's invocation of Rimbaud: ‘Je est un autre’(I is (an) other).
Of course, and again, the differences are considerable; after all, the unconscious, that which in psychoanalysis undermines conscious autonomy, and in relation to which Lacan rewrites the cogito , is a modern discovery.
A massive step forward from Descartes then, but also perhaps a step back to Augustine.
After all, it we were to ask which was the more metaphysical, divine law or the psychoanalytic unconscious, some might reply, ‘the unconscious, though not by much’.
Whatever, I do not find it surprising that Lacan admired Augustine, and credits him with  foreshadowing psychoanalysis (Ecrits , 20).
In discussing a different though related issue, Lacan observes that ‘the latest developments in modern thought on language’ are only a rediscovery of what was already known to Augustine, who ‘orients his entire dialectic around these three poles, error, mistake, ambiguity of speech’.
This is especially significant given that, according to Lacan, ‘Every emission of speech is always, up to a certain point,under an inner necessity to err’(Seminar , ii.
249, 260, 264; my emphasis).
Or, as Augustine might have put it, language is, of its (fallen) nature, always potentially perverse.
For sure then, the post/modern, in dismantling and displacing some of the ideological formations of the Enlightenment, Romanticism, and modernism, finds itself in a paradoxical but illuminating relationship with the early modern.
One way of putting this would be to say that with the deconstruction of these intervening cultural developments, we can see the early modern clearly once again.
This is emphatically not the claim I am making here.
For one thing, those intervening formulations have been profoundly determining of our own culture and consciousness, and their influence cannot be erased; even deconstructed, they continue to exert an influence.
It is not just that there survive undeconstructed residues of, say, Romanticism and modernism, or that the constructed forms echo still within the deconstructed (although they clearly do survive in these ways); it is also that they exert an influence in and as their newly deconstructed state.
The recent past informs the post/modern, even or especially as the latter is changing our understanding of that past.
I would say rather that, both despite and because of the obvious and considerable differences, post/modernism is helping us to understand again what the early modern period already knew but in a quite different form: identity is essentially informed by what it is not.
It also helps us to see that if (as was apparent in the early seventeenth century) identity is clearly constituted by the structures of power, of position, allegiance, and service, then any disturbance within, or of, identity could be as dangerous to that order as to the individual subject.
Hooker, in a now famous passage, asked: ‘see we not plainly that obedience of creatures unto the law of nature is the stay of the whole world?’
(Laws , i. 157).
Equally plainly, in this view disobedience is literally world-shattering; to transgress or deviate from the law of nature, to ‘fail, or swerve’(i. 185) from one's allotted course, is a perversion which brings ruin not only to the transgressive agent, but to every other dependent entity.
The metaphysical construction of subjectivity is at once an admission and production of its disruptive potential, a disruption in and of the very terms of its construction.
It also suggests, paradoxically, that the less autonomous individuality is thought to be, the more it might be marked by a potentially subversive agency.
But this is to anticipate the argument; for the moment I want only to observe that a conception of the self as socially and/or metaphysically constituted produces one idea of transgression, and that of the self as ideally (if not actually) unified and autonomous, quite another.
Early Modern: Cross-Dressing in Early Modern England
In Surpassing the Love of Men Lillian Faderman records two separate cases of women in France in the sixteenth century who were punished tor using transvestite disguise and deploying dildos in their lesbian relations.’
From one, modern, point of view, these women's transgression is suspect.
I am not referring to the conservative perspective which condemns sexual deviance per se , but to another viewpoint, one which might actually endorse deviance in principle, at least if it were seen as a quest for authentic selfhood of the kind explored in Chapter 3.
But here, precisely, is the problem; even (or especially) from this radical perspective, the women's behaviour is seen as inauthentic, not truly transgressive: in their use of men's clothing and the dildo they were trying to imitate precisely that masculine order which they should have been escaping or at least repudiating.
In short, their transgression was motivated by false consciousness.
That at any rate is how those who are viewed as their modern day counterparts are regarded by the heroine of Rubyfruit Jungle (above, Chapter 3); and the anonymous interviewee cited by Esther Newton: ‘I hate games!
I hate role playing!
It's so ludicrous that certain lesbians, who despise men, become the exact replicas of them!’
(‘The Mythic Mannish Lesbian’, 7).
But the question remains: why were those two Frenchwomen in the sixteenth century found so threatening?
One of them was sentenced to be burned alive, and the other hanged, punishments dictated, apparently, not by their sexuality as such but their transvestism and use of the dildo — at once, I want to suggest, appropriations of masculinity, inversions of it, and substitutions for it.
I have already explored in relation to Gide and others the kind of rebellion whose test they retrospectively failed, namely, transgression as a quest for authenticity: underpinning and endorsing the philosophy of individualism, it suggests that in defying a repressive social order we can dis-cover (and so be true to) our real selves.
For convenience of reference I shall call this idea of transgression humanist.
As I have tried to show, the significance for our culture of humanist transgression, this escape from repression into the affirmation of one's true self can hardly be overestimated.
But its prevalence has led us to misconceive both the significance and practice of transgression in the earlier modern period, and also in some of our own contemporary subcultures.
What intrigues me about that earlier period, especially its drama, is a mode of transgression which finds expression through the inversion and perversion of just those pre-existing categories and structures which its humanist counterpart seeks to transcend, to be liberated from; a mode of transgression which seeks not an escape from existing structures but rather a subversive reinscription within them, and in the process their dislocation or displacement.
I call this ‘transgressive reinscription’, a concept elaborated shortly in relation to the transvestite.
Other examples in the Renaissance include the malcontent who haunts the very power structure which has alienated him, seeking reinscription within it but at the same time demystifying it, operating within and subverting it at the same time; the revengers whose actions constitute an even more violent bid for reinscription within the very society which has alienated and dispossessed them; the assertive women, the ‘women on top’ described by Natalie Zemon Davis who simultaneously appropriate, exploit, and undermine masculine discourse.
Humanist transgression in the name of authenticity has never been able to comprehend this other kind of transgression, that performed in the name of inversion, perversion, and reinscription.
Transgressive Mimesis: Faustus and Vagabonds
Stephen Greenblatt draws upon several of the containment arguments outlined above (Chapter 6) in his pioneering study Renaissance Self-Fashioning .
In this immensely rewarding contribution to Renaissance studies, he argues that Marlowe's heroes remain, in effect, contained.
Essentially, they remain embedded in what they oppose: ‘they simply reverse the paradigms and embrace what the society brands as evil.
In so doing, they imagine themselves set in diametrical opposition to their society where in fact they have unwittingly accepted its crucial structural elements.’
In Faustus for instance‘the blasphemy pays homage to the power it insults’(pp. 209, 212).
Greenblatt has in mind here that extraordinary moment when Faustus seals his pact with the devil by  uttering Christ's dying words on the cross: ‘consummatum est’.
Faustus wilfully ends himself; he sells his soul to the devil.
Creation recoils; his blood congeals.
Via the expression of a perverse masochism, with its disturbing mix of abjection and arrogance, this act, in one sense the supreme antithesis of everything Christ died for — he died after all to save us all — is identified as Christlike.
Is not this transgression contained, the unintended reverence paid by the sacrilegious to the sacred?
Or is it rather a transgressive reinscription, a demonic perversion of the sacred?
What else, after all, was Christ in his death but the keenest image of abjection and arrogance, the epitome of that transgressive masochism which has played such an important part in making and unmaking our culture, not least in the figure of the martyr, and which figures over and again in the cultural depictions of the crucifix?
Via the dynamic of the perverse, Faustus violates Christianity in the name and image of Christ; assimilating Christ to his opposite he discloses that opposite within Christ.
Similarly, as I have argued elsewhere, this play collapses God into his antithesis, those contemporary secular tyrants who were legitimating their injustice in the name and image of God.
What we witness here is something resembling the Freudian proposition that the repressed returns via the very images, structures, and mechanisms of repression itself: the words which consummate the renewal of man, his salvation, these words return to signify the opposite of salvation which is damnation, and they signify also the desire which only damnation can acknowledge and which salvation must repress.
Consider another, quite different instance of transgressive reinscription.
The late Gá0mini Salgá0do once described the vagabonds of the Elizabethan low-life pamphlets as follows:
Seen through the disapproving eyes of respectable citizens they were nothing but a disorderly and disorganized rabble, dropouts from the social ladder.
But seen from within, they appear to be like nothing so much as a mirror-image of the Elizabethan world picture: a little world, tightly organised into its own ranks and with its own rules, as rigid in its own way as the most elaborate protocol at court or ritual in church.
(Cony-Catchers , 13)
From the respectable view, these rogues were merely the dregs of civilization — potentially dangerous, it is true, but in no way a part of  the true social order.
From another view they comprise a mirror-image of that order.
But if the second view is accurate do not the rogues become another clear instance of transgression contained, of a subculture which has internalized the structures and values of the dominant culture?
Are they not paradoxically reproducing the laws which exclude and oppress them, even as they seem to be escaping and subverting those laws?
Not exactly, because this very mimicry of the dominant, be it a literary trope or cultural actuality, involved a scandalous inversion.
In the words of one contemporary observer: ‘these cheaters turned the cat in the pan, giving to diverse vile patching shift s an honest and godly title, calling it by the name of law…to the destruction of the good labouring people’(Salgá0do,Cony-Catchers , 15).
And feeding back through that inversion is an equally scandalous interrogation of the dominant order being mimicked; civil society is shown to be rooted in a like corruption.
If this subculture imitates the dominant from below, it also thereby employs a strategy which embarrasses the dominant.
Even as civil society endlessly displaces corruption from the social body as a whole on to its low life, the latter reveals both the original source and full extent of corruption within the dominant itself (pp. 16, 174).
Inversion becomes a kind of transgressive mimesis: the subculture, even as it imitates, reproducing itself in terms of its exclusion, also demystifies, producing a knowledge of the dominant which excludes it, this being a knowledge which the dominant has to suppress in order to rule.
Cross Dressing
We have seen already how the most significant senses of ‘perversion, in the early period do not define a sexual pathology in the modern sense.
As a divergence or deviation from, perversion was also a contradiction of.
Similarly, ‘inversion’ could signify reversal of position and/or reversal of direction, both being inimical to effective government and social control.
So it is worth recalling at the outset of this discussion that it is in these senses that the female cross-dresser of the early seventeenth century could be described as an ‘invert’ or ‘pervert’, and hardly at all in the sense of those words as coined and popularized by the nineteenth-century sexologists and, later, psychoanalysis.
We might also usefully recall that to cross is not only to traverse, but to mix (as in to crossbreed) and to contradict (as in to cross someone); also that cross-dressing potentially involves both inversion and displacement of gender binaries.
Again we are confronted with a system of control in part generating the terms, the concepts, and the space of its own negation.
The female transvestite was indeed a deeply disturbing figure in the early seventeenth century.’
Certain cultural distinctions were breaking down and in the anxiety which this provoked we can read the effects of tar-reaching historical change.
As Lisa Jardine has recently reminded us, in the obsession with dress and what it signified socially, we witness contemporary tensions and struggles between classes, between residual and emergent cultures, between the mercantile order and what it was actually (or seemed to be) replacing, between rank and wealth, between innate and fiscal value (Still Harping , 141 — 2, 1 50).
So before examining the challenge of the female transvestite, we need to consider the more general attitudes to dress and what it signified.
Contemporary anxieties found expression in two main kinds of attack: the one on the dress violations of the emergent (middle) class, the other on the insubordinate (female) sex.
William Perkins sets out the conventional position vis-à-vis class.
Dress, he says,
must be answerable to our estate and dignitie, for distinction of order and degree in the societies of men.
This use of attire, stands by the very ordinance of God; who, as he hath not sorted all men to all places, so he will have men to fitte themselves and their attire, to the qualitie of their proper places, to put a difference betweene themselves and others…
By which it appeares, that many in these daies do greatly offend…
The Artificer commonly goes clad like the Yeoman: the Yeoman like the Gentleman: the Gentleman as the Nobleman: the Nobleman as the Prince: which bringeth great confusion, and utterly overturneth the order which God hath set in the states and conditions of men.
(Pioneer Works , 210 — 11)
Dress underwrites not only class differences but national and racial ones also, and Perkins has harsh words for those who adopt the fashion of other countries: ‘this one sinne is so common among us, that it hath branded our English people with the blacke mark of the vainest and  most newfangled people under heaven’(p. 211).
He also castigates those who use cosmetics ‘thereby making themselves seeme that which, indeede they are not’, and practising what ‘is most abominable in the very light of nature, and much more by the light of Gods word’(p. 214).
Accompanying the association between dress and class was that between dress and gender.
This is Stubbes:
Our apparel was given us as a sign distinctive to discern betwixt sex and sex, and therefore for one to wear the apparel of another sex, is to participate with the same, and to adulterate the verity of his own kind.
(Anatomy, sig.
[F5])
Thus the ideology of gender difference was just as fundamental as that of class in securing the social order.
In fact patriarchy, class, and hierarchy all presupposed a law of gender difference which was at once divinely, naturally, and socially laid down, the law descending from the first through the second to the third.
As we shall see, it is against and (again) in terms of this metaphysic that dress violation occurred.
Not surprisingly then, class and gender anxieties interrelated.
In a letter of 25 January 1620 Sir John Chamberlain remarks a very significant event in the contemporary cross-dressing controversy: James I's instruction to the clergy to suppress women doing it.
The king is reported as having told the clergy that they must reproach the practice ‘vehemently and bitterly’, and if this did not succeed, he would take further measures.
Chamberlain refers to this in the same breath as mentioning an argument between the Marquess Buckingham and Hamilton over ‘the selling of honours and abasing ancient nobility, by new advancements’.
Class and sexual disruption suggest each other, and with this conclusion: ‘The truth is the world is very far out of order’(Letters , ii.
286 — 9).
Though Perkins, Stubbes, and Chamberlain hardly convey this, the controversy over dress was no less complex than the social shift s which provoked it.
No simple transgression/containment model was at work.
And nor can we reduce the controversy to a straightforward clash between the new and the old orders.
For one thing, as Jardine points out, while on the one hand the shift of wealth to the mercantile classes was leading to the break-up of the dress code, and enabling the socially mobile to appropriate, for purposes of inclusion, what were supposed to be signs of their exclusion, it was also the case that those who had ‘arrived’ socially often wanted to enforce the code against those who had not.
Further, Baldwin discerns in the controversy an overlap of  class anxieties and pragmatic political considerations — for example the wish to encourage home industries and discourage the buying of foreign goods (Sumptuary Legislation , ch. 5, ‘The Reign of Elizabeth’).
The situation was further complicated by those like Stubbes and Perkins who saw dress contusion as symptomatic of impending social collapse, and those like James I whose hatred of female cross-dressing introduced a misogynistic factor which antedated current social anxiety yet found a powerful focus in it.
To the modern reader the stipulated dress codes for different classes and persons of different prestige and status seem bizarre and impossibly complicated (see for instance those reprinted in Jardine,Still Harping , 143 — 4).
But their very strangeness also helps us see how transgression is produced by the measures taken to contain it: the more elaborate the classifications, the more opportunity there was to transgress, and, quite possibly, the greater the attraction of transgression.
Whatever, it eventually became impossible to ensure compliance.
Theatrical Transgression
A significant focus for the controversy was the theatre, which, like the transvestite, was seen both to epitomize and to promote contemporary forces of disruption in and through its involvement with cross-dressing.
There was, for example, the general cultural disturbance generated by the theatrical emphasis on artifice, disguise, and role-playing.
Its significance can be gauged in part by looking at the range of objections to the theatre as a place which subverted metaphysical fixity.
To begin with the players were seen to undermine the idea that one's identity and place were a function of what one essentially was — what God had made one.
The idea of a God-given nature and destiny had the corollary that nothing so essentially predetermined could or should ever change.
Constant change was worse still; in the words of one satirist, the scandal of the player was not so much that he disguised his real self in playing; rather he had no self apart from that which he was playing: ‘The Statute hath done wisely to acknowledge him a Rogue and errant, tor his chiefe essence is,A daily Counterfeit …
His [profession]is compounded of all Natures, all humours, all professions.
''’ The association here of the player and the rogue is significant.
Both were itinerants and masterless men, sometimes both subjected to the same vagrancy  laws (alternatively the player might be a royal servant — an interesting opposition in itself).
They transgressed fixity not only because they were without fixed abode, but also because they lacked the identity which, in a hierarchical society, was essentially conferred by one's place in that society.
And there was a further link between rogues, masterless men, and the players; according to some observers the theatres quite literally brought them into association, being the place ‘for vagrant persons, Masterless men, thieves…contrivers of treason, and other idle and dangerous persons to meet together’(Chambers,Elizabethan Stage , iv.
322).
Again we see the same anxiety: social stability depended crucially on people staying just as they were (identity), where they were (location), and doing what they always had done (calling).
When the rogue meets the player two lawless identities converge.
This concern with unfixed identity was not unique to the theatre; society and politics more generally contained a theatrical dimension, what Greenblatt calls ‘the theatricalisation of culture’.
Renaissance courts involved theatricality in the sense of both disguise and histrionic self-presentation, while court manuals and rhetorical handbooks offered ‘an integrated rhetoric of the self, a model for the formation of an artificial identity’(Renaissance Self-Fashioning , 162).
And dissimulation was of course essential for the practice of realpolitik .
In the theatre was a model, indeed a sustained exploration, of the role-playing which was so important for social mobility, the appropriation and successful deployment of power.
It follows that the recurring emphasis within Elizabethan and Jacobean plays on life itself as a process of playing was not merely theatrical projection; the world as a stage, life as artifice, and so on; these were ideas which the theatre derived from, as well as conveyed to, its culture.
Louis Montrose points out a fascinating consequence of this: ‘If the world is a theatre and the theatre is an image of the world, then by reflecting upon its own artifice, the drama is holding the mirror up to nature’(Montrose, ‘Purpose of Playing’, 57).
Another, related, charge against the players is that in their dress violations they — again like the ‘street’ transvestites — transgressed the natural and fixed order of things by wilfully confusing distinctions which it was thought imperative should be kept distinct, especially within the categories of rank, class, and gender.
For menials to play those of a higher rank and breeding seemed a deep violation of the principle of fixed division on which civilization rested.
In Act v, Scene v, of Jonson's Volpone Mosca enters dressed as a gentleman; it is a moment which might be seen to mark the arrival of the urban impostor, he or she who knows that mimicry and impersonation possess the  potential not just to deceive and usurp, but also to subvert social differentiation and identity itself:
MOSCA.
But what am I?
VOLPONE: 'Fore heav'n, a brave clarissimo ; thou becomest it! pity thou wert not born one.
MOSCA.If I hold My made one, 'twill be well.
(v. v. 2 — 5)
Mosca prevaricates beautifully.
It is a reply which is at once deferential and contemptuous, self-effacing and arrogant.
'Twill be well because he is not the real thing, never could be, and is not even now presuming to be; but conversely, 'twill be well because the imitation, the travesty, of the real thing can also usurp it and to all intents and purposes become it.
What price then that metaphysical guarantee of social differentiation when it is so easily abolished in the confusion it was supposed to preempt and render impossible?
It is a concentrated, fleeting moment of ambiguity and irony (irony and ambiguity tending to be intrinsic to transgressive reinscription and alien to humanist transgression).
It is also a moment of appropriation in which there surfaces the play's underlying knowledge, at once exhilarating, ambivalent, appalling, and violent; a knowledge which incites yet also fears that riot of the perverse, the antisocial and the anti-natural which are Volpone .
Of course the power of superficial difference goes deep; when Volpone is discovered attempting to rape Celia he laments: ‘I am unmasked, unspirited, undone’(iii.
vii.
277).
To be unmasked is to be unspirited as well as undone.
To lose one's cover is to lose one's soul, to be undone in the sense of socially ruined and spiritually taken apart.
Can we attribute this perception entirely to Volpone's and Mosca's perversity?
Not exactly, if only because it is precisely at this point that Volpone shows how the normal is parasitic upon the perverse.
To be sure we are seeing it in a grotesquely parodied form, but what leads to Celia being nearly raped is nothing less than the prevailing structures of patriarchal and heterosexual authority: it is after all her hitherto paranoidly jealous husband who has literally dragged her to Volpone's bed.
One further aspect of dress violation associated with the theatre also contravened divine and natural law: the abomination of boys dressing as girls.
For John Rainoldes the boy transvestite destroyed the fragile moral restraint containing an anarchic male sexuality; the boy incited his male audience into every kind of sexual excess.
Rainoldes seems to  have imagined adult male sexuality not just as anarchic, but as satanically polymorphous, capable of engaging in the forbidden with alarming ease.
So, in seeing the transvestite boy, the male member of the audience might be moved to lascivious thoughts about women, which then transfer to the boy himself.
(In the light of which it is pleasing to discover that in 1566, when Rainoldes was a 17-year-old student at Oxford, he acted the part of a female in a play composed tor Queen Elizabeth — see Paine,The Learned Men , 23).
Rainoldes apart, the transgressions associated with the boy players, be they actual or imagined, rendered the theatrical self-consciousness surrounding transvestism complex and shifting; it provoked questions teasingly unanswerable: for example— and this is a question which remains intriguing for us today — which, or how many, of the several gender identities embodied in any one figure are in play at any one time?
There were factors at play in the association of theatrical cross-dressing and sexual transgressions.
Not only did prostitutes frequent the theatre, but the street transvestite was sometimes associated with prostitution and possibly sodomy: Henriques notes a regulation dating from 1480 forbidding prostitutes to dress as men in public, and remarks: ‘This masquerading presumably would have meant an added inducement to sodomy’(Prostitution and Society , ii.
88).
It he is right, then stage transgressions seemed to have spoken to immediate temptations in diverse ways.
The Roaring girl and Hic Mulier 
Middleton and Dekker's The Roaring Girl (1608 — 11), a play with a transvestite hero/ine called Moll Cutpurse, and the 1620 pamphlet controversy over cross-dressing both include attacks on the fraudulence of masculinity and the exploitativeness of gender inequality.
In both play and pamphlet the contemporary sexual metaphysic is turned inside out: gender division is recognized not as a divinely sanctioned natural order, but as the contingent basis of an oppressive social order.
Correspondingly the representation of gender inversion generates an interrogation both of the sexual metaphysic and of thé social order.
Moll Cutpurse is variously described as one who ‘strays so from her kind/Nature repents she made her’(i. ii.
211 — 12); who some say ‘is a  man/And some both man and woman’(ii.
i. 190 — 1), and yet others that she is ‘a codpiece-daughter’(ii.
ii.
89)
a thing
One knows not how to name: her birth began
Ere she was all made: 'tis woman more than man,
Man more than woman, and (which to none can hap )
The sun gives her two shadows to one shape
(i. ii.
128 — 33, my emphasis)
And yet this creature who so violates the natural order and traditional gender divisions by dressing as a man also does things better than a man: ‘I should draw first and prove the quicker man’, she says (iv.
i. 76)— and she does.
In the process she attacks masculinity as a charade, asserting its failure in its own sexual terms (ii.i.
290 ff.), something which the language of the play echoes elsewhere, facetiously, but defensively too (cf.
II.
i. 326 ff.; ii.
ii.
75 ff.; iii.
i. 142 ff.).
Moll also otters what in this period is an exceptional awareness of the prostitute as someone sexually exploited because of economic and other kinds of social subjection:
In thee I defy all men, their worst hates,
And their best flatteries, all their golden witchcrafts,
With which they entangle the poor spirits of fools.
Distressed needlewomen and trade-fallen wives,
Fish that must needs bite or themselves be bitten,
Such hungry things as these may soon be took
With a worm fastened on a golden hook:
Those are the lecher's food, his prey, he watches
For quarrelling wedlocks, and poor shifting sisters.
(iii.i.90 — 8)
Recognizing all this, and being shown too where the power lies in this social order, the politics of inversion become persuasive, perhaps irresistible; this is Moll, about to thrash the predatory Laxton: ‘I scorn to prostitute myself to a man, /that can prostitute a man to me’(iii.
i. 109 — 10).
Moll's denunciation of Laxton before she beats him up shows that the thrashing is partly in revenge for his not untypical masculine blend of misogyny and licentiousness (cf. ii.
ii.
252 — 5) to which of course the prostitute can indeed testify that it these things appear incompatible — isn't misogyny a kind of hatred, and licentiousness a kind of love, albeit a debased one?— in reality they go hand in hand.
It is in these ways that The Roaring Girl begins to disclose how, because of the complex connections between sexuality, gender, and class, and specifically between sexual and economic exploitation, economic and political anxieties can be displaced into the domain of the sexual and conversely, the sexual comes to possess enormous signifying power (though very different from that attributed to sexuality by the radical humanist).
As I have already remarked, the king himself intervened in 1620 to try to eliminate female transvestism.
He like many others at that time felt that female transvestites were usurping male authority.
This is indeed exactly what Moll does throughout the play, and especially when she beats up Laxton.
But perhaps more importantly the transvestite was contributing to a knowledge and a culture which undermined the discursive formations of authority itself, doing so through her perverse reinscription within those formations.
Similarly in the pamphlet controversy.
Hic Mulier, the voice of female transvestites in the most interesting pamphlet,Haec Vir (1620), insists that gender difference is an effect of custom only.
Custom becomes the cause where once it was only the effect.
This inversion is also an instance of what was to become the classic move in ideological demystification: the metaphysical is displaced by, and then collapsed into, the social.
Shorn of its metaphysical sanction, law in the Renaissance was always in danger of losing its prescriptive power.
Nothing is more absurd, nothing more foolish, says Hic Mulier, than custom.
In tact, it is ‘an idiot’.
The radical implications of this assertion can be gleaned from an observation of Montaigne's: ‘We may easily discern, that only custom makes that seem impossible unto us, which is not so’(Essays , trans.
Florio, i. 239).
Throughout the pamphlet Hic Mulier seems to be in sympathy with this remark of Montaigne's, but nowhere is her appropriation of the idea more challenging than in the way she dissolves both law and ideological fixity into a celebration of change and transformation, and, by implication, a celebration of her potential rather than her fixed nature: ‘Nor do I in my delight of change otherwise than as the whole world does’(sig.
B1).
At a time when change was almost synonymous with evil, or at least decline, this was indeed provocative.
Hic Mulier is not only shameless but, as Sandra Clark has recently pointed out, she suggests that shame itself ‘is a concept framed by men to subordinate women to the dictates of arbitrary custom’(‘Controversy’, 175).
Hic Mulier claims too that women are as reasonable as men.
And then comes the crucial claim: ‘We are as tree born as men, have as free election, and as tree spirits; we are compounded of like parts, and may with like liberty  make benefit of our creations’(sig.
B3).
And it is a claim whose force in this instance comes through a demystification generated across inversion.
But consider now a misgiving voiced by Linda Woodbridge and shared by many others: ‘To me the one unsatisfying feature of the otherwise stimulating transvestite movement is that it had to be transvestite: Renaissance women so tar accepted the masculine rules of the game that they felt they had to look masculine to be ‘free''’(Women and the English Renaissance , 145).
For understandable reasons Woodbridge seems to prefer the ‘hermaphroditic vision’(p. 145 and cf. p. 317).
The transvestite and the hermaphrodite: both were disturbing images; perhaps they are less so now.
Potentially the hermaphrodite dissolves gender difference and, at least in its associated idea of androgyny, has become acceptable.
Even in the Renaissance the figure could ‘symbolise the essential oneness of the sexes’(p. 140), and, with reference back to Plato's Symposium , the recovery of an original lost unity (itself intrinsically sexual).
The idea remains alive today, of course; I have already referred to Kaja Silverman's observation that the notion of sexual identity as an original androgynous whole, similar to that projected by Aristophanes, is central to the psychoanalytic theories of Jacques Lacan.
But the transvestite?
S/he is a strange and disturbing figure still, though now for different reasons from in the Renaissance.
Isn't s/he a figure who has exchanged one kind of incompleteness for another?
If misgivings persist they are not exactly moral.
Isn't it rather that, as Woodbridge implies, the transvestite seems to be a victim of false consciousness, and by switching gender roles rather than dissolving them reinforces the very sexual division which s/he finds oppressive?
So the transvestite fails the test of humanist transgression.
But it the hermaphrodite threatens the binarism of gender through ambiguous unity, the female transvestite of the early seventeenth century positively disrupts that same scheme by usurping the master side of the opposition.
To invoke again the earlier distinction between different kinds of transgression, the transvestite represents a subversive reinscription within, rather than a transcendence of, an existing order, while the hermaphrodite is often appropriated as a symbol of just such a transcendence.
Essentially the assertive female cross-dresser inverted the metaphysics of difference: from being a divine law inscribed essentially in each of God's subjects and which knowledge of self would confirm, sexual identity and sexual difference are shifted irretrievably into the domain of custom, of the social, of that which can be contested.
Perhaps this is the mode of transgression denied to the hermaphrodite, at least to the extent that s/he is associated with the mythological, the presocial, the transcendent.
Containment Theory and Transvestism
What I have just offered have been partial readings of the Haec Vir pamphlet and The Roaring Girl , partial not in the sense (at least this is not what I'm confessing) of being distortions of the texts, but rather readings that focus upon textual elements which can be correlated with oppositional cultural elements within Jacobean society, and consequently possible audience positions and reading responses.
But the representation of the transvestite in the pamphlet and the theatre is part of a cultural process whose complexity is worth exploring further.
The complexity I am concerned with is not that supposed intrinsic property of the text which politically motivated critics allegedly distort (in biased readings) and impartial critics transparently represent (in long readings).
It is the complexity which is first and foremost a social process, and within which the text was, and still is, implicated.
Viewing the text in this way raises the question of the containment of transgression, since both play and pamphlet have been seen to move toward a closure which contains — even eradicates — their challenging elements.
The Haec Vir pamphlet ends, notoriously, with Hic Mulier declaring that women like her have only become masculine because men have become effeminate.
They have taken up men's cast-off garments in order to ‘support a difference,(sig.
C2)— in effect to maintain sexual difference itself.
And if men revert to being masculine, the Hic Mulier figure continues, women will once again become feminine and subordinate.
Actually this conclusion barely constitutes containment.
To see this  argument as somehow cancelling what went before is probably to interpret the pamphlet according to modern and anachronistic notions of authorial intention, character utterance, and textual unity (all three notions privileging what is said finally as being more truthful than what went before).
The Hic Mulier figure (an abstraction) is a vehicle for a variety of defences of the transvestite, radical and conservative, and there is no good reason, given the genre, to privilege the one over the others as more truthful, more sincere, more representative, or to be dismayed that some of these arguments are incompatible with each other.
Presumably if the different defences had been split between several Hic Mulier figures the problem (for us) would disappear — again alerting us to certain, not necessarily appropriate, interpretative assumptions.
But it remains true that this culminating defence, conservative and apologetic as it is, still partakes of the same fundamental challenge to gender division as the other defences.
To state that gender difference can be and is being maintained through cross-dressing and inversion is to maintain or imply the crucial claim even while apparently surrendering it: the difference in question is capable of working in terms of custom and culture (and is thereby contestable) rather than nature and divine law (which are immutable).
Within this apologetic (ironic?) defence then, sexual difference is sustained by the very inversion which divine law forbids, and the fact that it can be so sustained is simultaneously a repudiation of the claim that sexual difference is itself dictated by divine or natural law.
The submission ironically incorporates — contains — the original challenge.
The Roaring Girl is a stronger instance of containment.
Right at the outset we are alerted to the tact that Mary Frith, the real-life cross-dresser on whom the play is based, is being given a more virtuous image than she in fact possessed (dedication, ll. 19 ff.; prologue, ll. 26 — 7).
For sure she creates disruption, signifies abnormality, and incites lewdness in others.
But she does not share the criminality of the real-life Frith who was apparently arrested several times, and variously recorded as being a bawd, thief, receiver, gang-leader, and whore; the character Moll Cutpurse definitely is not these things, and in the play-world is only falsely accused of being so.
So whereas the deviance of Mary Frith remained in certain respects implacably immoral and antisocial, in the figure of Moll Cutpurse that deviance is harnessed as the moral conscience of the selfsame society whose gender categories she transgresses.
More specifically, Frith/Moll is appropriated for a partial  critique of patriarchal law, sexual exploitation, and aristocratic culture.
She thereby also helps regenerate society and especially its ailing patriarchal basis: ‘MOLL.
Father and son, I ha’ done you simple service here' (v. ii.
206).
At the same time she remains ‘isolated from the very social structure which her courage and vitality have done so much to enliven and renew’(Rose, ‘Women in Men's Clothing’, 389 — 90).
In these respects Frith/Moll is represented in the tradition of the warrior woman and the folk figure of Long Meg of Westminster, both of whom distinguish true morality from false, the proper man from the braggart, and finally submit to the former (Shepherd,Amazons , esp.
70 — 2).
What this suggests is that if the demonizing of the deviant other leads to suppression and even extermination, the colonizing of the deviant involves an assimilation which re-forms, ethically and literally, even as it re-presents.
The play reconstitutes Mary Frith as Moll Cutpurse, who in turn is used to reconstitute a social order while remaining on its margins — reformed and reforming but not finally incorporated; hence Moll's stern yet haunting parting injunction to the assembled ‘gentlemen’ of the final scene: ‘I pursue no pity: /Follow the law’(252 — 3).
In this case containment is not the reaction of power after, and in response to, the event of subversion.
Nor is subversion the ruse of power.
Rather subversion and containment are always in play, each an intrinsic dimension of social process and in a dynamic interrelationship which their binary conception misconstrues.
Thus containment can effect rather than defeat change (and this does not presuppose the desirability or otherwise of that change; it might be reaction or progress or, as in this play, complex elements of both with each differently appropriated for different audience positions).
Rather than seeing containment as that which pre-empts and defeats transgression we need to see both containment and transgression as potentially productive processes.
The Roaring Girl presents a process in which containment of the deviant forms the basis of one social traction offering a critique of, and taking power trom, another.
In a more radical dynamic, containment, in the very process of repressing one kind of subversive knowledge, actually produces another.
It is to the latter process that I now turn.
Transvestism and Masculinity : Love's Cure
The most interesting theatrical containment of the transvestite challenge occurs in Fletcher's little-known Love's Cure (1624?).
Indeed, one wonders if the play was written as a conservative response to the controversy, since it directly addresses the most challenging claim or implication of the radical transvestite, namely, that gender division and inequality are a consequence not of divine or natural law but of social custom.
The play centres on the severe cultural disturbance generated by the fact that Clara, a girl, has been brought up as a boy and wants to remain one, while her brother, Lucio, has been brought up as a girl which he wants to remain, despite the fact that society is now demanding that both return to their normal gender ascriptions.
It is a humorous situation and one played up as such.
But the play also acknowledges quite clearly that what is at stake is nothing less than the legitimacy of the whole social order, hinging as it does on a ‘naturally’ sanctioned law of sexual difference.
This is a play about the perversion of nature by culture (or ‘custom’— i. ii.
47, ii.
ii.
95 — 7) with the eventual triumph of nature: ‘Nature (though long kept back) wil have her owne’(iv.
iv.
61 — 2; cf. ii.
ii.
248 — 59, iv.
ii.
187 — 90, v. iii.
90 — 4).
The cultural conditioning of both Lucio and Clara seems to go deep.
Parents and others try yet fail to restore the children to their natural selves; the father, Alvarez, cries angrily:
Can strong habituall custome Work with such Magick on the mind, and manners In spight of sex and nature?(ii.ii. 140 — 2)
The answer is, apparently, yes.
But then nature succeeds where authority has failed; attraction to the opposite sex awakens the siblings' own ‘true’ natural instincts, and gender incongruities are resolved.
Clara switches from being aggressive to being acquiescent and Lucio does the reverse.
Right order prevails.
We might say that Love's Cure produces transgression precisely in order to contain it, and in the most insidiously ideological way: the deviant desire which initially appeared to contradict nature is reconstituted by nature in accord with her (?) order.
Reconstituted, not repressed: deviant desire is effortlessly and internally transformed — not  forced — from the perverse to the natural.
However, in the process the very masculine code of honour which is affronted by Lucio's perverse failure of masculinity is shown to border on a perversity even more excessive than his.
It is as if containment, in reinstating nature over culture — that most fundamental and violent of binary oppositions — says too much about both.
Thus the effect of containment resembles the unintended power of the subordinates in this play who execute the commands of the powerful and of whom the Governor complains:
How men in high place, and authority Are in their lives and estimation wrong'd By their subordinate Ministers?yet such They cannot but imploy (iv.
iii.
1 19 — 21, my emphasis)
Masculine sexuality is shown to be complex and unstably implicated within the whole social domain.
Either nature does not contain it or nature contains too much to be conceived any longer as natural.
What is especially fascinating about this text is that a rehabilitation of masculinity coexists with an ironic repudiation of it, and a critique of what might be called masculinity's cultural unconscious.
An urbane text, it nevertheless discloses a violent scenario — social, psychic, and sexual (what has sometimes been mistaken for decadence).
Most obviously and consciously there is the fact that Lucio's effeminacy, construed by Bobadillo as an affront to ‘heav'n, and nature, and thy Parents (ii.
ii.
22)— i.e. that powerful conjunction of divine, natural, and patriarchal law — actually embodies positive civilized virtues.
Lucio would, for example, willingly renounce the savage illogic whereby a bloody family feud is being perpetuated among new generations (ii.
ii.
44 ff.) and also the sword as instrument and symbol of male violence (ii.
iv.
84 ff.).
In return his father rages at him for his inability to become a ‘real’ man, and demands as the only acceptable proof that Lucio has regained his masculinity that he attack the very next man he sees and sexually assault the first woman (iv.
iii.
37 ff.).
Though conceived as an absolute, uncompromising ethical stand (‘Lite's but a word, a shadow, a melting dreame, /Compar'd to essentiall, and eternall honour’— v. iii.
124 — 5), masculine honour is also represented as straightforwardly stupid and barbaric.
Also, two of masculinity's basic characteristics, sexual prowess and violence, are shown to be inextricably related, as indicated for example by the conventional but still revealingly obsessive association of sword and phallus (e.g. at ii.
ii.
86 — 90 and v. iii.
194 — 6) and the ambiguity of ‘blood’: at once sexual desire and what honour demands, literally, of the male opponent.
The internal critique is more searching still.
From the punning just mentioned we see that masculine sexuality is confirmed not only by women, passively, but also by other men, actively.
It is not so much that the culture of masculine honour is a sublimation of homosexuality,; rather masculine honour repeatedly incites what, heterosexually, it presupposes but cannot admit.
The differential status of men and women in confirming masculine sexuality is neatly demonstrated at the climax of the play, the arranged duel between Alvarez and Vitelli (seconded, respectively, by Lucio, now masculinized by falling in love, and Lamorall).
As they square up to each other the spouses of the first three men ‘Enter above’ and implore them not to fight.
Plea after plea fails.
‘Are you men, or stone’ cries the Governor; ‘Men, and we'll prove it with our swords’replies Alvarez (v. iii.
172 — 3).
And what honour dictates must occur between men — alliance/violence — simply overrides contrary honourable vows to women (162 — 4).
In tact, the women's pleas for peace only intensify the men's desire to fight, and to a sexual degree.
Within masculine sexuality the most significant other is the male — but it is a significance which presupposes, and is rehearsed in relation to, the female.
Thus when the women stop pleading for peace and resort instead to the threat of killing themselves it the fight proceeds, it is as if the currents of sexuality and violence, circulating between the men in a way which sustains sexual difference between male and female, are suddenly switched off; the threatened self-annihilation of the women is also a breaking of the circuit.
If they die, then the most necessary spectators and objects of masculine performance disappear.
But also, in this reductio ad absurdum of masculine sexuality, men become redundant as the women threaten to perform phallic violence on themselves in the attempt to forestall male violence (Genevora to the duellists): ‘The first blow given betwixt you, sheathes these swords/In one anothers bosomes’(177 — 8).
In an extraordinary speech masculinity is further shown to be rooted in a sexual violence performed inseparably against both men and women —(Vitelli to Clara):
When on this point, I have pearch'd thy father's soule, Ile tender thee this bloody reeking hand Drawne forth the bowels of that murtherer: If thou canst love me then, I'le marry thee, And for thy father lost, get thee a Sonne; On no condition else.
(104 — 9)
Literally, Vitelli will kill her father and replace him with a son born of her.
The object of the exercise is for Vitelli doubly to substitute himself  for Clara's father: first as her husband, then as himself in, and as the father of, her son.
But we can read/see much more in this speech.
Again, sword and phallus substitute for each other, but in a uniquely revealing way: not only is Vitelli's violence against Clara's father erotically identified with the sexual act performed ‘with’ her, but the disembowelment of him is aligned with her childbirth.
The hand he offers her is also the sword/phallus drawn reeking from the father's wounds.
It is a supreme displacement of the rival male via the very woman whom each struggles to possess, the one as father, the other as ‘lover’.
Additionally, this promised disembowelment/birth will implicate Clara in Vitelli's violence without at all changing her status as its abject victim.
And of course the violence against her father is as sexual as the proposed sexual intercourse ‘with’ Clara is violent.
He fucks her and fucks him over.
This is not the first time that Vitelli has insisted to Clara that his sexual desire for her is conjoined with an equally strong desire to kill/ fuck her father (and, now, her brother):
He, whose tongue thus gratifies the daughter, And sister of his enemy, weares a Sword To rip the father and the brother up…
That my affections should promiscuously Dart love and hate at once, both worthily!(ii.ii.189 — 95)
Speaking of himself in the second person and now deploying the phallic innuendo of tongue as well as sword, Vitelli presents masculine sexuality as spectacle, again demanding and needing the confirmation of his masculinity by an audience even as he conceives his masculinity in terms of spontaneous, self-generating desire and autonomous honour.
The opposite of honourable antagonism between men is honourable alliance, typically affirmed in the image and name of the brother.
But what are in one sense dramatically opposed kinds of relationship are in another simply alternative celebrations of masculinity.
Elsewhere in Beaumont and Fletcher's work valorous males similarly oscillate between honourable antagonism and honourable alliance, in an almost erotic state of arousal.
In both kinds of relationship men recognize and reinforce each other 's sexuality in the triangle man — man — woman.
But even as men enter into relations of honourable alliance with each other, it is with an unspoken but ever-present understanding: ‘I don't desire you, I desire to be like you’.
This repeated disavowal of direct desire in favour of imitative alliance is a crucial precondition of one kind of male bonding (what someone once called penises in parallel).
Anticipated  here is that always unstable disjunction between identification and desire upon which male bonding depends.
Strong Thighed Bargemen: The Erotics of Masculine Jealousy
Frequently in this period the representation of the man — man — woman triangle suggests that the desire which bonds men over women is as erotically invested for the men in relation to each other as for each of them in relation to the women.
In Beaumont and Fletcher's The Maid's Tragedy , Melantius, approving his sister's marriage to his best friend, tells her: ‘Sister, I joy to see you, and your choice/You look'd with my eyes when you took that man’(i. ii.
107 — 8).
Another revealing recurrence in these plays is the way that male sexual jealousy, even as it is represented as obsessively heterosexual in its demands, produces eroticized images of the rival male which are inseparable from the denigration of the woman:
FERDINAND…. my imagination will carry me To see her in the shameful act of sin….
Happily, with some strong thigh'd bargemen; Or one o'th' wood-yard, that can quoit the sledge Or toss the bar, or else some lovely squire That carries coals up to her privy lodgings….
Go to, mistress!
‘Tis not your whore's milk that shall quench my wildfire, But your whore's blood.
(John Webster,The Duchess of Malfi , ii.
v. 40 — 9)
In The Maid's Tragedy , when the King becomes sexually jealous of Amintor he too evokes his rival in a way which shows that the cult of masculine honour circulating in this court is ineradicably erotic (III.
i).
But should we describe this dynamic as homoerotic?
It certainly is erotic, but is perhaps better described, following Eve Sedgwick, as homosocial desire, if only, in the first instance, to avoid the easy but questionable assumption that what we witness here is the irruption of repressed homosexual desire as conceived by Freud.
This seems more like an eroticism created by rather than repressed by the social bond.
Even so, the question remains: why does the sexually jeaLous male envisage his rival so erotically?
Freud argues that the man who is sexually jealous of a woman would ‘not only feel pain about the woman  he loves and hatred of the man who is his rival, but also grief about the man, whom he loves unconsciously, and hatred of the woman as his rival’(‘Some Neurotic Mechanisms’, x. 197 — 8).
This may indeed sometimes be so, but, as before, the early modern period may provide grounds for some cultural distinctions within and against the psychoanalytic project.
In Jacobean drama masculine identity requires masculine ratification.
At the same time, and within a heterosexual economy generally, there tends to be a profound separation between identification and desire, especially for males.
Thus the male is required to identify with other males but he is not allowed to desire them; indeed,identification with should actually preclude desire for .
Conversely, those whom he is supposed to desire, and always in specified ways, namely women, he is discouraged from identifying with: that would equal effeminacy; so in relation to them desire for precludes identification with.
For the sexually jealous male, the separate/d objects of identification and desire — the rival man and the faithless woman — have united actually as a distorted counterpart of the forbidden conjunction in the jealous subject between identification and desire.
Thus his erotic imagining of the usurping male is not the eruption of repressed homosexual desire so much as the fantasized, fearful convergence of identification and desire, precipitated by an actual convergence of their respective objects.
That scenario can be distinguished from another which may nevertheless overlap and converge with it: the necessary identifications of male bonding —‘I desire to be like you’— produce an intensity of admiration some of which just cannot help but transform into deviant desire for, rather than just honourable imitation of, ‘man's’ most significant other (i.e. man).
And it occurs so easily — almost passively — requiring little more than a relinquishing of the effort of emulation, the erasure of ‘to be like ’ and the surrender to what remains: ‘I desire…you ’; thus: ‘I desire (to be like) you ’.
Again, we can it we like describe this second scenario as homoerotic.
But it is like the first scenario in this: both kinds of eroticism are specific to male bonding, both occur within and against the very situations in which heterosexuality is most ardently pursued, and both are in part the consequence of heterosexual ardour.
To shift, as I have done in this consideration of Love's Cure , trom the transvestite to certain wider issues of desire, the ‘nature’ of masculinity, sexual jealousy, and the homoerotic, is only to follow one trajectory of transvestism itself in this period: in appropriating, inverting, and  substituting for masculinity, the female transvestite inevitably put masculinity itself — and sexual difference more generally — under scrutiny.
Further, in the attempted containment of transvestism (Love's Cure ) masculinity and sexual difference are put in question in a very specific way: in the containment of one hostile knowledge another is inadvertently produced; suppression of an (in) subordinate deviance discloses other, equally disturbing deviations at the heart of the dominant; erotic deviations whose repression is a condition of domination in one of its most important forms: homosocial male bonding.
Finally, the transvestite challenge to masculinity and sexual difference works in terms of transgressive inversion and reinscription, not of transcendence, or the recovery of authentic selfhood.
‘We [i.e. women]are as freeborn as men, have as tree election, and as free spirits’, says the Hic Mulier figure,and she says it in drag .
Not then — to recall my point of departure in the previous chapter — knowing thyself, so much as knowing thy discursive formations — knowing them in the process of living but also inverting them; reinscribing oneself within, succumbing to, and demystifying them.
Post/Modern: On the Gay Sensibility, or the pervert's Revenge on Authenticity-Wilde, Genet, Orton, and Others
To be really modern one should have no soul.
(Wilde, ‘Maxims’)
Will he force me to think that homosexuals have more imagination than the…others?
No, but they are more frequently called upon to exercise it.
(André Gide,Journals , 1931)
The Elusive Homosexual Sensibility
Separately and in different ways, Susan Sontag and George Steiner have suggested that a (or ‘the’) homosexual sensibility is a major influence in the formation of modern culture.
In 1964 Sontag wrote that ‘Jews and homosexuals are the outstanding creative minorities in contemporary urban culture.
Creative, that is, in the truest sense: they are creators of sensibilities.
The two pioneering forces of modern sensibility are Jewish moral seriousness and homosexual aestheticism and irony.’
She seeks to substantiate this claim in the famous essay from which it is taken (‘Notes on Camp’, 290).
For Steiner homosexuality is it anything even more central to, and definitive of, the modern.
‘Since about 1890’, he believes, ‘homosexuality has played a vital part in Western culture.’
Whereas ‘heterosexuality is the very essence of…classic realism’, a ‘radical homosexuality’ figures in modernity, particularly in its self-referentiality and narcissism; indeed ‘homosexuality could be construed as a creative rejection of the philosophic and conventional realism, of the mundanity and extroversion of classic and nineteenth century feeling’.
Further, homosexuality in part made possible ‘that exercise in solipsism, that remorseless mockery of philistine common sense and bourgeois realism which is modern art’(‘Eros and Idiom’, 115, 117, 118).
Steiner's association of homosexuality with narcissism, solipsism, and the refusal of referentiality obviously suggests reservations about both  modernism (as he conceives it) and the efficacy of the homosexual influence upon it, and it comes as no surprise that in his most recent book he launches a strong attack on the former.
Steiner now contends that two historical moments, the one epitomized in Mallarmé's ‘disjunction of language from external reference’, and the other in Rimbaud's ‘deconstruction of the self’—je est un autre (I is (an) other)— splinter the foundations of the Western tradition and precipitate it into the crisis of modernity.
Rimbaud would seem to be especially culpable since ‘the deconstructions of semantic forms, the destabilizations of meaning, as we have known them during the past decades, derive from Rimbaud's dissolution of the self’.
Compared to these two cultural moments, ‘even the political revolutions and great wars in modern European history are, I would venture, of the surface’(Real Presences , 101, 94 — 6).
Steiner and Sontag are in a sense correct about the centrality of homosexuality to modern culture.
But the argument of this book is that its centrality is quite otherwise than they suggest.
Steiner's ludicrous generalizations stem in part from the very notion of defining cultures and history in terms of a sensibility.
Even a cursory look at gay history and culture suggests that the sweep and conclusions of his argument are questionable at virtually every turn, as indeed is the very notion of a homosexual sensibility.
Sontag's article at least has the virtue of tentativeness; it is in the form of notes (dedicated to Oscar Wilde), and acknowledges the difficulty of defining a sensibility, especially one as ‘fugitive’ as this (‘Notes on Camp’, 277).
But still questions abound: is this sensibility transcultural, or historically rooted in the (varying) histories of the representation of homosexuality?
Is it a direct expression of homosexuality, or an indirect expression of its repression and/or sublimation?
Is it defined in terms of the sexuality of (say) the individual or artist who expresses or possesses it — and does that mean that no nonhomosexual can possess/express it?
I shall suggest that there is a sense in which the very notion of a homosexual sensibility is a contradiction in terms.
I am interested in an aspect of it which exists, it at all, in terms of that contradiction — of a parodic critique of the essence of sensibility as conventionally understood.
Michel Foucault argues that in the modern period sex has become  definitive of the truth of our being (above, Chapter 14).
As such, sexuality in its normative forms constitutes a ‘truth’ connecting inextricably with other truths and norms not explicitly sexual.
This is a major reason why sexual deviance is found threatening: in deviating from normative truth and the ‘nature’ which underpins it, such deviance shifts and confuses the norms of truth and being throughout culture.
Wilde's transgressive aesthetic simultaneously confirmed and exploited this inextricable connection between the sexual and the (apparently) non-sexual, between sexual perversion and social subversion, and does so through Wilde's own version of that connection: ‘what paradox was to me in the sphere of thought, perversity became to me in the sphere of passion’(Wilde,De Profundis , 466).
If I had to give a single criterion of that dubious category, the homosexual sensibility, it would be this connection between perversity and paradox — if only because it suggests why that sensibility does not exist as such.
As we have seen (Chapters 1 and 3), Wilde's transgressive aesthetic writes desire into a discourse of liberation inseparable from an inversion and displacement of dominant categories of subjective depth (the depth model).
It is from just these categories that notions of sensibility traditionally take their meaning.
Additionally for Wilde, perverse desire is not only an agency of displacement, it is partly constituted by that displacement and the transgressive aesthetic which informs it.
Just as in reverse discourse the categories of subordination are turned back upon the regimes of truth which disqualify, so this ‘other’ sensibility is in part affirmed as an inversion and absence of sensibility's traditional criteria.
Perverse desire is transvalued, socially, sexually, and aesthetically.
Dorian Gray describes moments when ‘the passion for sin, or for what the world calls sin’ is utterly overwhelming
and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination, and disobedience its charm.
For all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are sins of disobedience.
When that high spirit, that morningstar of evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.
(p. 210)
Law and conscience are subjected to the perverse dynamic, being made to enable and intensify the rebellion they were supposed to prevent; likewise with Wilde's transgressive aesthetic in the realm of desire and culture.
Wilde lived an anarchic and a political homosexuality simultaneously.
Richard Ellmann describes him as ‘conducting, in the most civilized way, an anatomy of his society, and a radical reconsideration of its ethics….
His greatness as a writer is partly the result of the enlargement of sympathy which he demanded for society's victims’(Oscar Wilde , p. xiv).
I agree, and this can stand as a cogent it incomplete description of what is meant by a political homosexuality.
But Wilde also fashioned his transgressive aesthetic into a celebration of anarchic deviance, and this is yet another factor which makes it difficult to identify the sensibility involved.
There is a positive desire to transgress and disrupt, and a destructiveness, even a running to one's own destruction, paradoxically creative.
Though in a different way, what we have seen to be true of Gide was also true of Wilde: ‘running foul of the law in his sexual life was a stimulus to thought on every subject….
His new sexual direction liberated his art.
It also liberated his critical faculty’(Ellmann,Oscar Wilde , 270).
Conformity angered and bored Wilde.
It is not clear which, the anger or the boredom, was thought to be the more insulting, but both were expressed as that arrogance for which he was often hated.
Yeats recalls receiving a letter from Lionel Johnson ‘denouncing Wilde with great bitterness’; Johnson believed that Wilde got a ‘‘sense of triumph and power, at every dinner-table he dominated, from the knowledge that he was guilty of that sin which, more than any other possible to man, would turn all those people against him if they but knew''’(Yeats,Autobiographies , 285).
Maybe Johnson was paranoid; that does not stop him being correct.
Gide at the end of his life remarked that Wilde only began to live after dark as it were, away from most of those who knew him (So Be It , 27).
But the point here is that Wilde also lived in terms of the discrepancy between his ‘public’ and ‘private’selves, and took pleasure from it — from having a sexual identity elsewhere at the same time as being socially ‘here’.
The anarchic and the political, the anger and the boredom, are all active in Wilde's transgressive aesthetic, and most especially when the survival strategies of subordination — subterfuge, lying, evasion — are aesthetically transvalued into weapons of attack, but ever working obliquely through irony, ambiguity, mimicry, and impersonation.
Which brings us to camp, considered by some to be the essence of the homosexual sensibility, by others, both within and without gay culture, as virtually the opposite: the quintessence of an alienated, inadequate sensibility (above, Chapter 3).
The definition of camp is as elusive as the sensibility itself, one reason being simply that there are different kinds of camp.
I am concerned here with that mode of camp which undermines the categories which exclude it, and does so through parody and mimicry.
But not from the outside: this kind of camp undermines the depth model of identity from inside, being a kind of parody and mimicry which hollows out from within, making depth recede into its surfaces.
Rather than a direct repudiation of depth, there is a performance of it  to excess: depth is undermined by being taken to and beyond its own limits.
The masquerade of camp becomes less a self-concealment than a kind of attack, and untruth a virtue: many a young man, says Wilde, ‘starts with the natural gift of exaggeration which, if encouraged could flourish.
Unfortunately he usually comes to nothing, either falling into the bad habit of accuracy, or frequents the society of the aged and well informed’(‘Decay of Lying’, 294).
Compare John Mitzel: ‘gay people are, I have learned, in the truest sense of the word,fabulous ….
The controlling agents of the status quo may know the power of lies; dissident sub-cultures, however, are closer to knowing their value’(cited in Bronski,Culture-Clash , 41).
The hollowing-out of the deep self is pure pleasure, a release from the subjective correlatives of dominant morality (normality, authenticity, etc.)— one reason why camp also mocks the Angst -ridden spiritual emptiness which characterizes the existential lament.
Camp thereby negotiates some of the lived contradictions of subordination, simultaneously refashioning as a weapon of attack an oppressive identity inherited as subordination, and hollowing out dominant formations responsible for that identity in the first instance.
So it is misleading to say that camp is the gay sensibility; camp is an invasion and subversion of other sensibilities, and works via parody, pastiche, and exaggeration.
Jack Babuscio has suggested that the homosexual experience of passing for straight leads to a ‘heightened awareness and appreciation tor disguise, impersonation, the projection of personality, and the distinctions to be made between instinctive and theatrical behaviour’(‘Camp and the Gay Sensibility’, 45).
Richard Dyer remarks, in relation to Babuscio, that the gay sensibility ‘holds together qualities that are elsewhere felt as antithetical: theatricality and authenticity…intensity and irony, a fierce assertion of extreme feeling with a deprecating sense of its absurdity’(Heavenly Bodies , 154).
I would add that camp is oft en also a turning of the second set of categories — theatricality, irony, and a sense of the absurdity of extreme feeling — onto the first, such that the latter — authenticity, intensity, the fierce assertion of extreme feeling — if they remain at all, do so in a transformed state.
In this respect camp, as Andrew Ross observes, anticipated many of the recent debates of sexual politics: ‘in fact, camp could be seen as a much earlier, highly coded way of addressing those questions about sexual difference which have engaged non-essentialist feminists in recent years’(No Respect , 161).
Camp integrates this aspect of gender with aesthetics; in a sense it renders gender a question of aesthetics.
Common in aesthetic involvement is the recognition that what seemed like mimetic realism is actually  an effect of convention, genre, form, or some other kind of artifice.
For some this is a moment of disappointment in which the real, the true, and the authentic are surrendered to, or contaminated by, the factitious and the contrived.
But camp comes to life around that recognition; it is situated at the point of emergence of the artificial from the real, culture from nature — or rather when and where the real collapses into artifice, nature into culture; camp restores vitality to artifice, and vice versa, deriving the artificial from, and feeding it back into or as, the real.
The reality is the pleasure of unreality.
And the primacy of fantasy: as the inheritor of a religious impulse, ‘modern’ sexual desire seeks to universalize and naturalize itself.
Camp knows and takes pleasure in the tact that desire is culturally relative, and never more so than when, in cathecting contemporary style, it mistakes itself, and the style, for the natural.
Camp is not the same as gender inversion, but it often connects with it, and with good reason.
Like the cross-dressing explored in the last chapter, gender inversion remains controversial because it allegedly only inverts, rather than displaces, the gender binary.
But again, in (historical) practice to invert may also be to displace.
Mario Mieli quotes an unnamed gay writer: ‘we [gay men]demand our ‘femininity'’, the same thing that women reject, and at the same time we declare that these roles are devoid of sense' (Homosexuality and Liberation , 46).
An appropriate inversion becomes a deconstructive displacement.
So it is futile to try to define the homosexual sensibility according to the standards of conventional sensibility: first because the latter has sought to exclude the former; second because, in retaliation, the former has often worked to undermine the latter and, in the process, challenged the very nature of the aesthetic, fashioning in the process new and sometimes oppositional mutations of it.
The search for the nature of the distinctively gay sensibility can be productively redirected as an exploration of the limitations of the aesthetic as conventionally understood, especially the way it is said to transcend the socio-political, and used in support of the proposition that discrimination is the essence of culture.
Further, rather than seeking such a sensibility in an ‘inner condition’, we might more usefully identify it outwardly and in relation to other strategies of survival and subversion, especially the masquerade of femininity, and the mimicry of the colonial subject.
What it might be found to share with the first is a simultaneous avoidance and acting out of the ambivalence which constitutes subordination, and a pushing of  that ambivalence to the point of transgressive insight and possibly reinscribed escape.
As for the colonial context, Homi Bhabha argues that here mimicry is both a strategy of colonial subjection — an appropriation, regulation, and reform of the other — and, potentially, a way of menacing colonial discourse in and through an inappropriate imitation by the native, one which reveals the normative structure of colonial control.
As such, mimicry becomes, in Bhabha's memorable phrase, ‘at once resemblance and menace’.
Knowledge and Pleasure in Jean Genet
In so many respects utterly ditferent from Wilde, Genet nevertheless also subverts the depth model of identity via the perverse dynamic, and perhaps more so than any other writer since Wilde.
Like the latter, Genet inverts and subverts the surface/depth binary, confirming and exploiting the connections between the paradoxical and the perverse, and turning them against the regimes, heterosexual and otherwise, which outlaw the deviant.
Genet, also like Wilde, produces both anarchic pleasure and subversive knowledge inseparably.
Charles Marowitz once identified a crucial characteristic of Genet's work:
In perhaps one of the most shocking hypotheses ever put forward in the drama, Genet suggests that the only thing that distinguishes the sexual pervert who masquerades as priest, king, or hero from his legitimate social counterpart, is a certain timidity.
The sexual pervert lives his fantasies in private and is therefore harmless; whereas the social personages play out their roles in public.
(‘The Revenge of Jean Genet’, 173)
This facilitates and in part constitutes the challenge of the perverse:
the highest ideal in The Balcony is for characters to attain that point of social definition at which others desire to impersonate them.
Reality corresponds to the density of one's artifice.
When a man achieves his highest reality he can serve as a fantasy for another man; and in a frightening Genetic turnabout, both then become equal.
(p. 173)
They become equal because fictions of selfhood are transvalued.
Genet said of himself: ‘Dehumanizing myself is my own most fundamental  tendency’(Our Lady , 82).
The transgressive drive in his work is not a quest for the authentic self, but almost the reverse:
The mechanism was somewhat as follows (I have used it since): to every charge brought against me, unjust though it be, from the bottom of my heart I shall answer yes.
Hardly had I uttered the word — or the phrase signifying it — than I felt within me the need to become what I had been accused of being….
I owned to being the coward, traitor, thief and fairy they saw in me.
(The Thief's Journal , 145)
To be sure, the characteristics of the transcendent self remain in play: to become what others saw him as being required great self-discipline ‘similar to spiritual exercises’; eventually he aspires to a classical stoic independence of spirit, a kind of sainthood (p. 146).
But then in Our Lady of the Flowers ‘the gesture of solitude that makes you sufficient unto yourself’ is not abstinence or retreat, but masturbation (p. 124).
Inversion and substitution are intensely narcissistic; despite that — or rather because of it, since Genet also transvalues narcissism — they extend tar beyond the self.
of Divine, the anti-hero/ine drag queen of Our Lady , it is said:
her carnal pleasures never made her fear the wrath of God, the scorn of Jesus, or the candied disgust of the Holy Virgin…for as soon as she recognized the presence within her of seeds of these fears (divine wrath, scorn, disgust), Divine made of her loves a god above God, Jesus, and the Holy Virgin, to whom they were submissive like everyone else.
(p. 138)
Here, the figures who act as transcendent foils to a mundane inauthenticity, abjection, and subjection are themselves brought low, made to submit to what they once subjected.
Notions of the freedom and autonomy of the self are at one and the same time inverted and used to pervert the ethical and metaphysical values which such a self is or was supposed to instantiate.
Authentic selfhood is denied and then reconstituted in a perverse, parodic form — and then perhaps denied again, transformed from other to same and then back to a (ditferent) other.
Genet reinscribes himself within the violent hierarchies of his oppression, installing himself there relentlessly to invert and pervert them.
He writes in Our Lady : ‘We are, after all, familiar enough with the tragedy of a certain feeling which is obliged to borrow its expression from the opposite feeling so as to escape from the myrmidons of the law.
It disguises itself in the trappings of its rival’(p. 1 13).
Such incorporation facilitates a specific kind of transgressive reinscription.
As in this passage, Genet not only disguises himself in terms of the law, but internalizes the disguise.
What transpires is not the sacrilege which pays  testimony to the sacred (i.e. containment), but a sacrilege inscribed within the sacred.
Inside the church
the [priest's]sprinkler is always moist with a tiny droplet, like Alberto's prick which is stiff in the morning and which has just pissed.
The vaults and walls of the chapel of the Virgin are white-washed, and the Virgin has an apron as blue as a sailor's collar.
Facing the faithful, the altar is neatly arranged; facing God, it is a jumble of wood in the dust and spider webs. (p. 161)
In the description of the sprinkler and the apron, and especially the altar, the internalization of law (as disguise) results in this sacrilege within reverence, an intimacy with law which can blow apart its ideological effect (revealing the hidden side of the altar)— and with a strange knowing innocence strangely inseparable from that intimacy.
Orton's Black Camp
Joe Orton, so different again from Wilde or Genet, nevertheless shares their transgressive commitment to inversion and the critique of authenticity.
His What the Butler Saw (1969) becomes a kind of orgy of cross-dressing, gender confusion, and hierarchical inversion.
It is also an angry repudiation of sexual repressiveness as enforced by the ideology of authentic, normal sexuality, now ratified by state law and the medical professions.
But once again anger works through irony, parody, and pastiche, and is held together not by a unified dramatic voice but by a stylistic blankness a kind of black camp.
Here, as in his and Halliwell's notorious defacement of library books (for which they were imprisoned), and in Orton's theory of montage, there is an anticipation of that effect of pastiche which Fredric Jameson identifies as a defining criterion of the post-modern:
Pastiche is, like parody, the imitation of a peculiar or unique style, the wearing of a stylistic mask, speech in a dead language: but it is a neutral practice of mimicry, without parody's ulterior motive, without the satirical impulse, without laughter, without that still latent feeling that there exists something normal compared to which what is being imitated is rather comic.
pastiche is black parody, parody that has lost its humor.
(‘Postmodernism and Consumer Society’, 114)
The difference is that Orton's pastiche is comic but in a way which interrogates rather than presupposes the norm.
As Jane Feuer points out, camp involves a kind of sensibility in which ‘blank mimicry and a critical edge may coexist’, and thereby resembles that form of postmodern parody which Linda Hutcheon defines as a ‘repetition with critical distance that allows ironic signalling of difference at the very heart of similarity’.
Thereby camp may also, either implicitly or directly, interrogate the norm which, according to Jameson, traditional parody assumes.
This is only one respect in which camp delights in the selfsame artifice which others distrust.
Orton's intention was to outrage.
Had he been alive he would doubtless have been delighted at the response of the leading conservative theatre critic to What the Butler Saw (1969): ‘Orton's terrible obsession with perversion, which is regarded as having brought his life to an end and choked his very high talent, poisons the atmosphere of the play.
And what should have been a piece of gaily irresponsible nonsense becomes impregnated with evil.’
Perhaps Hobson spoke truer than he knew, for the play is a kind of gay non-sense:
[DR]RANCE.
When Dr Prentice asked you to pose as a woman did he give a reason?
NICK.
No.
RANCE.
Didn't you consider his request strange?
NICK.
No.
RANCE.
Have you aided other men in their perverted follies?
NICK.
During my last term at school I was the slave of a corporal in the Welsh Fusiliers.
RANCE.
Were you never warned of the dangers inherent in such relationships?
NICK.
When he was posted abroad he gave me a copy of ‘The Way to Healthy Manhood’.
By insisting on the arbitrariness and narrowness of gender roles, and that they are socially ascribed rather than naturally given, Orton expresses a central motif in the sexual politics of that time.
What the Butler Saw becomes an orgy of confused and refused gender identities:
GERALDINE [dressed as a boy].
I must be a boy.
I like girls.
RANCE.
I can't quite follow the reasoning there.
PRENTICE.
Many men imagine their preference for women is,ipso facto , a proof of virility.
Cross-dressing leads to wholesale gender confusion, while Dr Rance's precisely inappropriate assumptions about madness, the natural, and ‘the order of things’ discredit the claims of psychiatry:
RANCE.
Were you present when Dr Prentice used this youth unnaturally?
NICK.
What is unnatural?
RANCE.
How disturbing the questions of the mad can be.
(To Nick [disguised as a girl]) Suppose I made an indecent suggestion to you?
If you agreed something might occur which, by and large, would be regarded as natural.
If, on the other hand, I approached this child —(he smiles at Geraldine [disguised as a boy])— my action could result only in a gross violation of the order of things.
In the 1960s psychiatry was attacked for being a form of social policing which, with the aid of pseudo-scientific categories, mystified socially desirable behaviour as natural, and undesirable behaviour as the result of abnormal psychosexual development (a deviation from ‘The Way to Healthy Manhood’).
R. D. Laing wrote in The Divided Self :
Psychiatry can so easily be a technique of brainwashing, of inducing behaviour that is adjusted, by (preferably) non-injurious torture….
I would wish to emphasize that our ‘normal’‘adjusted’ state is too often the abdication of ecstasy, the betrayal of our true potentialities , that many of us are only too successful in acquiring a false self to adapt the false realities.
(p. 12, my emphasis)
Orton goes further than Laing, for his plays transgress accepted norms at every point yet refuse to replace them with ‘our true potentialities’; Laing is still preoccupied with the authentic self, the repressed human essence.
Orton refuses that long-established kind of transgression which, in the very sincerity of its non-conformity, revalidates society's lapsed moral integrity.
As John Milton put it centuries before: ‘Men of most renowned vertu have sometimes by transgressing, most truly kept the law’(Tetrachordon, Prose Works , iv.
75).
A significant contemporary manifestation of that belief, and a vivid instance of how ‘modern’ sexuality became a surrogate religion, somewhere for an essentially religious notion of integrity to survive in a mutated and displaced form, was at the prosecution for obscenity of D. H. Lawrence's Lady Chatterley's Lover (1960).
In that trial the author was defended on the grounds that he had to transgress moral respectability in order to be moral at a deeper, more authentic level dictated by personal conscience.
Even the indignation of satire might  assume the same moral perspective as that of the order being challenged, or at least an alternative to it.
But, as his diaries indicate, Orton's indignation was too anarchic to be recuperated in such terms.
In What the Butler Saw , sexuality, like language, becomes decentred and therefore radically contingent: it not only escapes from, but disorientates the medical and legal attempts to define and regulate it.
Not surprisingly, Orton's anarchic irresponsibility was thought by some to go too far, not just in what he actually did , but in the refusal in his work to confront established morality with an earnest moral alternative.
What we find instead is a kind of delinquent black camp.
In the article referred to at the outset, Susan Sontag remarks that camp ‘is a solvent of morality.
It neutralizes moral indignation, sponsors playfulness’(‘Notes on Camp’, 275, 280, 290).
Orton's camp is indeed constituted by playfulness and it acts as a solvent of morality — but it does this to provoke rather than disarm moral indignation.
‘No first night of the sixties was more volcanic than that of What the Butler Saw ’, says Orton's biographer, John Lahr; while Stanley Baxter, who played Dr Prentice, has recalled the ‘militant hate’ of the audience, some of whom ‘wanted to jump on the stage and kill us’(Lahr,Prick Up Your Ears , 333 — 4).
Hostile Eroticism
As a style, and even more as a politics, the transgressive reinscriptions practised by such writers have proved controversial, especially when grounded in the celebration of a perverse inauthenticity disturbingly implicated in authenticity itself, as in Genet.
On the positive side there are those like Kate Millett who find in Genet's deviants a subversive inversion of dominant heterosexuality, especially its masculine component.
Thus inverted, these structures are shorn of their ideological legitimation; in effect the world of normality, beyond which Genet lives in exile, is ridiculed and contradicted in the very process of being imitated.
Genet's femininity for instance‘is, as Sartre phrases it, a ‘hostile eroticism'’, delighted to ridicule and betray the very myth of virility it pretends to serve' (Sexual Politics , 18, 349).
All this means that, for Millett, Genet is ‘the only living male writer of first class literary gifts to have transcended the sexual myths of our era’(p. 22).
Conversely, for Hans Mayer, Genet's commitment to inversion makes him deeply conservative: ‘Genet's books are the exact opposite of a  literature of indignation and rebellion.
The author has no intention of making accusations or unmasking society.
He is a true believer in the bourgeois order, not a critic.’
More critical still are those like Walter Heist who conclude that Genet is pervaded with fascism (cited by Mayer,Outsiders , 225, who dissents from the view).
Certainly there is a crucial sense in which Genet presupposes what he would challenge: ‘I am steeped in an idea of property while I loot property.
I recreate the absent proprietor’, he says in The Thief's Journal (p. 129); and in a 1975 interview: ‘I would like the world, and pay attention to the way I'm saying it, I would like the world not to change so that I can be against the world’(Gay Sunshine Interviews , 79).
There is an ambivalence in Genet which his critic always misread and his defenders often overlook.
Such ambivalence often figures within transgressive reinscription, and is one reason why it rarely approximates to a straightforwardly ‘correct’ political attitude.
Consider two kinds of ambivalent transgressive reinscription within gay culture, camp and machismo.
As styles they are very different, virtual alternatives in tact.
But both have been regarded as politically reprehensible, camp because allegedly insulting to women, machismo because allegedly aping the masculinity oppressive of women (lesbian and straight) and gays.
Defenders of camp and machismo point out that they are parodic critiques — in the first case of what is allegedly insulted (femininity), in the second of what is allegedly aped (masculinity).
Certainly both gay camp and gay machismo can and do problematize femininity and masculinity as traditionally understood.
Thus Richard Dyer has argued of gay machismo that, by taking the traditional signs of masculinity and ‘eroticising them in a blatantly homosexual context, much mischief is done to the security with which ‘men'’ are defined in society, and by which their power is secured' (‘Getting Over the Rainbow’, 61).
Throughout Gender Trouble Judith Butler offers — and tor, rather than against, feminism — a similar defence of practices like drag, cross-dressing, and, in lesbian culture, butch/femme sexual stylization.
She contests the view that these practices are ‘either degrading to women, in the case of drag and cross-dressing, or an uncritical appropriation of sex-role stereotyping from within the practice of heterosexuality, especially in the case of butch/femme lesbian identities’(p. 137).
Thus she reads drag as playing with a threefold distinction: anatomical sex, gender identity, and gender performance:
If the anatomy of the performer is already distinct from the gender of the performer, and both of those are distinct from the gender of the performance, then the performance suggests a dissonance not only between sex and performance, but sex and gender, and gender and performance…
In imitating gender drag implicitly reveals the imitative structure of gender itself — as well as its contingency .
(p. 137)
Butler sees deviant sexualities more generally as involving this same process of denaturalizing, as parodic subversive repetitions which displace rather than consolidate heterosexual norms.
The parody of deviant sex, far from presupposing and ratifying an original natural sexuality, exposes it as a fiction.
Thus ‘gay is to straight not as copy is to original, but, rather, as copy is to copy’(p. 31).
Additionally, the parody encourages a ‘proliferation and subversive play of gendered meaning’(p. 33).
Most controversially of all, this argument has been extended to sado-masochistic sexuality which, far from ratifying the ‘real’ violence of society, theatricalizes and demystifies it.
In certain respects this argument replays for a post/modern politics Wilde's transgressive aesthetic and the gay (anti) sensibility which it helped inaugurate.
It also resembles the strategy of the early modern female cross-dresser for whom sexual difference was not derived from natural and divine law, but produced by ‘custom’, that is, culture.
Here then is a continuity between the early modern and the post/modern, one oft en overlooked when we concentrate on the differences in the way sexuality is conceptualized in the two periods.
But crucial differences remain, and it was because the early modern transvestite was not conceptualized in terms of a pathological sexual subjectivity — the modern ‘homosexual’— that her transgression was regarded, albeit with paranoia, as more social than sexual.
The connections between gender and class were apparent enough in the early modern period, and if the transvestite was a pervert or invert it was precisely in the pre-sexological senses of these ideas; whether actually or only in the paranoid imagination of the dominant, she was regarded as upsetting the entire social domain, even when her sexual ‘orientation’ was not the issue.
So when it is argued today that the sexual deviant challenges sexual difference by denaturalizing it through parody, the realization of the early modern transvestite that both the deviant and the difference are effects of culture rather than nature is being revived and sophisticated.
But a residual effect of the ‘privatizing’ of sexuality, and in particular of the construction of sexual deviance as an identity, a pathology of being, rather than a kind of behaviour in principle open to all, is that the challenge to this construction often itself remains imprisoned by the public/private dichotomy.
So while the whole point of the argument, and rightly, is that when gender is understood as culture rather than nature we see that gender is implicated in all aspects of culture, in practice the argument rarely gets oft the bed.
As we shall see shortly, the way out of the bedroom is via the wider cultures, rather than the specific sexual acts, of transgressive reinscription — for example, the writings of Wilde, Genet, and others, the subculture from which they emerge and help to form and transform.
First there is another objection to be considered: do deviant identities and sexualities really denaturalize through theatrical parody as straightforwardly as is sometimes suggested?
Leo Bersani thinks not, at least where camp and gay machismo are concerned.
He concedes a potentially subversive dimension to camp, but one inseparable from a more problematic and ambivalent relation to both femininity and women:
the gay male parody of a certain femininity, which, as others have argued, may itself be an elaborate social construct, is both a way of giving vent to the hostility toward women that probably afflicts every male (and which male heterosexuals have of course expressed in infinitely nastier and more effective ways)and could paradoxically be thought of as helping to deconstruct that image for women themselves…
The gay male bitch desublimates and desexualizes a type of femininity glamorized by movie stars, whom he thus lovingly assassinates with his style.
Of the subversive claims for gay machismo, Bersani is even more sceptical, since he regards it as involving not a parodic repudiation of straight machismo, but a profound respect for it.
But, crucially, and this reminds us of Genet, Bersani locates a challenge inseparable from a certain ambivalence: if gay males threaten male heterosexual identity, it is not because they offer a detached parody of that identity, but rather because ‘from within their nearly mad identification with it,they never cease to feel the appeal of its being violated ’(‘Is the Rectum a Grave?’, 208 — 9, his emphasis).
Bersani arrives at this position because he sees gay male sexuality as enacting insights into sexuality per se which heterosexual culture has to repress ruthlessly (above, Chapter 17).
The cultural dynamics of transgressive reinscription suggest how both positions are correct: identification with, and desire for, may coexist with parodic subversion of, since a culture is not reducible to the specific desires of the individuals comprising it — desires which anyway differ considerably — and even less to the ‘truth’ of desire itself.
Gay culture is in part constituted by a self-reflexive, ironic representation of desire itself, gay and straight, and of the objects of desire, again both gay and straight.
This is especially so of its involvement with masculinity.
In one and the same gay milieu one is likely to encounter identification with, desire tor, and parodies of masculinity.
Among numerous other things, gay subcultures (as opposed to the illusory ‘truth’ of a unitary homosexual desire ) include all three, and sometimes indistinguishably.
And it those subcultures discredit any notion of an essential or unitary gay desire, they also constitute a crucial enabling condition of transgressive reinscription.
More than that, they help constitute it.
This is why transgressive reinscription should not be understood in terms of discrete transgressive acts which ‘succeed’ or ‘fail’in some immediate sense.
Reinscription is an oppositional practice which is also a perspective and language (sensibility?) constantly interpreting and re-presenting all sections of a culture including its dominant and subordinate fractions, its conventional (e.g. heterosexual) as well as deviant (e.g. homosexual) identities.
Butler remarks the importance of repetition in the process of resistance and transformation: ‘The task is…to repeat and, through a radical proliferation of gender, to displace the very gender norms that enable the repetition itself’(Gender Trouble , 148).
Certainly, but that displacement can only occur it if is also a struggle in and for representation — specifically, the representation of the repetition as re-presentation/inversion/displacement of the norm.
In short, the displacing repetition still has to be culturally construed as such.
In the process the transgression and the norm are both re-presented.
And this, far from being a containment (transgression presupposing and thereby ratifying the norm it contravenes), is one condition of the norm's undoing.
Transgressive reinscription will always remain controversial, if only because it raises such disturbing questions about desire itself, making it profoundly social and thereby asking equally disturbing questions about culture, representation, and social process.
This is even more so when, as I have argued with homosexuality, so many dimensions of a culture have been displaced and/or condensed into the identity of the transgressor.
But then there is no transgression from the position of the subordinate that is not controversial; it is a virtually inevitable consequence of the disempowered mounting a challenge at all.
Thinking Transgressive Reinscription
Consider two similarities, the first between two post-structuralists whose work is in most other respects incompatible, the second between post-structuralism and the post/modern.
This is Foucault:
Rules are empty in themselves, violent and unfinalized; they are impersonal and can be bent to any purpose.
The successes of history belong to those who are capable of seizing these rules, to replace those who had used them, to disguise themselves so as to pervert them, invert their meaning, and redirect them against those who had initially imposed them…so as to overcome the rulers through their own rules.
(Language, Counter-Memory, Practice , 151, my emphasis)
Elsewhere he writes:
There are no relations of power without resistances; the latter are all the more real and effective because they are formed right at the point where relations of power are exercised; resistance to power does not have to come from elsewhere to be real, nor is it inexorably frustrated through being the compatriot of power.
It exists all the more by being in the same place as power.
(Power/ Knowledge , 142)
Now compare Foucault with Derrida:
Our discourse irreducibly belongs to the system of metaphysical oppositions.
The break with this structure of belonging can be announced only through a certain organisation, a certain strategic arrangement which, within the field of metaphysical opposition, uses the strengths of the field to turn its own stratagems against it, producing a force of dislocation that spreads itself throughout the entire system, fissuring it in every direction and thoroughly delimiting it.
(Writing and Difference , 20)
And then both Foucault and Derrida with Baudrillard:
a system is abolished only by pushing it into hyperlogic, by forcing it into an excessive practice which is equivalent to a brutal amortization…
A parody and a paradox: it is by their very inertia in the ways of the social laid out for them that the masses go beyond its logic and its limits, and destroy its whole edifice.
A destructive hypersimulation, a destructive hyperconformity…that has all the appearance of a victorious challenge — no one can measure the strength of this challenge…
There lies the genuine stake today, in this underhand, inescapable confrontation between the silent majority and the social imposed on them, in this hypersimulation reduplicating simulation and exterminating it according to its own logic — not in any class struggle nor in the molecular hodge-podge of desire-breaching minorities .
This revolution…proceeds by inertia, and not from a new and joyous negativity.
(In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities , 46 — 7, 47 — 8, 49)
Transgressive reinscription: a turning back upon something and a perverting of it typically it not exclusively through inversion and displacement.
The idea seems strange: is not transgression a liberation from, a moving beyond; a breaking out, perhaps even a progression?
As we saw in relation to Gide, even in a secularized philosophy of transgression, metaphors of transcendence abound.
In comparison, the  idea of turning back upon, or into, seems regressive — literally reactionary.
But transgressive reinscription appropriates reaction for resistance, thereby substituting agency for autonomy.
The early modern transvestite and the post/modern gay (anti) sensibility suggest some of the ways in which transgressive reinscriptions have been around for much longer than post-modernism has been fashionable.
There are of course others: such reinscription has worked via minimalist perversion — for instance, the complete defacement via minimum change as in the street graffito which blackens one tooth of the billboard toothpaste ad, or the MLA panel paper: ‘A thing of beauty is a boy forever’— a difference of barely more (or less) than a single inverted letter).
Then there have been the more elaborate perversions which parody the sophistication of high art — Joe Orton's and Kenneth Halliwell's defacing of library books, Duchamp's moustache on Mona Lisa .
A principal medium of transgressive reinscription is fantasy — but again, not the fantasy of transcendence so much as the inherently perverse, transgressive reordering of fantasy's conventional opposite, the mundane.
Rosemary Jackson is surely right to remind us that ‘fantasy is not…transcendental.
It has to do with inverting elements of this world, re-combining its constitutive features.’
Fantastic literature ‘does not introduce novelty, so much as uncover all that needs to remain hidden if the world is to be comfortably ‘known'’…
As the term ‘paraxis'’ has already suggested, fantasy lies alongside the axis of the real…
This area, according to Freud, is one of concealed desire' (Fantasy , 8, 65; see also p. 78).
Jackson quotes Freud's view that something has to be added to what is novel and unfamiliar to make it uncanny; this something is ‘nothing new or alien, but something which is familiar and old — established in the mind and become alienated from it through the process of repression’(p. 66).
Fantasy may itself be a kind of transgressive reinscription, one presupposing a radical impurity in all identity, not excluding the transgressor's.
It knows too the impurity of transgressive desire, and most of all perhaps the impurity of dominant forms of identity, be they white, heterosexual, whatever.
The very impurity which the radical humanist seeks to transcend, only despairingly to rediscover at the very  centre of his or her being — this impurity, for the fantasies of transgressive reinscription, is not the ground of its failure but the material upon which it works.
This is partly the inevitable consequence of gender being socially constructed.
As many have observed, the recognition that gender is so constructed implies that it can be altered.
What is less often conceded or, if conceded, considered — Bersani being a significant exception — is that if gender is socially constituted so too is desire .
Desire is informed by the same oppressive constructions of gender that we would willingly dispense with.
Desire is of its ‘nature’ saturated by the social.
It is just this which allows subversive potential to parodic repetition but which also means that the parody will typically be inflected with the ambivalence I have described and, partly because of that ambivalence, oscillate between the political and the anarchic.
To liberate desire from oppression is not — could never be — a matter of resuming or regaining a desire/subjectivity as it existed prior to discrimination.
If oppression is imagined as a distortion of the self, then the lifting of oppression might be imagined to result in the self resuming its natural undistorted form.
But, even assuming, first, that the oppression has indeed been lifted, second, that we can speak of, and know, a time when that desire was ever free, and third, that we can speak meaningfully of a ‘natural’ or a ‘liberated’desire (and my argument questions all three assumptions), even assuming all this,liberated desire would still always be different from its pre-oppression counterpart .
It will bear the history of that oppression, not necessarily as that which disables desire (though it may), but as desire itself.
All desire bears its histories, the desires of the exploited and the repressed no less than the desires of those who exploit and repress.
But differently in each case.
This is the subject of the next and final chapter.
The proposition that the history of sexual oppression will always inhere in the sexual desire of the oppressed, most powerfully in the form of self-oppression, confesses to tragedy.
There is truth in that, also in the proposition that in Western culture the ‘tragic vision’ has been one of the most powerful means of containing and sublimating desire.
But never completely: in turning back upon his or her own desire the deviant knows how to read the history within it.
Included there is a history of heterosexuality hardly known to itself.
PART 9 Beyond Sexual Difference 
Desire and Difference
In Chapter 17 I considered how homosexuality has been construed within theories of sexual difference.
Beholden to an anatomically derived, heterosexually structured, and all-embracing dualism, such theories could only conceive of homosexuality as a disavowal of that very difference which is assumed to be fundamental to social, psychic, and sexual organization.
At the same time their insistence on otherness was found to be inseparable from a fear and disavowal of the same, or the proximate.
Further, one after another these theories either overlooked or actively disallowed the erotics of other kinds of difference; as Mandy Merck observes, in such theories ‘no non-genital differences (of race, class, age, etc) can signify such total Otherness, no genitally similar object can be legitimately eroticised’(Merck, ‘Difference and its Discontents’, 5 — 6).
But of course such differences have always been erotically invested, not least in lesbian and gay cultures.
So perhaps then we should displace sexual difference by cultural difference?
This could not exactly be a straight substitution: to attempt that would involve something like a category mistake.
The suggestion to be explored is rather that to think difference culturally rather than sexually might be both more illuminating and more liberating.
Attractive as that proposition has seemed in recent years, the form in which it has been pursued is fraught with difficulties.
Most significantly, an ahistorical, largely theoretical, emphasis on cultural difference remains limited.
As Ania Loomba puts it, in relation to colonialist studies, ‘the neglect of histories surrounding native insubordination either devalues or romanticises the latter, or worse, tends to read colonised subjects through linguistic or psychoanalytic theories which, for some of us at least, remain suspiciously and problematically shot through with ethnocentric assumptions whose transfer to all subalterns is unacceptable’(‘Overworlding’, cited from manuscript).
Utopian Differences
No consideration of cultural and/or racial difference should ever neglect the sheer negativity, evil, and inferiority with which ‘the other’ has been conceived throughout history.
In the shadow of that history there is all the more to appreciate about the way progressive movements in our  time have turned things around, and begun positively to identify the difference of the other: ‘the emphasis on discontinuity, the celebration of difference and heterogeneity, and the assertion of plurality as opposed to reductive unities — these ideas have animated almost an entire generation of literary and cultural critics’(Mohanty, ‘Us and Them’, 56 — 7).
Such critics have attempted to conceive or represent the other in a way which does not replicate the repression and subjugation inherent in the traditional ways of so doing (p. 58).
Just one relevant instance is Roland Barthes's celebration of difference, so much difference in fact, as eventually to subvert repression itself, producing a concept of desire wherein there would be, for instance, not homosexuality but homosexualities ‘whose plural will baffle any constituted, centred discourse’(Roland Barthes , 69).
Far from being an endorsement of discrimination, an excess of difference would disarticulate its very terms.
The instance of homosexuality is not incidental here since ‘perverse, desire figures centrally in Barthes's influential theories of difference and textuality.
Like Wilde, Gide, and others, Barthes uses perverse desire to animate and inform his aesthetic and linguistic theories, and it is in terms of language and art that such strategies would in part operate.
In his inaugural lecture he imagines a utopian plurality of languages on which we would draw ‘according to the truth of desire ’:
This freedom is a luxury which every society should afford its citizens: as many languages as there are desires — a utopian proposition in that no society is yet ready to admit the plurality of desire.
That a language, whatever it be, not repress another; that the subject may know without remorse, without repression, the bliss of having at his disposal two kinds of language; that he may speak this or that, according to his perversions, not according to the Law.
(Selected Writings , 467)
From within such a perspective sexuality comes to be understood relationally — not as the relations within sexual difference, but the relations between the sexual and the non-sexual as these have been both imagined and as they may now be radically envisioned.
To recover more for the domain of the non-sexual is related to a progressive sexual politics.
But the aim now is not necessarily to liberate sexuality (the sexual drive), but to eroticize the social while at the same time releasing it from the grip of sexuality especially as manifested in the ideology of sexual difference.
Such theories have been plausibly criticized for their romantic and Utopian strains, also for the way they echo and sometimes invoke a post-Freudian version of the polymorphous perverse.
But again, cultural context makes the crucial difference: the appropriation of the romantic, the utopian, and the polymorphous for what has  hitherto been marginal, and both demonized and repressed by the centre, and internalized as such at the margins, has quite different effects and implications trom, say, a more general (post/modern?) theory that ‘anything goes anywhere’.
For one thing Barthes's perverse perspective on difference foregrounds a different history, one wherein there is no simple privileging of the marginal: the paradoxically perverse interrelationship between centre and margins, whereby the marginal returns to the centre in a way which disarticulates the centre/margin binary itself, is signified, in this instance, by Barthes inaugurating his professorship with a lecture on the significance of perversity vis-à-vis language.
Barthes's vision is sometimes aligned with the post/modern.
‘Postmodern knowledge’, says Jean-François Lyotard, ‘refines our sensibility to difference and reinforces our ability to tolerate the incommensurable’(Postmodern Condition , p. xxv).
This is the urbane version of how to relate to the ‘other’; it is what post/modernists aspire to in contrast to the negative, paranoid, fearful way of relating to the other which produces (for instance) misogyny, homophobia, racism, and xenophobia.
And as the antidote to such things it is devoutly to be wished.
Except that already it is not quite that simple, since the post-modern sophisticate is also the critic of these other, negative ways of relating to the other; he or she is the one who diagnoses their social and psychic economies.
In the process the misogynist, the racist, and the homophobe, locked into a negative fear of their own others, have as such become the negative others of the post-modern.
Perhaps it could not be otherwise, not ditferent.
I only mean to preface this discussion of cultural difference with an awkward question: in the world we have, is it possible for us — any of us —not to have at least some inferior others?
It is a question that needs to be asked now that, in theoretical terms, the affirmation of difference has become almost a new orthodoxy.
Mohanty's warning that his celebration may involve a sentimental charity concealing a more fundamental indifference is timely.
So too is Homi Bhabha's scepticism about the way cultural theory uses the ‘Other’ to deconstruct ‘the epistemological ‘edge'’of the West'; the problem being that ‘the ‘‘Other'’is cited, quoted, framed, illuminated, encased in the shot-reverse-shot strategy of a serial enlightenment' while at the same time losing ‘its power to signify, to negate, to initiate its  ‘‘desire'’, to split its ‘‘sign'’of identity, to establish its own institutional and oppositional discourse'.
Even as otherness is being affirmed it is also being foreclosed (‘The Commitment to Theory’, 16).
Interestingly, homosexuality has hardly ever been rehabilitated as a positive difference within and by those heterosexual discourses which have hitherto constructed it as negative other.
Progressives would willingly remove some of the stigma from homosexuality, and have often acknowledged the homosexual component within the heterosexually identified.
But this is typically the at once honest and evasive acknowledgement of a troubling presence/absence.
Put bluntly, to be identified positively, homosexuality usually has to be dissolved into the androgynous.
Or, alternatively, homosexuality might be called upon to loosen the rigid gender identities within heterosexuality: men are permitted a ‘feminine’ component and (though less oft en) women a ‘masculine’one.
But such acknowledgements of the ‘other’ gender usually make for a fuller, more rounded, heterosexual identity.
Héléne Cixous is an exception in this respect, and it is interesting that she becomes so by almost reversing the psychoanalytically inspired account of homosexuality as involving a fear of difference/desire of the same.
Even though homosexuality as such remains muted, subsumed into an ‘other bisexuality’, it is here nevertheless explicitly and exceptionally identified as a creative otherness:
This does not mean that in order to create you must be homosexual.
But there is no invention possible, whether it be philosophical or poetic, without the presence in the inventing subject of an abundance of the other, of the diverse…there is no invention of other I's, no poetry, no fiction without a certain homosexuality (interplay therefore of bisexuality) making in me a crystallized work of my ultra subjectivities.
(Marks and de Courtivron (eds.),
New French Feminisms , 97)
Desiring the Different
The rarity of such positive conceptions of homosexuality within, or in relation to, otherness, is the more significant given that homosexuals have been among those who have literally (rather than metaphorically or theoretically) embraced the cultural and racial difference of the ‘other’.
Kobena Mercer and Isaac Julien are right to emphasize that the complexity which arises at the junction of race and sexuality is something which ‘some people simply don't want to talk about’.
Of  the convergence of homosexuality and race, fewer still are prepared to speak, and those who have spoken have oft en done so in racist and/or homophobic terms — and that, as Mercer and Julien show, includes people in both the black and gay communities.
A constructive if brief discussion of the problematic convergence of race and homosexuality occurs in Dennis Altman's now twenty-year-old pioneering study,Homosexual Oppression and Liberation .
Altman discerns links between the oppression of blacks and of homosexuals, in the way that both are vulnerable to an internalization of their oppression.
He remarks that in America especially there has always been a strong cross-racial homosexual attraction less restrained by social barriers than its heterosexual counterpart; ‘the very furtiveness and outlaw status of the gayworld has led to its greater integration across colour lines’.
Yet he refuses to sentimentalize the connection, recognizing that white homosexuals are not necessarily less racist than white heterosexuals, and that the cross-racial attraction in question may, tor both parties, be a consequence, rather than a repudiation, of their oppression.
He suggests that blacks have been ‘at one and the same time both more accepting of and more hostile towards homosexuality’, and that the hostility has often been extreme — as in the case of Eldridge Cleaver's notorious attack on James Baldwin (Altman,Homosexual Oppression , esp.
192 — 207).
Despite this difficult history, crucial alliances have occurred.
The gay movement learned greatly from black analysis and black political experience, and it was possible in 1970 tor Huey Newton, joint founder of the Black Panther Party, to welcome alliance with the women's and gay movements.
In this he made the Black Panthers the first significant radical group to recognize gay liberation as a valid political movement, and did so in terms which provoked hostility from some in his own party: ‘maybe I'm injecting some of my prejudices by saying that ‘even a homosexual can be revolutionary'’.
Quite the contrary, maybe a homosexual could be the most revolutionary' (Newton, quoted in Altman,Homosexual Oppression , 204; see also Genet in Leyland,Gay Sunshine Interviews ).
The relevance of this obscure, marginal history where race and homosexuality converge is once again being recognized.
Jonathan Ruthertord finds something strangely relevant for cultural politics in Britain in the 1990s in the cross-racial identifications of Lawrence of Arabia some seventy years before: ‘His identification with the Arabs and their culture displaced the centered position of his identity as a  white man.
The story is a compelling image of a postmodern world that is challenging so many of our own certainties and our cultural, sexual and political identities’Identity , 9).
Rutherford cites Lawrence's own remark in The Seven Pillars of Wisdom to the effect that this identification ‘quitted me of my English self, and let me look at the West and its conventions with new eyes: they destroyed it all for me’.
Significantly Rutherford does not mention Lawrence's homosexuality although this is, as Kaja Silverman shows, a crucial determinant in all this.
Silverman explores the way Lawrence's homosexuality promotes an erotic identification which is itself crucial for his psychic participation in Arab nationalism; of how, in effect, he discovered himself within the Other.
More generally the case of T. E. Lawrence becomes an exemplary reminder that we are obliged ‘to approach history always through the refractions of desire and identification, and to read race and class insistently in relation to sexuality’(White Skin, Brown Masks , 4, 10, 12).
This is especially so with writers like Barthes and Genet, and Wilde and Gide before them, who, far from subordinating their outlawed sexuality to their radical politics or radical aesthetics, actively inform them with it.
Of course, there were and are risks in doing that.
From the vantage point of so-called post-liberation, we know only too well the political blindnesses of sexual desire, and how disastrous it can be to make sexuality the prime mover of a political vision.
That holds true in principle for any sexuality.
But, significantly, this is rarely if ever what those writers advocated.
Arguably the blinder kinds of sexual radicalism, wherein sexuality is made the prime political mover, have tended to be mainly heterosexual, and in the case of Wilhelm Reich, overtly homophobic.
What we learn from Wilde, Gide, Barthes, and others is that a conventionally understood politics which ignores sexual desire will quite possibly be as disastrous as one which makes that desire the prime mover — even, or especially, in the age of so-called post-liberation.
But also, it is not exactly that they bring sexuality to politics (it was always already there); rather deviant desire brings with it a different kind of political knowledge, and hence inflects both desire and politics differently.
Desire and Strangeness
In 1920 Gide recalls walking the streets of Biskra with Dr Bourget of Lausanne.
The latter does not like what he sees: ‘‘Young men ought to be brought here to give them a horror of debauchery'’ exclaimed the worthy man, bursting with disgust.’
Gide's response nicely if unawares repudiates the sexual-difference view of homosexuality as a solipsistic refusal of the other: ‘how little he knew of the human heart!— of mine at any rate…
Some people fall in love with what is like them; others with what is different.
I am among the latter.
Strangeness solicits me as much as familiarity repels’(If It Die , 253).
Seventy years on Michael Carson, writing of his own homosexual desire for the racially other, expresses a similar sentiment though now with a revealing, probably necessary, and certainly crucial distinction: ‘I have always been sexually attracted to foreigners.
Foreignness for me provided a difference that moved me in a way that sexual difference never did ’(‘Home and Abroad’, 44, my emphasis).
But perhaps this celebration of the exotic cultural/racial other is merely the counterpart of the racist's demonizing of the other?
Very possibly, and a remark of Michael Carson's explaining what it was that took him abroad in search of the other shows how the celebration may share the stereotypes of the demonized:
what I lacked was a foreign accent, almond eyes, straight or springy black hair, a black skin, a muscular physique, a mind full of difficult alphabets, a sense of rhythm, a pitiful history of slavery and oppression, and a massive member — though not necessarily in that order.
(‘Home and Abroad’, 44)
But Carson is also suggesting how the fantasized desire for the ‘other’ actually begins at home as a domestic projection; how fantasy is ineradicably social and, as such, susceptibility to stereotypes of all kinds, including racial and racist ones; how fantasy of and for the other exemplifies the mobilities of desire and identification.
And that certain lack at the heart of both desire and identification: what Carson actually finds in twenty years abroad is some oppressive sexual mores epitomized in the loveless fuck over the bonnet of a Chevy Impala.
And his article is about the corollary of discovering that the other begins at home, namely disenchantment: ‘almost twenty years later I am not convinced that sexual love between men exists in places like Saudi Arabia’(p. 45).
Gide's experience, elsewhere and seventy years earlier, was very different, but, as we shall see, he too experiences the desire of the other as finally about disenchantment.
Perhaps then, and in a way which recalls Freud, Carson and Gide are also writing about the strange impossibility  of desire?
Whether their accounts confirm, coincide with, or can substitute for the psychoanalytic account of desire as lack is hard to say.
But Gide's account especially does suggest how the vision of desire as loss is strangely inseparable from both the blindness of desire and its capacity to know more than it wants.
Taking Boys Home
I began this book with Gide's chance encounter with Wilde in Algiers and, through Wilde, that momentous sexual encounter with Mohammed which profoundly changes Gide's life and profoundly influences his art.
I end it by returning to those encounters.
On that same visit to Algiers Gide befriends another Arab boy, Athman, and determines that he should accompany him when he returns to Paris.
Gide's mother, aided by others, fiercely resists the proposal; with unprecedented tenacity Gide rebels against his mother but eventually loses the battle.
Gide contends that he was virtually blackmailed into leaving Athman behind.
There is a memorable description of their parting:
When, on the third morning I looked for Athman to say goodbye to him, he was nowhere to be found and I had to leave without seeing him again.
I could not understand his absence; but suddenly, as I sat in the speeding train, a long way already from El Katara, I caught sight of his white burnous on the banks of the oued .
He was sitting there with his head in his hands; he did not rise when the train passed; he made no movement; he did not give a glance at the signs I made him; and for a long time as the train was carrying me away, I watched his little motionless, grief-stricken figure, lost in the desert, an image of my own despair.
(If It Die , 296)
Gide had tried to persuade his mother, as he had persuaded himself, that bringing Athman to Paris was a ‘moral rescue’, a question of the salvation of a boy through adoption.
Even so his mother was appalled; she thought ‘that the desert and solitude had turned my brain' (p. 293).
She told him that he would cover himself with ridicule by bringing the boy back.
After much argument Gide received a letter from a trusted household servant, Marie, who ‘swore she would leave the house on the day my ‘negro'’ came into it.
What would become of mamma without Marie?
I gave in; I had to' (p. 294).
Epitomized in this struggle over Athman, and especially in Gide's  correspondence with his mother, is a hesitant yet certain knowledge of how sexual discrimination relates inextricably to other kinds of discrimination.
In this one episode we find interconnections with race, class, colonialism, and (cultural) imperialism, and in ironic, domestic, tragically intricate ways: witness Gide finally capitulating to the class, racial, and cultural prejudices of his own culture,as voiced through his mother, who in turn speaks through her servant .
Discrimination descends through a hierarchy of the subordinate.
Or, more accurately,hierarchies , including those of class, race, and gender, and within each of which each subject is situated differently.
Discrimination works through the asymmetry of subject positioning, and the plurality of hierarchies, as well as the brute fact of inequality institutionalized in hierarchy itself.
That is partly what it means to speak of the interconnections of race, class, and gender.
It suggests too why establishing personal culpability is not the issue.
But since Gide has been criticized in this respect it is something which needs to be addressed.
In his personal relationships with Athman, and his political stance on colonial oppression, Gide could claim to have said and done more than most at that time.
Travels in the Congo records his first-hand encounters with the brutalities of French colonialism.
In an entry for October 1925 he states his determination to find out their full extent, and to speak out against them (Travels , 60).
One of his biographers, Justin O'Brien, says Gide's awakening to social consciousness began here, when he saw the people of the Congo exploited, beaten, and killed by whites intent on quick profits (Portrait , 321).
On his return to France Gide succeeded in publicizing the injustices he had witnessed, with some effect at government level.
His later siding with communism was undoubtedly influenced by this journey.
Against that consider the following despicable episode which occurred during that same visit.
It concerned Lord Alfred Douglas who was on this occasion accompanied by Gide (but not Wilde, who had returned to England) and a boy called Ali with whom, according to Gide, Douglas was in love.
On discovering that Ali was also having an affair with a prostitute, Meriem, Douglas horse-whipped him: ‘his howls created a tumult among the people in the hotel’.
Gide, who disliked Douglas, adds: ‘I heard this uproar, but considered it wiser not to intervene, and remained shut up in my room’(If It Die , 291).
Gide's account is at once critical and complicit and in a way inviting reflection.
In the escape from sexual oppression and sexual repression  individuals have often, like Gide, crossed divisions of class and race.
Potentially, both the experience of repression in their own culture, and the experience of cultural difference on the other side of the divides they cross, contribute to a critique of repression which includes, but also goes beyond, its sexual forms.
An identification consequent on a prior dislocation can make for a creative, empathetic partiality which is then the basis of a further identification and understanding of other kinds of discrimination.
I have shown how this is true of both Wilde and Gide.
At the same time they remained, as we all remain, implicated in other kinds of discrimination of which they and we, originally and subsequently, are the agents rather than the victims, or maybe both agents and victims.
If Douglas's brutality epitomizes racial, cultural, and sexual domination in its most callously direct form, Gide's self-description of remaining in the security of his room, considering it wiser not to intervene, becomes a resonant image of the hesitant complicities which most kinds of brutality and exploitation presuppose and in which most of us are implicated.
So desire for, and identification with, the cultural and racial other brings with it a complicated history.
Bronski, discussing the romanticizing of the non-Anglo by Edward Carpenter and others, declares: ‘the English fascination with the non-Anglo — and therefore more ‘primitive'’ and ‘‘natural'’— cultures…was also based in and inseparable from deeply rooted standards of white British racism and political and cultural imperialism' (Culture-Clash , 26 — 7; see also p. 15 and Bakshi, ‘Homosexuality and Orientalism’).
Edward Said's pioneering Orientalism offered a searching analysis of this phenomenon.
With Gide and many others in mind, Said observes that virtually no European writer who wrote on or travelled to the Orient in the period after 1800 exempted himself or herself from a quest for sexual experience unobtainable in Europe:
What they looked for often — correctly I think — was a different type of sexuality, perhaps more libertine and less guilt-ridden; but even that quest, if repeated by enough people, could (and did) become as regulated and uniform as learning itself.
In time ‘Oriental sex’ was as standard a commodity as any other available in the mass culture.
(p. 190)
What makes the situation especially difficult in the case of homosexuality is that there are those who arm their homophobia by ignoring the first dimension described above — an exile which generates critique — insisting only on the second — the exile who flees one kind of discrimination only to reproduce others, and who is seen to do so in virtue of the alleged ‘predatory’ nature of the homosexual desire, now quintessentially defined as a desire to exploit the disadvantaged.
Decentring the Self in the Desire for the Other
For homosexuals more than most, the search for sexual freedom in the realm of the foreign has been inseparable from a repudiation of the ‘Western, culture responsible for their repression and oppression.
For some, as indeed for T. E. Lawrence, this entailed not just the rejection of a repressive social order, but a disidentification from it requiring nothing less than the relinquishing of the self as hitherto constituted and inhabited by that order.
In other words, precisely because of the Western integration of subjectivity and sexuality, deviant desire becomes also a refusal of certain kinds of subjectivity.
Of Pasolini's ‘growing passion for the Third World’ Enzo Siciliano says: ‘He had the idea that ‘Negritude…will be the way'’.
One might say that in him an old cultural dream — exoticism — donned progressive clothes.
And it was true — progressivism was followed closely in his heart by the decadent enigmas of forgetfulness and oblivion' (Pasolini , 263, 265).
As so often, ‘decadent’ is used here in a way evasive of what it gestures towards.
But the connection of transgressive desire with forgetfulness and oblivion is important and follows in a long tradition: religious, mystical, or romantic or some combination of all these.
It suggests too why the other of sexual fantasy may be stereotypical or two-dimensional in a way somehow at odds with the intensity and density of the desire which constructs it.
It also becomes an experience which indirectly registers the resilience of the individual's own immediate cultural past: forgetfulness and oblivion are the means of its escape, but become so in a way which register its continuing presence.
The case of Gide is once again exemplary.
I remarked in Chapter 1 his attraction to African landscapes as places where consciousness surrenders.
At the very end of his lite, writing again of the importance of how his experience as a homosexual had pushed him along the path of revolt, and recalling joyfully one of his lovers, Mala, Gide adds:
My most perfect memories of sensual delight are those enveloped in a landscape which absorbs it and in which I seem to be swallowed up.
In the one I have just  evoked of those transports with Mala, it is not only the beautiful swooning body of the child I see again, but the whole mysterious and fearful surrounding of the equatorial forest.
(So Be It , 42, 126 — 7).
Such experiences of sexual liberation bear witness to the socially constructed ‘nature’ of identity with respect both to its contingency and its resilience: on the one hand the self can be and is experienced as radically different in the space of the other; on the other hand it the extinction of self is the precondition of passing into the ecstasy with and through the other, it is an extinction which has to be replayed over and again as a constitutive part of sexual ecstasy itself .
And if, as so oft en, ecstasy obliterates the specificity of the landscape which simultaneously enables and absorbs it, this is not only because ecstasy is of its nature blind; it is also because what we repudiate remains with us as partial blindness to what we embrace in its stead.
Those of Gide's travel journals published as Amyntas are even more revealing of this process whereby loss of self becomes a discovery of self; both selves, the centred and the dispersed, being kept alive, both being necessary for the lyrical, unorthodox Western narrative which Gide maps on to the African landscape and his own illicit sexuality within it.
Amyntas:Desire and Loss 
If ecstatic union with the other entails a liberating loss of inhibition and even loss of the self, by the very same token, it is then that desire may become most unaware of the plight of the other, especially when, as here, it is powerfully mediated through the pastoral genre.
Amyntas is a pastoral narrative of self-redemption in relation to, in the desire for,and in the space of, the other.
But just as the loss of self is the precondition for the discovery of a more ‘real’ because unconflicted, unrepressed self, so the precondition for pastoral sublimity is the loss of history, and once again the landscape which crystallizes desire, in such remarkable images, is also effaced by it:
i
…a child's laughter at the water's edge — then nothing, no misgivings, no thoughts…— What have I wanted until this day?
What had I feared?…
iii
…
The village stays the same: no one here wants more — no effort, no novelty.
Within these narrow lanes, no luxury compels such poverty to know itself.
v
…
Time passing here is innocent of hours, yet so perfect is our inoccupation that boredom becomes impossible.
vi
What have I sought till this day?
Why did I strive?
Now, oh now I know, outside of time, the garden where time comes to rest.
A tranquil country, sealed away…
Arcady!
I have found the place of peace.
x
…
No moving: Let time close over us like water…over this world, let the even surface of time close once again…
xi
…
Behind us, the patch of scorching crag that blocks the north winds; sometimes a cloud passes, a white tuft; hesitates, frays out until…absorbed by the blue air…
And ahead of us, nothing — the desert's variegated void.
xii
…
Here life is more voluptuous and more futile, and death itself less difficult.
(pp. 3 — 11)
It is not for long that death is less difficult, the histories of self and other lost, and consciousness unconflicted.
As the distilled purity of pastoral and the fullness of desire give way to the absences which constitute them, so the journals move towards disenchantment, the acknowledgement of loss, and a sense of the futility of returning in order to recover an original intensity of being:
six times I have returned to that country, demanding the past from the present, flogging my emotions, requiring of them, still, that freshness they once owed to novelty, and from year to year finding in my ageing desires rewards ever less vivid…
Nothing compares to the first contact.
(p. 1 15)
I have dreamed that I came back here — in twenty years.
I passed by, and was no longer recognised by anyone; the unknown children did not smile at me; and I dared not ask what had become of those I had known, whom I feared to recognise in these bent men exhausted by life.
(p. 141)
The narrative suggests a movement into time which is also a fall into knowledge and loss of innocence (p. 143).
Yet there are also brief moments of recovery, moments of gratified desire and a coming to life: ‘on this abandoned divan, I shall inhale for a long while still the earthy, vegetal smell which the faun left behind; then, in the morning, wakened at dawn, I shall fling myself into the delicious air’(p. 104).
Occasionally he finds a transcendence of ardour, an equilibrium beyond desire —‘the disappearance of desire and the renunciation of  everything’, a time innocent of hours, a perfect inoccupation in which boredom becomes impossible, a coming to life which is a loss of consciousness: ‘I dissolve, I evaporate into blue air’; a being alive in a world where ‘death itself is less difficult’(pp. 101, 105, 107, 111).
The most extraordinary moments traverse conventional divisions, occurring both in Edenic gardens (pp. 112, 146 — 7) and the drug-induced languor in darkened recesses of cafés: ‘to linger there…
Abd'el Kader, leaning toward me, points to the sole ornament on the white wall, hanging in the center — a hideous, shapeless, childishly daubed doll, and says in a whisper: ‘The Devil'’.
Time trickled by' (p. 102).
The last travel journal ends with Gide back in Cuverville dreaming again of a loss of self —‘to be rid of oneself, so that one blue breath, in which I am dissolved, might journey on…!— a dissolution which would redeem loss, but only by disavowing the recognition that what is most intensely desired is lost to the past.
Redemption and disavowal are not compatible and the final lines suggest the yet severer knowledge that desire is of its nature the desire for what is lost:
In Normandy's autumn, I dream of the desert spring…
The rattle of the palm fronds!
Almond trees humming with bees!
Hot winds, and the sugary savor of the air!…
The squalling north wind beats against my windows.
It has been raining for three days — Oh! how lovely the caravans were those evenings in Touggourt, when the sun was sinking into the salt.
(p. 155)
There is in these travel journals a movement towards the recognition that the most acute form of nostalgia is that which, in evoking the past as lost fullness, then faces it with the knowledge that the restless incompleteness felt so acutely now, in the present, was also a part of the imaginary fullness then; the truthfulness which aims to allay nostalgia only intensifies it.
Even with such insight it has to be said: we go to the exotic other to lose everything, including ourselves — everything that is but the privilege which enabled us to go in the first place.
That privilege needs to be understood in diverse ways.
Gide was, at least at that time, the sexual tourist of which Said and others have written, his opportunity to come and go enhanced by what is aptly if euphemistically called independent means.
His privilege and independence might further be seen to confer the trappings of a ‘humaneness’ which in truth was only a benign counterpart of the more brutal colonialism that appalled him.
Further, what kind of indifference to (cultural) difference made Gide so confident Athman could survive in Paris?
Was he really so unaware of those difficulties experienced by the person of colour in white European  culture — difficulties of which Frantz Fanon was to write so compellingly fifty years later in Black Skin, White Masks , and in relation to France specifically?
The destructive psychic and social conditions Fanon describes would have been compounded in the case of Athman.
It is all too revealing that, searching through the biographical work on Gide for further references to Athman in Europe, I came across hardly anything except the occasional derogatory, passing remark.
When Athman did re-emerge into visibility, it was once again as someone embroiled in the struggles of others, and, now along with Gide, subjected to the homophobic sneer.
Consider, for instance, how Rupert Croft-Cooke, out to discredit Gide's account of Wilde's seduction of him (Gide) into a confirmed homosexuality (above, Chapter 1), writes of Gide that he ‘picked up (among others) the Algerian boy prostitute Athman, who became known to other visiting Europeans, including Eugène Rouart and Francis Jammes and was brought to Paris by Henri Ghéon’.
I would remark yet a further factor relevant to race and colonialism, one which raises again the always ambiguous status of the aesthetic, and inseparably from its achievements: Gide is in Africa as a writer discovering and nurturing a creativity of itself intrinsically exploitative.
In retrospect then it is the final remark in that poignant description of Athman by the river which is the most telling: ‘tor a long time as the train was carrying me away, I watched his little motionless, grief-stricken figure, lost in the desert,an image of my own despair ’.
It is an image encountered by Gide, but also projected by him, familiar and unforgettable as an evocation of the sadness which pervades the history of illicit love.
It is also an image which tells us that, it Gide's contribution to the liberation of the subjugated was as a writer, it is also true that he exemplified the writer's inevitably exploitative relation to the same, and that this exploitation persists as an aesthetic mode long after the blindness or impossibility of desire was acknowledged.
The ‘mature’ writer not only survives those renunciations, they help constitute his art, an art which will always finally take priority over the plight of the other even if, as was the case with Gide, it also succeeds in mitigating it.
But I would hope to reinscribe all of this knowledge within Gide's narratives of sexual liberation without surrendering or denying their affirmations — I was about to say tenderness — and to do that in part by acknowledging that it is a knowledge implicit in or enabled by Gide's  own transgressive crossing of some forbidden boundaries.
Here the example of Frantz Fanon becomes instructive.
Fanon: Race and Sexuality
Fanon's analysis of racism and ‘negrophobia’, and his articulation of the predicament of the person of colour living in, or in relation to, white culture, is also instructive for understanding sexual discrimination, especially homophobia, and the predicament of the gay person living in, or in relation to , heterosexual culture.
My own study is indebted to Fanon's analysis of how discrimination is internalized psychically and perpetuated socially between subordinated groups, classes, and races — what, in relation to the latter, he calls ‘the racial distribution of guilt’(Black Skin , 103); also to his realization of the way the demonizing of the other is, above all, a mercurial process of displacement and condensation, so fluid yet always with effects of a brutally material, actually violent kind.
Even so, there can be no facile equation of racist and sexual discrimination, and this for three main reasons which, even as they preclude that equation, emphasize the significance of those points at which race and sexuality interconnect, and the particular importance of Fanon's work in this respect.
First, as Mercer and Julien remind us, such an equivalence tends to obscure exactly those differences which need to be addressed if we are to understand not only each kind of discrimination separately but also their interconnections (‘Race, Sexuality and Black Masculinity’, 99 — 100).
Second, Fanon offers a kind of cultural critique which mostly pre-empts facile politics per se .
Homi Bhabha, in a significant essay arguing the urgent need to re-engage with Fanon in and for our own time, shows why.
Bhabha writes of how Fanon ‘speaks most effectively from the uncertain interstices of historical change: from the area of ambivalence between race and sexuality, out of an unresolved contradiction between culture and class; from deep within the struggle of psychic representation and social reality’(foreword to Fanon,Black Skin, White Masks , p. ix).
It is from these uncertain interstices that there emerge Fanon's challenges to Enlightenment ‘Man’, and indeed to the very idea of an essential human subject; Bhabha finds in Fanon a powerful and subversive sense of identity as involving a split, precarious, contradictory relation to the Other, the upshot of which is a radical ambivalence, destructive but also potentially empowering.
The third reason why there can lie no facile equation of racist and sexual discrimination via the appeal to Fanon concerns the place of  sexuality, especially homosexuality, in his own writing.
Fanon is surely right to stress the sexual component of racism, especially its destructive effects on (hetero) sexual relations across race.
He stresses also the white person's fear of and fascination with the imagined sexual potency of the negro: ‘For the majority of white men the Negro represents the sexual instinct (in its raw state).
The Negro is the incarnation of a genital potency beyond all moralities and prohibitions’(pp. 1 59, 164, 177).
Also the ways in which, as a result, the negro ‘has been fixated in terms of the genital’(pp. 157, 165), and the corresponding displacement on to the person of colour of inadequacies and fears intrinsic to the cultural as distinct from natural formation of European sexuality (pp. 1 57, 165).
Despite all this, Fanon deploys some of the worst prejudices that psychoanalysis has been used to reinforce: ‘All the Negrophobic women I have known had abnormal sex lives…
And besides there was also an element of perversion, the persistence of infantile formations: God knows how [blacks]make love!
It must be terrifying.’
Of the white woman's negrophobic fear of rape by the black man Fanon asks: ‘Basically does this fear of rape not itself cry out for rape?
Just as there are faces that ask to be slapped, can one not speak of women who ask to be raped?’
Fanon's apparent ignorance and misrepresentation of women and feminine sexuality has been remarked before; less so his equally problematic representation of homosexuality, and the way he slides from the one to the other: ‘the Negrophobic woman is in tact nothing but a putative sexual partner — just as the Negrophobic man is a repressed homosexual.’
The homosexual is implicated all ways round, and according to some fairly crude psychoanalytic binaries.
So, whilst in the foregoing passage repressed homosexuality is construed as a cause of a violent and neurotic racism, elsewhere Fanon regards manifest homosexuality as an effect of the same neurotic racism, though now in a masochistic rather than a sadistic form, and especially the masochistic relation of the white man to the black man: ‘There are, for instance, men who go to ‘houses'’ in order to be beaten by negroes; passive homosexuals who insist on black partners' (pp. 158, 156, 177).
He attributes an implied or assumed absence of homosexuality in Martinique to the absence of the Oedipus complex in the Antilles.
Of certain transvestites there Fanon is anxious to assure the reader of their masculinity, and that they lead ‘normal sex lives’.
He adds: ‘In Europe, on the other hand, I have known several Martinicans who became homosexuals, always passive.
But this was by no means a neurotic homosexuality: For them it was a means to a livelihood, as pimping is for others’(p. 180).
Of the ‘Fault, Guilt, refusal of guilt, paranoia’ which Fanon sees (surely correctly) as symptomatic of racism, he adds ‘one is back in homosexual territory’(p. 183).
And in the process of contesting racist representations of the negro's ‘sensuality’ Fanon adds: ‘I have never been able, without revulsion, to hear a man say of another man: ‘He is so sensual!'’
I do not know what the sensuality of a man is.
Imagine a woman saying of another woman: She's so terribly desirable — she's darling' (p. 201).
In short, there are places in Fanon's writing where homosexuality is itself demonized as both a cause and an effect of the demonizing psychosexual organization of racism which Fanon elsewhere describes and analyses so compellingly.
Such constructions of homosexuality in relation to race and racism are not specific to Fanon.
The myth that homosexuality is ‘the white man's disease’ persists today in some black communities, especially in certain kinds of political radicalism and nationalism.
Cheryl Clarke cites from a leaflet distributed at a Black Liberation Movement meeting in 1981: ‘Revolutionary nationalists and genuine communists cannot uphold homosexuality in the leadership of the Black Liberation Movement…
Homosexuality is a genocidal practice…
Homosexuality does not birth new warriors for liberation…[it]is an accelerating threat to our survival as a people and as a nation.’
Clarke further remarks how here too homophobia often connects with misogyny.
She also makes the crucial point that it is wrong to attribute it to the mass of black people, finding it most marked among some intellectual and political leaders, who also obscure the central roles played by lesbians and gays in black communities.
By contrast, says Clarke, the poor and working class within those communities have often been more accepting of those ‘who would be outcast by the ruling culture — many times to spite the white man, but mainly because the conditions of our lives have made us empathic’.
The point made earlier about the potential empathy of the sexual outcast is here made in reverse — about a community in relation to him or her.
Those points of apparently incommensurable differences between groups, classes, nations, races, or whatever have been negotiated hesitantly and all too oft en anonymously by the outcasts and the deprived from either side.
These are fragile empathies, too important to be either romanticized or ignored.
Another difficulty concerns the relations between politics and what has been called ‘Black Macho’.
Again, the homosexual perspective is revealing.
Jean Genet responded to an erotic charge in Arab and black masculinity inseparable from the recognition of its significance in a  culture of resistance and fight for liberation.
As we shall see shortly, this is another point of identification between the different, one which suggests that the masculinities of any culture, black, Arab, or white, cannot be grossed up as always and only homophobic.
But it this ‘assumption of…manhood’(Fanon,Black Skin , 41) has constituted an agency of resistance — no small achievement when one recalls the crippling effects of domination and exploitation at the subjective level, effects which Fanon himself charts — it is one which perpetuates, in terms of sexual and gender relations, the very oppression being resisted at other levels.
There is an analogy here with working-class culture, black and white, where masculinity has also been a source of resistance, but once again at the expense of ratifying a larger exploitative framework for men as well as women.
As Jewelle Gomez has observed, homophobic prejudice is particularly dangerous for the black lesbian.
Hers is a vulnerable yet crucial role as negotiator between difference: typically she is one who refuses to outcast herself from the black community and family, because aware of its value and importance, yet by virtue of that same tact subjected within them to sexual discrimination: ‘we straddle the fence that says we cannot be uplifters of the race and lesbians at the same time’(‘Talking about It’, 54).
Race and Humanism
The task Gomez envisages for the black lesbian returns us to radical humanism, and both Fanon and Gide as important points of reference.
Homi Bhabha finds that Fanon most profoundly evokes the colonial condition not in his yearning for ‘the total transformation of Man and Society’, nor in his appeal to the human essence (though ‘he lapses into such a lament in his more existential moment’), but in his understanding of the workings of ‘image and fantasy — those orders that figure transgressively on the borders of history and the unconscious’(foreword to Fanon,Black Skin , p. xiii).
Perhaps the two interconnect more closely than this suggests — as they did with Gide.
Gide's narrative of a development from the desire for self-redemption in the space of the other, through the loss of self at the ecstatic height of this existential quest, to the unresolved sense of desire itself as a kind of loss, is amenable to a similar analysis; in Gide's case image and fantasy do indeed figure transgressively on the borders of history and the unconscious.
Even of that first ecstatic experience with Mohammed in 1895 he would write much later, ‘Every time since then that I have  sought after pleasure, it is the memory of that night I have pursued’(If It Die , 283).
Nevertheless, those ‘most perfect memories of sensual delight’(So Be It , 126 — 7) remained a strength, the impetus for a nonconformist humanism which, precisely because of its universalist aspirations, provides further identifications beyond sexuality.
In their humanism at least Fanon and Gide may be compared.
Bhabha is critical of Fanon's nonconformist humanism, especially its essentialist fantasies of the self and the yearning for total transformation which they partly enabled.
On the penultimate page of Black Skin, White Masks Fanon declares that one of the things that he, the man of colour, wants is ‘that it be possible for me to discover and to love man, wherever he may be’.
And he asks:
Why not the quite simple attempt to touch the other, to feel the other, to explain the other to myself?
Was my freedom not given to me then in order to build the world of the You?
At the conclusion of this study, I want the world to recognize, with me, the open door of every consciousness.
(pp. 23 1 — 2)
Homi Bhabha finds here an ‘existential humanism…as banal as it is beatific’, adding: ‘there can be no reconciliation, no Hegelian ‘recognition'’, no simple, sentimental promise of a humanistic ‘‘world of the You''’(pp. xx — xxi).
He suggests that such tendencies occur here as an overcompensation for the closed consciousness or ‘dual narcissism, to which Fanon attributes the depersonalization of colonial man; that ‘it is as it Fanon is fearful of his most radical insights’(p. xx).
I would regard Fanon's humanism otherwise.
Certainly it is quite different from the timid and time-serving humanism all too familiar within ‘Eng.
Lit.’.
More importantly, it is also utterly different from, and indeed envisioned in direct opposition to, the colonial history of humanism.
A reassessment of Fanon's humanism has become necessary for reasons similar to my reconsideration of Gide's and others' essentialism in sexual politics.
Benita Parry argues that the most influential recent analysis of colonialist discourse encounters certain problems inseparable from its anti-essentialism and anti-humanism; in particular its tendency has been to obscure ‘the role of the native as historical subject and combatant, possessor of an-other knowledge and producer of alternative traditions,, and to ‘limit native resistance to devices circumventing and interrogating colonial authority’(Parry, ‘Problems’, 34).
Parry sees the problem which Fanon addressed as precisely that of how to constitute self-identity in a way which validates native difference, and thereby empower the native to rebel.
In the process Fanon might be said  to have overestimated the extent to which, from subordination, it is possible to construct ‘a politically conscious, unified, revolutionary Self, standing in unmitigated opposition to the oppressor’(Problems , 30).
Or, put slightly differently, in imagining that self, he builds into it too much of the oppressor's culture — i.e. precisely that which needs to be destroyed.
Note how, in an utterly different context, we encounter again some of the same charges brought against Gide and others with their sexual essentialism.
But, as with them, so with Fanon: the criticisms underestimate the extent to which an oppositional humanism transforms in the process of appropriation.
Likewise with his existential emphasis, which closely relates to that humanism.
If, as Kobena Mercer suggests, white, middle-class sexual politics is over-preoccupied with the ‘self’, and psychotherapy and psychology as its corollary (Mercer and Julien, ‘A Dossier’, 123), Fanon offers an alternative whereby the existential dimension is rendered inextricably social, and on virtually every page.
The same existential emphasis made Fanon acutely aware that oppositional identities emerge not simply against, but from within, the terms of their oppression.
Thus Jean-Paul Sartre's dialectic relativizing of ‘Negritude’(see below) is passionately reproached but not refuted.
Similarly, the self-evident fact that ‘the racist creates his inferior ’ gives rise to a complex history, and the complex, ambivalent, conflicted identity of the subordinated (Black Skin , 83).
So Fanon's oppositional humanism coexists with a demolition of one of the corner-stones of conventional humanism, the idea of a stable unified self.
Yet, crucially, this painful awareness of the historically constituted ‘nature’ of oppositional identities is not disavowed but itself reconstituted within and as the humanist universal affirmation: ‘The negro is not.
Any more than the white man’(Black Skin , 93, 231).
This is one of the several moves whereby, for Fanon, ‘a native contest initially enunciated in the invader's language, culminates in a rejection of imperialism's signifying system’.
As Parry adds, this is something which more recent colonialist discourse theory has not adequately considered (Parry, ‘Problems’, 45).
Writing the preface to Fanon's The Wretched of the Earth (1961) Jean-Paul Sartre remarked the violence and duplicity of European humanism in the colonial context; it had been, said Sartre, ‘nothing but an ideology of lies, a perfect justification for pillage; its honeyed words, its affectation of sensibility were only alibis for our aggressions’(p. 21).
In the conclusion to that book Fanon himself put it thus:
Let us waste no time in sterile litanies and nauseating mimicry.
Leave this Europe where they are never done talking of Man, yet murder men everywhere  they find them, at the corner of every one of their own streets, in all corners of the globe.
for centuries they have stifled almost the whole of humanity in the name of a so-called spiritual experience.
(p. 251)
Against Mannoni's assertion to the contrary, Fanon insists that ‘European civilization and its best representatives are responsible for colonial racism’(p. 90, my italics).
Which means that the Third World's potential for transformation is crucially conditional on not imitating or trying to ‘catch up with Europe’(p. 252).
But, as The Wretched of the Earth and Black Face, White Masks both indicate, the social and psychic realities from which transformation will come are also those which require transformation; the dominant which the emergent contests always already informs the emergent; in short, there is no outside from which to make a totally new start.
For Fanon this means that, despite Europe's crimes, which will not and cannot be forgotten, the Third World's ‘new history of Man’ must ‘have regard to the sometimes prodigious theses which Europe has put forward’since ‘all the elements of a solution to the great problems of humanity have, at different times, existed in European thought’(Wretched of the Earth , 253 — 4).
What is required in such a scenario is an insurrectionary appropriation so radical as to be also necessarily perverse: Fanon uses Hegel, Freud, and Sartre but in each case simultaneously contests and perverts fundamental principles of their thought.
Thus to have application to race the theories of Hegel and Freud must undergo radical critique and transformation; with some of Freud's followers, it is even the case of first having to discredit an overtly racist psychiatry (see e.g. Black Skin , 63, 138, 151 — 2, 220;Wretched of the Earth , 240 — 50).
So with humanism more generally and more radically: it is not to be imitated, not modified, not simply borrowed from or differently applied; rather, its appropriation and transformation is conditional upon its negation, the using of it destructively against itself.
What emerges from the space of humanism contradicts what once defined that space; in this sense Fanon can be said to have followed the path of the perverse: a negation of the dominant is made from a trajectory that emerged from it — a deviation from, which is also, simultaneously, a contradiction of.
The radical interconnectedness of culture is redeemed for a radical politics, and via transgressive reinscription.
This appropriation of European humanism was generous in a way inseparable from its shamelessness: the final manifesto of The Wretched of the Earth makes it clear that the vision for a new humanity which emerges from the appropriation is undertaken on behalf of Europe  as well as the Third World.
But perhaps the generosity is best revealed in the anecdote rather than the manifesto:
At first thought it may seem strange that the anti-Semite's outlook should be related to that of the Negrophobe.
It was my philosophy professor, a native of the Antilles, who recalled the fact to me one day: ‘Whenever you hear anyone abuse the Jews, pay attention because he is talking about you’.
And I found that he was universally right — by which I mean that I was answerable in my body and in my heart for what was done to my brother.
Later I realized that he meant, quite simply, an anti-Semite is inevitably anti-Negro.
(Black Skin , 122)
Both The Wretched of the Earth and Black Skin, White Masks close with affirmations made in the knowledge of exactly what threatens them — that being, after all, what both books are about, and what powerfully pre-empts the charge of humanist sentimentality: ‘I can already see a white man and a black man hand in hand’(Black Skin , 222).
Genet: ‘Risking a Sensibility’
Obviously, the demonizing of the other is often inseparable from his or her exploitation.
But so too may be identification with the other, as Charles Marowitz implies when he describes Genet's The Blacks as a play which champions blacks ‘not because they are socially downtrodden but because they personify two of [Genet's]favourite types: The Rebellious Outcast and The Splendid Primitive…
Genet uses the blacks, the way a man who has just emptied his revolver reaches for the knife at his side’(‘The Revenge of Jean Genet’, 175).
Possibly, except that in homosexual culture it has rarely been, and certainly was not tor Genet, quite that simple.
Genet speaks of his own identifications across race and culture in an interview with Hubert Fichte in 1975:.
I was invited by two revolutionary movements, the Black Panthers and the Palestinians…. these two groups have a very strong erotic charge.
I wonder if I could have belonged to revolutionary movements, even if they were as just as — I find the panthers' movement and the Palestinians' movement to be very just — but this belonging, this sympathizing with them is at the same time dictated by the erotic charge which the Arab world in its totality or the black American world represents to me, to my sexuality.
Genet joined these movements because asked by them to do so.
But he made it clear that, in these identifications, desire and politics were inseparable.
That might plausibly be thought to take us no further than  Wilde in Algiers in 1895: ‘The beggars here have profiles, so the problem of poverty is easily solved’(Wilde,More Letters , 129).
In Genet's case it produced among other things Prisoner of Love , a record of the time he spent with the Black Panthers's in the US and Palestinian soldiers in Jordan and Lebanon.
He began the book in 1983 and completed it shortly before he died, in 1986.
It is an extraordinary poetic meditation on desire, politics, loving, and dying.
In the same 1975 interview Genet declares that he had no choice but to identify with oppressed blacks since he too was black.
What such an identification involved becomes apparent in Prisoner in a passage which renders the crucial difference not one of colour, yet by the same criterion reinstates the distinction between blacks and whites: ‘What separates us from the Blacks today is not so much the colour of our skin or the type of our hair as the phantom-ridden psyche we never see except when a Black lets fall some joking and to us cryptic phrase.
It not only seems cryptic; it is so.
The Blacks are obsessionally complicated about themselves.
They've turned their suffering into a resource’(p. 46).
Throughout Prisoner Genet again insists that his reasons for his identifications across race and culture were incorrigibly personal.
He says he completely failed to understand the Palestinian revolution (p. 3), that he could never completely identity with the nation or their movement (p. 90), that he participated for fun (p. 9), that his record of what happened is inaccurate (p. 19), that writing itself is a lie (p. 27) and memory unreliable (p. 39).
Even the revolution was unreal —‘By agreeing to go first with the Panthers and then with the Palestinians, playing my role as a dreamer inside a dream, wasn't I just one more factor of unreality inside both movements?’(p. 149).
But this is not exactly the blindness of desire, nor even the selective vision of fantasy.
First because in Prisoner desire and fantasy seem transformed into nonsublimated social identification; as he puts it in relation to one group of black students in America, ‘while I never desired any particular person, I was all desire for the group as a whole.
But my desire was satisfied by the tact that they existed’(cf. pp. 178 — 9).
Second because this is a kind of desire inseparable from an abundance of curiosity and attention; desire is curious, and attends in a way which renders desire itself an inappropriate word.
Genet is inclined to speak rather of a love which alters perception and complicates judgement, especially in relation to masculinity, and relations between men in the context of war and revolution.
A range of issues recur throughout Genet's book; I concentrate on masculinity only because of its problematic centrality in  contemporary considerations of race, homosexuality, and gender more generally, and because Genet's reflections on it often make other recent writing about it seem by comparison the simplistic and reductive pronouncements of a banal gender politics.
Genet regards the eroticism of the Black Panthers as manifest and inseparable from their politics and the challenge they presented to white America (pp. 259 — 60).
Moreover, despite their restraint, ‘the Black Panthers couldn't throw oft their mutual attraction.
Their movement consisted of magnetized bodies magnetizing one another.’
As for the fedayeen, they ‘observed a smiling rigour.
But the eroticism was palpable.
I could sense its vibrations, though I wasn't bothered by it’(p.126).
But this eroticism, and the masculinity of these men, frequently confounds the stereotypes.
Thus he says of Ali, a member of Fatah, ‘He knew I loved him, but it didn't make him the slightest bit arrogant.
It awakened his kindness’(p. 267).
Genet speaks also of the kindness of the Panthers, which ‘brought me both real protection and education in affection’(p. 83).
Different again is the dancing of the bedouin soldiers, at once chaste and erotic —‘chaste because it takes place among men, mostly holding one another by the elbow or the forefinger…erotic because it takes place between men, and because it's performed before the ladies.
So which sex is it that burns with desire for an encounter that can never be?’
In their dancing Genet detects a display, almost a confession, of the femininity that contrasted so strongly with their masculinity, and an acceptance of, even a desire for, annihilation.
Genet returns to this wish for death and martyrdom.
He is admiring of the soldiers' courage but not persuaded by their beliefs: training people to sacrifice themselves produces not altruism but a fascinated following of others to death not so much to help but merely to follow (p. 88).
And looking at the Palestinian revolution ‘trom a viewpoint higher than my own’ he regards it as ultimately a revolt reaching to the limits of Islam, a ‘calling for a revision, probably even a rejection, of a theology as soporific as a Breton cradle’(p. 88).
Of the young Falangists, ‘something halfway between monks and hoodlums’, singing of the Immaculate Conception and marching towards immortality: ‘I was enchanted.
I could calculate their cruelty from their stupidity’(p. 32).
In others he finds both the impulse to self-sacrifice, and their masculinity, quite complex (p. 124).
One of the men who most attracts him, Mubarak, is also one whose sexuality is most self-conscious, withdrawn, and complicated; Mubarak's masculinity is itself strung out across difference: he is a Sudanese African in Asia, and fighting for a people whom he does not understand and who regard him with a racist  indifference (pp. 194 — 5); he speaks perfect French, but with a Parisian urban working-class accent.
Genet describes him as ‘so obviously both a pimp — a barracks or red-light district ponce — and a whore that I could never make out what he was doing among the fedayeen’(p. 153).
Alternately ironic and sad, provocative and withdrawn, Mubarak shares Genet's gift for insightful reflection on the revolution and the socio-political forces at work within it and beyond.
He also exhibited a flirtatiousness aimed at everyone and everything, ‘a desire to charm [which]prevented him from being sufficiently implacable’(pp. 152 — 3).
Yet later, after Mubarak's death, Genet discovers that he did not sleep with women or men; all of his sexuality was social: ‘the warmth of that voice had the shy yet imperious sureness of an erect penis stroking a beloved cheek.
In that too I saw him as an obvious heir to the boys of the old Paris suburbs’(p. 143).
Perhaps that is also why Mubarak says, or at least why Genet recalls him saying, that if he wants his book (Prisoner of Love ) to be read he must write it in ‘a voice that's sweet but inexorable’(p. 151).
With the fedayeen, love always at once complicates and simplifies the narrative.
One of his most vivid memories is of three separate groups of fedayeen, each situated on a different hill, singing to each other just before dawn; it was a polyphony, ‘a great improvisation performed among the mountains, in the midst of danger’, heedless of death, expressing and eliciting love (pp. 36 — 40).
Elsewhere Genet writes of a 19-year-old, washing the clothes of his friend who is shortly to go and fight, declaring that he loves the revolution and all the fedayeen, but his friend especially: ‘Yes.
It is love.
Do you think that at a time like this I am afraid of words?…if he dies tonight there will always be a gulf at my side, a gulf into which I must never fall’(p. 87).
More than 200 pages later Genet writes ‘out of the crowd a glance swifter than a wink reveals two fedayeen as two lovers…
Chaste, but so close that if one of them is sad the laughter of the other immediately fills the void in him’(p. 330).
These are Genet's reconstructions, and perhaps the gulf, the void, are his as well as the soldiers'.
If Genet is seduced by the magnanimity of the fedayeen, their selflessness, courage, humour, and love for each other, he is also perplexed and disillusioned by the inseparability of these qualities from an ‘underlying desire for self-slaughter, for glorious death if victory was impossible’(pp. 271 — 2).
Surfacing from that perplexity, which is to say between, and sometimes within, the lyrical meditations on love, is the sense of a truly disturbing proximity of antagonists, most powerfully articulated in Genet's angry ‘fantasy’ of the palace and the shanty town:
one wonders which was real and which only a reflection.
Anyhow, if the Palace was the reflection and the shanty town the reality, the reflection of the reality was only to be found in the palace, and vice versa.
Getting to know the other, who's supposed to be wicked because he's the enemy, makes possible not only battle itself but also close bodily contact between the combatants and between their beliefs.
So each doctrine is sometimes the shadow and sometimes the equivalent of the other…
What sort of beauty is it these lads from the shanty town possess?
When they're still children a mother or a whore gives them a piece of broken mirror in which they trap a ray of the sun and reflect it into one of the Palace windows.
And by that open window, in the mirror, they discover bit by bit their faces and bodies.
(pp.58 — 62)
Regarding Difference
All the foregoing texts and histories suggest why theoretical or pseudopolitical gestures towards difference are inadequate.
As is (another recent development) separatist or essentialist ‘identity politics’ wherein one group seeks its own advantage at the expense, or ignorance, of others.
Still, I have no intention of prescribing a correct attitude towards difference, even less a correct theory of difference; I do not even know what the latter could possibly be.
My consideration of difference originated in a turn to history in order to repudiate one such theory — specifically, that which construed homosexuality as an embrace of the same because of a fear of the different.
It is a history which quite quickly produces that excess of difference which discredits the theory which ignored it but which also questions the theoretically facile celebration of difference per se .
My task has been to reconsider some of those complicated but always significant histories wherein differences conflict and converge as desire itself.
In doing so I wanted not to reduce, say, Gide's or Fanon's defence of difference to the limiting historical conditions of its articulation — the first as merely a sexual tourist, the second as developing a homophobic theory of Negrophobia.
Rather, I have wanted to recover the history of each in relation to the other, finding in the process that Gide understood more than most about desire for the different, Fanon more than most about the ambivalence of difference itself.
As for Genet, someone whose involvement with the different has variously been repudiated as fascist, racist, and anarchistic, his Prisoner of Love is nothing less than an  affirmation of the love that Fanon envisaged and which has sometimes given the dissident their courage.
If I risk ending this long study of sexual dissidence by speaking of love it is without apology and simply to acknowledge its inspiration.