

The Yeti
It was all the Yeti's doing when you come right down to it.
If it hadn't been for the Yeti, I'd never have met Malcolm McLaren or Johnie Rotten.
Pete Dawson was his real name but no one called him that At 15 he was six-feet tall, stroke for the rowing eight, and had loads of long hair.
He looked like a wild thing so we called him the Yeti.
We went to school together at St Clement Danes, an all-boys grammar school in West London, at the tail end of the period in which secondary education was split by the 11-plus into grammar schools for those who passed and secondary schools for the rest.
St. Clement Danes was an old-fashioned school which would have liked to have been more middle class than it was Unfortunately most of the kids came from the White City Estate  which is about as working class as you can get
As well as being a mate of Yeti's at school we worked together at Whiteleys, the department store in Queensway, on Thursday evenings after school and all day Saturday — for which we got paid the grand total of 36 shillings or £1.80 today.
There was a whole gang of us who went out together at the weekends.
The particular Friday night when the Yeti sealed my fate, we went to an end-of-run party for the school play,Doctor Faustus it was that year.
I'd worked on it as the slide projectionist One of the reasons we were all so keen on going to the party was that Faustus was a joint production with the local girls school.
When you re at an all-boys school that is really important It s so hard to meet, let alone get off with, girls at an all-boys school.
Then, after the party we went along to see Man at The Lyceum.
It was an all-night show, the first I'd ever been to.
Ace were on the bill as well.
(It seemed — with Ace and Man — that the theme of the evening was Bands With Extremely Short Names.)
The bands started playing around 11 in the evening and, basically, people didn't go there for the music but to get a sleep if they lived too far out from central London to get home after the tubes had closed down for the night.
I remember standing at the back of The Lyceum and looking down at the crowd.
It looked like a bloody great sea of Afghan coats with tufts of long hair poking out from them.
(Before you ask no, I didn't have an Afghan coat,) There was nobody dancing or even moving very much.
The bar was shut.
And Man were playing.
They were OK in bursts but then they'd stand in on one of their boring, self-indulgent, 20-minute solos.
Not the most exciting of prospects maybe but even so, I was having a good time.
Then the Yeti suddenly produced all these blues — speed, amphetamine, call it what you like.
The rest of my mates steamed right into them.
But I didn't.
Not out of any idea that taking drugs was morally wrong but simply because I was already enjoying myself and didn't feel the need of any chemical additions to that enjoyment.
I hung around The Lyceum till early morning.
Then, when the show was over and it was time for everyone to wake up and go  home, they opened up the roof — the whole thing rolls back to one side.
It was one of those gorgeous early mornings when the sun has just risen but it's still dark enough to see the brightest stars.
We watched that for a bit, then took the first tube of the day round to a friend's place for a while.
Four or five of us were Whiteleys regulars so we all turned up there promptly for work.
But I was the only one who hadn't taken the blues.
It was a very old-fashioned store — which was hardly surprising as it was the first department store in London.
It certainly looked like it was.
There were a couple of things that I've never seen anywhere since, relics of Victorian engineering.
The service lift was water-powered.
Each time you wanted to go up or down you had to pull a chain.
It was like being in a loo that rose and fell.
The cash flow was regulated by an incredibly ancient compressed air system.
It must have been the last one left in London.
When someone bought something you put their money and their sales docket in a little aluminium container, placing it in a tube by your counter.
It would then whoosh straight off to the central cashiers' office.
There, they would check it off and whoosh it back to you with the customer's change and the docket stamped.
Basically, it was a late surviving example of 19th century employers' attitudes towards their staff: checking up on them all the time or they'd have their hands in the till, It was straight out of H.G. Wells' Mr Kipps .
That Saturday I was fine until the afternoon Then I began to feel totally spaced out.
Everyone else — because of the blues of course— was right as nine pence.
But I'd had no sleep and I was feeling it got worse.
I was really flagging.
I'd never felt that tired in my life.
I started to feel quite weird.
Suddenly the Yeti turned up in the men's department where I worked.
Here, Glen he said, you wont believe what's happened.
Some fucking idiot's cocking it right up.
They've been I putting the money into the tube and forgetting the dockets.
So they're up there in the cashiers' office trying to figure out where all the money's coming from.
It's total pandemonium up there.
The fucking idiot cocking it right up was yours truly of course.
I didn't hang around to take the blame, just worked that day out  and sloped off home.
I knew though that they'd work it out in the end so I was on the look-out for a new job.
A few days later I took a walk down the Kings Road, mostly searching for a pair of brothel creepers.
I'd been after a pair for ages.
I can't think why.
Maybe because the teddy boy fashion was just beginning to edge back in; it was around the time of Roxy Music's Spaceman Ted look.
Maybe it was because I'd seen Ronnie Lane of The Faces — who was my hero at that age — wearing a pair on TV.
Something as daft as that.
There I was strolling down the scrubby end of the Kings Road, mooching along.
Round the kink in the road after Beaufort Street market and there, on the right hand side, was a shop with a pair of creepers in the window
Let It Rock, it was called, Or maybe Too Fast To Live, Too Young To Die.
It had signs up for both so I never could work out which it was.
I walked inside and it was just like my granny's sitting room Not only did it sell teddy boy clothes but there was also a fifties radiogram and fifties wallpaper.
It was all put together with really good attention to detail.
Straightaway I thought; I need a job and this really looks like somewhere interesting to work.
As soon as I set foot in there, I knew that I had to be involved somehow.
So I asked them if they needed anyone to help out on Saturdays The guy behind the counter said, we do as it happens but you'll have to speak to Malcolm when he comes in.
Eventually this bloke turned up, the one he'd called Malcolm.
He was wearing some kind of rock ‘n’ roll suit, the sort of thing that Jerry Lee Lewis might have worn — or more likely the duds you'd see on a young country buck in one of those dreadful fifties US musicals like Carousel or County Fair .
It was flecked cloth with zips down the side of the jacket — which looked absolutely horrible — and peg trousers.
At that time no one was wearing peg trousers.
He was selling teddy boy gear but what he was wearing — drecky as it was — had moved on beyond that into something new.
Before I even had a chance to talk to him he was all round the shop talking to everyone.
The strange thing was that he spoke to everybody with a different accent.
Sometimes posh sometimes 
American.
What's up with this bloke?
I thought.
He can't seem to make up his mind who he is.
By the time he got to me his accent was thick Cockney, all ‘cor blimey’.
He sounded like my granddad actually.
‘Ere, what you bin doin' then, boy? he said.
Working at Whiteleys.
Whiteleys, eh?
That's where Brian Jones worked.
What else do you do?
I'm at school.
Why do you want to work here?
Well, I need a job.
And, as soon as I'd said that, I realised it was the wrong thing to have said.
What do you mean? he asked suspiciously.
Forget it, I said, For a moment I thought he was going to tell me to sling my hook.
Then he must have changed his mind.
Well, we do need someone, he said.
And that was that.
I was Malcolm McLaren's Saturday lad.
It wasn't that I was an amazing person or exactly the right guy for the job.
It was just that I happened to ask at the right moment.
They needed someone and I turned up asking.
The right face at the right time.
The bonus for me was that the money was so much better than Whiteleys, Instead of getting 36 bob for Thursday evening and all day Saturday, Malcolm paid me three pounds 10 shillings — almost twice as much — for the Saturday only.
Plus, while I had to get up at eight for Whiteleys.
I didn't have to get into Let It Rock until 11.
So I was well happy.
When I first started there I really felt like the proverbial spare prick at a wedding.
I turned up dressed in what I thought were my best clothes — a corduroy suit from Take Six with Oxford bags à la Trevor Eve in Shabby Tiger which was on TV at the time Both of which were quite cool things to wear then.
Certainly nobody else at my school was wearing anything like that.
They were all into loon pants or being heavy duty skinheads.
But known.
The first day there I noticed all these queens waltzing in and out.
New experience for me, boy.
But I got talking to one of them and he told me he'd just come out of prison where he'd done  time for soliciting.
Blimy, I said, it must have for you in there.
Ooo no dear, he said.
All those rough men.
I loved it.
Quite an eye-opener for a 15-year-old grammar school boy from Kensal Green.
My parents called me Glen after the bandleader who took one too many cross-channel flights Swing was the music they'd grown up with and courted to.
So my name was a kind of tribute to their courtship.
My dad was a coach builder and my mum worked at the gas board.
We were never poor but it was no life of suburban luxury.
Respectable working class, that's the phrase they use about families like mine.
Reasonable jobs, best suit on Sundays and parlours as clean as operating theatres.
We had never moved, always living in the same place, 18 Ravensworth Road, Kensal Green A late Victorian artisan's house it was, a two-up-two-down with me and my parents on the top floor.
Bathtime meant filling a hot tin tub from kettles.
Downstairs in the other two rooms lived an Irish family.
We were always having rows with them about the back garden, territorial disputes over 15-square-feet of packed mud covered in cat shit.
My mother really looked down on them.
You know, she'd say, they cook their cabbage in the same water as the bacon.
Then, when I was 14, my dad bought the house.
Suddenly we had four rooms, a plumbed in bath and no poor Irish downstairs.
Kensal Green then was an old-fashioned, tight-knit working class community, the kind that had survived through thick and thin since Victoria was on the throne and that nowadays only exists in sociology textbooks and TV soaps.
A lot of our family lived in the same road.
Both my nan and my uncle Colin, my mum's brother, lived at number 28.
Them aside, though it was a small family.
Not only was I an only child but my dad's father was an orphan and my mum's family had been happy to get out of Kensal Town — which was a little down the road.
A real heavy duty place it was in those days 
As I grew up in Kensal Green — which is just up the road from Ladbroke Grove — it became one of the areas the first wave of black immigrants came to.
Lots of West Indians.
Walk down the street and there was always Blue Beat coming out of a window.
We used to play football in the streets with the lead singer of The Skatalites — when we could entice him out.
I can't remember his name but he was something of a latecomer to the band.
They'd had their one hit with ‘Guns Of Navarone’ and he was the toaster by the time they were doing the small-time club circuit.
He lived in my mate Densil Alleyne's house.
Densil's mum let him a room.
We'd shout up from the street to him.
Hey, coming out to play football?
We never seemed to see anything strange in the fact that he was maybe 10 years older than us.
Alright, he'd shout back, soon as I'm finished with these two women now.
He d have these two hideous, fat, white women up there and when he'd finished he'd come down to play football in the street.
Always barefoot and with real hipster trousers which showed the cheeks of his bum.
It was a poor area.
Nobody had a flash car.
The best you saw were third-hand Morris Minors or — as we called them — Wogmobiles, Mark Two Zodiacs or Zephyrs with every conceivable extra.
Sun visors, whitewall tyres, furry dice hanging from the mirror, umpteen fog lamps, whiplash aerials, the whole bit.
Self-cleaning oven so far as I knew.
There was no major racial tension around but there was always a slight twist on the relationship with black people.
I was a little bit of a skinhead myself for a while.
I had the Sta Prest and I the short hair, and every party you went to it would be all Tamla and Blue Beat and ska.
But, although I heard that music, I never saw it as the kind of music I'd be involved in And that was because Kensal Green was a deprived place and the most deprived people were the blacks.
Terrible as it sounds, you didn't want to be associated with that deprivation It was a downer You wanted out There was no question of not liking blacks, it was a question of social standing.
If you wanted some, that wasn't the avenue to go down.
It had nothing to do with friendships though.
Phil Fearon, the soul singer, went to junior school with me.
I remember we all  went on a school trip to the Geffrye Museum of period furniture and costume in Hackney, East London.
They showed us a spinette and asked if anyone could play the piano.
Phil stepped right up and tinkled out Danger Man and the theme from Robinson Crusoe .
(Years later, he came down to a jam with The Pistols when I thought we needed a keyboard player.
There was a funny atmosphere all the time he was there Then after he'd left, the other guys turned to me and said, what you doing bringing a sooty down?)
Another thing that cut me off from the other kids was going to the grammar school — and having to wear a bright green blazer every day.
There were quite a few Asian kids at the school but very few blacks — particularly few when you consider how black West London is.
Mikey Craig, from Culture Club, was one of the few.
I used to play football with him, Speedy Matlock, they used to call me.
I played full back, tearing up the wing — a right clogger, always kicking people in the air.
In fact it was something of a school for bass players.
Not only was there Mikey and myself but in the year above me was Gary Fraser, brother of Free's Andy Fraser, who played in Stray.
(The rest of Stray went to Christopher Wren — Steve and Paul's Alma Mater.)
That was the London of my childhood and youth.
A London that was still, 25 years after the event, recovering from the Second World War.
There were bomb sites around and a lot of it looked like something out of the Ealing comedies.
But this wasn't the London most people think of.
Mine wasn't the city of sophisticated, cosmopolitan life.
In some ways I might as well have been in the Outer Hebrides, Now everyone's got a car it's difficult to explain how isolated somewhere like Kensal Green used to be in those days.
It was a world unto itself, a working class community that existed quite separately from central London — which we thought of as Town, a totally different place.
It was only a few miles away but it seemed unimaginably distant.
Even Whiteleys.
That was at most a couple of miles up the road and no more than a few pence on the bus.
But to go there was to enter another world.
And Malcolm's shop, that was another universe.
Blind Lemon Matlock
Apart from liking London bands such as the Stones and the Kinks, for some reason I always had a working knowledge of the Small Faces.
I remember seeing them on Ready Steady go and liking Ronnie Lane's smile.
Although I was really young I was struck by his attitude.
All bands smiled when they were on TV then.
But, while pop bands like The Tremeloes and The Searchers seemed to be smiling just because they were on TV and feeling famous, The Small Faces had much cooler smiles.
Their smiles were like a knowing wink: sussed and street-wise without being in the least dour or po-faced.
I cottoned on to that.
It wasn't so much a case of thinking: he looks a lovely chappie.
It was more now there's a cheeky chappie.
After that I went off music for a while.
Then one evening — I  must have been 12 or 13 at the time — we were driving back from visiting my nan in Kent.
The car was an old Morris Minor It didn't even have a radio fitted.
So we used to take a big old transistor with us and put it on the back shelf.
Every time the car went round a corner you had to turn the whole radio round to face a different way That was the only way you could get half-decent reception.
I was sitting there looking out of the window and suddenly this wonderful record came on.
It was ‘The Israelites’ by Desmond Dekker.
I kept on listening to the show.
It turned out to be the Mike Raven programme on Radio One.
He'd play all kinds of black music, everything from ska to soul and blues.
Strangely enough, I got into the blues.
He played one record I liked so much I decided to go out and buy it.
It was by Blind Lemon Jefferson.
A 13-year-old white kid living in Kensal Green going out to buy a Blind Lemon Jefferson album, I ask you!
The mates that I played football with were skinheads into Blue Beat while the girls were into that pop group The Love Affair.
They all went to the local comprehensive — which I wanted to but, because I passed my 11-plus I got sent to the grammar instead.
That made me feel a bit of an outsider.
That bright green blazer we had to wear didn't help much either.
So, I suppose going out to buy Blind Lemon Jefferson was a deliberate search for something esoteric.
It was like finding my own identity by finding something different to like, something different to what all my friends liked.
But they didn't have the Blind Lemon album in the shop.
How about this instead? said the guy, showing me ‘The Story Of The Blues’.
It had ‘Parchman Farm on it — country blues stuff — and city blues from the thirties like ‘Butterbeans’ and ‘Susie’.
But it also went right up to the fifties.
Elmore James and Otis Spann, things like that.
I thought, hang on, this is more like it.
So I became the only bluesman in Kensal Green.
I already had a guitar.
‘Guaranteed Not To Split’, it said on it — which was just as well as much later I had the initial idea for ‘Anarchy’ while messing around on it.
I'd been given it when I was seven but I'd never learnt to play it.
Now I had the blues and playing it was suddenly all so easy 
The blues really are elementary.
Three chords and you could play just about anything on the album.
I'd sit up in my room bashing out the blues like I was Blind Lemon Matlock.
Then, when I got fed up with that, I'd go downstairs and make a racket on the old upright piano my nan had lent us.
A lot of blokes say the reason they got into music in the first place was they thought it would be a great way of pulling women.
All those girls in the front row, that kind of thing.
But I reckon that's bravado on their part.
Most people in bands have quite similar backgrounds and I reckon a lot of them shared the same experience as I did.
And that idea never came into it.
Mostly, it was just a way of keeping myself occupied.
Going to grammar school really made me isolated It was only a couple of miles away from where I lived but that's a long way when you're only 11 — years-old and all your mates from junior school had gone to the local comprehensive round the corner.
Not only that — they also thought, because I'd gone to the grammar, that suddenly I was too snooty to be friends with them.
And, on top of that, all the new friends I made at the grammar lived out West, in Greenford or Ealing.
So, through no fault of my own, I was at a loose end quite a bit.
I felt ostracised quite honestly.
Starting to play music was a way round that It was a way of entertaining myself, passing the time.
No big mission, no feeling that I was going to change the world with my music.
That came later.
Around then I also got hold of a folk album by Pete Seeger and I remember being really struck by a track called ‘Goofing Off Suite’.
I dug the idea of being free enough to just goof off from incessant maths homework.
Eventually I moved on from the blues, picking up on Ronnie Lane again, only by this time The Small Faces had become The Faces.
So, impressed by him, I got myself a bass guitar.
Which was absolutely stupid.
There is nothing worse than playing a bass guitar — without an amp because you can't afford one yet — all on your jack up in your bedroom.
The bass I had was awful as well.
A Rossetti.
I haven't seen one since.
The jack plug was soldered on — which meant you couldn't pull the lead out, you had to wrap the plug and lead  around the neck before you could put it away.
For me that meant wrapping it in a blue launderette bag which served as a case.
Some time later I got an amp as well It was as big a piece of junk as the bass — a Fenton Weill Mk II with a Goodman speaker, which is nothing but a cheap copy of the Ampeg Portaflex B15N.
(I sold it eventually — for 15 quid.
I was going on the school trip to the Norfolk Broads and needed some spending money.)
But, playing through the amp, I began to realise how daft it was sitting up in my bedroom by myself with it, trying to work my way through tunes.
I'm going to have to start playing with other people, I thought.
so I got together with a couple of blokes from school ‘Hold Your Head Up’ by Argent was in the charts at the time We'd play that again and again and again It was the only bass line I could play properly — because it's so simple, it's exactly the same all the way through.
We'd rehearse in the huts after school, having squared it with the music teacher.
The singer Steve Mariner, was a bloke in the choir with a really high voice who thought he was Jack The Lad.
You weren't allowed to smoke on school premises but he'd always light up while we were rehearsing.
One day, the Head of Sixth Form — a teacher called Don Palmer — came in and asked what we were doing.
He was obviously peeved that we'd squared it with the music teacher while he didn't know anything about it.
Anyway, Jack The Lad said, rehearsing, and blew smoke in his face.
The next day we were informed that we weren't allowed to use the huts again.
Jack The Lad, of course was right in the shit for smoking on school premises.
And that was the end of that band.
Except some time later there was a school dance.
Don Palmer asked if our band would play at it.
No, we said Why?
We're just not good enough we had nowhere to rehearse, you see.
That was basically spite, of course, but you always start as you mean to go on.
It was an odd period in music.
It was the time of progressive rock.
Led Zeppelin and Jethro Tull were meant to be a more intelligent kind of music which appealed to sixth formers, like me.
But they all looked like complete prats.
On the other hand, T. Rex might have looked really good but everything else about them was so naïve and teenybopperish that you couldn't really admit to your mates that you liked them.
There just wasn't much British around that had an edge and at the same time looked good.
Just The Faces, maybe Slade and then Bowie really.
The biggest impact Bowie had on me was with his haircut.
I thought it was really something new.
I had shortish hair at the time.
Like all schools then there was a rule about long hair.
You were only allowed to have it down to just below the bottom of your ears — which looked absolutely daft.
I'd had enough of my hair looking like a toilet brush, so I always had it cut short — like Ronnie Lane's of course— which was less hassle.
Then came Bowie.
Straightaway I went off and had a bright red flash put in across the front of my hair.
When I got home my dad took one look at it and said, you look like a bleeding nancy boy.
He didn't talk to me for a week after that.
The next day in school all my mates started calling me Ginger.
Then came Pure Maths — with Don Palmer.
Not only had I had that run in with him over the rehearsals but he was also the fussiest teacher in the school when it came to long hair.
He stood there writing on the blackboard.
Then every now and again he'd turn round and stare at me, his mouth open, totally incredulous.
You could see his brain working I must be able to do something about this, he was thinking, but there was no rule against hair colour, only length.
I loved that, seeing him stuck for words.
It was like.
Gotcha.
I did my ‘O’ levels, and then my ‘A's but really I had no particular academic drive.
I never wanted to go to university although I do know, however, that my mum and dad always had it in the back of their minds that I would go.
But nor did I want to go out to work.
From somewhere I got the idea of going to art college I'm sure it was because I'd read about all the rock musicians who'd started their bands at art colleges — John Lennon and Keith Richards in particular.
I was interested in drawing but I never saw it as part of a potential career.
I went to art college for the music not for the art.
In fact, I only became a half decent painter after I got into art college.
Let it Rock
The particular premises that Let It Rock occupied had always been in the very vanguard of London fashion trends but working there wasn't as much of a shock as I thought it was going to be at first.
The way people looked was the most shocking thing.
They were all so done up and seemed so aloof., Yet, in fact they were really easy going and fine to get along with I'm thinking of people like Jean Krell who co-ran Granny Takes A Trip the painter Humphrey Ocean and Bernard Rhodes the friend of Malcolm's who went on to manage The Clash.
They all came from similar backgrounds and, as like minds, they were all congregating at the same place for the same reasons.
They all used to hang out there and quite a scene had  developed Some of it had to do with it being the antithesis of the whole trash/sleaze thing that was going down at the start of the seventies.
Cockney Rebel had it a bit, and it was the time of the film Cabaret, The Rocky Horror Show and Biba's nightclub on the roof of what used to be Derry and Toms Every other phrase in the newspapers seemed to be ‘Iounge lizard’.
The cover of Bryan Ferry's second solo album — with him in a white tuxedo by a swimming pool — really sealed it.
That was what was supposedly chic.
Personally I thought it was a load of fucking cobblers and yet that was the swamp from which punk rock emerged.
You could tell that the real reason people came into the shop was to hang out.
Bernard Rhodes, for example, was always in the shop and he was always up for a chat I talked to him a lot and we struck up a rapport.
Bernie was seen as a bit of an oddball — although not by me — but he was very instrumental in getting The Pistols together, especially when Malcolm was away.
They'd been friends for some time when I first knew them but I didn't realise how long.
Bernie would always have it that he had known Malcolm since he was a mod in the sixties hanging out at — among other places — Eel Pie Island, where The Who and The Stones used to play.
I didn't believe him at first.
I thought he was having us on exaggerating — because there were always people hanging out, trying to crash Malcolm's scene.
But this time, it turns out he was telling the truth.
His line was that he'd lost contact with Malcolm because he could only stand to be with him for so long at a stretch.
Then he'd have to go off and do something else for a while before he could stomach being with him again.
They were like Little And Large in a way, but I never did work out which one was the straight man.
Bernie did one very important thing for The Pistols He made us focus our thoughts.
In the early days of the band, before John arrived, he'd beaver away at us in the pub, making us think through our attitudes We’ d be sitting there talking about music and he'd dive in.
Fucking hell, he'd say, you don't really like The Faces, do you?
Why?
And you'd have to think about it, then tell him.
But that was never enough.
Well then, he'd say, what don't you like about them?
Well, Rod Stewart, he's a bit of a cunt.
Why  is he a cunt?
Bernie would go on and on at you like that, making you define and redefine your attitudes.
I remember having some really interesting discussions with him when we'd go and see a band somewhere.
All of us were checking new bands out the whole time.
For two reasons.
One, like any new band we were checking out the opposition.
Two, it was a strange time.
There was a rock ‘n’ roll vacuum.
We were looking for anybody who could help fill it.
There was almost a desperation about the way we'd try and fill our recreational time with something worthwhile.
There was always pub rock, in sweaty drinkers like The Kensington, The Torrington, The Hope And Anchor The Greyhound and The Nashville.
Mostly they were second-rate copies of the kind of American bar-room R&B bands the members of these pub bands had seen in the days when they had a bit more going for them and had actually made it to the States one time in the late sixties or early seventies.
For the price of a pint, you could catch Bees Make Honey, Ducks Deluxe, The Tyla Gang or Brinsley Schwarz.
And many a night I spent at The Greyhound watching Brinsley Schwarz, diligently studying Nick Lowe's bass playing.
However, aside from the fact that their musicianship was pretty solid, these pub bands were still really mundane to a young kid looking further ahead.
Later there were bands like The Vibrators, The Stranglers and The Hammersmith Gorillas, horrors one and all, but pride of place in the pub rock pantheon went to Wilko Johnson's Dr Feelgood and the wonderfully esoteric Kilburn And The High Roads, featuring Ian Dury and kitted out courtesy of Let It Rock.
We were always out there looking for something new, trying to find any slight glimmer of someone with the same kind of ideas as us.
We'd go right out of our way in the search.
Once Bernie and I dragged right across town to a pub in the back of beyond in North London because we'd seen a gig advertised there featuring a band called The Teenage Rebels.
They were absolute rubbish.
They had no idea They were on a totally different wavelength from us.
We went looking for like-minds and found aliens.
Bernie went up to the singer after the show and said, we thought you were called The Teenage Rebels, yet you're not teenagers and you're certainly not rebellious.
That's the point, said the singer, we're rebelling against teenagers.
Bernie was speechless, for the first time since I'd known him.
Yet another wasted exercise, we thought.
Sometimes when we'd been out to clubs Bernie would give me a lift home to my parents', right out in Greenford where we'd moved just about the time I started keeping twilight hours.
Which was a right drag — Kensal Green was a quid cab ride from the West End which was within my pocket.
But Greenford was in Middlesex and many was the night I spent in the pissing rain having walked to Acton Town station to wait for the first train home in the morning.
And we'd sit there in the car for an hour or so, chatting through what we were trying to do.
It was like some kind of School Of Rock ‘n’ Roll.
Cor blimey Bernie, I said, you're just like my teacher.
I was half-joking, half-serious.
But he clammed up right after that.
If Bernie hadn't been around we would have been a band, and we would have been a good band but we wouldn't have been the band.
He had a real ability for making people decide exactly what they were trying to say and do.
He put it all into practice with The Clash When he got Joe Strummer into The Clash he asked me what I thought of him.
He's alright, I said, but he's a bit old.
Don't you worry about that, said Bernie, I'll have 10 years off him.
And he was right, he did.
Next time I saw Joe he looked maybe not 10 years younger but certainly a totally different man and ready to rock.
What Bernie gave The Clash and us was an understanding of the importance of being clear-cut.
If you are, it's a real strength It's like going to buy a packet of peas.
you know exactly which brand you want, you go right to it without dithering around
Now this emphasis on focusing and honing everything right down to its simplest form can sound a bit like naked capitalism, treating rock ‘n’ roll as nothing more than a game.
But, if you want to be a success that s what you have to do.
You have to be really clear-cut about who you are and what you're trying to  achieve.
Bernie was wonderful at making us think all that through.
The shop was the hip place to hang out.
It was the temple for everyone who wanted to be involved in something that had nothing to do with what most people thought was ‘happening’ in that part of the seventies.
It was a world away from both glam rock and the soul boy look.
It was a place for people who wanted to stick their necks out.
Lots of people are fed up with the way their lives are headed but they don't often take the trouble to do anything about it.
Most of them just go with the flow, ending up as something like a gas fitter or a policeman.
Not that I have anything against gas fitters but I do think that to do what I did at 15 takes a bit more courage.
At that age everybody is down on you.
Your friends, your parents, your school, your peers, they all try and stop you going out into left field.
It's not a big deal in the scheme of things but you get an awful lot of hassle when all your mates are going to university, or start bringing home the bacon.
Meanwhile you don't feel that way inclined.
Suddenly it seems that only certain avenues are considered as suitable options for you.
So you're kicking against the pricks right from the start.
Just by opting for a more left field occupation you're putting yourself on the edge a bit It really does take a bit of bottle to do that and find your own way through the maze rather than just go with the flow.
All of which inevitably makes you more forward-looking.
Surprisingly, working in Malcolm's shop made me feel quite at home.
Not because I actually felt at home with all the ‘weirdos’ in there but because the shop really did look like my nan's house.
And that meant a lot to me at the time because all the paintings I was doing were subjects from my childhood years.
Not because I wanted to go back to my childhood but because I had a deep, healthy interest in finding out a bit more about what was happening while I was growing up.
As a film like Scandal , which dealt with the Profumo affair, might make young people go back and check out more about what  was happening in the early sixties, so I was doing the same in terms of the fifties.
I was really into checking out fifties style.
The general idea of the clothes was pretty well known: this was when Malcolm was selling updated versions of teddy boy clothes from the fifties.
When I started in the shop I was into digging out a bit more detail about it, finding out the kind of Arthur English-style kipper ties my granddad used to wear and the cars that were around then.
For example, I really liked the Jowett Javelin but by then they'd already pretty much disappeared.
About the only place you could see them was on the scrap heap.
So the very few that were still on the road I really treasured and appreciated seeing.
I was interested in all this for the simple reason that as something that takes your fancy passes you, you only get a glimpse.
Then, when you get the chance, you want to have a closer look and check it out.
Let It Rock did unbelievably good business Friday night or Saturday morning a lorry would turn up with a delivery of creepers — the very things that enticed me into the shop in the first place.
We'd stock up the shelves and by the middle of the afternoon all that would be left would be size 14s in puce and some size fives that maybe a girl would pop in and buy for a party just before we shut.
A lot of money was generated by that , I know.
Tommy Roberts used to phone me on a Saturday when I first started working there.
He'd been the man behind Mr Freedom, the shop that was the first place to sell T-shirts with slogans printed on them.
Nik Cohn, the writer, described him as, ‘an amiable fatman from Catford, a bit of a slag and conspicuously so but shrewd, funny and hard to dislike.’
I can't improve on that.
At the time he'd just started City Lights, a new shop in Covent Garden.
This was well before it became a tourist attraction, when it was still a fruit and veg market.
Tommy's always been one step ahead.
Often one step too many for his own good.
He managed lan Dury before Dury was famous, and City Lights provided the suit that David Bowie wore on the cover of ‘Pin Ups’ and which people were forever coming into Let It Rock trying to get copied, much to Malcolm's chagrin.
Tommy'd ask me how much money we'd done that day.
I was the Saturday lad, he was  a mate of Malcolm's, what did I know?
So I'd tell him.
It was a grand or more each time.
Eventually Malcolm realised I was telling Tommy and put me wise about how fly fat slags from Catford can be.
Next time Tommy asked I kept my mouth shut.
Malcolm also slowly moved into made-to-measure tailoring, probably because of teddy boys coming in and asking for stuff to be made up.
Then he moved on from that, into what he called Alan Ladd suits.
They were pretty much the style of suits that people wear now — double-breasted with peg trousers — but then they were something of a revolution.
Like most of the clothes Malcolm sold they were beautifully made, of pale coloured gaberdine.
I always really wanted one but the trouble was they were 70 quid a pop, which I certainly couldn't afford on a Saturday lad's money — even the Saturday lad's money that Malcolm paid.
Another line was what he called his jazz suits.
They were made of City Gent-type striped cloth and had even more violently pegged trousers.
The jacket was very fitted and single-breasted, cutting in sharp at the waist — which made the trousers balloon right out.
It looked like something you might see in a photograph of black New Orleans in the thirties.
(Which is probably exactly where Malcolm got the idea from.)
It was nothing really radical in terms of modern design — even apart from Malcolm having adapted it from a picture — but it had great presence.
Like an awful lot of other things Malcolm worked on.
This is where I was first introduced to Paul Cook and Steve Jones, both of whom were regulars in the shop.
They'd get off the bus from West London there because they were such big Faces fans and Malcolm's shop was right next door to the home of the dandy fashion shop Granny Takes A Trip — a shop which had a Cadillac sticking out of its window — where The Faces and The Stones bought their clothes
Steve was a new face to me but Paul I already knew from playing football against him down at the Lillie Road recreation  ground.
There was a little five-a-side league there.
He was a good footballer and he always looked a bit weird with his striking blond hair However, there was something of a monkey-like mischievousness about him.
Whenever they came into the shop Steve'd be on about: where's the action?
Bernie got absolutely sick of him.
Blimey, he said, if that bloke asks where the action is one more time I really don't know what I'll do.
If we knew where the action was, do you think we'd be sitting around here?
I knew they had a band because Malcolm would talk to them about it.
How's it going? he asked one day.
Blinking Del, they said.
Del was Paul's brother-in-law and supposed to be their bass player.
He hardly ever turned up though and when he did — despite being married to Paul sister — he'd bring girls with him to bolster his ego.
Now he was someone whose only real interest in pop music was the girls in the front row.
Del just had to go, they told Malcolm.
We've got to find a new bass player.
Coincidentally I'd just told Malcolm that I was a bass player — although at this point I was only mucking around by myself at home — so Malcolm told them.
It was as simple as if they'd asked him if he knew a good plumber.
Again right face, right time.
We happened to meet up that very night, at The Marquee where we'd all gone to see Thin Lizzy.
Fancy a try-out with us? they said
Okay.
Then come down to Wally's tomorrow afternoon
Wally's real name was Warwick Nightingale resident of Hemlock Road, East Acton He had a Rod Stewart haircut, feather cut and shaggy, and mostly he'd dress in Granny Takes A Trip kind of clothes with maybe one thing added from Malcolm's shop, a pair of creepers perhaps.
He had the most disgusting rotten teeth and horn rim glasses with milk bottle lenses.
On a good day he looked like a mixture of Rod Stewart, Steve Jones and Buddy Holly.
He went to the same school as Steve and Paul, Christopher Wren.
One of the reasons they all became friends was that Wally's mum and dad didn't mind that he bunked off school all  the time.
Paul's house was always full of people and Steve didn't really have a home at all— when his mum remarried, his stepfather couldn't stand him and didn't want him around.
So, as far as I can work it out, they found it was cool to go round to Wally's and hang out, particularly as the school was only just round the corner from his place So they'd sit there doing very little and getting bored.
But, of course, the devil finds work for idle hands, and they began thieving, acquiring all manner of things but particularly musical equipment When they realised it was mostly too hot to sell they thought maybe it wasn't such a bad idea to learn how to play the stuff they had thieved.
Paul took up the drums, Steve sang and Wally became a guitarist, not a bad one either, very much in the Ron Wood school.
As they were so into The Faces they'd go down to Richmond.
to Sir John Mills' old house which Ron Wood had just bought.
Keith Richards used to stay in the little cottage at the bottom of Ron's garden.
Steve and others would get in there, rifle around it, have a go on one of Keith's guitars, nick a shirt and leave a little note saying, ‘Steve was here.’
That was their fun of a Saturday night.
Wally was an odd bloke though.
I always thought he fancied himself as a bit like a character in a war film,The Dambusters , Bomber Harris maybe.
He was like the bloke who you saw right through the film overseeing the whole operation, just standing there sticking little pins into a map.
I could never really work out the basis of his friendship with Steve and Paul They were pretty street-wise while he was just odd.
Strange bedfellows.
But his parents' place in Hemlock Road was their base for a long time.
They'd go round there and have meetings over cups of tea.
It was there I first auditioned for the band.
His dad who was always popping in asking if anyone wanted to come down the pub — he was always off to the pub — also wrote the lyrics to our first song, ‘Scarface’ They were truly horrendous: ‘Scarface, scarface, scarred from ear to ear, Scarface, the girls don't even care.
Terrible.
We knew they had to go so we messed around with it.
In time to come, John would add some new words all about a bird he  knew who kept trying to commit suicide: ‘Blood on the ceiling blood on the walls, blood on the floor.’
That wasn't the ticket either.
Finally Paul came up with an idea, ‘Did You No Wrong’.
But we stuck with the same tune that Wally had come up with.
If you listen to ‘Did You No Wrong’, you can hear The Faces influence.
It's a real Ron Wood lick which is what Wally was all about.
In those early days we were a real sub-Faces band, all Gibson guitars and plonking bass lines.
That was the common ground between us; the reason I got the job in the first place was because I could play The Faces' ‘Three Button Hand Me Down’.
Wally was in the band a couple of years.
It was during that time we all learned to play properly.
It took a hell of a long time but learn we did.
The line-up was Paul on drums, me on bass, Wally on guitar and Steve singing.
Later on Steve got — what do I mean got, he stole it — another guitar and started playing as well as singing.
Gradually his playing became better than his singing.
The very first proper rehearsal I had with them was in the Covent Garden Community Centre.
Wally s dad was there, pissed as usual.
In fact, when he drove us home he was in such a state I had to get out of the van.
As we walked down towards the community centre they all stopped off somewhere to steal some cymbals.
I thought, fucking Ada who are this crowd?
After that we spent a lot of time practising in what later became Riverside Studios.
They belonged to Hammersmith Council who had bought them from the BBC for something like three million pounds.
Wally's dad had the contract to clear them out, sort out what could be sold off and junk the rest.
He gave us a set of keys and we started going there regularly setting it up nicely.
Paul was an apprentice electrician at Watneys brewery in Mortlake so he brought some barrels of beer along and we set up a proper bar.
It was a wonderful studio as well.
It had one of the best acoustic sound-dubbing rooms in Europe — they'd been fitted out some time in the thirties to be used for putting soundtracks on to movies.
When Steve and Paul brought in all their stolen gear, it looked like a right little Aladdin's cave.
It was down at Riverside that I had what you might call my first ‘exotic’ sexual experience.
Up until then I was still pretty naïve when it came to affairs of the heart.
The woman was older than me, a certain rock star's girlfriend, an American who was in the shop all the time, obviously at a bit of a loose end while her boyfriend was touring.
One day in the shop she'd been waiting for Malcolm's girlfriend and partner, Vivienne Westwood — they'd been planning to go somewhere but Vivienne hadn't turned up, she'd phoned to tell this American girl that.
When she was on the phone to Vivienne she suddenly turned round and shouted, which one's Glen?
Me, why?
Vivienne said I should hang out with you for a while and then we can meet up with Malcolm later.
She came down to Riverside with me, watched as we rehearsed then followed me into the loo and gave me a blow job — something I just wasn't used to as a 17-year-old grammar school boy still living at home with his mum and dad.
Then I went back to rehearsing with the band while she sat around listening.
When it was all over we all squeezed into Steve's van and drove up to Dingwalls, the club in Camden.
It was a little Mini van that he ran around in saying it was for the band but really he had it because he thought it was ‘a good shagging mobile’ with just enough space in the back for ‘entertaining’.
She never managed to meet up with Vivienne and, as there didn't seem to be much happening at Dingwalls, we decided to drive down to Brighton, all of us crammed into the back of the Mini van.
There was me and her, Wally, Malcolm and Paul.
Of course, when we got to Brighton there was nothing going on there either.
So we ended up staying the night at a hotel, The Majestic, the big one right on the sea front As usual Malcolm feigned being borassic so she ended up shelling out for two rooms.
Steve, Paul, Malcolm and Wally had one.
She and I had the other.
When we got to the room she went to pull the curtains.
Don't bother, I said, it's six floors up.
All that's out there is sea.
No one can see in.
So we went to bed.
Everything was fine except that when we were at it I did hear these funny noises coming from somewhere.
As I couldn't work out where they were coming from I ignored them.
Then, the next morning, Steve started giving me a pep talk, all this advice on how to fuck.
Don't do it like that, he said, do it like this.
I know, believe me, and you're doing it all wrong.
So, Mr Knowitall, I said, how do you know?
Because, he said, I had a look at you last night, didn't I.
It turned out that he'd inched along the parapet — a thin one about six inches wide — and had a good peek at us through the windows.
He was probably fed up with having to sleep four to a bed.
For a bit of fun before we went back to London we got a boat trip round the harbour.
Then, in the van on the way back, the American girl noticed Malcolm yawning.
Feeling tired? she said
Yeah, he said.
You don't sleep too well four to a bed.
So she pulled out a rolled up tenner and a small packet.
Here, she said, I've got some Charlie left.
Malcolm opened it up.
But there was nothing there.
The spray on the boat had got to it, more or less dissolving it all away.
After that I saw her maybe a couple of times.
I guess, looking back on it, I was her toy boy.
She was about 10 years older than me.
But nothing much came of it.
In fact, I gave her the bum's rush — although it was quite inadvertent.
A couple of weeks after Brighton she came into the shop, presuming we were going out together that evening — without having told me what she intended, I'd arranged to go and see a band with a mate from art college.
Bye, I said to her, got to go now.
I'd not been thinking of us as boyfriend and girlfriend, you see.
But one look at her face told me she had.
Sex
Suddenly Malcolm decided to change everything about the shop — name, stock, attitude.
It was to be Sex.
Fetishism.
Rubber clothes.
Things that no other fashion shop would dare sell.
What sparked the idea off, I really don't know.
I'm sure Malcolm and Vivienne had discussions but at that stage, I was just the Saturday lad.
They didn't make me part of their discussions.
Later I thought it through and decided a big part of it was that, although he was coining it from the teds, I think he felt he was seen — by his peers — as an artistic cretin.
All he was doing was catering to one particularly backward-looking group of people.
He and Vivienne were also probably fed up with the teds' meathead mentality.
Basically, they were forerunners of the skinhead attitudes which re-emerged in the mid-seventies.
They had the same right wing, racist hard-nut minds.
A bit more cultured, a bit more refined, a bit more genteel.
But they would kick your head in if you spilt their pint just the same.
They got fed up with that.
I think Malcolm saw it as a way of getting himself established, starting a shop and making a reputation.
But now it was time to move on.
Time for a change.
The first I knew about it was Malcolm going on about rubber.
This was around the time he first started seeing me as more than just an employee.
Once he'd found out that I was applying to go to art school he opened up quite a bit and we began to talk.
We're going to change this shop into Sex, he said Yeah, we're going to have these rubber clothes.
Maybe masks with zips in,
He had all these old catalogues from Soho sex shops which he'd go through, things like She And Me , pointing out what he was going to do.
Sex itself was a strong idea but it evolved quite slowly.
Malcolm wanted to create the most direct statement of what clothes were about.
OK, he said all clothes are basically a way of attracting the opposite sex.
So let's go with that.
It's debatable whether that statement is true or not but it was certainly pretty blatant.
As he realised it would, it had the impact of blatancy.
It was shocking and it brought him even more public and media attention.
But it pissed me off no end when he finally decided to change over because he shut up shop while he did it, leaving me with no Saturday job and no money.
So I used to call up quite regularly, asking how the refit was going.
Ar, boy, he'd say, nothing's happening yet.
Give us a call next week.
Finally he got so used to me calling that he asked me to come down and give them a hand fixing it up.
I helped do the Sex sign and put all this foam rubber on the walls which were then decorated with quotations from Alexand Trocchi, soft porn spray can graffiti from the ‘68 Paris student revolt.
Slogans like ‘Under the paving stone lies a beach’; and prenez-vous ca que vous desire pour la realite .
(Funnily enough, years later in France I saw in the Orange branch of the Credit Agricole exactly the same slogan used to advertise personal loans.)
I saw the whole thing slowly take shape.
There was never a big overnight change.
It wasn't a case of a lorry-load of new stuff — all rubber and zips and suspender belts — turning up one day.
It appeared piecemeal because — despite the takings of a Saturday — they just didn't have the finance to cover that kind of operation.
There was no party or anything for the reopening.
One day it was just open again.
And all the old crowd returned They'd often come past the shop to see when it was going to open up again.
Fortunately, Vivienne had argued Malcolm out of one of his crazier ideas.
He wanted to have an intercom by the front door and only let people in by appointment.
This was mad.
Someone pointed out that it would stop passers-by popping in to buy something.
That got home to him He certainly wasn't going to miss the chance of making a few bob out of someone with money to spend.
As a 15-year-old still at school I wasn't too sure about it all.
I talked about it with my art teacher.
He knew I worked with Malcolm because he was one of the few teachers I could have a conversation with about something more than homework or football.
How's the shop going? he asked one week.
Well I said, they're getting into this rubber wear.
He looked a bit concerned.
Yeah, I said, I'm not too sure about it myself.
Well, he said, you don't have to work there you know.
I agreed but then thought, yes I do, what else have I got going for me?
Working there was my exit from the straight world.
Anyway there was nothing really sordid about what we sold.
It wasn't full of dildos like a Soho sex shop.
Mind you, we did get some funny people coming into the shop.
Because of all the rubber stuff, Malcolm had magazines like Rubber Monthly knocking around.
Sometimes I'd have a flick through.
They'd be full of stories about Wimbledon Common for some reason.
We were there last weekend, they'd say, and the elements were against us, but we were snug from head to toe in our rubber suits.
The counter in the shop was a little kiosk with a till which stood slightly higher than the rest of the room.
One day a bloke came in wearing a rubber mac, a real Wimbledon Common regular by  the look of him.
He stood there in front of the counter asking the price of things.
These rubber tights, he said.
How much are they?
Ten pounds, I told him, noticing he had his hand in his pocket
And these rubber suspenders?
Fifteen pounds.
His eyeballs popped.
Fifteen pounds .
he screeched and rushed out of the shop.
He'd come his whack and there was this trail of spunk behind him all over the floor.
We always had trouble like that It was horrible You'd go into the changing rooms after someone had tried on some rubber tights and there'd be cum all over them.
Vivienne would pick them up and say, it's alright I'll just wash them down and put them back on the rack.
This was when Chris Spedding, the guitarist, started hanging out in the shop.
Partly he'd be in because he was really into leather himself and partly he was there because his girlfriend of the time, Nora — who now lives with Johnny Rotten — was in the shop just about every day.
For ages Bernie maintained he already knew her from somewhere but couldn't quite place it.
Eventually he remembered — he'd seen her hanging out with Jim Hendrix in the sixties.
So Nora went from Jimi to Chris to Rotten.
She was German and a right pain.
She'd come in, pick up a rubber skirt and say, half you ziss in one leetle size bigger?
I'd say, it's the only one we've got and we're not getting any more.
So she'd try it on and it wouldn't fit.
Two days later she'd be back, picking up the same rubber skirt and saying, half you got ziss in one leetle size bigger?
She was always in the shop.
I didn't twig at the time but really she just wanted to hang out in the shop and she was coming up with any old excuse she could find to be in there.
Spedding was just another person on the scene.
I wasn't really aware of who he was, he was just a kind of mate.
Steve and Paul were more in awe of him than me because of all his work with Roxy Music.
But, as far as I was concerned, he was just another rockabilly who'd park his flash motor out the front and seemed  to have more money than all the rest of us put together.
Malcolm was his friend too.
Apart from Nora and the weirdos we'd get people buying it for their girlfriends, as a laugh Some girls, those who were a bit more out there, would buy the rubber wear for themselves.
Others would buy it for a fancy dress party or a dare.
Also there were the people who'd been coming in to the shop when it was still Let It Rock.
As well as the teds there were always a few young art school types who were interested in the idea of teddy boy style.
They weren't so hidebound.
They didn't say, as the teds did, I can only wear a drape They'd mix it a bit, getting into biker stuff and cap-sleeved T-shirts.
Others were into the glam rock idea and liked the idea of Sex.
It was about this time that Vivienne began to get really evangelistic about it all.
Although the shop was a bit of an Aladdin's cave, something of a tot shop with all kinds of different clothes hanging around — some from Let It Rock, some from Sex — she really got into the idea of there being a party line.
Sometimes she'd lay right into somebody.
I remember one bloke who was part of a working class West London crowd that had been coming into the shop since the early days.
They'd started out as mods but gradually dritfed into fifties Americana and then the Alan Ladd suits.
A lot of them used to come in and religiously buy something every week.
They always had money because they left school early and went to work, mainly as builders and labourers.
They played hard as well.
They'd meet at The Roebuck, the same pub that everyone from the shop used, on Saturday lunchtime, then go down the Kings Road spending their money.
Which could be quite a bit as they all still lived at home with their mums and dads.
Some of them even made enough to run hot rod cars.
One of them came in, looked at the rubber gear and said, cor, I don't know about this any more, this is all a bit too weird for me.
He'd changed his way of dressing as well.
He'd been buying his clothes at Acme Attractions up the road — a stall which generally did exactly the same as Malcolm only six months later, and were quite open about it.
He had on what you'd now call a yuppie look — baggy trousers and braces.
When he started saying what he felt about the new clothes, Vivienne piled into him.
Oh you, you look like you should be in a fucking potting shed, she said.
Not in my shop.
If you don't like it, get out.
Working for Malcolm and Vivienne was like being in the army.
You felt as if you'd signed the Official Secrets Act.
There were all these agit prop politics that you had to toe the line about.
Fuck it, I often thought, it's only a fucking Saturday job.
Towards the end of my career in retailing, when we were gigging as a band, I was late quite a few times.
Once I got in well hungover at four in the afternoon when I should have been there at 11.
Well, Malcolm, I said I can't do this any more, it's quite obvious.
Vivienne got furious.
What's up with you? she said, don't you want to work here?
You realise it's a privilege to work here?
Of course I said yes because I needed the money.
But their attitude that you had to be part of their camp used to get to me.
It was just like the phrase that Thatcher was so fond of.
‘One of us.
No bleeding difference between Thatcher and Westwood.
I never really got to know her She was the most obtuse person I ever met.
Once she told me about sending her kids to boarding school and asked me what I thought.
Well, I said, sounds like Stalag 13 to me.
Stalag what?
Stalag 13.
What do you mean?
Stalag 13 was a prisoner of war camp.
So?
Well, the school with its rules sounds like a POW camp.
(Plus I knew one of the kids was trying to escape all the time) It can't be much fun being locked up there It really sounds like a POW story.
What do you mean? she said At that point I gave up.
She was always in Malcolm's shadow.
They say that gentile women who marry Jewish men become more Jewish than Jews.
That's a good parallel for Vivienne and Malcolm.
He was a radical so she had to be even more radical.
Malcolm was impressive though.
You d find yourself copying him and his mannerisms.
When he first started selling peg trousers he developed a stance to show them off He'd bend his legs at the knee and stand half turned.
I found myself copying, as did everyone else who worked in the shop.
Not because we thought it was great but because it was just so infectious.
And it was so stupid.
I'd stand in the lunch queue at school in my pegs while everyone else was in these horrible big flares.
I'd adopt the Malcolm stance.
Far from looking cool I must have looked like I'd done a packet in my trousers.
People often remark on how alike John and Malcolm look these days.
Well, I'm sure John did pick up on certain mannerisms that Malcolm had, not deliberately but because Malcolm did that to people.
We were just in our early twenties by the time I left The Pistols, beginning to find our way in the world, starting to get more confidence.
It's not that Malcolm was a father-figure to us — as some have said — he was more like an elder brother who'd actually been out there in the world and done it so he had the confidence and experience.
So we looked up to him like that.
We'd hang out with him all the time.
He liked being with Steve and Paul because they were like his bit of rough.
He was a middle class radical who fancied the idea of being around two real street kids.
We'd drink in The Roebuck, just up the Kings Road from the shop every Saturday straight after work.
We'd sit around chatting for a bit then go on to whatever was happening that evening.
We'd go on to gigs or to parties or out to eat.
One time we went to The Last Resort in Fulham Road.
Malcolm was pissed and agreed to pay for everyone's meal.
He was never tightfisted but it wasn't often he was that generous.
So we all dived right in, me, Steve and Paul, and Wally.
We ordered so much we couldn't eat the last dish they brought us, couldn't even touch it.
Vivienne got really angry.
You're just being greedy, you lot, she shouted, your eyes are bigger than your bellies.
Fuck it, we thought, it's the first time Malcolm's splashed out and Vivienne's coming on at us like some kind of school maam, and Malcolm wasn't bothered, he was past caring.
On the other hand, Vivienne gave me an early insight into Malcolm's history.
As I was applying to art school I needed a reference so I told Vivienne that I thought I'd ask Malcolm, since he was my employer.
Oh no, she said, you don't want to ask Malcolm.
He's been thrown out of every art school in London and some that aren't.
Around that time I came across a dog-eared treatise on the 1968 student uprisings, in particular the LSE sit-in.
One day I was browsing through it in the shop.
Malcolm saw me and said, hey what are you reading, boy?
I showed him.
He smiled.
Oh, he said pretty casually, I'm in that.
He wouldn't say any more.
I had to find out for myself.
I read on paying great attention, trying to find out what he meant.
The only passage I could find which could have referred to him was a section describing a debate during the LSE sit-in when the students were deciding whether to break down a pair of iron gates which lead to the bursar's office.
The idea was they were after the records which the college held on all students.
They couldn't come to a decision so they put it to the vote when — as the book put it — a pair of bearded anarchists, one with flame red hair, appeared out of nowhere and took their decision for them, smashing down the gates with sledgehammers.
Malcolm and his old friend Jamie Reid?
Malcolm would neither confirm nor deny it.
From then on, I took more interest in him, looking at him as more than just my employer.
I began to understand him a little The rubber clothing, for example, I never saw as part of his own sexual fantasy world, but as part of the fascination he had with all secret worlds.
He saw rubber fetishism as one of the few remaining genuine underground cultures.
Simple as that And he always wanted to be in on any underground culture going.
He was like a kid making his camp under the dining room table with some blankets and pillows.
Everybody would be sitting there round the table having their Sunday dinner while down below them the kid would think he had the only important world to himself.
I always thought Malcolm was a bit like that kid.
For example, he wanted to be a member of as many clubs — of any description — as possible.
Give him an unknown society, any society, and he wanted in.
He'd take you to places like The Candy Box, just off Carnaby Street.
It opened at three o'clock in the morning, a club purely for hookers and people who worked in other clubs.
They'd go there after work for a drink and a few rock stars would turn up.
A real den of iniquity it's divided up into several little catacombs.
It's  absolutely horrible but Malcolm would insist on taking you there because it made him feel part of some secret society.
Both Vivienne and Malcolm were also very good at using people.
Malcolm was really into doing good window displays for the shop, often influenced by the ones Mr Green used to do for his Vince's Man's Shop in Soho — which was the first boutique ever, bringing faded blue denim and hipster trousers to the British public in the fifties.
Once we did a window together, just made a waste-paper basket out of chicken wire and hung shoes off it.
I had a day off and when I came back there was a big trophy sitting there in the shop.
Where did that come from?
I asked.
These people came in yesterday, he told me, who were judging a competition for the best window displays in the Kings Road.
And I won.
Not we won, you notice, but I won.
Thank you Malcolm.
They also really used me over the T-shirts which got them busted — and persuaded them to change the shop name from Sex to Seditionaries.
There were different sorts of T-shirts, each with an image and a slogan or comment on the status quo, some of which Malcolm designed and some of which were designed by Bernie and Malcolm together.
There were the cowboy ones — two rough riders facing each other with their enormous dicks hanging out in front of them like door handles with a caption.
There was the Cambridge Rapist in his mask with references to ‘A Hard Day's Night’— the idea was to link it to the death of The Beatles' manager, Brian Epstein, during a supposed bout of homosexual S&M.
And there was a third T-shirt, which featured a black bloke clutching a basketball, with his 12-inch, semi-erect dick hanging down like a Nigerian salami.
Muggins got the colour separations done for that at art school.
I felt a right prannet doing that.
Vivienne — with Bernie backing her up as Malcolm was in the States, having extended his visit after striking up a rapport with The New York Dolls at the time — talked me into doing it.
The trouble was, although they'd got me to do it — maybe because they knew it would save them money, or maybe because you can't get that kind of work done by your usual process shop — I didn't know how to do colour separations.
I knew what they were.
A photographic process which breaks a picture down into four colours — well, three colours plus black — and lots of little dots.
That's how all photographs are reproduced, be it for T-shirts or newspapers or books.
That I knew,
But I had no idea how to make them so I had to ask my tutor and show him the work.
He took a look at this picture of a black bloke with this dick practically touching his knees and said, Glen, fancy an extra tutorial one day soon?
So I kept telling Vivienne and Bernie that I'd lost the keys to my locker.
That way, I figured, I couldn't do the work.
Bernie laid right into me, telling me I was stupid for losing them.
Then Vivienne joined in and the three of us had a big slanging match.
Partly, I wasn't doing the work because I thought my tutor had decided I was a poof but, more importantly, I was dragging my feet because I wasn't keen on the work itself.
I told Vivienne I thought it was stupid, just childish.
It wasn't real outrage, it was cod outrage, like scribbling obscenities on the wall.
There was something fascist about it.
Quite what, I don't know.
I couldn't explain it very well at the time and I still can't.
But Vivienne came down on me like a dragon.
You, she said, you're a fascist.
I felt really used.
I was the one who had to take it to my tutor, not them.
It was all down to them thinking, oh, Glen's at art school, perhaps he can get it done for us.
Not being paid wasn't a problem; what was however was that I was being used for the donkey work without any consultation on the artistic side of it, And that was important to me.
When they did make up the T-shirts — as I backed down and did the separations — they got busted for sedition, which was an obscure act of whenever.
The actual person who got them busted was Alan Jones — not the artist but a gay guy on the scene, known as Leather And Bones Jones, a regular enough guy.
He got busted and they got done as well.
The thought of the bust always struck me as hilarious.
The idea of a regular Mr Plod seeing Leather And Bones walking down the road in his T-shirt and saying, here my lad, you're being seditious, come with me.
Malcolm got really paranoid, deciding that there was a conspiracy out to get him.
He decided to shift all the T-shirts.
As I had  a twelfth-hand Hillman Imp at the time I drove him down to his place in South London.
He'd just sold his jukebox so we had the back seat piled up with records from it.
Just as we were crossing Chelsea Bridge we were stopped by the police at a road block.
Christ, I thought, just my luck, no tax, bald tyre, I'm going to get done Malcolm saw it differently.
See, he said, I told you you shouldn't have come this way.
He didn't care about me.
But we both got out of it.
When the copper peered in the back and said, that's a lot of records, what are you going to do with them?
Paul, who was in the back, piped up, plain as anything, play them.
The copper said, oh yeah, right.
Having been made to look stupid, he let us go without even checking up on the tax or the tyre.
Or even getting to see the T-shirts.
Malcolm taught me things as well.
Things like how not to mouth off about any ideas you might have.
There's always people out there ready and willing to nick them.
People were always coming into the shop looking for things to copy.
Don Letts — who then worked for Acme Attractions and was until recently part of Big Audio Dynamite — was always in.
Which probably had something to do with the way that what we sold would reappear slightly redone in Acme six months later.
We'd always have to be slinging people out.
They'd come in prowling around.
At first you'd think they were just looking but really they were turning things over and over in their hands to see how they were made and checking out the cut so they could rip them off.
The worst one I remember was a woman whose company had a small place in the rag trade ghetto round the back of Oxford Circus.
Malcolm had designed a very nice women's mac.
A real fifties style, it was made of very thin ciré and looked almost like a dress, with its circular skirt and stand-up collar.
It was like something that the B52s might have worn — half a dozen years later.
This woman's firm had totally ripped it off for one of the midmarket youth fashion houses.
And made a mint out of it.
Without paying a penny to Malcolm and Vivienne — whose idea it was.
Well sort of.
They probably ripped it off themselves from a  Hollywood still.
But that's not the point really.
Theirs was a fully-developed idea and garment.
Things like that made them really cagey, hence I was always having to lob people out of the shop if they looked like they were examining the clothes too closely.
And I certainly learned the value of keeping my mouth shut about any ideas I might have
That was probably another of the reasons why they became so obsessed with loyalty, with the idea that you were part of some élite squad.
That obsession, if anything, became more in
The bondage suits, for instance, were based on the idea of the strait-jacket, with trousers to match.
Straps on the arms and legs could be fastened to restrict your movement.
They came in right at the end of the period I spent working there I never owned one myself — although I'd sometimes wear one in the shop I thought they were stupid.
How the fuck are you supposed to run for a bus in this was what I thought — a bit more down-to-earth than Malcolm and Vivienne.
Their attitude was, when you buy it you make a commitment to buying it and you wear it.
Which was another part of Vivienne's ‘One Of Us’ schtick.
If you weren't, fuck off.
But, even if you were, you had to buy the whole manifesto.
It never seemed to enter their minds that someone might like to buy a pair of trousers from Sex and a shirt from somewhere else.
You had to buy everything from them.
They were quite totalitarian in their own way.
I thought the Sex stuff was a bit weird but not so weird that I didn't want to get involved with it.
It was interesting.
I was along for the ride.
I took from it what I liked — just as John later added safety pins to his jackets and T-shirts.
Which was how most people treated the shop.
They took from it what they felt they could handle — or wanted to handle, or could put to some use — and rejected the rest.
As far as I was concerned, the bits I rejected I just didn't bother with.
Peeping Steve
It was around this time that Nick Kent started coming down to rehearsals at Riverside.
He was the star writer on the NME then and always in the shop because he was a Keith Richards clone and our shop was the last one n the Kings Road before Granny Takes A Trip — where all the Keith Richards clones bought their clothes.
Marty and Jean who ran Granny Takes A Trip were mates of Malcolm's and they all used to meet up after work in the pub Sometimes Nick would be there too and we got talking to him.
Malcolm used to court him.
As he was the NME 's star writer I guess Malcolm realised that once the band really started to get going, Nick would be able to help us out — whether he knew it or not.
Mind you, Malcolm did take the piss out of him as well, calling  him Troy Tempest in a leather jacket.
Probably because it was a way of roping him in for the future, Malcolm invited him down to a few rehearsals.
We, d jam, going through things like ‘I Can Feel The Fire’ from Ron Wood's solo album which was out around that time.
And we'd knock out things like ‘Slow Death’ by The Flamin' Groovies — who also used to come in the shop now and again when they were in town.
Then one day Malcolm said to me, what's going on with this Nick bloke and the band?
Not a lot really, he's come down and hacked through a couple of tunes with us.
You sure that's all there is?
He's been calling me up all hours of the day and night complaining about you guys especially Steve.
He reckons he's having to do all the work, write all the songs.
He says you lot can't play and it's getting to him, it's too much work for him to take on, what with his writing and everything.
So I had to go and put Nick straight, tell him that he wasn't even one of the band, just a mate who'd come and play with us every now and then.
I was still living with my parents at the time and I'd not long passed my driving test — with Bernie's assistance — so I borrowed my old man's Austin Cambridge one Sunday morning and drove over to Nick's.
I got there at what I thought was a reasonable hour, around midday.
When I found the right place it was a real hole.
A girl eventually answered the door.
She looked exactly like Nick, only female.
She had the same kind of eyes, a real pinned kind of look.
I didn't realise what that was all about till long after.
She said, come in, but Nick's not awake yet, go up to his room.
So I strode up there to have this man-to-man chat with Nick.
I really like Nick, I thought, how am I going to explain this?
I started right in by saying there must have been a bit of a misunderstanding.
He said, yeah, there has, which came as a great relief to me and we left it at that.
Fancy a drink then? he said.
A cup of coffee would be nice, I said.
He looked round the room and it was an absolute disaster area, stuff piled everywhere.
But there was no kitchen and he sure as hell was in no state to get up, so I was wondering where he was going to get something to drink from.
Eventually he reached into his bedside table.
Here it is, he said and pulled out a bottle of foul-looking medicine that could well have been the very stuff that Dr Jekyll used to turn himself into Mr Hyde.
It probably wasn't bubbling and smoking away like a witch's cauldron but I certainly remember it that way What was it?
Kaoline and morphine or some such brew apparently.
No thanks, Nick, I said.
I think I'll be getting home for my dinner Are we straight now then?
Yeah yeah.
We both knew what the other one meant but we never said it in so many words.
He didn't come down to rehearsals too much after that.
He was going out with Chrissie Hynde in those days.
The first time I remember seeing her was in The Roebuck.
Mike Smith, the singer and keyboard player in The Dave Clark Five, was having a quiet drink.
Chrissie knew who he was because she had a real background in screaming teeny bop stuff.
I didn't realise then that The Dave Clark Five had been that enormous in the States.
Chrissie shouted to him, oi, where are your Beatle boots then? and started bashing out the rhythm to ‘Glad All Over’ on the table.
Who's this? she said.
He got so embarrassed he turned round and scuttled out.
She didn't understand at all.
Shit, she said, I would have liked someone doing that if I were him.
That summer I thought I was going to be able to work in the shop full-time up until I started at St. Martin's School of Art in the autumn.
But Malcolm suddenly gave the job to Chrissie instead Because, I suppose, she was older and more rock ‘n’ roll with her leather jackets, whereas I was still at school and pretty straight.
But things started going a bit wrong before she could start.
One day she was hanging around the shop when Nick Kent followed her in, angry.
They'd had a row.
He took his belt off and started whacking Chrissie with it.
A bloke called Adrian happened to be in there as well.
A supposedly famous photographer in the sixties, he was now most famous for the farce and frequency of his suicide attempts.
Once he jumped from a roof and managed to land on the soft top of a passing van.
It merely broke his fall and carted him a couple of miles up the road.
But this day he was all action, stepping right up to Nick and thumping him hard.
Nick crawled away.
Adrian spent the next  hour nursing his fist and repeating over and over and over again, I hit him, I hit him, at last I've done something.
That was a quiet summer for the band.
Steve had been nicked and was in prison — Ashford Remand Centre — for a while.
He d been thieving again, of course, but it was no big deal really.
Certainly not compared to the time he got caught messing around on the roof of Battersea Power Station trying to nick the lead.
Someone saw him and called the police When they arrived he shimmied right to the very top of one of the chimneys.
A copper chased him up there.
When he caught Steve he asked him what he thought he was up to Well, said Steve, my mum and dad have split up.
She's moved in with another man who's an exboxer who knocks me around.
I've had enough of it and I wanted to be alone.
The police considered this and took him down to the station — for tea and sticky buns.
Because there was so little going on with the band I arranged to give myself a bit of a holiday.
A girl I was seeing pretty regularly had gone to France on an exchange visit to Tours I took a job for a couple of weeks in a lino warehouse with the idea of getting some money together
With the money I'd saved I went over to France, going straight to where she was staying in Tours.
The idea was that I'd go for a fortnight but when I got there she gave me the bum's rush so I spent a couple of miserable days in France and then hared it back to England.
When I got to London Chrissie was no longer working in the shop.
I think what happened was that Nick had been hanging around waiting to get hold of her.
Malcolm didn't think Chrissie being larruped with Nick's belt in his shop was good for business So I got the weekday job again.
Good old Nick, I thought, now I've got my old job back on direct account of him.
The Alex Harvey Band came into the shop quite a few times that summer, Chris Glenn, the bass player, bought his gold lurex socks from us.
Then, on one occasion, Malcolm happened to be around when they came in.
He took one look at them and said, what are those blokes doing here?
Get'em out.
Malcolm was really having a brainstorm.
I had to go over to them and say, I'm sorry but we're going  to have to close for a bit.
Perhaps you could come back tomorrow.
Fortunately, they were alright about it and sloped off.
I was used to suddenly closing up the shop anyway.
When Chelsea turned out on a Saturday afternoon, if we didn't lock the door, we had all the football fans in the shop trying to nick stuff and screaming obscenities.
So it was no skin off my nose, it was no big deal to shut up shop in the middle of the day.
But this was different.
Malcolm, I said, what was that all about?
Those blokes he said they were weird.
I reckon they're from the Inland Revenue.
Malcolm they're not.
How do you know? he said, implying I was only the shop lad and what did I know?
I said, I know because they're The Sensational Alex Harvey Band.
The Sensational what band? he said.
The Sensational Alex Harvey Band.
They're a group.
They've been playing The Marquee every week.
They're really good actually.
You should come and see them
Are you sure?
Yeah.
Well, what do they want?
A pair of creepers maybe.
Or some socks.
Or a T-shirt.
Alright then, he said, but watch ‘em.
A couple of months later he did come to the Hammersmith Odeon with Bernie and me to see them play I could seethe relief on his face when he realised they really were a band.
That autumn, I started my foundation course at St Martins, which is in Charing Cross Road right opposite all the musical equipment shops in Denmark Street, London's Tin Pan Alley.
Because of that it was inevitable that sooner or later I would be delegated by Steve and Paul to fence some of the gear they'd purloined.
And they did delegate me, of course, handing me a guitar to get rid of.
I took it to a couple of shops who just weren't interested and then to Macaris who seemed to be interested in buying it but who were being a bit funny about it to me.
The bloke behind the counter said, look, I've just got to go and look up the year of manufacture, I'll be back in a couple of  minutes.
I've got to check the price.
He'd come back and make another excuse to keep me hanging around.
Then the young assistant started giving me funny looks, as if there was something up and I should know there was something up.
He couldn't actually tell me what was going on because that would put him in shtuck but he was trying to tip me the wink.
I realised I was going to be nicked.
I've never been nicked before, I thought, I wonder what it's like?
So I hung around and, sure enough, a few minutes later a squad car turned up all its lights flashing.
They handcuffed me.
You don't need to bother with them, I said, I won't run off.
Oh yes you will, they said.
Not stupid coppers are they?
But this time they were wrong.
I was really curious to know what it was like to have your collar felt.
I guess I was trying to earn a couple of lowlife brownie points, so I could catch up with Steve and Paul's criminal pedigree.
As it was right across the road from college everyone was hanging out the window to see what was happening.
All my mates, my tutor, everyone saw me bundled into the back of the squad car.
They took me to West End Central and, instead of telling them what had really happened, I gave them a story.
I said I'd bought it off a bloke in The Roebuck.
They swallowed it and said they were charging me with handling stolen goods.
Just like in TV cop shows there was a nice cop and a nasty cop.
The nice one — who was a dead ringer for the compère in Hi-Di-Hi — came in and said, Well Glen, we've thought about it, we're not going to charge you with handling stolen goods.
Great, I thought.
No, we're going to charge you with theft.
If I plead guilty to that, I thought, I'll end up in the nick for the rest of my life.
But he told me that, in the eyes of the law, theft is actually a lesser charge than handling stolen goods If there weren't people handling stolen goods then nobody would nick things in the first place.
At least that's how they figured it and that's how he explained it to me.
I went up before the beak at Great Marlborough Street magistrates court.
Again they swallowed my story and gave me a year's conditional discharge.
Oh, I piped up, does that mean I  get off?
No it does not, young man, snapped the magistrate in no uncertain terms and explained how it all worked to me.
As I was leaving I made a big show of asking to see the guitar one more time.
I paid good money for that, I said, can't I just have a last go on it?
They let me have one last look and told me that it belonged to someone in another band — which made me feel really guilty.
Then they said, you're at art college, you must be able to draw, you could do a drawing of the gentleman in question you claim you bought the guitar from.
Maybe they meant it, maybe they were teasing.
They said that it was in everyone's interest that he got caught.
So I just made up a face, drew it for them.
Now luck would have it that my drawing was spot on for a guy who drank in The Roebuck.
Plus it turned out that he was a speed dealer.
The kids in the band whose guitar it really was set up a look-out in The Roebuck and, of course, they spotted him.
The dealer got more and more paranoid sitting there, noticing these two guys in the corner who kept looking at a bit of paper then at him, then having a bit of a conflab.
He got so paranoid he decided to leg it.
The kids immediately followed him thinking this was proof that he was the right guy.
Act guiltily and they'll judge you guilty As they started to follow him down the street he got more and more worried He broke into a run.
So they took off after him, caught him and gave him a hiding.
But, of course it was entirely the wrong bloke.
They should have been chasing Steve Jones.
Slowly we began to take the whole idea of the band more seriously.
We'd try and come up with ideas of what it was all about — sometimes prompted by Bernie, sometimes not.
For example, we decided to pay attention to the way we looked so we all had our hair cut short — except Wally — and took to wearing Hush Puppies and jeans, a kind of mod look — which was odd considering that Malcolm had a shop which specialised in teddy boy gear.
But what it shows is how, right from the earliest days, we were always much more than assembly line workers in Malcolm McLaren's dream factory.
Our next major step was to sort out a name.
Before I'd joined they'd called themselves Strand — after the Roxy Music song ‘Do The Strand — and The Swankers but both these names were well past their sell-by date by the time I arrived.
Yet, although we hadn't thought of a name, we'd started to fancy doing a couple of gigs and, of course, you can't do gigs without a name.
Our idea was that we should call ourselves The All Stars.
As it would only be a temporary name we felt it didn't really matter all that much what we should call ourselves
Malcolm was about to go to the States.
This was to be the visit on which he linked up with The New York Dolls.
Eventually he took over their management and put them into red patent leather suits, effectively driving the last nail into The Dolls’ coffin.
So it was Bernie we got talking to in the pub about a name for the band.
He was adamant.
No, no, no, no, no, he said, it's got to be the real thing, you've got to start out as you mean to go on Get it right from the beginning.
Get the correct name and stick with it.
Everything flows from there.
So that put the damper on gigs for a bit.
Some time before, Malcolm had come up with a list of half a dozen names.
The Damned was one.
Kid Gladlove was another.
A third was Crème De La Crème.
Blimey leave it out Malcolm, said Steve when he heard that one, that sounds more like some poncey wine bar.
And there was QT Jones And The Sex Pistols.
As well as the pun, I'm sure the reason Malcolm chose QT was that it was the postal code around where Steve — who was still the singer at this point — was staying.
The rest of the name was quite straightforward Pistols was a strong, hard word, not bad for a band's name.
Sex, of course, came from Malcolm's shop.
He was never shy of a bit of cross-promotion.
I'm also sure another influence was Disco Tex And His Sex-O-Lettes.
They had a big hit around the time and the shop was always full of these kids who were really into that gay, shallow disco — stuff like ‘The Hustle’.
These kids would hang out in The Sombrero in Kensington High Street and Chagueramas in Covent Garden — which became The Roxy Club a couple of years later.
So we didn't think much of it as a name at first but while Malcolm was away in the States, we somehow came round to it and decided to go with it.
Sex Pistols it was.
We dropped the QT Jones bit and, by the time Malcolm came back, we were really quite up about it.
A lot happened around that time.
We got a name, we left Riverside and we slung Wally out of the band.
The three things which really set us up for John's arrival.
I got on quite well with Steve around that time You hungry? he said one day Come on then I'll treat you.
He took me to a pie and mash shop on Hammersmith Broadway.
I was starving so I had pie and mash twice He had double pie and double mash twice.
As we waddled, full as pillows, back to Riverside, I said, I thought you were skint.
Well, he said, I found this attaché case, see.
Yeah?
And it had a grand in it.
Steve was also a major factor in our leaving Riverside.
What happened was, when we'd go there to rehearse on a Friday night, he would disappear for an hour or so.
One week we decided to follow him to find out where he was sloping off to We found him on the roof ledge peering down at people in a car below.
As this was something of a lovers' lane, he had a good chance of catching a couple knobbing on the back seat And Steve, as I'd already found out for myself, always did like a bit of voyeurism.
Unfortunately, soon after that a copper spotted him doing his Peeping Tom bit, followed him inside the studios and looked very strangely at all this expensive gear lying around.
So we would have had to leave anyway, in case the cops started taking too close an interest in it.
But we also had to leave because we chucked Wally out of the band.
As the place was really his gig we couldn't use it without him We'd been talking about it for ages — and Bernie was always badgering us about it — but we'd not really done anything about it.
The crunch came when Malcolm returned from America.
He put his foot down straightaway.
I told you to sack Wally before I left, he said.
How come he's still in the band?
I won't have anything more to do with you lot till you give him the elbow.
Which we did.
I never really minded Wally.
When push came to shove, I stuck up for him.
Then Paul said, I don't know why you're sticking up for him, he's been trying to get you slung out on your ear for ages.
So that was it really.
Wally left the band.
He's a strange bloke though.
He still calls me up now and again.
Not long ago he was on the phone to me moaning about Paul saying, he won't give me the time of day.
Which, given the way Wally rambles on, is scarcely surprising.
Then he started on me, I made them what they are today, he said.
Without me The Pistols would have been nowhere.
I'm going to take them to court and sue them
What's all that about then Wally?
The group was all my idea.
Before they met me, Steve and Paul were just petty criminals, didn't know nothing about nothing.
I told'em what to do, I told'em.
What did you tell them Wally?
They used to nick things like shoes, bits of jewellery and cars.
Now, what's the good of nicking a car if you can't drive it and you've got to ditch it?
So I told'em.
Guitars.
That's what they should be nicking.
If it hadn't been for me they'd never have nicked any guitars and there would have been no group.
So you're going to stand up in front of a judge and say all that, are you, Wally?
No, not exactly.
With Wally out of the band we could really take it seriously.
But for a while we found it hard.
Without him we had to struggle along with just the three of us.
Steve was doing OK but he was finding it hard to play guitar at the same time as singing.
Not that he was playing any flash lead parts but to keep a strong rhythm part going and sing at the same time is rather like having to twiddle both your thumbs in opposite directions at the same time.
So we decided we had to look for a new singer.
I'll Kill You
I'll kill you, said John on the phone in his best whine.
It was the first rehearsal with the band and none of us had turned up.
we booked The Crunchy Frog which was a hippy commune/warehouse/community centre by the Thames in Rotherhithe down in South East London, but we couldn't be bothered to go.
We'd been using it for a while since we had to leave Riverside Studios, trying out a couple of new singers.
But all to no avail.
It was a bloody long way to go across London.
The last time I'd been there I nearly got caught bunking my fare.
Every time I changed trains there was a posse of London Underground inspectors, so I had to keep doubling back on myself.
It took me about three hours to get six stops.
So I decided to give it a miss that day.
I really don't fancy schlepping all the way down there.
Steve and Paul didn't bother either.
Only John and his mate, John Grey, turned up.
John never went anywhere by himself, there was always an entourage.
I was deputed to phone him up and apologise.
That's when he threatened to kill me.
But I cooled him out and he agreed to come along to a new rehearsal place that we'd found, The Rose And Crown in Wandsworth.
That's where we really started rehearsing together properly as the band.
Where we got the money to pay for it, I'm not quite sure.
Perhaps Malcolm coughed up.
He was certainly very keen that we have John in the band.
Or maybe we sold some of the gear.
There weren't that many rehearsal places around at that time which we could afford.
But this one was cheap so we booked a full week.
Our idea was that at last we could have a real go at it, make sure things worked out.
But they didn't work out.
The landlord had obviously decided he could make a lot of money out of this rehearsal room lark.
So he'd taken an upstairs room and divided it into six spaces, figuring he could charge £1.50 an hour for each of them and really coin it in.
What he didn't understand was the nature of rock music.
It's loud.
And he hadn't put any sound-proofing in.
There were just hardboard partitions between the rehearsal rooms — cubicles really.
Nothing substantial enough to stop the noise going straight downstairs into the bars
Every time we struck a chord people would come tearing up from the bar to tell us to turn that fucking racket down.
And we'd say, we're paying good money for this.
Nothing really constructive got done there But it was where we first had a serious go at turning ourselves into a real band.
We weren't doing nine to five but we were working every afternoon for a week.
This new zeal was strange in a way because John wasn't really our idea, but Malcolm's.
John had turned up one day in the shop.
Malcolm, who had been told to look out for him by Steve, was impressed.
He arranged for us all to have a drink with him at The Roebuck.
We  trooped along and he more than likely brought his mate John Grey along with him.
He looked much the same as he did later, with a T-shirt and his 5000 volt haircut.
We had a few drinks and all thought he seemed a bit of a laugh so we asked him to come back to the shop with us and have a bit of a sing.
He was obviously nervous about it, but he came.
We put a few records on the jukebox and got him to mime along.
One of them, I remember, was Alice Cooper's ‘Eighteen’.
He stood there, shouting along and flapping his arms round like an over-excited seagull.
He looked just like he did when we played real gigs.
He was John Rotten from that very first moment
But we still couldn't tell whether he could sing or not.
It was a funny situation.
He felt awkward and so he mostly just took the piss out of it to get through.
But we decided to try him out.
This guy is the one, Malcolm said, and we went along with him Who knows why?
It certainly took us a while to understand John's plus points.
When we first started with him, even when we were rehearsing properly with him, all we could think of was that he couldn't sing.
Malcolm's got us this singer, we kept saying to each other, and he can't sing, what is all this about?
What we didn't realise at the time was that one of the main reasons that Malcolm was so keen on John was that he was so like Richard Hell — who was one of Malcolm s mates in New York.
He was as near as dammit to being a stylistic carbon copy of Hell.
We knew Malcolm had been really impressed with Hell in New York because they kept up a correspondence.
And, at one point, Malcolm must have asked him if he'd consider coming over to join the band, because Hell wrote to us via him saying that it sounded interesting but that because money and visas would be a problem he just couldn't.
But, at that time, none of us had seen Hell in person We'd seen a picture of The Heartbreakers that Malcolm had brought back from New York — the one in which it was meant to look like they'd been shot in the heart but in fact looked like they d all had the same accident with a ketchup bottle.
But we hadn't seen him perform.
And when we did, we all thought: aha, John, now we see.
Another person we thought of using as a front man was Midge Ure — who I went on to work with straight after The Pistols, in The Rich Kids.
Malcolm also made that contact when he and Bernie went on a trip up north, searching round textile factories for old fifties cloth to use for making up zoot suits.
We had some extremely hot gear lying around so we asked them if they'd have a go at getting rid of it for us out of town where it maybe would have cooled down somewhat.
They ended up trying to sell a Marshall amp in Glasgow.
The shop they went into wouldn't have anything to do with it though.
They must have thought something was fishy.
They certainly must have thought Malcolm was fishy, dressed as he was in black leather from head to toe.
No one at that time in Glasgow had ever seen anything like it outside a porn mag.
Midge happened to be standing next to them in the shop where they got the bum's rush.
Canny Scot that he is, he guessed what was happening, followed them out of the shop and offered them a tenner for the amp.
Malcolm took note of the way he looked — with his hair all slicked back, a really avant-garde gesture in Glasgow when everyone else was in loon pants.
He told me about Midge when he got back to London and I called him from the shop one Saturday, telling him we'd be interested in him as a singer.
But he wasn't interested in us.
I would, he said, but I've got this thing called Slik just going.
So what made us persist with John?
It's difficult to say.
Maybe that very quickly he started coming up with lyrics and that he and I got on well right from the off, Well, not quite from the off.
To begin with, he thought I was as close to Steve and Paul as they were to each other— and they were like a single amoeba that won't let anyone else into its world.
But, once he realised that I was a bit apart from them, we started to get on well and wrote a lot together, coming up with new lyrics for ‘Did You No Wrong’ and beginning to find cover versions that would really establish our identity.
From Steve and Paul's point of view, I reckon they thought he was a real card and that it would be a big laugh having him around.
Certainly John's arrival changed our attitude.
Before he came along we'd mess around with songs like ‘Build Me Up Buttercup’, with me fiddling around on a little clavinet that we'd found knocking around somewhere and Steve singing.
With John in the band we began to search out songs which were really us.
Quite soon we had enough songs for a set.
Some of which were cover versions that one or other of us had found.
Some of which were songs John and I had written together.
But we still always had a problem finding somewhere to rehearse.
We tried out The Roundhouse for a while, even interrupting a World Service broadcast which was going out live from somewhere else in the building while we were bashing through a rehearsal — probably our first public airing.
So that didn't last long.
We tried lots of rehearsal spaces but they were all a rip off and totally out of the way.
One day, flicking through the music papers like we did every Wednesday, I spotted an ad in the Melody Maker for premises in Tin Pan Alley — Denmark Street.
I showed it to Malcolm and he said to call up and offer £1000 blind.
So I called.
Here, I said, I think my mate's mad but he says to offer you £1000 for your place without even seeing it.
And the bloke on the other end of the phone said, I think we could talk business.
Malcolm got right on the phone with him and sorted it out.
The bloke's name was Bill Collins, the father of Lewis Collins, star of The Professionals TV show.
Bill had been a Beatles roadie and then became a manager, of The Mojos and Badfinger — which is how he came to be the owner of studios in Denmark Street.
Badfinger had worked out of the studios but the main guy topped himself in 1975 (to be followed by another in 1983) and Bill was left with a studio and no band.
His big thing though was his piano theory.
He'd been involved with bands all those years and could play a bit of music but he never quite got the hang of the idea of written music.
So whenever he tried to explain any musical idea he just couldn't make his bands understand.
The classic example of that happened with Badfinger.
They wrote a song called ‘Without You’, which they recorded as a semi-rock song.
Bill's idea was that they should play it as a ballad  instead.
So he tried to show them on the piano.
But as he couldn't play it that well, he just couldn't get his ideas across.
Which was a dreadful shame.
They badly needed a hit at the time.
(And it was that lack of hits which probably helped bring about the suicides.)
They might have had one if Bill could have explained his idea because that's exactly what Harry Nilsson later did with the song, turned it into a big ballad and scored a number one hit with it.
So, frustrated by this inability to demonstrate his ideas, he developed an entire new musical theory.
It had no sharps or flats and was based on a six-line stave — instead of the five-line one which is usual for musical notation.
He then built a machine for the piano which had a series of lights which went on and off ensuring that you played the right note — without ever having to understand what a sharp or a flat was.
He tried to get it marketed or patented but he never succeeded.
Anyway Malcolm quickly agreed to the terms on the lease and Steve and I moved in, living there as well as using it as a rehearsal room.
It was a small outbuilding off Denmark Street, behind a Greek bookshop.
It looked like it had been built as a rag trade sweatshop at the turn of the century and was sandwiched between a musical equipment shop and The Tin Pan Alley Club — which was a notorious music biz drinking den.
Amongst other things, we were always finding used syringes that had been lobbed over the wall.
At the far end was St. Giles Church — which meant we never had an excuse for being late anywhere as the bells tolled the hour — and the quarters — right through the night
Inside there were two rooms, one on each floor, both the same size, about 20 feet by 15.
It was small and poky, the carpet stank of sweat from all the bands that had rehearsed there over the years, the floor was rotten and covered with fungus More unpleasant smells came from the toilet that didn't work and the leaking skylight which let in so much rain the whole place was always damp.
The windows had been bricked up as part of the soundproofing.
Squalid is the word.
Steve and I shared the one room upstairs and tried to do it up a bit.
We put in a new sink and Malcolm  bought us a Baby Belling cooker, one electric ring on which we could heat a an of beans very, very slowly.
We fixed it up as well as we could — which wasn't well but it did give us both somewhere to live away from our parents, a first real taste of independence.
and it meant we had a regular rehearsal space — which we used nearly every day.
Maybe we'd only do half an hour before sloping off but, bit by bit, we were able to put a set together.
Our first gig was all of one hundred yards down the road.
On November 6, 1975, we played support at St Martin's School of Art to a band called Bazooka Joe — which included a young man called Stuart Goddard, later to become Adam Ant and so obsessed by punk that he has an almost complete set of Seditionaries clothing.
We'd been moaning to Malcolm about wanting to play some gigs.
Alright then, he said, if you're so keen, why don't you go and find them yourselves?
I took him at his word.
At that point I'd just left St Martin's.
I'd finished my foundation year earlier that summer and, although I'd been offered a fulltime place — and grant — to do my Fine Art degree in painting, I blew it out.
I was proud of getting accepted, particularly at St Martin's because it was such a good art school, but Fine Art seemed a fast road to nowhere What kind of job can you get at the end of that?
Even if you become a great painter you end up being some rich man's lackey, sponsored and dabbled with — if you're lucky.
More likely you rot as a tutor in High Wycombe or somewhere like Hatherley School of Fine Art, teaching the talentless children of the rich.
When the band became serious, I thought this is a far more contemporary and interesting way to make an artistic statement.
So I packed in art school.
Which was stupid really.
And Vivienne kept telling me, I should have stayed on just for the grant.
Which is what Mick Jones of The Clash did.
He was at Hammersmith Art College.
He turned up the first day of the term, picked up his grant, bought a guitar with it and then disappeared ‘till the start of the next term and that term's grant cheque.
But it was because I'd been at St. Martin's that we got that first gig.
At the end of my foundation year I'd been voted in as Social Secretary, in charge of putting on all the shows there.
So I trooped down there and muscled us in on the Bazooka Joe gig.
Then, just before that gig, I went over to Central School of Art in Holborn and swung us another gig there.
I walked in through the door and, feeling a bit lost, I asked the first person I saw if he knew whether the Social Secretary was around.
Yeth, he said, I am.
This was Sebastian Conran, son of Terence Conran, who founded Habitat, and brother of designer Jasper Conran.
But the bloke next to him wasn't having any of that.
Yes, he said, we are, making it clear that they were joint social secretaries.
This was All McDowell who became a close friend of mine, founded i-D magazine and coined the phrase ‘Fuck Art: Let's Dance.’
Why do you want the social sec? he asked.
I'm in a band and we're looking for a gig.
What's the name of the group? asked All.
The Sex Pistols.
Sebastian's eyes lit right up.
Oh yeth, he said, with a name like the Thex Pithtolth we must have you.
So I invited them to the gig at St Martin's.
Which was something of a racket, plus Bazooka Joe kept on pulling the plugs on us trying to get us off the stage.
And they were in the audience.
All was dressed up like Bud Flanagan for some reason almost drowning in a raccoon coat.
And he kept roaring with laughter all the way through the set — well, what we managed to do of it.
I really thought we'd blown it when I saw him cracking up.
But, in fact, he really liked us.
The Central gig was the first one where we were actually allowed to play our own set all the way through.
This time we were promoted to co-headliners, with Roogalator who were another of the big names on the pub rock circuit at the time.
As soon as we arrived, the bass player, Paul ‘Bassman’ Riley, took one look at us and came over with a proposition.
Instead of moving all the gear around, he said, how about if I borrow your bass cabinet?
OK, I said.
Er, he said, while we're about it, you couldn't lend me your bass as well, could you?
They were meant to be a pro group while we were just starting out.
Yet we were the ones with all the flash gear.
Which just shows you what a lot of stuff Steve had lifted for us.
The show itself was one of the best we ever played.
On the other hand though I was really drunk so maybe I only remember it that way John turned round to me at the end and said, I can't understand you All the people I know, when they get pissed, they start fights, whereas you just seem really happy
There you go, I thought, a solid illustration of the difference between John and myself.
All this time we were still trying to fix up Denmark Street so that it became vaguely comfortable.
We got so fed up with the leaking roof that we decided to try and mend it with some tar.
Steve had gone off somewhere so, to help me along, I nicked one of his black bombers, the capsules of speed he always had around.
He had a prescription for them, from an infamous doctor in Harley Street.
They were meant to be for his weight but I'm not sure I believe that.
I thought maybe he'd convinced Malcolm that he was overweight — which he wasn't — and Malcolm had this real thing about us looking the part.
So Malcolm sprang for the script.
And Steve got the free speed he was after.
Out of my box on this bomber, I remembered there was a bird I fancied at St. Martin's — Virginia.
So I went there and cornered her in the canteen and tried to chat her up for half an hour.
I was rabbiting and rabbiting and rabbiting as we drank our tea.
She quite obviously wasn't listening to a word of it.
Glen, she said, you alright, Glen?
It was a freezing cold day and I'd been sitting there in nothing but these dungarees that I'd been working on the roof in.
Never got anywhere with her, of course.
Steve was already there when I got back.
He looked at me really carefully and deliberately.
He got out his pills, tipped them out on the table and started counting them — which took absolutely ages because he never did count too well.
Just as he  got to the last one I said, by the way, I had one of those.
That's how it is between flat mates.
Because someone had tried — very badly — to soundproof the room, all the walls were covered with cork tiles which stood proud from the wall behind.
We took it all down in one day, helped by Steve's mothers' little helpers.
All that was left to do was a big hole in the wall by the sink that needed filling.
We decided to go to bed for the night.
We both got our heads down and then a scratching noise started up Steve is that you?
No, Glen is that you?
We turned the light on The room was full of funny little animals whizzing all over the floor.
Mice.
A squadron of them moving four abreast in perfect formation, frightened because we'd put the light on, scampering around trying to jump over the bed and the settee.
They'd been happy behind their cork and we'd torn down their cover.
Whooooah, Said Steve and dived under the covers.
We had to sleep like that.
I had to try and get a bit of kip on the crumbling sofa with a torch in one hand and a big bit of four by two in the other, ready to whack any of the mice if they came out to get us.
It was bad enough already sleeping there.
In fact, it was fucking horrible.
The roof leaked.
Every time it rained you had to move your bed.
And after that, of course, we couldn't get to sleep.
Every little noise we thought was another assault wave of killer mice.
‘Ere Glen, said Steve, you asleep?
No, can't.
Me neither, Glen, you ever had a wank with a johnny on?
Can't say I have, Steve.
It's fucking great.
Mind you better than that is a loaf of bread.
Not sliced stuff though, none of that Wonderloaf lark.
It's got to be a good loaf of bread, like that one you buy down the road, the black one, that'll do.
Slice the top off and scoop a bit out from the middle.
Then fill it up with water from the kettle, Not boiling, mind, that could prove disastrous.
Just a nice kind of warm, room temperature slosh of water, that's what you need.
And you shag that.
It's fucking great.
The best thing of all though is…
Yeah?
Pound of liver with a slit in it.
Goodnight Steve.
We were so broke when we were living there that I'd buy a bar of Kit Kat in the morning, have two fingers of it for breakfast and the other two for dinner in the evening.
That's all I'd have to eat all day.
By this time I'd left St. Martins so there was no more grant.
I was having to survive on my dole money — which seemed to disappear the day I got it.
Kit Kats were about all I could afford.
Then we sussed out that bread and milk were delivered to the local restaurants really early.
So we'd wait up all night, follow the delivery van around and survive on the bread and milk we could swipe.
We complained to Malcolm, told him we were fed up with the mice and we didn't have enough money to eat properly.
(John, by the way, would always claim they were rats — with his usual sense of accuracy.)
So Malcolm went down Club Row market and bought us a cat and the most ridiculously horrible food — tins of sardines and those disgusting tinned plum tomatoes they used to try and make you eat at school.
There you go boys, he said, that'll do you
And he cooked us sardine soup.
It wasn't bad actually.
Cor, he said, this is almost like being an art student again.
But, that one banquet apart, it wasn't.
We were always hungry.
One Sunday I was so fed up with living on Kit Kats that I called my mum.
How you going Glen? she said, Bit fed up actually, I'm hungry.
Come over son, there's a nice bit of Sunday dinner going here.
Naah, I said.
I can't make it, I've got to go and see a mate.
But that was an excuse.
Really my mouth was watering.
The truth was I really fancied going there but I didn't even have the money to bunk the tube.
All I needed was 10 pence — which was what you had to pay in those days if you said you came from the previous stop — but I didn't even have that.
We were always hungry and we were always broke.
It's not as though we weren't making money at the time either.
We were gigging and getting well paid for it.
When we did start playing proper gigs we got surprisingly good money.
We'd get  £50 or £60 a night — which might not sound like a lot but that's still what young bands get for the same gigs today.
In fact, a lot of bands starting out these days have to pay to play their first gigs.
Which is a right liberty.
But we never saw any of that money.
It got to the stage where we didn't bother to ask what happened to it.
We didn't even think about it.
Only once did I get some money after a gig.
We'd played in St. Albans and I'd met a girl there, Claire, She was the Social Secretary at the college who'd booked us in to play.
Give us a quid, Malcolm, I said, so I can get home in the morning.
He gave me a fiver.
I couldn't believe my luck.
We went down to an awful Wimpy Bar opposite Chagueramas — which later became The Roxy.
In those days it was full of horrible camp types dancing to limp disco.
They were all sub- ‘Virginia Plain' characters with half a floorbrush on each shoulder.
It was supposed to look like they were wearing epaulettes but it never did.
That was the first time I'd had any money out of gigging in a year.
We played some strange old gigs in that period.
Andrew Logan's party, for instance, which got us our first press — a mention in an upmarket society fashion magazine.
The party was held at his flat which was a loft in a warehouse down by the river in Shad Thames on a wharf right next to Tower Bridge I'd never seen anywhere like it.
We had to take all the gear up in a hoist.
Then, when you got inside, you could see how this man had come to run something as bizarre as The Alternative Miss World — with its transvestites and concept artists.
Logan had done some of the designs for the old Biba department store in Kensington High Street and, when it closed down, he took all his work back to his flat.
His bedroom was the Sleeping Beauty scene he'd done for Biba's children's department and the kitchen area was full of artificial trees — which his party guests used to piss against.
I thought it was great.
Unsurprisingly, Steve looked around and said: bum bandits, all of 'em Come on, said Malcolm, be cool, he's letting us play here.
But Steve really wasn't happy.
This wasn't his idea of a proper place for his band to play.
When we did get to play, the stage was a set that Logan had designed for a movie — the court scene in Derek Jarman's Sebastiane .
We played The Marquee for the first and only time supporting Eddie And The Hot Rods.
We were dreadful — but arrogant with it.
It was the first time we'd had proper monitors on stage — which meant it was the first time John heard his own voice.
And he didn't like what he heard So he trashed the monitors.
A terrible gig.
But also our first review.
Neil Spencer wrote about it in the New Musical Express beneath the headline ‘Don't Look Over Your Shoulder, But The Sex Pistols Are Coming.’
You can't play, a French tourist at the front shouted.
So what?
I shouted back.
Later Spencer chatted to us, asking about music.
We're not into music, we told him.
What are you into then?
Chaos.
We quickly found that few places would let us play so we started looking round for alternatives.
Malcolm had taken on an assistant by this time, Nils Stevenson.
He wanted to give Nils something to do to justify his position so he sent him out to hunt out unusual places for us to play.
Nils came up with El Paradise, a strip club in Soho's Brewer Street, It fitted.
The Sex Pistols plus strip club.
What could be more natural?
We took it over for a Sunday night, hiring it, promoting the gig ourselves, pushing out a lot of handbills.
And, on the day itself, we turned up early to sort out the club.
It was a tiny place — nothing more than a shop knocked through from the street at ground level, no more than 60 feet long At one end was a small bar — from which we sold orange juices on top of the counter with the booze tucked away underneath.
At the other end was a stage with footlights.
To one side was a row of lights which flickered on and off like something you'd get
the Palladium — a cheap trick to try and convince the punters that they were in somewhere far classier than was really the case.
And it stank.
It was absolutely filthy, horrible and scuzzy, with disgusting stains on the floor.
So — hard as it may be for some people to believe — we disinfected the whole place, sloshing the stuff everywhere.
When it came to show time, John started acting very oddly.
Either because he had the hump or because he thought it would make for a good show he started smashing the footlights one by one.
As he did this a Maltese feller started striding slowly but purposefully towards us from the back of the club.
We knew he was the owner of the club and — while he can't have been more than four-foot-nine inches tall — we knew that Soho was run by Maltese gangsters just like him.
He was built like a brick shithouse and he plonked himself down right in front of the stage.
He put one elbow on the stage itself and stared straight at John.
There was a fair crowd there but it was scarcely crowded: John couldn't have not noticed him.
But that's what he pretended.
for three numbers the Maltese heavy stared at him — while all his henchmen stood at the back of the club watching him watching John.
For three numbers John looked everywhere but at him.
Really, his point made — a kind of behave yourself young lad, or you will come to a sticky end — he stood up and wandered back to the bar.
It was also during this period that we had the strangest set of photographs taken of us, by Peter Christopherson who worked for a design company, Hipgnosis — whose offices were at the back of our Denmark Street HQ — and who later joined Throbbing Gristle, a band best known for tabloid spreads on their occult practices.
Their offices faced right on to our living quarters and they were always staring at us.
It got so bad we had to do the full old lady bit and put up net curtains.
Then one day the main guy who'd been peeking at us turned up and asked if he could take some pictures of us.
Malcolm said OK, but even he can't have had any idea what Christopherson intended.
Paul, he made up covered with bullet wounds.
Steve, he photographed in handcuffs.
John, he put in a straitjacket.
And  me, he took me round to the YMCA locker room and photographed me half dressed.
It was pretty obvious he was after making me look like a rent boy.
A very weird man — who, if The Pistols had stayed together, could have made a fortune flogging those snaps to a Sunday dreadful.
Apart from our regular rehearsals we often found ourselves at a loose end and would all troop round together.
One afternoon we were all wandering up Tottenham Court Road for some reason.
Maybe we were on our way to a cheap Indian self-service restaurant that Malcolm had introduced us to.
Maybe we were on our way to the Fender Soundhouse because Steve needed some new strings for his guitar.
About half way up Tottenham Court Road there was, and still is, a Scientology centre.
They have people hanging about outside on the pavement trying to entice gullible idiots in.
We had nothing much better to do so we all piled in.
They gave us a questionnaire each to fill in.
And the results really showed the four different characters in the band.
Well, three different characters really because Steve and Paul always kind of lumped themselves together.
They were like Fred Flintstone and Barney Rubble, that's how I used to think of them.
I went into another room to talk to a Scientology person.
He started telling me that I was an emotional cretin and to improve I'd have to pay them a load of money to get into their reading room — at £10 an hour.
I said, hang on a minute, you haven't even read my questionnaire yet.
You're telling me all this guff and you haven't even read what I wrote.
I thought it was all a joke, you've really got to be some schmuck to fall for that one.
And I walked out
I hung around outside, waiting.
After a few minutes, Fred Flintstone and Barney Rubble emerged.
They were really worried.
They believed everything they d been told.
Straightaway Steve got on to Malcolm and told him they needed all this money to join up with Scientology.
Malcolm told him not to be so stupid.
For ages afterwards all these letters kept arriving at Denmark Street from the Scientologists.
They'd say things like, ‘Glen, you've been a really naughty boy.
You didn't turn up for a meeting two weeks ago.’
Malcolm just used to screw them up and chuck them in the bin.
John, however, coined out of it.
he conned them into believing he was really into Scientology.
So they gave him a job.
And, as far as I can remember, he did it.
He went up there a couple of times and stood outside on the pavement forcing leaflets on people, trying to get them to come inside.
I said to him, don't you think it's morally wrong trying to con people like that, getting them to shell out all that money?
It's exploiting those who are least able to handle it.
He said, it's not my fault if people are stupid.
Iggy Pop had a similar attitude.
Years later I remember we were recording at Rockfield Studios.
We were all eating roast venison and at the same time discussing vegetarianism.
Jim (no one who knows him calls him Iggy) being Jim was squatting on the table stuffing everyone else's venison into his roll and eating it with his fingers.
The way I see it is this, he said, if animals weren't so stupid, they wouldn't get caught.
Just like John.
It was while we were at Denmark Street that the punk scene — as it would later be called — began to develop.
All of us would hang around together.
Not just The Pistols but others, like Mick Jones — who formed The Clash — and Tony James — who started Generation X.
On Fridays we'd often go to the Royal College of Art where they used to have these great shows which went on till three or four o'clock in the morning.
I knew about them because of being at art college and I took Steve and Paul down with me and introduced them to a scene they knew nothing about.
It was after one of those shows that I introduced Mick Jones to Joe Strummer for the first time.
A whole crowd of us were walking back to Denmark Street — me and Rat Scabies and Brian James — two founders of The Damned — and Mick Jones and some others.
We bumped into Strummer on the corner of Old Compton Street and Frith Street, just down the road from Ronnie Scott's.
Which was where Strummer was going.
What you doin'? he said.
I went to see this bloke play at Ronnie Scott's last night.
He was fucking great.
You should go.
In fact, he said if I wanted to bring along some mates, he'd get us all in free.
So we checked it out.
This being the early days of punk we looked like complete urchins.
So everyone working on the door at Ronnie's had a good laugh at us while Strummer was hustling to get us in.
Tom said if I brought some mates, he'd get us in.
Tom who? said the bloke on the door.
Tom Waits.
Oh, he said, but he did go off and fetch him.
And there was Tom Waits at the door, in this big Crombie coat.
Hey Joe!
What can I do for you?
Well, you said if I brought a couple of mates down you'd get us in.
Yeah, that should be OK.
How many of you are there?
We had a quick count up and there were about 10 of us.
Hey! said Tom, hang on there a minute.
He leant back against the door, opened this big overcoat and there, in the inside pocket, was a pint of Guinness with a perfect head on it.
He can't have put it there for effect because he didn't know who was going to be there.
He just happened to have a pint of Guinness with a perfect head on it in his pocket.
Though how he managed it I don't know.
I've tried to do it endless times since but the drink just goes everywhere.
He stood there, reached into the coat, pulled out the pint, drank it all down in one go and nodded to the barman.
Hey!
Let the boys in.
And he was great.
Another person who was around the scene at the time was Chrissie Hynde who, after Malcolm's shop and writing for the NME , had really been scuffling around.
One night I remember, she knocked on the door at Denmark Street just as we were packing up.
The other guys all left and she walked out with me.
As we got to Tottenham Court Road — which is just round the corner — she spotted the Ann Summers sex shop there and said, hang on, let's just pop in there for a minute.
What are you going in there for?
I said.
To get a job.
It wasn't that she wanted to work in a sex shop but that she needed work of some kind.
She'd been writing for the NME , about David Cassidy and things like that but it must have been quite a struggle to get by.
She was an alien in the country with no dole to fall back on, didn't have much money.
So basically she was looking for a job.
Still, even though they didn't need any staff, I must admit I thought Ann Summers was a funny one to pick.
Paul was a big problem for a while.
John and I were on the dole.
Steve got by as best he knew how.
But Paul had a full-time job.
We were always putting pressure on him to jack it in.
We told him that this was a band for full-timers not part-timers.
He was an apprentice electrician at Watneys brewery in Mortlake.
As he'd nearly finished his apprenticeship, he was understandably loathe to pack it in.
He must have reckoned that having a back-up trade was always a handy thing when you're going into something as risky as the music business.
My dad certainly agreed with him.
He was always on at me to become a cab driver or something.
Just in case the music didn't work out.
But Paul didn't like to admit that this was the reason he didn't want to give up his day job.
So he created a smokescreen, making the excuse that he didn't think Steve was a good enough guitarist by himself and that we needed a second guitar.
Nothing but a diversionary tactic.
So we had to go through a whole charade of auditioning a second guitarist.
We put an ad in the Melody Maker which read: Whizz Kid Guitarist.
Not older than 20.
Not worse looking than Johnny Thunders.
Auditioning.
Tin Pan Alley.
Ring 351 0764, 673 0855.
All these Herberts turned up.
The first bloke was late so, instead of waiting, we decided to go to the pub.
Just as we were leaving he turned up in the hallway.
He was Greek or something like that.
Definitely a bit of a bubble.
He had snakeskin boots and a matching snakeskin guitar case.
His shirt was undone to the waist, showing off a little gold shark's tooth on a chain and a Keith Richards-style scarf.
With him was a friend dressed exactly the same.
We walked straight past, pretending not to notice him, but he got hold of Malcolm and said, where's the audition?
You can't be for the audition, said Malcolm.
Why do you think that? said Mr Snakeskin.
Well, said Malcolm, did you read the ad?
Yes.
Well, you must have missed the bit where it said ‘not worse looking than Johnny Thunders,’ The poor bloke was completely crestfallen.
But it was mostly all like that.
People turn up for auditions who can't play at all.
You get used to it.
The only one who really could play was Steve New who was later in The Rich Kids with me.
He turned up for the audition with his art teacher, Rose, who he was dating at the time.
He told us he was 16 but really he was only 15.
Him apart though it was pretty much all no-hopers — nothing more than a total waste of time and a convenient way for Paul to take the pressure off himself.
So we took Steve New on as second guitarist.
But he was on a hiding to nothing really.
Jonesy was getting better by the minute on the guitar and the sound we were after had no space for the flash lead work that Steve could play so well.
So, after a month with two guitarists, we were back to being what we started out to be, a four-piece.