

BOOK TWO
Two
His eagerness made her, suddenly, want to be intelligent again.
Under his dynamic tutelage she started reading — not the literature of her childhood, but hard politics, sociology, philosophy, ideas, and experimental fiction.
To please him she learned to talk about what she read and what she thought.
He was, and she forced herself to remember this with gratitude, one of the best talkers she had ever met; funny and fast.
Passionate, and unashamed.
A man who could and would talk the hind legs back on to an injured donkey, provided it had decent proletarian credentials.
They had all learned from him; she and Lisa still spoke, stylistically, as he had taught them to.
He had set his mark on them.
Where was he now?
Phoebe lying on her bed in her mother's house in north London, asked herself with a sudden rush of nostalgia.
In what corner of what foreign field did he still keep the faith, further the revolution, wake up his current lover at three in the morning to discuss the delicate interweavings of class and race.
She could not bear to think that he had taken all that pure wrathful zeal into marketing or insurance broking.
Occasionally she half hoped to see him again, she would find herself watching faces rising towards her on the escalator of the Tube and wonder what she would feel if one of those faces were suddenly to be his.
Where had they all gone, those extraordinary skinny left-wing men, who had bullied their girl-friends into the Women's Movement and been surprised when the hand with which they had so kindly offered freedom had been bitten so damn hard?
Nearly twenty years later Phoebe still found it hard to suppress a little vindictive chuckle at the looks of growing shock on Jim's face -Jim and Lisa's Jonathan and Sue's Alan — when they discovered that their righteousness was not enough.
Their women, far from being grateful, turned on them, snarling, in late night conversations telling them to shut up; far from setting them free to work for the Revolution, their women demanded that they take emotional responsibility and also clean the loos.
And finally, only a year or so later, turned them out of house and home — put them on the street, as women who failed to be properly grateful to the fathers had been put for centuries.
But even as she chuckled, Phoebe knew now that this was not fair.
There had been a time, a brief time, a glorious dawn, when despite her growing awareness of her own sexual failure, despite her anger and frustration, despite her own laziness and lack of commitment, there had been a time when she had been happy and hopeful and joyous.
It had not, as it turned out, been Jim that had made the happiness for her, but the house itself.
However he, with his determined hands and determined nose, had been her way in.
She did not know where he was now and she did not really care, but he had probably been the most influential person in her life: her handsome prince and Maggie's father.
He had given her that household, a little society, warming itself in its own glow of virtue, insulating itself from the big bad world; but within its own limits it had been open and supportive.
She had, during that year, woken some mornings giddy with courage and boldness, excited and certain.
Motivated.
It had been, however briefly, a time when her body and her mind had fitted together so tidily and wholely that, waking up one morning and deciding that it was time to go back to Oxford and visit her mother, was neither traumatic nor casual, but straightforward.
She had discussed it with her family; hugged Lisa and Sue, kissed Jim, left home, and taken the tube to Acton where she stuck out her thumb on the edge of the A40 on a smiling spring day and gone home.
Had that, she wondered now, been a mistake?
A kindly lorry driver on his way to North Wales, chatting of his own daughter and his home, had dropped her at the roundabout at the top of the Banbury Road at about lunch-time.
She had walked down through suburban Summertown, taking her time but without reluctance; watching the tidiness of the shoppers and the smartness of the shops with something akin to smugness -how little energy and vitality they had, compared to her own shopping street, with its untidy market atmosphere permeating even the Safeways and Boots which had tried to raise their modern, never-had-it-so-good façades in challenge to the poverty and squalor, and had failed.
Two blocks away from the house of her childhood it suddenly occurred to her that her mother might have left, that there might be strangers in the hallway, a different set of curtains hanging at the windows; her father's study might have been turned into a playroom for a new generation of North Oxford children, so different from herself in her prim Clark's T-bar sandals that she would not be able to recognise her own infancy in theirs.
It would be too humiliating to have to contact her mother through her publishers or her employers.
How could one ring a bell on a house door in respectable places like this and say,
‘Excuse me does my mother live here?’
That was the stuff of melodrama, and now she was back in Oxford she knew she was somewhere, somehow, still too middle-class, too much her father's daughter, to want that.
This was leafy north Oxford, this was the pace of security.
This was the corner to which she had tottered, her mother holding her on white leather reins, her legs encased in knitted leggings whose scratchiness she could still remember.
This was the street along which she had run, a skinny and excited ten-year-old, to boast to her father that she was the only girl who had made it to the next round of the chess competition.
This was the pavement along which, awkward and gawky, she had struggled to find a graceful, even a comfortable, way of carrying her cello to and from her chamber music group.
She hesitated at the corner, reluctant almost to discover that she was now, as of this moment, completely lost in the world, and for the first time she asked herself clearly why she had decided to come here.
This was not home.
Home was in Peckham, in the shabby house whose light spilled each evening out onto the street.
Family was Jim and the others; family was her women's group and squabbling at two-thirty in the morning about whether women could be said to constitute a separate class because they had a separate relation to the mode of production, while still making each other coffee and giving each other hugs.
And love was standing outside the local supermarket collecting signatures for the campaign to keep Family Allowance as a separate benefit.
She had forsaken her people and her father's house, and had, like every other well-brought-up girl, established her own household and she should cleave only unto it, forsaking all others so long as she should live.
She did not know why she had come.
Not certainly to reassure her mother, but…to boast of her new self!
To show off?
And then the moment had passed, and tall and tanned and fit in the sunshine she had walked down the green street with the gardens either side of her, and had known by an instinctive glance that her mother still lived there, that nothing had changed.
She rang the doorbell, listened to the silence within and felt a moment of panic.
Then she laughed at herself, with an edge of self-mocking irony.
All her self-righteousness had failed to inform her that her mother, a hardy professional, was certainly still at work in the city that she had left behind her.
They had probably passed each other on the road.
She went back to the corner and across to the nearby pub, where she sat sipping beer, munching a cheese sandwich, and waiting.
She had waited all afternoon — later sitting in the garden and reading.
When the sun moved round she too had moved to the doorstep, her sleeves rolled up and concentrating half on the book and half on the remembered scene until her mother had arrived, walking up the street where they had both walked so many times before.
That had been the moment of her undoing.
Her mother had got older, fatter and sadder.
Phoebe felt an enormous, and unwelcome, surge of pity, of compassion and caring; and with it guilt.
In one swoop the feeling swallowed her up and she had never got rid of it since.
She saw in Rachel's face three years of loss and loneliness; she saw too the simpler anger that Rachel would never dare to express.
And to cover up the dreadfulness of the moment, the pain of the knowledge that Rachel had become old, alone, and friendless, she had giggled and said something about having lost her key.
She felt the deep need in Rachel's hug, and responded to it, but it was Rachel's need not her own.
She was furious.
Her fury made her aggressive and she attacked.
She was mean and horrible to her mother, snide, self-righteous and unkind.
Only in her anger could she drown out the dark shadow that pity and guilt had cast over her.
She hated herself for it, and went on and on, convinced that her only defence was to make Rachel throw her out again, and Rachel refused to be provoked.
Finally Rachel responded and Phoebe had forgotten in her wanderings just how bloody clever Rachel was.
How well she could keep control and use words and manipulate their meanings and score points.
It was this ruthless clarity and brightness that she had run away from.
She, Phoebe told herself, did not play those stupid games any more, she was direct and straightforward.
But her mouth motored on and what came out was simply, and childishly, rude.
Phoebe felt foolish.
Rachel seemed able to absorb everything that Phoebe tried.
She was calm and sweet and later insisted on taking Phoebe out to dinner at some fancy little pseudo-Bohemian bistro.
Then to her final and total humiliation Phoebe found that she was actually having a good time; she was enjoying her mother and her mother's easy authority and charm.
Her mother, she thought with a most annoying pride, who was one of the few genuinely creative women scientists around and in whose success, were it anyone except her mother's, she would be rejoicing.
She went to bed in her own room, still full of pictures and possessions that had belonged to a previous and vanished Phoebe.
She curled up in the position she had slept in as a child; and realised with a sinking heart that it was not only the most comfortable way of being in bed, but it was also one that you could not adopt in company.
She thought that she never wanted to sleep with Jim again, that the bonds of love were snares and that she must at all costs leave as early as possible the next morning and never come back.
She had a clear and frightening premonition that she would not be able to manage it.
Perhaps if she had not got pregnant…perhaps they could have pulled it off.
Perhaps not.
Now she no longer knew.
She found it hard to remember with any precision exactly what had happened next.
She remembered a little of the acrimony, of the mounting bitterness within the house, of their winter of discontent, which was so much part of and not part of the winter outside, and the miners' strike.
But the light no longer poured out of their house and onto the street; the power cuts, although they supported them passionately, cut off their power somewhere.
Jim and Jonathan especially were never there, and the arguments about washing up versus serving the revolution lost their gaiety and became mean-mouthed.
Alan and Sue moved out, went north to do something else.
Phoebe had not seen Alan since, though Sue had moved back again briefly later that winter, saddened and distressed by Alan's disaffection.
She had been part of a long stream of women who had come and gone swiftly, lives collapsing in one area as they gained power and certainty in another.
Suddenly there were too many women realising that their happiness had to be taken at the expense of their men's — men who had promised so much and could not now deliver the goods; just like her father five years before.
Lisa and Phoebe shared the painful knowledge that they had been conning themselves as well as their men.
How had a Conservative Government happened?
Where were the golden days which Paris and Chicago and Grosvenor Square had promised them?
In the meantime, the miners represented hope for all of them, but within the giddy cycle of excitements they were all edgy with new fears and old illusions.
After Sue and Alan left, Lisa and Phoebe had invited their neighbour Jo and her lover Sophie to come and share the house with them.
Jim and Jonathan had been away, picketing and pamphleteering in Reading, had simply been not available, and Jo's squat had been suddenly repossessed and it did not occur to any of the women that the boys would mind.
Sophie moreover actually had a job, had an income, which was beginning to be something of a pressing issue, inflation and the changing climate began to bite into their indifferent superiority to the outside world and they had given no thought as to how to fight that.
Then the boys, as it turned out, minded bitterly having Jo and Sophie.
Since, on principle, they could not say that lesbianism made them nervous and that the complex new demands made on them scared them, they found more underhand and aggressive ways of expressing their resentments.
The women outnumbered them and plotted together.
Having the other two women in the house taught Lisa something new about herself; she and Jonathan stopped sleeping together, which left them all short of space.
Phoebe felt betrayed by Lisa's desertion.
She and Jim talked together secretly about leaving the house and going off to somewhere ‘more committed’, but Phoebe could not bring herself to give up the only home she knew of, could not bring herself to choose absolutely Jim's commitments over the women's commitments.
Jim did not seem to be there enough for them to talk it through and neither of them had any money.
The women were there, there talking, struggling, excited, engaged and angry.
Jim got fed-up coming home, weary and sensing that things were going increasingly wrong, to find the women talking late into the night, ignoring him, even asking him to go away, to go to his own room, to mind his own business.
They fought.
Jim was better at that than Phoebe was, and inside herself she sulked.
He was actually far more articulate, better informed.
She had no clarity to toss in his face as he tossed ‘bourgeois deviation’ and Engels in hers.
At first, after their early fights, Phoebe would work on making peace, leave the women to be with him, offer herself in ever more elaborate rituals, but after a while repetition made this boring.
Phoebe ceased even to bother to calm him down, to open herself to him.
After months of weeping and shouting and apologising, she did not care enough.
Sometimes they fought and sometimes they fucked and there seemed little difference between the two.
The house was escalatingly filthy and anarchic.
It was not fun any more.
The miners were defeated and so were they.
And somehow in that cold and confused spring, somewhere in some loveless and last sexual act, Phoebe got pregnant.
By the time she realised what had happened, Jim had departed.
Packed his bags and gone.
It had in the end been a spectacular departure; Phoebe's final fling with overpowering emotion.
He had told her that he had started sleeping with someone else, a ‘real woman’, he had said rashly.
And although, now, twenty years later, she could understand his hurt and confusion and desire for revenge, then it had hit her squarely in all the areas she was most vulnerable.
She had quite literally thrown herself at him, she had bitten him in the neck so hard that he had bled, she had scratched his face and torn his clothes.
A new ferocious Phoebe, a Phoebe for one brief glorious moment allied to all those mad bad women, Jael and Charlotte Cordet and Boadicea; to Lilith and the Greek Furies and the terrifying armies of the Amazons.
But he would not fight back.
‘For heaven's sake, Bea,’ he said, ‘grow up.’
She knew that if he wanted to he could have killed her; without apparent effort he held off her attack once the first shock had past.
His reasoned calm defeated her.
She looked only stupid.
A stupid child in a tantrum.
A child whose father had never allowed the tantrums, who had held rational behaviour out as the price of his love.
There was no space anywhere, even here, even in this free world, she thought, which they had so boldly created, for wildness.
All that got you was humiliation.
Jim had stomped downstairs wiping the blood off his face with a handkerchief and later it had been Jo and Lisa who had packed his bags and told him never to come back to the house.
When she realised that she was pregnant, her one clear emotion was that he should not know.
She would never allow him a reason to pity her again, to hold her in contempt.
It was one of the more simple reasons why she denied the pregnancy, even to herself, for so long.
Now her memory refused the whole thing; simply refused to countenance the next few months.
Phoebe could remember no details, could recall only with an effort that was profitless, the numbing passivity that had fallen on her.
She had never convinced herself of the reality of her pregnancy, she had never done anything about it.
She kept the pregnancy to herself — or rather kept it from herself, and from everyone else, for too long.
Now, quite suddenly, Phoebe was wide awake again.
She sat bolt upright in her bed and said aloud,
‘Damn,’ and then, ‘damn, damn, damn.’
She was meant to be thinking about happy things.
She was meant to be persuading herself that life was worth living.
Why was she so damn slow?
Why had she not made connections between the secrecy, the silent, passively gloomy, growing of Maggie inside herself and this new, equally secret, growth?
Why had she not made the connection and what, in any case, was the connection?
She lay down on her back again, almost smelling the sharp odour of the whisky; just awake enough to resist it, just sleepy enough not to make the climb out into the cold worth it, and felt numb with fear.
Lying there she was aware for the first time that night of Maggie above her and Rachel below her; both, she imagined, sleeping sweetly, and again the grinding weight of compassion and guilt swept over her.
She cannot mother her child and she cannot mother her mother; everything she did inclined towards death.
What would happen to these two women who had done nothing to deserve her evil body and heart between them, what would happen to them when she was dead?
Had she simply had Maggie so that someone, somewhere, would have to love her and take care of her?
At one level, of course, it had worked, because throughout her pregnancy Rachel had been carefully and systematically nice to her.
Rachel would appear, warm and generous, with smiles and a determination to be friendly and tolerant.
Rachel had been, apparently, more relieved that Phoebe should be an unmarried mother than that she should have to have Jim as a sson-in-law.
Lisa, who had first noticed this oddity in Rachel, had found it hilarious, had even teased Rachel about it directly.
But Phoebe had felt a harsh jealousy that she did not like in herself when she realised how well Lisa and Rachel got on: she did not want that.
She wanted somehow to have her mother for herself, but only so that she could reject her herself.
She did not want Lisa to have any part of Rachel, and she did not want Rachel to have any part of Phoebe.
Almost in tears, Phoebe took her breast in her hand and squeezed and banged at it until it hurt.
In the pain there was both forgetfulness and satisfaction, just as there had been when Maggie was born.
Her labour, at least, stood out sharp and clear.
The pregnancy itself was lost in a fog.
There had been the long drift through cold spring into hot summer; the long sinking into the mercies and bossiness of her friends and thence into the arms of the medical profession; the final humiliation of accepting, because she was too inert to refuse, money from Rachel.
She remembered indistinctly the sense of her body being gradually taken over and pumped full of something that was not Phoebe.
She had experienced mounting terror at the thought of a new role in which she would certainly prove a failure — a woman who could not do her work, could not save her father, could not love her mother, could not satisfy her man, was most unlikely to make any sort of mother.
Then rising like dawn from the mist, the pain was utterly and entirely real.
So, with it, was the focused love of her friends.
They had not approved of the baby; they had thought Phoebe negligent at best for getting pregnant and not taking appropriate action; they had chivvied her through the later months of her pregnancy with a mixture of indulgence and irritation, cross both that she was pregnant and that she wasn't taking it seriously.
Lisa and Jo had taken her to clinics, booked her in with midwives, read up on birth technology, warned her about smoking; and all with an air of adult exasperation towards a wayward child.
But when the pain came they were there.
A little scared, since they were then all very young and had believed the stuff about painless childbirth, and a little over-excited by their own courage and naughtiness, but completely present for her — not as grown-ups to a child, but as women.
It was in the pain that she found their love and tested it and found it so true that the bond would never break.
A night, a nightmare of pain.
A night, a nightdream of love.
Inseparable.
A period of almost literally climbing the walls, turning away from the world and kneeling up, holding the end of the iron hospital bed, and Lisa's hand firmly on the pain, firmly on the small of her back pressing, pressing, pressing away the pain and the fear, keeping her in contact.
A long plateau in which the never-ending surrealism of pain muted down into boredom and there was Jo laughing bravely, veiling her fear and doing great lines from Gone with the Wind in a deplorably bad imitation of a southern black accent.
Staying was the point; they stayed there with her and that enabled her to stay there with them.
And even then her flesh would not give up its alien growth without a struggle.
She went down too far, too far into the riding waves of pain, deep under water and drowning.
The midwife muttered her spells, and from far away Phoebe could hear voices calling her, siren voices that called her back to the pain and the reality.
Not angry but loving calls, which the midwife tried to hush because she had never encountered young women who could yell abuse so lovingly;,
‘Bea, you goddam asshole, just try.
Lazy bitch.’
Phoebe, knowing the strength and command of Lisa, was comforted and, in some other place, almost amused to hear the midwife shocked, ordering Lisa to be more gentle.
There was no gentleness like Lisa's fierce love; and she tried to respond to that while another darker voice called her to unconsciousness and silence.
In the end she saw the giant fish-hooks come down down into her and she thought they would haul her out of the depths, but they did not.
They had not come to rescue her, but the child whom Phoebe would not let be born.
Forceps hurt.
Then suddenly everyone was no longer concerned for her as she lay there, but for another woman; a tiny fierce woman whose fault it had all not been and Lisa's gigantic, striding power melted into softness, soppy for the baby.
‘Ah, Bea, look — just look.’
But she had turned her face to the wall.
Guilt and exhaustion is what she had felt for the next year.
Everyone adored Maggie.
She had seen that instantly the next afternoon; in Rachel's eyes she recognised the same melting joy as she had seen in Lisa's.
And she loved Maggie, too: how could one not?
How could one fail to love a small person so infinitely resolute to follow her own path?
How could one not admire a woman so clear as to her needs that she did not care whose flesh she carved her way through, who did not care whose sleep she shattered in the small hours of the dawn?
How could one refuse tenderness to someone so frail and tiny, to someone whose bones one could break with the flick of wrist, to someone who greeted one with smiles and later whoops of purest delight, who wept if one left them, and would die if one neglected them?
But she, who had run fifteen thousand miles to find her freedom, she who had driven Jim out of the house rather than wash his dirty teacups, was now a slave to someone who never washed their cups, who was never interested in her ideas, who never wanted to talk, hear, understand, sympathise, who hurt one's body as no one had ever hurt it before and who chained one forever to mountains, not just of washing-up, but of washing itself.
The launderette was two and a half blocks from the house; probably less than three hundred yards.
Six nappies, even wet ones, did not weigh that much, and there were others who were willing to help.
In the launderette it was warm and cosy; here Maggie made friends and fans and she had inconsequential conversations which mysteriously made her a member of the local community in a way she had never been when she had been fighting for the area's well-being.
None the less, throughout the autumn and the cold winter that followed, those three hundred yards became three hundred years each and every time, the sign of her defeat, the sign of her capture — she felt herself a wild animal tamed and she devoted herself to Maggie with what appeared to be maternal passion mainly because she felt guilty at her lack of joy in it.
Maggie, it quickly emerged, induced a turning of mood in the rest of them.
Rachel was kinder and gentler towards her than she had ever been before; but she also required Phoebe to take responsibility for the baby, to be a good mother, to take heed for the morrow.
Phoebe could accept that, it was how grandmothers were meant to be, but when she turned to her friends, looking for guidance and inspiration, she did not find it.
When it came to childraising, although they were libertarian towards the baby, they seemed conservative towards Phoebe's needs: demand feeding and endless devotion seemed to be required of her.
‘You're behaving like a goddam husband,’ she said sulkily one night.
Lisa looked startled, but was stern.
‘I'm beginning to feel like one,’ she said.
Lisa had got a proper job at last, as though tired of waiting for the Revolution.
‘Look, Bea, I feel like a shit as a matter of fact, but I can't live like this -.
This little ghetto, where feelings are the most important thing in the world.
I want to get out there.
I want a decent job, I want to do something useful, and something interesting.
I'm not and I never have been a hippy, I can't just ‘hang out’ any more.
That bit is over now.’
Phoebe felt accused, felt useless.
She also felt worn out, oppressed by the cold scruffiness of the house, and the energy of her friends.
She tried making friends with other women who had children, exploring ways of shared childcare; but faith was not enough, they were bogged down by impossible travel arrangements, endless irresponsibility and hopeless public transport.
She had no money.
Rachel proposed an alternative.
Rachel wanted to move to London, and thought that perhaps they could share a house.
‘Not share it, Phoebe, split it.
You'd be independent and I could babysit for Maggie.
You could get out more, it would be good for you, darling.’
Phoebe said to Lisa, ‘if I go and live with her it will be the end.
I'm a sucker for middle-class comforts.
I'm not tough enough to toe the line.’
‘Oh Bea,’ said Lisa affectionately, ‘Don't be such a puritan.’
Lisa adored Rachel, which frequently made Phoebe cross.
Lisa however was full of her own schemes.
She had gone to work first for a radical magazine, perched in a cramped office behind Kings Cross.
When she had acquired a range of basic editing skills she started looking round for what to do with them.
Soon she aligned herself with a small group of women who wanted to break into publishing.
‘We need to control it Bea; why should those fat cats get rich off our books?’
‘What books?
Shiny hardbacks for middle-class feminists.
Masses of American theory and no socialism.’
‘We could do better, then.
What books do we need?’
Phoebe was seduced suddenly.
‘Well, some decent history for one thing, I suppose.
And some fiction; women must be writing better books than they seem to be publishing.’
‘There you are, you see.
You, the Women's Movement, on the street and in the home, need me!’
They forgot briefly that they were having a fight; instead they had a happy half-hour of fantasy about what books they could write and read and live with.
Phoebe said finally, ‘OK, OK.
But we'll all be so busy reading all this wonderful stuff, and learning from the big bad world about how to market it, that we won't have time to do anything else.’
‘Look,’ said Lisa, ‘I never thought that the Women's Liberation Movement would be spread by word, rather than action, but that is how it is.’
‘Only if we let it be.’
‘No there are skills; we need those skills.’
‘You'll have to wear a skirt to the office.’
‘Don't be silly.’
Lisa had a good degree from some northern university and had little trouble finding herself a job in a proper publishing house — 'Biding my time,’ she said laughing.
‘You wait.’
What Phoebe had realised quickly was that Lisa liked working.
Lisa had a passion for working.
And at first it was nice because there was more money coming into the house, and they could feed the gas monster and have hot water and fires.
But Lisa had less time for her, and was meeting new people, refining a way of living that even a year ago she would have claimed to despise.
Phoebe could not, try as she might, despise it for her, because it was so obviously making Lisa happy; while she, clinging to a nostalgic and increasingly sentimental vision of the household, was patently not happy, not useful, and not passionate.
She felt envious, but unable to change.
She could not find in herself any source of passion.
Jo and Sophie were working too.
Phoebe began to feel like a housewife.
There she was, ably supported by active and intelligent people while she sat at home feeling cold and tired and guilty.
That winter Maggie did not nourish.
She seemed little and mingy, pale and tight.
She coughed, and when her nose was plugged up it was difficult for her to suck properly; she cried to be fed all through the night and Phoebe got more and more tired, more and more passive and despairing and guilty.
In the spring, almost without knowing how it happened, she accepted Rachel's invitation to go and live with her in the new house she was buying in London.
The day she moved in she knew she had been defeated, that love, love for her mother and for her daughter, had defeated her.
The passion she had tried to feel for feminism was not enough, it did not give her enough strength to stand up for herself against the demands of these two women who wanted her, needed her and demanded her.
Even Lisa thought the move was a good idea.
Phoebe was now wide awake again and irritated with herself.
She did not feel she was doing very well in her attempt to persuade herself that her life was full of joys and worth living.
Without turning on the light she sat up and reached for her bottle and glass, faintly alarmed to discover she could find them both by feel alone.
Her friends did not think of her as a drunk and Rachel would be truly shocked if she knew about the long nights of insomnia and secret alcohol.
She was shocked herself, but that shock was muted by the greater shock of realising that even now she was not certain that she would keep the appointment she had made for the morning.
Shocked and ashamed.
Of course, the fourteen years since she had moved into the Bayswater house had not been years of unremitting misery and depression.
Soon after they had moved in Maggie and she, too, had begun to thrive.
Rachel was undeniably wonderful with the baby; and took such joy from having Maggie with her that it was impossible for even Phoebe to feel much guilt about the times when she was free.
As Maggie became more settled, and ate and slept better, Phoebe's own health and energy returned, and with it a determination to get some sort of job and pay for her own keep.
Oddly she never felt the least guilt in accepting money from Rachel to help her bring up Maggie.
She had scrambled through the middle years of the decade.
At first she had scraped a more or less adequate living as a free-lance journalist.
She did not require a lot of money, would indeed have despised it.
She was only half aware that Rachel was heavily subsidising her rent, because she was living in a part of London and a sort of house so different from her friends that she had no easy comparisons.
Feminism was, briefly, news, and women feature writers were welcome.
Phoebe was good at looking into things, she discovered; never brilliant, but perfectly competent.
Then for a couple of years she helped set up a women's bookshop and café run on high but unmanageable collective principles.
Initially it seemed quite exciting to her, but she quickly realised that she was unable to care with the intensity felt by the other members of the group.
She did not believe that it was going to change the world or that every minute detail was worth the drama and emotionalism that the others seemed to want to pour into it.
Maggie became an excuse to leave the endless collective meetings early.
Afterwards she knew that she had tried, but had not triad very hard.
She had not tried hard enough because she did not care enough.
She resigned finally from the co-operative over a minor political skirmish about which rooms in the shop would be open to men.
She felt a superficial moral righteousness and a profound fear about her own boredom.
Both her mother and Lisa had been cross with her; they both had felt she ought to settle down.
She felt infantilised by them, but also felt bitterly that they were not fair, and she was bored and frightened at the thought of remaining bored all her life.
She went vaguely back to occasional journalism and found it increasingly difficult to sleep in the evenings and get up in the mornings.
One evening Rachel invited her to dinner, to meet some old family friends who had recently retired from academia and moved to London.
Rachel and Phoebe did not often invite each other to formal meals, although they often ate together with Maggie.
Rachel's friends had, as usual, been charming.
They remembered Phoebe from Oxford days, and she could not fail to notice their thinly veiled compassion for Rachel that her brilliant daughter should have turned out so odd, so unsatisfactory.
Somehow, somewhere, she got the impression that they were congratulating themselves on Martin and Rachel's failure; on their very irresponsible approach to Phoebe's education.
They were obviously delighted to be able to use Phoebe to prove their conviction that child stars burn out if they are not raised to be as dull as anyone else's children.
Had they been jealous, thirty years ago in Oxford, of the young Phoebe's special status?
Phoebe now wondered, with an inner smile, remembering the evening when, aged about twelve, the master of her father's college had rearranged the high table to make her his senior guest.
Certainly they now boasted insistently of the marital bliss of their daughter and the solid Civil Service progress of their son.
She felt more at her ease realising that long ago had they had probably minded bitterly that the Petheringtons' little daughter had been so much more extraordinary than their own.
She felt furious on her father's behalf and oddly compassionate on her mother's.
In inviting her Rachel had proclaimed the absolute acceptability to her of her daughter even though she knew that Rachel did not feel this.
Because feeling grateful towards Rachel made her uncomfortable, she turned her attention to the other guests, a couple of solid neighbours whose grandchildren played in Kensington Gardens with Maggie during the holiday visits.
The mixture of gratitude and discomfort made Phoebe unusually charming and civil.
The husband, a gentle and kindly man, had recently had a minor stroke.
His doctor had told him to ease up.
He confided to Phoebe that what made him sad was his garden.
‘Planned it for years to give me pleasure in my retirement and now it's just getting into a mess.
Amy won't do it and I can't find anyone even to come in and keep it tidy.’
‘Can't, Graham, not won't,’ said his wife.
‘I know, dear,’ said Graham and they exchanged a pair of smiles so sweet and affectionate that Phoebe, despite herself, suddenly liked them.
But the Oxford guest said, ‘You'd think with all this unemployment…there seem to be an extraordinary number of people around who don't want to work.’
He gave Phoebe a sly look.
She really only said it to annoy these old friends of her mother's.
She said, ‘I'm free-lance; any job is a job.
I'm reasonably fit.
If you'll teach me I'll come and work for you a few hours a week.’
Amy smiled and said, ‘It's hardly the job for a socialist-feminist revolutionary, Phoebe.
Tidying up rich people's gardens.’
At any other time Phoebe would have thought she was being mocked and taken offence.
Now, dazzled, she realised that Amy was in fact praising Phoebe's commitments, on her side rather than on the side of the pompous arrogant ex-professor.
She grinned back.
‘I don't know.
We could call it community work, couldn't we.’
‘Yes, indeed.
Or rehabilitation for old age pensioners.’
Graham joined in, ‘I'll find out what the union rates are tomorrow.
TGWU?’
Even Rachel was willing to share the subterranean joke.
She broke off her conversation and said,
‘Better make it NUPE, Phoebe, much more radical.’
‘But worse paid.’
‘Anyway,’ said Graham, ‘I do draw the line at being described as ‘public’.
Perhaps I shall ask the farm workers' union.
They're bound to have the lowest rates.’
‘And no London weighting,’ added Amy.
‘True,’ said Phoebe, ‘but I'd probably get to be a Union Official immediately, owing to the lack of competition in the Bayswater Chapel, and then Graham would have to give me endless paid hours off to attend to Union Business.’
Rachel said courteously to her other guests, ‘Any suggestions then?
What do the rest of us pay our servants these days?
Twelve pounds a year and a free uniform?’
The professor's wife said something about how difficult and expensive it was to get a good cleaning woman, and the professor responded uneasily, insensitively, aware that he was not getting the respect he was used to in his Senior Common Room.
He started blustering about the general election and an end to the inflationary spiral.
But when Graham left later, with something of the earlier benignity still binding him and Phoebe together, he had asked,
‘Were you serious?’
‘Why not?’
‘I can't tell you how grateful I'd be.’
‘No need.
Shall I come about eleven next Wednesday?’
So by a collusive accident Phoebe had become a gardener.
Not all at once of course.
At first she had just worked a couple of hours a week for Graham.
What had surprised her was how much she enjoyed it.
Graham was not just a kind elderly man, he was a passionate and knowledgeable gardener.
He wanted her to do more than dig and weed.
He wanted her to be interested.
Soon she realised that he was singing her praises to his friends, because other similar garden owners rang her up and asked her if she could do a few hours for them too.
In her bedroom now, sipping her whisky, she acknowledged for the first time in her life that if she had to make a list of the happy times, it would properly have to include the hours she had spent with Graham in his garden.
When he died six years later he left her all his gardening books: not just the technical instruction manuals, but coffee-table picture books, historical studies and a collection of exquisite, hand-tinted Victorian flower drawings, and a Beatrix Potter original which, she now knew, would keep Maggie in shoes for the rest of her childhood if Phoebe could have brought herself to sell it.
It was the first personal bequest she had ever received, and the first time in years that she had cried.
About six months after the dinner party she realised that, for the first time in her life, she had turned down a decent journalistic commission in order to start work for a crazy old lady off Ladbroke Grove, whose garden specialised in old roses, and who was insistent about sterilising soil before new plantings.
A few months after that she had said to Rachel,
‘Mummy, I'm thinking of going back to college.’
She shut her heart firmly against the look of incredulous joy that lit Rachel's face.
‘Really, Phoebe?
Where are you going?’
‘Capel Hill, I should think.’
‘Capel Hill?’
And, then after a pause, in which she saw Rachel's joy cancelled out by fear, ‘Is that in America?’
She had almost laughed.
That was a plot against Rachel she had never thought of, to take up maths again but to do it in the USA.
That would show the old bag.
It was too late now though.
‘No, it's in Enfield.
I want to be a gardener.
You do City and Guilds and those things there, and then the Council will employ you.
GLC or DoE, or the Royal Parks people.’
Rachel had been nonplussed.
Even now a ten-year-older Phoebe could not suppress her amusement.
Rachel had wanted her to settle down to something, Rachel had wanted her to get some proper qualifications and chose a career.
She had done so; Rachel had not known how to handle it then, and still did not know ten years later.
The memory of her own amusement encouraged Phoebe suddenly.
There, she had been happy in Pakistan; she had been happy in the Peckham house at least for the first year; she had been happy working for Graham; she'd been enthusiastically interested at college and during the first two years after she had qualified; she had been completely delighted when she had got the job she now had: a tenants' association garden in a dreadful estate in Hackney, but where she, with a community group, had planned the garden from scratch and had made a small desert blossom like a rose.
All right then, she thought, her courage high, she had also been extremely happy while she was having her affair with Tom.
It had simply been fun, the sort of fun she had with her women friends, except that she had also desired him, and he her.
It had been splendidly undemanding; because of his family, she did not see him more than a few times a month, always meetings snatched at short notice and with absolutely no expectation from him that she would be available.
Apart from the holiday in Italy, they had not spent a whole night together more than half a dozen times in two years, and never at her home; always when they could find excuses for them both to be in other cities.
Before she knew him she had never stayed in real hotels with private bathrooms taken for granted, and coloured TVs and room service for all guests.
She had met him at one of those dinner parties which had now become the nexus of her social life, replacing conferences and meetings, although few of the individuals had changed.
One of those dinner parties which she loved and mocked almost equally, where people envy each other their success while feeling faintly guilty about their own.
Friendship networks so old and intimate that the differences and difficulties could collapse into wild mirth at any instant, or could flare into fights which, however vicious at the time, would not actually change anything nor prevent her and all her friends coming together again soon after, at identical but different pine kitchen tables, scattered in a loose lop-sided circle around central London.
The detached, amused part of Phoebe sometimes thought that her main feeling at these parties was a wish that she, and everyone else too, would dare to improve the quality of the wine, but they were all too self-consciously afraid of being mistaken for Yuppies, despite the fact they were mostly a little too old and slightly too poor.
Property prices and psychoanalysis were mentioned shyly, rather as Rachel might mention sex, but once in the air everyone turned out to be immensely knowledgeable about both, as well as about the contemporary cinema, the wickedness of Thatcher's government and the perils of current educational reforms.
Those that had children struggled desperately to keep them within the state school system and also to see the frequent failures of others to succeed in this as being somehow a rather nasty disease, with compassion and sorrow the appropriate response, rather than the fierce bell-like anger they would all have produced reflexively only ten years before.
Another part of Phoebe hated herself for this cynical internal grin, because these were her friends and she was indubitably one of them, and could not imagine being otherwise.
She and Tom had met because they had had a playful debate about whether and in what sense you could say that coal pre-dated miners.
‘Of course,’ said Phoebe, showing off a little , ‘miners come before coal.
That's what Engels is trying to say, all that stuff about there not being mines and machinery in Siberia, where the natural circumstances ought to favour it, but only in England.’
Tom grinned an enormous grin across the table and said, ‘You're cheating, because a) what are your natural circumstances if it's not the very existence of coal, b) I don't believe Engels said it at all and, c) even if he did, that doesn't make it true because he was working with an outmoded scientific model.
New physics and astronomy have done for all that.
In the beginning there was carbon, and after several generations of Super Novae there was the solar system and then there were a whole lot of trees and they all fell down plonk into bogs and got turned into coal, and that led to the dinosaurs and that led to the mammals and that led to humans and that led to the miners.’
Phoebe was impressed; she laughed with pleasure and said, ‘And it's all in God's purpose and plan, eh?
Then he got peevish and decided on a rain storm and the dinosaurs were so overgrown that they wouldn't fit into the ark so the flood destroyed them all.
Seriously, coal doesn't exist outside of a market condition, OK? and you can't have a market condition without someone to extract the damn stuff.
Hence, miners first, coal second.
QED.’
They looked at each other quizzically, trying to decide how much emotion the other was prepared to invest in this.
Did they really want to argue?
Clearly they each believed there was a real issue, and that the other was intelligent enough to pursue it.
Phoebe decided to give it a go.
She gave him a tentative smile, suggesting, she hoped, her pleasure in the game and drew a breath, when he said.
‘Oh my God, I know who you are.
It's that let's-get-on-with-it expression.
Hell.’
She was totally baffled.
Please, not Goa in 1969, she thought.
Please, let it not be some man she had slept with and now could not even remember ever having seen before in her life.
He had attracted the attention of the rest of the table.
He was suffused with laughter.
‘This woman is the first woman who ever beat me at chess.
In Cambridge, twenty years ago.
You cannot imagine how furious I was.
She made the first breach in my armourplating of male superiority.
Where the hell have you been ever since?
I have a debt to pay off and I still want to beat you.’
‘You would now.
I haven't played for years.’
‘Good.
You have changed though, that sweet little fringe and those neat pearl earrings.’
He smiled, ‘It's OK, you don't have to pretend you remember me; this instant recall is but an outward symbol of the soul-scarring effect you had on me.
I was just one of those Tweedledum and Tweedledee corduroy-jacket-wearing chess buffs who hung around the club.
Women were rather more conspicuous.
Why did you stop playing?’
‘A long story,’ she said, ‘I'll tell you sometime.’
She heard the invitation, the promise of a future, in her voice and was surprised.
However when the party broke up and he offered her a lift home, she was quick to negotiate secretly with her hostess for her bike to remain unmentioned in the stairwell until she came back the next day to collect it.
He drove well and efficiently.
She watched his profile in the dark car and it pleased her, soft floppy hair and a decent nose.
He seemed relaxed and simple.
They chatted impersonally about the dinner and how they each came to know their hosts.
When he stopped outside her house he said,
‘We must meet again.
We've got unfinished business, you and I.’
‘Chess or miners?’
‘Both.’
‘You could come in now and have some coffee.’
‘Unfortunately I have to get home.
But I'll come another time, please.’
‘Come on Saturday afternoon?
We can play chess and I could probably correct your anti-materialist views on the coal industry in a matter of moments.’
He laughed, ‘Mine anti-materialist?
Mine are materialist; yours are mystical-Marxism, the opiate of the middle classes.
Actually I can't come on Saturday, I have family commitments.
What about one evening next week?’
‘Are you married?’ she asked him abruptly.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘do you mind?’
‘Funnily enough, I think I do.
I suppose your wife doesn't understand you.’
‘On the contrary, she understands me very well and I'm still free to play chess.’
‘Thank God for that,’ she laughed.
‘Come next Wednesday if you can.
You can meet my daughter.’
‘Are you divorced?’
‘No,’ she said, and watched a tiny nervous flicker on his face.
‘I'm only not divorced because I was never married.
I have a delightful little bastard who can chaperone a long-delayed revenge match.’
‘You're on.’
She opened the door of the car and climbed out.
She knew perfectly well she was going to make love to him sometime, so there did not seem to be any hurry.
She waved happily as he drove off.
He beat her easily at chess the following week, but when he came again she had been thinking and remembering.
After a long game in the kitchen which ended in a draw, they went upstairs and made love.
He was undemanding, unemotional, light-hearted and pleasing to her.
Once Phoebe had started playing chess regularly again she realised she could probably have become considerably better than him quite quickly, but she did not want that enough to work on it.
They played together a couple of evenings every month, but after that first time by mutual consent they never made love in her house, any more than they did in his.
He and
Maggie got on well and he was calmly nice to Rachel.
Phoebe tried to build up a little guilt about his wife but failed to do so.
Because she never had to be his lover in front of Maggie or Rachel she had no need to worry about that either.
Occasionally she could see a gleam in Rachel's eye, as though she might suddenly ask him if his intentions were honourable, but for the first time in her life she learned to be grateful for her mother's good manners.
He was fun.
He would turn up at her garden with a picnic in the late afternoons, laying out a white cloth, champagne and strawberries under the shadow of the tower block and the bemused scrutiny of the local youth.
He would stay for just an hour or so and then gather up the equipment and disappear.
When he was working out of London she would join him.
She saw more of England driving with him in his car, or walking through cities while he attended to business, then she ever had before.
He planned carefully so that there was always time and no panic.
And she loved his body, the astringent unsweaty cleverness of it, that gave with delight and asked for so little back.
Their Italian holiday had been different, a tiny golden time, snatched out of nowhere and more than either of them deserved.
Last spring he had said,
‘I have to be in Rome for six weeks.
It'll be so hot I thought I might rent a place in the country, but it might be a waste of money.
Julia and the kids are going to her parents in Cumbria.
What do you think?’
Phoebe went skiing early every spring.
She had learned as a girl and given herself a week's holiday for a thirtieth birthday present.
The extreme delight of it had almost shocked her; it was her one personal extravagance.
Now she thought that she could give it up for three weeks in the Italian sun.
‘I don't see why not.’
‘Bring Maggie,’ he said, ‘she'll love it.
I'll find you somewhere with a pool.’
‘Tom, can I afford that?’
‘I shouldn't think so,’ he said, ‘not all of it, but I need it too and can write if off as expenses.’
‘Cor,’ she mocked in her best cockney accent, ‘kept woman now, Phoebe Petherington, you ought to be ashamed of yourself.’
He seemed to find that adequate gratitude.
So he found them a tiny cottage just south of Orvieto, in the grounds of the villa of some Italian friends of his who had departed for the northern mountains, a villa with a pool and a shady veranda along one side and an unspeakably romantic view down the steep hillside towards the floating cathedral.
She had taken Maggie off to the sunshine.
She had not travelled for pleasure since she had come home from her long sojourn and she had wiped out of her memory the simple delights of hot sun and cheap wine.
She had risen at dawn each day, when the sky was still apricot-coloured and swum naked and alone as the sun rose.
She had lain with Maggie beside the swimming pool and had let her whole body soak up the sun.
Tom spent the weekends with them and drove up many afternoons from Rome to dine with them and stay overnight.
He took them for drives, showing her the extraordinary beauties of Umbria.
It was hot and gentle; Maggie was playful and contented.
One day she would remember forever.
It had been another perfect morning.
She had woken earlier even than usual, with Tom beside her, sleeping contentedly and openly on his back.
Knowing it impossible to sleep again, she had lain there for a while and listened to the silence of sleep throughout the house.
Then she got up, half cross to be awake when other people were still sleeping and half pleased with the intensity of quiet and peace.
Downstairs she made herself a cup of coffee and carried it out onto the patio and drank it at the table, smoked a loose-rolled sweet Italian cigarette, and watched the coming of the dawn.
She had swum, very conscious of the water, cooler after the night, swallowing her into itself and the darkness retreating before the splashes of her arms and legs.
The sky would begin to change from grey to silver gilt, then peach, but still the sun did not rise.
After swimming she had felt completely alive and glad to be awake and have this time of her own, which had been a gift to her from Tom and Maggie.
She had gone for a walk up the road, beside a field of sunflowers, and although the sun had not yet risen she could sense the whole field turning away from her and each flower raising its face towards the eastern hills over which the sun would shortly leap.
She had felt the whole silent movement of that field, each straining golden head, instinctively, blindly, passionately turning towards the light.
And equally instinctively, she had turned with them, leaving the road and taking a cart track along the upper side of the field.
Above her the fields rose steeply, rough grass and scattered olive trees, which in that light looked immovably ancient and grotesque.
Below her the muttering sunflowers continued their ghostly and invisible movement.
Suddenly, the track fell away sharply, in front of her feet, and she felt before she saw the expanded horizon.
She had looked up; and like the sunflowers she was facing right into the heart of the brightness which preceded the sun.
The eastern mountains looked black and shapely, silhouetted against that great apricot-coloured fire.
She had been on the very edge of the steep hills which surround the basin in which Orvieto sits; and the basin itself was alive and moving, swirling with smoke, with smoky white mists which filled it almost to the brim.
Then and there the sun rose abruptly and she could see the city bright and sunlit, floating on the mists, a magic city of mediaeval romance.
That sleeping peaceful beauty had been almost too much for her.
Only a couple of days before Maggie had pointed out how the great cathedral dominated the city, like the spines along a dragon's back, while the other buildings lay in a rough sprawl.
She had laughed then at the vivid imagination of the child, but now for a brief moment she saw the city as Maggie saw it, basking in the first rays of the sun and oblivious to the dangerous mist below that might suck it in before it could wake up and take wing against the now blue blue sky.
Then far away, only emphasising the silence, a cock had crowed, shrill and certain.
With both laughter and irritation Phoebe had returned to consciousness ironically amused at how nature could behave with such excessive romanticism.
But the day had insisted on playing itself out in the idyllic pastoral mode.
Tom, when he woke later had insisted that they should absorb some culture, had chivvied them both into his car and driven them first to the Villa Lante.
‘You'll love the garden, Bea,’ he insisted when she had looked longingly, lazily, at the swimming pool.
‘It's one of my favourites.
It was built by a series of cardinals as a hunting lodge.’
‘I don't like those high Renaissance gardens much,’ she said, though unaggressively.
‘There are never enough flowers, only designs.
And I'm meant to be on holiday.
Gardens are work for me, not leisure.’
‘You'll like this one,’ he said firmly, ‘partly because of the water; it all flows downwards, the whole garden works its way downwards.
And also you'll like it because the house had to be split into two separate halves — the garden takes priority over domestic comfort.
And also you'll like it because the cardinal who designed it was a practical joker and built in all sorts of extremely infantile jokes so that he could spray water onto his innocent friends while they were eating their dinner or trying to watch little masques.
You will like it very much.’
‘Is that an order?’ she teased him, but indicated her consent by beginning to search for her shoes.
‘No,’ he said, hugging her, ‘It's a present.’
She laughed and accepted his gift.
And he had been right.
She did like the garden, its delicate wit and gentle scale.
They had walked up the worn stone staircase, arm in arm, with their beautiful girl child dancing around them.
And Phoebe was so relaxed that it actually amused her to realise that everyone who saw them would assume they were a boring married couple, English middle-class tourists.
Afterwards they had eaten lunch and then despite the heat had started home.
Then on the way back he had suddenly turned to Maggie and said,
‘That was a garden for your mother, now I have one for you.’
He wouldn't tell them anything more, but drove by tiny back roads, through impossibly steep villages to the grotesque gardens of Bomarzo.
He had scarcely known Maggie, could not have known that he could not have chosen a better treat than this mysterious park, with its vast statues carved out of the living rock: the huge-mouthed cave with its mighty teeth, the vast stone giant, his shoulders visible through bushes a hundred yards away, half hidden in greenery; and above all, the great carved stone dragon with its broken wings, and wild Chinese eyes.
The three of them entered a place outside time, on a day of such stillness and heat.
Later that evening they had been sitting in a restaurant and Maggie had looked at Tom and said, her delicate face and long neck almost visibly aquiver with pleasure,
‘Thank you.’
‘What for?’ he had looked almost startled by her vehemence.
‘For the nicest day in my whole life.’
Phoebe, her body content and her mind rested, had heard her daughter without a flicker of guilt, or envy, simply with affection.
Would she have enjoyed him so much if she had thought the whole thing permanent? she asked herself sternly now, sitting up in bed and shaking off the poppy and mandragora effect that thinking about that summer had on her.
Would she even have started the relationship if she had not been reasonably certain that in the end he would not leave his wife?
Perhaps not, but she did not care.
Who had been the loser?
On paper, she had; and perhaps his wife.
He had, in the classic language of such things, had his cake and eaten it too.
But what was she supposed to have lost?
Nothing that mattered to her.
That, of course, had been the rub.
She had not cared enough.
He told her so at the very end.
Just after Christmas she had travelled up to Birmingham after work one evening, to spend the night with him.
The weather had been bitter, she had been tired and stiff.
Sitting on the train she had suddenly thought that it was not worth it.
She could have been at home, warm and snug.
She could have been at Lisa's house, laughing.
She could have been alone with in dark shadow in her breast, nourishing it quietly and secretly.
But Tom and she would go skiing at the end of the month.
It would not be damp and she would not be so weary.
She tried to jolly herself into enthusiasm.
Their moods did not meet that night.
He was ebullient, excitable, verbal, and passionate.
‘I'm tired, Tom.’
‘My sweet love, you're tired a great deal too often.
Are you well?’
The tide of her secret lapped around her; soon she would be too tired all of the time.
Soon she would lie down in the arms of a stronger lover than Tom would ever be and fall asleep.
The thought of being so discovered made her careful.
She put her arms round his neck and said, ‘Come to bed and hold me tight.’
Hopefully as well as affectionately, he did so; undressing her as she lay on the too-large hotel bed and stroking her shoulders and upper arms.
He never ceased to be amazed by her physical strength.
‘Why don't you look muscly?’
‘I've told you.
These are real muscles, not the detachable falsies you get in the gym.’
She was rather proud of herself and could not suppress the smug tone of voice.
He smiled.
‘Real breasts too.
No detachable falsies these.’
If he had been less aroused he wouldn't have done it; if he had been more aroused he wouldn't have noticed.
He ran his hand half playfully, half seductively round her left breast and then stopped.
The whole room stopped.
Her whole life stopped.
His hand felt rigid, and then his thumb moved delicately.
‘Don't,’ she said sharply, and sat up.
‘Darling,’ he said.
He reached out to her but she did not move into the offered harbour of his arms.
‘Why didn't you tell me?’
‘I suppose because I didn't want you to know.’
‘What does your doctor say?
What are you doing about it?’
She couldn't think of a lie quick enough.
He just stared at her.
‘Are you insane?’
After another long silence he said,
‘Bea…
I'll leave Julia.
I'll come and live with you.
Please.’
‘No.’
‘Is that why you didn't tell me, because you were thinking of me, of her…’
‘No.
I didn't tell you because I knew we'd have a scene like this and I don't like it.
‘Of course we're having a scene like this.
I love you, Bea, you know that.’
He tried to lighten his mood, grinning at her like a schoolboy, ‘Apart from anything else we could make love at breakfast-time, lunch-time and tea-time.’
He had found out her secret and she hated him.
She said, ‘Apart from anything else I can't imagine any sex worth giving up tea-time for.’
As soon as she had said it she knew that it was true and that made her sadder and crosser.
But he looked so hurt that she tried to make a joke of it,
‘You know me.
I adore crumpets; and I loathe romanticism and that ‘all for love and the world well lost’ stuff.
I've loved you because I like relationships to be comfortable and not too much hard work, and sex to be civilised.
I prefer doing the crossword puzzle anyway.
You've never made scenes and I don't want them.’
But although they both tried to smile still, neither of them failed to notice the past tense she had used for the word ‘love’.
‘You'll never want anything of me, will you?’
‘Well, not dramas, and miserable marriage breakups and guilt and scenes and deathbed proclamations certainly,’ she had replied.
‘Nor have you wanted them from me, You'd never have stayed around so long if I'd pushed you about.’
He had not quite known what he wanted to say.
He had not wanted a drama, demands, excitement, but he had somewhere wanted her at least to complain that he did not.
He said almost sulkily, ‘I've been behaving badly for two years, and you know it, and you don't even mind.’
She knew what he meant, but she would not help him out.
She was not going to have a fight with him.
She would see– him occasionally for the rest of her life, and she wanted to be able to chat to him, invite him for more games of chess, more visits to historic gardens.
She would never make love to him again, though.
She did not care enough.
She kissed the balding patch on the back of his head as she clambered off the bed and went to the fridge to pour them both a drink.
‘You don't care, do you?’ he said with amazement.
‘I don't mean just about me; I mean you really don't care whether you live or die.
I can't cope with that.
You just don't care enough.’
They did not say that it was over, neither of them.
They did not need to.
She went on the skiing holiday he had paid for and accepted his excuse about his daughter's measles without a moment's hesitation.
She had thought it would be a pity not to have him around any longer: Rachel and Maggie both liked him and she had not told either of them about his wife.
She preferred such a relationship to a more driving one.
She had always known she was devoid of passion: she worked at her garden and talked to her friends.
It was all she would ever have.
She missed him, and missed the companionable secrecy of their relationship, but she was not miserable about it.
She was more miserable about not being miserable.
She felt her inability to demand anything from him, to need to demand anything from him, was a mark of failure.
She would have liked to fall in love with him.
And instead she had fallen in love with her own tumour.
‘You must be insane,’ he had said, and she was.
All love was folly; a grand passion was madness.
This was a love worth dying for, at last.
And all these pleasures, these frail joys that her most stringent discipline over the last couple of night-time hours had summoned up for her memory, they were simply not enough.
They were not worth living for.
Her mother had once told her scornfully about a crazy book produced on the contemporary new wave of evolutionary theory: a book which abandoned Darwin and returned to his predecessor, Lamark.
Or rather, as Rachel had been at pains to point out, a misunderstanding of Lamark's theory of learned characteristics being inherited.
The author of the book had argued that evolution was a product of desire: a wingless animal, unconsciously, wants to fly — it wills a wing, a pair or wings, or a longer neck to reach the trees, or swifter legs to escape its predators.
It is this will which is inherited.
The book claimed that cancer and other deformities were mistaken wills, were new organs to meet new needs dreamed up in the deep unconscious, and that therefore they should be treated not with surgery but with interest and affection — humanity was limiting its potential by cutting out the tumours, blasting the cells.
Phoebe, like her mother, did not believe a word of it, but part of her knew it was true.
She had wanted to fall in love, she had willed it, and her body had produced the lover, close to her heart, fed by her own blood, watered by own needy greedy wanting.
Secret and adored.
She knew it was not sane.
She knew it was insane and dangerous, what she was doing.
She knew it so clearly that three weeks ago she had made an appointment to take her breast lump to a doctor.
But she had done it in a very peculiar way: she had booked in to a private Well Woman Clinic under an assumed name.
The appointment was now for tomorrow.
She was amazed at herself, but she had done it, and now in the early hours of the morning she did not know if, even so, she would go.
Who was he, this dark and secret lover who had inflamed her with so great a passion?
Was he Death astride his dark charger, was Death the moment of consummation, the moment of glory?
‘Tell me,’ she commanded herself, ‘tell me what is going on.
What is this certainty?’
She was in a new place where she had never been before.
She had run off with her lover to a new country which was strange and beautiful and dangerous.
In this new place there was an orgasmic sweetness in the thought of dying.
She was pierced to the heart and made alive with the consciousness of passion, of love, of choice…
She had found a sweet lover where there had been no love.
The patterns were broken because she had broken them.
This love was a new pattern, a new Catastrophe Theory and she was happy in its embrace.
She wanted the world to go away and let her live with her lover in a secret palace, give herself over to his embrace, to be beyond responsibility and care and hard work and sanity.
Her hand was caressing her own breast now, probing with such delicacy, feeling the hard resistance, the anger of her lover.
Soon, soon if she has the courage, it will not matter, mt will be too late for anyone to protest, to come to her with sensible and sound advice.
Soon, soon her lover will take over her whole body forcing his way deeper than any lover before — not just into her vagina, or, like Jim's sperm, further in to her womb.
This lover will penetrate every corner of her body, her lymph nodes, her spine, her lungs, kidneys, liver, brain.
This lover will be irresistible and she will be taken over entirely by him.
She has only to consent, to be passive, to welcome him and he will take her home, will welcome her into his kingdom and his kingdom will be her flesh.
But she did not consent.
‘No,’ she said aloud.
‘No.’
‘Why not?’ he asked sweetly.
She wanted to say, ‘Because of Maggie and Rachel and Lisa and the garden and duty and sunshine,’ but alone in the darkness she did not believe in any of that.
‘No.’
Suddenly, overpoweringly, she needed her mother, she needed to be taken in her mother's arms, like a little child and to be held there.
‘It's four o'clock in the morning,’ she told herself.
‘You cannot wake up an old lady just to listen to your insane and morbid fantasies.’
But she knew that this was more important.
She had never asked Rachel for anything.
It was difficult.
Rachel was not an easy person to go to with such a strange and garbled fear.
Rachel would try to be rational and calm.
Rachel would not want to hear.
But it was not to Rachel that she would go, but to her mummy.
She turned the light on and got out of bed.
She was shaking with fear.
The moment she spoke to Rachel the die would be cast, and she would have to go along the road of sensible health planning and operations and anxieties and reality.
She would have say goodbye to passion and secret joy.
She put her knickers on, and almost smiled, because even now she would not go to Rachel without them.
She walked over to her door, practising the sentences with which she would wake Rachel.
‘Mummy, wake up and listen to me.’
When her hand was on her doorknob she paused; the call of the dark was so strong, it slowed her movements down.
He was calling her.
Promising her.
She wavered.
Her hand tightened on the handle and she pushed down on it.
Then she heard an enormous crash, a bomb exploding somewhere very near, a great roar of shattering glass and, after a moment's stillness, screaming, ear-splitting, horrible screaming, from just over her head.
Three
Maggie's room, her own place, had been made for her the summer she was eight by Phoebe, Paul and Uncle Wong.
Lisa had helped and Rachel had encouraged.
Even now Maggie remembered the making of it as a time of rare delight: when all the people of her life came together and did something for her.
The result of such a burst of love and energy from such an assortment of individuals was inevitably extraordinary.
It was a magical room, carved out of the attic and reached only by a wrought-iron spiral staircase which Paul had rescued from some abandoned church.
High above the house the room floated lightly.
The ceiling sloped down tightly to the floor, making dark shadowy edges which were well nigh impossible to clean, and three odd narrow passages ran to the three dormer windows, which cast odd blocks of light into the main spaces of the room.
But there was also a huge skylight, facing both ways and divided across the middle only by the roofbeam of the house itself.
By day light flooded the room and by night darkness, because no one had ever worked out a satisfactory way of curtaining these great expanses.
Phoebe continually meant to buy blinds, blinds that would be ingeniously fitted into little runnels either side of the glass slopes, but it was one of those domestic chores that she had never managed to complete.
Maggie now slept on a low bed draped with a Chinese spread covered in dancing dragons and spinning suns, exactly underneath the centre of these windows, and on clear nights the moon rode over her head, and the clouds, illuminated a sickly yellow by the vastness of the city, would race past.
Because there had never truly been enough height and the angle of the ceiling was so acute, nothing was ever quite symmetrical and balanced, and cupboards and wall space were eccentric and fortuitous.
Maggie clung to the privacy of her room, as small children do to their teddy bears; she never invited her friends there, preferring to contain them in the large sitting-room below.
This was her place, her secret place; hers and Fenna's.
The first night she had slept there she had known.
It had taken only a little practice to discover how to lie there, flat on her back, and slowly, with great care, peel away the roof beam and open back the two vast panes of glass.
Even from the beginning she had lain naked and adoring under the moon and Fenna could come and go as easily as the clouds did.
Fenna is Maggie's dragon.
Fenna is the one purely joyful thing in Maggie's life.
Fenna is flame and fire.
Fenna moves at night.
Fenna is flame and fire, and moves on the wings of the night that are dragon-wings, to dance with taloned claws and mock at hopes of safety.
Fenna is the dark force of the imagination as well as its golden dancing; Fenna is chaos as well as order, and brings, on fiery dragon breath, the full danger of the chasm.
Maggie and Fenna belong to each other.
For Maggie, this is the primal sentence.
Not the first words spoken, but from before the surfacing of memory she has known this.
It is her first self-conscious sentence.
It is the sentence around which she has shaped her identity.
To deny it is therefore impossible.
To break it down is extremely difficult.
Dangerous.
The words will remain, indubitably.
‘Maggie’, ‘Fenna’.
There is no question about them.
And ‘each’ and ‘other’.
‘To’ as well.
Maggie feels no doubt about that: so small a word, so small and so necessary a word is bound to survive, to slip through the net of destruction that she and Fenna — no, that she herself, alone — will loose on the cold sky tonight.
But ‘belong’— she is fearful that for her at least the word may explode, may vanish in a puff of smoke as delicate as the smoke that trickles from Fenna's nostrils when he is asleep; as delicate as the fronds of smoke that drift mysteriously from the end of Phoebe's cigarette when she gestures impatiently in conversation.
Maggie might no longer belong, to anything or anyone, if she did not belong to Fenna.
Fenna accompanied Maggie into consciousness.
There must have been a time before Fenna, just as there must have been a time before words, but Maggie cannot not conceive of either.
How could it have felt to be lonely and dumb?
But at the same time Maggie was still young enough to hold two or more things in her mind, clear and contradictory.
Her mind, like the women in her house, was still laid down in strata, each virtually impermeable to the others.
All this about Fenna was entirely true, but she would not have said it, would not have known how to shape such sentences.
If she were asked where Fenna had come from she would have told a quite different story: the story of the arrival of Fenna.
Her Uncle Wong, her grandmother's friend, who was now under a shadow so deep that without being told, Maggie knew she must not mention his name, her beloved Uncle Wong had given her Fenna.
When she had been about five he had come to stay, returning from Hong Kong and, like other wise men from the east, he came bearing gifts.
He had given her an egg; an orange egg about four inches long and made, of all things, of soap.
She had felt disappointment waiting to pounce, but swiftly he had assured her it was a magic egg, that if she washed with it carefully it would hatch.
She had for nearly a month washed fanatically, with all the clarity and determination of which five-year-olds are capable.
After about two weeks, long cracks had developed in the egg, lines of longitude.
Even so young Maggie was not a child to cheat; it did not occur to her to prise the egg open, only to stay longer in the bath and to forget to take the soap out of the water, when she climbed out herself, pink and skinny.
At last, from the thin end of the egg, a rounded point appeared, and, three evenings later, in the bath, the egg had suddenly split in half.
Encased in the soap was a tiny green dragon.
In one hand she held half the soap with the embedded dragon in high relief, its tiny green wings minutely scaled, its long head thrusting forward and its tail descending to the soft nobble which had first appeared.
And in the other hand was the orange soap holding the shadow of a dragon, the clear and perfect indentation of a three-inch-long green plastic dragon.
After the careful brooding, she had hatched a dream.
That was Fenna.
She had shown him with pride to both her mother and grandmother and had carried him to bed more deeply satisfied than at any time since she had been weaned from Phoebe's now forgotten breasts.
For the next few days she had carried the tiny dragon everywhere.
And then she had, as children do, lost him.
To comfort her desolation and guilt Rachel had told her about the Mongolian desert, where she had been as a little girl, hardly older than Maggie was now, to look for dragons, which she called dinosaurs, and where years later Russian palaeontologists had found the great fossil eggs in which the sleeping baby dinosaurs could still be seen.
She told Maggie about the palace of the Princess Tang Li, north of Beijing, which she had visited with her own beautiful mother, Maggie's great-grandmother.
In that-place there had been intricate gardens, where water wheels turned musically and water lilies bloomed moon-white, and giant goldfish floated under them.
And there had been green and gold and scarlet dragons painted on every wall and woven into every silk hanging.
There had been stone dragons, and jade dragons so delicate that they disintegrated at a puff of breath.
There had been copper dragons and dragons painted on porcelain so fine that light filtered through them and their colours seemed to change as you looked.
China, Rachel had told Maggie, was the place for dragons, where it was hot, and where in the villages great paper ones were paraded with veneration.
And being as usual in the mood to get things right she told her a Chinese dragon story.
Rachel's Dragon Story
This is a Chinese story, Maggie, and in China they used to understand dragons better than here in Europe.
Once upon a time there was a man who thought he could be a dragon-master.
He was a scholar and for many years studied to learn the ways of dragons; he was proud but not stupid, and he learned all that the books could teach him, and then he set off on a long journey and captured two baby dragons and brought them home as pets.
He had learned everything that dragons need, but he had not understood any of it.
He built his dragons a garden, the most beautiful garden in the world, and although he surrounded it with an iron wall which he believed they would not cross, he made the wall beautiful for them, lavish with filigree work and sweet with hanging plants.
He built them a pagoda of solid jade and embellished it with precious gems — not realising that to grow up a dragon must accumulate its own hoard, must steal it from Emperors and princes.
He had a pond dug for them, so pretty and sweet, surrounded by bullrushes with a delicate arched bridge and floating with water lilies — Not realising that a real dragon needs a whole ocean to sport in, needs the spume of the white capped waves, needs the great storms and clanging icebergs, needs the coral islands of the southern seas, needs the dark rains and winds and currents to make its blood flow green and its whiskers curl ferociously.
The scholar fed his pet dragons on the choicest tit-bits, bringing them rump steaks of the purest virgins and a daily supply of swallows' flesh — not realising that such things, for true dragons, are treats, are after-dinner delicacies and no more a fit diet than endless chocolates would be for you.
As you can imagine, his pet dragons did not grow very large, but they did grow lazy and fat and tame.
And then one night, one bright and starlit night, a true free dragon came by to pay a call.
He looked down on the pretty garden and saw the two of them snoring there, their front claws tucked neatly under their chins which rested on silk cushions and their tails dipped tidily into the pond whose waters did not stir enough to move their dreams to wildness.
The great dragon was angry but courteous, and he woke them up in as mannerly a way as he knew how.
Immediately they invited him to join them, singing in their slightly squeaky voices of the charms and luxury of their lifestyle.
‘What?’ cried the great dragon, his deep brass-gonged voice ringing out and causing several of the gems to tinkle off the jade pagoda.
‘What!
Come down and snooze in a garden when I am a dragon, an ocean-lurking, sky-flying free dragon; when the mother wind that keeps the world spinning caresses my scales as I fly across the moon and bring warnings and hopes to the fiery heart of the world; when I can dance aloft at dawn, so that the rising sun turns my every scale to a pure diamond and the tides and rhythms of the oceans slow down in delight.
Have you gone insane?’
‘Well,’ they answered a little sheepishly, ‘this is so much cosier.’
‘Cosy!
Do you call yourselves dragons?
What of your great calling?
Your dragonish duties; your dignity and pride?’
‘But we cannot escape,’ they whined.
‘See, he has imprisoned us inside an iron wall.
You see we are real dragons; all dragons dread iron.’
‘Dread, yes,’ he replied, ‘but fear can be defeated.
Come on out, you miserable cowards.’
‘Oh, no, thank you,’ they both said hastily.
‘It might hurt our Lord's feelings.
And he does look after us so well; we are truly comfortable and urge you to try it.’
The great dragon snorted a cloud of fire, and gonged back at them, ‘Stay then, you foolish worms.
I came to help you escape and you have insulted me, me and all true free dragons with your petty invitation.
I'll leave you to your fate, but I warn you, tame dragons never come to any good.
Just wait and see.’
And he roared away into the night, the rough scales on his throat catching the breeze of his anger and making a hissing hum as he vanished.
But he was right.
For soon enough their scholarly owner grew bored with his dragon studies — as well he might since his samples were such Poring dragons — and decided to investigate the secrets of the turbine jet engine instead.
Of course he needed to finance so improbable a research programme, so he sold his dragons to an Emperor, who had them minced up and served to him garnished with spit-roasted swallows' tongues, at one of his less important banquets.
And Maggie had giggled and had indeed been comforted.
To comfort Maggie's desolation and guilt at the loss of her little dragon, Phoebe had suggested that the dragon, having gained his strength from her love, had flown away.
Being for once in the mood to get things right, Phoebe had brought home from the library a book about dragonflies.
Not a children's book at all, but a modern illustrated coffee-table book with careful, delicate photographs.
As a child she had not had time for many fairy stories and did not now know them to tell to her daughter again, but instead she showed her the pictures.
First the ugly lumpy larvae, the precision closeups showing its undershot jaw as it chomped its way through its subaqueous world.
Then the tight cysts, not unlike Maggie's soap egg, glued onto the reed stalks, and swelling, swelling, splitting until finally the pictures captured the moment when the dragonfly broke from the chrysalis, crawled desperately up the reed stem and unfolded its glorious wings in the sunshine, spreading them out to harden, to firm up, to set, to grow strong.
It was shimmering, incandescent, as the colours deepened and the long blue-black tail unfurled and stiffened until it gained the strength to fly.
‘Perhaps you were the sun for your little dragon; and now she is strong enough, she wants to be free.’
‘He,’ said Maggie obstinately, and with unusual tenderness, Phoebe did not contradict her.
Thus Maggie was comforted.
And that night, from these gifts, Maggie had resurrected Fenna.
Using the solid material of history and science she had recreated, restored, raised up Fenna in her imagination and he had never gone away.
For ten years he had been her constant companion.
Now, arriving in the safety of her own room, Maggie undressed, folding her clothes and putting them away with an unusual neatness for a fifteen year-old.
In her case this was a consequence of living with two women like Phoebe and Rachel.
Phoebe loathed housekeeping so profoundly that she felt guilty about it and always did it with a disciplined and joyless rigour, expecting everyone else to do so too.
Rachel, on the other hand, thought that tidiness was simply a moral necessity, along with generosity, thoughtfulness, good manners and clarity.
Phoebe, who might have been a slut, had in fact become exactly the opposite — she had not time or patience or tolerance for anyone she considered to be exploiting the manual work of other women.
Since Rachel had sneaked her Mrs Gordon into Phoebe's half of the house, misunderstanding and not caring about Phoebe's impotent fury, Phoebe had become even more rigorous about Maggie's tidiness.
The mess in the kitchen was typical of neither of them, and should have announced to them both the distress of the other.
The fact that they had not fought about it should have announced their despair.
Maggie had never bothered to resist their reasoning, and she folded her clothes partly from the natural instinct of obedience, and partly because she had never been entirely sure that these external appendages did indeed belong to her, Maggie Petherington, or if perhaps they were loans from the mysterious outer world; loans that would doubtless be called in some day.
She undressed without turning the light on.
She was not afraid of the dark, because when she was very little Maggie had had the last few scales of Fenna's tail to suck on while she fell asleep.
The scales across Fenna's shoulders and haunches were as large as dinner plates, and thick, heavy and dry — they changed colour in different lights, from dull pewter through to a dark red, the colour of dried blood, or the murky green of the lower waters of the Amazon River.
When they were wet from rain or swimming in the oceans, the light might catch on some deep oil in them and they would glimmer shadowy rainbows of colour, like oil spills on a road.
The scales on Fenna's belly were as large, but softer — pastelled reflections of his back, glimmering in pearly tones: oyster, and creamy-grey like dawn, or pollen yellows and dusty pinks.
But the scales down Fenna's tail grew gradually smaller and smaller, the darker shades of his back and the paler shades of his underside blending together, and at the very tip, small as a child's thumb, they were minute and a shade that, when she tried to match it to paint sample cards was usually called eau de nil .
She had sucked comfort with the distant vibration of Fenna's breathing rumbling down to his tail tip, and he had spun stories for her and woven them into dreams.
Fenna's Bedtime Story
This is an old story, Maggie, even by the datings of dragon lore.
Times have changed and now courageous young men on noble horses come out to kill us with their spears.
In this bright new world there is no place for the dragon: no one wants the shadow, wants the dark magic which is as old as the caves in the hills where we dwell.
It is not easy to kill a dragon, but it can be done, and there are many handy manuals to teach an aspiring hero the tricks of his trade.
It is much much harder to tame a dragon, to embrace a dragon, and to love and accept the darkness and the fear.
There are no manuals for this struggle, for it can only be done by those who have pure hearts and sharp wits and the wisdom to know themselves.
Once upon a time, long long ago and far far away, out in the dreamlands, there was another Margaret just like you.
I do not know whether we dragons loved her or hated her; her will was like iron, as fast clad as our scaled hides, but her heart was like a songbird in the morning and she was as lovely as the lilies of the field.
They say she lived at Antioch in Pisidia during the reign of the Emperor Diocletian.
Her father was a magician; he knew something of the old magic, but he turned it against the little people to whom it belonged, and demanded their money, their livestock and even their children to appease the gods with rivers of blood.
But Margaret laughed at him, and when she heard about a new God who sacrificed only himself, and gave bread and sweet wine to the people, she became a Christian.
All magicians can be tested by laughter because corruption cannot stand mockery; and when his daughter laughed at him he drove her out into the wilderness, and she lived in the wilderness with the wild beasts and angels ministered to her.
Hunting one day, Olybrius, the grand governor of Antioch, saw her and seeing her innocence and her loveliness he was jealous and immediately wanted to destroy both.
So he had her captured and brought to his palace.
He wanted to marry her, but she laughed at him too, and said she had already made her choices and they did not include giving up her God and replacing him with a somewhat vulgar and certainly brutal man.
Not surprisingly he was livid, and having failed to realise that those who laugh easily do not fear easily, he tried several means of torture to get her to consent.
It says a great deal about the natural stupidity of tyrants that, having discovered that torture works extremely effectively in intellectual or political cases, they immediately assume that it will work as well in the inspiring of desire in young women.
By and large it does not, and it certainly did not in Margaret's case: she merely laughed all the more, and sang the taunting hymns of her new faith, about how tyrants would be put down from their thrones and the humble and the meek raised up.
Then Olybrius' fury flared and even the ground shook in fear.
Deep deep in a limestone cave where the stalagmites grow less than an inch a century, but still tower so high as to humble the cathedrals of the surface, the shaking fear of the ground woke a dreaming dragon.
Called by Olybrius' anger, the dragon rushed on crimson wings, down from its home in the cold north.
The flame from its mouth passed over the western lands like a comet and woke millennial longings in the hearts of Roman legionaries, who eked out their twenty years of cold service dreaming of victories and of eating fresh figs under the olive trees of home.
The dragon homed in on Olybrius' wrath, which called him across the continent.
Cross at being so abruptly awoken from his sleep, he spotted Margaret and licked his great lips with glee.
Virgin flesh was not so easily come upon in those days; and a virgin garnished with terror was an unexpected breakfast treat after his long sleep.
He swooped across the market square in Antioch, while the crowd fell back appalled, and opening his huge mouth, like a salmon to a fly, snapped Margaret up.
Without missing a wing beat, he bore her high above the city and flew on.
He was just shifting this succulent morsel in his mouth before grinding her bones, when he heard an extraordinary sound; he heard a gurgle of laughter.
So shocked was he, and flying so fast, that he gulped and swallowed her whole.
And now both fear and joy fell upon the dragon.
He flew on, his great red and gold wings beating the sun-filled Mediterranean air, his huge scarlet tongue hanging out of his mouth in a desperate effort to cool down and not blow out any smoke and flames.
And when they were over the blue Aegean sea, many miles from Antioch, he circled widely, descended, and alighted on a small mountainous island, on soft green grass beside a grove of apple trees.
When the dragon had flighted across the market place of Antioch, and Margaret had found herself swept up between the huge teeth, she had laughed like a child at the brief glance she had had of the panic around her; she had laughed from the pure unexpectedness of her escape and at the terrified way the mighty Olybrius had nearly swallowed his moustaches.
But now in the belly of the monster she learned what fear was.
Inside the great dragon it was very hot and very uncomfortable; it was also very noisy, since the dragon's stomach rumbled like a volcano.
The dragon's internal boiler was situated very near to its stomach, and since he was making tremendous efforts to cool down, there were also terrifying hissing and grinding sounds.
But more: Margaret had been brought up in a household where true magic had been corrupted for profit and was therefore rightly feared as dangerous.
She knew, without any consolation, that she was at the mercy of everything which was most ancient and fearful.
The terror of death was upon her and, sensing this, the dragon's appetite awoke again.
The walls of the cavern where Margaret was sitting began to ooze with digestive juices, pungent with the smell of sulphur, and the quicklime of the morgue.
The acid began to eat away at the edge of her tunic, the bottom strands of her curly hair.
She longed for a weapon, for even a hairpin, and knowing that she did not have one, she knew too that she was totally defenceless, unarmed and alone.
She could feel the great flight of the dragon and sensed that she was high in air and travelling fast towards the sunset; she could feel the great muscles of the dragon's wings send ripplings down the stomach walls and she gave herself over to death.
And in the moment that she laid herself open to dying she heard the whispery voices of the wild beasts in the wilderness:
‘Yeah, though I take the wings of morning and fly to the uttermost ends of the sea, yet thou art with me.’
It was true, she knew, that dragons were huge and fierce and wild and mysterious; but it was also true, as she also knew, that not everything that was huge and fierce and wild and mysterious was necessarily evil, necessarily wanted to kill you.
Her God had made the dark at the same moment as the light.
He had made the shadow, the wildness and the passion.
Nightingales sing only in the dark.
In the dark there are new joys.
The dragon was the same as her wild longings, her fierce and stubborn courage, her desire to fly.
Then she felt the great gliding swoop, the downward hover and the bump as the dragon landed.
In a still moment of total blackness she could feel the sinewed strength, the velvet softness of the dragon's tripes.
‘At least,’ she thought, ‘I will die touching something beautiful.’
Her heart soared as she realised that this was a new adventure, an adventure through darkness into the greater darkness which might, just might, be even more beautiful than the slow throbbing of living blood, richer in iron than the veins of any mine, passing through mighty arteries, driven by the rhythmic pounding of the great beast's heart.
So she waited eagerly.
Suddenly far above her head she saw a little shaft of light.
It grew until it was a window and out through the window she could see down a long tunnel; and beyond that the sun shining and the mountains rising over the fruit trees.
Wider and wider, the dragon was opening its mouth.
He wanted her to come out.
It was a scary journey, scrabbling over that slippery great red tongue and passing through a great hall of teeth and palate, each pillar taller than she was and as sharp as a knife.
Stepping out on to grass she turned and knew that she was one of the few in all history and legend who could safely look a dragon in the eye.
So she did.
‘Thank you,’ she said.
The dragon was ashamed.
‘I wanted to kill you, but I could not.’
‘Well,’ said Margaret laughing, ‘I wanted to kill you too, but I could not either.’
The dragon heaved a huge sigh of relief and politely turned his head to let out a huge smoky belch; then he settled down for a dragon-like snooze.
Margaret kissed the side of his cheek and went to gather daisies in the grass and make a daisy chain to lead her new friend and spectacular pet through all the illuminated and flower strewn pages of Christian manuscripts.
Maggie had fallen asleep rejoicing.
So now Maggie was not afraid of the dark, even though the great windows exposed her to the full moon and turned her own skin white and pearly — a reflection of reflected light.
That light came originally from the same source as Fenna's fire, from the heart of the golden star, from the sun itself — but it was light crashing around space at speeds which defy relativity, rolling like waves, bouncing like particles, rebounding off the dead desert of the cold moon and hurled thence, down through nearly a quarter of a million miles, forced through the steadily slowly moving liquid molecules of solid glass which made the windows.
Maggie lay there on her back, stiff, formal, upon the great silken swirls of her Chinese bedspread, her feet tidily together, her arms spread wide, cruciform, and her rib cage rendered elongated and tortured by the moon shadows.
The moon was at her feet and she was clothed by the sun and so she waited.
By a strong act of will she kept the roof on her room.
She would not allow it to open up and expose her directly to the moon, and to the distant but approaching dragon.
Fenna, by all the ancient laws, could not come to her until she invited him; but he could, and did, will her to invite him, and the will of dragons is strong.
Once upon a time Fenna had brooded on a hoard for so many years and with such desire that it had quickened and grown, diamonds breeding and bringing up their young under his weight.
The unimaginable heat and weight of Fenna had pressed the ooze in the cave, pressed so hotly and heavily that the molecules of mud were squeezed apart, breaking up into carbon atoms and hydrogen atoms, and his weight had compressed the carbon atoms into diamond crystals, and more and more diamonds until his hoard was a lure to garish youths, who had toiled up to his cave and exchanged riddles and blows with him, but when he had fixed them with his ancient evil little eyes, they retreated abashed to sing his praises.
The force, the weight and heat of Fenna's will was no small thing, and Maggie had never before tried to resist it.
Nor was resisting enough.
It was only the beginning.
But St Margaret of Antioch had been swallowed up by a dragon too, and she had climbed out again, fresh and free, to become the matron saint of women in childbirth.
This gave her hope, for it was nothing less than a re-birth that Maggie was aiming for.
Maggie would not close her eyes, because that would be cheating, but she shortened her focus so that it rested precisely on the window-panes, and although they were not dirty and the moonbeams seemed to shine straight through them, they were there.
If she fixed her focus with enough concentration she could envisage the invisible barrier.
All she knew of self and love she knew through Fenna, and now she had to send him away.
Suddenly, lost in misery, she could not even remember why.
Lying on the bed, naked and waiting, Maggie lost her nerve.
She knew that she could not do it alone.
But surely she owed her beloved that honour at least, the honour of single combat, which is a dragon's privilege.
You do not go out after a dragon with hounds and huntsmen; nor with gangs of labourers to dig pits and set fires and lay traps.
No, you polish your armour till it gleams, you sharpen your lance and you mount your white charger, you raise your banner, you bid farewell to the grieving city, where the crowd stands in terror and hope at your preparations and your parting.
Then you ride out alone, across the springing grass all beset with tiny jewel-like flowers; you ride up the rushy mountains and down the rushy glens and come to the mouth of the dragon's cave.
Then you draw your sword, wave it over your head and call the dragon out.
Some dragons banter words with you, more devious and less answerable than the Sphynx herself; they spin word games which you must not play, and then in the end they come out and fight like men, until you can plunge your spear into the soft white spot where their plated armour is thin.
Maggie was tempted to that particular plot, for the story had been told that way so many times, and it is very hard, at moments of crisis, to re-cast the language and the shape of old stories.
But she had lived with a dragon for over ten years, and she had lived in a house filled with strong women, so she knew that there was something very wrong with that scenario.
In the first place, she did not plan to kill Fenna, although she recognised that he might die of grief or loneliness.
In the second place she was naked not armed, she was lying not riding, and she was the heroine not the hero.
This was a new battle.
Moreover the young hero was never alone; he always had a pure process, waiting for him, holding the thread of life which would protect him from the flames and the teeth and the dark belly of the monster.
It is women who have to go alone; whose lovers do not have the patience to wait at home and pray for them.
Maggie however had no intention of doing this alone.
Her courage returned.
This time she was not going to permit Fenna a re-run of the old plot; this time she was indeed going to make a brand new story; her own story.
She knew her own limitations.
She had been brought up by clear-thinking women.
The effort of thinking up a new way to tackle a dragon, a beloved dragon, daunted her for a minute.
Her doubts came back.
She allowed her steady gaze to flicker from the glass which she had been holding firm.
Immediately and frighteningly she could feel Fenna's will power.
She honestly could not hold him off alone.
Then her eyes fell briefly on the painting her grandmother had given her.
In the picture, St Margaret held her power over her dragon steadily and calmly.
She had not killed him, she was leading him away from the open mouth of the cave and towards the distant city.
Her holy obstinacy, her sulky refusal to bend her stubborn head to emperors, fathers, lovers, or dragons had proved strong enough to conquer even the need to kill.
Inspired, Maggie called on St Margaret for aid.
St Margaret had passed several dreary centuries in heaven; people very seldom sought her intercession nowadays, and then it tended to be superstitious old women with sentimental requests.
Since the Second Vatican Council she had even been removed from the Universal Canon, by ignorant prelates who — full of their scientific and rationalist approach to the institutions of sanctity — insisted she had never existed.
Since the beginning of the modernist theological era, she had not even had the once-yearly chore of taking her urn and collecting up the incense and imprecations put up, however formalistically, for her own feast day.
In the middle ages Margaret had had a wonderful time; women had understood then that it was not to other mothers that you turn in childbirth, it is to those women who have lived it, who have been down between the dragon's teeth, have travelled the dragons' pathways and have lurked in the dark and boiling belly of pain, have been chewed and digested and emerged.
It is free virgins whom women need in childbirth.
She had been busy and useful day and night.
But nowadays they call on new and brasher saints, whom St Margaret had not even met — Saints Epidura and Psychoprophilaxia.
So St Margaret had sat in her empty court feeling neglected for decades.
Now she heard Maggie's intercession with delight.
Another tangled virgin called on her for help against a dragon, called on her though she had thought that her time was past and the dragons had all departed.
With a smile so radiant that the light in heaven itself sparkled, she leapt into action.
And, down below, laid out there on her bed, Maggie felt the full strength and joy of a bored woman given something useful to do flowing through to her.
St Margaret held the dragon's will by the power of her own legend.
Fenna knew both fear and respect.
The old passionate story had come between him and Maggie, and he trembled and retreated.
Poised between Maggie and Fenna, St Margaret took her stand.
She plucked a great hank of silk thread from the girdle of her spinsterhood; tied one end of it to the wedding ring of her virginity and, looping the two ends of the hank over either wrist, spread her hands and invited Maggie to take the other end and wind a neat ball.
Maggie, who had never learned such useful arts from either of the women who had brought her up, had to be shown what was required, but soon the smooth rhythm of one woman winding and the other co-operating by swinging her hands in and out as the thread unwound, pleased and comforted her.
Soon Maggie held a golden ball of thread and St Margaret had one end of it firmly attached to her finger.
Freed, thus, from the weight of the dragon's will, and safely assured of being able to get home again Maggie turned her mind to her own task and went travelling down into the labyrinth of memory and desire.
Just as Maggie could not remember a time before there was Fenna, and a time before there was the big house and the three women living in it, so she could not remember a time when there was not the constant tug of tension between her grandmother and her mother.
She could remember though the time when she realised that she must, for love of them both, never let them know that she was aware of it.
It was that night that Fenna had taught her to fly.
She had been eight.
She had already known, half consciously, that she liked her grandmother better than she liked her mother, and loved her mother more fiercely than she loved her grandmother.
Rachel always had been safer, Rachel's adoration was guaranteed, secure and clear.
When Maggie had hugged Rachel as a child, her small arms stretching wide to reach round her bum, Maggie had been able to feel the solidness of her, the deep-grounded certainty that Rachel exuded.
When Rachel looked at someone, she saw what was there to see.
No one else could look at things the straightforward way that Rachel looked at things.
Maggie trusted that, trusted the clear steadiness, the certainty that Rachel would do what she said; and what she had said, and went on saying quietly, calmly, efficiently, was that she loved Maggie.
She paid attention.
At eight Maggie had not known that her grandmother was famous, but she had seen that people had something in their manner when they looked at Rachel; later she learned that something was respect.
Rachel deserved respect.
If there were games to be played or work to be done or stories to be read it was always to Rachel that she would turn; Rachel who went out and came in when she said she would and said ‘yes’ or ‘no’, not from whim or temper, but with authority.
Rachel was as safe as a rock.
Phoebe was different.
Maggie could not depend on Phoebe and knew that she would not.
But it was Phoebe that she wanted.
Phoebe was unreasonable and distant and dangerous.
Phoebe had too short a fuse, and it was impossible to guess how she would be, each meeting had to be gauged with care, and it had always been so.
She could not be certain that Phoebe wanted her and needed her.
Maggie knew all about Phoebe's restless unhappiness, her discontent.
She did not know if she herself were a part, a cause of it.
She wanted Phoebe to concentrate on her.
She wanted Phoebe's long bold stare, so different from Rachel's serene regard -more dangerous, more challenging.
She wanted Phoebe to feel passionate about her.
She needed Rachel to stay alive, but she needed Phoebe to be alive.
She knew the tension that existed between Rachel and Phoebe.
She could sometimes experience it as a physical thing — a slender cord strung between the two of them, as though they each held one end, and she, she had to balance on that tight rope, poised and tricky.
She had to perform for them with the spotlight on her and she knew that no trick would be good enough.
If she danced without a safety net Rachel would find her foolish, and if she refused to attempt a wild and abandoned triple somersault with twirls and flourishes, Phoebe would not notice.
It was easier really to learn to fly.
That day when she was eight she had disappeared, or as Rachel tried patiently to call it, wandered off.
They told her over and over again that she must not do it, but she couldn't help it.
Usually she could not remember why she had wandered off.
Neither of them seemed to realise that she never planned it.
Just somehow, somewhere between the sweet shop and her house, between home and school, between tea-time and bath-time, she would lose concentration.
Something would attract her — a cloud, a flower, a fat lady on the street- and she would drift away from the track unthinkingly.
She knew that her grown-ups were frightened and she did not want them to be frightened, but she also knew that Fenna was a mightier protection than all their loving care could ever be.
She could walk safely in the forest of city streets and that no harm could touch her.
She would just wander off; and then later she would come to, wondering where she was and remembering that they would be angry with her again.
That day she had wandered off between leaving her mother's kitchen and arriving in her grandmother's sitting-room.
She was supposed to do this, unless it was raining, by going out the front door and down the area steps, rather than through her grandmother's bedroom.
There seemed hardly time for anyone to wander off, but wander she had, and she had come to swinging happily on a swing in the park playground.
As soon as she realised what had happened she had jumped down guiltily and run home.
There was only one big road to cross, but it had a zebra crossing and she had been road-safe at Phoebe's insistence for years.
But she was scared of their anger — not their anger with her, but with each other, so she ran.
Arriving, she saw that the front door was still open: perhaps she had not been gone long, perhaps they had not yet missed her.
She skipped up the steps and into the house.
She could not have failed to hear them.
Rachel was saying, ‘It's not naughtiness.
I agree she has to learn, I agree she can't go on like this, but it isn't naughtiness.
She's…
I don't know, can't you see?’
‘Oh, Mummy,’ Phoebe sounded rough, cross.
Maggie was too young to hear that as anxiety.
‘For God's sake, you know that isn't the point.
The point is that you muddle her, you muddle her up.
I'm not surprised she has to get out sometimes.
I'm not bloody surprised.
I wish I could.’
There was a pause.
The grown-ups were above her in the stairwell.
They were in neither half of the house, but in a space that did not really exist for Maggie, who never asked herself which half the house was whose, since the whole house was, for her, theirs.
She could sense that Rachel was being careful; after the pause Rachel said, very calmly and reasonably:
‘Are you sure it's me that muddles her?
I think it's partly you.
You stand against everything I tell her, obstinately and in her hearing, you give me no support, but as soon as it's convenient to you, you pack her off back downstairs.’
‘She's my child.’
‘I never contest that.’
‘Yes, you do.’
Maggie, down below, knew that Rachel had bitten her tongue before she had snapped out ‘Oh no I don't’.
Rachel was horribly sensible if you tried to fight with her.
She was so horribly sensible that it could drive you, as Maggie knew it was now driving Phoebe, into complete tantrums and screaming, because Rachel would not share that part of the argument.
It was not fair.
She could feel her mother s irritation rise to balance the calmness that her grandmother threw over the fight.
‘I can't cope with all this any more,’ said Phoebe, and there was a screech in her voice.
‘If we have any more of this nonsense, we're going to have to move.
I shall take her away; I shall take her abroad and that's final.’
Maggie knew, even as she heard it, that Phoebe did not mean anything of the sort; it was the kind of thing that Rachel dragged you into saying.
Then Maggie heard what she did not want to hear; she heard Rachel, who was always so controlled, so strong, so clear, she heard Rachel whimpering, begging,
‘No, Phoebe please.
Please.
Perhaps you're right, perhaps I do interfere.
I'll try.
I'll try.’
She heard her Phoebe sounding ugly and fierce.
‘You'd bloody better.’
And Maggie whisked herself down the stairs, out of the house and fifty yards along the street.
She approached her home again, and entered noisily and tearfully.
She took the punishments meted out to her without a murmur.
Then, curled up in bed that night, she told Fenna that she must not do it anymore, she must not wander off, he must not let her.
She must never ever do anything that might make them fight.
She had to be careful and clever.
So Fenna taught her how to fly.
She would never forget the first time, balanced high on the steep roof of the house, huddled from the wind against the chimney-stack, Fenna's great shadow hovering over her, although Fenna had surely not been so hugely vast then as he was now, his shadow had not obliterated the stars, threatening their very existence.
She had been joyful and terrified and Fenna had urged her to trust him.
‘Trust, leap, jump, trust,’ he had commanded her.
And she had leapt.
Caught in an eddy of storm, she had feared herself falling; and then between her and the ground below there had been a stillness.
She had found herself in the safe nook between Fenna's sail-like wing and the crenellated and fantastic fortress of his spine.
But she was not resting in the hollow, she was floating in it.
She was flying, just within the still pocket of air, but enough to know that she had the power.
Fenna's mightier flying, inside which she had her little flight, lifted her up, higher and higher.
Then poised above the shining city, among the burning stars, Fenna had paused, dropped one great wing, tilted over, tipped her away from his side and she had flown free.
They had danced on the night winds through the dark hours and before dawn she had flown safely home, filled with a new and fierce joy which was the warmth of Fenna's fiery breath and the width and grace of freedom from gravity.
It was also another burden of secrecy.
When she had been a tiny child, and Fenna had still been a small, manageable and undemanding dragon she had, often spoken of him, to her mother who had grinned, to her grandmother who had smiled, and to her schoolteachers and friends, who had laughed indulgently.
But as she and he both grew, people smiled less often and Fenna himself began to insist on secrecy and darkness.
A child who was not allowed to wander off to the park, would certainly not be allowed to fly off to the planets.
But by keeping him secret she had given him too much power.
Now here, lying on her bed while St Margaret held his dragon power in check, Maggie knew she had indulged Fenna too long, that she had fed him and petted him into overweening size and pride.
Now he even dared to challenge his maker.
His maker, she repeated to herself firmly; she was his maker, and he had no existence without her, without her consent and her will and her passion.
But although she said it she could not be certain that it was true.
She could not be certain that she wanted it to be true.
For he had given her gifts beyond dreaming.
Fenna had given her freedom and power and joy; she would not call those things illusions, because without them there was nothing worth having in her life.
She did not know if she could live without him.
What could be the point of life without that great sweeping tail that could scatter the stars across the sky, without the dark rumbling tenderness when they slept together after their soaring adventures.
Could she live without magic and intimacy?
But she would have those things for ever; she would have them in her head, in her memories and her dreams, and no one could take that away from her.
It was time to put away childish things.
She must remember them, but not brood on them.
She must move forward.
She must look at two other things, hard and solid, so that she would be strong for the battle ahead.
It was getting harder and harder to pretend to be ordinary.
When she had been little it had been easy, and now it was not.
When she had been little, temporary lapses and been easily passed over.
Her early school reports were peppered with comments, complimentary or judgemental, depending on the teacher: ‘Margaret has a very active imagination’, ‘Margaret must learn not to go off into day-dreams’, ‘Margaret does not yet seem to have learned the difference between fact and fiction’.
But while these were unfortunate, and inclined to make Rachel crumple up her forehead and lecture her on the scientific method and the importance of mental clarity, there was no real danger in such remarks.
They were just little signs warning her that she had failed to keep Fenna the perfect secret that he had to be.
When she had been little, once Fenna had taught her how to fly so that she no longer went wandering off, there had been very little time when she had been left alone.
The night-time, the time after she had been tucked up in bed, that was the proper time for Fenna, for flying and dreams.
When she had become a teenager however, she had more time alone, and when she was alone it was so much harder to remember.
She flew more and more, like this last evening.
It had not been fully dark when she had been flying.
It had certainly been risky, landing in the tree round the corner.
She had been lucky so far; she had not yet been caught, not yet been dragged off to some shrink and asked for explanations.
She was even lucky in a way that her mother never paid any real attention.
If they found out…if they found out, Phoebe and Rachel would tear each other apart, and her with them; it they found out, Fenna would be lethally furious.
It was too dangerous.
It had to stop.
The more she flew, the more irresistible it was; like a drug, an addiction.
She knew she was doing it more and more, taking more and more risks.
Sometimes it was as though the risk and the pleasure had grown together, nourishing each other.
But…at school less than a month ago she had lost her temper with her maths teacher.
She hated her maths teacher anyway, and that dislike was fuelled by Phoebe's frequently repeated conviction that the woman was a moron and taught not mathematics but ‘sums’, a subject apparently lower on Phoebe's scale of values than home economics and office skills:
‘You've got a bloody calculator,’ Phoebe would yell, ‘she ought to be teaching you to think.’
The maths teacher hated Maggie too, because one Parents' Evening Phoebe had turned up in overalls and working boots.
She did not look like anyone else's mother.
Everyone else's mother came in neat and respectful skirts, and were accompanied by neat and respectful fathers who sought wisdom and understanding from the teachers.
Not Phoebe.
Maggie thought Phoebe did it deliberately; Phoebe was normally rather well-dressed in a casual sort of way, and had the best fitting proper designer jeans and lovely hand-knitted posh jumpers; she had plenty of skirts and frequently wore them.
But she had to turn up at Maggie's school in her working clothes.
When Maggie tried to tell Phoebe about her gruelling embarrassment Phoebe just laughed and told her she was turning into a bourgeois little creep and should perhaps be taking domestic science and dress-making.
‘It's called Textiles nowadays,’ muttered Maggie furiously, knowing that this was irrelevant.
Maggie knew that many of her school-friends admired Phoebe; they thought she was rather splendid, especially since they had all got into ecology, but this did not help Maggie.
It was not enough that Phoebe should turn up looking like a manual worker —('But, for God's sake, Maggie, I am a manual worker')— and wearing a button on her overalls which said ‘This facility is under threat from rate-capping,’ which made boys on buses make obscene jokes; she also had to take on the maths teacher.
The maths teacher had been, Maggie knew, contemptuous and rude and sexist, but Maggie felt that Phoebe should have put up with it for her sake.
Phoebe was selfish.
She certainly did not, in the vast school hall, in front of two hundred other parents, in a very loud voice,need to tell the maths teacher that she was a moron and incompetent to boot.
She did not need, while wearing boots with the mud still on them, to give the teacher an advanced lesson in maths.
At the top of her voice.
Nor to tell her that it was women like her who prevented girls doing well in sciences.
Nor that the reason she had sent Maggie to an all-girls' school was not to protect her from evil-minded youths, but to protect her from the sort of teaching that she seemed to be getting.
Maggie had wanted to die.
At the same time she had fiercely wanted to be proud of Phoebe, to support Phoebe's admirable fight on her behalf.
She had felt trapped by the old mesh of loyalty and shame.
Phoebe, in fairness, could not have known that the maths teacher, shamed in public, should take to hating Maggie with a spiteful glee, though she would probably not have cared if she had.
Maggie had dealt with that as best she could, taking it quietly and never complaining about the minor injustices which a teacher can inflict — work returned because of untidiness, petty sarcasms, rigorous enforcement of minor school rules.
Then, one day, she had lost her temper, completely, suddenly and, even to herself, shockingly.
Maggie had been amazed at her own fury, rocked by the power of Fenna within her, breaking through the cool disdain she tried always to preserve in front of this loathsome woman.
Twenty minutes later she found herself inside the Head's office, white and trembling, so obviously terrified that the Head herself was taken aback.
Maggie knew the source of her own fear: in her anger she had so nearly, so very nearly, launched herself into the air, growling a dragon's fury, sparks flying not from her eyes but from her mouth, raining blows from above, hovering over the teacher like St Michael over the devil.
And if she had…
If she had, all hell would have broken loose.
Fenna would never have forgiven her.
Fenna would have killed her.
She would have been locked up in a mental hospital, or alternatively taken off for parapsychological testing and Rachel would have been unforgiving.
Rachel believed that mechanistic science could explain all phenomena, even those of the heart and soul; Rachel would never have forgiven her, the last place of safety and affection would have been taken away.
Fenna had become too powerful.
Maggie did not want to be a crazy person.
She wanted now, at any price, to be able to sit in the rooms of young women who could be her friends and not feel that she was travelling in territory stranger than the night caves that were Fenna's home.
She wanted life to be like it had been earlier that evening.
She wanted to be able to sit there and be like them, to sit there and sip Coke and not to have to worry about whether she would laugh at the right moments.
She just wanted to be free of the burden of her own special powers.
What was appropriate and necessary at eight, was inappropriate and dangerous at fifteen.
She was stuck.
Stuck in too many ways.
As she lay there on her bed Maggie suddenly raised her arms, breaking the iconic cruciform of her pose, and ran her hands over her naked chest.
She was fifteen.
She knew that she should have breasts, that she should be menstruating; that, judging from the giggled conversations of her friends, she should have at least wanted to find out about love and sex.
One more guilty secret that Maggie felt obliged to keep from everyone was the deep fear and disgust that she felt at the thought of sexuality.
That was Fenna.
Fenna did not want her to menstruate, Fenna would not allow her to desire.
She was not just Fenna's friend and child, his daughter of delight.
She was also Fenna's hoard; and Fenna had kept from her until too late the awful, consuming greed and jealousy that, from before the dawn of time, all dragons have had about their hoards.
Dragons can lie for dark centuries brooding over their treasures, bedding down on frozen flames that will never see the light of day.
Dragons love virgins, but they hate the creamy smell of female desire that will bring the young men to their caves, to steal and kill.
Princes on white chargers are like bloodhounds, over mountain ranges and mighty oceans they can scent the whiff of virginal longing and are drawn to it like wasps to jam jars.
The wise dragon so captivates his maiden that she never even has a second for longing, that she turns not from him to stare out across the wide meadows and lakes of adolescence.
Now at last Maggie had realised that something had gone wrong.
The power of flight, the companionship of joy and dream had been bought at too high a price.
Fenna did not want her to bleed, and because Fenna did not want it, she had not wanted it either.
Taught by Fenna's crafty and ancient wisdom she had learned well the deft turns of deceit.
It was easier for her than for many, for she had always lived in two kitchens, under the different and Indifferent ministrations of two cooks.
She knew she ought to be furious that her mother had apparently not noticed that she did not bleed, that she did not eat, but until recently she had always been grateful.
Now she felt that she could have used Phoebe in her struggle with Fenna.
Phoebe lived in a totally other world, a world she could not even begin to penetrate, a calm world of profound indifference, which is not the world that Maggie lived in, nor the one she wanted to live in.
Often she was afraid that when she sent Fenna away she would become like her mother, that there would be nothing, nothing left.
She had realised from when she was a tiny child that Phoebe did not love her as she loved Phoebe, and as other mothers loved their lovely daughters.
Loved by Fenna and by Rachel it had never occurred to her to consider herself unlovable, but now she needed a counter-weight in the real world, and her mother would never be that for her.
Her mother would not come into the arena with her, strip naked for combat, risk her life and her neutrality for Maggie, and Maggie recognised that tonight with a new sadness.
She knew that if Phoebe needed her, if she could even imagine that Phoebe might ever need her, she would have no problem, no problem at all, dealing with Fenna.
That evening, as her mother had stood at the kitchen door with the shadow of future old age lurking behind her, she had felt for the first time what it was to be a grown-up, what it was that she was missing in the never-never land of Fenna's spell.
But Phoebe had not wanted her there, had not wanted her love and concern and caring.
She had to face the fact that Phoebe was not, not then and not at any time, going to pull Maggie out from the night-time and into the daylight of loving and needing.
Phoebe was not going to devour her in love and thus keep her safe from the great fangs and wraths of Fenna.
Who, then?
There was her grandmother, solid and real, who could offer her stories nearly as miraculous as those that Fenna told her and which would have the miraculous ponderousness of fact.
If she took her problem to Rachel, Rachel would listen and she would be on Maggie's side.
She would be willing to try, but Rachel was not able to understand about Fenna.
Rachel hated Fenna.
She walked too firmly in the world of the day, of science.
No one, not even Fenna, could actually stand up against Rachel when she had once got the bit between her teeth: she was better at the game of controlling, containing, winning, than anyone else that Maggie knew.
She was very strong.
But Rachel stood against the powers of myth and imagination.
That, Maggie knew, was why Rachel was so unhappy now.
Maggie had known, for months, that something was wrong with Rachel.
When she looked at her grandmother with the sharp eyes that Fenna could lend her, she would see that solid outline waver, dissolve, crumble.
At first she had thought with a shock of fear that it was old age, that old age was like silicon, water-soluble, it flowed into you and as you dried out, it hardened, recasting you in blurred shapes and muted tones.
But now’ she thought that it was not that, but something worse; Rachel, who had always known things, did not know them properly any more.
Rachel was in trouble deeper than her own; Rachel needed her help this time.
She could not ask Rachel to help her.
There was only herself.
This battle must be fought by herself alone, and if she lost, she would lose alone.
Then, almost magically, as she realised this, something stirred inside her and that something was excitement and courage.
The same glorious sensation as she had felt that instant when, poised on the highest diving-board, she had known that this time she really did dare, that moment of poise and thrill before the free-fall.
She clenched her fists, spread eagled her arms and legs and called, exultantly, to St Margaret that she was ready.
And St Margaret, her cheeks glowing with the realisation of her strength, the knowledge that she indeed held the great dragon at bay while this new young warrior prepared herself for combat, felt a moment of disappointment, anticipating a return to the boredom of heaven.
She almost offered herself for the fight, the surrogate, the already-victorious.
But she looked down through the glass skylight and recognised in Maggie's cropped hair and long white body the same contours that she had seen in that other virgin warrior whom she had inspired into battle.
This was a new Joan: another of these modern women with their new language and new dreams who could follow where she had led, if she were generous enough to let them fight their own battles.
So she removed her right hand from the glass skylight and placed it instead over her left finger with the ring and the thread.
Then she withdrew her will from Fenna, leaving the dragon free to go or come as he would.
Fenna came.
Maggie had braced herself against Fenna's wrath, but dragons are deeply wily, they are tempters used to souls far more subtle than any fifteen-year-old child can be.
They have lent forms and skills even to the great serpent who beguiled Eve, who swallowed Jonah and who wrestled in the wilderness with the young man from Nazareth.
Fenna did not come wrathful now, Fenna came sweet.
Came again as the little dragon of her infancy.
He slipped through the skylight and sat at her feet, small like a baby, sweet like a beloved puppy.
He sat and looked at her, and licked her toes with such a gathered pure tenderness, such a chuckled tickliness, that it was heartbreaking.
Fenna came offering now only love, huge steady love and joy and that seemed the hardest thing to resist.
And then there was a harder one.
Fenna came sad.
Fenna shows those great scaled flanks, untouched for centuries, uncaressed, unloved.
Dragons dry out easily, their scales turning dusty and arid.
The great Dust Bowl which Maggie has seen only from the air, was once the long flank, the turning of the armpit of a dragon greater than Fenna, the great dragon laid out across the world its tail cooled by the oceans of the Antarctic and its breath, no longer fire, turned to ice around its head in the most northerly places of the globe.
Fenna cried out to Maggie, ‘Need, need, want.
They have told you lies.
There is no evil, there is only dragon.’
Fenna said, ‘I need you.’
Fenna came full of love and sorrow and joy.
Maggie was too surprised, too taken aback to resist him.
Like all the maidens, in all the stories, half seduced and half petrified, she consented to Fenna's plans and he swept her high on his great wings and bore her away over the roofs of London and higher and higher cavorting and caracolling through the star-spun night.
Now, as from the times of childhood, she rode Fenna, seated in the deep hollow of the meeting place of scaled neck, veined wing and rising battlement of spine; a throne protected from the great gale of his flight, as safe as the rocky cradle secures the foetal child, leaning back towards the bumpy spine as she had leant before, she gave herself over to their journey.
Now the Thames was a thread of silver below them, and Fenna flew as he had never flown before.
The Mediterranean was a bowl of dark green glittered with lights too tiny to count.
They were sweeping over the ancient continent of Africa, the everlasting wastelands of the desert no more than a patch on a great patchwork quilt.
Fenna dived low over southern Africa, where his shadow presence in the night would simply meet with old dreams and young magic, and he plunged into the dancing spume of Mosi oa Tunya , ‘the smoke that thunders’, now called the Victoria Falls.
Their deafening boom tossed up lunar rainbows; and Fenna gave them to Maggie for playthings and they dissolved in dark brightness between her fingers.
The huge clean moon stood at her right hand, lemon-yellow and patterned with shadow.
Before her marvelled eyes the Southern Cross lifted itself off the horizon and hung glowing, silent and fierce.
Now they were too high to see the great waves of the southern Atlantic carry the whales on their singing pilgrimages.
Two hundred miles from land the fierce Amazon river stained the dark water darker, red with the silt it carries down from the secret jungles and mountains of the New World.
The Andes, serried like dragons' teeth, sparkled as the sun rose behind them, chasing them eastwards across a peach-coloured ocean dotted with green islands.
Now Fenna rose, higher and higher, and, holding all his power for one sharp second of perfect concentration, revealed to Maggie the crazy onrushing of the galaxy where everything spins through space so fast that the observer is locked in stillness.
For one blinding moment she knew absolutely that Galileo should have died for his truth, and yet had also been right to retract because he had still not known one particle of the whole.
For, as the speed of light rushed down upon her, she heard, in the untimeable pause between the upbeat of Fenna's wings and their down swoop, she heard the singing of the spheres, the harmony of the universe which turns, turns, turns in the atom and in the infinite and is unmoved in its own movement and is all one single force.
Now, in the dream influence of the moon, Fenna told Maggie to look down on all the kingdoms of the world, and across China she saw the snaking of the Great Wall.
On the southern side she saw the mandarin silks of the beginnings of civilisation and the huge courage of the Long March; and on the other, to the north, the eternal silence of the greatest desolation.
She looked on north, north, north, through desert and tundra, to the unbroken cruel peace of the polar seas.
And Fenna awaited her thanks for a journey so beautiful and so unique, the gifts that only he could offer her.
Maggie was ready to give him the glory, to return to him and stay with him forever.
Then she heard, barely a distant whisper, but clearly, her mother's voice telling her that the Great Wall of China is the only human-made object that can be identified from the surface of the moon.
She heard her grandmother informing her that out there, in that Mongolian vastness, was ‘The Dragon's Tomb’ where her own great-grandfather had gone to find the dinosaur eggs.
Empowered by their voices, she drew a deep breath and, scarcely audible in that vast space where they were floating, she said, ‘Fenna, it's over, go away.’
Fenna laughed, an ancient laugh, a sweet summer thunder laugh that echoed off the dancing planets.
When he had done laughing, he told her,
‘I do not believe you.’
He told her that she would not be able to let go of him, that his power was deep, deep in her bones and she was bound to him for ever.
‘Fenna,’ she told him, ‘please.
I know I cannot go unless you let me, please let me go.
I love you.
But it is too much.
Let me go.’
‘No,’ roared Fenna.
‘No.
No.
No.’
And now the anger Maggie had feared was loosed.
The great flames poured from his mouth, rivers of fire across the cold darkness of space.
The comets that streaked the skies and scared the ancients were powered by Fenna's breath.
The meteors that burned out the dinosaurs two hundred million years ago were the gouts of flame and phlegm from Fenna's nostrils.
His flailing tail swept down a third of the stars of heaven and cast them on the earth.
The great City of Babylon was fallen, fallen before his fury.
The lost island of Atlantis was swallowed up in his wrath.
The roots of the World Tree were shaken by his writhings, and the old Gods stirred and marched out to Ragnarok.
In the epicentre of the maelstrom, with the moon at her feet and crowned with the stars was Maggie, surprisingly unmoved.
‘Fenna,’ she told him sternly, ‘I can out-tantrum you.
You may be a dragon, but I am a child.
I am just a little girl, I haven't even started my periods yet and little girls can tantrum louder and then can sulk deeper than anything else in the universe.
That is my power and you have strengthened it in me.’
In speaking, in making conscious the secret hidden power of little girls, Maggie became a woman.
Fenna wanted nothing from the woman.
It was the child he had desired.
Fenna loved Maggie, and knowing that all was lost and love had departed, that she had betrayed their long friendship, that she had asserted herself over his mastery, he howled and, dropping his shoulder, hurled her out of her safe nest and into the immensity of space.
She fell.
She fell.
She fell as Lucifer, the ancient dragon, had fallen first, long long ago before the creation of the world.
The ancient race memory of that fall stirred in Fenna's marrow and he was appalled.
He was broken with compassion as he watched her crashing like a falling star, pulled by gravity and centripetal forces towards the consummation of the sun and in a moment of weakness he relaxed his will.
There was space then for her free-fall to be guided, even as Lucifer's had been guided, across the vast vacuity, down to a home prepared for him by his enemy.
Now Maggie learned that falling and flying were different and the difference was fear.
In the naked fear of falling in a space so huge that she did not know whether she was falling up or down, inward or outward, she met a fear so great that it burned away forever all the other fears.
The fears of sex, of adulthood, of life; the fears that Rachel and Phoebe would tear her apart, the fears that they would not; the fears of love and hatred.
She would never be frightened of them ever again,
All her little fears were burned away in the great fear, the fear of ceasing to be, of falling falling falling and never landing.
Knowing that fear, she abandoned all pride and she called into the darkness for someone to come and rescue her.
She called on her mother to leave the little green park, leave neutrality and passivity, and come to her aid; she called on her grandmother to leave the grand study, to leave scientific fact and come out here and save her.
She called to St Margaret and St Joan and to all the women who have fought the burning and conquered the dragon.
She called to Hermione and Joanna and all the girls who had gone already along the paths she had rejected, called to them to wait for her and place their steady walking boots on solid earth to catch her.
And still she fell and fell.
Because she has called, they can answer.
St Margaret tugged firmly on her thread.
Maggie felt it in her hand, frail, attenuated, overstretched, but tautened by the love and knowledge of all the women.
It would lead her safely home.
She, too, could afford compassion, even as she fell; compassion and wisdom.
She cried out suddenly into the enormous silence.
She cried,
‘Fenna, go to Rachel, go to Rachel!’
Rachel is the crone, she knew as she spun downwards.
Rachel is the one grown old and weary.
Rachel needs, Fenna needs, they need each other.
The moon is turning, Now is a new moment.
Go to Rachel, the barren one, and fill her with the harvest of fire.
‘Fenna, I command you.
Go to Rachel.’
Then Maggie followed the thread back through the atmosphere barrier.
She was blasted by the friction of re-entry, scorched by her wild rush through particles and atoms of welcoming air, hurled through the orbiting phase.
She crashed through the glass of her own skylight.
In a shower of diamonds, in a dust cloud of shattered stars, in a bee swarm of broken glass, battered and bleeding, she was hurled face downward onto her own mattress and she lay there and screamed with fear and relief.
BOOK THREE
How much energy and time we wasted in all our endless love tragedies and their complications!
But it was also we who taught ourselves and those younger than we that love is not the most important thing in a woman's life.
And that if she must choose between love and work, she should never hesitate: it is work, a woman's own creative work, that gives her the only real satisfaction and makes her life worth living.
Alexandra Kollontai
One
Because they were both already awake and on their feet it took neither Phoebe nor Rachel long to reach Maggie's room.
Phoebe being younger, fitter, and a storey and a half nearer was first.
Barefoot and in a panic, she missed the bottom step of the wrought-iron spiral staircase, stubbing her toe and grazing her right shin.
Maggie was still screaming above her and she did not even notice until later that her own blood was added to the devastation of Maggie's attic.
Picking herself up, she shouted,
‘Coming, darling!’
But she did not pause to listen for an answer.
Seconds later she shoulder-charged the door, and found herself in an eerie moonlit room where she could distinguish nothing, except the deafening howls which seemed to reverberate off the walls.
Disoriented, she could not for an instant even locate her daughter.
She groped for the light switch, but could not find it.
All those years ago they had thoughtfully placed it unusually low on the wall to make it easy for the child Maggie had then been to reach.
It was about the height of Phoebe's thigh and, after a flustered second, she remembered that decision with an instant clarity.
The electrician had been very irritated by their insistence.
And even while she remembered, she was also scared by the mystery of the moonlight, by the disorientation and, above all by her daughter's screams.
They seemed to her unearthly; a new combination of loss, pain and fear: they were howls she would have made herself only half-an-hour before, if she had known how.
Then the brighter light of electricity drove out the ghostly moonbeams and she saw only her daughter, her child, flat out on her bed, naked, apparently bedecked in diamonds and rubies, a fierce tattoo of glass and blood.
‘Christ!’ she said, and the next moment, forgetful of her own safety, she had Maggie in her arms, shushing and soothing as she had never in her life done before.
Outside Phoebe's open bedroom door Rachel paused, wondering if her daughter had heard the explosion and responded to it.
Then she became aware of the noises of Phoebe's ascent.
Despite her anxiety she registered both the relief that Phoebe should have acted so promptly and a tiny flicker of jealousy, which she quickly quashed.
She was panting, she realised, and hung for a moment on the newel post of the spiral stairs and waited for her heartbeat to calm down.
Maggie's screams died suddenly into moans, and she knew her darling was safe.
She even considered a discreet retreat to her own lair, but recognised that she lacked such disinterested nobility.
With her hand on the iron banister, she started to pull herself towards the rooftops.
The scene that greeted her at the top was already less frightening than it had been when Phoebe arrived.
The light was on and Phoebe was sitting on the bed with Maggie's arms wrapped convulsively around her, her scarlet and sparkling body thus partly hidden from her grandmother.
Rachel was, though, more able to take in the ruin of the room than Phoebe had been.
The great skylight had shattered.
All the other windows on both sides of the room had imploded.
The great metal roof-tree which held the house together had bent inwards as though from some giant's blow, and listening, Rachel could hear tiles still slithering down the slope and crashing into the street forty feet below.
They would have the fire brigade round in a few moments if the external noise had been as loud as the internal one.
Rachel even thought of going down to Phoebe's bed room and using her phone to reassure the outside world, and protect themselves from its invasion.
But before she could move, Phoebe looked up, saw her and said,
‘Mummy.’
The appeal was stronger than Phoebe had ever made before.
The years reeled back, her old saggy breasts seemed to respond and she crossed the room without realising it, wrapping both her children in the Chinese spread and taking them into her arms like a mediaeval St Anne with Virgin and Child.
For a silent moment the three of them sat there.
Abruptly the full moon passed across the gaping wound in their roof and no longer shone directly into the room.
The neon quality vanished and they were all together as one flesh with three faces.
Released from the spell, Rachel took a deep breath and knew her duty.
She said, with a rigorous assumption of calm and maturity.
‘Whatever is happening here?’
Phoebe looked up and smiled with simple gratitude before she said,
‘I don't know.
Maggie, darling, what happened?’
Maggie's sobs were becoming more natural, but she still had her arms tight round Phoebe's neck and her head pressed against Phoebe's breast and her voice was muffled.
‘I fell.
He dropped me and I fell.’
The two adults looked at each other.
She was shocked?
Still dreaming?
Phoebe looked to Rachel for help, and Rachel was frightened.
Panic, though, would not help, she told herself.
‘It's too cold in here,’ she said, ‘Maggie, darling, do you think you can get up, because even your mother cannot carry you down those stairs, you're too big.
And I don't think this room is safe for the moment.
Is she badly hurt?’ she asked Phoebe.
Together they gently uncovered the child and inspected her.
There were still splinters of glass gleaming on Maggie's shoulders and high flat breasts.
There was a longer gash on her right elbow and a bruise forming at the top of her arm.
Both of them noticed with shock how alarmingly thin she was, frail to the point of vanishing.
She was shaking all over but seemed miraculously free from serious injury.
Rachel offered her her dressing-gown, but Maggie seemed to want to keep the Chinese silk around her.
Phoebe lifted her to her feet and they started towards the door.
At that moment Rachel heard the electronic siren of a fire engine.
‘Maggie,’ she said firmly, ‘I'm sorry to make you do this but you have to.
You have to decide, right now, do you want to go to the hospital or stay here?’
‘Stay, please,’ said Maggie; now she was on her feet she was returning to them rapidly.
‘Please.’
Then she added, ‘I'm OK, honest.’
Rachel and Phoebe exchanged half-smiles.
Rachel said,
‘Phoebe, I'll go deal with the authorities.
They'd probably better check that the whole place isn't falling down and I'm afraid they'll want to see Maggie, but I'll get rid of them.
Take her to the kitchen and try and wash some of that glass out.’
Phoebe was suddenly grateful for her mother's calm and decision; if anyone could get rid of the London fire brigade it would be Rachel.
Suddenly Rachel leant over and kissed Phoebe quite gently on the cheek, and then she turned and led the way downstairs.
Maggie did not want to take her arms away from Phoebe, she needed to be held.
Phoebe was both gentle and firm.
In the light of kitchen she sat Maggie down and started to brush gently at her shoulders, but after a minute or so she said,
‘I think the shower would work better; let's go to the bathroom.’
She made Maggie kneel down and lean her head over the bathtub, just as she had when Maggie had to have her hair washed as a little child.
Under the warm water and the delicate probing of Phoebe's fingers, Maggie relaxed.
After a few moments she was saying very natural and quite irritable ‘ouches’ when Phoebe prodded too hard.
They could hear Rachel's commanding voice out on the landing, showing the firemen up to Maggie's room.
Quite suddenly Maggie giggled and, imitating Lisa's voice, said,
‘Good old dinosaur.’
Her release from tension released Phoebe's fears.
Suddenly it was she who was shaking and crying,
‘Oh Christ, my darling, I thought you were dead.
I've never been so frightened in my life.’
She wanted to be as mature and sensible as Rachel was, she wanted to be reassuring and maternal and all she could do was cling to Maggie and sob and sob.
Now it was Maggie, soaking wet and still oozing blood who turned and took Phoebe in her arms.
‘Mummy, Mummy, it's all right.
I'm all right.
I'm OK.’
Cuddling her mother, petting her, she felt almost exultant.
The two of them clung together, soggily, hugging closer and closer until Rachel knocked on the door and asked them to come out.
Phoebe wrapped Maggie in her towel and called Rachel to come and hold her while she found them both some clothes.
The two women passed in the doorway and exchanged glances of pure gratitude.
In her room Phoebe pulled on her jeans and a shirt, and snatched up a thick pullover and the bottom half of her track suit for Maggie.
Then suddenly she changed her mind and reached into her wardrobe for a new pair of tight stretchy ski trousers that she had hardly worn.
Maggie was a very young woman, she thought that if she had to face a gang of young firemen she would be more comfortable in something smart.
She was amused at herself for thinking of it, but saw, back in the bathroom, that Maggie appreciated the thought.
Rachel, perfectly dignified in her dressing-gown, made the firemen cups of tea.
Maggie sat huddled on a kitchen chair and Phoebe held her hand.
Under Rachel's serene autocracy the firemen agreed that there was nothing much to be done now, that the house seemed safe enough but they should not use the attic until someone ‘from the department’ had been and inspected it the next day.
And finally Rachel swept them from the kitchen and down the stairs, chatting amiably as she went.
Phoebe offered Maggie a cup of hot chocolate, and ten minutes later Rachel returned smiling and quoting,
‘They took peculiar pains to souse
the pictures up and down the house;
until Mathilda's aunt succeeded
in showing them they were not needed.
And even then she had to pay
to get the men to go away.’
Both Phoebe and Maggie smiled warmly, remembering the frequent readings from Belloc with which Rachel had edified their childhood.
Phoebe made all three of them hot chocolate.
Later, Phoebe tucked Maggie into her own bed.
She kissed her tenderly, then grinned and said,
‘I tell you what, you can take tomorrow off school.’
Maggie seemed safe, warm, relaxed, sleepy.
Then she opened her eyes and said,
‘Mummy, can I have my St Margaret picture?’
‘Now?’
‘Please.’
‘Of course you can, sweetie.’
She climbed the stairs to get it, crunched her way across the glass-strewn room, feeling a strong rush of her earlier panic, and unhooked the painting from the wall.
It was quite small and she could hold it easily between her hands.
It had hung in Maggie's bedroom for as long as Phoebe could remember: she had not looked at it properly for years.
Now, with it in her hands, she knew absolutely that it was not a worthless Victorian copy, as Rachel had once told her.
It was very old.
The virgin saint was leading the dragon on a slim gold chain across a field of flowers towards a distant and elaborate city; she had a thin white face and an expression of nonchalance, almost tedium.
It was a strong talisman for a little girl, for a young woman.
Phoebe smiled, and allowed herself an unusual and agreeable start of gratitude to Rachel, not just for her consistent kindness to Maggie, but also, freshly, for her generosity and understanding towards herself.
She found Rachel still in the kitchen, looking old and weary.
She was sitting at the table with her chocolate cooling in the mug between her hands.
She raised her head when Phoebe came in.
She thought how strained and tired her daughter looked.
‘Sit down, Phoebe, I'll warm some more milk for you.’
Phoebe let her.
Outside the sky was turning pale.
It was morning.
Looking at each other with a new respect, they both wanted to say something to mark the importance of this dawn.
They were both too tired.
Two
Maggie woke up.
The pale April sunshine flooded the room, but it was different from usual.
She felt the change unconsciously, and with it an unaccustomed warmth.
Dozily she felt her arm ache.
Then the whole night flooded back into her memory, and she realised her loneliness and desolation.
Instinctively she sought through the whole cosmos for Fenna, and knew she would not find him.
There was nothing there, except the comfortable warmth.
She opened her eyes and was aware of being in her mother's bed, where she had not been for over ten years.
Phoebe was still asleep beside her, curled up and with her back close to her daughter's: Maggie enjoyed the moment of comfort, adding it dreamily to the shadow that was also there.
She felt strange.
She was still wearing Phoebe's trousers and jersey.
Perhaps that was why…surely she had not wetted herself?
She reached down with her finger and drew it out covered in blood.
A simple adolescent embarrassment flamed her face: she had ruined her mother's new, and pale blue, trousers.
She was frightened that Phoebe would respond to this news with excessive enthusiasm, congratulate her, want to celebrate in some humiliating way, even ring her friends and tell them.
She sat bolt upright, and there to greet her was St Margaret serenely leading the tamed dragon towards the city.
Encouraged, Maggie prodded Phoebe.
‘Mummy, I'm bleeding.’
Phoebe woke up quickly, as though she had been waiting for Maggie's summons, but not quickly enough.
‘More glass, darling?’ she enquired without turning over.
‘No,’ cried Maggie, ‘and Mummy, I've messed up your new trousers.’
‘Oh,’ said Phoebe, who now understood, ‘it doesn't matter, they'll wash.’
Then, hearing something more distressed in Maggie's voice, she became maternally reassuring.
‘It's probably last night, Maggie; a shock can easily change your cycle.’
‘I don't have a cycle,’ said Maggie crossly, feeling that her mother ought to have known.
‘This is my first time.’
‘Christ!’
Phoebe sat up immediately and then, overwhelmed with hangover, tiredness and surprise, flopped down again abruptly.
It made them both giggle.
For a while they lay there, recouping their dailiness, setting up this soft laughter against the horror of the night, close and easy together.
Then, businesslike, they faced the day.
Phoebe dealt with Maggie's immediate needs and took her trousers off to soak in the bathroom.
‘You'd better put on one of my tracksuits, we're not meant to go up to your room until they've sent someone to inspect it or something,’ she called on her way to the kitchen.
She slung the milk saucepan casually on top of the other unwashed dishes in the sink, unbothered now by the mess, aware that Rachel had seen it all last night and had said nothing.
She put on the kettle, craving her morning cup of coffee.
Soon Maggie joined her, and made toast.
Still floppy from giggling they were careful to avoid catching each other 's eye, but there was warmth and repose enough there to set against the hardness of the day's demands.
Rachel woke in her own room, tired- and uncomfortable.
She was too old, she told herself, for all these midnight cavortings.
She turned herself over in her bed, and snuggled down for an extra, self-indulgent and rare hour of sleep.
But her eye caught her bedside alarm clock and she pulled herself properly into wakefulness.
All her temptations had dissolved the moment she had heard Maggie say,
‘I fell.
He dropped me and I fell.’
The final quiet half-hour in the kitchen with Phoebe had only made her conscious of what she had then known was now necessary.
She did not like what her life demanded of her, but she knew painfully and absolutely that the moment for truth had come.
So this last time she wanted to be in her office, correct and professional at the right time.
The board meeting was at four o'clock, but she had paperwork to do and she must at least speak to Clare before then.
She lumbered out of bed, reached for the too recently removed dressing-gown and took herself off to her bathroom.
A little later, neatly dressed in tweed suit and cashmere jersey she climbed the stairs to Phoebe's flat.
She had expected to find them both still in bed, and was surprised by the noises from the kitchen, but she poked her head round the door and saw Maggie sitting at the kitchen table eating Weetabix in a reassuringly healthy way.
She could sense the goodwill between the two of them, and it encouraged her.
She crossed the kitchen and kissed Maggie on the head,
‘Are you all right, my darling?’ and then, almost surprising herself, she passed on and kissed Phoebe too.
‘And you?’
‘Yes, thank you.’
‘Well, if everyone is all right, I think I had better go into the office today.
I have something very important that I ought to do.’
Phoebe was surprised; she had somehow thought that after Rachel's sterling conduct of the night before, she would now take charge, go on looking after them all, manage everything for them and leave her free to walk the road that she had to walk.
But in her mother's kiss she had learned something of the importance of whatever it was that Rachel had to do.
Her mother so seldom asked her for anything, she realised with a jolt.
It was she, Phoebe, herself, who imposed all those expectations upon herself, not her mother.
Now in some obscure way Rachel was asking for something, for help, for reassurance, for permission.
‘Of course we can manage,’ she said and grinning added, ‘I'm a big girl now.’
Then suddenly that was not enough.
She returned her mother's kiss and said, ‘Good luck.’
Rachel was used to being the tallest woman in a room.
She seldom remembered that Phoebe was actually taller than she was.
Now she could feel the solid muscle of her daughter's arms and she wanted to lean against her and draw comfort and strength; but she pulled away and looked at Phoebe with that straight, clear, appraising look that was her hallmark.
She did not ask any questions.
She said goodbye to Maggie and then, just as she was leaving the kitchen, she looked directly at Phoebe and added,
‘Good luck yourself.’
Then she went down the stairs, collected her satchel and left the house by Phoebe's front door.
Phoebe and Maggie had a trying and tiresome morning.
The fire brigade reappeared, bringing them some council inspector, who obviously wanted to evacuate the house.
They probed and measured and cross-questioned Phoebe in the most condescending manner, made worse by the fact that they clearly did not have a clue as to what might have happened.
Phoebe wanted to scream with temper, or indulge in wicked and vicious sarcasm.
At the same time she was certain that Maggie did not want to have to cope with that.
She bit her lip and kept her peace, and even made them cups of tea with the same grace that her mother had demonstrated in the dark hours of the night.
Maggie kept catching her eye with an expression of knowing amusement, but at the same time she obviously hated having these men stomping through her every possession and destroying any remaining magic in her secret chamber.
Finally the men gave up, grudgingly admitted that the room was safe, and left muttering about ‘freak accidents’ and ‘acts of God’.
They recommended a glazier, a brush and an insurance claim.
Phoebe thanked them wearily.
She and Maggie brushed the room out as best they could and the glazier arrived with an enormous sheet of polythene for the roof.
He set to work steadily on replacing the panes of the side windows.
Phoebe went back to the kitchen, heated up some tinned soup and made tuna fish sandwiches.
Then she called Maggie.
Their shared tiredness was too great; they could not replace the goodwill of the morning.
They sat limply messing with the food.
But Phoebe knew that she must act.
‘Maggie darling, I don't have a clue what happened last night, but I think you do.’
Maggie looked unattractively sly, sulky and fearful all at once, but Phoebe doggedly pushed on.
‘Darling, I'm not going to ask anything about it, but there is something I have to know.
Is the house really safe now?’
‘I think so.’
Maggie looked away from her mother, ‘Yes.
The house is quite safe.’
Phoebe held her breath.
She could feel Maggie's distress; Maggie needed more than to have her care about the house.
More, but not too much more.
‘And you, darling, are you safe?’
‘Oh yes,’ said Maggie with such bleak sincerity that Phoebe knew she must go on.
She must keep her appointment at the clinic at all possible costs.
‘In that case I want to go out this afternoon and do something.
Something important.’
Maggie only repeated her question of the night before, ‘Are you OK, Mummy?’
But now, it was a time for truth and Phoebe said, ‘No.
No, I'm not OK.
But I want to be.
That's what I'm going out for.
‘It's to do with getting better, getting OK.’
And Maggie came round the table and standing over Phoebe gave her a long silent hug.
Meanwhile Rachel had taken a taxi to the museum; she had entered by the back door and exchanged a smile with the doorkeeper.
She crossed the dinosaur gallery, carefully averting her eyes from her own display, unlocked the solid door and arrived in the security and peace of her own office.
Deliberately she sat herself down at her desk and examined her post.
Carefully she opened the drawer where the two copies of her paper lay and took them out.
She started to read and for a moment lost her rigid self-consciousness in admiring delight at her own writing, its clarity and generosity.
After a while, though, she pulled herself together and, leaving one copy on her desk, took the other down to the secretarial room and asked if someone could run her off two more copies, ideally before the board meeting.
Rachel was popular among the stall, always courteous and concerned and never asking for the impossible except with great charm and self-deprecation.
She got an enthusiastic response, ‘Of course, Mrs Petherington, I can stay in through my lunch-break if need be.
I'll see to it.’
‘Thank you so much, I would really appreciate it.
I'm just sorry that I didn't give it to you sooner.
It was very stupid of me.’
She went back to her own office and sat down at her desk again.
She put her elbows on the desk and rested her head in her hands.
She had seldom felt so old or so tired or so wretched.
Then she picked up her internal telephone and, very civilly, asked Clare if she could spare her half an hour or so — yes, before the meeting; yes, as soon as possible.
For the ten minutes before Clare arrived she leaned back and looked around her with a sense almost of satisfaction.
She had burned her boats.
The interview with Clare was very trying.
Clare was at first protective and maternal, then weepy and emotional, and finally, when the implications of what Rachel was doing became clear to her, she was furious.
‘You can't.
You absolutely cannot do this to me.
It was you that taught me to be a Darwinist, a decent gradualist.
How many times have I heard you?
You can't rat on that and give all those American lunatics — and I'm quoting you — this kind of support.
You can't.’
‘I can,’ said Rachel stubbornly.
‘No, you can't.
I don't mean all this, here,’ she jabbed at Rachel's typescript with an irritable finger, her face looked blotchy and plainer than ever, ‘this bit about your blasted reconstruction.
All that's fine with me; I've known the bloody thing was wrong for ages anyway.
We can take it down; we ought to take it down really.
But you don't have to rush off to the other extreme.
Are you crazy?’
‘Clare, read it.’
‘I have read it.
I don't mean here, this version necessarily, but you're not the only person in the world who keeps up with the wider literature, you know.
I read it all the time.
And if you really want to know what I think, it's that you Cretaceous people are insanely arrogant.
You can't solve one little corner, one little technical hiccup so you'll throw a hundred years of decent work out the window and replace it with sci-fi fantasies.
Your time-scale is all wrong.
For heaven's sake, Rachel, look at the fossil record as a whole.
Not just your little bitsy corner.
There's more going on than just the Cretaceous collapse.
What about archaeopteryx ?
And my therapsids?
You don't have to do this.’
‘But I'm going to,’ said Rachel.
She was too exhausted, too weary to argue it out with her now, but she was also excited.
Now Clare had abandoned her respectful kindness it would be fun to fight with her.
‘Look,’ she said reasonably, ‘you haven't even read the paper properly yet.
Take it away and read it, and we'll talk it through if you are still not convinced.
But I am convinced and I'm going to tell the board so today.
I only wanted to tell you first so you could save yourself this sort of scene in front of them.
I owed it to you.’
‘Thank you,’ snorted Clare in as ungrateful a manner as she could manage, swept her copy contemptuously off the desk, and stalked out of the room with a moderately successful attempt at dignity.
Rachel allowed herself a brief smile at such youthfulness.
Then she sat down to write a letter to an old friend, the editor of her chosen journal.
She pointed out to him the attraction of publishing so surprising a paper and urged him to do it as quickly as possible.
It was a charming letter, a well-managed mixture of humility and boastfulness, and she sent it down to be typed with a feeling of smugness.
She realised that she still had fifteen minutes before the meeting was due to start and on an impulse she rang Paul.
She needed someone to rejoice with her.
He was out.
She had neither the energy nor the time to feel irritated; instead she took out her pen again and reached for a sheet of the museum's paper.
My dear Paul, in ten minutes I am going to tell my board that I have become a convert to Catastrophe Theory.
Poor dinosaurs.
Now I am in urgent need of a tutor in such matters as the shadow star Nemesis, the irridium level and other such metaphysical absurdities.
I hope you are up to the job.
Please ring soon.
Love, Rachel.
‘That'll get him,’ she said aloud, and grinned.
Contrary to her usual habit, she rang for a motorbike messenger.
She put the sheet of paper in an envelope, addressed it clearly, added the word ‘Urgent’ and carried it down to the office, where she left it for collection and received instead the original and the photostats of her article.
Then, quite calmly, she proceeded to her meeting.
As soon as she entered the room she knew that Clare had already been telling tales; or at least complaining to her colleagues.
What had she said?
‘The old bag has gone completely batty.’
‘Besotted by that silly queer over at Imperial.’
‘How are we going to get her out of here?
It's too embarrassing.’
Or even, Rachel wondered, ‘You've got to say this for the old girl, she does keep on trying.’
She could sense the excitement and the nervousness, the sudden lull in the conversation as she entered.
She thought someone might ask her questions, but she was saved by the arrival of their director.
He was a dour middle-aged man, who feared he was a failure and compensated himself with an excessively professorial beard and a punctiliously formal manner.
For nearly two hours he worked his way through his agenda, more administration and finance today than scientific exploration.
He was, apparently, completely insensitive to the frisson of curiosity and tension in the younger members of his staff.
Rachel relaxed, grateful, and gave her usual careful consideration to the matters before the meeting; calmly ploughing through the minutiae and bureaucratic red tape of museum management, making the sort of useful contributions that she had made at any such meeting in the last twenty years.
Finally the Director brought the whole thing to a close; he pulled his papers towards him, preparatory to getting up and said,
‘Any other business?’ in an off-hand and discouraging tone.
But Rachel was not discouraged.
‘I have, Henry; I'm going to have to ask for a complete and urgent reorganisation of the dinosaur gallery.’
‘Huh?’
‘I'm afraid so.
I have become convinced that our whole approach is hopelessly unscientific, in fact wrong, and particularly that my own reconstruction is so fundamentally flawed that we really don't have the right to be displaying it anywhere except in a Disneyland type of amusement park.’
‘Rachel!’
‘It is a bit embarrassing, isn't it?
I'm sorry, Henry, but I have written a paper, which I'm planning to send to Tom Haines, which more or less says precisely this.
Clare has seen it, although she probably hasn't had time to read it fully.
And although she seems to disagree with its overall drift, she tells me she's in complete accord with my views on what she called my ‘blasted reconstruction’.’
Let that be a lesson to you, Clare, she thought, to lose your temper and try me with your emotional immaturity.
She was buoyed up suddenly on the wave of amazement and admiration that she could feel enveloping her from across the whole room.
She was pleased with herself and her own calm style.
She had not thought she had this much spunk left in her.
She smiled at them all and added,
‘Clare has a copy of the paper now, and I have brought in a couple of extra copies; so perhaps the dinosaur people, at least, might like to have a look at it and see what they think.
You'll probably want to talk about it without the embarrassment of having me here to listen.
But don't dilly-dally for too long; once it's published we are all going to look a little risible if we have made no adjustments to what is after all known as being predominantly my own design of gallery.
Also, I am a bit older than the rest of you, but you can perhaps understand that I don't want to drop dead without a proper and public recantation.
Since I'm technically retired I can't say that I'll resign if you disagree with my request — and particularly that we should remove my reconstruction as quickly as is feasible, but I do feel it that strongly and I shall publish whatever you decide.’
Suddenly she wanted to put her head down on the big table and howl with misery.
She pushed back her chair and stood up abruptly; she was terrified that she would sway, topple and crash to the ground.
And then she heard her mother's voice.
Even though she had learned so recently that this was not the authentic voice of her mother, the intellectual knowledge had changed nothing, nothing, and perhaps it never did.
Now her mother's voice called to her, telling her to act like a lady.
All through her childhood she had resented the voice, had resented her mother.
Now she thought ‘Mother’ deliberately, summoning up from a deep centre the bossy voice which had haunted her and with it a sweet softness, older still and loving.
In the strength of that voice she was able to gather up her papers, push them into her satchel, and leave the room with perfect dignity.
She made it back to her office and sank into her chair; but after a few minutes she sat up, combed her hair and decided to go home.
Just as she was reaching for her jacket the phone rang, and without thinking she answered it.
‘Hello.’
‘Rachel?’
‘Paul.’
‘Rachel, what is all this?
I get in from a dull lunch and find your urgent communication on my desk.
What are you up to?’
‘You can read, Paul.
I suppose it was Smit and van der Kaars in the end.’
And Paul himself and Maggie and Fenna, but she would not try to tell him that.
‘I've written a paper; a recantation you might call it.
I think Tom Haines will publish it…he'd be best, don't you think?
I mean the whole thing is wrong, the reconstruction, the theory behind it.
So I supposed I'd better tell my board about it and I did this afternoon.
Clare is out for my blood of course, poor thing, but I couldn't really help that.
I thought I'd better get it sorted out before I died.’
‘And you just got up in front of Henry and those pipsqueaks in your department and said, ‘Sorry and all that, old chaps, but I've been wrong all my life and led you into error and wickedness’?’
‘More or less.’
‘Rachel, you are amazing.
That's the bravest thing I have ever heard of.
Can I come round this evening with a bottle of champagne?’
‘Well, that would be very nice.
Thank you.
I should warn you, though, we're in a bit of chaos at home.
The roof fell in last night.’
‘What?’
Suddenly she could almost hear her mother giggling.
She could hear her mother's distant laughter and her voice saying faintly, ‘Rachel, do stop showing off.’
More immediately she could hear Paul's resounding,
‘What?’
‘The roof, dear.
You know what that is.
It fell in, caved in rather.
Maggie's skylight smashed.
But we're all fine.’
‘But Rachel, why?
I mean why did it cave in or whatever.’
‘Well I haven't heard the official report because I had to go to my board meeting, but if you ask me, Maggie's dragon did it.’
‘Rachel, are you drunk?’
There was a pause, and suddenly Paul laughed, ‘Have I ever told you, Rachel, that I adore you?
You are the most extraordinary and wonderful woman I have ever encountered, and I shall make it a magnum of champagne.
I love you.’
When she put the phone down she felt fizzy with excitement, but with his smiling voice cut off, the feeling did not last.
Instead she felt very, very tired.
Then she knew that she needed not to sneak out by the convenient back exit, but to leave through the front entrance, trusting its outrageous, ostentatious vulgarity to reassure and comfort her.
And thus it was, that February evening, that she came to be standing at the top of the monumental sweep of the staircase, under the huge doorway, pausing for a moment, offering tribute to herself and all her gods.
Meanwhile Phoebe had taken a shower, found some clean knickers, mounted her bicycle and ridden off to her appointment at the clinic.
Even as she chained her bike up she noticed three different taxis drawing up and depositing their customers.
Hers was the only bicycle attached to these particularly well-painted railings, and her soul cringed.
Despite all her resolution, she paused outside the plate-glass doorway and looked around guiltily.
The chances of any of her acquaintance passing at this moment and noting that she, Phoebe Petherington, was entering the evil portals of a private hospital, were, she admitted, so small as to be risible, but that did not allay her shame.
She slunk covertly through the entrance.
Her sense of inadequacy escalated rapidly; not only was the receptionist extremely pretty, she was also immaculately dressed, well-mannered, and had perfectly clean, shell-like little fingernails.
She said, ‘Can I help you?’ as though she meant it.
Phoebe, on the other hand, suddenly could not remember what false name she had given when she made the appointment.
She stumbled over the words, muttered and blushed, her duplicity and stupidity so abundantly clear to her that she was surprised that the charming young woman did not immediately leap to her feet, denounce her as an impostor and throw her out onto the street again.
She almost wished she would.
Then the luxury of the place reached out and embraced her.
It was the stuff of her darkest fantasies, her most secret longings.
Well-manicured hands took her jacket respectfully, offered her a seat, brought her coffee in a china cup with a saucer.
She was asked discreet questions about private health insurance and, in the face of her disclaimers, equally civil ones about her credit cards.
She was led away into a crisp-looking cell where she was measured and weighed; a careful, polite pair of hands found a vein in her strong arm and removed a vial of her blood.
Someone took her blood pressure and remarked on how healthy it was.
She could not restrain a flash of pride in her physical fitness; all the nurses were smaller than she was and, although they were prettier, she felt her dignity and certainty returning.
She had imagined that the doctor would be male; she had looked forward to it even, a chance to pit herself against him, to resist, to overcome; but when she was finally ushered into the consulting room she was greeted by a woman younger than herself.
This shocked her suddenly, shook her back into the real world and changed the entire course of the interview.
It was no longer a fantasy, a ritual extension of the dark dreams of her night times, in which the doctor was to play out some version of her lost father, an ally against the demands of the women in her life.
This was real; Maggie and Rachel deserved that reality.
So sharp was her sense of the rules having changed that she was shocked to see the name Mary Hunter at the top of the card in the doctor's hand.
Only simple embarrassment prevented her from correcting it.
‘You're a remarkably fit woman, aren't you, Mrs Hunter?’ said the smiling doctor.
‘What do you do for a living?’
‘I'm a gardener,’ Phoebe said, and felt a simple pride in the fact.
This proved stronger than her irritation at the surprise in the young doctor's face.
Clearly well-spoken female gardeners were not the usual clientèle of this hospital.
They plodded through the whole range of routine questions.
Long before they reached the relevant section.
Phoebe had decided she was going to lie about the amount she drank.
She had not come here for that; it was another problem that she must take on, but not now, not here.
Then, as instructed, she removed her clothes and lay out on the couch.
Glancing down, her toes seemed miles away, disembodied, belonging to someone else.
It was this moment that she had come for.
The doctor was rubbing her hands, probably to warm them, but it looked like a gesture of glee and greed.
Phoebe hated her with a brief clear flame of anger.
This was the avenging angel who would steal her lover away from her.
And at the same moment she had the shattering thought that perhaps she had imagined the whole thing.
There would be no lump.
The doctor would feel her breasts, find nothing, smile and send her off to deal with a new, an incurable bitterness.
The doctor, still chatting away, put her stethoscope in her ears and listened to Phoebe's chest and heart, then had her sit up and tapped her back.
Phoebe felt the tension prickling her belly as she lay down again.
The doctor, whatever her politics and morals, had lovely skilful hands, which Phoebe could not but admire.
She made the vaginal examination comfortable and smooth.
‘Now breasts,’ she said.
‘Do you do your own self-examinations?’
‘Sometimes,’ muttered Phoebe; she was not going to tell this woman that for the last six months she had done practically nothing else.
‘You ought to, you know; I'll show you how afterwards.’
Her hands were warm and competent.
Phoebe liked the sensation and was terrified.
The doctor started with her right breast; circled it tenderly, skilled fingers pushing against the flesh; in some different context, Phoebe thought, it could be very sexy, this slow gentle probing, dispassionate but intimate.
The doctor smiled quietly, reached for her pad and made a note; she smiled, walked round the foot of the high couch and came up towards Phoebe left-hand side.
Phoebe could feel her own heard beating.
The doctor ran her hands round again, with the same disinterested precision.
Phoebe knew when she had reached the lump, but the fingers went on circling, and then probing her armpit.
Time slowed down, Phoebe wanted this moment to go on for ever, this calm moment before the storm.
Eventually the doctor's fingers came back again, back to where the lump was.
Phoebe opened her eyes and saw the abstracted professional look in the doctor's face; attentive not to Phoebe but to the lump, to the breast itself.
As it should be.
And then the doctor caught her eye.
She began a reassuring smile and then stopped abruptly.
‘You knew, didn't you?’
Her eyes widened and she looked angry.
‘Yes,’ said Phoebe, because it was too late now for untruths or pretences.
‘You must be insane.’
The doctor seemed almost embarrassed by her own outburst, but Phoebe was relieved.
It was a clear diagnosis, the same as Tom's.
Better that than discretion and gentle kindliness.
She did not want to have the news broken to her carefully.
‘Go and have the mammogram and then come back and talk to me.’
In her fantasies Phoebe had somehow assumed that the mammogram would be visible.
One afternoon she had lurked in the medical bookshop at the top of Gower Street and looked at glowing colour plates of carcinomas.
She tried to tell herself that she had come here today to be cured, to return to the cold world of normality; but in another part of her mind she had dreamed of this meeting, the apotheosis of the love affair.
She would raise her lamp and view the lover that she herself had grown, even if this meant that she must lose him for ever.
She had fantasised the meeting: she would be lying naked and on some screen in front of her she would see, pulsing and radiant, her own dark lover and his home place.
There would be her breast filled with veins and glands, the source of Maggie's milk and much of her own sexual pleasure, all pink and red and living, and there, in the heart of it, would be — green and gold and sparkling — the bright egg of her dreams.
However the mammogram room was cold and scientific.
There was no doctor, no magic seer to give her the golden branch and lead her into the underworld, only yet another pretty young woman, the radiological technician.
Phoebe had to stand on the cold and excessively clean linoleum floor, far away from the fitted carpets and deep leather chairs of the waiting area.
The radiologist apologetically but firmly positioned Phoebe in front of a ferocious-looking machine; she took Phoebe's arms and stretched them forward into an awkward position.
The tie of the white gown she had been given to wear caught in her hair and pulled it.
Phoebe jerked away and the radiologist only just managed to suppress her irritation.
They started the ugly dance again.
Once she had got Phoebe back where she wanted her, the radiographer manhandled Phoebe's breasts, without interest, between two cold plates.
These were clamped together, squashing her breasts flat, pulling at the skin of her underarms.
It hurt.
It hurt, not unbearably but sharply, and under that pressure the last of Phoebe's passion was squeezed out.
Under her bare toes the floor felt real and solid, and although she was lonely and sad she knew she was going to choose to return to the real and solid world.
Politeness alone made her go back to see the doctor, and listen to her almost stern advice.
This was not Phoebe's place and she knew quite simply that tomorrow morning she would go to see her own GP and organize the necessary hospital visit.
Maggie needed her, Rachel needed her, and she had no other choice; passion was not to be part of her calling.
The old mistake made in a bathroom in Oxford twenty years before had fixed her course and all she could do was to walk it.
Just before leaving the consulting room she knew that she had one thing left to do and it was important.
‘There's something else I should tell you,’ she said.
‘I gave you a false name.
I am really called Phoebe Petherington.
That is my name.’
She knew the doctor thought she was a lunatic, but as she would never see her again, it did not matter now as much as the truth.
She paid her bill to the efficient receptionist and left the hospital.
Leaving the clinic she realised suddenly that she wanted to go to her garden.
It was an impulse she did not question.
She mounted her bike and pedalled eastwards.
Halfway there she remembered Maggie and stopped to telephone her.
But the first kiosk only took cards, and she did not have one and the next kiosk was broken.
She gave up and rode on.
This was important.
Maggie was safe.
But when she reached the vicinity of her garden she was seized with a sudden embarrassment.
She had not even phoned them that morning to explain her absence.
And she did not want to talk to anyone.
Quickly she decided not to go into the garden; instead she would climb the nearby tower block and see her garden from above.
And thus it was that she came to be, that February evening, standing at the top of the tower block staircase, leaning against the wall and panting a little from her climb, pausing for a moment and thinking gloomy thoughts about life and death.
Meanwhile Maggie stayed sitting at the kitchen table.
Slowly and without thinking she ate all the tuna fish and mayonnaise her mother had prepared.
She also finished the loaf of bread.
Later she dug about in the fridge; and although the result was depressing, she did find and consume two pots of yoghurt, a hunk of cheese and a slice of ham which had begun to curl up at its edges.
She felt sick, but was relieved to feel something: the weight of the food in her stomach did something to counteract the sense of unreality that afflicted her.
Her brain was foggy and muffled.
She might have sat all afternoon, nibbling and stuporous, exhausted but not sleepy; but the glazier finally came down from the upper floor, cheerfully announcing that all was now right and tight and he would be on his way.
Maggie could tell that he would have liked to stop for a chat, that he felt sorry for her left on her own, but she lacked either her grandmother's grace or her mother's energy, so she did not offer him tea.
When he had gone, she dragged herself up the iron staircase to her own room.
‘The room had lost its magic: instead of the great sheet of clear sky overhead there were subdued shadows; the polythene letting in less light than the glass.
The whole place smelled of putty and turpentine, and the crash had shaken down not only stars of glass, but also dust and grime.
Most of the glass had been removed, but the dirt had not, clouding the air and deadening the surfaces.
Her picture and her silk quilt had been carried down below in the chaos of last night and she did not have the energy to seek them out.
Phoebe had also, that morning, borne away all her bedding and some of her clothes to shake the glass out of them.
The room now looked like what it was: an attic, the keeping-place for forgotten treasures, the home of the dead.
It did not matter to her anyway.
She tried lying down on the bare mattress, but the whole place felt cold and close.
After a bit she got up again and crept down to her mother's room.
That too lacked the warmth and comfort of the morning, though her picture was still on the mantelpiece.
Her stomach ached dully but distractingly.
She knew not whether from eating too much or from her period.
Fenna might have given her both appetite and menstruation in his parting, but neither of them seemed as though they were worth the effort.
She wanted to cry and even that did not seem worth the effort.
She curled up on her mother's bed, pulled the duvet over her and lay there, inert.
She had seen and noticed this despondency, this weightedness, in her mother.
Once she had assumed it was somehow her mother's fault.
Out there the whole cosmos rolled and sang, out there the stars had danced and sung when Fenna called to them.
On stormy nights it had been exhilarating to fly in the teeth of the wind.
Hard to steer, to balance, to float, she had learned instead to consent; to cast herself onto the wind and learn the whole length and depth and height of its strength, and in perfect relaxation, the stern corseting of gravity left far below, her whole body had been open to power and loveliness.
She had thought that if her mother had learned to consent, to let go, to be filled, then Phoebe's passivity and disinterest would drop off like a cloak and she too could be naked with joy and love.
Now, coiled here, she thought it was not Phoebe's fault, it was the dullness of being an adult; it was the natural flavour of the world once one had said goodbye to childhood.
It might be necessary but it was not fun, and nothing would ever be fun again.
On a conservative reckoning she would have to live at least another fifty years in this bland and dreary universe.
She could of course, she thought with that sudden burst of adolescent enthusiasm, not live.
She held the idea of death briefly between her hands; but noticed how fast her mind darted away and took up sentimental pictures of her funeral, of her mother's and grandmother's distress, of her friends.
She knew she would not cheat and take that option, and she could think of no other.
The swift burst of curiosity and eagerness flickered out.
She just lay there, not thinking, or even feeling, anything.
The phone rang.
She pulled the duvet over her head and ignored it.
The phone went on ringing, and finally, irritated, she stumbled off the bed and picked up the receiver from the floor where Phoebe usually left the phone.
‘Hello,’ she said in what she hoped was a dignified version of annoyance.
The caller seemed oblivious.
‘Maggie! how are you; Are you OK?
Where have you been?’
It was Hermione, genuinely concerned because she had not been at school; someone who had missed her.
Her spirits rose a little,
‘I'm fine.’
‘But what happened to you?’
‘No, listen, this totally weird thing happened last night.
There was I, sweetly asleep, and suddenly the roof collapsed on top of me.’
‘What?’
‘Really.’
And suddenly it could be a story, a funny story that was making Hermione laugh.
Suddenly she knew how to do this, this chatting and joking and telling her life, sharing it, warming herself from the fire of affection she had lit in her friend.
Distantly she remembered that she had never understood the art of it, had to work on it, conscious and struggling all the time.
Now, her head emptied of Fenna, it flowed out smooth and bubbling, almost unnoticed.
This was Hermione, this was her friend.
After a while she said, ‘How was school, then?’
‘Oh, moan.’
‘No I meant really, did we get masses of homework?’
‘If you came over I could give you all the assignments.’
They laughed, the transparency of their own schemes delighting them.
They didn't do many subjects together and were only in the same group for French and history.
Their grown-ups however, who might well, in the middle of their GCSE year, object to a Monday evening of socialising, would not know these things.
‘I can't be late,’ said Hermione dutifully, ‘I really have got that gruesome geography project to hand in.
I know what, let's do it now.
I'll meet you in the park, you know the gate at the top of Gloucester Road, that's about equal for both of us.
We'll hang about or something…my mother's out, I'll leave her a note.’
‘Aye, aye, Captain,’ said Maggie, ‘so's mine.’
‘Keep some of the broken glass for Mrs Fish's break-time coffee.
We can grind it during the lunch break tomorrow.
See you in half an hour, then?’
Laughing, Maggie hung up.
After a moment she realised that she would have to change; there was no way she was going out to meet Hermione in her mother's elderly and considerably over-large tracksuit.
As she ran up to her room she was, for the first time in her life, actively grateful to Phoebe and Rachel for their absolute laws of tidiness.
Her clothes, neatly in their cupboards and drawers were not ruined or dirty after the catastrophe.
If it had happened to anyone else, to any of her friends, half their garments would now be lying under glass or dust around the floor.
But it could not have happened to anyone else, she was almost forgetting that this had not been exactly a freak accident in the way that everyone thought.
Not everyone.
Her mother had known.
Sort of.
She felt a tiny moment of pride: this was an accident that her power had brought about and Phoebe knew it.
Perhaps Rachel did too, or would do when she had had time to work it out.
Even if it was the last thing she was ever able to do, Phoebe would have known it, and would have to notice her now.
Phoebe had obviously needed her reassurance that the house was safe.
Her elation took her into her clothes, back to the kitchen to leave Phoebe a scrawled memo, and out of the front door.
It carried her into the park and only wavered when she saw the playground.
Then suddenly the park looked so different, filled not with dragons dancing but with ordinary people, and she was just one of them.
Over the next two hundred yards she slowed down again, her misery and inertia crowding back upon her, her loneliness embracing her.
Until at the top of the hill, despite spotting Hermione's black hair and bright red jacket down below her, she came to a stop.
And thus it was that she came to be, on that February evening, poised at the very crown of the hill in Kensington Gardens, looking down the hill, with her back to Bayswater and home and trembling with the fear that she had at last grown up.
Three
After a couple of minutes Phoebe recovered her breath; she pushed herself off the wall with her hands and went through the stairwell doorway into the green-painted corridor.
She walked along the passage and came, as she had planned, to the window which made the end wall of that floor.
She was poised now over her garden and could see the whole of it, laid out like a little world, from her great height.
She had created it from the chaos, she was its God.
She leaned against the window, resting her forehead on the glass, enjoying its cool smoothness.
She felt her own tiredness.
And why should it hurt so much, be so unutterably wearisome, to say goodbye to death, to the dark passion that had consumed her?
There was nothing left now, but to grow old, but to grow old and take on the burden of her mother growing even older.
To give up the burden of Maggie getting older.
To acknowledge that she could not and never would ask Maggie for the mothering that she would give to her own mother.
To accept finally and irrevocably that there was no romance in her life, that romance was a deep killer, a consuming passion and that she was too tough a woman to be consumed.
And there was nothing.
She leaned more heavily against the window and stared unseeing at her park below.
She would offer her breast as a blood sacrifice for life and in that moment of despair she had no doubt at all but that death would accept it and she would have to live.
Lopsided, belonging not to herself and her inner love, but to doctors and chemotherapy and the loss of all her hair.
The tears, of self-pity and self-loss, welled in her eyes.
As she raised a hand to wipe them away she noticed how deeply the dirt had eaten into her fingernails, so that they were not, and so long as she worked never would be, pink and sweet and shell-like.
When she raised them the rest of the way she held them not to her streaming eyes, but to her ears, listening intently for the sound of the sea.
But she did not hear the sound of the sea, she heard instead the sound of the earth.
The earth on her fingers spoke to her, spoke to her of sowing in tears and reaping with joy; of dying and growing.
The earth on her fingers sung to her and she could hear the rhythm of the seasons, the wobbling journey of her planet through space, which gave the earth its sides and turns, and within that there were the smaller rhythms of her rake, of her tractor engine, of her trowel and of her brain.
Her eyes were clear of tears; she looked from a great height down into the park and saw its order and its beauty so determinedly brought forth.
She saw, coming out of the hut and walking across towards the gate, Pete and Sammy, two of her youth volunteers.
She could not help but pause in her misery to be proud of the fact that, without her supervision, they had been at work in the garden.
As she watched, Sammy threw a casual playful punch at Pete's shoulder and, fooling, Pete fainted away and bounced back.
They were playing like children, and she could be a child too and play with them and the garden would mother her — a stern and demanding mother, but with moments of perfect attentiveness.
Her park knew she was up there watching and waiting over it, and it tossed off a loving welcoming wave; it — the tractor, the boys and the bulbs in the earth — knew she had chosen for them and was coming back to them.
Of course there was still love, there was healthy, growing love and its name was called Work.
She had fallen in love with it so slowly and gently and sweetly that she had never noticed it had happened.
The park, unlikely though it might seem, was not a job, not a political ideology, not a way of filling in the weary hours until she was old enough to retire, not even something to spite her mother with once and for all while she accepted everything else from her.
It had been all those things, it had started as all those things, but now it was work and love.
She saw her work laid out there in the garden, all the muscled cold wet harshness of it; all the labour and the ingrained resistance to working, and she thanked her mother, who had given her this thing.
This knowledge that in the end everything must crumble but a woman's work is her rock and her shield, a strong fortress, a faithful lover.
This enormous gift that, despite all the trying things that went with it, Phoebe had received; this capacity to look at a thing and know that, because it must be done, it is the doing of it that brings freedom and salvation.
She remembered something.
‘If a woman must choose between love and work, she should never hesitate.’
She could not remember where it came from, but she muttered the line to herself, and the mutter took root in her stomach, grew and blossomed into an enormous belly laugh.
Maggie saw Hermione shake exasperated shoulders and suddenly feared that she might walk away.
The fear propelled her out of her stillness and she ran down the hill.
It was almost like flying, this running downhill towards a friend who might vanish if she delayed.
Lightness and truth came to her with the wind's speed.
‘Hermione,’ she said, once they had greeted each other, ‘there is something I want to tell you; it is sort of a secret.’
‘Oh Lord,’ said Hermione grinning.
‘Who is he?’
‘It's not that at all,’ said Maggie, but now she was nervous again.
Nervous but steadfast.
‘It's about what really happened to our roof last night.
Let's go and sit on some bench.’
They sat on a bench in the Flower Walk, the beautifully tended beds laid out for them and all the tulips listening attentively, and Maggie broke the rule of her lifetime and told Hermione about Fenna.
In the telling it became neither nightmare nor obsession, but a beautiful tale, the stuff of dreams and fairy stories, and Hermione heard it all with tenderness and pleasure while the sun set and the dusk gathered thickly around them.
Afterwards they stood up slowly, not wanting to part from such intimacy, but beginning to feel chilly now the warmth of the story was over.
They looked so beautiful, together, black and gold.
And then suddenly, not black and gold but gold and silver.
Hermione was glowing radiant in the dusk, an intense silver light, vibrantly running in the tight curls of her hair like neon, in the soft pinker palms of her hands like candlelight, in her eyes and teeth like electricity, and across all her whole skin like fluorescence.
Maggie was almost fearful.
‘It's all right,’ said Hermione softly, smiling, amused.
‘I'm radiant.
When I was little I learned to swim in the ponds of the Romney Marshes, behind Dungeness.
The water was radioactive.
I'm irradiated.
Whenever my atoms get excited they glow.
They're glowing for you and your dragon.’
‘Does it hurt?’ asked Maggie, trembling with awe and joy.
Hermione grinned.
‘Wait and see,’ she said and to both their surprises she turned and put her arms on Maggie's shoulders.
After a moment Maggie too began, faintly, pearly, to glow.
‘You can give it away, magic,’ said Hermione, giggling.
‘If you give it away it comes back in its own good time, like that dreadful assembly hymn, you know…and ‘you end up having more’.’
This is what my mother meant, thought Maggie, this is what she meant and meant to give me.
The two of them were overcome with giggles, shaken by their own senseless amusement.
They were floppy with laughter, leaning against each other and passing the magic atoms backward and forwards like little kids playing clapping games in the cement playgrounds of primary schools.
Maggie scraped the radiant atoms off Hermione's arms and juggled them in the air, but she was giggling too much and kept missing the rhythm.
They collapsed into each other 's arms and at that moment a group of callow youths stomped past, bigger than the girls and ferocious looking.
‘Well,’ said one of them, ‘what have we got here?
Looks like a couple of little dykes to me.’
They might have been frightened, or offended, but they were laughing too much.
‘Don't wormy about it,’ said Hermione, cheeky in her hilarity.
‘It's probably just a phase we're going through.’
The boys grinned a little sheepishly, acknowledging her courage.
‘It's all right,’ says Maggie, perfectly clear, her bell sounding again uncracked and certain as she had feared it never would.
‘My grandmother says that a normal evolutionary phase can last two hundred million years.’
Rachel was very tired and paused now on the monumental steps of her museum.
She would just have to cling to her professional integrity as she had done for fifty years, and she would, as she had always tried to, make that sufficient.
The pose, the swagger, the moment of pride was solitary, an indulgence for herself alone, and there would be nothing more.
She would go home.
And it was high time she retired.
She shook herself slightly and took a final look down the proud granite staircase towards the traffic.
Then, running her eyes along the row of plane trees, she suddenly noticed, for the first time, that a medium-sized dragon was sitting in the upper branches of a particularly fine plane tree and munching a green leaf.
It's back was a dull pewter colour, with a paler underbelly, but the tip of its tail was eau de nil and looked soft and delicate.
The dragon looked directly at her.
Its ancient and mischievous eyes were almost tender.
The smoke furled dreamily from its navy blue nostrils and wafted gently into the evening, almost indistinguishable from the exhaust fumes of the cars below it.
She had never seen a dragon before, and now she nearly exploded with joy.
For someone over seventy her descent of that great staircase was as good as a frolic; her satchel swung wildly round merrily bumping her large bottom, her sensible suede shoes skippetty-hopped like the finest quality glass slippers, while her honest tweed skirt flirted up her legs in order to give her long beige knickers their first sight of the sunshine in quarter of a century.
By the time she reached the bottom the dragon had vanished, but this, far from mattering, only added to her amusement.
Quite suddenly she felt a generous relief, as though she'd given science and herself new hope of heaven, and set out through the gathering dark, home, home across the dragon-haunted park.