

Sir Adrian Cadbury 
Born: Birmingham, 1929.
Educated: Eton; King's College, Cambridge.
Sir Adrian Cadbury is chairman of Cadbury Schweppes plc.
He joined Cadbury Brothers Ltd in 1952 and became chairman in 1956.
After the merger between Cadbury and Schweppes he succeeded Lord Watkinson as Chairman of the combined company at the end of 1974.
He wads knighted for his services to industry in 1977.
He is a director of the Bank of England and of IBM UK Holdings Ltd, and chairman of Pro Ned, an organisation that encourages the appointment of non-executive directors to company boards.
He also heads the CBI Business Education Task Force.
He is chancellor of the University of Aston in Birmingham, a trustee of the Bournville Village Trust and president of the
Birmingham Chamber of Industry and Commerce.
He was made a freeman of the City of Birmingham in 1982.
Sir Adrian Cadbury is not one of those who subscribes to the popular theory that a truly professional manager can take over the helm of any type of business with only a superficial knowledge of the nuts and bolts.
I'm very sceptical of the ability to shift from managing a bank to managing a steel mill, for example.
I have grave doubts about that.
I think it is essential to understand the key factors for success or failure in your type of business and I'm not convinced you can do that without actually understanding the process in some detail.
For that reason, Sir Adrian looks back with gratitude on the job-rotation policy that was an integral part of basic training when he joined the family firm after coming down from Cambridge in 1952.
He found the experience of working in a wide variety of company departments invaluable and believes it held him in good stead when he reached the higher echelons of management.
There was a strict system of career development at Cadbury's in those days.
About six other Cambridge graduates joined the firm with Sir Adrian and they were put under the protective wing of the head of the employment department, who guided their career progression.
It was a firm edict of company policy that all new recruits with management potential should undergo the experience of working temporarily in as many company departments as possible.
I spent the first eighteen months working in all the factory departments, so I started with a good knowledge of precisely how the product was made and did all the jobs that then existed in the production of confectionery.
Everyone did some time in the factory.
I did longer than most and it had the advantage that, given there was much greater stability of employment then, I got to know a very large number of people.
He next moved on to the buying office, a very important department in a company such as Cadbury's where the skilful purchase of the ingredients that go into the products can have a crucial impact on the viability of the business.
Sir Adrian found this work fascinating and would have been perfectly happy at the time to have made it his long-standing job.
But the company's rotation policy dictated that he should be moved ‘rather abruptly’ into the wages department, where he played a role in setting and negotiating piece rates.
We had a large factory at Bournville employing about ten thousand people and there were a great many incentive payment schemes, so that became my job.
I hadn't asked to do it, but in fact found it very interesting and that took me as a result into trade union negotiations and finally into becoming personnel director.
As he progressed in the company, Sir Adrian also spent time out in the field selling.
All of us who were not on the sales and marketing side spent a day a month selling.
We were given a sales territory.
So for the rest of the month I was in charge of wages, piece rates, training, negotiations and all the rest of it, and then one day a month I was regularly calling on the same customers in Bloomsbury and I was collecting money, selling the goods and so on, which I think was a very important part of my continued training.
This varied experience served to convince Sir Adrian that no top executive can really be successful without an in-depth understanding of the finer points of a company's operations.
I worry about what was certainly a facet of the past in this country — a view that you could be a professional director of dozens of companies.
All of that to me smacks of a lack of appreciation of the need to understand a business thoroughly, where you're going to be involved in making major decisions.
I also think it's a question of being able to provide, certainly at the top of a company, a sense of direction and I find it hard to see how you can have an absolutely clear sense of direction unless you yourself are able to assess the essentials as you see them for success in your particular trade.
The basic grounding that all new management recruits underwent on joining Cadbury's helped to ensure that each of them obtained this innate understanding.
Members of the Cadbury family did not escape this strict initial training.
There was no automatic ticket to senior management.
We were a big family, so there were never any guarantees that members of the family would progress.
The arrangement was that they were happy for members of the family to come into the business and, in a sense, find their own level.
What is perhaps unusual for a family business was that we had members of the family at very different levels  in the company.
One of my cousins was a senior foreman by the grading of the day.
Another was a sales manager.
The one who was the senior foreman never moved beyond that grade.
In fact, Sir Adrian had no preconceived ideas about the sort of career he would follow when he came down from Cambridge with a degree in economics.
It was perhaps a foregone conclusion that he would go into the family firm founded by his great-grandfather, John Cadbury, in 1824, although he had two tempting offers from outside industry when he had completed his degree.
One offer he describes as ‘managing quite a lot of money’ and the other was a partnership in a substantial firm of solicitors.
He rejected them both in favour of joining the family firm, but he was vague about the specific role he would play.
It was a conscious choice that I wanted to go into the company, but I didn't have a clear view as to what particular part of the business I was interested in.
It just seemed like an interesting challenge.
At that time it was very much more of a family firm than it is now.
It was then called Cadbury Brothers.
The title of the holding company was The British Cocoa and Chocolate Company and my father was the chairman.
There were a number of other members of the family on the board.
The economic climate in Britain was very different then to what it is today.
Sir Adrian believes that today young people aspiring to careers in industry should seriously think about setting up their own small firms.
But there was no such enterprise culture in Britain in those days.
Very few of my contemporaries thought of starting up on their own.
So it seemed a fairly straightforward move to go and work for the family firm.
It was an entirely different climate from today.
Food was still rationed and it was very much a question of making the best use of available resources and we had absolutely unlimited demand — a very false situation as it turned out when you think about what happened to British industry afterwards.
One of the qualities Sir Adrian came to regard as essential as he gained experience of the family firm and aspired to become chairman of Cadbury Schweppes plc was integrity.
‘I don't see how you can expect people to follow your lead, to trust you, to commit themselves to the business unless they believe that all of these things are dear to your heart.’
He is more hesitant, however, about including an aptitude for leadership among the prerequisites for a successful captain of industry.
I'm always a little cautious about leadership, because I'm never absolutely certain what it means.
There is a connotation to leadership that needs perhaps getting out of the way.
The real question, it seems to me, is the sense of direction a leader has.
It doesn't seem the slightest use having leadership if you're leading in the wrong direction.
Sir Adrian cites the example of the army commander who leads his troops over the top of the trenches when it might have been more prudent to stay put.
Reckless heroism, very clearly, is not the sort of quality he admires.
He doesn't entirely dismiss leadership as a meaningless term, however.
‘I totally accept that what you need is the ability to get people to believe in the vision that you put forward of the company, to accept it and to be willing to work towards it.
That does seem to me to be important.’
Sir Adrian seems unhappy with the idea of drawing up a vast catalogue of top management attributes and is more inclined to the view that being a good senior executive is something gleaned from hard experience.
Although he is a thoughtful person, who loves to put his ideas down on paper in the form of articles for such august publications as the Harvard Business Review , he suspects that labels are attached to management practices in hindsight rather than as objectives executives set out to master.
He is sceptical about the plethora of management books that deaf in ‘grand abstractions’.
He is not convinced that having read them aspiring managers can go away and teach themselves to be good leaders.
He believes, rather, that such abilities are acquired through a steady upward progression within a company.
There has to be a period of simply understanding how  things work; then graduating to some degree of management control.
I'm not sure you can jump from there to the strategy of the business.
I don't think you can miss out any of the intervening stages of progression.
Given that Sir Adrian places so much store by integrity in top management, he views the apparent decline in business morals with some concern.
I believe in the end that one of the casualties of taking short cuts and losing integrity is that you will not get good people coming into the business.
At the end of the day, that is what it all turns on.
If companies such as our own can be successful while maintaining standards I think we will attract people who will get something worthwhile out of a business career.
Sir Adrian attributes the moral decline largely to pressure brought about by a faster-pace world, particularly in the City where salary levels have become inflated beyond all recognition and where greed can easily take precedence over ethical practice.
I think the pressures have changed enormously since I started work.
The big change is that literally the market place is now global.
This seems to me to be an enormous change.
Curiously, it was actually very slow to happen in the financial services markets.
They protected themselves for a long time.
Now suddenly it's happened, so you get a lot of new people coming in.
You get an abrupt rise in the size of firms.
It's very difficult then to exercise the same kind of partnership control which traditionally those firms had.
So you get a breakdown in the structure.
That is a direct result of the sudden increase in competition and the consequent expansion of the range of services and the size of firms in order to respond to it.
You see the same thing in our kind of business, but we've really been operating in international markets for much longer and it's a slower process.
You can see it in our trade obviously in the way in which companies have  amalgamated and merged and grown.
The size of the players has changed.
We have to try to make ourselves more efficient and to accept change, but there are certain things we should hang on to.
Rapid changes in the market place put a great strain on top management to ensure a company is keeping pace and is sufficiently aware of what is happening around the world.
Sir Adrian believes it is very much the responsibility of a captain of industry to take the lead in such matters and to define the sort of company you want to become.
‘It's very difficult to do because if you aren't careful you just write down a series of platitudes, but I think that a statement of aims and beliefs is very necessary even if it does look platitudinous.’
Since the war, Cadbury Schweppes has undergone two fundamental rethinks about the strategy it should adopt.
One was in 1969 when the original firm of Cadbury merged with Schweppes, a merger that changed the whole character of the company.
A more recent reappraisal took place in the early 1980s when the decision was taken to shed the foods side of the business and concentrate on the confectionery and soft drinks divisions.
Operating in an international market, what you do is dictated by the moves your competitors in the confectionery and soft drinks markets are making.
Against that background, we decided to switch direction.
We had previously gone for a somewhat broader base to the business for perfectly good reasons.
Developing the food side of the business was a way of making better use of the Cadbury brand.
We had an asset in the Cadbury brand, so we spread it across biscuits, cakes and a range of other products.
We were getting more mileage out of an asset we already owned and it gave the business a wider base to cope with fluctuations in any part of it.
But it became clear that was not the way to hold our own against companies like Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola, or Mars on the confectionery side.
Our resources were too widely deployed, which gave us stability, but lost us a competitive edge.
So there came a point when it made sense to change that particular balance.
Such major changes of strategy aren't made without sacrifices, and the consequent upheavals took a certain toll at Cadbury's, not least of which was the need to reduce the work-force.
This is an issue that is close to Sir Adrian's heart.
Having devoted much of his career to the personnel function and having been an ardent advocate of participative management, he talks about such problems with an obvious depth of feeling.
He has no hesitation in saying that the most difficult aspects of management for him are those that involve making decisions about people, whether it be a question of promotion, demotion or making somebody redundant.
‘Of all business decisions, these are the most worrying,’ he maintains.
‘You can't be certain you're right and there is the greatest temptation to put them off and not to take them.
And obviously you worry about the consequences for the individuals concerned.’
Sir Adrian does feel, however, that companies can take measures to reduce the hardships that redundancy inevitably brings.
There are ways in which you can soften it.
We did in fact get through a very major reduction at Bournville without any forced redundancies.
We did it simply by foreseeing the situation and starting the rundown early enough by stopping recruitment.
What you need to do is to involve people so they know what has to be done and plan it as far ahead as possible to minimise the impact.
But having said that, you have to close sites and obviously that does lead to hardship.
What Sir Adrian is absolutely certain about is that top managers need to be decisive and should not push issues under the rug in the hope they will solve themselves.
One of the most difficult decisions he was faced with in recent years was whether or not to sell the foods business, particularly as it involved disposing of Cadbury's Cocoa, the product with which his great-grandfather launched the company.
It was a traumatic moment for the chairman.
It also epitomises the complexity of business decisions that top managers have to take and the many issues that have to be weighed in the balance before reaching a conclusion.
And after that, the implementation of the decision can be equally difficult.
The first decision was clearly whether it made sense to concentrate all our resources behind the two core businesses, without foods.
We kicked that around and in the end, I'm absolutely certain rightly, decided it was better to concentrate our resources.
There was then the decision about what should happen to the foods division.
We had the possibility both of a management buy-out and of interest from outside the company.
This presented Sir Adrian and his top management team with a dilemma.
There is a widely held view among many business experts that selling off a business to a management buy-out team is the easy way out and is not in the best interests of a company's shareholders.
We had to weigh up the bid which the managers put forward against outside bids and they're never in exactly the same terms.
So, in a sense, you're comparing apples with pears.
We agonised over the decision before selling to the management and I'm absolutely convinced with hindsight that the decision was not only right in people terms but it was also the right business decision for the shareholders as well.
Part of the deal with the management buy-out team was an option on ten per cent of the new company when it came to the market, no equivalent of which was possible under the terms of any of the outside bids.
The buy-out company — premier Brands — has since been doing well and Sir Adrian is confident Cadbury's shareholders will have nothing to complain about when the new company does eventually go to the market.
The decision top management took has been vindicated, but there was some criticism, particularly from City analysts, at the time it was taken.
Stressing the complexity of such business decisions,
Sir Adrian points out: ‘It isn't a question of just saying it's A or B. There are any number of stations between A and B you have to examine.’
Sir Adrian doesn't profess to have any special technique for making up his mind over difficult decisions as some top executives do.
He returns to his familiar theme of the need to study issues in depth and to do all the necessary homework.
‘All you  can do is study the situation as thoroughly as you can and be clear as to what the issues are and who is going to be affected by the decision.
The essential thing is that you should do the homework as thoroughly as you can.’
He does, however, condemn procrastination.
Having done that you have to make up your mind and the great sin, it seems to me, is to put decisions off.
One of the things I worry about considerably is that I feel a lot of well-meaning people bring pressure to bear on companies not to take decisions.
If you go back to the time United Biscuits felt they had to close their Liverpool factory, the bishops up in Liverpool marched on Hector Laing and tried to persuade him to put the decision off.
They meant well, but the easiest thing in the world to do is to put difficult decisions off.
That really is the primrose path.
I don't think the people who advocate these policies understand that you have every wish to put the decision off.
Nothing would be pleasanter than not having to make people redundant, not having to close a factory, but your job is to take the decisions when you have assessed the evidence as carefully as you can and not to shirk them.
Sir Adrian is a staunch believer in decisions based on logical analysis, rather than the gut feeling some entrepreneurs prefer to act upon.
I would find it very hard to follow gut feel if I could not put forward arguments on two sides of a sheet of paper as to why it was the right decision.
I like to think things through.
I like, before coming to a decision, to get the arguments down on paper and it seems to me if you can't then convince yourself or anybody else that what you propose is logically right, it doesn't much matter what your gut's doing.
Bournville, the community that has grown up around Cadbury's Birmingham factory, is widely regarded as a company town, although from its foundation it has been open to people who do not work for the company and only a minority of the residents now have any link with Cadbury's.
But having spent all  his career in a family business, Sir Adrian has inevitably given a lot of thought to the responsibility a company should have for the community in which it operates.
He nevertheless finds it difficult to define, because there is such a thin dividing line between paternalism and being a good corporate citizen.
It seems to me you have to start from the fact that your role in the community is to produce goods and services which people want.
That's your prime task, which in the end you have to come back to.
If you don't do that efficiently then you are not doing a good job for the community.
Then you have the problem of reconciling that with other duties, such as your legal duties which tend to lag behind best practice.
He believes that each company needs to set its own targets for being a good corporate citizen, which can range from how much money should be donated to charities to making senior executives available for secondment to advise small businesses.
In one sense, businesses are licensed by the community to operate and you have to work within the terms of the licence, which tend to change.
You have to keep in tune with the changes.
After all, it wasn't that long ago that it was quite acceptable to belch smoke over the countryside.
The responsibility can be defined differently at different periods of time.
It's very easy within our own company to see the stages that Cadbury has gone through.
My grandfather built the village in 1895 — not as a company town.
It was open to everybody, but clearly it was convenient for people working in the place.
He built it for a very simple reason.
Not because he wanted to set up a model village, but because he saw that with the employment he was generating at Bournville out in the Worcestershire countryside, speculative builders would come in and put up very inferior dwellings if he didn't take a hand.
So he bought the land around the factory, and the village now covers one thousand acres.
But it was with a very clear purpose.
It was to prevent bad development and to show that you could build decent houses with gardens at  rents people could afford and also that you could develop a community, which is why he was never in favour of a company town.
He set the village up as a separate body even then under a charitable trust, which it continues to be to this day.
Obviously the gap between the two has grown through time.
In those days, Cadbury's saw it as part of its social responsibility to provide training and education for the workers it recruited.
When Sir Adrian joined the company it was compulsory for all young people up to the age of eighteen to spend a day a week at the company's continuation college.
That seemed to me to be a perfectly proper use of what the company had to offer.
It meant we got good recruits.
Now the world has changed.
In the early 1960s it became clear that compulsory continuing education was actually becoming a hindrance to recruitment.
Fewer people were coming forward to take jobs because they didn't like having to go to school.
So continuing education became voluntary and therefore the dividing line between what is paternalistic or not is constantly shifting.
There is no doubt in Sir Adrian's mind that it is more demanding today being a top executive than it used to be.
Running a large company has become far more complex, which is aggravated by the rapid pace of change, in his view.
But he believes that there are developments around the corner that could bring a lot of changes for the better, not least of them, technological changes.
He believes such innovations as ‘distance working’, which will enable people to operate from home ‘instead of having to converge on places in order to work’, will offer all kinds of promise for improving some of the less agreeable aspects of a business career.
He fondly hopes that in the meantime talented managers won't be deterred from seeking to take on top jobs because of the greater demands.
‘It seems to me that people who worry about their responsibilities and mind about the consequences of their actions should be prepared to take senior jobs.
It would be a very sad day if that wasn't the case.’
He believes that talk of the so-called ‘post-industrial society’ is raising some unnecessary fears that may be causing some talented managers to have second thoughts about aspiring to a top job.
Like a lot of top executives in manufacturing industries, he believes the repercussions of a predicted major shift towards the service industries to be grossly exaggerated.
‘I'm sceptical about what post-industrial means.
It sounds suspiciously like getting everything without working for it.
I think the fundamentals will stay the same.’
He does accept, however, that automation will continue to eat away at jobs and leave top executives with agonisingly difficult decisions and that this is bound to make their jobs more stressful.
He believes it will call for a fundamental rethink about the way that work is structured.
I think there will be far more job-sharing.
I think people, if they have any sense, will work shorter hours.
Some will follow the example of Arthur C. Clarke, who has retired to Sri Lanka, because he says he can work better there, can enjoy the environment and is just as close to his numerous correspondents as if he were in America.
Sir Adrian utterly rejects the definition of work as full-time employment.
He fervently believes we must all become accustomed to more flexible lives in which work, education and training are all intermingled.
Most of us will be working part time and voluntary work will be considered work just as much as paid work and in that way we can distribute the enormous amount of work that needs to be done more evenly.
It's absurd really to say that because of automation there is less and less work when you see how much there is that needs doing in the community.
I think we will balance work and leisure in a totally different way.
Sir Adrian personally believes there is a lot of satisfaction to be derived from being a top executive, although he spurns the more visible trappings of success.
‘I have no interest in fast cars.
I don't have a yacht or a second home,’ he points out.
His pleasure comes from a different source: ‘I am obviously very conscious of what  my forebears achieved and therefore it matters to me that the business has survived, remained independent and has grown.’
He has tried hard to balance his managerial duties with outside interests and not to allow himself to become too much of a workaholic.
But that has led to him becoming involved in an ‘appalling number’ of outside bodies, in addition to being chancellor of Aston University and a trustee of the Bournville village.
‘If I were to go to only one meeting a year for each of them, it would still be more than one a week,’ he confesses, admitting that it is one of his greatest weaknesses.
He writes most of his articles at home, however.
‘I may not be as much with my family as I should be, but at least I am at home,’ he reasons.
His love of writing, he believes, stems from his analytical training at university.
‘I like thinking something through and then setting it down on paper.
It puts my mind at rest.
I feel I have worked it out of my system.’
There may be similar reasons for his love of gardening.
‘I think I've got a tidy mind,’ he volunteers.
He used to be a keen sportsman in his younger days and rowed for England.
He still takes an active interest in Henley Regatta, where he is a steward.
‘I need to do physical work in fact’, he says.
Most of the outside organisations he is involved with are based in the Midlands.
‘I get satisfaction from being able to be involved in a number of activities in the part of the world where
I live and have my roots.’
His three children have all made their own way in the world, preferring not to join the family firm.
But what advice would he pass on to any young person with their sights set on a career in industry?
I would tell them that they should study something in depth and really understand it.
I don't think it matters much what you study, but I think to do so is very important in terms of promoting the power to think about issues.
I wouldn't be too worried whether people do that at university or not.
The idea that we should divide our lives into three parts — education/full-time work/retirement — seems to me to be absurd.
The ability to return to education at later stages in one's life is something that is very important and I hope will  be encouraged.
Nevertheless, I would advocate studying some subject in depth, not necessarily as an undergraduate, so that you can feel you have really mastered it at some stage in your career.
I believe you should understand the mechanics and the principles of the business you want to take up, whether it's a profession or a service or manufacturing.
The only thing I would add is that you need to find out what you are good at; you need to find out what it is you can contribute which other people can't and that is something which only you can find out for yourself.
Sir Terence Conran 
Born.: London, 1931.
Educated.: Bryanston School, Dorset; the Central School of Art and Design, London.
Sir Terence Conran is chairman and thief executive of Storehouse plc, the £1.5bn retailing group formed when British Home Stores merged with Habitat Mothercare in January 1986.
The group employs some 33,000 people and has over 950 outlets, excluding franchises.
Conran was one of the designers involved in the Festival of Britain in 1951.
He set up as a freelance industrial designer making furniture from a basement studio in 1952.
In 1956 the Conran Design Group was added, now one of the largest design organisations in Europe.
He began his retailing career in 1964 when he founded Habitat, a chain of stores selling well-designed modern furniture and furnishings.
In October 1981 be floated the company on the Stock Exchange and four months later be merged Habitat with Mothercare, the world's largest chain of stores catering for the needs of mothers and babies, and became chairman of the Habitat Mothercare Group plc.
In April 1983 this group acquired Heal & Son, the long-established and well-known furnishers.
In September 1983 Habitat Mothercare embarked on a joint publishing venture with Octopus Books plc under the name of Conran Octopus Ltd.
A range of books has been launched which reflects his design philosophy and style.
In September 1983 Habitat Mothercare joined with merchant bankers Morgan Grenfell to purchase the Richard Shops chain.
Three years later Storehouse acquired Morgan Grenfell's fortyeight per cent stake in Richards.
In June 1985 Habitat Mothercare, in conjunction with a major French insurance company, acquired the  majority shareholding in the French retailing company, FNAC.
In April 1987, Storehouse plc, in a joint venture with the Pamplemousse Clothing Company, opened seven Anonymous stores in the London area, selling stylish fashions for the eighteen-to thirty-year-old woman.
In December 1987, Storehouse balanced its women's fashion business with the purchase of Blazer, the successful menswear chain specialising in classic English style.
In 1983, Conran was presented with The Royal Society of Arts Bicentenary Medal, awarded to designers who have ‘exerted an exceptional influence in promoting art and design in British industry’.
He received his knighthood in the 1983 Queen's New Year's Honours List.
‘Did it ever occur to you that everything in this world has had to be designed?’ asks Sir Terence Conran, pausing for the significance of his question to sink in.
There is a hint of impatience in the tone of his voice.
He is clearly rather tired of preaching the design gospel when it has been evident to him for many years the fundamental role it plays in good business practice.
Ever since Conran converted a struggling furniture-manufacturing business into a unique chain of retail shops called Habitat and set in motion a high-street revolution, good design has been at the core of everything he has done.
It has taken the rest of industry in this country a remarkably long time to come around to his viewpoint, but it is finally looking as though the penny has dropped.
Until fairly recently I don't think people have understood the design process or what it can do for the success of their companies.
Design is about the way a product not only looks, but also functions, and for anybody in manufacturing industry or retailing to say they don't take an interest in it would be perfectly ludicrous, because at the end of the day it is design that causes a product either to be successful or unsuccessful.
There is nothing manufactured by man that has not been designed, because whether it's a Rolls-Royce engine or a piece of printed paper, there's always a decision to be made  not only about what it's going to look like but about how it is going to be made and how it is going to operate.
That is what design is.
Everybody's been doing it, but they've not thought about it as a design process and they have not usually brought people with design skills into the team to make these things happen better.
Everybody obviously can design something.
We are designers simply in the way we write our name on a piece of paper.
It may be unconscious, but we've made a decision at some stage about how it's going to be.
So in my view design is absolutely fundamental and at the very core of most businesses.
Conran, whose own highly successful application of design to a flourishing business speaks for itself, explodes the myth that it is a mystical process, largely to do with aesthetic qualities dreamed up by artistic types with a special vision denied to most of us.
In his view, design is ninety-eight per cent commonsense and two per cent a magic ingredient to do with aesthetics.
Some would say that Habitat used the two per cent to great effect in creating a unique style of goods that appealed to the popular taste.
But Conran claims that it was the application of the commonsense element of design that was primarily responsible for the retail group's eventual runaway success.
It was, he maintains, the complete reversal in the manufacturer-retailer relationship where design is concerned that brought about the high-street revolution for which Habitat was largely responsible.
The great change that has occurred is that retailers no longer go out into the market place and buy what is offered to them by manufacturers.
They go now with a much greater knowledge of their customers to manufacturers and say: ‘We want our products to be made like this for us and we want them to be our products.’
In other words, they're taking a lot of the task that used to be given to manufacturers away from them and so manufacturers today are not by and large so concerned with manufacturing brands which are their own and will sit on retailers' shelves as with providing a product for a retailer who wants to construct his own brand.
Conran has been steeped in design from his early years.
He  trained at the Central School of Art and Design, but never graduated, joining instead a group of frustrated designers, which included such budding innovationists as Mary Quant and Laura Ashley, who, like Conran himself, were eventually to become household names.
Conran ran a café selling 4p bowls of soup and a King's Road coffee bar to help raise the capital to start up his own furniture-manufacturing business, which turned out products similar to those found in Habitat shops today.
He first ventured into retailing in 1964 because he was so disenchanted with the way his furniture was being displayed in the shops to which he supplied.
It was often buried away among Regency reproduction furniture in shops which were empty most of the time.
One spring Conran went on a tour of sixty shops which sold his furniture.
He was appalled by the lack of imagination and innovation in the way the furniture was displayed.
To show the trade how furniture should be displayed he opened his first Habitat in the Fulham Road in London.
But first he analysed what was wrong with the established shops.
‘People buy furniture infrequently and therefore go into the shop very rarely.
That's why they are nearly always empty,’ he explained in an interview with Your Business magazine in 1984.
We asked ourselves what we could do to make the shops busy.
The answer was to sell other things in the same style: china, lighting, textiles, rugs and kitchenware.
But we had no idea it would become a chain of shops.
It was the moment when there was new interest in cooking in this country, but nowhere to buy kitchen equipment.
So we went to France to this huge warehouse in Les Halles.
There were stacks of things being sold to the French restaurant trade which were perfect for us.
But we were so hopelessly naïve we didn't realise we were buying at retail prices.
All we got was a small discount because we bought such a huge quantity.
Despite such naïvety, the concept that was to give Habitat a unique position in Britain's retailing trade was born.
Conran had launched a business empire that was eventually to employ thirty-three thousand people.
The growth was far from meteoric, however.
After an unsuccessful merger with Ryman, the office  equipment chain, Conran bought back the Habitat name and shops.
The 1970s were the boom years.
His empire mushroomed across Britain, France and the USA.
It went public in 1981.
Months later it merged with the considerably larger Mothercare chain in a reverse take-over.
The upmarket London furniture store Heals, fashion chain Richard Shops and finally British Home Stores were absorbed into the group, which eventually became known as the Storehouse group.
It is rare in British industry for a designer to become the head of such a large business, and Conran can sometimes appear defensive about the unusual position in which he finds himself.
He argues that if anyone questions the suitability of a designer as a captain of industry it displays the lack of understanding about the true nature of design that has plagued this country for many years.
He maintains that the same rational decisionmaking process that applies to any design project applies equally to running a business.
Arriving at a design for a new product, he insists, entails seeking marketing advice, weighing up how the product is going to be made and manufactured, understanding the cost elements and how it is going to be sold and presented to the customer.
‘The majority of a designer's work is simply a rational process.
Therefore, why shouldn't a rational person be able to head a company, just the same as a figures man, who is also a rational person?’
Conran also disputes the suggestion that it must be difficult for a man so wrapped up in design to divorce himself from detailed involvement in the creative process in order to tackle the numerous other tasks that befall a captain of industry.
A designer involved in any industrial process is involved with a team of people.
He's involved with the buying side of the business, the marketing side, the production side and probably the advertising side.
As chairman of this group, I obviously have financial people, accountants, treasury people, lawyers, personnel people, property people and so on who all make part of a team.
It's a different sort of team, but it's a team.
So I am used to that process of working as a team and to delegating responsibility to the team and then of course monitoring and checking the results of the team.
Conran is convinced, too, that his experience of manufacturing in the early days has stood him in good stead as head of a retailing empire.
He first decided to go into manufacturing because when he finished his design training in the early 1980s there were few jobs available simply because in those days industry, by and large, saw no call for designers.
Fortunately for Conran, he had attended the sort of public school ‘which had taught me a lot of practical skills’.
Going into manufacturing for himself, therefore, was something that came fairly easy to him and for most of the 1950s he built up a substantial furniture business.
I thinks the manufacturing experience I had was very important, because it enabled me to see things from the manufacturer's point of view, which many retailers haven't done.
Retailers have a tendency to be quite selfish people wanting more and more of a product that is selling well, but cancelling an order and telling you to go away and solve your own problems when there's a product that isn't selling well.
Being able to see both points of view has helped me in doing what we are trying to do, namely having things made specially for us and creating our own brands.
Conran's transition from manufacturing to retailing was a gradual process.
After he pulled out of the Ryman operation, however, he left manufacturing for good.
I was quite sorry to do so because I liked the manufacturing process very much indeed, but I don't believe you can be both a manufacturer and a retailer.
You can only be one or the other because the whole business of supply and demand is so complex.
When I became chairman of Hepworths, it had its own clothing plant and it either produced too much or not enough of the right quality at the right price at the right time.
There's always an argument between your own manufacturing company and the retailing side.
Another problem is that if you're trying to deal with other manufacturers in the way that we do, where we have this extremely close relationship and they are very reliant on our forward forecasts of volume, they feel if you have  your own manufacturing plant that you would always give preference to it in bad times and the other suppliers would be the people to suffer if sales declined.
The relationship when manufacturing and retailing are in the same company never seems to be a healthy one and I think there are many examples of that.
Leaving manufacturing behind enabled Conran to concentrate on retailing and position his company at the vanguard of the high-street revolution.
I suppose we were the first people in the 1960s to target our market and bring to people things that were well designed at an affordable price.
We probably opened a lot of people's eyes.
It is extraordinary that it took so long for the importance of this to be realised in Britain.
We were a tiny fumbling company for ten years before anybody took any notice of us.
Today, I think people would say that a lot of what we did in those early days has been influential in the general brightening up of the high streets in this country.
Having proved the value of a design-led business, Conran saw the logic of applying the same approach to other retail companies that had perhaps got left behind in the high-street revolution.
The take-over of Mothercare, despite the fact it was three times the size of Habitat, seemed to make a lot of sense.
The mother and baby specialist retail chain had been very successful in identifying a gap in the market and had filled it very efficiently, but it lacked the flair and creative genius that Conran had brought to Habitat and was losing business as a consequence.
The reason it was suffering a decline was because its product was no longer meeting the aspirations of the young mums in this country, and while other companies were improving their product ranges Mothercare had become stuck in a groove, because the very competent man who ran it really didn't know how to go about improving the product.
He had no skills as a designer.
He knew how to get a product that was decent and rather unexciting on to the shop floor, but when it became necessary to add more  to that product and to innovate in design terms, he didn't know how to go about it.
We had very little experience in clothing design at that stage, although we had run a small experiment with Habitat called Clothes Line.
But we knew how to bring our design skills into Mothercare, because the design process is very much the same for graphics design or engineering design or for fashion design.
It's just a question of finding the right people to bring in and form a fashion-design group.
This we did and very soon improved the Mothercare product range with sparkling results.
It took us three years to do it, but we changed the face of Mothercare and doubled the profits.
Conran was undaunted by the size of the acquisition.
Organisationally, Mothercare was solidly run with all its management systems working well.
It had simply lost its way in terms of product innovation, the area in which Habitat had demonstrated itself to be supreme.
In addition, Conran's company had by now developed some advanced management systems of its own.
In the early 1970s, Habitat was the first retailing company to install electronic point of sale systems (EPOS) in its stock control department for the automatic replenishment of stocks.
The idea was just beginning to catch on in America and we knew that it was going to become the way that retailing companies were run.
So here was a company run by designers, as people might like to criticise us, putting in the most forward-thinking advanced systems for controlling stock, because it was the logical thing to do — the common-sense thing to do.
Provided you choose the right companies to work with and employ the right people to do it, you can get the right results.
It doesn't always go so smoothly.
In 1987 there was a complete breakdown of a computerised distribution system in Mothercare, which had been installed by a leading group of experts.
We made the mistake of not having enough of our own practical management to check that they were doing the right thing.
You should never assume that because they are  the world's greatest experts on retail warehousing that the job can be left entirely to them.
You've always got to have it checked out.
My favourite cartoon is of a businessman standing in Wall Street selling boxes of matches and around his neck is a placard which says: ‘I left it all to expert advice.’
It's a very salutary lesson.
Employ the right experts, but check it all the time.
In the autumn of 1987, Conran ran into a potentially more serious stumbling block to his plans.
The Storehouse group suddenly became the target of unwelcome take-over bids, first from Mountleigh, an ambitious property group, and then from Benlox, a £45m group, twenty-three per cent owned by Egyptian financier Ashraf Marwan, and advised by the enfant terrible of merchant banking, peter Earl of Inficorp Earl, part of Tamwood.
There were also rumours that newspaper tycoon Robert Maxwell was showing more than a passing interest in Storehouse.
Conran found himself beleaguered and somewhat bemused as to why his group should suddenly be the focal point of so many would-be suitors.
His theory about the most likely cause of all the furore is an interesting reflection on the recent workings of the City of London.
I think it's a perfect example of rumour feeding on rumour, that once something gets into the market place it causes all sorts of entrepreneurial people out there to think there's an opportunity they ought not to miss.
The City is going through a very muddled stage at the moment — post-Big Bang — forgetting some of its traditional commonsense.
I don't want to sound dog-in-the-manger about it, but we have performed reasonably well in quite a difficult retail climate, but a view was put around that the individual companies in the Storehouse group were worth more separately than as a group.
popular theory now decrees that small specialist retail companies get a higher stock-market rating than the big conglomerates, so the latest fashion is for Sock Shops, Body Shops, whatever it is, with very high p/Es, while larger organisations get a lower rating because they are a group.
In fact, the centre of Storehouse is very small.
It's about  thirty people, really that of a very small central overhead, certainly when spread around a company with £1.8bn of sales.
Also, we have something that is very unique and that is a design group that provides a design service at arm's length to each of the operating companies.
They buy from it and the design group has to look after its own destiny and its own profitability.
So what's happening is a lot of rumour out there and a lot of people who think that this is a wonderful opportunity to make ten per cent on the deal.
The rumours were further fuelled by a general statement Conran had previously made about the responsibilities of a group chairman when talking to a journalist.
He had said that it was the duty of any chairman to refer an offer that came from a reputable source to his board and shareholders.
That had been wrongly interpreted to mean that Conran was actively seeking a suitor.
The lesson Conran has learned is never to make general statements to the press that can be quoted out of context and always to keep a weather eye on the latest fads in the City.
But in fact there appears to be little a company chairman can do other than try to ride out the fashion of the moment.
Conran suspects that the current vogue for de-mergers will eventually turn full circle and there will be a return to the times when it was thought that,
a collection of targeted retail companies supported by a strong central management core actually is a good thing rather than a bad thing.
At one time the City had an enormous enthusiasm for mergers.
We were quite a good example with Habitat merging with Mothercare and then taking on Richard Shops, Heals and eventually BHS, all done extremely amicably.
We are very likely to see the cycle coming back again.
Conran cites the time when Habitat and other leading British-Based retail groups were first entering overseas markets and had a struggle to make profits as another example of the fickle behaviour of City investors.
It became the common view that any British retailer attempting to expand abroad  signalled a deterioration in its fortunes, with the consequent lack of interest from the City.
The City very soon changed its tune, however, when the retailers in the fullness of time proved the wisdom of venturing into overseas markets and ultimately returned good profits.
The lesson is to stick with what you really believe in.
Keep on looking at it all the time.
Be aware of what is happening all over the world, but for goodness sake don't allow the market — by which I mean the City — to guide the destiny of your company.
Conran acknowledges that in the face of-City rumour it is important for a group such as his to communicate to the outside world what its overall strategy is and to spell out the logic of its master plan — something he feels Storehouse might have done to better effect prior to becoming besieged by unwelcome take-over bids.
The job of communicating is very important indeed and maybe one of our problems is that we have been doing so much within the business that we are not ready to communicate to the outside world that it perhaps doesn't understand sufficiently what our targets are.
You have got to keep the analysts and the institutions on your side and let them know what you're proposing.
The problem is that if one of the projects you tell them about goes wrong, as inevitably it will, they're inclined to hold it against you.
Conran admits that he derives little satisfaction from having to fight off unwelcome suitors.
I find it very depressing because it takes me away from the constructive side of the business and into being a sort of financial PR and being defensive.
I'm bad at being defensive.
I don't enjoy it.
It's not a role that I welcome, although I try hard as a responsible chairman of the group to do the job as well as I possibly can.
There are moments of amusement in it.
I suppose my main concern in all this is that we employ thirty-three thousand people and their  lives are being considerably upset by this activity and I feel
I am fighting for them as much as for the shareholders.
The Storehouse chairman feels far more at home leading the expansion of the group he has built up so assiduously.
He believes it still has a long way to go.
I don't believe there is such a thing as being able to stop a business in its tracks and say that's far enough.
I think there has always got to be for any executive — and for any employee for that matter — new challenges, new frontiers to keep them enthused.
They can't go on making the same widget day after day.
There's got to be development and opportunities.
Conran has never allowed his job to become mere routine and there is no doubt in his mind about the satisfaction he has derived from building up a business empire.
I suppose the appeal to me has been making things happen and changing things and feeling quite British about it and proud of what in my very small way I have been able to do in this country and being able to export that abroad and make it a success there.
So there's a certain amount of nationalist pride.
There were also many years of frustration in my youth when the business was very small and I was bubbling with ideas, bubbling with energy and desperate to get things to happen but couldn't in the very dull environment of the 1950s and early 1960s.
So I feel a terrific relief and release that in the latter part of my business life I've been really able to make things happen at a considerable speed.
Surprisingly, the turning point that saw a struggling business transformed into a trendsetting group that has become a household name can be traced back to a Dutch merchant banker, who persuaded Conran to widen his horizons.
British merchant banks had failed to see the enormous unfulfilled potential in Habitat and tended to regard it as one of those here-today, gone-tomorrow phenomena.
However, the Dutchman, with shrewd insight, saw  great prospects for Habitat and persuaded Conran that in order to grow big he had to think big.
When the opportunity to acquire Mothercare arose, the Dutchman encouraged Conran to seize it with both hands.
‘It just needed somebody to say: ‘Don't be so humble.
You are really much better than you think you are.’
He opened our eyes to a lot of opportunities.’
With widening horizons, it was inevitable that Conran would turn his attention to expansion abroad.
When he was looking to expand into Scotland, Britain was on the verge of joining the Common Market, a move Conran, a staunch European at the time, embraced with great enthusiasm.
‘The problems of distribution and the various changes that we had to make to establish ourselves in Scotland made me think that if I just swung the compass I'd land up in Paris.’
By coincidence, a manager who spoke good French and understood the French market place had just been recruited.
Conran asked this manager to carry out a feasibility study, the result of which convinced him that Habitat should move into France, a country for which he has always had a great fondness.
The group's expansion into the US market was not quite so smooth.
The City took a dim view of what it regarded as the inordinate amount of time it took for the group to return a profit there.
But Conran had decided not to soft-pedal in the US and had made up his mind to make a big splash immediately, which required large investments which it took years to recoup.
You can adopt two lines of approach when you start a new business.
You can either be very timid and start in a small way, building it up gradually and expecting to make a profit in the first year.
Or you can say: I've researched it, I know the idea is right, I'm going to go in big and I'm going to have to sustain four or five years of losses before I turn it into a profit.
The trouble about starting a very small business is that it's difficult to do things of any great originality, because you don't have the buying power or maybe the manufacturing base to really get the thing off the ground.
That's what I did when I started my furniture business, building it up gradually from a crude workshop and it took a hell of a long time.
I didn't get anywhere very fast, but when you are confident and you know the  market is there it is inevitable, because of the heavy initial investment, that you're going to make substantial losses in the early years.
That's the view we've always taken in expanding abroad.
We're prepared to sustain losses for several years while we get it going.
While tastes differ from country to country, good design is universal, in Conran's view.
The functional qualities of a product are very much the same everywhere and transcend most boundaries.
To insure against peculiarities of taste, the Storehouse group has always put its overseas ventures under the control of local managers who tailor the businesses to suit national idiosyncrasies.
Mistakes are not always avoided, however.
When Habitat decided to launch its incredibly successful range of glass tableware in the US, it expected to take the American market by storm.
It had overlooked the fact, however, that the Americans tend to be more generous when pouring drinks and like to add large ice cubes to their favourite tipple.
The British-made glasses were simply too small to accommodate American tastes.
Conversely, Habitat flew in the face of expert opinion when it introduced pack-flat furniture on to the American market.
The pack-flat furniture had been invented recognising that younger people had become more mobile and often did not have the time to wait around at home for furniture deliveries.
The pack-flat furniture was easy to transport and could be assembled at home.
Habitat was advised that the Americans would never take to this peculiar British invention.
But after Habitat set about educating them to the advantages of the idea, the Americans adopted it with tremendous enthusiasm.
Habitat is an old hand at changing habits of a lifetime.
It was the first company to introduce duvets in both the UK and the US.
Few would have dared to predict in the late 1960s that duvets would ever catch on in this country, but today it would be hard to find a British household that doesn't have one.
The Habitat-Mothercare group reduced the risk of offending against local custom when it entered the Japanese market by operating a franchise through an established Japanese retail group called Siebu.
The main problem was that all the furniture had to be scaled down to suit the smaller stature of the Japanese and to fit their smaller homes.
Perhaps surprisingly, Conran's management style and operating methods have changed little in the light of his vast experience.
I suppose the most recent lesson is that if you merge with a company you don't have the same opportunities for changing its culture as you do if it's a take-over.
If it's a take-over, you are the boss from day one.
If it's a merger there's a gradual shifting of the sands until it finds its own level.
I think perhaps in the Habitat-Mothercare-BHS merger things have taken rather longer to settle down than they might have done if it had been a take-over.
There are also a lot of advantages in acquisition accountancy which can provide a sort of beer mat for the first years while you are trying to put the businesses together, and of course we didn't have these in the merger.
We had merger accountancy rather than take-over accountancy.
Absorbing a merged company into the group presents Conran with one of his most difficult management tasks.
The most difficult aspect of a merger is trying to put a team together of people who come from different business cultures and trying to adjust them to a different end.
It is a question of trying to get them to learn each other 's good qualities and to recognise their own bad qualities.
I can't say it's something I've found easy to do.
Sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't.
We had a big management shakeup in BHS when I could see that certain people were just not going to change their spots.
Although they were perfectly competent people and good at their jobs, they were never going to become part of the new culture which we have been trying to design for the Storehouse group.
So they left the business.
I find that a very difficult situation, because I can see the merits in most people.
Most senior executives in a business have got plenty of good qualities.
The problem is assessing whether they are going to change or not and I suppose I get criticised for being too tolerant at times.
I like to give people a very fair chance.
When people seem to be falling down, I like to give them the opportunity to  right themselves.
If they can't do that they simply have to go.
I certainly wouldn't go into a new business and make instant decisions about who has got to go.
I would try and get people to work as a team together and then when it obviously isn't going to work properly, only then would I make the decision.
Some people probably think I take too long to decide such matters, but I can demonstrate to them that sometimes by giving people a reasonable length of time to adjust they come through with flying colours.
I particularly try and develop an atmosphere of autonomy in the subsidiary companies where they feel they are part of a team and can look across at the other companies and can see admirable things going on.
It's a rather bad analogy, but I like to think of them as first-division football teams with their own particular qualities.
You let them play against one another and sometimes you transfer a player from one club to another, so that it builds up a mutual admiration society.
Conran is first and foremost an entrepreneur, who lives up magnificently to his own definition of what such a person should be: someone who takes risks after carefully assessing the opportunities available to him.
He does not believe that Britain lacks for entrepreneurs, but he is concerned that many of them do not do their homework well enough.
I remember once being on the board of a risk capital company when the Business Expansion Scheme first came in.
There were hundreds of companies coming to us for funds and they were meant to be writing their business plans properly and cogently.
I was absolutely horrified at the number of flaws you could very quickly find in reading one of these papers for half an hour.
Their thinking was coloured about how they were going to make their million and be launched on the USM.
They were all aspiring entrepreneurs, but so few of them had an original idea.
I think the most important thing is to try and find that gap in the market that is not well trodden by a lot of other people — to find something which you can do which is different from all the rest of them.
There's no point in just joining a mass of people who are simply competing with one another.
One of the reasons we developed a design-led retail business, offering our own unique products, was because we saw we could distance ourselves from other retailers who were just selling manufacturers' products and discounting them and getting into constant competitive battles.
It's difficult to be an entrepreneur, I believe, by simply following a well-trodden path.
Conran never really switches off from work, because he surrounds himself by objects that are beautifully designed.
He drives a Porsche, because apart from being a car that operates in harmony with man, in Conran's view, it is also beautiful to behold.
‘I've always driven a Porsche ever since I could afford one.
I'm one of the original Yuppies, I suppose.
It's a beautiful car, beautifully engineered and a great pleasure to drive.
The actual process of driving yourself in a Porsche makes you feel good.’
His main hobby is to take derelict old buildings and convert them into habitable homes that are monuments to the Conran design credo.
He has two such homes in France, one in provence, which he visits frequently.
He has recently completed a book on all the aspects of France he loves so much.
In the heart of the English countryside he runs a workshop where four craftsmen turn out fine furniture.
It is a hobby he has taken up with two main aims in mind: ‘Firstly, it keeps my hand in as far as manufacturing is concerned and secondly I like to see this small bit of entrepreneuralism on my doorstep.
I find it very relaxing.’
Conran doesn't see anything ostentatious about owning four homes.
I have to have a home in London because I live and work here.
I like being in the country very much indeed.
My real home is in the country near Hungerford.
I love being in France and I recently bought an old barn there and took great pleasure in rebuilding it and making a garden.
It's not essential for me to have four houses.
In many ways I would prefer to live in one place, but taking old and derelict houses and making them relive again is a source of enjoyment to me.
Although Conran is very conscious of what he buys and surrounds himself with, he has not allowed his love of good design to become a fetish.
He applies the same pragmatic attitude to design in his leisure-time pursuits as he does to the working environment.
For example, he does not seek out chic restaurants that are the haunt of the artistic set.
He is more likely to enjoy going to a restaurant that has good traditional furnishings that are well designed in their own terms.
What I am anxious to do is to find things that are not cynically made.
It is the cynicism in the design process that offends me; the suggestion that there's no point in designing anything special for the working classes because they don't have any taste.
People's taste is created not by their genes but by what they're offered in the shops.
If they're offered, as they have been for years and years ever since the industrial revolution, things that have been cynically designed for the working classes, is it surprising that we have a nation of people who are supposed to have no visual standards?
It is only when people are shown and offered things that excite their brains and imagination that standards go up.
When the British started to go out of Britain and go abroad for their holidays their eyes were opened.
They started to eat different food, see different clothes and furniture in the shops and different houses and their perspective widened.
Sir John Cuckney 
Born: Murree, India, 1925.
Educated.: Shrewsbury; St Andrew's University.
Sir John Cuckney is chairman of 3i Group plc and Royal Insurance plc and a former chairman of Westland Group plc; deputy chairman of TI Group plc; a director of Brixton Estate plc and a former director of Midland Bank plc.
After service with the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers in World War N, he was attached to the War Office until 1957.
Since then he has held directorships of various industrial and financial companies, including Standard Industrial Group (director
1959–66, managing director 1966–70), Standard Industrial Trust (chairman 1966–70) and Lazard Bros $ Company (currently a member of the board).
He was chairman of Brooke Bond Group plc from 1981 to 1984,; chairman of John Brown plc from 1983 to 1986 and chairman of Thomas Cook Group Ltd from 1974 to 1987.
In the public sector, he was chairman of the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board (1970–72); the Port of London Authority (1977–79); the Building Economic Development Committee (Little Neddy)(1976–90) and International Military Services Ltd (owned by the Ministry of Defence from 1974 to 1985.
In 1972 he was appointed chief executive (second permanent secretary) to set up the Property Services Agency at the Department of the Environment and held that position until his appointment as chairman of the Crown Agents for Overseas Governments and Administrations in 1974, which he held until 1978.
He was chairman of the International Maritime Bureau (of the International Chamber of Commerce) from 1981 to 1985.
He is a freeman of the City of London.
He received his knighthood in the 1979 Birthday Honours List and in 1980  was elected an Elder Brother and a Member of the Court of Trinity House.
Sir John Cuckney's career has embraced a fascinating mix of public- and private-sector service, a combination he has always found very appealing.
Even after deciding to put public service behind him and concentrate on the private sector, he has never quite seemed able to escape involvement with government.
A classic example was when he found himself at the centre of media and national attention after taking over the chairmanship of the troubled Westland Group in June 1985.
He set about drawing up a rescue plan amid a political storm that resulted in the resignation of two cabinet ministers.
But possibly because of his broad experience of both the public and private sectors, Cuckney rode out the storm calmly.
Once the Prime Minister had declared that Westland's problems were a private-sector matter and not something that should be unduly influenced by government issues, his priorities became abundantly clear.
Cuckney's longest stint in government service lasted for about ten years.
After World War N, during which he served in the army with the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers, he was attached to the War Office.
But by 1957 he had become disenchanted with government service and decided it was time to join the private sector.
‘In the mid-1950s I found public service very restrictive.
I wanted the greater freedom which obtains in the private sector.’
He went to work for an organisation that combined the roles of an issuing house and a conglomerate.
The two sides of the business were interrelated and operated in parallel.
The issuing house was active in turning small- and medium-sized firms into public companies.
At the same time, an industrial holding company was being built up by acquiring firms which, for various reasons, were unsuitable for turning into public companies.
In 1970 an opportunity came Cuckney's way which offered the kind of unusual challenge he has always relished.
He was invited to become chairman of the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board, which fell into the grey area between the public and private sector for which Sir John has always found special fascination.
It also faced him with the need to untangle a financial crisis, a task that has frequently occupied him in his career.
It was an interesting problem.
The Mersey Docks and Harbour Board was a public-trust authority which was becoming rapidly insolvent, yet there was no way in law in which it could go into liquidation.
The only type of receiver who could be appointed was a receiver of rates who has no control over assets and no management control which a receiver normally has.
It had an active business operation side and Seaforth — the container port — was still being built.
So it presented a mix of business operations of a rather specialised type, but also a classic area of interface between the public and private sector.
As a public-trust authority with central government funds committed to it through the Harbour Act, it needed a private bill to get its constitution altered.
So there was a parliamentary battle.
It was a mix of problems that I very much like.
After this, Cuckney again found himself drawn to public service.
he became a second permanent secretary in the Department of the Environment during Edward Heath's administration.
His somewhat thankless task was to attempt to introduce private-sector techniques into the Civil Service by setting up the Property Services Agency.
It had a very ill-fated start in that some of the original ideas of establishing it as an independent agency with a trading fund were thwarted at the last moment.
It remained an integral part of a government department but with an attempt to try to introduce accountable management and run it in a businesslike fashion.
It was called a departmental agency, but the constraints of trying to be fully integrated with a major department like the Department of the Environment meant that the theoretical freedom to manage, which it had started off with, very quickly disappeared.
After two years, Cuckney left to become chairman of the Crown Agents, another organisation that was encountering fairly major  financial difficulties.
And again, it was an organisation with a blurred constitution.
Central government's responsibility for it was not at all clear.
It moved into banking and property development just ahead of the secondary banking crisis.
It was still fulfilling its traditional functions of looking after overseas governments and acting as a purchasing agency for them — and indeed it did administer World Bank and British Government overseas development loans.
It took Cuckney four years to overcome the financial crisis he encountered when he took over the Crown Agents in 1974.
Towards the end of this period he also became chairman of the Port of London Authority.
But by the latter part of the 1970s he experienced an irresistible urge to return to the private sector and he had a very clear idea of how he would go about it.
Going back into the private sector I was very keen to become a pluralist.
I didn't want to be totally dependent on any one source of income or any one group.
I think the most attractive feature of being a pluralist is the independence it gives and that has certainly been borne out in my experience.
I very deliberately wanted a mix of interests.
On leaving the Crown Agents he became a director of Midland Bank and chairman of Thomas Cook, which Midland Bank owned, and he became a director and subsequently chairman of Brooke Bond and a director and subsequently chairman of Royal Insurance.
After eight years in the public sector, Cuckney was more than ready to become involved with private industry, but he firmly believes more top executives in the UK ought to join the traffic between the two sectors.
‘The movement you often see exhibited in France where people move very frequently from the public to the private sector and back again is something which I wish happened more often here.’
But Cuckney does not find it easy to put his finger on the  fundamental differences between operating in the two sectors.
There are, of course, differences and I've often wondered what is the most significant difference.
As a permanent secretary in the Department of the Environment I was an accounting officer, which meant as a civil servant I was responsible directly to parliament, which also meant I regularly had to go before the Public Accounts Committee.
Shortly after I left the public sector again, I was invited to chair a seminar at the Civil Service Staff College at Sunningdale comparing being an accounting officer in the Civil Service and being chairman of a public company and appearing before an annual general meeting.
It was a very interesting comparison one was forced to make.
The most fundamental difference to me has always been that the private sector is so much more dynamic — the rate of change is so great.
Of course, there are changes in the public sector, changes in organisation — indeed government finds it an almost irresistible temptation to tinker with its machinery, merge departments, break them up and give them new titles.
But despite all that, there is a great stolidity; there is a great security-cum-fairly rigid structure supporting the Civil Service — and necessarily so.
It needs to have continuity and stability but in the private sector the real difference is the incredible rate of change in the market place.
The external factors affecting your business are constantly changing and you have in order to survive to adapt to these external changes.
It's a nice idea that in business or banking you can go through a period of ‘consolidation’, but it seldom works out that way.
The more dynamic pace of change in the private sector is something that appeals to Cuckney.
I like the challenge that you've got to identify changes ni the externals and you need to take initiatives.
Nobody is going to tell you what to do.
You've got to make your own judgements and assessments.
If you are involved in a business with overseas investments — and more and more businesses have to think in global market terms — you need  to be conscious of the very rapidly changing international scene.
The international political and economical scene is rarely stable.
If you're interested in current affairs, as I am, they have a very direct impact on your business.
It was perhaps ironic that having decided to dedicate the rest of his career to the private sector that Cuckney became caught up in a major government row when he took over as chairman of Westland Group.
The UK's only helicopter manufacturer was on the brink of insolvency.
There was a shortfall in orders to carry the company into the 1990s — the famous ‘black hole’— and it was vastly overmanned for the amount of work that was likely to come its way in the immediate future.
In 1985 Westland was making losses of £95m on a turnover of £308m and its future looked bleak.
Quite clearly, an urgent rescue plan was needed.
At one point it looked as though the helicopter operator and entrepreneur Alan Bristow would come to the company's rescue, but when he changed his mind there was a crisis of confidence.
Westland became the centre of a political storm between Michael Heseltine, then Defence Minister, and Leon Brittan, Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, over the form the rescue package should take.
Heseltine was anxious to set up a link between Westland and a consortium of European helicopter companies, whereas the DTI was adamant the company should make up its own mind.
There was a lot of emotive talk about the UK's only helicopter company selling out to the Americans, but in the event the Sikorsky-Fiat minority involvement won the day and Heseltine resigned from the government.
The political storm disguised the fundamental problems facing Westland which Cuckney, as chairman, and chief executive Hugh Stewart set about tackling.
The work-force was pruned by two thousand people and a new management structure was introduced to reduce Westland's dependence on helicopter sales and place greater emphasis on new technologies and components for the aerospace industry.
In hindsight, it's difficult to understand what all the furore was about, since Sikorsky only took a minority stake in Westland, but at the height of the storm Cuckney found himself in the unwelcome glare of national publicity.
It's an experience he is glad to put behind him.
Westland was a unique situation, hopefully never to be repeated.
One began recognising at the outset, of course, that there was an important relationship to government in that government was the main customer, the main purchaser of the product.
One also had links with government to the extent that the DTI provided launch aid for civil helicopter developments and the Ministry of Defence partfinanced development aid for helicopters, or improvements to them, for defence purposes.
So one started at Westland knowing you were going to have two major government involvements.
When you're in a defence industry that is inevitable.
There were fundamental differences between these two government departments — between two ministers — and Westland was piggy-in-the-middle, which was a very costly and unfortunate experience.
The important issue for me as chairman throughout that period was to remember that once the Prime Minister had said that Westland was a private-sector problem which must be solved by private-sector measures and techniques, one's interests were obviously the shareholders, the employees, the customers and the banks, since the company was heavily indebted.
One was not then justified in thinking and functioning in terms of what might be in the national interest, what might ultimately be a desirable development for NATO strategy or defence strategy.
It was rather a more specific and harsher problem which, to put it bluntly, was to survive as Westland was drifting on to the rocks of insolvency.
We knew in 1985 that when we made our preliminary announcement of our results for the previous financial year that we would become technically insolvent.
So the main thrust of all one's efforts was to try and save the company as a corporate entity and secure the interests of the employees, the shareholders and the banks.
Confining his attention to private-sector issues, Cuckney was in no doubt about what his priorities were.
Divorced of all the political drama, the issue was reasonably straightforward — which rescue plan offered Westland the best prospects of survival?
It was of little consequence which quarter it came from.
There was a lot of misunderstanding about the European-American argument.
As far as the company was concerned, as one drifted nearer to insolvency, any rescuer who appeared would have been welcome provided we'd been absolutely assured at the critical time when the loss of £92m was announced that a rescue was legally binding, underwritten and in place.
What was attractive about the American consortium approach — and I must emphasise that it was never a take-over bid, Sikorsky's stake is only eight per cent— was firstly, we had worked with Sikorsky on and off for forty years.
But of overriding importance was the sheer professionalism of the American participation.
United Technologies (Sikorsky's parent group) came to take part in what developed into a contested capital reconstruction with a proxy battle.
They came armed with batteries of attorneys, British and American, merchant bank and investment bank advisers and the way in which their participation developed was immensely thorough.
One had greater faith on the day that one would be assured of their support — and incidentally the negotiations with the banks were fairly difficult.
The European consortium did not appear to us to be particularly cohesive in their aims and objectives.
It was less clear what their ultimate intentions were for the company.
One had a fairly strong feeling that part of their motivation was negative, in that it was to exclude the American participation, rather than positive — to build up the company.
The experience underlined for Cuckney the importance of having clear goals in a crisis and being determined not to waver from the chosen course of action:
I think you have to be extremely clear-minded and unemotional about what your objectives are and if it is a public company you must remember the paramount importance of the owners of the business — the shareholders.
I had, as it happens, had experience just before Westland of another very well-known public company — John Brown — which had encountered difficulties.
As chairman, I had been involved in its capital reconstruction and ultimate sale to  Trafalgar House.
What was interesting about that was that at the time John Brown got into financial difficulties the banks and institutional shareholders took a tough but very constructive view that it was worth helping the company through a reconstruction rather than forcing it into liquidation, which had been an attitude prevalent some years earlier.
It was in fact my experience of working with the banks and institutions for the recapitalisation and reconstruction of John Brown which led me to think that the City is much maligned over its attitudes to industry and the accusation of short-termism is not justified.
The institutions and banks had been immensely supportive in helping save the company.
When I was approached over Westland, it was by some of the banks and institutions that had been involved in the John Brown affair.
One of my reasons for becoming involved in Westland was that I felt in some respects that I owed them something.
Cuckney has never found it difficult switching from the public to the private sector, or vice versa.
He has found the management problems in each sector to be remarkably similar.
‘There is a lot of common ground — the same causes for companies and organisations encountering difficulties, but of course the solutions have to be tailor-made to a particular industry or company culture., A sound organisation structure helps to overcome many operational problems, in Cuckney's view.
It is extremely important that you have an organisation structure that is clearly understood and then you should not keep altering it.
That can be very destructive.
But I think you have to recognise that there is no ideal organisation structure, whatever the arguments are for centralisation, decentralisation, functionalisation, regionalisation, for a line-management or matrix-management approach.
What really matters are the personal relationships within the structure.
There will always be imperfections and they can only be overcome by personal relationships.
I think there are enough common factors in management, including the role of chairman, that apply to all or most businesses, such as the need for careful succession planning, the need for developing a strategy or a corporate plan.
When I say corporate plan, I don't necessarily mean you have to live with it rigidly.
Putting it at its simplest it should be at least a clear mission statement which the whole organisation understands.
I also think that apart from the corporate plan, the strategy and the mission statement, you really do need to give some vision about the future of your company and a vision in which those working with you can share.
You can usually tell an organisation that has a clear corporate plan but very little vision about the future.
The lack of vision is reflected in the atmosphere among the staff and all the employees.
Cuckney also feels that a top executive needs to set an example by being something of an entrepreneurial risk-taker.
There's a need for an entrepreneurial spirit.
After all, in the whole of the private sector there is a need for innovation; there is a need sometimes for diversification, although that can be a dangerous area; there is a need for a sensitive but effective response to the changing market place.
All of that is going to involve risk-taking.
Cuckney does not believe that the qualities needed to be an effective chairman of a financial institution such as 3i (Investors in Industry) are that different to those required to oversee a manufacturing company.
He is not even convinced that the head of a financial institution needs to be all that numerate.
I think the really critical issue is to understand the concepts behind the particular forms of financing which are used.
People do tend, I think rather superficially, to concentrate on figures and relationships between the figures, whereas what really matters is the concept behind them and I think a financier could be somebody who is awfully bad at arithmetic, but does understand the concepts.
Cuckney is chairman of 3i, which claims to be the largest venture-capital organisation in the world.
It was established in 1945 as the Industrial, Commercial and Financial Corporation to  try to ensure that British industry had access to sufficient funds to feed its long-term growth.
Using funds raised in public capital markets all over the world, 3i is a major force in the provision of share and loan capital to unquoted British companies.
Owned since its formation by the clearing banks (eighty-five per cent) and the Bank of England (fifteen per cent ), it represents a commercially successful, City-based initiative to help meet British industry's long-term capital requirements.
Since 1945, 3i has supported over nine thousand companies.
It provided over £500m in capital in 1987 to nine hundred businesses.
It invests in all the major points of change in the life of a company, from start-ups through to flotation.
In a typical year it supports some three hundred brand new or very young ventures.
Its total assets are over £2bn.
What 3i has done is demonstrate that the clearing banks in the UK have collectively over forty years ensured that there is access to long-term development capital for British industry.
It is a living example which shows that the accusations of short-termism levelled against the City are really not valid — certainly in this respect.
What has been achieved by 3i over the years is a very clear demonstration that the banking system has done a lot to help the growth of small and medium-sized businesses.
Cuckney challenges the view that there are vast sums of money locked up in pension funds floating around the City that could be diverted towards helping struggling small firms to grow.
I don't think the market place is ill-organised.
I don't think there is any shortage of venture capital or money to back good propositions.
What there is a shortage of is good propositions which are realistically priced and properly thought through and presented.
The 3i chairman is convinced that an enterprise economy does now genuinely exist in Britain.
One can see it by the numbers of new business start-ups; also by the number of failures which does show there is  some healthy risk-taking.
I think one sees it by the change in the structure of big business, by so many management buy-outs and the realisation that size is not everything; large companies concentrating more on their core businesses and getting rid of peripheral businesses and spending more on research and development in supporting core businesses.
I think there is a dynamic movement in the structure of industry and in the geographic location of industry, the move away from some of the old traditional steel and coal mining and heavy industries into service industries and electronics, which does very clearly demonstrate that an enterprise economy does now exist.
Cuckney was attracted to the chairmanship of 3i because it is an organisation that has an interesting mix of expertise,
not only of financially trained and financially innovative people, but it also has a strong contingent of industrial advisers.
It's an organisation I have always recognised provides a facility to commerce and industry which I think is highly desirable — that is a facility to take a long-term view.
It's an essential feature of 3i that the positions it takes are long term.
It has been a shareholder for a very long time in some private companies and I think we've become known to be a supportive shareholder.
We certainly were with British Caledonian.
More recently 3i has become involved in the fashionable technique of ‘buy-ins’, where teams of successful managers are headhunted from larger companies to run smaller struggling firms and turn then around.
Cuckney regards such managerial mobility as healthy.
I see no objections at all to it.
I think the development of buy-ins and management buy-outs, spin-outs, and all that kind of thing are a good indication of adjustment and adaptation to changes in industry.
One of the factors common to businesses that have fallen on hard times is an inability to adapt and change and a failure to recognise that the market place is changing around them.
I think there is  always going to be this element in business.
It's rather like pond life — little tadpoles eating even smaller ones and bigger ones eating them.
I think that movement is essential.
One of the major changes industry had to adapt to in the autumn of 1987 was the stock-market slump that sent share prices plummeting.
Cuckney does not believe the crash was the result of any fundamental change in the structure of national economies, but he does suggest that it signals the fact that greater volatility in global markets is here to stay.
I think we in Europe have been a bit slow to recognise that we are in a totally new era.
With all the new techniques now available, such as twenty-four hour trading and the global marketing of securities, we have been a bit slow to adapt to changes that are now going to be permanent.
A domestic market that becomes part of an international market is going to be subjected to the effects of changes which might otherwise have been more slow in coming — or wouldn't have immediately affected it.
All this has coincided perhaps with some inevitable over-optimism.
There have been some rather unrealistic valuations being put on businesses.
But I think the critical issue of Black Monday and what's happened since is that this is a very major change in the nature of the market place, but not in the underlying economies of countries, especially the UK.
I think we will continue to have a degree of volatility in markets we've not experienced previously and I think the way the market maker has to interpret his role now is such that we will never get the sort of fine tuning that the old jobbing system could provide.
With so much more volatility in markets, it is perhaps inevitable that greater stress will be put on senior executives as they strive to adapt to, and cope with, ever faster changes.
The ability to deal with crisis is something Cuckney has cultivated over the years.
During the Westland episode my worry beads got red hot on occasions, but I think each time you go through a  corporate crisis of some sort, you'd be silly if you haven't learned from the previous ones.
I think it's terribly important in an organisational crisis to remember that the crisis aspect of it, the critical nature of it, is something you've got to put to one side.
You've got to get on and deal with the problem and forget it's a crisis.
I think if you don't do that, you'll very easily become over-influenced at the time by the fact that it is a crisis you're dealing with.
You should treat it as a straightforward job of work and get on with it.
In any crisis, my greatest support is a clean sheet of paper and a pencil and the telephone off the hook.
I think it is absolutely essential that you are extremely clear-minded on your objectives and you're extremely clear-minded on your order of priorities, remembering the prime aim is to serve the shareholders and their interests.
Sir Monty Finniston 
Born: Glasgow, 1912.
Educated.: University of Strathclyde (formerly the Royal College of Science and Technology).
Sir Monty Finniston is a former chairman of the British Steel Corporation and now runs his own company, H.M.
Finniston, in London.
He began his business career in 1948 when he became chief metallurgist at the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority at Harwell.
In January 1959 he joined C.A. Parsons as managing director of its subsidiary, International Research and Development
Company, the largest sponsored research organisation in the U K.
He was chairman of the organisation from 1969 to 1977.
In 1967 he was appointed deputy chairman of the nationalised British Steel Corporation and in 1971 took on the additional responsibility of chief executive.
He relinquished both posts in
1973 when he became chairman of the corporation for a period of three years.
In 1976 he joined Sears Holdings Ltd as a director and Sears Engineering Ltd as chairman.
He resigned from Sears in October 1979 prior to setting up his own company in 1980.
He is chairman of a number of companies, including K.C.A. Drilling plc, Sherwood International Ltd, Industrial Technology Securities Ltd, and Mullholland Ltd.
His directorships include that of Cluff Oil plc, British Nutrition Foundation, Caledonian Heritable Estates and Combined Capital Ltd.
He is chairman of the Council of the Scottish Business School, the Prison Reform Trust and the Scottish Enterprise Foundation.
He is president of a number of business-related associations, including the Industrial Building Bureau, the Industrial Marketing Research Association, the Institute of Mechanical $ General 
Technician Engineers, the Engineering Industries Association, the British Export Houses Association and the Society of Environmental Engineers.
He is chancellor of Stirling University and a freeman of the City of London.
Sir Monty Finniston entered the industrial arena relatively late in life.
He was already fifty-five years old when he took up his first corporate post, as technical director of C.A. Parsons, manufacturers of electrical generators, transformers and turbines.
A research scientist by profession and temperament, he had spent all his previous career ‘never more than ten yards away from a laboratory’.
Once he had made the switch, however, Finniston tackled his successive responsibilities with great relish, including the awesome task of reorganising the British Steel Corporation, which at the time was 260,000 strong.
Stark though the contrast must have been, Sir Monty explains the transfer from the closeted laboratory life to the public glare of big business with simple logic:
I didn't think I was being very original any longer and I was basically administering.
If you're administering, you might as well administer something that is new and challenging rather than doing something I had been doing all my life.
It happens to many scientists.
His first challenge was to take charge of a nuclear research centre for C. A. Parsons, which at the time employed 350 graduates and trained scientists, but for which there was little work.
Finniston converted it into a major international research organisation that still exists today.
But his horizons were dramatically broadened when he joined British Steel and was asked by the late Lord Melchett, who was then chairman, to reorganise the fourteen widely dispersed companies that had been put into the same melting pot under the nationalisation programme.
It took Finniston a year to complete the task.
That taught me a lot about how you actually get people to  operate within a hierarchical structure.
It was a fundamental reorganisation, because fourteen private companies working in rivalry with one another is quite a different thing from fourteen companies being merged into a single corporation with a single objective.
The experience caused Finniston to do some thinking about people and their relationship to organisations.
McKinsey, the leading management consulting group, which advised on the restructuring, held the firm view that people should always fulfil the specifications of the job.
It rejected any idea that an organisation should ever be created to suit the individual characteristics of people.
Finniston questions whether this approach can be adopted slavishly.
This philosophy obviously works in some cases when it is an established function like an accountant.
But on many occasions you've got talented people who just don't fill the job specifications, but whose qualities, put to an objective agreed by everybody, are valuable beyond measure.
After completing the restructuring of British Steel, Finniston was asked to draw up the group's first corporate plan.
It formed the basis of the ten-year development programme that was submitted to the government in 1973.
The project involved an in-depth analysis of British Steel's operating units to examine how they stood against international competition.
Finniston made some startling discoveries.
When I joined the company it had fifty-eight blast furnaces, the largest of which produced 2,750 tons a day.
The smallest blast furnace the Japanese were building then produced 10,000 tons a day.
So we had to make radical changes.
We didn't need fifty-eight blast furnaces.
It only called for eight at the most.
It was a mammoth task, but Finniston considers that his scientific background fitted him well for the challenge.
Scientific training makes you think rationally and logically.
To start with you have to deal with every problem rationally.
That forms the basis of your planning.
Then you have to say that, of course, the world is not a rational place.
It's got all kinds of people and all kinds of situations you didn't take into account and you couldn't take into account.
The money you have at your disposal, for example.
To do the task requires X amount of pounds, but you've only got X minus something.
Then you have to modify the base to suit particular circumstances.
The implementation of the rationalisation programme left a lasting impression on Finniston which was to influence his future operating style.
The original 260,000 employees have since been whittled down to 50,000 and Sir Monty is a little resentful that he is probably most remembered for setting that radical rundown in motion.
His was not an enviable duty.
In rationalising the corporation and giving it the equipment that would allow it to compete with rivals, particularly foreign rivals, I had to have a capital programme.
The capital programme, as in all manufacturing industries, required a reduction in manpower.
Productivity had to go up and this was going to be achieved through the introduction of new capital rather than the introduction of new labour.
I became chief executive in 1971 and I then became responsible for the implementation of the plan.
It was quite clear to me that 260,000 people would be reduced very substantially and that for every person who was made redundant in British Steel, seven people were affected — another three in the family, plus the people serving that family in the shops and in other ways.
Finniston pauses for an ironical chuckle as he recollects the weight of responsibility placed upon his shoulders at the time.
‘So there I was, responsible for nearly two million people in a way.
That's a big chunk of the population and I worried about the hardship that I was causing as a result of what was really a commercial decision.’
He first began to think about the repercussions of such hard commercial decisions in 1971, and by the time that he 65 became chairman of British Steel upon the untimely death of Lord Melchett he had formulated a way to ease the hardship.
He set up an organisation called BSC Industry, which had the prime task of counselling redundant steel workers, retraining them and helping them to redirect their careers and, in many instances, set up their own small businesses.
It was a positive answer to an appalling problem that has since been copied in different forms by many other industries.
At the time it was revolutionary approach.
Finniston proudly describes it ‘as the first essay in caring capitalism that I know of.’
‘If you take Ebbw Vale as an example, where we rendered 2,500 people redundant in a very close community, we got 1,500 people back to work again within eighteen months by the start-up of nineteen companies.
We did that without any financial help from the government of the day.’
The experience made Finniston aware of the needs of people when making major corporate decisions.
I became very much more conscious of people, because when you're a scientist you're dealing with inanimate matter, unless you're a biologist.
Inanimate matter doesn't answer back and if you get fed up with what you're doing you throw it down the sink or get rid of it.
But you can't do that with people.
They are the only appreciating asset you have in business.
All the other assets disappear; you write them off.
You depreciate them every year.
In five years a machine is counted as nothing in the balance sheet, but people count and age makes them more experienced, gives them better judgement — if they're capable of learning, which most people are.
In addition to the people aspects of a business, Finniston also had to pick up fairly swiftly a keen understanding of commercial factors, such as pricing.
He dismisses the popular theory of the need to price according to what the market will bear.
That's a stupid phrase actually.
How do you know what the market will bear?
Do you hold a wet finger up to the wind and say that's it or do you calculate what it is?
There are many difficult commercial decisions.
How much do you  produce in advance?
How can you gauge what a market's worth?
Never mind the home market, what about the foreign market?
How do you go into competition with people?
How do you get over protectionism?
Finniston admits that being plunged into the deep end of commercial decisions he inevitably made mistakes in the early stages, although he is not prepared to take the blame entirely.
‘If the mistakes had been that obvious there were people around me to tell me where I had gone wrong, but they didn't.
So perhaps they would have made the same mistakes as well., He believes his most serious mistake was wanting to get things done in a hurry.
In hindsight he wishes he had been more patient, particularly with the twenty-nine different unions he had to deal with at British Steel.
I tried to get the trade unions into a form which made my managerial activities easier rather than trying to let them find a consensus between themselves.
But I was in a hurry to get things done.
I think patience is very important, particularly with people.
Of course it conflicts with the commercial urgency of producing something or gaining a new market.
You've got to balance the urgency of the situation against the patience required to do it.
Finniston is in no doubt that making decisions and seeing them implemented properly are the most important aspects of a chairman's job.
He was once asked what he considered the function of a chairman to be and he gave a three-part answer:
First the chairman must be quite clear what the objectives of the company are.
It doesn't matter what size the company is, whether it's in manufacturing or services.
He's got to say this is what he's trying to do in order to gain what it is he's trying to gain.
The objectives must be quite clear.
Every year after I became chairman of British Steel we set aside one board meeting at which the objectives of the organisation were raised.
We never changed them very much, because we knew the path we were on, but we consciously spoke about them.
Secondly, having decided the objective, make quite sure you've got the resources to meet it — that means in manpower, money, in machines and in markets.
There's no point in idealising a policy and never being in a position to achieve it.
It's much better in those circumstances to reduce the objective.
Then thirdly, make quite sure the objective is implemented properly, so you have to monitor.
You don't monitor day in and day out, hanging over the shoulders of individuals but periodically you go in and question why people are not meeting deadlines they've agreed to.
Finniston also believes that choosing a good successor is an important duty of a chairman, but as chairman of a nationalised industry he was in no position to do so.
The former steel boss recalls that he was able to assimilate the theoretical aspects of senior management very quickly and implement them in an almost academic fashion.
But he found there was nothing academic about dealing with people and with the unions, because ‘established institutions have their dogmas and their attitudes are frozen rigid.’
He picked up a few tricks of the trade as he progressed.
In union negotiations, for example, I always found that if you had a heart to heart with the opposition, the single leader, you could probably gain something.
At some stage, informal contacts can be very effective.
They can't be informal to start with.
People have got to define where they stand — on both sides.
A case in point was a series of devastating strikes that Finniston had to weather at British Steel in 1974.
The corporation was sustaining appalling production losses and Finniston wrote to each of the trade unions suggesting that they meet on the neutral territory of a Heathrow hotel.
He gave the union leaders the opportunity to tell him in a forthright manner where they thought he was going wrong with his policies and he in turn did some pretty plain talking about what he saw as their shortcomings.
The idea was so successful in defusing the explosive situation that the meetings continued to be held at six-monthly intervals.
The special relationship Finniston forged between top management and the work-force at British Steel is epitomised by the fact that he was given farewell parties by each of the seven major steelworks when he came to leave the corporation at the end of ten years.
That was something he took great pride in.
In many respects, Finniston was ahead of his time in the management policies he adopted during the period he was chairman of British Steel but he stresses that commercial strategy without enlightened personnel policies can never be successful.
I don't think if you just consider products or a market in the abstract that you can be ahead of your time.
That's not the kind of vision that distinguishes people.
It's when at the end of your career you can say that you have benefitted some part of society, if not all of society, that you can say you have done well.
Finniston's greatest disappointment during his time at British Steel was that he never succeeded in persuading the unions to form a single group to simplify negotiations.
‘It made it unnecessarily complex having to deal with so many.’
But he was never overawed by the sheer scale of the task he undertook.
‘That never worried me.
I've never worried about large orders of magnitude.
Problem solving is quite independent of the magnitude of the figures.
It just means you have to think more carefully, that's all.’
Creativity is an essential prerequisite of running a company successfully, in Finniston's estimation, and in 1978 he outlined the elements of creative management to a gathering of The Royal Society of Arts.
It would be hard to improve on his observations today:
Creative management is about creative managers.
What then makes a creative manager?
Basically, he must be endowed with or develop certain characteristics of character.
He must have the will to engage in management as a changing, improving exercise benefitting his company, those responsible to him and for him.
He must have courage since there will be many obstacles to the achievement of his objectives.
He must be resilient since he must recover when there are setbacks.
He must be patient since there is no instant creativity and implementation takes time.
He must be critical of himself — and others — since in a changing world he must constantly be questioning his methods, his direction and the administration of his responsibilities.
He must be thoughtful since lack of thought is probably responsible for most of the world's difficulties.
He must be communicative since he has to work with or through other people.
He must be educated with professional expertise, not just in a specialist discipline but with a general knowledge of the disciplines which bear on management, to allow communication with other contributors to the industrial activity of the company or organisation.
He must learn to delegate , encouraging those responsible to him by placing responsibility and authority on them as part of their career education.
And he must be aware of people since he is not only concerned with the technical standing of machines but also with the physical and mental health of his operators.
The paragon of all these virtues is a rare animal — but thankfully is not extinct and hopefully will continue to breed.
Finniston still puts great store in these qualities today and he believes they equally apply to any kind of company or organisation.
I don't think what you run makes any difference, because I've run companies of very diverse natures and the principles that apply to British Steel at one end apply equally to a small company at the other end of the scale.
What I would most strongly suggest as the conditioning factor is the people you have to work with.
This determines everything.
That's why you can have two people who are going to occupy the same position and you'll treat them quite differently, because of the different characters.
There are some people who know  best all the time.
They may have other qualities which are worthwhile having, but trying to get them to change their minds requires one kind of approach.
There are other people who only work by consensus, but once they've agreed to something they'll do it very effectively.
That requires a different approach.
Finding people and educating and training them without them being aware that it's being done is very important.
The former steel boss takes the view that any intelligent manager can learn the technicalities of a new industry reasonably quickly.
It didn't take him long to master the basics of what British Steel was all about and he has been just as versatile in acquiring an understanding of a diverse range of other businesses, from computers and oil drilling to knitwear machines.
The art, according to Finniston, is to ask intelligent questions and look for inconsistencies.
By phrasing questions in different ways, inconsistencies are exposed without the need for having a detailed knowledge of a particular technique.
There is one area of management, however, that Sir Monty has changed his view on as a result of greater experience.
I used to believe it was possible to make forecasts — market forecasts in particular— which were likely to be accurate.
I no longer believe solely in figures.
I believe in sensitivity analyses and I believe in ranges.
But I've come to the conclusion that these are sometimes a bit astrological, particularly if you're in a competitive situation.
You've got to know what your rivals are doing.
Finniston cites Japan as a vivid example.
I know Japan is the country everyone points to, but it is the favourite one because it happens to show all the deficiencies of forecasting and combatting rivalry that are available.
In 1951 the Japanese produced only 6 million tons of steel and in that same year the British steel industry produced 15 million tons.
In 1981 — thirty years later — the Japanese were producing over 100 million tons and we were still producing only 15 million tons.
You've  got to ask yourself what they had that we didn't have.
Or what did they do we should have done?
It wasn't because we didn't have the talent.
It's not because we couldn't have done it.
The country didn't have the will to do it and the politicians didn't have the will to do it.
Finniston firmly believes that a lack of training and inadequate educational facilities are two of the major stumbling blocks to industrial efficiency in Britain.
He cites some statistics from two recent reports to support his argument:
Of all the people who call themselves managers or are designated managers in Japan or the US, eighty-five per cent have a degree qualification.
The figure in this country is twenty-four per cent.
In the US, West Germany and Japan five full days every year are devoted to off-the-job training for every manager.
In this country it's less than one day.
Now I'm quite happy to argue we're twice as good as the Japanese, but I'm not prepared to claim we're four times as good, which is what these figures suggest.
Finniston also believes that there should be a greater element of entrepreneurship in all types of businesses.
He points out wryly that ‘entrepreneur’ is a French term and that there is no equivalent word in the English language.
A literal translation would be ‘undertaker’, which doesn't have quite the right ring!
He contends that the whole of the business world is,
a risk-taking business.
The term, enterprise, really is a four-letter word — RISK.
But we play safe.
Take this craze for making everyone a shareholder.
The bulk of investors put money into gilts.
But putting money into small new firms, where the failure rate is pretty high and great risks are being taken, that's what enterprise is all about.
Today, Finniston runs his own small firm (small by comparison with British Steel at any rate), but at least fifty per cent of his time is now taken up with interests outside the corporate world.
He is chancellor of Stirling University and spends a lot of time going around lecturing at universities and schools.
He has been  chairman for ten years of the Scottish Business School, which comprises the business studies departments of the Universities of Glasgow, Strathclyde, Edinburgh, Heriot Watt and Stirling.
He is president of three technical societies and is deeply involved in inner-city problems.
He is a founder member of the Prison Reform Trust.
When they're young most people look naturally to their own selfish ambitions.
If they're married, they look to improve their lot and that of their family.
But after you reach a certain stage in life — I'd put it somewhere between forty-five and fifty-five — you suddenly feel you are as secure as you can be and you really ought to give something back to society.
There's an old Jewish phrase which I think is worth repeating.
It says: ‘If I am not for myself, who will be for me?’
That's the voice of selfishness and ambition and personal interest.
It's the voice of the entrepreneur incidentally.
But then the saying adds: ‘If I am only for myself, what am I?’
I think that's the voice of conscience and the voice of charity and the voice of doing something for the general good.
It's a very interesting phrase and was thought up four thousand years ago.
Finniston maintains there is inescapable evidence that the corporate world has become more selfish and self-seeking.
I think people go out to make a fast buck without worrying about the consequences.
Who is affected is not their concern.
The concern for the people for whom you are responsible by being given a position of influence and power and authority has gone.
The Golden Handshake, the Golden Hello and Big Bang and the whizz kids have changed all that.
Finniston believes that the enterprise culture that has been fostered by the present government has to some extent fuelled a disregard for social responsibility.
Encouraging enterprise is a good thing in many respects, but enterprise has been defined in people's minds as looking  after your self-interest.
How can you be satisfied with the economic state of a country when there are three million unemployed?
Never mind if there are a few who don't want to work.
People keep telling me hundreds and thousands of them don't want to work, but I never meet any of them.
By definition, if there are hundreds and thousands of them, I must meet one or two of them as I go around, but I never do.
Morality, Sir Monty points out, is an integral part of a society's culture at any given time in its history, and in his view our moral conditions have changed radically.
‘People don't feel ashamed these days even when they have been caught out,’ he suggests in a tone of disbelief.
The people who set the standards are no longer the older generation, the people who have lived their lives and come to some judgement on what life is all about.
It's now the younger people, the people who make fortunes, like Richard Branson of Virgin, or even tennis stars, who set the standards.
Extraordinary!
On the other hand, Finniston feels that the younger generation is having a favourable impact on the need to rid Britain of the ‘them and us’ syndrome that has plagued industry for so long and been at the root of so many of its ills.
The next generation which is taking over the reins of industry is a generation who were not brought up in the same milieu that I was brought up in.
I think they are becoming more conscious that the world is not right.
They are arguing that it is not fair to have the ‘haves’ and the ‘have-nots’; it's not fair to have a north and south divide.
It takes time for this to develop and for people to recognise that they are partly responsible.
Finniston takes issue, however, with the view that the next generation of managers will find themselves working within a post-industrial society, where manufacturing industry has largely given way to a dependence on the service industries.
He  dismisses the whole concept of the post-industrial society as ‘an economists, gimmick’.
Economists in particular don't distinguish between the creation of wealth, which nowadays can be provided in large measure by machines, and the creation of employment, which in large measure requires other policies.
We are a country of very poor natural resources and our standard of living depends upon high imports — it shouldn't but it does.
These imports have to be paid for and what is interesting — and why manufacturing is vital to us — is that over the past hundred years, if not longer, seventy per cent of these imports have been paid for by the export of British manufactured goods.
That's the important thing.
Finniston is convinced that too much emphasis is being placed on earnings from so-called ‘invisible’ exports.
They, too, are subject to great competition, he argues.
‘The Japanese are coming in through ‘Big Bang’’.
We're small.
If you take the largest ten banks in the world, there's not a single British bank among them.
The first bank that comes into the ratings is NatWest or Barclays at number fifteen.’
Finniston's thesis is that the creation of wealth should come before the creation of employment,
because it is the creation of wealth that creates employment, not in the thing that is creating the wealth but in other things.
You recirculate it through taxation and through individual wealth.
You can't afford the service industries unless you've got a good manufacturing base.
I'm only talking about this country.
If you lived in America or some of these other places where there's natural wealth under foot, like Saudi Arabia, that's a different matter.
But the only appreciating resource that we've got is the talents and skills of the people to design, to manufacture, to produce and provide a service.
Finniston's own skills have certainly made an enormous contribution to the industrial growth of Britain.
He seems to have sought very little in return, apart from the satisfaction of knowing, in his own words, that he has ‘benefitted society’.
He has very few of  the traditional trappings of the successful captain of industry.
‘I live a good life.
I've been happily married to the same woman for fifty-odd years.
I've got a nice apartment.
I've never owned a house.
I've always owned apartments because I was born in a tenement in Glasgow and I like flat-life., If he has one regret it is that government never saw fit to offer him another major job as challenging as his chairmanship of British Steel when he gave it up in 1976.
He confides that he would have liked to have ‘taken a crack at another big public objective,.
He was requested by Prime Minister James Callaghan to head a commission that looked into the future of the engineering profession in Britain, which kept him occupied for two and a half years.
The resulting report,Engineering our Future brought about a minor revolution in the profession.
But Finniston still harbours the belief that the wealth of experience he acquired during his ten years at British Steel could have been put to better service for the nation.
He is now, however, imparting that experience to the managers of tomorrow by his active involvement in a whole range of educational pursuits.
Even in his mid-seventies, Finniston is showing no sign of flagging in his boundless energy or in the missionary zeal with which he preaches the gospel that a healthy industrial economy is in the best interests of society as a whole.
Sir Robert Haslam 
Born.: Bolton, Lancashire, 1923.
Educated.: Bolton School; Birmingham University.
Sir Robert Haslam was appointed chairman of British Coal (formerly the National Coal Board) in September 1986.
He had been deputy chairman and chairman-designate since November 1985.
He is a former chairman of the British Steel Corporation and of Tate $ Lyle plc.
A graduate of Birmingham University, where he took a BSc in coal-mining, he joined Manchester Collieries Ltd, in 1944.
He qualified for his colliery manager's certificate in 1947 and is one of the longest-serving members of the Institute of Mining Engineers.
In January 1947, the colliery company became part of the North Western Division of the newly formed National Coal Board.
Later in 1947 he joined the Nobel Division of Imperial Chemical Industries as a mining engineer specialising in explosives for the mining, quarrying and oil-prospecting industries.
For the next ten years he travelled the world, visiting and working in mines and quarries in every continent.
Subsequently, he had wide general management experience in three ICI divisions, becoming chairman of ICI Fibres, a main board director, personnel director and deputy chairman.
He is also a director of the Bank of England, a governor of the National Institute of Economic $ Social Research, a governor of Henley Management College, chairman of Manchester Business School and an advisory director of Unilever.
He is a former chairman of the Nationalised Industries Chairmen's Group.
He has also been a non-executive chairman of Cable $ Wireless, chairman of the North American Advisor), Group, chairman of the Man-made Fibre Producers Committee and chairman of the European Synthetic Fibre Manufacturers.
He was made a freeman of the City of London in March 1985.
There have been a number of significant turning points in the career of Sir Robert Haslam, which he describes as ‘negative accidents’, but which turned out to have very positive results.
It was, for example, a sheer fluke that he began his career as a mining engineer with Manchester Collieries Ltd.
He had aimed to go to Cambridge to read geography, but failed the Latin entrance examination it was necessary to take in those days.
In the event, he was accepted at Birmingham University, but just before he arrived he was informed that the geography department had been closed down because of austerity measures brought in during World War N. He therefore decided to read geology instead, but shortly afterwards he received notification that this department was also to be closed.
The next best option was to take a BSc degree in coal-mining — and that was how he ended up becoming a mining engineer instead of a teacher, which in all probability is the career he would have followed if he had managed to fulfil his original goal of studying geography.
Forty years later, after an enormously varied industrial career that has seen Haslam running a diverse range of businesses and involved in a wide variety of functions, from selling to personnel, events have turned full circle.
His early days underground working alongside miners on the coal-face have imbued him with a special rapport with the thousands of miners he now oversees as chairman of British Coal.
I worked in the coal mines for three years to obtain my colliery manager's certificate.
As part of the training programme, you had to spend this period underground, of which eighteen months had to be spent on the coal face and during that time you did lots of jobs that mineworkers did.
At times it seemed a bit strange to have a university degree and be working so physically hard but in many ways those three years were a very good period.
In particular, Haslam found the camaraderie he experienced working alongside mineworkers extremely rewarding.
It was rather like being in the army on active service.
The human relationships are very intense and therefore the learning curve is accelerated.
I learned a great deal during that formative period about what made people tick and one saw what life was really like.
Even though as a graduate I was something of an oddity, I was absorbed into the background after a time and people treated me as one of them.
They behaved towards me as they would to anyone else and I found it a very valuable exposure.
Above all, it taught Haslam the ‘common touch’.
As he recalls: ‘You had to be able to tangle with fairly tough and earthy, but likeable and well-meaning, people.’
He stayed in digs in a colliery village at the time and found it equally possible to integrate easily into the local community.
He detected no atmosphere of ‘them and us’, though he suspects that in similar circumstances today it might be a different story.
He had been promised that once he had obtained his colliery manager's certificate, he would be made an assistant manager.
He received his certificate in July 1947 but the British coal industry had been nationalised in January of that year and his new bosses told him that in the changed circumstances they would not be able to carry out the undertaking he had been given.
The disappointment Haslam inevitably felt at being let down in this way led to a second turning point in his career and one of those ‘negative accidents’ that ultimately proved to have a positive outcome.
He went to a local pub in the mining village where he was staying to drown his sorrows and found himself sitting next to a stranger who remarked on his dejected demeanour.
It turned out that the stranger worked for ICI and he told Haslam that Britain's major chemical company was looking for mining engineers.
Three days later Haslam was being interviewed for a job at ICI and he was offered the chance to become a technical services engineer in the Nobel Division, an offer he snapped up immediately.
The job involved visiting mining camps, quarries and oilfields all over the world selling explosives and it gave Haslam his first taste of the excitement of travel, something that has remained with him all his life.
It wasn't really a management job.
You operated very much as a self-contained individual.
There were very few major countries I didn't visit during that time and travel was nothing like as easy as it is now.
Going to South America, it would take you at least thirty-six hours to get to Lima, for example, in some clapped-out old aircraft.
We had trips in those days that took as long as three months which not many people would undertake now.
It was not all fun and games.
I used to spend a lot of time in demanding places like the Andes and in remote parts of Africa.
He was eventually put in charge of the twenty people comprising the explosives technical services department and got his first taste of real management.
After four years in the explosives division, his management potential had been spotted and moves were made to launch him on a management development programme of rotation to broaden his experience.
He was offered a job on the production side, which would have entailed being a works superintendent.
Not realising the long-term strategy behind the offer, Haslam turned it down, regarding it as an inferior job for someone with his mining engineering skills.
He suspects that a black mark went firmly down against his name for turning down the job and when he was later asked to become personnel manager for that division of ICI he was left in no doubt that it was an offer he should not refuse.
I was told that there wasn't going to be any nonsense like last time.
I was going to be moved whether I liked it or not.
In those days you could be a glorious amateur.
You didn't have to be highly professional and experienced like a personnel manager has to be today.
Everything was much freer.
you could use commonsense much more.
You weren't so bound by rules, legislation, case law or anything like that.
Although Haslam's lack of experience was no real handicap at a time when inspired amateurism prevailed, he did not face an easy task.
During the years of World War N and for some time afterwards there had been a heavy demand for commercial and military explosives but by 1960 when Haslam was made personnel  director of the Nobel Division of ICI the demand, particularly for military explosives, had dropped dramatically.
It led to a period of sharp retrenchment and redundancies, a situation that at the time was very foreign to ICi which had been accustomed to unrestricted expansion in practically everything it undertook.
Having never had to face a situation of wholesale redundancies in the past, ICI's policies for dealing with them were out of date and inadequate.
I was about thirty-four when I was made personnel director of the Nobel Division.
I was only in that post for two years, but during that period we closed a lot of works.
In the process we helped to reshape the whole of ICI's redundancy policy and the terms under which people left the company.
Although the terms have continued to be remoulded and made more sophisticated, they basically emanate from that period.
It was a very difficult period, because whereas retrenchment and redundancy are now something employees understand and accept, this was the first time it had ever happened in ICI since the war.
People couldn't believe it.
It was essentially confined to our division.
We were a pioneer of a necessary but very undesirable kind of activity.
Haslam learned the hard way how to handle such a traumatic situation and how to some extent to play God when it became necessary to select the people who had to go.
There are basically two kinds of redundancies.
One is where you shut a works and everybody's in the same boat.
That is an easier situation to handle.
We always tried in ICI to offer people jobs elsewhere in the company whenever we could.
The more difficult situation is where you have to apply some measure of selectivity.
The question of people's status and their standing in the community can thereby be undermined.
The lesson Haslam learned from his ICI experience was that wherever possible redundancy should be on a voluntary basis if the trauma were to be kept to a minimum.
So long as people can walk out of a room and say they have decided to leave on their terms, they retain their dignity.
People argue that by adopting a voluntary approach you lose the good and the bad.
It's primarily a matter of how you do the counselling as to who you lose.
I'm not saying you may not lose a few good people but on balance it's worth that sacrifice rather than pursue an enforced redundancy policy.
Having to make hard decisions involving people is the only thing that gives Haslam sleepless nights.
I don't worry about business in the money sense.
I do worry about having to retire or remove somebody, particularly somebody close to me.
I think that's the most difficult aspect of management.
But you should never take the easy option.
So often in my life, where I've made a mistake, it has been by taking the soft option.
If you rationalise it by saying I don't want a row because I've got so much on my plate, it usually bounces back at you, often in an amplified form.
If you cut corners just for a quiet life, you'll have trouble.
It just builds up.
The next phase of Haslam's career was a totally different experience.
He was plunged into the commercial side of the business, first as deputy regional sales manager for ICI's Southern Region and later — in 1963 — as commercial director of the Plastics Division.
In those days sales of all ICI products were regionalised, a system he felt had shortcomings.
He was a member of a working party which caused ICI to switch to a new approach under which each division took direct control of its own sales.
It was as a result of this new approach that Haslam found himself in the Plastics Division, a more glamorous part of ICI, in contrast to the Nobel Division he had recently left.
At about that time, plastics was one of two ICI divisions that had been selected to come under the scrutiny of McKinsey, the famous management consulting group.
The consultants recommended that the Plastics Division be broken up into four groups, each with its own director.
As a result, Haslam inherited what was then the plastic-film group, which was at an embryonic stage of development.
But  the business was growing very rapidly and expanding abroad.
Haslam soon found himself in a position of having to make entrepreneurial decisions of staggering proportions.
In those days, ICI had a sabbatical system and the chairman of my division went away for nearly four months.
At this stage we were selling about three thousand tons of polyester film a year and my two closest lieutenants, my planning and marketing colleagues, persuaded me we should double the size of the plant at Dumfries in Scotland and that we should build another plant in Europe.
We put these two expansion proposals through the ICI board while the divisional chairman was away.
When he returned, he sent for me and said I must be stark crazy.
He pointed out that we were then selling three thousand tons of the product and had sanctioned plans to build plants for twelve thousand tons.
Well, I went off on holiday to Switzerland and on the way back I suddenly thought: Oh my God, what have I done?
I went up to Scotland where by now they had dug the hole for this second plant and it looked absolutely enormous.
I began to get cold feet, but these other two guys were totally positive and they were absolutely right.
Those two plants came on stream at a time when we needed all the capacity they could provide.
It was a period of risk-taking and setting horizons for growth rates which were different to anything I had experienced before.
By now Haslam was firmly on the management ladder at ICI and his broad experience of a wide variety of jobs and functions under the company's rotation scheme was clearly paying dividends.
People often feel a sense of frustration that they are not moving up quickly enough when they join ICI.
You have to go through a sort of incubation period while people weigh you up.
You are not conscious of them weighing you up, but they do.
The chances are that during the first eight or nine years you may appear to be treading water in the process of proving yourself.
You can have the finest degree in the world, but at the end of the day you are judged as an  individual and on your performance and them things begin to happen.
Some people in ICI still come up by one functional channel and reach the top, but most emerging people get the management development treatment rather like I did.
Running the film group for ICI gave Haslam particular pleasure because it was the first time he had ever been fully in charge of a business, which he found very challenging.
When he was promoted to deputy chairman of the Plastics Division in 1966 he remained in charge of the film group.
But plastics as a whole had started to hit bad times.
Sales of polythene and PVC, which had been two of ICI's mainstay products, had suddenly plummeted.
it was a similar story when Haslam moved to become deputy chairman of ICI Fibres in 1969 with the intention that he would soon take over as chairman.
Fibres had been one of ICI's big money spinners, but by the time Haslam joined the division nylon was already making a loss and polyester was about to collapse, having been a ‘jewel in the crown’.
As the patents had run out on many ICI fibre Products, so competitors had jumped on the bandwagon and started building plants at a frenzied pace.
The inevitable result was over-capacity in the market place followed by a vicious price war.
It was a foregone conclusion that Haslam would for the second time in his career find himself ‘pitch-forked’ into a retrenchment programme.
This time it was on a much larger scale.
The fibres division was an international business with plants in West Germany, Canada, the US, South Africa and Australia.
When he took over ICI Fibres it employed around twenty-seven thousand people in Europe.
He eventually whittled it down to eighteen thousand and his successors have since reduced the number even more dramatically.
The impact of such a major reversal has left an indelible mark on Haslam's memory.
In two years we went from a £32m profit, which I suppose in current rates would be in the region of £150m, to a £14m loss.
So in two years flat, after riding on the crest of a wave, people who had been cock of the walk in ICI suddenly found themselves at the bottom of the league.
This was a time when Haslam learned the subtle art of keeping  up appearances despite the fact that the world seemed to be collapsing all around him.
The most important thing was just physically keeping up the morale.
I had almost consciously to go out of the house in the morning with a smile fixed on my face, keep it on and breathe an air of absolute confidence when I was feeling anything but that way inclined.
It was vital to give the impression at any rate that I and my board colleagues were in control of affairs and that we had a clear strategy that somehow was going to restore our business to its former glory.
Haslam believes this experience taught him the need to recognise that many products follow a predictable life cycle.
First you have a unique product which has a highly profitable phase, but this frequently comes to an abrupt stop.
Patent protection falls away and competitors can't wait to get in.
Everybody thinks they can grab five per cent of everybody else's market without actually losing any of their own.
So everyone expands rapidly and these collective misjudgements create a disaster situation.
It doesn't matter who's running the show.
Anybody who pretends they can buck these trends is under an illusion.
You can only affect them peripherally.
The momentum is there and it's like trying to change the course of a battleship.
The important thing is to recognise that it is happening and take the relevant action.
It can take up to ten years to readjust to this new market situation.
By then the product will have reverted to being a reasonable business again — but not in a glamorous way as in the first phase.
It becomes a ‘cash cow’ business in that you generate a lot of money from existing assets, with minimum investment.
The repercussions of such a turbulent period are not all disadvantageous, however.
Haslam recalls a time when Sir Peter Allen, then the ICI main board director responsible for plastics, predicted at a small dinner party at the ICI guest house  at Welwyn Garden City that the market price for polythene would drop from the current 4s a pound to 1s 6d a pound within six months.
Everyone laughed it off as a typical piece of board-room exaggeration.
But Allen was only wrong in that the price collapsed suddenly to ls a pound.
This, however, had the effect of dramatically expanding the market for polythene.
It immediately became economical to use polythene for all kinds of products, like plastic bags, which nobody had ever contemplated previously.
A host of new opportunities were opened up, once again revitalising the market.
Haslam points oui that such experiences demand a great deal of positive thinking.
It's a period of facing up to radically new cost levels.
That means you've not only got to economise in manpower; you've got to bring new technology to bear on the problem.
Inevitably, too, you will need to build more economical large-scale production units to meet the great new opportunities which have opened up.
Another danger Haslam warns about is the complacency that comes from being a successful innovator.
‘ICI has been the first in the field with major products, such as polyester fibre and polythene.
My impression is that if you invent something, you tend to have a built-in arrogance.
You have a sort of halo around your head.’
But Haslam points out that the competitor who takes up the new technology when the patents expire does not suffer from this halo effect.
Its only aim is to knock the market leader off the pedestal.
The Japanese, of course, are past-masters at this.
The more you make the running in this critical phase, the more you need to become sensitive to future technological and quality advances, because if you don't the other guy is going to leap-frog you.
You can never rest on your laurels.
After having been in the thick of the battle for a number of years, Haslam found the transition to main board director in 1974 somewhat difficult to adjust to.
After running a substantial  international fibres business, it came as something of a cultural shock to find himself sitting in ICI's headquarters with only a secretary to command.
He became the product director on the board for both paints and fibres and also territorial director for
India and Pakistan, but he had to work in each case through the chief executive who was charged with running the business.
Haslam found this a rather passive role compared to running a business himself, so when he was asked to become ICI's personnel director he jumped at the opportunity to tackle a job which appeared to have a higher executive content.
It meant, too, that he would have some troops of his own again.
By this time the personnel function in ICI had ceased to be the domain of inspired amateurs.
Haslam was backed up by a four-man team of senior colleagues, all of whom were highly professional.
One was responsible for industrial relations and union negotiations.
Another looked after the monthly staff employees.
A third was entirely concerned with management development and career planning and the fourth acted as a one-man think-tank, whose task was to advise on how ICI's personnel policies should evolve in future.
It did not bother Haslam that he had to rely to a large degree on the expertise of others to perform his own job well.
I think the art of moving around as I have done in my career into different products and functions and into various industries is the ability to sum up quickly your close colleagues.
You can never hope to achieve the professionalism of those who have been in a single business all their lives and hence you need quickly to get to know those whose opinions you can trust.
These may not always be the people who sparkle a great deal because they often have a maverick quality.
If you are to move about in the senior echelons of industry, this is an important ability to develop.
Some people arc incredibly reactive.
They get into discussion with a neighbour on Concorde going to New York and when they get back they say they've got the finest idea since sliced bread.
Such colleagues tend to be great achievers, but you have to restrain their worst excesses.
I've seen quite brilliant people in ICI who throw off sparkling ideas like an emery wheel, but only one in ten of their ideas is likely to  be viable.
On the other hand, other people display a great sense of diffidence but often have admirable ideas which they are reluctant to reveal.
Such people need drawing out.
Haslam paints the picture of a corporate impresario who recognises the various talents and skills of those around him and orchestrates events so that these talents may be used to the greatest benefit of the enterprise.
But he pinpoints another factor that influences the way the players perform together — company culture.
People talk about the role of chairman or chief executive as though these are clear definitive roles.
These can be very variable depending on the culture of the company.
for example, ICI doesn't have a chief executive and operates on a consensus basis with the chairman acting as a primus inter pares .
We rarely took a vote sitting around the board table.
If there was a strong majority in favour of a particular action, we would go to great lengths to persuade the minority of the error of their ways.
Many other companies have a more autocratic culture in that the chairman and chief executive will have a disproportionate say in what happens.
‘The other board members will expect to have their say, but at the end of the day they expect, and accept, that the chairman should decide.’
The next phase of Haslam's career was one where he moved about from company to company rather than from function to function.
While serving as deputy chairman of ICI he became ill and was advised to take life a little more quietly.
He therefore took on the chairmanship of Tate $ Lyle on a part-time basis.
That was as much as he felt he could cope with for a while, but he was soon to be ‘prevailed upon by government’ to become chairman of British Steel in double harness with the Tate $ Lyle job.
I thought at the time it was a crazy thing to agree to and early events seemed to confirm this.
In the end, it worked out very much better than expected, essentially because the two companies had outstanding chief executives, both of  whom eventually succeeded me as chairman.
But it was still very difficult, because every day I was in London I was moving from one business to the other and they could not have been more different in character.
It was a particularly testing time at British Steel as we were still engaged in the major retrenchment exercise and we also had the very difficult task of keeping the steel mills operating during the miners' strike.
It was during this time, moving from one company to another, that Haslam learned the true meaning of what it is to be an adaptable manager.
These companies all had able and high-calibre people who knew their respective businesses very well, but his objective was to inject his own ideas into the decision-making process in the hope that this would produce an added beneficial dimension.
‘Many companies, however successful, tend to be somewhat inbred and for this reason people often welcome an injection of new thinking into their affairs.’
Whereas Haslam has found that a detached outside perspective has proved to be valuable in several of the companies he has served as a board member, his early intimate knowledge of the coal industry was equally beneficial when he was asked to become chairman of British Coal, bringing his career full circle.
It's amazing, even after a forty-year gap, that I feel I still have a rapport with most mineworkers because of my early days in the industry.
I can also listen to a conversation between mining engineers and understand ninety-five per cent of it, even after all these years.
They've got a particular jargon.
Very occasionally a new phrase disconcertingly emerges which I have never heard before.
Haslam's exposure to the worldwide business scene nevertheless gives him an extra dimension with which to tackle the British Coal job.
The combination of a broad industrial experience and a close understanding of how the typical mineworker views life gave him the confidence to take on a responsibility which a less courageous man might well have ducked.
In a way this job at British Coal is a particularly gruelling  one.
The other side of the coin is that it is very satisfying and rewarding because it stretches me in every possible way.
You've really got to be able to play all the keys on the piano on this one.
It's enjoyable but inevitably has some masochistic undertones!
Haslam admits that being the focal point of all the national publicity that inevitably surrounds the British coal industry is not something that he relishes.
I don't find that easy and never will.
I find TV particularly demanding, but it's almost impossible to avoid it.
I feel reasonably relaxed if I am interviewed on my own ground, but find TV stations rather stressful and alien situations.
With somebody like Mr Scargill, I think you've got to make yourself as available to the media as you can.
L think most people felt that during the early stages of the miners, strike the British Coal balance with Scargill was not strong enough.
It's not a thing I'm particularly good at, but I do try to put over our viewpoint.
As far as the perks of the job are concerned, Haslam looks back at his ICI days with a certain amount of nostalgia.
He travelled widely in those days, often accompanied by his wife, and they lived for two years in the United States where he was responsible for ICI's affairs in North and South America.
Life as the head of
British Coal is a lot less glamorous.
Going to Blackpool or Scarborough is now an adventure.
I get jet-lag flying to Manchester!
My wife and i feel somewhat denied.
Obviously I can go to the US or China to see mining practices there if I choose to, but it's not easy to get away.
I feel more tied down than I've ever been before.
Haslam also feels deprived of some of the cultural facilities that were available to him during his ICI days for entertaining customers and associates.
Like most major private-sector companies ICI has facilities reserved for it at many of the events that dominate the social calendar, such as Glyndebourne, Ascot and Wimbledon.
There are no such privileges for the senior  executives of a nationalised industry like British Coal.
‘I am dependent on people with whom I have been associated in the past inviting me and I must say they could not have been more gracious.’
Despite such curbs on his social life, Haslam rarely spends an evening at home during the week.
He is in such demand as a speaker that he has had to make a rule that he will no longer accept invitations to functions that are unconnected with the coal industry.
The biggest problem is containing the number of speeches you have to give, because despite the fact the industry has contracted, all the institutions that relate to our industry are still flourishing.
A lot of people retire from industry and spend a great deal of effort on these activities.
So the demands on your time to speak at a wide range of institution meetings and dinner functions are legion.
Although Haslam has been obliged to cut back on business travel, he and his wife still do a fair amount of travel for personal pleasure and grab as many long weekends as they can to get away from it all, making flying visits to the Mediterranean.
They have both been occasional golfers, which they still enjoy when on holiday in Spain or Portugal.
But although they live on the edge of Wentworth Golf Course, Lady Haslam prefers gardening when at home.
Looking back on his varied career, Haslam is somewhat guarded about passing on any pet theories on how to manage at the top.
If his successor at British Coal were appointed from within the corporation he considers that it would be impertinent to tell him how the job should be done.
He does, however, have some general advice for anyone coming into British Coal from the outside.
In this industry you've got to be very much an ‘open-door’ person.
You've got to be prepared to listen to a lot of varied opinions about many difficult problems, assess the people who give you those opinions and at the end of the day you've got to be very decisive and determined.
If I analyse the bosses I've worked for, the ones who irritated  me the most were the ones who were indecisive and who constantly asked for more information just to delay making a decision.
When you are appointed a chairman of a nationalised industry, you are given clear objectives by your Secretary of State, and you have to see that your immediate colleagues and indeed the whole team are aware of, and are striving to achieve, these objectives.
In both British Coal and British Steel I have been enormously impressed by the ability and dedication of my colleagues, particularly when one recognises the totally inadequate rewards they receive in comparison with their opposite numbers in the private sector.
Sadly, despite recently introduced performance bonus schemes, this gap is still widening.
It is important to create, as I've tried to do at British Coal, a sense of challenge.
If I look back on the people who have led me very well in the past, it was those who were able to create and sustain just such a sense of challenge.
When I was in the Nobel Division of ICI, the chairman was one of the most diminutive of men.
He was about five-feet tall, but he had an enormous ability to make you feel that you had been given a real challenge and it seemed all-important to discharge it to his satisfaction and he was equally praising of your achievement.
This is true leadership.
You've got to be very conscious too of people's personal problems and relationships.
It is particularly important, whatever their preoccupations, that managers find time to discuss and help with such problems.
In terms of the business they probably don't matter a great deal, but it's very important if you're going to develop the right team spirit.
Sir Hector Laing 
Born: Edinburgh, 1923.
Educated: Loretto School, Scotland; Jesus College, Cambridge.
Sir Hector Laing is chairman of United Biscuits (Holdings) plc, a company capitalised at £1.4 bn that employs thirty thousand people and produces five billion food packets every year — the equivalent to one for every person on earth.
He was knighted in the 1978 New Year's Honours List.
He joined the family firm of McVitie $ Price in 1947 and became chairman in 1963.
He was appointed managing director of United Biscuits in 1964 and took over as chairman in 1972.
He is a director of the Bank of England and of Exon Corporation Inc.
He is chairman of Business in the Community both in Scotland and England, and is joint-chairman of the Per Cent Club, a group of companies that pledge a proportion of their income to the community.
He is governor of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research and a member of the Council for Industry $ Higher Education.
From 1977 to 1979 he was chairman of the Food $ Drink Industries Council.
He is joint-treasurer of the Conservative Party.
There was never a time in Sir Hector Laing's life when it ever occurred to him to work for any other company than the family business, originally called McVitie $ Price and now known as United Biscuits.
He was steeped in the business from an early age.
When only five years old, he used to go into the bakery with his father before school just for fun.
He and his brother would take delight in cutting out oat cakes.
At school he did  ‘extraordinarily badly’ by his own admission and he also failed to obtain a degree in agriculture at Cambridge University, but with his sights firmly fixed on a career in the family business, such academic shortcomings represented no real handicap.
He served with the 3rd Battalion of the Scots Guards during the war, but finally, in 1947, he was able to fulfil his long-cherished ambition to savour company life.
From the very first day I enjoyed it.
There was no doubt in my mind what I would do and I've never regretted going into the business because we've seen it grow enormously.
When I joined the company it was capitalised at about £4m and it is now capitalised at about £1.4bn.
That has all been great fun.
Laing could have added that it is also now a company that employs tens of thousands of people and produces a phenomenal amount of food snacks.
It is best known for its mouth-watering digestive biscuits, but some staggering statistics graphically illustrate the incredible production rate at United Biscuits.
It produces five billion food packets every year; that's one for every single person on earth.
Each week the company produces biscuits equivalent in weight to 1,200 elephants.
If the group's total annual output in biscuits were laid edge to edge, they would stretch twice to the moon and back, or forty-eight times around the equator.
The United Biscuit's chairman could never have guessed in his early days with the firm that it would grow into such a huge food manufacturer.
Then, it only commanded a small proportion of the UK biscuit market.
He started by doing stints in the three main factories in London, Manchester and Edinburgh, often working very long hours.
For a period, he worked in the Manchester factory from 3am until 5pm, going to bed at 7pm so he could get up in time for the next day's duty.
He regards this somewhat gruelling routine as having been a vital part of his training.
Part of the advice one would want to give to any young person today is to thoroughly know your business by working on the factory floor.
I came to understand fully about making biscuits and if you make things right you  have a chance of selling them — as the Japanese have amply demonstrated.
If you fail to make them right, then all the marketing and computers in the world won't help you.
Laing is convinced that businesses which are run by people who have little understanding of the products being made are ultimately doomed to failure.
I think the shoemaker should stick to his last.
Most of the conglomerates which were made up of a disparate collection of businesses have failed.
The best businesses over a long period of time have been the ones with a single thrust.
Ours happens to be food.
It's a wider range of food than when we started, which was only in biscuits.
If you can sell biscuits, you can probably sell crisps, but it doesn't mean to say that if you can sell these you can sell dresses or bicycles.
Although Laing started at the bottom of the ladder, he admits that the fact he and his brother inherited control of the business early on in their careers helped them to climb the hierarchy rather swiftly.
He took over the firm with some very clear ambitions.
In those days it was common for industrialists to go to the United States to learn how major companies should best be run.
The Americans were setting the pace.
Laing wanted to make such a good job of the London factory that the reverse would be the case — that the Americans would want to cross the Atlantic to inspect the exemplary way the British ran things.
Secondly, I wanted to create a factory where nobody would ever have to do any physical work.
We achieved both goals.
From 1953 to 1964 we built up that factory into perhaps the second largest of its kind in the world and certainly the largest and best in Europe.
Laing's desire to reduce physical exertion stemmed from personal experience during his early days on the shop floor.
‘When I started I was carrying flour sacks on my back, digging fat out of boxes, syrup out of barrels, that sort of thing.
We were the first to automate all that.’
He acknowledges, however, that striving for automation brings other problems in its wake.
It tends to make life a bit dull at work and we've tried to come to terms with that.
It also has implications in terms of the number of jobs, in that you need far fewer people.
When I started it was about two hundred people per ton and now we produce five tons an hour with three people.
So it displaces people.
On the other hand, if you're making something the world wants, by making it as the lowest cost supplier, you can usually expand your work-force.
But even if you can't you have to be the lowest cost supplier if you possibly can.
When you are, you've got a good business.
A number of key people influenced Laing during his early impressionable years in the company.
One was his grandfather, whom he describes as,
a compassionate employer — compassionate by those days' standards, not by today's standards.
So one set out with a policy of having good human relations and my friendship with Marcus Sieff (now president of Marks $ Spencer) dating back to 1953 has also had an influence.
I think we both recognised early on — perhaps he before me — the importance of good human relations and our policies have, I believe, been beneficial to both our businesses.
Another mentor Laing remembers with affection was George Miller, who was the sales manager at the London factory, who taught him how important it was to have ‘a main thrust’ in a business.
In our case that was to make a very short list of high-quality biscuits.
Before the war, that factory had made 384 different biscuits.
We cut it to four and those four are still our major selling products and the foundation of our business.
I learned a lot from him and his ability to see what had gone wrong from a sales point of view.
Someone who possibly had more influence on Laing than anyone else was the late Sir Douglas Crawford, formerly chairman of Wm Crawford $ Sons, which became part of United Biscuits in 1962 when Sir Douglas became vice-chairman until his  retirement in 1974.
Laing thought very highly of Sir Douglas, whom he saw as ‘a man of great integrity and absolutely straightforward’.
Crawford taught Laing ‘the value of low cunning and lovable dimness!’
Laing has striven hard over the years to implement the enlightened human relations policies he first learned from his grandfather.
He has, for example, adopted a single-status policy at United Biscuits, which, among other things, ensures that the same company pension scheme applies equally to top management and the rank and file.
I think you have to look after people both at work and when they retire and we inflation-proofed our pension scheme during the whole of that pretty dreadful time when inflation was running at over twenty per cent.
We try to see that conditions at work are such that if I, to make it personal, was working in a particular factory, I would find them as congenial as they could reasonably be.
I think if one looks at life and says: ‘If I was doing that job, what are the conditions I would like to work in?’, and then put them into operation, people will probably think it's about right.
Laing has never felt that being a compassionate employer has been at odds with doing the right thing commercially.
Even when it is necessary to close down factories it can be done with compassion, in his view.
‘You've got to have a work-force that believes in you.
Therefore, you've got to give it leadership and you've got to be seen.
I think a business can hardly fail if it's got that sort of spirit.
If the work-force is working against you, it can hardly win.’
These beliefs were put to the test when United Biscuits was obliged to close one of its main factories in Liverpool.
It was a ghastly thing to have to do — in Liverpool of all places.
We took four years to do it, partly so people would get accustomed to the idea, and it was fantastic that during those four years people worked at least as hard and as well as they had in the previous four.
We tried every way to find them alternative jobs.
The pending closure fell foul of the Church, however, and Laing was confronted with a deputation of protesting bishops.
They said what I was doing was terrible and in a way, from the people's point of view, it was.
But we employ thirty thousand people and therefore one has to look after the majority, however hard it may be on a relatively few — one thousand people in that particular case.
But it's not something one enjoys doing.
In Laing's opinion, a manager becomes increasingly sensitive to the needs of others as he gets older and more experienced.
When one is young and brash — and I think I was brash — one is inclined to brush people aside because you know what you want and you are determined to get it, whereas when one has seen some of the problems of the world, I think one is probably more tolerant.
Motivating employees is another issue to which Laing has given much thought.
‘Choose people well, train them well, give them their heads, but you have to monitor their performance as well,, he advises.
‘I'm a great delegator, but it is important to delegate to those who are capable of carrying through the task and you must have a good report-back system.’
Communicating well to the troops is another important aspect of senior management, in Laing's opinion.
He cites the example shown by Viscount Montgomery in World War N. Laing, who fought under the famous military leader, recalls that the troops always had great confidence in him because he was very visible.
He told us what he was going to do and we knew some people were going to get killed, but that's just life.
It's the same with closing a factory.
Some are going to have to go.
But if you see the top man around the business you are able to look him in the eye and tell whether you can trust him or not.
Laing has applied the Montgomery approach to business.
We employ 30,000 people in the UK business and I speak  to 15,000 of them every year in groups of 200 or less, because I think the Japanese have shown what good human relations can achieve.
Too many managers in this country want to sit in their offices and write memos.
If people can see that you know your job, that you work probably harder than they do, that you communicate with them and tell them what you're doing, they will respect you.
They may not like you, but they will respect you and they will work well for you.
Laing has developed some rather unconventional methods for communicating to his troops.
He used to go around with a jug of orange juice to drum home to people that it is impossible to earn more unless more is produced.
I used to pour the orange juice, which represented the added value in our products, into four separate glasses.
I poured 70 per cent of it into a glass representing the wages paid to those of us who work in the business, 20 per cent into a glass representing what was ploughed back by way of reinvestment in plant and machinery, 5 per cent into a glass representing dividends and 5 per cent into a glass representing tax.
What I tried to teach people was that if we didn't increase the added value, but took more of it and put it in our pockets, the only place we could take it from was the glass marked reinvestment and that makes people unemployed quicker than anything — and permanently.
I think perhaps on the whole people understand that better than they used to.
He maintains there are no short cuts to managing effectively.
‘The work-force can pick out a fraud very easily or someone who's just glossing things over.
It's much better to look people in the eye and tell them the truth.’
In Laing's view, getting to the top in management by climbing up through the ranks is fifty per cent luck, but when the opportunities present themselves, they have to be grasped, and that often requires courage.
The person who never takes risks never achieves anything in his view.
One of his favourite sayings is that:
The man who never makes a mistake works for somebody who does.
There's got to be an element of the entrepreneur.
You've got to be ambitious, not necessarily for yourself, but for your company to be among the best in the world and you've got to strive to get it there.
You've got to ensure that your products are really first class and you have to have first-class people at every level.
Then you have a first-class business.
Laing has never had any problems about getting to grips with long-term strategy.
It is not always possible to give adequate thought to the future when caught up in the day-to-day running of an operation, but if you live the business, as Sir Hector unashamedly does, there are always less hectic times to mull over major issues.
He tends to ponder on such weighty matters in the bath or while gardening.
One of the issues that called for more profound thought than usual was the direction United Biscuits should take after its products had come to command the lion's share of the market and couldn't be expected to squeeze out many more sales.
When I started we only had about five per cent of the biscuit trade.
We now have close on fifty per cent.
When you saw that happening you realised you had to go into other things.
The other thing that is important is that I don't think you can get anything on the cheap.
Therefore, if you really want to move the business forward and make it a great business, you've got to live it.
I tell the young people joining us that the great division in their lives, if they climb in the business, is the division between the company and their family.
If they're not very careful, the family will lose out every time and that causes a lot of problems in our society.
I think you've got to be fair about how much time you give the family.
I ask nobody to work seven days a week or twelve hours a day, except in very limited periods when we all have to.
Laing has often been accused of being a workaholic himself, but he denies it.
He has an understanding with his wife that weekends are sacrosanct and the couple always enjoy six weeks'  holiday together every year.
‘That's not to say when you're gardening or on holiday that the wheels stop turning and you don't have any ideas.’
Laing's favourite technique for resolving major business problems is to ‘chew things over’.
Unlike many top executives, he doesn't believe in committing thorny issues to paper.
He prefers instead to hold meetings with his colleagues and to talk things through until a solution emerges.
I will sometimes arrange to discuss things on three successive Mondays, for example, or three successive months perhaps, because you never have to take a quick decision in a business, and out of the talking with people who respond to your way of working the right answer very often comes — the decisions mostly take themselves.
One of the few occasions that United Biscuits ever took a hasty decision was when it bought a company in Spain at a time when it felt under pressure to expand into Europe.
It was before Spain had joined the Common Market and United Biscuits' efforts to acquire a suitable company in one of the EEC countries had come to nought.
Laing admits that the Spanish company was bought out of desperation and it cost United Biscuits dearly.
We regretted the decision for the next ten years.
It taught me the lesson that you should never do something because you feel you've got to.
You should wait until the right opportunity comes along.
You should look for the right company if you're intending to buy one, the right situation in the right country and then move quickly.
But don't just jump in because you feel you've got to.
The top executive who is constantly looking ahead rather than backwards will rarely steer his company into a tight corner, in Laing's view.
He suggests the top man should repeatedly be asking himself: ‘What if…?’
Because if you don't say ‘What if?’ you'll be saying: ‘If only…’
Laing points out that this approach generates a lot of ideas, many of which will be worthless, as happens in a brainstorming session.
But, he maintains, if you don't throw up a lot of worthless ideas you are unlikely to come up with sensible ones either.
Laing pauses to collect his thoughts when considering what was perhaps the most difficult decision of his long career.
He eventually concludes that it involved another acquisition — this time the American firm of Keebler in 1974.
We paid over $50m for it, and that, for a small British company in those days going into a market where British companies hadn't been notably successful, was seen as a very big commitment.
Our shares plummeted because the City felt we had taken a great risk.
But it turned out to be one of the most marvellous things we ever did.
It has done so much for us.
Not only has it made a very good profit, but getting a bit of the American ethos into the business has been a good thing as well.
He was, however, disappointed when in 1985 a planned merger with the Imperial Group failed to go ahead.
The merger would have resulted in by far Britain's largest food company and placed it among the world league of major food groups, capitalised at around £5bn.
But the grand design was torpedoed when Lord Hanson made a bid for Imperial that shareholders found impossible to resist.
The government also intervened on the grounds that a small part of the proposed merger, relating to the crisp business, contravened the monopolies law.
The idea behind trying to get together with Imperial was to create a world-size food company with, as it happened, tobacco money to back it up, because the cashflow from tobacco is much more than the tobacco business actually requires to sustain it.
I was going to be chairman and chief executive and Bob Clarke, my chief executive, was going to run the food side.
That seemed to me to be a nice balance — good for our shareholders, good for our company and good for the country, as I saw it.
Laing does not blame the shareholders for opting for the Hanson offer.
But as far as Great Britain Ltd was concerned and building a food industry that would have a major part to play  in China and Brazil and other developing countries, I was sorry the shareholders took the view that they did.
What I do criticise is the City taking a short-term view.
I find it galling that they seem to keep looking for jam today.
We are not going to establish British companies across Europe, let alone across the world, if our monopolies legislation disallows mergers of major companies within one industry — the only way they are going to be strong enough to do it.
The problem is compounded when we allow our leading businesses — Rowntree and perhaps Cadbury's and others — to be bought up by foreign predators so that our muscle is destroyed.
Anyone running a major company in Britain today needs to be keenly aware of the international scene in Laing's opinion.
We are only fifty million people in this country and if you're going to run a decent-size business at all, you need to be looking at the horizon.
This may sound harsh, but it seems to me that when we lost our empire our eyes came down from the horizon and looked at our feet.
Since 1979 we have just begun to have confidence in ourselves to raise our eyes to the horizon again.
If we had paid more attention to what the Japanese were doing we would perhaps not be so subject to their products as we are.
Laing broadens his horizons by travelling a lot and by taking part in a large number of outside activities.
‘I think you should get to know as many people as you can the further up the business you are,’ he says.
He travels to the US at least once a month and enjoys getting out and about.
‘I travel in comfort,’ he adds to explain why he finds it less of a hassle than many businessmen.
‘I travel first class and I take Concorde whenever I can.
I think it's important to keep your eyes open.
It's not enough to say that things can be done differently or better.
You have to see them first hand.
I suppose it's called ‘Management by Walking About’.’
As a director of the Bank of England, Laing, who confesses that finance has never been his strong point, broadens his horizons on  the economic front.
While he could equally get the information from other sources, he finds that ‘going there every week, you hear about what's going on, which is a great help.’
Laing has some strong convictions about the role major companies should play in the community as a whole.
He is chairman of Business in the Community and of the Scottish BIC, an organisation that supports enterprise agencies and arranges the secondment of experienced senior executives to fledgling small firms.
He believes that the financial support companies give to charitable works can, and should, be quantified.
To do something concrete in this direction, Laing hit on the idea of forming what he wanted to call the One Per Cent Club, all the corporate members of which would pledge one per cent of their UK pre-tax income to the community.
Unable to persuade other firms to commit to such a specific amount, he arrived at a compromise by forming the Per Cent Club, which has 120 corporate members giving not less than a half per cent of their annual UK pre-tax income to the community.
United Biscuits have pledged a one per cent contribution, which in 1988 amounted to £1m.
Critics of the idea argue that companies can achieve the same purpose by paying out good dividends, but Laing questions whether much of this money finds its way back into the community.
When I was a youngster much charitable giving came from wealthy families.
As they became progressively more heavily taxed, that responsibility, instead of going to companies, went to government and government has been seen to do it very badly.
So we are now getting it back into the corporate sector.
Laing feels strongly that the chief executive of a company should define, as he has done at United Biscuits, exactly what its responsibilities to the community are.
He should make it known within the company that this is one of his priorities, that the whole board supports it and that a percentage of the profits should be devoted to it.
Not only do we do that at United Biscuits, we also second one manager for every two thousand employees.
So we've got  fifteen to sixteen managers seconded to various bodies in this country that need help.
Laing rejects the view held by some people that managers from major corporations are unsuitable for giving advice to small firms because they live in two different worlds.
If you take one of our accountants who might spend a day a month with a small business, the fact that the business is small and we're big doesn't matter at all.
The governing factors, whether it be marketing or computers or finance, are the same for a big or small company.
The scale of the problems will be different, but a chap who can run ICI, if he can be bothered to help a small business, will do it very well from his experience.
Laing accepts that to some extent he was born with a silver spoon in his mouth.
‘I've never had a money worry,’ he admits in all honesty,
and of course that's very lucky, but it's also a responsibility.
It's what you do with the money that counts.
In a lot of families, if you've plenty of money when you're young you question the necessity of work.
My ethos was I've got a lot of money, but I've got to look after the people as far as I can who have helped to produce it and I am going to make it grow bigger for our successors.
The oak tree has got to grow all the time.
‘That probably sounds pompous,’ adds Laing apologetically, reflecting on what he had just said.
‘I love our business and I take great pride in it.
I was lucky being a major shareholder.
Of course my salary is important to me, but it doesn't give me my life style.
That has come from the family.’
Inheriting wealth has not led Laing into a flamboyant lifestyle by any means.
His two concessions to luxury appear to be a passion for fast cars — he is the proud owner of a turbo-Bentley — and a 5,000 acre estate in Scotland.
Apart from that, his life is devoid of ostentation.
‘What my wife and I really like doing are the very simple things, like gardening and walking,’ he adds.
‘We go abroad for a week or ten days every year, but I think we have a very simple life compared with many.
We don't have luxury yachts or go to expensive hotels all the time.’
Laing also has very modest tastes in food.
He favours the plain dishes when eating at home, such as a plate of mince, sardines, spaghetti or bacon and eggs.
‘But every now and again it's jolly nice to go out and have an absolutely top-class meal in a super restaurant,’ he adds with relish.
Laing acknowledges that the up-and-coming generation of managers are faced with a much faster-paced world than operated in most of his life, but he is not convinced it is any more difficult to be an executive today than in the past.
He points to the fact that the Atlantic can now be crossed in three and a half hours as indisputable evidence that the pace has hotted up, but in his view, the next generation will assimilate such changes.
It's interesting that if you have a machine wrapping biscuits at 50 a minute and it is increased to 70 a minute, the operators who have been doing it at 50 find it very difficult to adapt, but the new operators who come in at 70 cope with it easily.
It's just like young people today dealing with computers.
They are all growing up with the computer effortlessly.
The United Biscuits chairman is, however, concerned that today's executive finds himself working in a business environment that appears to be in danger of moral decline.
He recently drew up an ethics policy for United Biscuits, which he expects all his managers to endorse, because ‘as a business becomes bigger and bigger — we now have operations in Japan, America and Belgium as well as the UK — I think the family ethics drawn up by the founders can gradually get eroded or watered down.’
Another concern of Laing's is the shift from private to institutional shareholders.
Fund managers are intent on doing their best for their funds and have no interest whatsoever in the businesses they invest in or the people who are producing the profits.
I am not saying this is universal, of course, but I think the pressure from the City on industry to maximise profits tends to make them take short cuts.
One reason I have written  this code of ethics is that no one has to take short cuts ever.
You have to keep the City informed about what's going on, but I think you can run a business — and I hope we do — to the highest moral standards whether it's today or in the 1900s.
Laing feels the problem is exacerbated by the tendency today for the corporate world to live in the short term.
In the UK and the US a company's financial performance is judged at quarterly intervals.
Laing believes that countries like Japan and West Germany which take a more long-term attitude to performance are less subjected to such pressures.
I believe in a competitive world, but at the same time I think we have got to be laying sound foundations for future growth and if we are constantly pressured into satisfying stock-market expectations, which are short-term, or under threat of take-over, we will not be investing enough for the long-term development of our businesses.
Laing is convinced that the future generation of managers need have no fear of what lays in store from the so-called post-industrial society.
He simply doesn't believe in it.
‘I've heard it said that we are going to be a service economy.
Well, we can't be a service economy because that doesn't actually make anything.’
Rather, Laing believes the UK has got to reassert itself as a manufacturing economy.
Make what the world wants and the world will come for it.
Look at the mess British Steel got into.
It's now one of the best steel companies in the world.
The errors we made in the 1960s and 1970s can, and are, being corrected.
OK, give it ten years and perhaps only 20 per cent will be producing what 60 per cent or 70 per cent were twenty-five years ago.
We can go on producing more and more with less and less people.
I can see the day when our London factory will be totally automatic.
This, Laing believes, will demand an entirely different approach to work with the emphasis on flexibility.
I'm going to say something which the Church won't like — and I go to church every Sunday.
Our plants have got to work seven days a week, but with people working a four-day week.
Or you can forget the week as a unit of work altogether and you can say: ‘I will contract you for a certain number of hours.’
The company has then got to say: ‘If you want to take three months’ holiday, good luck to you provided the contracted hours are worked.’
The plants have got to keep going, but I think we can make working hours much more flexible.
Laing would also like to see a fundamental reappraisal of the way unions operate.
‘1 would like to see the union structure changed totally,’ he says uncompromisingly.
We don't want trades unions, we want unions.
The food industry should have one union, just like in Japan and West Germany — and then totally flexible hours.
I think you could play so many tunes on it that not only would we be producing much more efficiently and economically, but people could have a better quality of life too.
Giving employees a greater say in how their companies operate could be an important step towards such a goal, but Laing is opposed to the appointment of worker directors, as is the practice in Scandinavia.
‘I think everybody who joins a company in any capacity should, if he's got the capability, be able to reach board level.
But I don't think you should just appoint somebody and say he's a worker director.
I just don't believe in that.’
Laing firmly believes, however, in assisted share purchase and profit-sharing schemes, which give all employees the opportunity to share in a company's financial achievements.
He also maintains that if the brain drain is to be halted there needs to be an upward hike in salaries in Britain.
While he considers that salaries in the City have grown out of all proportion, he is convinced that corporate managers are falling behind in the remuneration they receive.
If we want to keep the best scientists and the best engineers in this country, we'd better do two things: we'd better attract  them with good pay and we'd better train them right and give them the proper facilities.
As we become richer as a country we shall be able to do all these things.
We did get damn poor, you know.
Laing still has one outstanding ambition before he retires.
Having seen United Biscuits ‘gain a toehold in Brazil’, he would like to see the company expand into China.
He faces the prospect of retirement with the same level-headed commonsense approach with which he has tackled most of the issues that have confronted him in his long career.
I have been in the company forty years.
I've been chief executive and/or chairman for twenty-five years and the tendency is to think you're indispensable and you have to stay on until you're seventy-five, as some people do.
I think one wants to go at a time when people still want you to stay, rather than stay until people want you to go.
If you've been pretty dominant in a company I don't think you know when that time has actually arrived.
So I shall go when people rather wished I stayed in a way.
But it's your responsibility to see that your successors are properly groomed to take over.
But there's no question of Laing fading completely from the corporate scene.
I'm not going to sit back and watch TV.
In retirement I hope my company will provide me with an office and a secretary, so that I can go on contributing to society from my experience.
I would like to work on lots of things in the inner cities and the community.
Sir Austin Pearce
Born: Plymouth, Devon, 1921.
Educated: Devonport High School.
Birmingham University.
Sir Austin Pearce is a former chairman of Esso Petroleum Co and British Aerospace.
He was knighted in 1980.
He joined AGWI Petroleum Co, later to become Esso, in 1945 as a technical assistant at Fawley Refinery.
He became managing director of Esso in 1968 and was chairman from 1972 to 1980.
He was president of the Institute of Petroleum from 1968 to 1970 and president of the UK Petroleum Industries Association from 1979 to 1980.
In 1976 he became a member of the organising committee charged with the responsibility of welding a disparate group of UK aircraft companies into the nationalised British Aerospace group.
Four years later, as chairman of BAe, he was asked by the government to prepare the group for privatisation.
From 1982 to 1983, he was president of the Society of British Aerospace Companies.
He is vice-chairman of the Royal Bank of Scotland and was chairman of Williams $ Glyn's Bank from 1983 to 1985.
He is chairman of Oxford Instruments Group and a nonexecutive director of Pearl Group, Jaguar and Smiths Industries.
He was a member of the President's Advisory Committee of the Confederation of British Industry from 1982 to 1988 and is currently a member of the Takeover Panel.
In addition, he is chairman of the trustees of the Science museum and pro-chancellor of Surrey University.
Someone once asked Sir Austin Pearce when he first decided to become chairman of Esso.
He answered that it was when the job  was offered to him.
His entire career in industry seems to have been a series of opportunities seized with relish.
Not for him the carefully charted route to the top.
‘If I'm given a challenge I have to have a go at it,’ he admits, reflecting on the guiding principles that have taken him to the top of two major industries.
‘I've had a number of opportunities and taking them, particularly in the oil industry, has sometimes been a desperate gamble.’
His eyes light up at the recollection of some of the challenges he has tackled that would have daunted the more faint-hearted.
There was one classic occasion when the flare went out at Fawley refinery.
It burned at the top of a 25Oft stack and we tried all sorts of things to get it to light again.
In the end there was only one way of doing it and that was climbing up there with a match and a long piece of wire.
A fitter and I went up and did just that.
I wouldn't do it today.
Just think what could have happened.
It could have turned us into a cinder.
When he retired as chairman of British Aerospace in the summer of 1987, Pearce had spent forty-two years in industry, all but ten weeks in management, which must make him something of an authority on the subject.
He also underwent the unique experience of being asked by successive governments to take a hand in both the nationalisation of British Aerospace and its subsequent return to the private sector.
He has thus learned what qualities are necessary to run a business both under the bureaucratic yoke of government red tape and in the cut and thrust of the world of international competition.
Yet he started his career with a very modest ambition.
In his last year at Devonport High School in Plymouth he set himself the aim of finding a job which would earn him £5 a week, because up to that time, his father, a Westcountryman, had never achieved such a princely sum.
It seemed to Pearce that the best way to gain his goal was to go into the Civil Service, which was the career that most of the more successful pupils from his school tended ti follow.
‘I was under pressure from my grandfather to become a teacher and that's the last thing I wanted to be.
I knew quite a number of people who had gone into the Civil Service and it seemed a good thing to get into.’
Ironically, fate intervened and he never did make that his career, which is probably just as well, since when he was given the task many years later of steering British Aerospace into the private sector he crossed swords with more than a few civil servants and didn't have a lot of time for them.
The reason he never became one himself is very simple.
Germany marched into Poland on his eighteenth birthday and the Civil Service entrance examination he was scheduled to take was cancelled.
He was then left with two alternatives — going into the forces or to university.
He was advised by his teacher to choose the latter and it was suggested that he should go to Oxford and read chemistry.
He applied for, and won, several scholarships, but was particularly attracted to a scholarship in oil engineering that was on offer from Birmingham University.
His teachers at his Plymouth school threw scorn on the idea of going to a redbrick university when he could have chosen Oxford, but he felt a strong pull towards oil engineering and displayed the stubborn streak that was later to characterise his industrial career.
I read oil engineering which was primarily on the production side and out of a course of thirteen, I was the only one who was interested in the chemical side of it — the refining side.
I just loved the idea of being able to use my chemistry in the design side of things.
The two things just clicked.
His research work at the university's petroleum warfare department led indirectly to him joining Esso, and within weeks he was faced with one of the many challenges that were to punctuate his rise to the top of the industry.
Because of the nature of his studies he was sent to work at the Esso refinery at Fawley.
‘I joined the refinery straight from university, never having been anywhere near the place before, and within ten weeks I was actually in charge of my own shift.
I was certainly plunged into the deep end.’
But he couldn't resist the challenge.
The way people tackle things is very much the influence of their background and each will achieve things in different ways.
I suppose one of the key factors of my whole industrial career has been that if an opportunity comes up, I grab it.
It could be argued that on occasions I've taken on things which probably I haven't done as well out of financially as I might have done if I'd done something else.
But to me the excitement of the job is so much that if something comes along, I don't think twice.
Accepting the refinery job meant that Pearce was able to exceed his £5 a week goal by £1, but it was still a meagre wage for the amount of responsibility he shouldered.
In 1945 I was paid £6 a week.
I had a PhD.
I was in charge of a refinery on my own.
I was the lowest paid person on the refinery.
But the experience I had was fantastic and it didn't take long before my salary was considerably more than that.
If I hadn't taken that opportunity I'm sure I would never have done the things I later did in the refinery business.
He had no burning ambition to climb to the upper reaches of management in those early days, however.
He recalls vividly being told shortly after he took the job at Fawley refinery that an Esso director would be calling to see him.
He had to ask what exactly a director was.
But the lessons he learned from those formative years were to stand him in good stead later on when he was to understand what it meant to be a director from first-hand experience.
When I was put in charge of the start-up at Fawley at the ripe old age of twenty-nine most of my team were people who were twenty years older than I was and being on shift with a lot of operating people taught me the problems and the realisation that I could learn a hell of a lot from them — the realisation that the chap on the shop floor usually knows far more about what's going on than management does.
It also taught him the importance of training.
He discovered that learning could be a two-way process.
He had a lot to learn about operating methods from the people on the shop floor, but he could also pass on to them the fruits of his university education.
He discovered, for example, that laboratory technicians at Fawley were carrying out chemical tests without really  understanding what it was they were doing.
Pearce offered to fill in the gaps in their knowledge.
At about 2am I used to go up to the lab.
It was a quiet time and I would sit these fellows down for half an hour and take them through what they were doing.
They were then prepared to help me.
I was green at my job and some of them had been around twenty-five to thirty years doing this sort of work.
I learned an awful lot from them.
Pearce is convinced the experience of those early years had important universal lessons of which any young graduate entering industry today ought to take heed.
I believe any young graduate would get an awful lot of value from working with people on the shop floor.
A lot of people today say it's not necessary.
I'm afraid we have a lot of people in top management today whose background is such that they don't really get involved with people on the shop floor.
I'm talking in the manufacturing sense.
Of course a lot of industries today are changing and they don't have as many people on the shop floor anyway and you have many more people who are systems analysts and people like that.
But I think it s very important top management should get to know some of the problems those people have too, because if they're not doing it right, the company could be in trouble.
But this depends very much on your personality.
Some people are very good at it; some people aren't.
Some people communicate easily; some don't.
In some respects, you have to determine what your strong characteristics are and then use them.
In Pearce's experience it is easy for top management to become remote from the shop floor and lose contact with the centre of operations.
It's just the pressure you work under.
The things you have to do make it progressively more and more difficult for you to really get around and see what's going on in your factories.
Take British Aerospace with its twenty different locations.
Each of them requires a complete day out to go and visit them and it's very difficult to find a complete day because there are so many other things, so many other demands on your time.
I would have loved to have spent more time out there where the action is, but it just wasn't practical.
Pearce nevertheless made a point of visiting every single British Aerospace factory at one time or another during his seven years as chairman, some of them more than once.
As Pearce progressed in his career, he found that there was a discernible shift in his management priorities.
As a refinery supervisor or a supervisor out in one of the British Aerospace factories, you have to get things out that day.
There, you're concentrating on getting the job done.
It's much more of a hands-on style.
The further up the line you get, the longer your time horizon becomes.
As a chairman, I didn't have to worry about finding a particular part to put in a piece of kit to make it work.
But I did have to worry about whether we were going to have the cash flow in ten years' time to make sure that the parts can be paid for so the chap on the shop floor can stick the thing together.
Pearce considers that one of the main priorities of any top executive should be to develop the managers under him.
One of his great disappointments at British Aerospace, he confesses, was that:
I was not successful in getting the system going as I would really have liked.
This was because there are so many old Spanish customs within the company and rigidities of thinking which take a hell of a lot of changing when you're talking about people.
Since I've understood what management was about — I suppose that must have been back in the early 1950s — I've had the philosophy that if I go into a job I must do it better than the bloke who's been doing it before me.
I've also adopted the philosophy that I must develop somebody to do my job better than I have done it.
I don't always succeed in doing that.
Pearce could have done with more than the seven years he had at British Aerospace to achieve the kind of management culture he would have liked to have bequeathed to the company.
But he has little hesitation in declaring that his successor as chairman of Esso has done a better job than he was able to achieve.
Unashamedly blowing his own trumpet, he also considers that many of the people he selected for management roles in Esso are doing a better job than the people before them.
‘They're better trained, better educated.
They have many more management techniques, which we didn't have — which we've given them — and of course they've got new ideas coming along as well., Pearce's own progression within Esso was a series of the grasped opportunities he talks about enthusiastically.
He next became assistant refinery manager and was then promoted to general manager over the head of a friend and colleague who was ten years older.
There was a momentary hesitation while he considered the implications, but it was one of the many challenges he couldn't let go.
He held the job for five years and became heavily involved in building Esso's Milford Haven refinery and the new Irish refinery.
Then one day he was sent for by the refining director and given twenty-four hours to make up his mind about a posting to the United States.
He had been earmarked for senior management and his posting to the US was intended to serve a double purpose.
It would give the American parent group a chance to examine his potential at close quarters and at the same time he would be able to undergo some training to prepare him for the more elevated positions he was destined to occupy in future.
Despite the domestic chaos caused from being given such short notice, Pearce again rose to the challenge and had moved with his family to the US within six weeks.
But he found that the job that awaited him there was several rungs lower than the job he had been holding down in the UK.
He astounded his American masters by demanding that they give him a more worthwhile job or he would be on his way home.
He ended up as a departmental head with two other jobs besides.
When he returned to the UK he was eventually appointed to the board, but not, as might have been expected, in charge of the refinery side of the business.
He was made responsible for marine operations, an area of the business totally new to him.
Pearce pauses for reflection when asked to define the qualities which took him to the top with such apparent ease.
But he seems to have no doubts about his answer:
I think there's got to be determination, consistency, the ability to listen to other people and then make your mind up and stick to it.
You can do that in a variety of ways.
Some people would do it in a very extrovert way.
That's not my way of doing it.
I prefer to work quietly behind the scenes.
Usually, I know exactly what I want, but it is much better if you can get other people to do it and let them take the credit.
I think I can say that during my career most of the things I've decided ought to be done, I've got done, but I've done them in very different ways to other people and sometimes I've been criticised for not going out and grabbing the headlines.
That's not me.
Engineering change through quiet persuasion nevertheless requires clear-cut goals and a strong sense of direction.
Pearce lists these as two important qualities for a top manager together with being able to look at a problem and see the two or three key factors.
‘You have to say ‘to hell with the rest of it; that's what you've got to deal with’.’
This was precisely the approach Pearce adopted when he was asked by the Conservative Government to become chairman of British Aerospace in 1980 to prepare it for privatisation.
Ironically, five years earlier he had been asked by Eric Varley, the Labour Government's Energy Secretary, to serve on the committee for overseeing the nationalisation of the company.
He was very clear in his mind, however, about what steps needed to be taken to make the company fit for the private sector.
‘One was we had to take an international outlook rather than being a purely British company.
The other was trying to find a mechanism to sell more., Another example of the ability to see the wood from the trees can be drawn from the time he was asked to take charge of Esso's marine operations.
When I took on the marine operations every ship had a fiftyfour man crew and it seemed to me that this was inefficient, so I did a trip on a ship and I came back quite convinced you could actually run a ship with twenty-one men.
You also had to maintain things, so I came up with the figure of thirty-one.
Everyone in the whole marine department just threw up their hands in horror and told me I was crazy, I didn't know the first thing about ships, the whole marine fleet would fall apart.
I also wanted to get the organisation out of London down to Fawley, which is where you have the ships.
You can't get many into London!
Again, by exercising his powers of persuasion and sticking to his guns, Pearce's view prevailed and he succeeded in both aims.
I suppose I've been lucky with my training, having been an engineer.
I could look at all these things and say that's just not the right way to do it.
It would be better for doing it this way.
And you've got to be stubborn.
There's no question about it.
Part of the reason Pearce decided to accept the request to head up British Aerospace was that he had been thirty-five years with Esso, eight as chairman.
He welcomed the opportunity to move to a British company and he felt in any case that eight years was probably long enough at the top of any major company.
That, in his view, is long enough to be able to come up with new ideas and see them implemented.
After that, a top executive tends to get stale, in Pearce's opinion, because ‘you're seeing the same problems coming up for the second, third or even fourth time and you begin to think you've done it all before.
But you haven't because the world's changed.’
He was advised not to overstay his tenure at the head of Esso in unusual circumstances.
It happened while he was still managing director of the company in charge of the fleet.
A new tanker, the Esso Northumbria , the first of its kind, was being launched by Princess Anne at her first public engagement.
When the ceremony was over, Pearce was the last to leave the boatyard at Newcastle.
He climbed into the bus that was taking him and the company's guests back to the hotel and he sat next to someone he did not recognise in the only seat left vacant.
This person turned to him and asked how old he was.
Pearce  said he was forty-nine.
The stranger predicted Pearce would be chairman by the time he was fifty.
Pearce expressed surprise and said that this was the first he had heard of it.
The stranger asked him to promise one thing: ‘Don't stay in the job for more than ten years, because you'll get stale.
You won't be doing a good thing either for yourself or your company.’
The man who offered this piece of advice turned out to be Lord Cole, who was chairman of Unilever at the time and went on to be chairman of Rolls-Royce and several other major companies.
Pearce laughs heartily at the recollection.
But he has heeded the advice.
As a general rule ten years is long enough, but of course it depends on the individual and it depends on the company too.
If you are running your own company which you own and have built up from scratch you have a different approach to somebody like myself who's a professional manager.
That's what I am, let's face it.
It doesn't matter whether I like it or not; it's a fact of life.
I didn't own the companies I worked for.
I've got a few shares in British Aerospace, but nobody would notice if I sold them all.
Pearce believes a professional manager can be equally successful at running a variety of companies, but he needs to be selective about the switches he makes.
I could switch from oil, which has a chemical background, to the chemical industry.
I think I could go to the food industry or to the brewing industry.
I'm an engineer by training, so I could move into something like British Aerospace.
But could I switch to be chairman of Burtons, for example?
That's a very different sort of activity.
It's possible but it would not be a very natural switch.
Pearce's switch to British Aerospace was helped by the fact that he had been a non-executive director of the aerospace company for three years prior to the move.
But being a nationalised company the chairman's salary was fixed and the £80,000 annual remuneration Pearce was receiving as chairman of Esso was cut in half overnight.
He did have the advantage, however, of pursuing a single specific goal — that of taking the company through privatisation.
Although he had helped to set up British Aerospace as a nationalised company, he was convinced it could not take on the huge rival plane-makers in the United States unless it was unfettered from government control.
Basically, my objective was to ensure that British Aerospace stayed in business somehow.
I had agreed with the necessity of BAC and Hawker Siddeley being put together in one company, but having a nationalised company that involved a lot of civil servants and politicians was a ghastly inefficient way of doing things.
A lot of people involved, a number of ministers and most of the civil servants, were delightful people, very charming people, but they weren't trained to run an organisation.
They didn't think in the right way.
It was unfair to them, quite frankly.
There were quite a few battles before Pearce got British Aerospace on the road to privatisation, particularly with civil servants and ‘officials who were not really responsible, but tended to sit on the sidelines criticising and always coming up with a reason why you couldn't do anything.’
Positive thinking is another cause Pearce has always tried to promote.
If you produce a proposal, the first thing a lot of British engineers will do is tell you what's wrong with it.
That, I regret, is a British characteristic.
I wish they would adopt the positive principle of looking at something and seeing the good in it — seeing how it can be improved by building up the positive aspects.
The British engineer tends to look at something and knock it down.
Pearce also met with a considerable degree of resistance from within British Aerospace in his efforts to steer it through privatisation.
There were individual factory loyalties and there were divisional loyalties and it had been a pretty cosy relationship between the organisation and the Ministry of Defence.
So  why destroy it?
It's very important for a chairman or chief executive to recognise that the world is going to change.
A lot of people just think by definition the world is going to carry on as it is today, but it doesn't.
You've got to try and guess what's going to happen in three, four or five years' time.
The chairman of a company like British Aerospace has to anticipate change on a global scale.
He has to look at everything from an international perspective.
For Pearce, with his strong belief in personal contacts, that has meant a lot of travel to different parts of the world.
It has also meant visiting customers worldwide, but he admits that his greatest pleasure came from meeting the company's own employees around the globe.
I had to meet customers and politicians and people like that, but the greatest thrill for me is meeting our own people, letting then know we hadn't forgotten them and getting ideas from them, hearing what they think about the company and things like that.
That involved a fair amount of travel.
I don't enjoy getting from point A to point B. The last place I want to go to is an airport.
Getting the right balance in life is important to Pearce.
He has always been careful to balance his busy executive life with a strong interest in extramural activities.
He has been particularly keen on educational pursuits.
He is pro-chancellor of the University of Surrey and chairman of the trustees of the Science Museum in South Kensington.
He believes that industrialists have a lot to offer academic institutions in helping them to manage their resources.
All the universities today are under enormous pressure financially.
The government's giving them less and less to work with.
It's a question of giving them help in areas where they may not traditionally have had expertise.
As far as the Science Museum is concerned it's a question of helping it with the whole game of raising finance and all the other things they have to do.
One of the things museums are going to have to do in future is take over their buildings.
Curators are not used to coping with that.
They don't have a clue what maintenance of buildings is all about.
The PSA has always done it in the past.
Now they've got to do it for themselves.
They don't know where to start.
Pearce has found that his involvement in so many outside bodies has helped to broaden his knowledge and outlook.
In his Esso days he was invited to join the board of Williams $ Glyn.
He found that it opened a window on the City that he would otherwise never have had.
It meant he could go and talk to the governor of the Bank of England and the chairmen of any of the clearing banks whenever he felt the need.
When he was approached to run British Aerospace the government insisted he should give up the directorship of W$G, but Pearce, displaying his usual resolve, wouldn't hear of it.
He felt the contact was so invaluable that he was prepared to turn down the job at the head of one of the UK's premier blue-chip companies if it meant making such a sacrifice.
Pearce is not convinced that it is any tougher to be a top executive today than in the past, despite the faster pace and greater complexity of modern business activities.
You've got to deal with different problems, there's no question about that.
They're on a worldwide scale rather than a national scale, but you have to recognise that there are only so many hours in the day in which you can be efficient.
Therefore you've got to be selective in what you do and you've got to be the right person to deal with those things, of course.
And you have to be updated periodically, more so than in the past.
Nor does Pearce believe up-and-coming managers should be put off by the apparent decline in moral standards of business.
He believes standards have only slipped in the case of a few companies, but that the press tends to seize on these examples and blow them up out of all proportion.
He asserts that in the majority of businesses the moral standards have improved very significantly.
But the media only pick out the failures, because that's what  we as readers want to read.
You can blame the media, but really you ought to blame the readers.
No matter where you are, there are always a few black sheep.
The snag today is that those black sheep will create much bigger problems than they could in the past.
What specific advice would Pearce pass on to the next generation of senior executives?
Make damn sure you've got the right people in the right place, so they do the work rather than you.
You've got to concentrate on financial control, on your customer and on your people.
These are the three main areas.
Anita Roddick 
Born: Littlehampton, Sussex, 1942.
Educated.: Worthing High School for Girls,; Bath College of Education.
Anita Roddick is managing director of The Body Shop International plc, a group of more than three hundred cosmetic shops in thirty-three countries, stretching from the Arctic Circle to Australia.
The company claims to have a larger presence abroad than any other British retailer, trading in thirteen different languages.
Roddick experienced her first taste of trading as a child while serving in the family café in Littlehampton in Sussex, which is now the centre of her worldwide retailing empire.
Before going into the cosmetic business she was a teacher, and worked for the United Nations in Geneva.
It was while travelling around the world for the UN that she first became impressed with the simple forms of cosmetics made from natural ingredients used by remote communities.
When she returned to the UK, however, she entered into the restaurant and hotel business with her husband Gordon.
Looking for a less demanding occupation, she opened the first Body Shop in a tiny premises in a back street of Brighton in 1976, selling fifteen different products in plastic bottles with hand-written labels.
She set up the business with a £4,000 bank loan and shortage of capital persuaded her to expand through franchising.
The decision set in motion a chain reaction that was to become an international phenomenon — hundreds of shops, all a mirror image of her original concept no matter where in the world they are located.
The Body Shop went public in 1984 and the company's shares have consistently dazzled City analysts with their high performance.
As one leading business magazine put it.: ‘Body Shop's star in the City is not so much rising as super-glued to the roof  of the firmament.’
The same magazine declared The Body Shop the second fastest growing medium-sized business in Britain in a survey of two hundred firms.
This is particularly remarkable when it is considered that Roddick has made no acquisitions and has no major plans for diversification.
She was awarded the OBE in the 1988 New Year's Honours List.
Anita Roddick has made a virtue of flying in the face of business convention.
She seems to thrive on heretical statements and swimming against the tide: ‘I look at what the cosmetic trade is doing and walk in the opposite direction,’ she declares with the kind of outspoken defiance that has made her a retailing legend in the decade it took her to turn The Body Shop into a worldwide phenomenon.
She once summed up to a gathering of marketing specialists the extent of her success, which earned The Body Shop the award of business of the year in 1987:
We produce over three hundred products in well over three hundred shops from the Arctic Circle to Adelaide, covering thirty-one countries and thirteen languages, without once diluting our image.
We've done this with humour, intelligence, a sense of joy, magic and fun, which have always been our essential ingredients.
In achieving this remarkable success, Roddick has always been scornful of traditional business credos.
She refuses to be part of the general cosmetic industry hype.
She will make no extravagant claims for her skin- and hair-care products, all derived from natural ingredients.
There is no room in her vocabulary for terms like ‘nourishing cream’, because ‘only food nourishes’.
She has never had to advertise any of her products because ‘the shops and the product are the best advertisement’.
Her success speaks for itself.
She has never hired anyone with a business-school education, because she believes such people are too rigid in their outlook.
She has set up her own training school because she found conventional training schemes offered no scope for the  kind of message she wants to get across.
She has even formed her own film and video group because she finds most training films ‘a yawn a minute’.
She has trodden her own distinctive path guided by her mission to make The Body Shop ‘the most honest cosmetic company in the world’ because she could find no shining example in the retailing industry from which to draw inspiration.
For me there are no modern-day heroes in the retailing world.
I have come across not one company which incorporates the pursuit of honest profits with social awareness, which provides a vision for themselves and their workers.
I have met no retailing captain of industry who makes my blood sing.
Retailing itself has taught me nothing.
I see tired executives in tired systems.
These huge corporations are dying of boredom caused by the inertia of giantism.
This is a fate Roddick has avoided by operating most of her shops under a franchise system.
It was a route she chose originally because she did not have enough capital to expand at the rate business demanded.
But she has no intention of changing course now as she believes that, run as separate entities, the shops remain manageable and provide a strong incentive to succeed for the franchisees.
She nevertheless keeps a tight control on the products, the shop displays, training and the operating style of the shops.
There is, for example, an unwritten clause insisting that franchisees must agree to adopt a community project.
In this way, all the shops reflect Roddick's concern for the environment and her insistence that private wealth should be used for public good.
It is all part of Roddick's determination to imbue retailing with a higher status in society.
This is something she feels strongly about and she tends to become even more animated than usual when trying to articulate her philosophy.
A torrent of words pour out as thoughts race around in her head, vying with each other for verbal expression.
She basically lays the blame for the low status retailing enjoys today at the door of the education system.
A former teacher, she speaks with some authority on the subject.
Some of the most important social changes and some of the greatest philanthropists in the last century were in the field of retailing and yet they are not our heroes.
It's not part of our culture; it's not written up in the history books.
One of the reasons is that people in this country don't value labour.
They talk about it as an expenditure and not as an investment.
They are always quibbling about the amount they are prepared to pay their staff while drawing enormous salaries for themselves.
People forget that their staff are their front-line consumers.
Roddick cossets her staff.
They get free samples because their opinions about the products are highly valued.
There's a suggestion box at every till.
They are also given share options.
Training includes courses in sociology and in urban survival.
She justifies this by pointing out that there are three thousand young women working in town centres around the country, whose welfare is paramount to her.
She even invites AIDS sufferers to come and talk to them.
What Roddick is at most pains to demonstrate is that honesty and commercialism can make compatible bedfellows.
Indeed, she would argue that her forthright and uncompromising approach is a vital element of her success.
The cosmetic industry is bizarre because it is run by men who create needs that don't exist, making women feel incredibly dissatisfied with their bodies.
They have this extraordinary belief that all women want is hope and promise.
They've got this absolute obsession with not telling the truth, which is bizarre because some of the products they make are actually good.
But to me it's innately dishonest to make claims that a cream that is basically oil and water is going to take grief and stress and fifty years of living in the sun off your face.
It's nonsense.
Roddick attributes her entrepreneurial flair and her individualism to her upbringing.
She was one of four children born to Italian immigrants.
She helped in the family café at the Sussex seaside resort of Littlehampton, which is still the base for her worldwide empire of retailing outlets.
She has fond memories of the café, which was a popular meeting place for a large number of local children.
‘We had the first juke-box in the town after the war, the first knickerbocker glories and the first Pepsi-Colas.’
But it wasn't an easy life, particularly as her father died while she was still quite young.
Coming from a first-generation immigrant family there was a strongly defined work ethic and after my father died heavy responsibility was thrust upon us.
All of the children had to contribute and to some extent we lost our childhood.
We didn't have time to play on the beach or in the streets with the other kids.
I didn't know it then but I was receiving subliminal training for later business life.
I was always surrounded by strong images — the image of the café, how it looked and the service it provided.
We kids either had to serve behind the ice-cream counter or wait on the tables.
One of the most important aspects is that we saw ourselves as town traders — that magical area where buyer and seller come together.
One of the bizarre things I find today is that England doesn't really like traders.
They're very happy with manufacturing, but the selling of the product and the trading is not quite the right thing to do.
They think it's a bit infra dig .
But Roddick did not immediately turn her trading experience into entrepreneurial endeavour when she grew up.
Typical of immigrants, her parents were anxious that she should do better than they and persuaded her to take up teaching as a profession.
Roddick did not offer any resistance, because at the time she was a frustrated actress and she felt teaching English and history to a class of forty kids at a local secondary school was the next best thing to acting.
It wasn't a hardship because good teaching is theatre.
I learned how to create atmosphere so that the classroom was a visual delight.
I always did things differently.
Friday afternoons I did a course in aesthetics and I was allowed to paint the classroom — an old Nissen hut — black and red.
I couldn't believe that anyone could live their life and not be surrounded by brilliant objects and colours.
I always taught  my history lessons with the most relevant music.
So if we were talking about the Middle Ages we had Gregorian chants, or if we were doing the First World War we had First-world-war songs.
Everywhere I went my individuality was encouraged.
Roddick is convinced her own schooling was also influential in forming her attitudes to life and the business world.
She failed her eleven-plus and ended up at a local secondary modern school, which turned out to be a blessing in disguise.
It was the first secondary modern school in the area to introduce O-level courses and the young Roddick was one of twenty girls specially selected to participate in the experiment.
‘So right from an early age I was told I was special.
I had the best schooling in the world.
It was magic.’
Prior to becoming a teacher, Roddick decided she wanted to see something of the world.
‘I thought the intelligent thing to do was to go away and work for two years and then come back and teach.
Where do you go in the 1960s?
You go to Paris to suffer.’
She worked in the Paris office of the New York Herald Tribune for a while and later she went to Switzerland to work for the International Labour Office of the United Nations.
Her confidence and conviction that she was somebody special served her well when she applied for the UN job.
Although she had never had any secretarial training, she had the nerve to apply for one of the most eagerly sought-after positions in Europe.
Asked what her typing speed was, she bluntly replied: ‘Hit and miss and the use of a rubber.’
She gave a similarly flippant answer when inquiries were made about her shorthand skills: ‘Longhand and memory,’ was her answer.
‘Then I said what I can do — organise, put twenty-four hours in a day and I'm energetic.
I just sold myself.’
Even at that early stage in her career, Roddick knew she was different and she cultivated it.
She finds it hard to explain why, but ponders that it may have something to do with the religious faith she grew up with.
It was a sort of Catholic stab against death, I suppose.
You try to defy death all the time when you've had a Catholic upbringing, because it's just so awful.
I suppose it's striving  for immortality, just being different, making your mark.
I lived in a town called Littlehampton.
All it needed was a bit of tumbleweed to make it seem more deserted than it really was and I used to just fight against that dissatisfaction.
My friends at sixteen were getting married or getting pregnant.
I just wanted something more than that.
It was while travelling around the world that the seeds of her future calling were first sown.
Courtesy of the UN, which paid her a handsome tax-free salary, she travelled widely, visiting exotic spots like Polynesia, Mauritius and the New Hebrides.
She spent time with remote island communities and observed the simple but effective way they lived their lives.
‘1 just lived as they did and watched how they groomed themselves without any cosmetic aids.
Their skin was wonderful and their hair beautifully clean.’
She watched Polynesians scoop up untreated cocoa butter and apply it directly to their skins and felt the smooth texture the skin consequently acquired.
Today, Roddick spends about two months a year travelling the world, picking up tips about natural ingredients to go into her products.
Cocoa butter is now an important ingredient in her skin-care products, for example.
She has also observed Sri Lankans using pineapple as a skin cleanser and later discovered that the natural enzymes present in the fruit act on the skin to remove dead cells, making it an effective cleanser.
We can learn from women in other societies.
They know that these well-tried and tested ways work, and do not need a scientist or advertising agency to sell them.
You only have to look at what they use.
Very often it is a plant which grows readily at hand.
There are more than 200,00 known plant species in the world and it is said we have learned to use only 2,500 of them.
It is the marriage of traditional wisdom and knowledge of raw ingredients with modern research that makes The Body Shop products innovative and effective.
But the idea for The Body Shop did not take root immediately.
By the time she returned from travelling the world, she was in her mid-twenties.
She fell in love, married and opened a restaurant  with her husband Gordon.
Looking back on it, Roddick believes that too was a good training ground for future developments.
Terence Conran once said to me: ‘the reason why you and I do things well is because we had our apprenticeship in restaurants,’ and I actually think that's a very valid point, because you've got twenty planks to the one function of actually serving food.
You've got to order, you've got to prepare, you've got to have the right environment — the character of the place — and you've got to sell what you're offering, for example.
The original plan was that Anita would do the cooking and her husband would serve the customers, but she did not enjoy being behind the scenes and eventually taught Gordon to be a fine cook while she spent her time out front chatting up the customers.
After two years, however, Gordon too got the wanderlust urge and planned a horse-back ride from South America to New York that would take him two years.
Anita encouraged him to go and decided that while he was away, running a shop would be a less demanding occupation than working all hours in a restaurant.
It had occurred to her that most products came in a variety of sizes and offered a wide choice, but she felt the cosmetic trade was too dictatorial about what the customer should buy.
She envisaged a shop where cleansing lotions would be displayed in simple bottles of all shapes and sizes and which would contain the natural ingredients she had come across during her trips to remote communities.
Personal experience, Roddick maintains, is the best market research there is.
You can't just pull ideas out of the air.
You've got to find out what irritates you, annoys you to death and then translate that into a business.
What irritates me about going shopping in any supermarket is having to bag my own goods up.
Why isn't there somebody there to bag them for me and create a service?
Starting with a bank loan of £4,000, Roddick had no time to sit down in the early years and draw up a grandiose mission of  what her organisation should set out to achieve.
The first, and crucial, goal was survival.
Reality says that if you set up a store and you're undercapitalised, you're going to go bust.
The reason you do it usually is because if you don't succeed you're not going to eat.
So you put in all the hours God gives you.
You pray that you'll make enough to pay the rates and the petrol for the car.
That's your apprenticeship.
My apprenticeship was in a shop for a year working and adapting and changing and getting an understanding of it all.
Also, learning to be obsessive about detail.
It's the detail that matters.
The success of The Body Shop grew out of an almost naïve belief in herself and sheer hard work.
Having been told I was special from a very young age, you believe everything is possible, but I also knew that you got nothing unless you worked hard.
We were protected by not really knowing the risks.
We worked hard, therefore we survived.
We didn't know what the risk factors were.
We didn't have any understanding of the business colleges.
In fact, I would suggest that anybody who has one ounce of individuality should never go to a business school — and I've said this often at Cranfield and London — because you're structured by academics who measure you in the science of business.
They use a business language that is so predictable and going out and doing it is not part of the course.
Lack of academic training does not appear to have been a handicap for Roddick.
The Body Shop expanded rapidly under the franchise system.
Roddick merely called it ‘self-financing’, because she didn't have the capital to do it any other way.
‘We just went in and did everything for everybody.
We helped with putting up the shelves and we filled all the bottles in each shop.
Everyone did their own labelling., As a result of this approach, a strong camaraderie developed between the Roddicks and the franchisees they selected to help spread their business philosophy.
They found themselves working alongside like-minded young people with similar values to  their own.
Roddick describes herself and her husband as ‘children of the 1960s’.
They had both been ardent followers of such causes as Shelter, Freedom from Hunger and the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, the popular issues of the day for caring people with deep moral convictions.
As her business empire grew, Roddick was left with little time to participate actively in such environmental causes as Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace, with which her own convictions were closely aligned.
But she made certain that her great concern for environmental issues were built into her business philosophy.
For example, The Body Shop was the first company in Britain to use jojoba oil, which is obtained from a desert plant, in cosmetics.
The plant oil closely resembles sperm-whale oil, which has been used in cosmetics for many years.
Her way of supporting Greenpeace's campaign to save the whale was to demonstrate that there are always substitutes to be found in nature and that there is no commercial excuse for hunting an endangered species out of existence.
There are, in fact, other powerful reasons for making jojoba a universal substitute for whale oil.
It can be grown on some of the poorest land in the world, which is totally unsuitable for conventional crops, and in regions where people have no work and are living in poverty.
Roddick has pledged herself and her organisation to ‘increasing public awareness of the qualities of jojoba oil and to lead the way by using it extensively, so helping both people and whales.’
This enlightened approach came as a natural product of Roddick's values and her philosophy of life.
It wasn't until she had successfully launched The Body Shop on to the Unlisted Securities Market that she began to examine the direction in which the business was going and to start articulating its mission in a definitive way.
She suddenly realised she had passed from the survival phase to a phase where she could see that The Body Shop had become a retailing institution that was going from strength to strength.
This left her asking herself how she should direct her success and what her responsibilities to society were.
Instead of letting our success lead us into a fat-cat mentality, it led us much more strongly and much faster into a mentality of asking what are we going to do with it.
Everybody's shop was making a lot of money and we just couldn't bear the  thought of us all getting like the rest of the industry.
I was learning very fast to walk in the opposite direction.
There was just one yardstick.
Whatever the cosmetics industry was doing, do the opposite.
It worked well.
One of the main outcomes of all this introspection was the setting up of an environmental and communities department to translate Roddick's beliefs and concerns into practical projects.
The Body Shop as a group joined Friends of the Earth and pursued such policies as using recycled paper for packaging.
But more importantly, as far as Roddick is concerned, each franchised outlet is required to take on a community project in its area, which she believes gives the young women in the organisation additional status and helps them to realise that everybody has the ability to change the world for the better.
But none of the employees are expected to take on extra duties after a hard day in the shop.
All the projects are undertaken within working hours.
Each franchisee decides their own project.
There is no question of coercion.
But Roddick sees her expanding retailing network as a means to spread her own deep beliefs about the environment and Third World issues, educating both employees and customers.
She sees the whole process as a self-perpetuating cycle.
Ingredients obtained from the Third World, providing work and sustenance to underprivileged societies, go into products which are sold to the more fortunate, the profits of which go into her educational programme aimed at making people more aware of the critical issues of our times.
We're the only company I know that puts issues like acid rain, waste and pollution as shop-window issues to educate our customers.
In a way, we've almost come full circle back to what I was trained to do, which is teaching.
We have half a million kids coming into our shops every week.
Just to sell them a product without educating them to challenge and to care about the ingredients that go into those products would be wrong.
They should be constantly asking why a bottle is the shape it is and whether the ingredients come from a whale or from a natural substance of which there is great abundance.
The cosmetics industry  is an irrelevant industry.
It is not a life and death industry, so it is a joyous task to create more relevancy.
Typical of the kind of community projects The Body Shop undertakes is one run in collaboration with the Brighton Health Authority.
Part-time workers, recruited through the Manpower Services Commission, are being trained to provide a regular massage service for elderly and psychiatric patients.
It has also become involved in the Work-out scheme in London, which aims to help the young unemployed take an active approach to life.
Body Shop staff adopt a young unemployed person on a one-to-one basis, helping with job applications, for example.
Attempts are also being made to set up community-run Body Shops in inner urban areas, such as Brixton.
Roddick's determination to use private profit for public good has now reached some of the remotest parts of the world.
She has launched a number of Third World projects, which she often discovers during her two months abroad each year.
One of her latest projects is to set up a paper-making plant in Nepal.
The paper will be processed from pineapple and banana leaves, under the initial guidance of a Canadian crafts specialist.
Roddick plans to use the paper so produced for wrapping Body Shop products.
There's a similar plan to make paper from water hyacinth in Bangladesh.
The water hyacinth grows in profusion and tends to choke up the local rivers.
So the project will have the double benefit of clearing the rivers and at the same time creating a saleable product.
In southern India The Body Shop has provided the means to set up a boys' town for destitute youngsters.
They are taught rural crafts and how to make products, such as foot rollers and Christmas cards, which are sold in The Body Shops.
The money from the sale of the products is put into a trust fund, so that when the youngsters leave at the age of sixteen to make their own way in the world they have the means to purchase a flock of sheep or a horse and cart, giving them a vital start in whatever activity they take up.
Any additional revenue goes into funding more boys' towns.
So far three thousand jobs have been created under the scheme.
Roddick has never found that her commercial and philanthropic interests clash.
She refused to listen to the Jeremiahs who  predicted she would have to change her operating style once her company came under the scrutiny of the Stock Exchange.
I have learned a lot in the last few years.
There are a hell of a lot of myths perpetrated in this industry.
They say when you go on to the Stock Market you should be worried because you can lose your strength.
It's just not true.
If you're doing well, the Stock Market leaves you alone and what's even better, if you're doing terrifically well, as we are, they listen to you.
They spend more and more time trying to study how we work and how we do things.
The second myth says that the bigger you get, the less communication you have.
That's nonsense.
We've invested an enormous amount in communications at all levels — our training school, a newsletter, videos, and so on— and it works.
Nor is Roddick fearful that she will be unable to ensure that the most suitable people are recruited to join The Body Shop as it continues to grow at such a fast pace.
She points out that there are five thousand people on the waiting list wanting to take up a Body Shop franchise and that it takes three years before any of them succeed.
‘Unless you're absolutely obsessed you don't get a look in.’
Applicants also have to undergo strict vetting, which includes an offbeat questionnaire.
Roddick calls it the Marcel Proust questionnaire and it asks such unlikely questions as: How would you like to die?
What's your favourite flower?
Who's your heroine in history or who's your hero in poetry?
Roddick claims that the answers to such bizarre questions tend to be very revealing and she can usually judge whether an applicant is going to be somebody who is on her wavelength and with whom she can comfortably work.
In fact, Roddick has managed to achieve an astonishing uniformity with her worldwide network of shops.
Wherever you are, each is a mirror image of all the others.
We've got stores in the Arctic Circle, we've got shops literally in the desert in the Middle East and we've got them in Hong Kong and Singapore and they're all the same— and they all work.
I think the interesting fact is we're not seen  as an English company.
We're seen as cross-cultural with a product range with international ingredients.
Roddick has also resisted suggestions that she should diversify into other quite different product lines such as clothing and leisure centres.
‘All I want to do is to do what I'm doing, but do it better.’
The main pleasure Roddick derives from her success is,
the ability to effect change for the better.
There's power in money, but it's not often been utilised for good.
I've never seen private greed translate to public benefit ever.
There are two things I work on now.
Because we're successful, we're listened to.
Because we're humane, we're watched — and they're still watching us because they can't believe that you can develop one without losing the other.
All you have to do is commit yourself to it.
The one thing I can't stand is cynicism.
It's so soulless and inert.
It changes nothing; it's a disease of the old.
Private wealth certainly doesn't appear to have been translated into personal greed where Roddick is concerned.
She rarely indulges herself.
The pace of business growth is such that she finds very few spare moments for leisure-time activities.
‘For me work is more fun than fun and the one thing I was never trained for was leisure.’
What she most relishes about no longer having to worry about where the money to pay the rates is coming from is that it gives her the freedom to be creative.
‘Money is never the motivator,’ she insists.