

INTRODUCTIONThe hotel in Oslo was grim.
The man behind the desk eyed us suspiciously, heavy rucsacs on tired shoulders, pinched faces from the frozen air.
He pushed a book towards me, and raised an eyebrow as I signed my name.
I wondered if this might have been from surprise over the fact that I could write, but it was just one of a fair catalogue of mannerisms he had to offer.
He took a wrist-rupturing key from a rack and shuffled around to our side of the desk.
We followed him in silence up a flight of stairs to a corridor too dark for eyes to pick out its furthest point.
‘That's the bathroom,’ he said, vaguely indicating a door to the right behind which, we were to discover, an array of ancient pipework gurgled and glugged.
He opened our room.
It was long enough to need a semaphore to signal from one end to the other, dark enough so you would never have seen the flags, and so narrow we had to squeeze past  the single bed by the door to reach the open land before the next one.
It had just one redeeming feature.
It was cheap.
map: The European ArcticNathan moodily poked the bed, hiked down to the window and stared out at the night, then came back and sat on a seat in no-man's land.
‘OK?’
I asked.
A dumb question really.
he gave me a thin smile and shrugged.
It was not what he had in mind.
Nathan had just turned teenager and we were in North Wales for his birthday.
Being a lazy lad, much given to the idea of rising late when given half a chance, he had delayed his arrival in the world until 1 January.
It had been only a few hours, but that was enough to ensure that birthdays would always fall on public holidays and the correct number of hours could therefore be spent languishing.
We had languished yesterday.
Today we were in the Ogwen valley, in indifferent weather, wondering what to do.
A big peak was out of the question; it was a little too late, a little too wet and miserable.
It was a day for fingering duvets in Capel Curig or Betws, but Nathan, though difficult to start on cold mornings, was active once moving and would find that too dull.
We parked downhill from the cottage and ambled over to the top of the falls.
I started climbing down, without too much in mind, and Nathan followed.
We went down a hundred feet, perhaps a bit more.
We moved in closer to the stream and, attracted by something (though now I have no idea what) I went to the stream edge.
I ducked under a large rock and stepped forward.
Planting a booted foot securely on a rock in the stream, I stood up.
It is difficult to know what of the next few seconds I remember, or have pieced together, or have been told by Nathan.
I think I heard a loud, but muffled thump.
I do remember fighting to stay balanced on the rock and not  managing it, I do remember that when the world came back into focus I could not see out of my left eye.
The Polar Cathedral and Storskarfjell from TromsøNathan had watched while I went under the rock, had been surprised when I vigorously stood up and had stood transfixed as I gently pitched forwards off the rock.
Within seconds the blood from the gash that once been the left side of my head had poured all over the side of my face and filled up my left eye; so that was why I could not see.
He started to pour cold water over me, in part to staunch the blood, in part to revive me.
He got me out of the stream and a bit further back from the drop to our right.
He sat me down.
The wound bled enough to turn the semi-still pool in front of us red, but the cold water eventually stopped it.
Nathan helped me to my feet and very cautiously picked a way up through the boulders and small crags towards the road.
He led on the easy bits, followed and pushed on the worse sections.
We reached the road.
Nathan took my keys, brought the first aid kit from the car, and broke open some antiseptic wipes to attend to the cut.
Only when he had to stare straight into it did he flinch; it was not, his face said, a pretty sight.
He offered to drive the car, but I was not convinced that was a good idea.
He offered to stop someone, but I was feeling a bit better.
My head didn't hurt at all , although it did feel a bit light.
It was my neck that hurt.
I drove to the hospital in Bangor with Nathan watching the road intently and hanging on to the handbrake.
When they tried to take me away he explained, politely, that he was staying with me.
They shaved off my hair and sewed up my head.
The stuck needles in me and wheeled me in and out of X-ray rooms peering inside for evidence of the impacted fracture they were sure I had.
And through it all he stayed.
He was not saying much, but he was being there.
We agreed, after it was over — after the stitches (a large number) had been removed — that he had shown he was good enough now to go on a big trip.
He had stood in the queue at Heathrow, a very new Condor on his back, eyeing others who were obviously preparing to go to warmer places than we were.
He was a mountaineer.
The big boots, the gaudy anorak, the heavy rucsac.
This was definitely the way to live.
But not, he might now have added, if it meant staying in crumby hotels in places like Oslo.
I had needed to break our journey north int he capital to see someone in the tourist board's head office.
We could not do the trip in and out of the town in time to catch the last plane that evening, so we were condemned to this place and an early flight.
We dumped our kit and went out to find somewhere to eat.
Oslo is very much a capital city.
Go to the right places and there will be a big railway station or a billboard full of flickering neon lights.
It is pleasant in the port area, impressive near the castle, interesting at Bygdøy where the Viking ships are displayed on part of the large and excellent museum complex.
It is also, as with other capitals, impersonal, lonely and vaguely hostile.
There was the same combination that I had seen before: collected in groups that seemed threatening because you were not part of them, and between these bright areas black, empty alleys full of odd forebodings.
Nathan Sale above TromsdalenOur search for something to eat led us up these darkly menacing alleys.
It was freezing — literally — so after a not-too-exhaustive search we settled for a place that was warm and, as it turned out, very good.
Nathan cheered up a touch when he had eaten his way through half the menu, and was even able to smile at the prospect of spending the night in our corridor-like room.
Sleep came to the distant noise of a ship's siren, blown once, but echoing, a long way off.
Breakfast was forgettable, but it didn't matter by then.
Nathan had not been on enough flights to be anything but excited, and he was going north of the Arctic Circle for the first time.
We took off on time, but we had unknowingly booked on to the milk run.
We stopped at Trondheim and Bodø, and then at Bardufoss.
On every leg they gave us a cheese roll and several cups of coffee, and by the time we took off for the third time we were wearing a rut in the carpet down the aisle to the tail-end gents.
The weather worsened the further north we went, and by the time we crossed the Circle it was snowing.
Nathan peered through the thick flakes at the wagon that serviced the plane at every stop.
It was always the same shape and size, built, it seemed, solely for the transportation of cheese rolls.
On its side, in Gothic letters, was written ‘Dog Bladder’ — a strange name.
What did they put in the coffee that made it such a diuretic?
A day or two later we were enlightened — Dagbladdet is the name of the daily paper.
We took off on the last leg for Tromsø.
The snow was falling thickly and poured past the window in blizzard proportions as the plane hurled itself into the Arctic night.
Nathan was awestruck with the audacity of it all, but when he turned to tell me how impressed he was I was asleep.
Nothing his old man did in the rest of the trip came close to commanding such respect as falling asleep during that take-off.
He saw it as indicating the travel weariness of the great adventurer.
In reality I was bored to distraction by the journey.
As we approached Tromsø the snow grew thicker and Nathan asked, as casually as he could manage, whether they would clear the runway.
No, I told him, we'll land on the ice.
He gave me a pityingly look.
We taxied in close to the runway and were all pushed down the exit ladder to make a sprint for the terminal building; no automatic concertinaed walkways here.
We started out into the snow and stepped on to the ice-covered apron; that soon took the look off Nathan's face.
I was grateful when the rucsacs appeared on the carousel; Tromsøwas a full jacket cooler than Oslo had been.
Next day saw us in Trømsdalen.
Nathan had not been prepared for the bus trip into and out of the town and the long walk through the snow to a campsite either.
But he had performed well.
The day dawned grey and cold, but the snow had stopped.
At this time of year, mid-Autumn, the snow has usually not arrived in Tromsø and it is possible for you to have the hills to yourself in Tromsdalen or, better, in Lyngen, but this year there was already a metre of the stuff down at sea level.
During the days that followed our plans to backpack up into the hills had to be curtailed because of the weather, but to compensate there was the pleasure of watching Nathan explore the Arctic.
He edged down some unsafe planking in the harbour to poke his hand into the ocean and recoiled with the cold of it.
He peered into its depths amazed at the clarity.
He tried making snowballs as he had in Britain only to find that in these low temperatures he was left with a handful of flour-like snow that simply blew away when he threw it.
He looked for the pole Star on nights so intensely black that you almost had to touch your limbs to make sure they were still there.
He was staggered that he had to look almost straight up to find it.
We climbed Storskarfjell on a long and hard day that started before the sun came up and finished long after it had gone down.
It was memorable for the endless grind in one gully where the snow was waist-deep and we had to swim upwards, and for the point where we emerged on to the easterly ridge with views to Lyngen, and a wind that had bared the slopes and put our teeth on edge.
The plateau we crossed before the final pyramid was hostile, the snow wind-beaten to a hard, glittering crust that squeaked at the approach of our boots and then gave a satisfying crunch as we went through it.
We put on crampons for a steep section, Nathan all excitement at this new level of experience and commitment.
Then it was over, and with the end came that sense of anti-climax because tops are never as perfect as they should  be, nor the last few steps as brilliantly conceived or executed.
The view is never as good as it ought to be.
And you still have to go down.
Down was reversing the route until a bold decision to descend through trees was taken, a decision that in retrospect seemed debatable.
The maddening way-finding kept us interested, which did postpone the onset of real tiredness.
The way was down this slope, then crash through those low pine branches, then round the top of that steep bit, then over there — I think.
The coffee back at our base was good, the meal cooked from the sleeping bag the better for being so.
Tomorrow was another day.
We did our best in weather that got worse the longer we stayed.
One day's effort failed in a blizzard that was so thick route-finding became impossible.
We stopped and built a makeshift shelter to get away, as best we could, from snow that filtered its way through every opening to produce melt water that trickled coldly over us.
I made tea, my ungloved hand sticking to the Trangia when I tried to move it from its snowdrift.
The blizzard was worse now, and what little light made its way between the flakes was failing.
In a brief lull we moved quickly down to the river and followed it back down the valley.
On our last afternoon we went back to Tromsø to see a man about a dog.
To be precise to see a man about a good number of sledge dogs.
That night we stayed in the town as our flight was too early the next day to get to the airport from the good country to the south.
We treated ourselves to a reindeer steak, then went for a last walk over the bridge towards the polar Cathedral.
The sky was clearer than it had been for a week, and massive, but hardly elegant, Storskarfjell stood out like a white tent.
Nathan kicked snow off the bridge, watching it explode in orange light as it swept past the navigation lights on the bridge supports.
Tromsø was huddled and silent below and he took a long time over his last look. 
ICELANDIn the strictest sense of the word Iceland is not a ‘Arctic’ country; the Circle nicks only the northern tip of the isle of Grimsey and so leaves the main island in a sub-Arctic no man's land.
The pilot of a plane Tony and I shared with a bunch of drunks en route to Akureyri once told a very poor story.
No one in Iceland ever wanted to cross the Circle he said, except for one man, the vicar of Grimsey.
The Circle went through the middle of his bed, he told us, so he had a reason for crossing it every night.
But it was, as I said, a poor story and I won't trouble you with it.
Iceland has about forty per cent of the land area of the UK, but a population of only 250,000.
The great majority live in Reykjavik or a couple of towns close to it, and that leaves the country wonderfully bare, especially in the centre — what remains of the population is concentrated on the coast, where the chief occupations of fishing and farming are best practised.
The centre is vast and uninhabited.
It is also difficult for access.
The Icelandic road system is remarkable, with a continuous coastal road and numerous side roads, even if the majority are gravel rather than tarmac.
Each isolated farm has electricity, a newish car or two and is full of gadgets and gizmos.
The economics of the country are a disaster.
Iceland was discovered in the tenth century by Viking seafarers from the Scandinavian mainland.
The discoverer — reputedly Ingolfur Arnarson after whom a fine peak near Þingvellir and Ingólfshöfdi is named — called the country ‘Iceland’ because of the ice he found there; this created the first half-truth about the islands of the north.
Iceland is actually very green.
The next country to be discovered, Greenland, is actually very icy.
Even today  map — IcelandViking influence is deep-seated, especially in naming, where the old Norse method of patronymics is used.
A child's surname is the father's first name with son (for a boy) or dóttir (for a girl) added.
Our friend Pétur Björnsson (Pétur, son of Björn) has a lovely blonde daughter Marta, who speaks no English and talked to me all night when we were last there in a glorious mixture of Icelandic and sign language.
Her name is Marta Pétursdöttir.
In a family of four, with a boy and a girl, there will be four different surnames.
The Icelanders have a fine attitude towards their country.
The majority of the population — which has one of the world's longest average life expectancies — are active in one or more outdoor activities, with walking and horse riding especially popular.
(Riding is a fine way of seeing the interior of the country, and the high-stepping Icelandic horses are tireless over the difficult terrain.)
This love for their land is refreshing — they consistently enthuse about their country rather than being swift to bad-mouth it — and it is also reflected in their desire to protect large areas from exploitation.
It is easy to assume that with so limited a population and tourists numbering a fraction of those who head for the sun, protection of the countryside is straightforward.
Still, there are some areas that are ‘better’ than others, and these need special care.
Iceland has, therefore, a surprisingly large number of National parks and nature reserves with regulations that must be observed by all visitors.
Each of these parks has its own appeal; Skaftafell and Mývatn are favourites, while Þingvellir is historically important.
The lesser-known areas are also very good — Herdubreid, around the very dangerous mountain of the same name and the Askja volcanic area; Hornstrandir at the extreme north-west tip, beyond Drangajökull, an area of superb walking and bird cliffs; and Jökulsárgljúfur, to the east of Akureyri.
All air travel to Iceland is through Keflavik airport, about fifty kilometres from Reykjavik, a beautiful modern terminal, and one of very few where duty free is available on arrival.
Once in the country there is a good system of internal flights and buses. 
SUMMER — NW ICELANDKeflavik is one of the best air terminals in the world, an old plane hanging above the excellent facilities.
The journey to Reykjavik is not so good, and, although it is along a very reasonable road, it can be a bit daunting for the newcomer.
First you go past an array of AWACS planes, wondering whether you are actually allowed to see such things.
In the UK it is easy to form the impression that if you tried to get a closer look at something like this someone in a uniform would break both of your legs.
Beyond the planes you have the sea to the left, and to the right the surface of the moon an endless lava field with sharp brown rocks and occasional patches of greenery.
Desolation.
If you have a weak stomach you may wonder why you bothered to come at all .
I sat at the front of the coach, next to the driver.
He had a punk haircut and used his right knee to drive down the middle of the road.
His right hand caressed the gear stick while his left hand constantly fiddled with the knobs on the radio cassette, ensuring that the coach was flooded with, continuous stream of heavy metal.
Just as you were getting to like a track he would tune it out periodically, a vehicle would come the other way, its lights flashing furiously.
The punk would turn to me with a conspiratorial grin — hey, man, it's you and me against the world, eh? — then shift the bus across with his knee.
The furious lights would flash past and we would move into the middle again.
The coach dropped me at the Lofleiđ3ir, a palatial hotel.
The closest I will ever come to staying there is when I pass through it to reach the stop for the buses into town.
My next flight is from Reykjavik airport.
Many a visitor has been embarrassed by the fact that Reykjavik airport is different from Keflavik.
I can see the town airport from where I am, indeed I can touch its tarmac with a digit thrust through the chain-link fence — all that separates it from the Lofleiđ3ir — but to get from here to there is not so easy, and involves taking a bus into town and back out again or taking a taxi.
You could walk of course .
By fence climbing and tarmac crossing it is 400 metres to the terminal building; by the allowed route round it is five miles.
I take a taxi since my next flight leaves in an hour.
The taxi driver speaks no English and I spend a fraught moment or two wondering whether he has understood that I don't want to go to Keflavik, but after the shorter tour of Reykjavik we arrive.
I now discover that he speaks English numbers, as the bill is near perfectly pronounced.
for all that he has no words he then asks in the most eloquent and elegant way for a tip.
It is a really virtuoso performance — can I put the tip down on my tax form as ‘entertainment'? — and I am reminded of R2D2, the smaller robot in the Star Wars films.
Although he only chirped, peedled and burped, he had the best lines in the film.
The next flight is northward, to Ísafjördur, a rough ride, with the uplift over the highlands and the sea throwing the little plane about.
Across the aisle from me a young boy is telling his mother that he doesn't like it.
My Icelandic only runs to ‘coffee, please,’ but I can tell the essence of his story from the colour of his face.
His mother is less than willing to be involved, ignoring him in favour of the in-flight mag — an in-depth article on drainage ditch construction in the Middle East is far more interesting to her than her child's welfare.
At length the little lad grabs her sleeve and becomes insistent, and she is only just in time with the sick bag.
Pity, I thought after the performance, it might have done her good if he'd missed.
At journey's end she folded over the top of the bag and thoughtfully replaced it behind the netting on the back of the seat in front.
All in all I was glad she did not live next door to me.
The landing was one of the more memorable moments of my life.
The plane flew up the fjord, which seemed so narrow that the mountains were on both wing tips at the same time.
Having reached the end it went up on one wing, round through 180 ° in the space of fifty metres, and plummetted out of the sky on to the tarmac.
It was  an interesting airport, the first one I had visited where, in order to get the planes to land and take off, they have to go and shift the seals off the runway.
The town of Isafjördur is on the far side of the fjord, a long way from the town, and reached by a bus ride past the first fish-drying frame you will see in this part of the island.
But I was not going for a bus ride, I was looking for the gents.
Travelling with Nathan, my son, when he was young, we occasionally stopped at motorway service areas.
In the gents of these there would sometimes be those urinals — you know the ones, shaped like a maiden's hand — with one positioned for kids ten centimetres up the wall and not sixty centimetres up like the rest.
Nathan hated them because they implied that he was terribly little and when you are terribly little you don't want the world to keep pointing it out to you at every opportunity.
He was really pleased when he graduated to the bigger ones.
At this airport the pottery was the same, but it was placed so high up the wall that I was on tiptoe and firing upwards.
I know that having a seventy-eight-centimetre leg makes me shorter than average, but Jesus.
I beat a heavy retreat: what I did not want to do was find out what the locals were like.
Men who could use these things comfortably would have to be three metres tall, and when they came I really didn't want to be there.
From Isafjördur the best way to explore Iceland's north-west is to jump on one of Ernir Air's mail planes.
Ernir has the contract to deliver the post and fly planes out every morning.
You get on and fly to somewhere that takes your fancy, the airline being quite willing to take the odd traveller with his rucsac.
Once off you walk over the mountains to the next town, and over again to another.
As soon as you have had enough you wait until the plane arrives, going on to newer ground or back for a return flight to the bright lights of Reykjavik.
It is an elegant way to travel, much better than waiting for the buses which, at this time of year, seem to come every other Tuesday.
Later, at Reykjavik, I was chatting to somebody, telling them about the Ernir flights.
Ah yes, they said, the man in charge up there is a legend for landing his plane in appalling conditions and absolutely ridiculous places.
Stories abound of his having landed on a handkerchief in blizzards in order to take people to hospital or to bring in desperately needed supplies.
I mentioned that the man I had spoken to had an old check suit and a limp.
That was almost certainly him, I was told.
Did he get the limp in a flying accident on one of his stupendous runs, I asked.
Oh, no, they said, He fell off the roof when retiling it.
When I arrived in Þingeyri I was expecting this, the second-biggest town in the area, to be a place worth seeing.
It had a church and a garage which sold Mars bars.
It had a handful of houses and that as Þingeyri.
Unimpressed, I went down to the edge of the fjord to find somewhere to camp.
Nearby the sea terns and eider ducks were nesting, the ducks beautifully camouflaged, sitting tight as long as they could, then moving quickly to reveal eggs of a gorgeous sage green looking so warm in their nest of breast feathers that it made me long for the comforts of my sleeping bag.
The eggs were not pure poetry though, and many of  them had lines and streaks of yellow duck shit across their smooth surfaces.
Footprints on Hattersdallfjall, north-west IcelandI pitched the tent back from the sea, close to a river.
The view from my chosen balcony was superb.
Medadalur is wide and flanked by peaks that are proudly pointed.
The last of the winter snow was melting off the steep slopes, but the flatter areas and the passes still seemed to be well covered.
I decided to go for a walk westward along the side of the fjord.
So far it has been calm, but now the wind is picking up and white-topped grey waves move across the fjord.
The road goes through a small hamlet where there is a pond, a few square metres of tired water with a few pieces of rusty iron breaking its surface.
The land beside the pond looks tired too, the grass burnt by the frosts and ice of winter, the bare earth looking cold and wind-thrashed.
Two horses in a nearby field come towards me, curious about this thing in brightly coloured clothes.
Clearly there is little traffic on this road.
Further on two men on horses say ‘hello' to me and one of them, hearing my English reply, stops to talk.
He asks where I am going.
I tell him Dynjandi — the local name for the waterfall that most visitors to Iceland would recognise as Fjallfoss — and he thinks a little .
It is possible, he tells me, that the pass over the mountain to the falls will be open now, but he is not sure.
Certainly it was not open two days ago.
The weather this winter has been very harsh with a lot of snow and wind.
In view of the fact that I am walking this is somewhat academic, but it gives us a point of contact.
I ask if they know anything about the snowy owl.
When I arrived in the airport I had seen the local paper which reported the sighting of one near Isafjördur.
Yes, the man has heard about it.
It was sighted near Bolungarvik, the other side of Isafjördur from here, but, who knows?
These  birds fly far.
I ask if they are frequent visitors.
Oh no.
If they were that common they would not be on page one of the paper.
He laughs.
It is a fair point.
Međ3adulur, north-west IcelandWe talk a little more, about the eider ducks and the weather, then the two men ride off.
They would look incongruous, like far-flung gouchos, were it not for their high-stepping Icelandic ponies.
They keep to the road and ride with amazingly straight backs.
I watch as they disappear down the road, then turn and walk through the hamlet which seems completely free of people.
Beyond, the road becomes pot-holed — it was only gravel at its best — as it continues to a headland where it is blocked by a rock fall.
I go up on to the headland where there are huge cliffs shot with crevices and water streams down the walls from melting snow.
The whole place is a shambles of falling rock, soft shaly rock, slaty rock; everything has been split apart by erosion.
It is an interesting place to stand and watch rocks falling; all the time I am there I hear them crashing down.
I am stopped by an unstable-looking scree slope.
When I walk on it the whole thing starts to move and I am soon covered in the grey dust I am stirring up; it fills my nostrils and triggers a memory that links the smell with rock climbing.
I recall a day when I was new to the sport and I recall too the smell when lightning struck the limestone cliff on which I was climbing.
Whether it is the memory of ancient insecurities, or the real threat of new ones I do not know, but I decide to go back.
Discretion would appear to be ‘the better part’; about fifty to sixty metres down from me on the right are some very steep — probably vertical — cliffs falling the last thirteen to seventeen metres into the sea and I have no desire to ride an avalanche down.
Back at the tent it is getting late, so I set up the Trangia and cook myself a meal.
It feels cold: I had hoped for spring but what I am finding is winter.
I eat the meal inside the tent to get away from the wind, and even there I need an extra jacket.
The wind drops slightly as I am making myself another cup of tea and I like the idea of going out to watch the sun go down.
I take a camera and sit on the edge of the water.
A vee of geese goes over, one goose honking at the setting sun.
It is one in the morning before the sun finally disappears and I am left with twilight rather than lowlight.
I edge back to the tent, I feel lonely, desperately lonely, and it's not just being alone that is doing it.
It is many things — the lethargy of the travel, and all that space.
In one direction only a little earthy bank separates me from the edge of the ocean, while in the other the valley goes back for miles and miles.
It goes back for ever .
Once I catch a glimpse of the light of a car or maybe a tractor a long way up the valley, and this sees to make my isolation even more profound.
Most of the time this isolation is what I seek, but today I just feel lonely.
I make hot chocolate so that I can sleep more easily and as I sip it I am suddenly overcome with weariness.
I crawl into my sleeping bag and curl up in a tight ball.
When I wake the air is full of the sound of curlews.
It would be nice to see gyrfalcon and sea eagle, king eider and divers, but it is the sound of the curlew that is the call of the wild.
All the blues have gone away.
The morning is grey and windy, but I can see all the way up the valley.
I breakfast quickly, drinking several cups of tea, knowing that in this wind I need to avoid dehydration on the grind over the pass.
It takes a long time to reach Dynjandi, but the weather improves as the day wears on, leaving me with wonderful views across the Arnarfjörđ3ur, its far peaks wreathed in clouds.
As the sun dips low the clouds bounce refracted red light off their bases.
it hurries across the sea towards me, in the way that only light can, making the water turn brown and pink, making its wave ends sparkle and flash.
At the water's edge snipe rise and trill, while on the valley side there are wheatears and redwings.
A quick search reveals one female redwing on a nest in the short scrubby beech-like bushes on the leeward side of a stream cutting.
Dynjandi is almost frozen at its sides, the light brilliantly reflected from the rivulets of snow and ice.
I sit near the fjord's edge and wonder whether to continue south towards Latrabjarg or whether to return north towards Drangajökull.
In the end the decision is made by the snowy owl.
I know it is unlikely that I will see it, but just the thought that I might is enough.
Next morning over breakfast I decide to go back into Þingeyri to catch a plane back to Ísafjöđ3ur in the hope that I can get a boat or bus from there.
This means retracing my steps for a mile or so, but the country is wild and beautiful, full of new things to see.
I start up the hill towards Dýrafjöđ3ur but before I reach the top I am treated to some Icelandic weather.
In this country they say that if you don't like the weather all you have to do is   wait five minutes and it will get better.
By the same token, if it is good you only have to wait five minutes and it will get worse.
A storm arrives from the west, the snow falling so thickly in a few minutes that I fear I will lose my way.
The temperature rises with the cloud cover, and the snow underfoot becomes wet and soft, making progress difficult and tiring.
I move to my left, knowing that there is a road there somewhere — it is always best to avoid roads, but it is even better to be able to see where you are.
The storm is terrible now, the snow thicker, the visibility worse.
I fall into the occasional thigh-deep drift and expend a great deal of effort in escaping.
Life is becoming bleak.
Eider duck next, Dýrafjödur, north-west IcelandRed-necked phalarope, near HöfnHarlequin duck, MývatnEventually I reach the road and follow it to its top, surprised by how close I was to the summit of the pass.
At the top, just off to the left, is a hut, placed there, I assume, to help struggling people like me.
I gratefully go in.
There are candles and a gas cylinder.
It is a place to be warm, a place to be dry, a place to hang up my jacket and to pull faces at the storm outside.
I assemble my Trangia and cook food, avoiding the almost overwhelming temptation to use the gas cylinder.
Some day, someone will be in greater need than me.
The hut seems the ideal place to stay the night if the storm holds, but I am not sure if I am allowed to: it is full of instructions which are all written in Icelandic.
Next morning dawns bright and clear; the storm has blown itself out in the night.
Icelandic weather is really buggering me about, I decide, and conditions are now near perfect except for the metre of soft snow that lies over everything in sight.
I make it down to Þingeyri in time to hear the good news that the plane has gone.
No matter.
A local man offers to ferry me across the fjord and I am soon on the way to Holt.
There is no real news there of the owl, but someone suggests that I try the hills above Núpur where there has been much activity lately.
‘Activity' seems to be one car — all I see as I meander my way through the hills above the lonely hamlet of Núpur. beyond it is the biggest fish-drying frame I have so far seen, with overflow fish hung on a wire fence alongside.
Some of these have fallen off and are blowing around, suffering, it would appear, from a tragic case of neglect.
I put one or two out of their misery by introducing them to a cup of coffee and my insides, not necessarily in that order.
It is like eating cardboard, and tastes about as good.
In the hills that side a long valley on the way to Sæbol there is another emergency hut.
I contemplate a hut-to-hut tour of north-west Iceland.
Outside this one there is a lone snow bunting pecking mournfully at a muddy patch of shingle that is all that shows through the snow.
The bunting is the only bird I see all day.
By nightfall I am fed up with the search and determined to leave tomorrow for at least one day on Drangajökull.
Starting early, I traverse the long ridge of hills that separates me from Isafjördur, arriving late in the afternoon.
The road from the town that goes east towards Drangajökull has collapsed and no buses or lorries can get through.
I try for a boat.
Fraganes , a good way of getting to the more remote spots — it makes an eleven-hour round trip regularly, several times each week — — has gone, and no one is going my way.
I stay local for a night, then climb the ridge above the far side of the fjord, making for Hestöfjordur and a view of the big glacier.
Snow conditions are perfect, and so is the view to Drangajökull.
On Hestfjördur a diver — — probably Great Northern — sculls away across the water as I approach.
It is not enough to make me forget that the owl remains elsewhere. Fish drying, Flateyri, north-west Iceland
THE TOURIST ROUNDThe bus that goes east from Reykjavik can be used to visit the better-known and most important sites.
But before you go that way — real joy lies at the end of each bus trip to the east -it is compulsory, or so you might think, to visit Þingvellir.
The site has a special significance for Icelanders, whose independence has been compromised on several occasions over the years.
In World War II there were Allied landings here.
The Icelanders protested, not because they supported the cause of Facisim or German expansion — given the choice they would doubtless have stood with the Norwegians, fellow Vikings — but because they were not asked to choose.
The Allies arrived one day by boat and threatened dire consequences if their wishes did not rapidly become the law of the land.
Today there is a US air base at Keflavik.
Indeed, until recently the flight that took you to Iceland landed at the base itself rather than on ‘real' Icelandic soil.
Go any day to the Blue Lagoon, a  curious place of billowing steam clouds and science-fiction B-movie film-set machinery, and the place will be filled with Americans, all of them covered in sulphur when they emerge.
The Icelandic attitude to the new usurpers is ambivalent.
‘Not sure that I want the Americans, fairly certain I want their dollars.'
To a people with such a tenuous hold on real freedom — one puff at the fish export market from the US would blow Iceland away — roots are important.
Therefore Þingvellir is important.
It is the site of the oldest parliament in the world.
Iceland was a democracy while white Americans were still Poles or Irish, still several dozens of generations from crossing the Atlantic.
(Isn't it even the case that it was an Icelandic Viking who discovered America?
And isn't it also true that he kept fairly quiet about it?) Þingvellir is a curious place.
What the tourists come to see is a raised dais of grass hemmed in by a retaining wall.
Behind, a stiff Icelandic flag waves in the breeze.
As a thrilling spectacle it has little to offer, but as a powerful totem it is almost unique in its place in European and western culture.
Site of the world's oldest parliament, ÞingvellirTo reach the dais from the windswept coach park the tourists file down a narrow gorge before negotiating a series of ladders and bridges.
Few of those disgorged from the solitary coach on the day that we were there noticed the gorge, yet it is spectacular in a way that the dais is not; a volcanic fissure and a geological feature of startling proportions and beauty.
If you follow it along from the historical site it leads you to a perfect waterfall, and then to a point where flat grass lies between the vertical gorge sides.
The walls here can be negotiated for a view of the Icelandic interior — — stunning wildness and extent.
We travelled east on a fine, clear morning, heading towards Gullfoss, the golden waterfall.
The first Arctic fox I had ever seen watched me as I arrived at Gullfoss late at night, then turned and headed off with its huge tail laid out behind it.
The waterfall takes your breath away when first you see it.
Its vast volume of water pours into a huge cleft in the earth that is thirty-three, metres deep and in some places only thirty-three metres wide; a long, parallel-sided cleft that becomes a gorge or even a canyon.
The river that makes the falls runs down towards us, hitting the cleft at right-angles. first there is a series of rapids where beautiful mists of water hang above white horses that gallop over rocks, then the water disappears into the cleft.
The spray from the falls is so dense that you cannot peer into it and you must rely on logic to believe that it is the same water that makes the river that snakes along the gorge a few hundred metres away.
In the spray perpetual rainbows are fixed in position as though their unseen feet were nailed to the base of the cleft.
Tony and I were alone at Gullfoss.
Alone, and exhilarated by the noise, the spray and the view — — and also by the fact that we were not ankle-deep in wrinkled cans and other crap, or being persuaded to buy Gullfossburgers by bright neon signs.
Nothing was there to compete with this wonder of the natural world.
We camped upriver from the falls, stalling the leap into the chasm of some of the water by boiling it on the Trangia and making it into Earl Grey tea.
I did not sleep well that night: it had been a great day and the call of the wild kept me nervous and excited.
Tony, most unusually, was already up and hard at work with his camera when I emerged  to sniff the morning air.
the sky was a beautiful blue, the sun in just the right position for the rainbows to come out of the cleft in exactly the right position photographically.
I made tea for him as he worked, watching a vee of geese heading for the interior as the kettle boiled.
For three hours we worked and drank, worked and ate, worked and packed.
And in all of that time we had Gullfoss to ourselves.
Gullfoss — a detail of the centre of the fallsGeysir is more what the tourist from Western Europe, or America — is used to, with its hotel and constructed pathways.
Yet for all it is more visitor-orientated it really is very low-key.
The hotel is elegant and modern, but it does not have a bolted-on section where you can buy spoons with ‘Present from Geysir’ written on them.
There is a garage/café where souvenirs of a kind can be bought but only a very good marketing man could   come up with something stunning from a spot where most of the time nothing is happening.
Gullfoss in winterGullfoss in summerThe constructed path is to help keep visitors off the basalt pavements which are delicate and fragile, taking aeons to create and seconds to destroy.
Follow it — it is an Orange Brick Road, which proves how close you can come to a real advertising coup without quite getting it right: I wonder if the café serves 6-Up — and it will lead you to the Great Geysir.
This is the daddy of all geysirs, the one that gave its name to the (now better-known) hot-water spouts elsewhere in the world.
Sadly, it no longer spouts, or if it does it has a frequency measured in years.
Interest lies with its small brother, Strokkur .
This does erupt, but not to a defined time schedule.
Stand close and you can watch the hot water of last time's spray pouring back into the spout hole.
The whole area, a thicker, stronger basalt pavement, is funnel-shaped and the water pours back into the central hole that has been emptied to a depth of three or more metres.
I am not precise on depth because there is no great temptation to hang over the hole and peer down.
When the water has almost filled the hole, to perhaps a foot or so below the top, there is an audible pause in the proceedings.
The water level drops and then, woosh , up it all comes, first rising like a column — at this stage it looks like a vaguely blue shaggy ink cap toadstool — then blasting itself apart in a flourish of steam.
Stand close enough to see the column form and you will probably be pelted with near-boiling water.
Other than Strokkur the Geysir site is a little disappointing.
There are bubbling pools and mud that goes gloop but there is nothing to compare with Krísuvík or Hveragerđ3i.
Krísuvík is south and slightly west of Reykjavik, reached by a road across a beautiful lava field and through valleys that are almost civilized, or by a fine walk that takes these valleys and continues along a ridge above the bird-filled lake of Kleífarvatn.
The Krísuvík pools are not signed, either on the road or when you get there.
If you do not know they are there, or if you do not know where they are, you will miss them.
The site offers only one clue — a continuously blowing steam hole that in the right weather is visible from the road.
You will be alone when you arrive, almost certainly.
Duck boards will take you past a hot waterfall towards the blow hole.
Pass on the windward side if you don't want a hot bath, and you will reach an area of incredible beauty.
Sulphur and soil have combined to produce colours of Van Goghian purity.
Things go hiss and glug .
At one point a whole area steams gently so that the visitor can view the sun through a vapoury haze.
By contrast, Hveragerđ3i — ‘Hurdy Gurdy Land' to Tony and I, as the real pronunciation is a jawbreaker — is an upper-class thermal area.
Genteel pools of startling transparency lie quietly amid small, measured, tidy heaps of yellow and orange soils.
Mud pools wait until you are looking the other way before plopping discreetly.
I felt that if I looked back early the mud pool would blush and say ‘pardon’.
A pipeline meanders among the springs, collecting steam for distribution to rows of neat houses.
Iceland's horticultural college is here, the steam heating its greenhouses.
The tourist literature speaks of banana trees, but the singular of the noun ‘tree’ would be better employed.
It is certainly not a good idea to arrive hoping to fill a basket, or even a hand (unless you know an employee) with greenhouse fruit.
Beyond Geysir there is lazy travelling.
In Selfoss the assistant in the chemist's tries to sell us surgical spirit when we ask for meths and there is a pantomime while Tony explains to her, in best sign language, that what he wants is spirit for a Trangia.
Watching him perform is like watching charades.
Two words.
The whole thing.
You want to pour it?
No, no.
You want to rub it on your buttocks?
No.
Sounds like…
I am reminded of the time when we were leaving Italy after a while in the Dolomites and spent all our Italian cash in the last café making a phone call, only to find that the café owner was adding a surcharge to the bill.
She wanted another 35p (about two hundred million lire) and was insistent.
One lad with us, a genuine Cockney, finished up by explaining to this (probably normally) mild-mannered Italian who spoke no English at all that we couldn't pay because we were ‘borassic’.
I remember thinking that use of rhyming slang was going to help clear matters up in no time.
The assistant fetched a man from the back — please can I see the male assistant to explain what I want? — who nodded gravely.
Raudspirit , he said.
Seljalandsfoss is a ponytail of a waterfall throwing itself clear of the rim of its cliff to look like a 1950s American college girl shaking her head.
for just that reason Seljalandsfoss is best viewed from the side, unlike most other waterfalls.
Skógafoss is a sixty-seven metre monster, so wide and so tall, and so much falling in a single sweep that clouds of spray are produced.
Tony sends me forward into the spray.
It will make a lovely picture he yells at me above the crashing noise.
I go forward, reluctantly.
Periodically I pause and look back.
Each time he waves me forward.
It is, he assures me when I get back, a really good shot.
I am delighted for him.
I am also wet through.
Beyond the big waterfall is a desert of black sand, then lava fields, the black and red-brown lumps dotted with a whitish lichen, then another lava field where the lichenous moss is bright green.
The moss looks soft and springy, like the moss of the UK, but is hard and rough and dry like tinder.
We camped in the official site at Skaftafell.
The thought of doing so appalled us, but there are regulations.
We are aware that those who follow us may be judged by our behaviour, and exploration of wilderness areas brings responsibilities as well as pleasures.
As we erected the tent Tony became wistful again.
Many years ago Tony came to Iceland as a raw teenage cyclist.
While I came to the Arctic when I realized that climbing, my first love, was losing its appeal, Tony was born to the area, loving it, one might believe, even before he saw his first photograph of it.
His trip here was a homecoming, and there were times when I could see in his eyes that he was reliving his first memories.
That first trip was a bold move.
The Cod War  was less than popular.
To get over the problem he sometimes insisted that he was Welsh, claiming that the Welsh disliked the English as much as the Icelanders.
It doesn't sound like much of a cover story to me, and I prefer the idea that the locals thought Tony was just an eccentric who should not be allowed near sharp objects.
At the time of his trip he was such a novelty that he was featured in several Reykjavik newspapers, and treated with great hospitality wherever he went.
He even managed to bring a touch of real culture to the island, having arrived with tea (leaves not bags) and a teapot.
He told me the story again as we sat in the campsite in Skaftafell.
Then he told me about his climb up Iceland's highest mountain.
SkógafossMy first view of Hvannadalshnúkur was from the plane as I flew into Höfn from Reykjavik.
In those days the final link in the Iceland circle road had not been made and I needed a plane, bound for Fagurhólsmýri, to reach the National park.
I arrived at Skaftafell to find several groups of campers, all wild-eyed outdoor types, I suppose not unlike me.
It was nice to be with others; I had just had three weeks on my tod with company only in Reykjavik campsite.
The only other official  site I used was in Isafjördur but in the first week of June, at minus five degrees, I had been alone.
Strokkur erupting, GeysirStrokkur, GeysirThe other campers were good company and we all had a good laugh.
‘Would you like to join us on a walk?’ they asked.
The casual conversation turned to panic on my part.
‘We're going up Hvannadalshnúkur…’
I had never been on a glacier before.
Could I make it?
It was nearly 2,200 metres and from sea level.
Ben Nevis was a long drag; Snowdon is less than half the height and there you cheat by starting at 300 metres.
And, unlike cycling, there is no freewheeling downhill.
Was I fit enough?
Would my cycling shoes grip on the ice?
So many questions flashed through my mind.
What am I to do?
But, yes, I was fit-I had, after all, cycled 22,500 kilometres last year and had walked the Pennine Way the year before.
Anyway, what the hell?
This was the chance of a lifetime.
Before I could think any more my mouth had decided.
I was going.
That afternoon I went to the café at Fagurhólsmýri and bought a pair of Tuf workman boots.
They didn't have my size but they would be OK.
They would have to be OK.
I was going to make it.
The others had paid a lot of money to go on this guided trip.
Their package included walks around the Skaftafell area and, should the weather allow, a climb of Hvannadalshnúkur.
After five days' walking they were obviously all fit and experienced.
They were a group of twelve, mainly Icelandic, but with two Norwegians and a Canadian, and now joined by an English cyclist who pretended, when convenient, to be Welsh, The intended route was up the south-west side of the Öræfajökull, the glacier being climbed during the night, although in June the sun only barely dips below the northern horizon at midnight.
Even so , I was assured, the sun being low and behind the mountains would allow a firm crust to develop on top of the snow; there is nothing worse than deep, soft, wet snow.
We left the campsite at ten in the evening, the party reduced because a few thought they wouldn't make it, in a bus rescued from a St Trinians film set.
Although Iceland had changed some years before to driving on the right, the bus which was well past its sell-by date — was right-hand drive; the first bit of England I had seen for three weeks.
Thankfully we left it behind at Sandfell, a small isolated ruin about half-way down the road to Hof.
Our guide was there to meet us, his silver hair outshone only by the enormity of his rucsac containing about twenty-five flags on long poles.
Were we marking out a soccer pitch?
I had never been walking with flags before.
This was more power for the cause — these people use tea bags and drive on the wrong side of the road, they hang fish on clothes lines and then eat them dry.
Hot water pool, Hveragerđ3iDescending from the summit of HvannadalshúkurThe climb to the snowline was not pleasant, and I was haunted by memories of the boredom of Ben Nevis's path, even though here there was no path.
Neither was there Wendy, a girl in my form (it had been a school trip) who had legs that never quit, long legs, the type rampant fell men dream of.
She made the ascent of Nevis a pleasure, but now I was grown up and Wendyless.
I had also become a cyclist.
I remembered again why I preferred my bike: when you are shattered you can get off and walk.
Here I was shattered and there was no alternative.
Rocks splintered by centuries of cyclic thaws crumbled under my boots.
Our way was up to one of the few glacier tongues that wasn't too steep and broken up by crevasses.
‘If we climb high on the rock we can then drop to flatter ice.’
How I longed for this, inspired by the word ‘flatter.’
I hate steep, relentless climbs, especially at two in the morning in low cloud.
Two young lads from Hafnarfjödur, a small fishing village near Reykjavik, were going like loonies.
I decided to keep a low profile, after all I was a guest.
And I hadn't paid.
Anyway, I could go no faster, being the slow-starter, long-distance plodder type.
Helgi, the guide, laughed at them.
‘You watch them tire,’ he said to me, ‘those youngsters can't pace themselves.
It is a long, long way.’
Well thank you Helgi for those words of encouragement.
And why was he confiding this dire information to me?
Couldn't he see I was knackered?
The ice eventually came, small snow fields at first leading to the vastness of the great glacier. pleasure was dawning and so was the sun.
The snow, hard snow, was easy to walk on.
The slopes were gentle and convex like the outer optic of a huge fish-eye lens.
The sun rose magnificently over one of these slopes, warm hues glistening off the windswept, spiky blue ice.
Being anchor man, the one at the back of the rope, and because we were walking directly into the sun, I delighted in the shadows of those in front.
The light danced about, we were above the thin cloud line and suddenly my pains had gone.
Oh, how I love the light.
Am I all there?
Why am I moved by such simple things?
The obvious was now explained.
Helgi dumped the flags and revealed all — he had some farming to do and was going back!
Was this guy real?
A guide that didn't.
He insisted it was simple — go in that direction and plant the flags at regular intervals.
If the wind blows and snow fills your footprints the safe way between the crevasses will be lost.
The flags they tell you where to go, you see?
OK?
He left, and we were left confused.
The morning sun compensated for our loss by offering inspiration.
The Icelanders had seen precious little sun that summer and peeling noses were instant and plentiful.
Handkerchiefs held in place by the nose clips of sunglasses alleviated some of the worst effects but the speed of burning was staggering.
For me it was paradise; I was already brown.
Glacier walking is a piece of cake; well this bit was, with rolling hills of dazzling serenity.
Crevasses were walked around or jumped over, and those of any size were given respectful avoidance.
Wow, I was enjoying this.
It was not comparable to cycling, in fact it was so different that comparison was a nonsense.
The youngsters were also enthusiastic, but tiring, their antics and extreme youth catching up on them.
To help I now  had three rucsacs on my back.
I am not really a hero, they were only small daysacks, but my fitness surprised me.
Mars bars, a rip-off at three times the UK price, taken at regular intervals, got us there.
The final peak stands quite proud of the regular ice and we pondered the way up.
Large caves guarded by huge icicles, some fifteen feet tall, sheltered us from the wind as we ate lunch and did some more pondering.
Without an ice axe and with only borrowed instep crampons my climbing ability was somewhat limited, and this was not the place to take risks.
But who could get this far and not just push it a little bit?
So, still roped from the crevasse fields, we gingerly crawled to the top.
The clouds that were with us on the climb had gone, opening the way to spectacular views, views helped by the air being free of dust and haze.
There were views to the sea, views west towards Reykjavik, in fact views in every direction, as long as it was down.
I was on top of the world.
The Selfoss chemist's raudspirit was awful.
It spat a worrisome mixture of steam and flame out periodically and covered the bottom of the pans with black ooze, a treacly goo that got itself on to my pile jacket and put me in good humour for an hour or so.
I washed the jacket.
Overnight there was a frost and it went hard and crinkly.
Tony offered to make breakfast, an event so rare that there was a chance parliament would reconvene at Þingvellir.
He manufactured a concoction of such awesome vileness that it defies, even now, reasonable description.
It bore a marked resemblance to something that had already been eaten once before.
I made an excuse and settled for tea and muesli.
Tony went back to his past trip again, this time concentrating on the visual aspects of an air stewardess.
The memory was triggered by talk of a young woman I had met on one trip who showed me Dyrhólæy and the sea pinnacles of Reynisdrangar near Vik.
She was at pains to tell me — several times — that her male friends were divided into two groups.
There were ‘friends’, with a small ‘f’, people, like me, whose company was interesting and pleasant but who were just casual acquaintances.
Then there were ‘friends’ with a big ‘F’ who were lovers.
I had been greatly amused, although I think I should not have been.
Tony was equally amused at the story, and wondered whether there was a third group, too, of ‘FRIENDS’ with a big ‘F’, big ‘R’, big ‘I’ and big ‘ENDS’.
Our trip had been timed to coincide with nesting, although the birds were confused by the late spring and many had not yet started to build.
Nevertheless, on such a good day we decided to visit Ingólfshöfdi.
We gratefully accepted a lift to the nearby village of Fagúrholsmýri.
Tony assured me that there was a supermarket in the village, which seemed unlikely in a place that had less than ten houses, but turned out to be almost true — — the garage sold bits and pieces.
As he said (and not for the first time), you can't beat a bit of local knowledge.
We had a coffee, bought some reinforcements, deciding to leave the skyr that we had both become addicted to until later, turned south and headed for the sea.
Ingólfshöfdi is an island about six or seven kilometres off-shore, but separated from the mainland by a saltwater lagoon rather than by open sea.
Between us and the lagoon a number of rivers made their way seaward.
As we crossed ground that became increasingly boggy, the vegetation increasingly salt-spattered and sparse, Tony began to enthuse on the likelihood of our seeing geese and red-necked phalaropes.
I was more interested in how we were going to reach the sea, and in how we were going to cross it.
The reaching was straightforward enough: at the first river we took off our boots, rolled up our trousers to mid-thigh and, dividing about thirty kilograms of photographic and emergency equipment between us, waded across.
It was icy-cold, and soon numbed both feet and legs into submission.
By the time we had crossed two more we had decided to stop drying our feet and re-booting after each one, and set off across the bogs in bare feet.
We saw no phalaropes, but did find, quite by chance, the nest of a pink-footed goose.
The goose was sitting on eggs and flew off as we approached.
That worried us as there were several great skuas working the sky above the bog, and we spent some time waiting for the goose to return before setting off again.
The sea lagoon turned out to vary in depth from a few inches to a couple of feet.
Beneath the water the sand was, not surprisingly, the sinking, knackering type.
Mid-way, after a long, hard time, we stopped for a rest — at least , as much of a rest as you can get standing in knee-deep water unable to put down your rucsac.
Ultimately we escaped the cold, sticky grasp of sand   and sea, only to be faced by three miles of sand on its own.
The sand was not golden-brown and sun-kissed.
This being Iceland it was black, jet-black weathered lava, and was kissed only by a light breeze coming off the glacier.
As it is occasionally covered by the sea this sand is not compact so that at times we could walk fairly comfortably, but at other times we sank in unexpectedly, which broke up our rhythm and made us tired and frustrated.
Finally, after a desert journey of Lawrencian proportions — or so it seemed — we reached the base of Ingólfshöfdi.
En route to Ingólfshöfđ3iPuffin, Ingólshöfđ3iPtarmigan, MývatnThe island, in truth little more than a detached headland, is about seventy metres high, and progress on to it is by way of one of many gullies filled with sand.
This sand was dry, but climbing a 70-metre high-angled sand dune is not easy.
In fact it is downright unfriendly and I was very pleased to be at the top.
Pleased, that is , until I discovered that I had forgotten to bring the tea bags — the subsequent ‘Well, why didn't you bring them then's, ‘Why is it always my fault's reminded me of the Quentin Crisp line that marriage was impossible for him because he could not have tolerated an endless succession of mornings when the first words he heard were, ‘And another thing’ — and that there were no birds.
I lug the kitchen sink and assorted extras — but no tea bags, Tony points out — to this island to look at birds and what do I find?
And so on .
We crossed to the seaward, as opposed to the lagoonward side, where there are 70-metre cliffs.
Interestingly, it was not, as is usual, the noise that told us we were approaching a large nesting cliff, but an almost overpowering smell of guano .
The cliff on Ingólfshöfđ3i is the only sea cliff for miles.
There are several inland cliffs, but these are too far from the sea for auks and gulls, and so the whole, and large, sea bird population of this part of Iceland is concentrated on to this one cliff.
The result is that every ledge, from those that would take a small tent to those that a modern rock  climber would blanch to see, is packed with birds.
To add to this confusion the steep-angled grass above is riddled with puffin burrows; later in our stay we found that attempts to move tripods closer to the edge put us in real danger of disappearing downwards, compete with the odd half-acre of apparently stable cliff top.
The black sand beach, Ingófshöfđ3iThe sun came out and it grew warm on this sheltered side of the island.
We had been led to expect all the guillemots, but there were no black guillemots either on the ledges or in the sea.
There were commons, some of them bridled, and there were also Brünnich's.
There were plenty of kittiwakes, but on closer inspection some of them turned out to be Icelandic gulls.
We saw no razorbills, which was a surprise, and the few little auks we saw were all out on the water, but the puffins made up for the loss.
Never before have I seen puffins that are so red, so yellow, so black.
In the high-angled sun the feet of some reflected the light so that their breasts appeared red too.
We put Tony's tripod close to the cliff edge, wishing that we had a rope when each of us fell into unexpected crevasses in the cliff-top grass.
I retreated to leave the master to it and lay happily in the sun.
It really was difficult to believe that we could be so far north.
Surely this must be the UK — kittiwakes, puffins and guillemots.
And that small bird there must be a… snow bunting.
It was a pair, in fact, doing a little late courting, and then, just to push the point home, a great skua floated into sight.
Tony finished his work and we set off back towards the sea.
I went a little ahead, drawn towards a huge black sand dune on the island's top.
The dune offered the definitive photograph of Iceland, its top an absolutely flawless surface of jet-black lava sand and, behind it, Vatnajökull, even bigger, and glowing white and pink in the evening sun.
So taken was I with this vision of perfect Iceland that I did not realise that I had walked into a skua colony, not, that is , until one fearless great skua hit me.
Whatever he hit me with, feet or wings, it hurt and almost knocked me off balance.
For as long as it took me to get out of range, several birds used me for bombing practice, coming so close on occasions that ducking was a necessity rather than a flamboyant gesture.
Tony enjoyed it all hugely.
After that there was just the gully to descend, the sinking sand to cross, the sea to wade and the bog to hop.
As we hopped we saw grey phalaropes, inquisitive little birds seemingly unbothered by our presence, happily showing themselves now that there was insufficient light to film them.
After a night during which vengeful wind pushed rain through flysheet and tent, spraying our sleeping bags, we were joined by Ann and John, friends of Tony.
Their chief interest was in walking rather than in birds, so we compromised with a day that started near Svartifoss, a waterfall that tumbles between black basalt columns.
Beyond, the ground became awkwardly mixed.
At first there was semi-cultivated land covered with tufted grass.
The rusting remains of an old piece of farm machinery were evidence of some Icelander breaking his back to extract a living from the land.
And, it would seem, failing.
There is an area where the micro-ecology changes rapidly, so that almost with every pace there is new vegetation clinging precariously to the spare soil.
Then there is that saturated semi-peat that is often underfoot in the island, especially on the middle ground.
Here, though, even the higher ground was wet, so that the difficulty of making progress barely relented until we reached the snow.
There had been no real objective, except a vague idea that if conditions were good Hvannadalshnúkur might as well be climbed.
But we were barely half-way before clouds crept down the high peaks to threaten us with rain or sleet.
The temperature rose a little and the snow became impossible; at every step we had to haul our legs out of deep holes.
We stopped.
from here Skeidarársandur, an unusual feature when seen from ground level, becomes even more extraordinary.
There are square miles of shifting, sinking sand where the normally clean-cut edge between sea and land has become blurred.
In the opposite direction, above us and to the left, was a high serac-edged glacial wall with, far below it, a run-out — a broad, lethargic river the colour of putty.
We retreated, crossing a ridge of the mountain to reach a glacial tongue of Örafæjökull.
From far above the glacier looked like modern art, a canvas of grey-white curiously etched with black lines that appeared random at first sight, but in which a symmetry could at length be discerned.
We used the tongue in its lower reaches, where it licked land close to the edge of the Skaftafell site.
For our latest companions this was a new experience, but the glacier was benign and they were confident, unhurried walkers who found pleasure rather than because of the crevasses or steep, unstable cliffs.
Here the problem was the muck.
All glaciers are dirty where they end with that sticky paste of ground-up rock.
But this was dreadful, threatening to cover everything and to get inside it too.
We were pleased to reach the river and the ground beyond.
On the way to the camp we passed a boulder where Tony and I competed for rock climbing idiot of the evening.
Tony jumped from high up, landed heavily and pulled a face.
In the years we have been going to the Arctic (at least one summer and one winter trip now for as long as I can remember), we have acquired odd niggles.
Each of us carries an unreliable ankle for instance , and Tony had just given his a jolt.
He eased it back to the site.
When morning came he was in pain and not best pleased.
An easy day was called for, using the new car — what luxury! — to visit the northern hemisphere's largest great skua colony.
I tried to cheer him up with memories of the last time his ankle was hurting, when we slept in a sheep herder's cave — lined with graffiti that was centuries old — on the way from Landmannalaugar to the coast near Vik.
The country in the south had been really weird, with mushrooms of crumbling lava and wide flat rivers to cross, and it had rained for days, which had added to the general air of unreality as these features kept emerging from the mist.
He did not respond.
The skua colony turned out to be impressive, with few eggs but a host of great and Arctic skuas all intent on protecting their chosen nest site at all costs.
Such dedication was admirable, as was the aerial ability of the birds, which wheeled and dived, pulled up over our heads, wheeled and dived again.
Tony limped along with his tripod sticking two feet out of the top of his rucsac to protect his head.
We left the birds in peace, moving on to a river and lake site that offered Tony better angles for his camera.
He was finding walking a chore so we left him, following the river inland towards its glacial snout source.
We searched for kilometres — it seemed — to find a crossing point, eventually reaching a lake and being forced to cross at a place that was nowhere near as good as a dozen we had passed and dismissed as unsuitable.
The glacier beyond was dirty and torturous, but we trekked down it to reach a sandspill outfall.
The river we had crossed was to our left and was not, as we first thought, melt water from the spout; that formed a river to our right.
We trekked across the wet sand towards Tony on the far bank ahead of us.
By the time we reached Tony it was obvious we would never find a crossing point.
He was hugely amused by it, the more so as we paced up and down in exasperation.
Finally, sensing that we were on a loser and not keen on the mile-long trek back to the crossing point, I took off boots and socks and walked into the fast-flowing stream.
I had expected it to be cold but it surprised me with a suddenness that wrenched my breath away.
The river bottom was ridged sand, a difficult and unkind footing, that combined with the cold and the rush to make me want to go fast while forcing me to go slow.
I teetered across, on the edge of tipping up, a tightrope walk between panic and despair.
Tony caught it all on film.
Jökulsárlón is a beautiful place.
Close to the sea Breiđ3amerkurjökull, a broad flat snout of Vatnajökull, dies into this lake, the melt water exiting along a wide, fast channel into the sea.
On the southern side there is a tern colony, and the birds hover above our heads like noisy butterflies while we pad carefully between groups of their precious eggs.
In the lake seals surface and stare.
The glacier ends in a cliff that calves small icebergs that head seaward, grind to a halt when they hit the sand base of the river and dissolve in tears at the indignity of it all.
By Svalbard or Greenland standards the bergs are small, but they are nice enough in their setting, the stranded ones, sculpted by wind, sun, and rain, are brilliant blue on their shadowed sides.
Along at the river's mouth, at the standing wave formed where the incoming sea and outgoing melt water meet, a flock of terns hover and dive like gnats in the summer air.
Each surfaces from its dive with what looks like a sand eel.
Among the cloud of terns a solitary Arctic skua spins and wheels, selecting an individual bird and pursuing it to try to persuade it — bully it — to drop its catch.
The tern is swift, turning tightly among the flock to avoid the pirate.
The skua is astonishingly agile for so big a bird, but cannot keep up among the throng and gives up.
four or five times as I watch the skua tries and each time it fails.
It would surely take less effort to catch a fish itself.
Back at the campsite beside the iceberg lake Ann and John have made tea (much to Tony's disgust, since he is mainly a coffee man).
Earl Grey never seemed such a decent chap, and we laze back to  enjoy his brew.
It is foul.
After a few moments we realize why.
The tidal reach of the sea fills the lake so that at all times the water is brackish.
There is a resigned look from Ann and Tony, but John and I (the more English pair?) take ice axes and haul a small berg ashore, beating lumps off it for the tea.
The Trangia looks good with ice clumps poking out of its kettle.
And the tea tastes even better.
Next day I am taken to Höfn to catch a plane back to Reykjavik, leaving the others to continue to Mÿvatn and the north.
On the way red-necked phalaropes at last show themselves, tame, almost friendly birds that come towards the camera.
They are nothing like the divers we have tried to photograph and largely failed to capture because of their timidity.
Tony surprises an oncoming motorist by assuming a position that leaves his legs on the gravel road but takes the rest of him down among the lake-side vegetation.
It is an amazing sight, the more so for being a waste of time.
On our side of the road, where the water is within a metre of the gravel edge, the phalaropes have come within spitting distance for a better look.
Höfn is a straggling village — aren't they all? — — with a row of brightly-coloured ships in the harbour and a fine memorial out on a headland.
Of the town itself I remember only two things.
One was a small café that sold pizza and chips for less than the small fortune we expected, and served by a girl friendlier than we could have hoped for.
The second thing was…
I can't remember the second thing.
The plane lifted off but the weather did not and I was denied a view of Vatnajökull and the central plateau.
Below and behind Ann, John and Tony moved east and north.
Tony takes up the journey.
I remember the desert crossing, vividly.
The dust storms made my new bike very dirty.
Now, many  years later, I am in the luxury of a hire car.
Luxury?
I think not in truth.
It is very tedious, although it does minimize the more boring distances, allowing detailed exploration, by boot, of the areas of greater interest.
Having been forced out of the eastern fjords in endless rainswept misery we headed for Mývatn, Gođafoss and Akureyri, three attractions in the north of Iceland.
The route to Dettifoss, the greatest waterfall in Europe (fifty metres high and enormous in volume) was still closed, and perhaps will not open this year due to the extraordinarily long and hard winter.
True four-wheel drive vehicles or those with time for a 30-kilometre trek could have probably made it, but we, having neither time nor lockable differentials, carried on across the edge of Mývatnsöræfi, a huge featureless desert of lava and ash fields.
A desperate place.
The surface of Skaftafellsjökull from KristinartíndarCivilization is once again reached, the steam jets from prolific geothermal activities like flagpoles bending in the wind.
This is the area of Mývatn famous in the guidebooks for everything except the bleeding obvious — the stench.
Námafjall is a yellow mountain, offer (to those of no nose) stupendous views of the whole Mývatn area.
But first we make a stop at the east foot of the hills, a highly active area of slimy, bubbling sulphur pits.
There are memories you never forget — and they are revolting memories — and here they come again.
On my solo bike trip I spent two nights and a day in the Reykjahliđ3 campsite thunderbox after a visit here.
My insides were coming out.
This time I got out of the car and felt my stomach heave again.
Reflex action?
John accused me of wimpish behaviour, so we did the tourist bit around the pits.
Blurps and blops emit gases, and the smell is devastating.
I'm the wimp? Lava formations, MývatnWhere are you going John?
‘I'm just going,’ he said, his face the colour of the ground — yellow.
Some poor Dutch guy was being ordered by his woman to stand right in the steamy fumes for a photo.
Jesus, love is… having to stand in a sulphur plume?
Not bloody likely.
It was time to leave.
I couldn't take any more.
Ahead the round-Iceland ring road (sorry, rubble trail) leads to a newish geothermal power station called Krafla, generating steam from subterranean heat.
This area is active.
One impressive crater, Viti — the name means hell — — some 300 metres in diameter, was formed on 17 May 1724 as part of a five-year eruption.
The area last saw eruptions in 1975 and 1954: perhaps it's time to go.
Access to Viti is through the power station grounds and on to the road's end, although with the late spring the road was just another snow field.
The power station was unlike any I had previously seen.
There was the same turbine house, but there were also huge plastic multi-coloured geodesic domes covering steam taps, pipes leaking noxious gas and a general weirdness.
Mývatn is over the hill, past more vile-smelling industrial delights.
Some hero has at last heard our cry and painted a blue sky.
It had been a long time since we last saw one of those, so we bought ice cream, sat in the sun and wrote postcards at the Reykjahlid shop.
Life can be good on the tourist trail.
Close by are the famous Dimmuborgir, Grjótagjá  and Stóragjá underground hot springs.
On my last visit I swam in the Grjótagjá pools — a true delight for someone so young and so unused to mixed nude dipping.
Geothermal activities have so increased in recent years that these baths are now closed; they are too hot, too dangerous.
Even access is not encouraged, and the tracks leading to the caverns are also closed.
Instead we did the trail just south of Reykjahlid, climbing a lava mound overlooking the great lake.
The warmth was stupendous, the east and north of Iceland enjoying some amazing summer temperatures, over 20°C and climbing.
Mývatn itself is famous for its peculiar lava formations and its birds.
Only a very disinterested idiot could miss, and be unimpressed by, either.
John and Ann (although Ann to a lesser extent) were close contenders as they actively tried to get a tan.
I went to do some work, attempting to photograph some ducks and mergansers that were sheltering from the sun.
They steadfastly refused to come anywhere near close enough.
But I am long on stamina and waited for a red-breasted merganser aimlessly doing nothing under the cliff on which lay the dozing duo.
patiently, even more so than usual, I wished it out of the shade.
A 60th at full bore is a bit dicey with a 500mm lens hand held in a stagnant bog.
Come out in the open you, you… delightful, beautiful… that's it.
Sulphur pits, Mývatn‘DO YOU WANT SOME TEA, TONE?’
The shout terrified the bird as well as me, and I captured whitish streaks just discernible on an   otherwise blank Kodachrome.
I was soaked from lying in manky bog-like horrids, stalking some half-witted bird around lava lagoons, and John asked if I want tea.
Of course I bloody well did.
It was a delicious, if small, compensation.
Bubbling mud pit, MývatnGođ3afossThe south-west outflow of Mývatn was more successful.
Harlequin ducks were enjoying the rapids and sun, toing and froing, preening and looking most elegant, and I was enjoying myself, crawling commando-style at the water's edge, despite the odd passer-by's curious gaze.
Strange people, tourists.
Despite my luck with the Harlequin ducks the Barrow's goldeneyes declined to come close enough and I had still not got a good shot when, with reluctance, we left Mýatn.
It was sad to go, but Godafoss was waiting to be photographed in the evening sun.
I thought the land beside the ‘Fall of the Gods’ would make a good campsite, and it did.
I spent a long time photographing the falls, taken with their grace.
They are not particularly high, but very elegant and their remote location makes a visit a must.
The falls were in good fettle for the shots, with a lot of spring melt water and plenty of ptarmigan (for us, ‘chainsaws’, because of their call).
They were in unusual plumage.
In the mating season the male usually has a striking red-orange eyebrow, but these were still nearly all white although it was already June.
We ate well and watched yet another super sunset, a pastime any northern traveller will soon develop, the acute angle of the sun giving hours of once-off enjoyment.
At times like these, while I am watching a midnight sunset or sunrise, I shed a tear for those poor campers putting up with long hours of dark in the Himalayas or the like.
But then, we are all different.
A quick bit of mental maths told me that 4.30am was the ideal time for photographs; then the sun would fill the natural arc of Godafoss with light, a low, warm-coloured morning delight.
My schoolboy physics reminded me that the sun would be well below the magic 42 °, the limit of its elevation that will create — from the waterfall's mist — a single refraction rainbow.
It should be very good.
It probably was, but we didn't get up; we aren't completely stupid.
Akureyri is the capital of North Iceland with a population of about 14,000, with, amongst other  attractions, three memorial museums and Listđ3urinn, a public park and botanical garden with various types of trees and over 400 Icelandic plants.
My immediate interest is the pool.
Every town in Iceland has a swimming pool, usually geothermally heated and part of social normality.
Swimming in open-air hot bathwater in view of ice-topped peaks is different, wonderfully different — cleansing, relaxing and just good.
At the edge there are usually secondary pools where hot water, up to 45 °C in some cases, will drain you away, assuming you can even get into the water.
I close my eyes and forget the world.
Tomorrow it is on to Reykjavik and another trip will be over.
Tomorrow.
Just after midnight on 23 January 1973 a 2 kilometre-long fissure opened to the east of Heimæy, the town on the island of the same name, the largest of Vestmannæyjar (the Westmann Islands) off Iceland's southern edge.
From the fissure poured lava, blood-red lava glowing like the fires of hell in the night.
Most, but not all, of the islanders retreated to the mainland, returning five months later to discover that their island had grown by over a square mile and that nearly half the town had been destroyed.
The statistics of the eruption are outstanding.
Over one and a half million cubic metres of ash were swept out of what remained of the town.
The new land comprised 240 million cubic metres of lava which had spewed out at 1,100 °C (2,012°F) and was cooled by dowsing with six million tons of sea water in an effort to halt its relentless drive.
There are two volcanoes today, Eldfell having been created by the 1973 eruption and joining Helgafell to create a twin pair of cones to the south-east of the new town.
Helgafell is a disappointment.
From afar it looks like the classical volcanic cone and it is with a mounting sense of excitement that I climb the last section of loose lava gravel and sharp, welded lava rock.
A snow bunting twitters away to my left, laughing — as it turns out — at what is about to happen next, when I find that the volcanic dish is shallow and filled with grass and wind-blown rubbish.
The view however, is spectacular, taking in most of the fifteen islands of the Westmann archipelago.
An incongruous panorama dial names the islands, except Surtsey.
The eye is inevitably drawn to this huge Dundee cake, the world's newest land, born after a four-year gestation that started in 1963.
Northward, the edges of Eldfell are startlingly coloured with the browns, reds and oranges of burnt rock.
The warmth of the sub-lava magna can still be felt through the feet.
Dig down — use a stick, not your hand — for a foot or so and drop in a piece of paper.
It chars, turns black and crinkles.
Smoke wisps up and then it explodes in flames.
I wish, silently, that I had my Trangia.
Oh, to boil a kettle on red-hot rock.
The walk back to the town through the new lava fields is strange.
Weird shapes abound, here a Red Indian profile, there a church steeple.
The journey through the lava forest ends at the town, a fish-smelling old port, seedy and in need of a coat of paint, yet vibrant and friendly.
Beyond, the huge sea cliffs of the northern edge of Heimæy form a sharp ridge that offers an airy walk.
In spring those cliffs are alive with auks and gulls, and my favourite bird, the gannet.
On a sea of evening light Páll Helgason steers his boat towards the sun, poking it between stacks and through arches, sometimes into gaps that leave me thinking I can touch the rock walls on either side.
Here and there the ropes of egg and bird collectors flap against the cliffs.
Páll tells me that no one catches puffin any more, not since the government tried to tax the hunt.
But every eating house in town has puffin on the menu, I say, where do they come from?
Who knows? he asks with a grin.
As we head back towards Heimæy I watch the last of the light tinkering with the wave-tops.
I have seen photographs of orca, both still and movie, close-up and underwater, but nothing prepares me for the sight of a real one that scythes out of the water 100 metres or so away from the boat.
There is a triangular fin and the arch of a back.
It is a lazy movement but in an instant it is gone.
In that instant the power and grace of the animal is evident.
It is an awesome sight.
Páll tells me he once had his boat in the centre of a leaping school of orca.
In Norway, I tell him, the orca is called spekkhogger , flesh ripper.
He smiles.
That night we eat puffin, just to be sociable.
It is dark red with the crumbling consistency of pig's liver.
I expect it to taste mildly fishy or, perhaps, mildly gamey.
It is neither.
It is vile. 
WINTERFrom an early age Haflor Ferdinandson has been in love with 4WD vehicles.
He bought one as soon as his bank balance could survive the impact of bringing all that fancy engineering from Japan to Iceland and immediately set about modifying it to suit his own very special requirements.
Soon, he became the first man to drive on an Icelandic glacier.
Today he has also become the first man to drive across Langjökull, and the first to drive across Drangajökull.
His newest toy, a Toyota Land Cruiser with Gumbo Monster Mudder tyres so big that oxygen is required when you reach your seat, has CB, a radio telephone, an anenometer and a Loran radar set fixed in to transmitters on Greenland, Iceland and Norway.
It can accurately tell him where he is to the nearest ten metres or so.
Hafpor is a big man, nearly two metres tall and   weighing over 100 kilograms.
He is immensely strong, but also shyly gentle and has great sense of humour.
He decided to put up with Tony and I in order to support our attempt to cross the interior plateau in winter, using ski parachutes to help our progress.
Hafpor's truckUpskiing in the Þingvellir National ParkSo we sat in the swimming pool in Reykjavik knowing that outside we had all the food, all the clothing, the skis, the chutes.
Everything.
But we also had the attendant holding the door for us as we came out of the changing room because the wind was threatening to tear it off its hinges, as well as relentlessly trying to move the deep end up to the shallow end.
In the Icelandic centre the weather was worse, with snow drifting to over seven metres, and temperatures down around — 2O°C ( — -4°F) to act as a good prelude to wind-chill calculations.
Our pool was the middle of three small heated tubs and had a jet spray to it, a powerful Jacuzzi that relaxed our minds as well as our bodies.
We talked and gradually came to a decision that was quite contrary to the one we had held when we hauled ourselves out of our clothes a half-hour before.
Then it had all been defeat and misery.
Now it was still defeat — well, you have to be realistic — but cheerfulness.
We would give it a go.
What was the worst that could happen?
Failure?
If you travel in the Arctic you must never expect to succeed every time.
Worse?
No chance, not with Haflor's truck.
The journey had been impressively straightforward to date.
We were intending to reach Hveravellir, now about thirty kilometres away, to be dropped there and to get out.
We had stopped in Geysir for diesel and here it was, only three in the morning and we were half-way from the end of the road.
progress was occasionally slow but the big driver was coaxing the big wheels gently over and through the snow.
Tony and I shared the navigation seat, and right now I was in the back, warm, comfortable and dozing gently.
I was brought rudely back to the real world by Tony's tripod coming off the top of the pile of clatch (odds and ends) piled up above the seat and hitting me on the head as the truck lurched to a halt, diving itself into a drift of deep snow.
Hafpor eased us forward again.
Yawn, settle down again.
But not this time.
This time there was no relief.
Hafpor tried hard, but eventually admitted defeat and asked us if we would walk a little .
Five minutes later Tony and I were trudging  through deep snow, wishing we had spared the time to search out the snow shoes and wondering whether there had ever been a previous occasion in Iceland when the approach of a car had been heralded by walkers.
All we needed was a red flag to warn the locals that we might be about to frighten the horses.
We walked for a mile or so, easily outpacing the vehicle which was soon just a pair of yellow lights back down the valley.
We stopped.
My nose had long since lost all feeling and I massaged it back into life.
Tony gave me his thoughts on the situation — about how pleased he was to be wandering around at four in the morning, in the pitch black, in deep snow, in the cold, in the wind.
I told him I was pissed off too.
We lounged about and waited.
The wind was worse now and Hafpor's anenometer was showing gusts to 60 kph.
It only worked when he was stationary, but that was often.
By the time his ready smile reached us we were glad to see him and retreated to try to get warm and ask a few questions.
There was, he said, a bridge about 300 metres away.
If we could get to that things would be easier on the far side.
So we got out and walked again.
We walked 300 metres, then another 300, then several more.
By the time we had walked half a dozen or more lots of 300 metres, we were losing enthusiasm.
Tony offered to walk back towards the vehicle, now a long way off, and left me to think about it all.
To my left the shallow ridge that formed an edge of the valley rose up to finish at a shallow bump.
It looked a reasonable enough distance, so I made my way towards it.
The snow improved as the slope steepened and I made good time up the 100 metres to the ridge top and along to the ‘summit’.
I sat down on its rounded hump.
The wind was still banging away, but there was an inner calm that was at variance with the agitation I had felt below.
It may not have been sensible to climb alone up here at this time in these conditions, but it was little enough, and that straightforward.
In exchange I had a view over the wide, flat-bottomed valley, a view that dissolved into the fish-fin ridge on the far side.
To my other side the ridge tumbled away from below my hump.
Below in the valley the yellow lights of Hafpor's truck jiggled up and down with his frantic efforts to ease it through the snow.
Any noise it made was lost in the wind.
Speaking of the wind, it was getting stronger and I was getting colder.
Time for a little activity.
Back at the truck all was despondency in the gathering gloom.
We abandoned the attempt to reach Hveravellir, accepted that the weather and conditions were against us and retreated back down the valley towards civilization.
Morning found us at Gullfoss hastily trying to organize sleeping and eating.
It was hours now since we had last eaten, hours more since there had been any sleep.
Outside the wind grew even more savage and we cut short the one doomed attempt to raise the tent, retreating to the truck for a few minutes of poor slumber.
I woke stiff and cold, feeling as though I had been scrunched up like a paper bag.
We decided to walk to the waterfall to see what Gullfoss, well known to us in the summer, had to offer in winter.
The snow had drifted deep over the path that has been carved down to the chasm and we soon lost it, progressing by kicking steps into the hard snow.
Above the chasms we stopped and I kicked out a shelf for the camera bags.
Tony stomped past, stopped and peered into the chasm, setting up a shot.
He turned back towards me, opened his mouth to speak and was gone.
His feet had slipped from the kicked steps and he was sliding down a water slope that ended, abruptly, at the chasm about twenty-five metres below.
The square toe-cap of his Lundhag caught in the snow about two metres down.
He teetered backwards, got close to toppling over, fell back into the snow, looked up and hissed Jesus through clenched teeth.
He kicked good steps and we thought about it.
A couple more feet and even if the toe had caught he would have gone over backwards.
Then it would have been twenty-five metres of snow slide and a final trip down a thirty-metre vertical chasm into a mix of ice and ice-cold water.
The Gullfoss gorge is — certainly in winter — a stopper.
We would have fished Tony out two or three kilometres down after the water had knocked him around a bit , and given him a dreadful bootful since he was wearing his Lundhags.
‘Jesus,’ he whispered again when he reached me.
‘We'll go,’ I said, and we did.
‘What would you have done if I'd gone down?’ he asked when we were back on level ground.
‘Put the Bronica in my rucsac and claimed it went down with you.'
Still, it sobered us a bit , and after we had taken several more shots we decided that we needed some sleep, to try to get our minds back in gear.
Hafpor said he knew of a little hotel, and would  we like to go there?
Silly question.
Offered a free bed and nosebag, Tony is there like a rat up a drainpipe.
So we slept well, in a warm room with sheets, with a loo and a shower, and water that smelt of sulphur.
Good place, Iceland, you can spend lots of cash on accommodation and finish up smelling like a boiled egg.
The following morning the room looked as though an expedition had broken out in it, so we fought all the bits back into the sacs, smiled sweetly at the girl on reception and left.
Outside the wind had had its cutting edge dulled — possibly against the bones of my shoulders — and was wimpering miserably around the building, occasionally offering an aggressive bark.
We leaned against the woodwork, noting that it needed a coat of paint.
The receptionist, we decided, definitely needed a coat of looking at.
Hafpor arrived.
He took us to the Þingvellir National park where the clouds parted and the sun shone on square kilometres of snow that was so clean and pure it made me weep for all the time we had lost on the trip, and for the pleasure of being where I wanted to be.
Tony and I unpacked the Upski parachutes that we had so lovingly tended all the way from the UK.
John White, loaner of the kit, had given Tony all the instruction we possessed on how to use them.
The lesson had been given in a lay-by near Kendal on a soaking wet afternoon in February with an audience of coach-trippers on day release from the Satanic Mills.
The lesson had started at 2.30 and finished at 2.38 with both instructor and pupil wet through and hacked off.
Tony gave me the benefit of his wisdom as we stood on the edge of a mile-wide snow field and waved goodbye to Hafpor.
See you on the other side, we called.
Could be a long walk.
My lesson lasted about half the time of Tony's, terminating as he was explaining the purpose of the deadman's handle to me when a gust filled his chute and hauled him off in fine style.
I adjusted the position of my skis, laid out the chute lines, hauled in the centre cord a little , clipped the controller into my climbing harness, thought about it a bit , hauled the lines up to give the nylon a bit of air, closed my eyes and gritted my teeth.
After a few hundred metres the pleasure overcame the apprehension.
God, this is the way to travel.
The chute is a perfect dish hovering a metre or so above the snow and hauling me downwind at a speed that would be unthinkable on Nordic skis.
We go up a long, but steepish, slope and pause to catch our breath and share the experience.
After only half an hour we can tack left and right — a must in general , as going downwind puts the canopy between you and the way ahead giving you no chance of avoiding rocks and ruts — so that we can move almost anywhere in an arc that is up to 45 degrees on either side of the wind.
John had claimed it was just possible to go backwards (as it were ), but you must talk to him about that.
Suffice it to say that if the wind is going your way, get yourself a pair of skis — which must have a metal edge, and a fixed-heel binding — and a chute.
We were carrying light loads because it was our last day but we averaged about 25kph with ease, and for a long while.
At the far side we used Hafpor's truck to speed-check us, and in the light wind were easily making 45kph.
Given a fair blow much higher speeds must be just as easy.
After a while you lean back and enjoy the ride, letting the canopy haul directly from your waist to release all strain on the arms.
The legs and knees take a belt — — you are, after all, suffering most of the strains of downhill skiing and for longer at a stretch — but the distance travelled more than makes up for that.
By the time we were packing the chutes we were both hooked and planning another trip.
It is amazing what one good day will do. 
SCANDINAVIAMap — Mainland ScandinaviaTechnically, Scandinavia covers only the four mainland countries of Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark, even though most people also add Viking Iceland to the list.
Of the four mainland countries, three have land above the Arctic Circle, and Norway is the most important of these.
Norway is a long thin country, only about fifteen kilometres wide near Narvik and Fauske, yet 1,800 kilometres from nose to toe measured along the crow-flying line.
This is easy enough, but measuring along the coastline requires a very long ruler indeed.
Norway, excluding Svalbard, is a third as big again as the UK with a population of only four million, most of whom live in Oslo, a fine city with one of the best museum complexes in Europe.
All visitors to Oslo should see the Viking ships at least and Arctic travellers should make a point of going to the Fram museum, which pays homage to one of the most remarkable men and expeditions in the history of polar exploration.
Between 1893 and 1896 Fridtjof Nansen attempted to reach the North Pole by deliberately entombing his ship, Fram , in the ice near Ostrova Novo Sibirskiye (the New Siberian Islands).
Nansen, an excellent scientist, had realised that the polar ice drifted from east to west and reasoned that if he chose his entry point correctly the ice would tow his ship over the pole and release it near Canada.
He and his men spent three winters trapped in the ice, but sadly the drift was south as well as west and the ship was released north of Svalbard having reached a point no closer than several hundred miles from the pole.
North of the Arctic Circle Norway has some fine mountainous country and Finnmark, an expanse of flatter tundra that offers a very different and, in winter, a very cold trip.
East of Tromsø, the ‘capital’ of Arctic Norway, is Lyngen, a superb area of jagged peaks that is near paradise for the climber in winter.
Southward the Øvre Dividal National park offers excellent treks in both summer and winter.
further east, the border area with Russia is an interesting area, particularly within the Øvre Pasvik National Park where the quiet visitor can see brown bear and elk.
Sweden is a larger country than Norway with a compact Arctic region dominated by a mountain chain that runs along its western edge, near the border with Norway.
This chain includes Kebnekaise at 2,111 metres, the highest mountain in the Scandinavian Arctic.
(There are higher mountains in southern Norway and in other parts of the Arctic, including Iceland.)
The peak can be climbed as part of Kungsleden , the King's Route, an excellent if over-populated route and one of the very few waymarked trails in the Arctic.
The route starts at Ammarnäs, south of the Circle, and traverses the Peljekaise National park.
It skirts the Sareks National park to the east, reaches Kebnekaise and ends at Abisko.
Abisko lies on a lake and near a National park that is famous for its animal and bird life and its woods of birch and pine.
The southern mountain parks of Södra Storfjället, Sareks and Padjelanta have a limited flora and fauna, but some fine rugged scenery.
Sareks is especially good, but is difficult to reach and explore.
Further east, Arctic Sweden is flatter and less inspiring, although the Muddus National Park between Jokkmokk and Malmberget has fine forest and marshland.
Elsewhere these plains are home to the great grey owl and the shy brown bear.
Arctic Finland, in contrast to both Norway and Sweden, is flat, a vast tundra forest with lakes that is ideal country for the pulka-pulling skier but a little less inspiring for the walker.
Organized ski treks exist, their routes following set trails with accommodation en route .
One, the Border-Border Trek, is claimed to be the world's longest ski trek.
It goes from Tornio, near the Swedish border, to Kuusamo near the border with the USSR.
The fit and competent should cross the 360 kilometres in about seven days.
Other treks cross the two fine Arctic National Parks, Uhro Kekkonen to the east, and Lemmenjoki park in the north, a park that links with the Øvre Anarjokka Park that lies in Norway, to the east of Kautokeino, capital of Norwegian Lappland.
The capital of Finnish Lappland is Rovaniemi, home of Father Christmas — or so it is said — and a town that easily overcomes the embarrassment of having everything but the airport lying south of the Arctic Circle.
To the north-east of the town is the Pyhätunturi park, another fine unspoilt forest area.
Elsewhere, the Malla Park near Kilpisjärvi is famous for its flora, and walkers can reach the three-countries stone, where the three Arctic Scandinavian countries meet at a single spot. 
SUMMER — LAPPLANDMany years ago Tony and I sat drinking coffee and swapping experiences.
Tony had just returned from Iceland, his epic cycle tour, and I was back from Switzerland, buoyed up by time spent working at the Research Station on the Jungfraujoch.
I told him about the sunsets, when the Jungfrau had turned pink and I was the only person on the Aletsch.
He told me about the Icelandic landscapes, harsh yet wondrous, of the coloured rocks in Landmannalaugar and the emptiness.
Time we did something together, I suggested.
He agreed, but we had some difficulty in deciding what.
My conversion to the Arctic was still a little while away.
I talked of Via Ferrata and Alta Vie, he talked of Lofoten and the Padjelanta park.
Ultimately it was decided that we would try Kungsleden , the long-distance footpath through Arctic Sweden.
I could tell he was keen from the fact that he didn't mention it again for a couple of years.
We went here and there, but Kungsleden lay fallow.
Until 1985 that is.
At the time I almost lived up to my nickname, Bone — close to Tone, and closer still to bone idle.
This idea of a walk that was twice the length of the Pennine Way — or so Dick said — sounded horrid.
I'm a cyclist; four weeks of tramping with a rucsac would crease me.
The nickname was also used by those laughing at my structure — totally devoid of superfluous fat, so that any backpack was uncomfortable.
As Dick often pointed out, he had seen more flesh on a wooden leg, and more fat on the breakfast bacon.
Today rucsacs can be delightful to carry, a world apart from my heap of the 1960s, but in those days I really did not like backpacking.
I stayed quiet.
In the mid-1980s it was trendy to ATB (all-terrain bike) up famous mountains.
The purpose of such deeds seemed obscure — why carry a bike up a mountain only to have to push it down again?
Mountains are for walking, ATBs are for paths and tracks.
At the time I was writing for Bicycle Times and one day Dick's Arctic footpath came to mind.
Why not see if ATBs were any good for real wilderness touring?
Why not cycle up Kungsleden?
 I could knock up some lightweight special frames and do a positive test on their value.
Pete, the editor of the magazine, and Dick were both keen.
We met and a plan was conceived: Pete and Dick would get the next round in, then organise the logistics of food, route and transport.
I just had to supply three bikes.
Easy.
Maps of Lappland were fingered and any snippets of information gathered.
I begged and was rewarded.
Reynolds, manufacturers of quality bicycle tubing, came up with some special stuff.
The bikes had to survive a six-week tour in total wilderness, with fifty kilograms of camping gear, and they must not break.
They didn't.
The final creations weighed a mere ten kilograms, about the same as a top-class racing bike and about half the weight of most ATBs.
Information, even from the Scandinavian tourist boards, was difficult to obtain.
You are cycling through Lappland?
It cannot be done.
You must have a sprocket loose.
We carried on and eventually devised a plan.
It took about a year to organize, partly because the idea blossomed in the summer, too late for that year; it is not the sort of place to go cycling in the winter.
Just in time, Dick developed a viral nasty that made him lethargic.
I couldn't see the difference, but his vet insisted he wasn't fit enough, even when summer came.
His disappointment at missing out added to the way the illness was making him feel.
His absence necessitated some quick adjustments to strategy.
We continued with our three-man tent, a Phoenix Phor-3, and I must say, the extra space was much appreciated on several occasions, not least on 6 August when it snowed all day and I thrashed Pete at cards.
The final plan deviated from the original and we decided to go from Sulitjelma in Norway to Abisko, at the top of Kungsleden , in Sweden.
This allowed relatively easy access from Bodø, the start of Kungsleden (Ammarnäs) being a sod of a place to reach.
Because of a combination of so many unknowns, we, or should I say they — Pete and Dick did all the work, I just made the bikes — made  a total cock-up of ability and distance.
One stretch took three overnights where the great plan allowed just one.
But so what?
We had five more weeks and there was definitely no rush.
There was nothing to rush for and nowhere to rush to.
Staloluokta, our first place of rest, is an oasis of delight.
Four days from the nearest tarmac discourages the average vandal, factory unit or traffic warden.
On the southern shores of Virihaure, a huge lake rimmed by glaciers and wilderness , is this stunningly simple Lappish community.
Although it boasts little in the way of modern conveniences, it offers many services: mountain hut, camping area and thunderbox, basic shop — in truth very basic and equally expensive — bakery, fish, fish and more fish, church and pure honesty.
Aches and anxieties are dissolved in the bastu , the village sauna.
To the mountain people this  daily pleasure is a social event where visiting travellers are welcome, but experiencing the bastu requires some tough decisions.
The heat can be intense for those not used to saunas, so intense breathing becomes difficult.
Some of the local hard cases delight in the sadistic pleasure of ousting strangers by continually watering the stones, Relief waits outside, but it is a masochistic type of relief — icy-fresh river water that is cold beyond belief.
Between the two lies a jetty, home to millions of razor-sharp fangs waiting just for you, and your delicate, softened-up softer than usual, parts.
You know where I mean.
After leaving the hut, hesitation is not recommended.
The thermal shock is, by comparison, bliss.
The Lappish church, Staloluokta, SwedenThe Lappish church, Staloluokta, SwedenA real mountain bastu is one of those experiences not to be missed, and all you could want after a hard day's toil, a wonderful relaxant.
However, becoming accustomed to the Scandinavian way takes some adjustment.
Nudity to them is a much more relaxed affair.
We Brits are terribly prudish and you may be, as I was, a little uneasy at first .
Not to worry; the welcome and conversation soon takes over as you mix with the whole village: small kids, their little old grannies, Lappish reindeer herdsmen and the odd Swedish blonde.
I was worried about the latter but I can assure you here that there is little cause for concern.
The thermal shock of zero degrees water is so intense no one can tell how pleased you are to see them.
Another rarity at Staloluokta is the church, even to a heathen like me.
Its charm lies in its basic simplicity, a hemispherical structure of birch trunks, wind-proofed around the outside with turf bricks.
In contrast, light comes through triple-glazed window units (those bloody salesmen get everywhere).
On the floor birch twigs and greenery are over-carpeted with reindeer furs.
A wood fire in the centre adds to the warmth, the smoke exiting, together with yet more of those mosquitos, through a central hole in the roof.
It was a well-attended service, families coming both from the village and down from the hills.
The minister strummed on a guitar to the wailing and life felt wonderful.
The praise was complete and we all departed, the minister helicoptering off to the high mountains to give worship to the farmers herding their stock.
It was a peaceful day.
The journey so far had been an eye-opener.
The mountain range along the border between Norway and Sweden is wild and wonderful with 2,000-metre peaks soaring over seemingly endless glaciers with romantic names like Blåmannsisen and Salajekna.
I totally lost myself in the remoteness.
The Sorjus pass, 1,000 metres high, gives (relatively) good access to Lappland from civilisation.
Just down there is Sweden, we concluded in amazement.
We had decided this part would be tough, and for once we were right.
One steep 330-metre climb had to be done twice in order to lift all the gear.
Karrimor had made two special rucsacs, the bike's top tube clamping on to the reinforced cover flap so that the whole bike sat across your back.
putting your head through the main-frame triangle, or carrying the bike over your shoulder is uncomfortable in the extreme.
My method, although no good in woods, is comfortable and keeps the centre of gravity close to your back.
The pannier bags normally stay on, but this climb came only one day into the trip and with a fortnight's food on board I couldn't even lift my bike.
After eating most of the load the method is wonderful and wholeheartedly recommended.
Our journey was now planned as downhill all the way to Vietas, some six days away.
It was pretty good, but we left the rugged mountains with mixed feelings.
The vast openness of Lappland may be less spectacular but the trails are flatter, well-trodden and rideable, sometimes.
One thing we knew for sure — beyond here was the unknown, and it looked big.
The outflow of Sårjåsjaure ( jaure is Swedish for lake), at its eastern end, forms a spectacular waterfall, the spectacle being the volume rather than the length of descent.
The backdrop of the lake and the distant Sorjusjokka glacier is breathtaking, helped by the fluffy puffs of cloud stuck to the sky.
I like it here.
Last night we camped a metre short of the border, a beautiful spot between the upper and lower Sorjus lakes.
It was a time to dry out, three days of solid rain having dampened all but our spirits, and to finish our excess of the other kind of spirits before attempting to cross the border.
The border is spectacularly unimpressive.
A small cairn is the only evidence, making passports a waste of time.
Never mind, maybe later I will get a Swedish stamp to add to my collection.
Our evening meal was disturbed by a lone walker, a young German lad, extremely knowledgeable and pleasant.
He walked by night and slept by day, the midday sun being too hot for him.
It was a novel idea and one we appreciated later when the weather improved.
He was reluctant to admit his nationality, and usually claimed  he was Austrian to save any possible embarrassments of the truth.
He too had discovered that the Nordic people have long memories.
He sampled some of Pete's brew and continued his walk.
At the time Pete was fifty, making the challenge of his biking this wilderness more meaningful than my personal quest.
He had brought with him a wealth of experience and he shared many a story of his love of the outdoors.
In practical terms an experienced camper is obvious; there is no need to issue orders, each knows what has to be done and when, without debate.
Arriving at a suitable pitching site, I would erect the tent and Pete would fetch water and have a brew ready by the time we piled in.
His kitchen area was out of bounds to me at cook times so I was forced to use the (extremely useful) rear door of the tent.
Tidiness is not a fetish but a necessity in a confined space.
I would win no prizes for being tidy, but the main aggravation was the fact that we had, between us, eight identical black Karrimor pannier bags.
Never, ever was the item you desperately needed in the first bag, second bag…
Pete's cooking was obviously the result of many hours over a hot Trangia.
His pride in being able to cook three hot meals a day for two of us, on just one litre of meths in six days, was shattered when one pensioner told us that two weeks was more her time scale for such a luxurious amount of fuel.
They exchanged recipes like a pair of old women and we departed.
Food was mainly dehydrated but Pete would pep up meals by mixing in spices and niceties he kept in redundant Kodak film cans.
On miserable days when both of us were low, he would delve into the depths of a pannier and give me a mini Mars bar or some peanuts.
The old man looked after me well.
There were many obstacles to tax our resolve and our language.
Bridgeless rivers were waded, often several times, back and fro until all the kit was safely across.
Sometimes we had to rope up, sometimes we were frozen numb.
Snow fields were ploughed through and ice cliffs were given absolute respect.
Rain that made Scotland seem like the Sahara was no sweat, but the midget trees!
They were even worse than the mosquitos.
You can, up to a point (and we did up to that point), protect yourself against them with jungle gels and mustard gases, but the trees give no mercy and there are hours of them between Staddajakkstugorna, a mountain hut on the side of Kapasluoppal, and Staloluokta.
Walkers with rucsacs have created a path through these Arctic forests, a highway that reflects the profile of a backpacker — narrow around the legs and very wide around the rucsac.
A bicycle is not profiled the same and the pannier bags were constantly grabbed, causing many a rude word.
Progress was very slow, so slow we were genuinely concerned about the possibility of getting much further.
We had no idea how much of Lappland was covered with these nasties.
Luckily it turned out to be an isolated incident but we had nightmares about a recurrence.
A similar problem occurs on bridges, wire rope and wood affairs that swing, like a worn-out bra strap, in the slightest breeze.
The smaller bridges offered just a single plank of wood, too narrow to cycle across and too narrow to push the bike from the side.
A tight rope act is required but this is restricted by the near-vertical suspension cables.
Oh God, not another; perhaps it will be easier to wade the river, but then again perhaps not…
Carrying a tent where mountain huts are prolific may seem an unnecessary burden, but it allows total flexibility and we soon discovered the   benefits of camping where we chose.
The huts are predominantly in valleys near rivers, and invariably the local area was swarming with mosquitos.
Camping high, between the huts, we enjoyed insect-freeing breezes and spectacular night views of the midnight sun.
We weren't alone in having such ideas; many Swedes prefer this philosophy because it also gets you away from the Germans.
No matter how hard you try, they always beat you to the huts.
The waterfall at the exit of Sårsjåsjaure, Sårjåsjaurestugan, SwedenIsolation and wilderness travel require a special attitude to life.
Decisions can have alarming consequences and non-decisions can be fatal.
Choice of company is desperately important.
Can you share the same confines, for long periods of time, and where does your tolerance level lie?
Group  travel can relieve some of these pressures but it can also result in ‘ganging up’, for the silliest of reasons.
Unlike the kids in Lord of the Flies we had no real problems, but the remoteness does make me anti-social.
Both Pete and I found mountain huts overwhelming.
It was like being in a supermarket during late-night shopping, with that overpowering sensation that you are losing your space.
The occasional meeting of a backpacker on the trail was different, and friendly words were always exchanged.
Weather, where to pitch and where to fish are typically topical.
One meeting half-way across a stream led to a drinking session.
I spied a ‘Backpackers Club’ sweatshirt.
Are you English?
I enquired.
Oh no, I run the Dutch section of the club.
Well, I explained, the old codger with me is one of the founder members.
He'll be along in a minute.
The nearest bank was headed for, and out came their supply of local moonshine.
It tasted far worse than I imagine my four-day-old socks would — a memorable moment remembered for the wrong reason, not least for the expression of anguish on Pete's face as the brew hit his tonsils.
On the spongs of the Padjelanta National Park, SwedenMost impressive was the number of retired people we met backpacking.
They came mainly from Stockholm or, at least , southern Sweden and most had been trudging these paths for decades.
They seemed to know everything and anything about the area: the names of butterflies and Arctic flowers  flooded out from their memory banks.
One fellow told me, apologetically, that he and his wife only did ten to fifteen kilometres daily these days.
He added quickly that there was no hurry any more.
Don't apologise; I think that is fantastic and I hope — I pray — I am able to enjoy a similar style of retirement.
Also notable was the number of fathers and sons out together, for perhaps three weeks with a tiny pack of basic provisions — a tent, survival knife and a fishing rod.
This is country where it is easy to live off the land, or out of the rivers, and to learn about life.
Mountain hut, NorwayMost encounters started in the same way, with a question about the bikes.
‘Why the bikes?’
‘Why do you carry such loads on your back?’ was our most popular response.
It's easy to push a bike and it belts downhill.
The truth is that uphill the extra weight made it a little harder than walking, but the weight was not directly on my back, a fact that I appreciated.
We could push our laden bikes at a roughly typical walking pace up passes.
On the flat life was in our favour and we left most walkers behind.
Downhill we were in a different league.
On one occasion, on a 300-metre climb from the spectacular bridge over the Härrakalou, a green, algae-filled river that drains a huge area of the Sarek National Park, we were accompanied by two fit Dutch lads, who maintained a similar pace.
On the descent that followed, leading to Låddejåkkåstugan — stugan is hut — about six kilometres, we beat them down by forty-five minutes, freewheeling all the way.
Mountain bikes are good.
The going was often helped, considerably, by spongs , wooden walkways built over boggy areas by the Lappish people.
The quality of these ‘roads' varies with their age, the newest three-plank spongs allowing us to maintain incredible speeds.
However, occasionally the spongs also bridge ravines making for brave crossings especially when you have no idea of their quality.
The spongs are home to another source of interest — food — if you are desperate and very quick, because lemming live beneath them.
They are boring, grey-coloured, hamster-like devices that scurry away at the first sound of our Michelin Interroutes; I suppose I would leg it too if some mad giant was riding his bike over my roof.
What I would have given for a sesame bap.
Dehydrated packet breakfast, dinner and supper drives me potty.
The trails of Padjelanta are not that tough, which is ideal for our bikes.
We are now getting close to the flanks of Akka, a seven-peaked mountain that has been visible for four or five days.
Now I can understand why travellers rave about its obviousness.
We camped about five kilometres north of Låddejåkkåstugan on the open moors by a stream that thundered towards the distant watershed from Virihaure.
Coffee was followed by yet another sunset, the best possible after-dinner entertainment.
More stories, more coffee and another try with Pete's transistor radio.
We have tried to use it before but the mountain reception is far from good.
I am going to tell Roy Plumley's successor where he can stick the one luxury he allowed us to bring.
The only programme our free-with-petrol tranny would pick up was Soviet propaganda, in English, late at night.
In desperation we dug a hole, a big hole, in the depths of the night — brilliant sunshine at one in the morning — put the radio on full and buried it.
That shut it up.
We didn't make Abisko, chickening out as the weather worsened and the forecasts began to sound even more dire.
At last we had reached a road that led to a place called Ritjemjokk where we telephoned home and did all the civilized things in life; like sitting on a loo seat, for a long time. Ninety-year-old Lapp, SwedenFrom Ritjemjokk our maps and information showed ferry routes along Sitasjaure to the Norwegian border.
This was an alternative route we had considered in planning so we were dismayed by fresh news.
The boats are there to serve Lappish communities, or rather they were there.
Sweden has gone anti-nuclear in its power-generating policy and consequently vast hydro-power stations have been built in the northern lake areas for reasons better known to themselves, the Swedes made no provision for salmon runs so the huge lakes are now devoid of fish and the Lapps have left.
The ferries have left too.
Controversy is rife this year, the first summer after Chernobyl.
This is radioactive reindeer and salmon country.
The Lappish diet is restricted to these basic foods and the result has been both anger and concern.
However, the Lappish people are more concerned about the plight of their traditional fishing waters, the loss of which is forever, much longer than it takes contamination from Russia to decay.
The Lappish understand that the levels of radioactivity will eventually decay; they are far from happy about the fall-out but it is secondary to their fish problem.
But this is not news.
Did you see any post-Chernobyl documentary about the lifetime plight of the salmon lakes?
I didn't either, but then anti-hydro protesting is not vogue in these ‘green’ times.
Our chief problem is where to go from here.
We have three basic alternatives.
One, to bike up Kungsleden to Abisko and get wet; two, to cycle 600 kilometres around the road via Kiruna and Abisko to Narvik for our journey home; or three, hire a plane to take us somewhere else.
At this stage we had discovered that Kungsleden is a motorway for German ‘Pennine-wayers’.
No thanks, that's not for me; I'm even more of a recluse now.
So we hired the fiskflug , a float plane used to take fish from Lappish settlements to market and the outside  world.
Negotiations complete, we sardined our dismantled bikes into the Cessna.
Up, up and away, through the valleys to the north end of Sitasjaure and just into Norway once again .
On the rocks of Muokkeris, SwedenThe contrast was stark, an area devoid of anything green, or so it seemed from the air.
On landing we saw that small flowers and dying orchids line the rubble road, but the landscape was dominated by huge folds of dark grey rocks.
They resembled whales lined up outside the headmaster's office — huge humps sprawled over many kilometres.
They made a pleasant change, their undulations much easier to negotiate than the bogs of Sweden.
Here it was even possible to freewheel at speed without the risk of the front wheel submerging into a pool of smelly black moss.
Time and terrain allowed some short walking, the mountains being steep, yet rounded, firm rock with interesting views.
It was time for reflection: are these mountain the answer was yes, to both questions.
There were times when the bikes were a pain but, also times when they were of great benefit.
On the whole the trip so far was a success.
We had cycled on the road from Bodø to Fauske and on the Sulitjelma; pushed the bikes over to Sorjusjaure; ridden and swum our way to Staloluokta within the Padjelanta National Park; and then thrashed our way on the faster tracks through Arasluokuoktastugorna, Låddejåkkåstugana and Kisurisstugan to Akkastugorna and a ferry to Ritjemokk, before cycling by road to Vietas; and gone by plane to Sitastugan at the north-west end of Sitasjaure.
We had covered large distances both on-road and off the road, totally independent of public transport.
The physical and mental experience had made us healthier people and proof of the excitement and joy of the trip is that I have now become one of the greatest bores on mountain biking in the Swedish Arctic. Midnight, seen from a sleeping bag, SwedenAt last we were back in the mountains.
Sadly, the forecasts came true, with sleet and snow making views vanish forever.
Kungsleden must be hell in these conditions.
We escaped just in time and it was downhill all the way to Narvik.
The hydrofoil left Narvik in the early evening bound for Svolvær, on what turned out to be one of the loveliest journeys I have ever taken.
The day was idyllic, with clear blue skies and temperatures up in the shirt-sleeves.
Our ‘bus of the sea’ was off, skimming the waves and rearranging the dancing patterns of the evening light.
We were travelling along the Lofoten Wall, an apt description for the mountains protecting this huge sea fjord.
The mountains hang everywhere, big vertical peaks just waiting to be climbed.
perhaps next time.
Lofoten is a small group of islands sticking out off Arctic Norway rather like the Outer Hebrides do off Scotland.
I've heard they are quite beautiful, and I hope so.
I hope too that this weather holds.
To our right, off the tip of Tjedloya, sea eagles bask in the sun, a great pack of them.
They look mean.
Oblivious to us swanning by, they show no emotions, unlike me, all full of excitement at so many and so close.
Later that evening, after a brief stop at Lødingen, the Arctic light was once again tantalising.
Four Spanish lads tried their best to explain why they had returned.
It is the sun, they said; it is  such a different sun, so much more beautiful than ours, cooler yet with more warmth.
I can sympathize; I have often struggled to get this difficult explanation across.
The mountains around Svolvær are spiky and big.
The back light from the day's end made them even more dramatic and the sea was on fire.
Rings of mist were forming as the temperature dropped around the peaks.
That's a two-thousandths at f11; where is all this light coming from?
I just don't believe how fantastic it is.
This is going to be a good trip.
Fishing boat, LofotenMy first sight of a Lofoten fishing port was on a small island off Svolvær.
The hydrofoil entered the harbour, revealing the characteristic wooden docks, with brightly-painted buildings sticking out the fjord on spidery sticks.
Behind there are vertical cliffs, a dynamic backdrop dwarfing the harbour to insignificance.
And this place is hardly on the map.
I was sad to leave the boat, we had made many friends despite the trip being only a few hours long.
It was a good day and Svolvær looked rather a special place, but we were now tired and a campsite was priority.
Kabelvåg campsite is a few kilometres beyond the village, on the flanks of a charming little beach and remarkably civilized.
Campers are welcome to use communal kitchens and dining rooms, and there are washing facilities for both us and our clothes, each of which are in need.
I haven't been to an organized campsite for    perhaps fifteen years, so all this is new to me.
I do not know what to do and sneak looks at everyone else, while the ‘real’ campers pause to stare as we sit on Karrimats eating supper.
We soon learn that the huts give relief from yet more mosquitos, but compared to central Lappland insects these are either timid or full-up.
Get yourself a Tony Oliver!
Reine, LofotenBoats at Nusfjörd, LofotenEvening light over the salmon pens, Svolvær, LofotenThe Arctic Ocean near BodøEvening over KirkefjordenLofoten is the most beautiful place I have known, yet I find it one of the most difficult places to write about.
Clichés and superlatives are rampant in the log that I kept on the trip.
What do you say when you actually go beyond the realms of astonishment, amazement and incredibility?
Each day there was a new sight and each day I was pushing the ability of these words to cope with my thoughts.
Every bend reveals another staggering visual feast and it is all to do with the light, the dynamic mountain ridges, the pure white sandy beaches and the undisturbed peace.
Each day is too short.
There is so much to see, even though it is all basically made of the same ingredients.
Perhaps I am abnormal in my endless fetish for light and patterns, but I don't give a damn.
The most beautiful evening (perhaps of my life) was on Flakstadoya.
Pete and I took an afternoon ferry from Leknes to Napp, and sweltered the bikes over an unnamed pass to Vareid.
We were on the south side of a small sea fjord, the head of which formed a junction for the road to Nusfjord.
The setting sun — it was now mid-August, so the sun just dipped below the horizon — would round the headland of Flakstad village and dance over some tiny skerries off the shore.
We were only a metre from the only road, but the number of cars that passed was easily beaten by the number of coffees drunk.
Yet another master meal was prepared by le chef , Pete, and we ate and drank, and watched an incredible show of lights, all of it free and just for us.
Divers worked around the fjord and we did absolutely nothing, and said almost less.
Speech wasn't necessary; we were both absorbed, miles away, perhaps with loved ones, perhaps… well, who cares?
Ten o'clock, time for a swim in the Arctic Ocean — well described as bracing — more coffee and then more sky watching.
The sun slipped over Flakstad church and the light show began.
Even after the sun vanished, amazement continued.
Flakstad was drowning in mist, backlit from the northern sky.
We fell asleep wondering what we might be missing.
Arctic sunsets can last many hours; I once watched one sun take four hours to touch the sea, and then it immediately started into reverse and rose again.
In equatorial areas the sun drops like a lead brick into the sea, light to dark taking only minutes.
Here the sun, if you stand still all day, will just circle the sky around you.
Unless it's raining of course …
Henningsvær, Nusfjord, Reine are all the way the picture postcards show them, and a great deal more besides.
The fishing villages only come alive for the season when frantic fleets of boats fill their harbours to the brim.
for the winter traveller the climate is harsh, very cold, very windy and very close to the sea.
A nasty combination.
Now, in summer, the attitude is relaxed.
Henningsvær is so quiet, and the sun so warming that a beer is absolutely necessary in a rather super establishment.
The locals have obviously never tried a good pint of 6X; how can they drink this stuff?
And it's £3 a glass.
On the other hand, food in cafés is excellent value.
Whilst suffering another scorching day, we sought refuge in the eating house at Rambert.
There was no menu; you simply asked for what you wanted.
The hostess suggested plaice, a less common fish for these areas, and not a particular favourite with my palate.
We settled for salmon — bloody salmon again — which arrived as three huge steaks complete with white sauce, carrots and new potatoes.
We then had a bowl of fruit salad, and there was change from the price of a glass of beer.
This left me staggered as well as very satisfied.
Reine is phenomenal.
It is said to be the most photographed village in Norway.
I find this hard to believe; it sees little good weather and the trigger-happy Japanese and American tourists are down south.
But forget all that, this place is exquisite.
Little red huts stick out in the sea, the backdrop is spiky Snowdon-sized mountains straight up, and the place is deserted.
The surrounding hills offer fine walking, scrambling and technical climbing.
(Take care in planning a walking tour: one guy we talked to came across an impossible cliff which required a two-day detour.)
Reine was our base for several days.
from it we cycled to the end of the road, a village called Å; yes, just the one letter.
There are, apparently, three such places in the world and I wonder how the others compare in magnificence.
From here, the southernmost tip of Moskenes Penninsula, we took some fine walks.
The most spectacular of our walks was from Reine itself.
One of the joys of touring unusual  places is the variety of accommodation.
Like most of the fishing villages, Reine offers summer travellers the use of the vacated fishing huts, called rorbus .
Rechristened ‘Rambos’, a reflection of their basic and rugged form, they offered us refuge from a rare rainstorm, and gave us a safe place to store excess baggage.
We left the rorbu and attacked one of the 1,000-metre peaks overlooking the village.
A long climb through short vegetation was not helped by my taking my mountain bike.
I had come to Lofoten to photograph these beasts in real mountains for my forthcoming catalogue, so I pushed away.
The shots were going to look terrific, but this was ridiculous — the very thing I had been cynical about and did not wish to do I was doing; carrying a bike both up and down a mountain.
What a waste of time.
The view over Reine, Hamnöy and Kirkefjorden from the top of the climb is incredible, making an unreal backdrop for my equally fantastic work of art.
Right, a roll of K25 I think.
Where the hell is my film?
Christ, I've forgotten it, it's back in the rorbu .
I can see the hut down there, just a tiny pimple.
Four hours of hell for nought.
Pete finds this hilarious; he has been dying to get his own back for various things for ages and this comes close to the perfect opportunity.
I am quite a pleader at times and this occasion surpassed all previous pleads imaginable.
Pete had a roll of Ektachrome 200 and a Gold 100 print film.
Hobson's choice really, so I had both.
After the photo session we ate and sunbathed naked, taking advantage of the amazing heat and the warm breeze that kept away the mozzies.
Who will ever believe that I lay there, stripped naked, 1,000 metres up on top of a hill that is 300 kilometres north of the Arctic Circle?
It was a beautiful place.
Below, fishing boats and floating buses ploughed the fjord and seas.
The only other noise was from huge bumble-bees, flying like World War II plans, with a low drone that dropped even lower as they shot over my nose.
They turned out to be totally placid; just as well, since they are the size of hornets.
At five o'clock we wandered back; after all, it might get dark in fifteen days' time.
Each time we crossed the causeway over to the tiny island of Reine, we paused and photographed.
The view is as good as anyone could hope, yet each time it is different.
The sun on its endless tour round and round the sky gives shadows and hues of infinite variety.
If you don't like the lighting, wait, calculate your required angle of sunlight, and return.
The morning sun gives direct brilliance, while evening's afterglows offer backlighting and romance.
We left Reine with many memories and hopes of correctly exposed emulsion.
However, new things were to come as we departed on the tiny ferry to Værøy, the penultimate island in the Lofoten chain.
Only Røst lay further out to sea.
Røst is actually a small group of islets rather than a single island, and a haven for birds in the spring.
In summer the attraction wasn't so strong and we settled for Værøy.
The ferry arrived on Saturday evening and we instantly agreed to stay on the boat and to go elsewhere.
Saturday night is racing   cars up and down the eight miles of road, the nearest policeman being, perhaps, a whole day away.
We later learned that car ferries only arrived some ten years before and the novelty of owning, polishing and servicing cars has not yet been outgrown.
There are four taxi-cabs and on average each house has two cars outside.
All very well, you might say, but there is nowhere to bloody well go .
Two cyclists seemed fair game to these pissed idiots so we took off for the hills, only a small range but, we were to discover, quite beautiful.
Kvalvik, LofotenThe north-west-facing ridge walk was simply stunning, with wonderful views in all directions.
Down towards the town humps of moraines gave a moonscape appearance whilst back toward Moskenes huge rocks were glistening with cormorants.
Towards Røst the sea was a silver reflector, whilst the sky darkened, an Arctic trick we now knew well.
The islets themselves thrust upwards, a mass of weird shapes.
We ambled with a young German couple to the peak of Værøy, some 650 metres directly above an inaccessible golden beach.
There was nothing but height; no fence, no warning of the impending — once-off — leap, nothing.
One hell of a place; without words, we concluded Værøy was something else.
ferry timetables forced a quick visit, but it allowed two good days' walking.
A third to the far hill range would have been ideal, but something must always be left undone, as an excuse for a speedy return. Aerial view of Reine, Kvalvik and Hamnöy, Lofoten
SEA-KAYAKIt is high summer, although in the UK only the temperature of the rain would confirm summer rather than autumn to the blindfolded visitor.
Tony and I sit in the departure lounge of Heathrow wondering, yet again, how to fill the time between now and take-off.
Flying still excites me with that curious mixture of fear — knowing the plane has the aerodynamics of a brick once the forward thrust is lost — and the knowledge that at the other end of the journey there will be new sounds and smells and things to look at.
It pumps me so full of adrenalin that I pace in and out of duty-free shops, toilets, coffee shops, anything.
Tony closes his eyes and gives the appearance of nonchalance.
I am, he tells me, a bloody awful traveller, full of worries about missing flights, losing tickets and the like.
Why, he asks, can't I be more like him, calm, assured?
And full of bullshit?
I ask.
Heathrow has, at least , the marginal advantage of being civilized, in that the cattle are gently shifted from one place to another rather than being herded anonymously.
Once, at Milan airport, we were herded to the gate and corralled in an area almost big enough for half of us, then shifted to a bus with six seats and standing room for forty, in which the one hundred and twenty of us stood and waited for the idiot who always arrives twenty minutes late despite having been called ten times and being the subject of an Interpol missing persons search.
So we would not overheat they thoughtfully left the doors of the bus open.
Outside there was snow in the wind and the temperature was dropping.
After a few minutes it was the same inside.
After half an hour the bus started and moved us seventy metres, to the nearest plane, the one we could have walked to, with less effort and staying warmer.
They got us off and the bus disappeared, but there was still a reason why we could not board — they never let on what it was — — and we stood on the tarmac for a long time before being herded to the back entrance.
There the lucky ones among us were allowed half-way up the steps before being halted and held in position for twenty minutes while, I assume, the stewardess disentangled herself from more pressing engagements and tidied herself in readiness.
The wind blew and the snow fell, but it didn't matter.
The engines were just up there and their noise prevented us from thinking about how miserable it all might be.
Today we were close enough to the front of the plane to have a newspaper in English, and not have to settle for one printed in a strange dialect of Latvian (or whatever it is that they use for those that are always left at the end).
We are held briefly at the runway apron, and then we are off.
The excitement rises with the plane but soon it is just another flight.
Tony and I contemplate the likelihood that on this Scandinavian plane we will have one of those stewardesses you see in the adverts — — all blonde hair and curves.
Ours has a face like a welder's bench and sounds like the Swedish chef in The Muppet Show .
Ah, well.
My paper tells me that a dispute over pay between the leading British manufacturer of seaside rock and his chief sugar boiler has left the latter jobless and the former with umpteen sticks of rocks bearing the legend Mean Bastard all the way through.
I show the snippet to Tony and the resulting peals of laughter from the pair of us bring disapproving stares from all over the plane.
There we are, in Lundhags, a Swedish boot that is wonderful for its purpose but looks like a refugee prop from a Boris Karloff Frankenstein film, and oddly coloured clothes, rolling about.
It just isn't right is it Doris, I mean to say…
The alterations in progress when we were last at Fornebu, Oslo's airport, are now completed and we follow the new sign to baggage reclaim.
Round the first corner is a corridor hundreds of metres long with a sign at its end pointing left.
We go left into another corridor equally long and then left into yet another.
Clearly, in order to save some money, the carousel has been set up in downtown Oslo, about ten kilometres away.
We arrive exhausted, haul in our rucsacs, check in again and hike back along the corridor to the airport.
Two hours later I am mentioning to Tony that I have been to Tromsø airport more times than I have to Gatwick.
Not that he is interested.
It is raining in Tromsø.
The sky is the colour of  lead shot, with the Arctic Ocean dark and morose below it.
I lean against the window of the bus and watch the raindrops spatter down, just as I must have done when I was a kid.
Tony sits pensively next to me playing with his films.
He does that a lot.
This RS1000, he informs me, has already been to the Arctic about six times.
Deep joy.
We are grateful for a flysheet-pitch-first tent in the Tromsdalen campsite and as we work speedily on its erection, the man in the camp reception hut watches us through the windows.
I imagine he is impressed and that he will invite us for a coffee after, but when I look again he is gone.
I peer into the rain for a glimpse of Storskarfjell, but it is all wet misery to the south.
We discuss the merits of lighting the Trangia, decide that as nobody is watching, a coffee in the camp café will be OK.
Later we go to sleep with the noise of rain on the flysheet, that noise that is at one time both infuriating because it means that tomorrow's enjoyment may be curtailed, and soothing in a strange way.
The day dawns bright but still cloudy.
A night wind has blown the rain away, leaving behind pale grey rather than heavy grey clouds with, between them, enough blue to make a pair of sailor's trousers — as my mother would say.
We sort kit, hanging the tent up in a tree to dry and pouring the rucsacs out on to a Karrimat.
I have brought water-purifying tablets which has Tony perplexed.
Usually we are melting snow or ice so we don't bother, but this trip could see us near stagnant water.
He shrugs.
I tell him that a friend who is even now in the Karakoram had been told that in Pakistan it was advisable to double the suggested dose of tablets and then to boil the water for twenty minutes.
That should, it was suggested, reduce the likelihood of any problems by about fifty per cent .
Tony is amazed that anyone should want to go there at all .
Why, he asks, don't they just pour the water on the floor and machine-gun it?
Tony's devotion to the Arctic is single-minded.
I have tried once or twice to get him to the big hills, or to the Dolomites, but he sees no reason to waste time that could be spent in Norway or Greenland.
The last time, when I suggested a climb of Ararat, he asked where it was.
Turkey, I said.
He considered for a long time.
No, he said at length .
Why not?
I asked.
They eat a lot of foreign food there, he said.
In Tromsø Tony searched out a coin so he can call Christine to report the fact that another interesting trip is about to start.
I stare at the Ocean.
It is still clear, still wonderful.
I poke a finger into it; still cold.
Later that day we are at Belvik loading sea-kayaks into the ferry for Vengsøya.
With us are four members of the local sea-kayaking club who have agreed to act as guides and mentors for our first couple of days.
Tor Edgar is a giant man peering out shyly from behind glasses bequeathed by John Lennon.
His shoulders suggest he can paddle all day.
He can.
He is not much of a talker; a longish sentence for him is um , his standard reply to most questions.
Eventually, when he has decided that we wish to learn and that we love the Ocean as much as he does, he teaches us things that it is important to know.
Leila, his girlfriend, has John Lennon's other pair of glasses, but behind her pair are sparkling eyes set in a face that is always cheerful.
She is a teacher of primary school kids and decides, probably rightly, that these two English boys are really only ten years of age and should be treated as such.
Don't forget your paddle, Tony.
And what will you do if it rains and you haven't got your anorak on the deck, Dick?
Sorry, miss, I didn't think.
That's your problem, always has been…
Per Ivar — and woe to him who shortens it; just like Odd-Knut, he wants you to say his name properly — is blond and cheerful, ashamed of his English (God knows why, in comparison to our Norwegian), and shy of the camera.
Bianca, sitting boldly upright in her kayak Svalbard , is suspicious of us and aggressively protective of Norway and all things Norwegian.
By the time she is leaving us she is wondering why she came.
The sun shines on the ferry as we do the last of the packing, The kayaks have lifted snouts and two holes, one at each end, closed and sealed by hard rubber covers.
Into these we store kit; rather like trying to push a piano through a thirty-centimetre hole.
The hard bits that will not go are tied to the deck fore and aft of the paddler.
I contemplate the thought of days spent looking along the length of Tony's tripod bag.
As the ferry nears Vengsøya I talk to Tor about our chances of seeing an orca, a killer whale.
During our last dog sledge trip I had talked of my love of whales to Odd-Knut.
He tells me that a girlfriend of his was fishing, with her mother, from a rowing boat in the fjord near Tromsø one day.
As dusk fell they decided to go in.
Odd-Knut's girlfriend lowered her oar into the water and it hit  something hard.
When she looked over the side in surprise, to her horror a huge orca surfaced just a metre away.
It turned lazily around and peered at her.
This eye contact unnerved the girl and sent the mother near hysterical, but having decided that they either meant no harm or, alternatively, that they were no good for eating, the orca lost interest and left.
I should be so lucky as to get that close.
Um, said Tor, but then went on to explain that only a week or two before he had been within a hundred metres or so of a school of orca.
Was he afraid?
Um, he said, thought a little and then said no, he didn't think he had been afraid.
Um, I said.
The inhabitants of Vengsøya — or, at least , those near the ferry quay — watch us struggle on-shore with the kayaks with that curious air of pity, fear and interest I have seen before.
These people are going paddling on the Ocean.
Children wrestle to free their hands from their parents; Mummy, please let me go and throw stones at the idiots.
One comes and stands next to Tony, watching as   he secures the last bit to his boat.
Hello, says Tony, affably, how are you?
The kid grows wide-eyed; Mummy, mummy, the idiots talk all funny.
VengsöyaCampsite, VengsöyaI learned to canoe years ago when three of us put borrowed boats in the water at Glasbury and pulled them out, finally, several days later at Tintern, having gone down the Wye.
for many hours on day one the river seemed amazingly narrow, one bank of it always being on the front end of my canoe.
By the time I reached Tintern I could go in straight lines easily and had a right wrist the size of a tennis ball that was painful to touch and crackled ominously when I flexed it.
I hope that it was all good practice for the sea.
There is, true enough, no bank to poke into — get round the first headland and the next bank is the shore of Svalbard — but it would still be a good idea to be able to go in a straight line.
How do you do this?
Tony whispered as we carried our boats to the sea.
Calmly and quietly I suggested.
Sea-kayaks are unstable in comparison to river canoes I decide.
I ask Tor what the survival time is in the sea at this time of year.
He eyes me, thinking that, although I might have done a few things in the Arctic, I am still a tiny lad without any fat; he decides that it will be just a few minutes.
Comforting.
The Arctic Ocean from this distance, about a metre from eyes to surface, is even more wonderful than it seemed in Tromsø.
It is so clear that to look into it takes your breath away: there is no sense of depth and the rocks could be two or twenty metres away.
When I was a kid I loved the seashore for its mix of beautiful, subtle colours and strong smells.
I recall how disappointed I was in the morning to discover that the pebbles I had collected so lovingly the evening before were just a pile of dull stones now that they had dried and were away from the beach.
Still, that discovery never stopped me from making another collection of the glistening best ones that same night.
Here the rocks and pebbles on the Ocean's floor are the same glistening colours, permanently etched because they can never dry.
The sea is calm, but such ripples as there are flick the light from the sun about and refract the view of the pebbles so that staring over the edge of the kayak is like peeing into a kaleidoscope over whose speed of rotation you have no control.
Often I find that I am many hundreds of metres behind the party when I escape from the trance of pattern-watching and childhood recall.
I paddle quickly, aware too that the Ocean's cold has gnawed its way uncomfortably through the thin GRP of the kayak and into my poorly protected flesh Tony waits for me, to point out a small brown luck that is lurking among some rocks to our right.
We paddle over to investigate.
It is a female eider, duller and browner now that the mating season — for which she did not, in any case, dress up — is over.
With her there is another bird which at first and with excitement we take for a king eider, but closer inspection reveals it to be an immature eider drake still paddling along near his mother.
Ahead and to our right a head breaks the surface.
The seal, too far away to be identified with certainty but probably a grey, peers myopically and is gone.
I suppress an evil wish that an orca will be drawn in by this moving lunchbox of an animal.
We round a headland and I am behind again because of staring downwards and then towards the horizon, willing an orca to break surface.
It is late and the sea is a little rougher so Tor decides to head for a sheltered inlet that he knows.
The inlet is an almost perfect semi-circle backed by huge cliffs whose vegetation-hung rocks defy their position.
How can it be that here, on a north-facing cliff, with nothing between it and the North pole and situated more than 300 kilometres north of the Arctic Circle, the vegetation can look like that.
A few hundred metres off-shore we congregate so that Tor can explain the best way of going ashore.
It is straightforward — you paddle like hell straight at the beach and with luck and strength can get the boat far enough up to ensure dry feet when you get out.
It works too.
Tony and I drag our boats up the beach and head off to the rocks, our balance oddly disturbed by the many hours afloat.
The vegetation turns out to be more sparse than we had imagined.
It comprises stunted birch trees in the main , each tree with a mass of leaves.
I am puzzled.
Surely here, with day-long sunshine, there is no need for so many, and surely they just add to heat and water losses?
Under the trees there is a luxuriant mass of grass and moss beneath which numerous streams flow.
We discover this when we try to walk towards the cliffs, our progress hindered by the occasional disappearing foot and accompanying staccato shout of Shit !
We camp Lappish style in a lavvu that Tor, he of the wall-to-wall shoulders, has paddled here on his deck.
He has also brought a paraffin pressure stove (though if Optimus or Primus I am not sure) of such proportions that correct plumbing would allow it to centrally heat a sizeable town.
I fetch water — an easy job, just grab a kettle, head for the cliffs and fill from the first stream you fall in — and offer it to Tor.
Almost by return I get a mug of tea.
Sea KayakWe eat bread and the marvellous brown Norwegian cheese that looks and tastes like fudge.
The best is made from goat's milk, although the goat-cow milk mix offers a smoother taste.
I cut the cheese with the Lappish knife I acquired last time out; it has a 25-centimetre blade and can open cans, cut fire-wood and generally keep misery at bay.
Tor is impressed.
He takes it and examines it keenly.
Um, he says, and goes on to explain that in Norway a small, useless knife sometimes seen about the person of hunters and campers who have little idea is known as a ‘mouse castrator’.
Our knife, he decides, does not fall into that category.
Later we all climb to the top of the cliffs behind the bay, an arduous scramble up step, stream-washed scree.
At the top, perhaps three hundred  metres or so above the camp, the view is phenomenal.
flat-topped Sandoya rears up out of the sea, with, behind it, the tent-like shape of Sør-Fugløya, a bird reserve.
Per Ivar tells me his mother comes from Sandøya.
Life there was hard, especially in winter and today no one over-winters on the island, islanders preferring to fish and farm in summer and to retreat to the comforts of Tromsø in winter.
I suggest that it is sad that a way of life that is so ancient is ending, but Per Ivar is less convinced.
It is easy to be romantic about a way of life at one remove.
Maybe if I was on Sandøya when winter came, when the sun went in for two or three months, when all the water froze, when ice covered the ground and fishing was a risky business of frozen fingers and ears, on water in which survival was measured in seconds, I would be less romantic about it.
Probably I would be more convinced that Tromsø, with its snug wooden houses, its thick air-spaced double glazing, its heating systems, its hot water from the tap, its colour televisions and supermarkets, was not just a retreat from reality.
Sea Kayaking, KaldfjordenThe Norwegians choose a long ridge walk to go  back to the camp and by the time they have arrived, Tony and I have decided to take the kayaks out on to the Ocean.
Tor looks at his watch.
It is approaching midnight, but he agrees it is a fine idea.
Minutes later we are heading for a small island group north of Vengsøya, to round that and head on for the next.
The trip is one of the most beautiful I have known.
The sun is setting now, midnight sun ending a few weeks before, but it only disappears for an hour and even then it leaves behind its mark of golden twilight.
I sit on the first island to photograph the kayaks heading north into the last of the sun, then refloat again to join them.
The low-angle light smears colours, so that the Ocean is uniformly dark brown.
Above, the sky is yellow and yellow-orange, a thin band of cloud on fire with the red of the dying sun.
Sö-Fuglöya and Sandöya from VengsöyaThe Ocean is calm, so calm you could believe it to be lacquered wood rather than water and that if you were in a hurry you could leave the boat and walk to shore.
The sun disappears, leaving behind its glow on the horizon as if the colour is in my head, burnt in by gazing too long at the red sphere.
We stop paddling and rock very gently.
Tony paddles over; the dripping water from his paddle ends, and the suck of water into the holes they leave behind are the only sounds for miles.
We talk, using the hushed tones you would reserve for a furtive conversation in church.
Time passes.
I gaze at the island, a dark mass against the still-light sky.
The highest point on Vengsøya, a little over two thousand feet above the Ocean's surface, suddenly turns pink.
Not green or brown, but pink.
We watch, and the pink spreads downwards as the sun rises behind us.
We are in the wrong position to see the flash of light as the sun erupts again, settling instead for seeing it emerge from behind the northward island as we paddle slowly in.
I try to sleep, but cannot, and go for a walk along the shore and on to a ridge from where Sør-Fugløya is thrown into relief by the blinding sun.
Life is a privilege.
The privilege lasts through a good period of fine weather.
We paddle on seas the green of cat's eyes, and seas as clear as mountain streams.
We are watched by seals.
We see through jellyfish that are ghostly pale blue outlines in the water.
One day we see not one, nor even one pair, but two pairs of sea eagles lift off from the cliffs under which we are paddling.
One bird drifts overhead and I swear it is gazing at my quill-like yellow boat as I am gazing at its white tail.
Black guillemots ( teiste in Norwegian) dive and disappear as we approach.
A shoal of fish jumps out of the sea, a sight to quicken the heart as Tor says this often happens when the fish are being chased by orca.
But there is no orca.
The fine weather brings out butterflies — something else to surprise the infrequent Arctic traveller — — and mosquitos with jaws like drills.
For days after we are all victims to the angry itching bumps they leave all over us.
They drive me to distraction: at first I refuse to fight back, on the grounds that life is sacred and it is not their fault that they are mosquitos, but I eventually join in the swatting that punctuates the quiet every so often .
It is, I decide, not my fault either that I am a human being who does not want to be eaten alive.
During one meal I swat one off my arm and ask Tor if he knows what was the last thing that went through the mozzie's mind.
Leila helps translate this for me as she, but not he, understands the colloquialism.
No, he admits, when he understands, what?
His ass, I suggest, wondering how the bluntness of the joke will go down.
The taciturn Tor falls off his log and eventually complains of painful stomach muscles.
All over north Norway now this characteristic English reply is a trade mark of those who know the mighty Tor.
Finally, we make for home, heading past Vengsøya towards the mainland.
All morning it has been calm but now we are threatened by a storm that has been brewing out to the west.
It hurls itself around the island and in seconds the sea is alive, ugly waves crashing over the boats, white horses flicking over the surface on the hooves of the wind.
The sea worsens, the waves rising in height, and to add to the misery a sleety rain starts to emerge from the wind.
Unable to stop paddling for fear of capsizing, Tony and I cannot put on our anoraks and within a few minutes we are soaked by the freezing combination of sea and rain.
My glasses are creased by running water and I can no longer see past the end of the boat.
I ask Tor, who has come across to see how I am coping, if this is normal, a guarded, off-the-cuff way of informing him that I am shit-scared and would like the weather to change.
It is, he says, pretty bad.
Can it get worse and still be survivable?
Yes, he says, he has known it a little worse, but not much.
It is rough, he says, very bad.
He is glad, he says, it is not too far. SunsetLoading the kayaks at BelvikMidnight launchNot too far is about eight kilometres, a distance that takes us well over an hour, although time is irrelevant.
We are paddling at 45 degrees to the sea so on every wave the paddle must be just so to stop the boat going over.
It is a wearying business, and I find myself thinking again and again of the lecture I went to on surviving in dangerous situations.
The lecturer gave his definition of stress — a sense of impending incontinence.
Never before today have I realized that the man was offering a Great Truth.
Tor suggests we try to stop in the small bay where we will touch the mainland.
If we can go ashore we can have coffee and Tony and I can put on our anoraks.
Sounds good to me.
As we near the bay, Tony and I draw level.
How is it going, can you see yourself going all the way?
Well, I take every wave as it comes, Brian.
But they do win through.
The lads done well.
Getting ashore is tricky, with the sea threatening to destroy the boats on the boulders at the edge.
I haul my kayak up with what seems to be the last of my strength.
I am soaked, cold and not a little lacking in enthusiasm for the next try.
Tor goes off to a cottage up the hill from the bay and comes back disconsolate, having been told to ‘piss off’ by the occupants who were robbed last week and are not in any mood to offer the traditional Norwegian hospitality to a motley collection of bedraggled canoeists.
All the matches are wet, so we cram down a few handfuls of cheese and boiled sweets.
We change into drier — not dry — kit and go again.
The storm abates a bit , and there is no problem in reaching our start point.
Taking the boats out of the water and loading them on the cars is a chore.
Then everything must go in plastic bags so the car doesn't get wet.
Leila drives, a remarkable performance given that we are so wet and steaming that she must peer through condensation thick enough to carve.
She has, she says, only enough petrol to reach the first garage.
It is closed. 
WINTER — SLEDGING‘Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, this is the captain speaking.
We are flying at a height of 11,000 metres and at a speed of just under 750kph.
We expect to be landing in Oslo in about fifty minutes.
It is a good day in Oslo.
The temperature is 2°C (36°F) and it is raining’.
No one seemed to think this an out of place remark, but the three of us fell about.
Tony and I had organized a dog sledging trip which we hoped would take us from Dividal in northern Norway through Sweden and into Finland.
After his good showing the previous autumn Nathan was coming too.
He and Tony got on well: they started arguing over whether it was better to have two bits of black pudding rather than two sausages in the terminal café, and when that battle was over they started another about who was going to have the window seat on the plane.
Tony's meal was a revelation — solid cholesterol from first forkful to last.
It brought a new meaning to the phrase ‘terminal breakfast.'
At Oslo the performance of transferring the kit was an epic.
Tony's cameras were in three largish bags and each of us had a very large rucsac.
In addition there was a roll bag that our ‘tidy’ stuff was going in.
We were a two-trolley group.
Tony was bearded for the trip.
Having decided that he was very unlikely to shave for next sixteen or so days he wanted his beard to be at the past-scratch stage when he arrived.
I had my Arctic haircut, long and rat's-nested.
Nathan had needed no special arrangements: when very well dressed he looks scruffy — I suppose it must be a gift; it is certainly true that he couldn't give it away — and today he was not very well dressed.
We were, therefore, a to-be-avoided, two-trolley group.
Mothers kept their children away from us, and were grateful when we had checked in and gone for a coffee.
Tromsø had no more snow than we had seen in the autumn, but it was colder.
It was a raw cold too, the cold of being close to the ocean, a wet cold — — if that is not a contradiction for a temperature down around — -12°C (10°F).
It was a shrug the shoulders, sink the hands deep in the pockets and be fed up about the running nose cold.
It was too late to go to the campsite, or even to get a bus out of town, so we stopped at a hotel where they worried about us and charged too much for Coke.
We rang our dog man, Odd-Knut Thoresen, and told him we had arrived.
We had not yet met Odd-Knut, but his voice was friendly and competent.
He knocked on the door of the room I was sharing with Nathan while I was repacking kit.
Nat let him in and went to fetch Tony who appeared wearing a pair of boxer shorts and a big smile.
It turned out that he had locked himself out of his room which was likely to be embarrassing as I, for one, was not about to go down to reception for a key for him.
Odd-Knut had a Viking shock of blond hair, but little other resemblance to the Hollywood Norseman.
He was slight and short-sighted, with a gentle smile that belied an amazing toughness and an ability to withstand cold that was to beggar our belief.
He eyed Nathan suspiciously, clearly wondering whether he would survive the trip, but gave a reassuring ‘impressed’ look when Nat told him about our trip over Tromsdalen.
We went for a coffee and Odd-Knut explained his ideas for the trip.
He would pick us up tomorrow early and we could help buy some last bits and pieces.
Then we could go to his place and learn to sledge.
The day after it was off to Rostadalen to start.
We asked about going into Finland but he shook his head.
Rabies had reached southern Finland and there was an embargo on crossborder dog movements.
True, the disease would sooner or later reach Norway after travelling up through Finland, but the Norwegian government had decided to stall it as long as possible.
Who could blame them?
Odd-Knut — whose English was good enough to know that he did not want us to call him ‘Odd’ — suggested that he could leave us near the Finnish border and we could ski or walk the last bit.
We talked about the wildlife of the area and what we might see.
Odd-Knut smiled at us.
Later we were to learn that if you travel with two dozen sledge dogs you see no wildlife.
We drank coffee and talked some more.
Odd-Knut rolled a thin cigarette and poured himself yet  another coffee.
Tony bought him a whisky and then bought him another.
Outside the café the night sky was filled with the pale light of a ripening moon, invisible from here except as a shimmer on the quiet ocean.
Several months later, Nathan wrote up his dog sledging trip for a school project.
He was having some trouble with one section.
He was describing Odd-Knut's Volvo which arrived the next morning, the like of which I have yet to see again.
It was an estate, the hatch door being held down by gravity.
There were sections of smooth plate occasionally between the dents and here and there paint of an ancient Volvo hue showed through a patina of decrepitude.
Nathan thought hard and finally wrote that the Volvo was ‘old and depressed’.
I can't improve on that.
We loaded our kit into the car and went into the town.
Odd-Knut dropped us off so that he could go and get the last of his dog food.
I casually wondered whether this meant 50 tins of Pedigree Chum and then ambled off after Tony who was being shown the Arctic Ocean by Nathan.
Tony set up his tripod in a snow drift and started to contemplate a shot, so we left him to it and visited the town's Polar Museum.
It was an intriguing place, full of photos of early explorers and of Roald Amundsen, who left Tromsø for his Arctic nemesis.
Nathan was intrigued by a polar bear trap used when the Norwegians saw the big white bear as target rather than as tourist attraction.
The trap was hideously unpleasant and, probably, equally hideously effective.
Elsewhere there was a reconstructed hut which came alive with sound when you walked through a hidden beam.
There were dog howls, wind howls and ice creaks.
The suggestion was that Arctic travel was a miserable journey into a land of cold and fear.
Odd-Knut picked us up again and we went off to buy him and Tony some beer, available in Norway only at government alcohol shops.
Then he took us to the university where a friend of his, an Englishman, was studying the local bird life.
He was a fascinating man who shared with us some of his delight in Arctic birds and animals.
As he spoke I noticed, over his shoulder and out of his study window, a large grey bird go past, moving quickly with the wind.
I asked him what it might have been; after all, if he was an expert on the local birds then he ought to know.
He looked puzzled and for a better description.
Well, I said, it was about so long — hands out at just beyond shoulder width — and about this much across the wings — hands now indicating a fair wingspan of several feet — and it was grey, well, greyish.
He shook his head.
No, no that didn't fit the description of anything we had ever seen or heard about.
Was I sure it wasn't white?
No, grey.
And that big?
Yes, perhaps even a little bigger.
He shook his head again.
The others joined in the story.
Was I sure I had seen it at all ?
Of course I was.
Well, perhaps… and so on .
In the end, to draw matters to an unhappy conclusion they all agreed that it had probably been a bin liner.
Odd-Knut Thoresen was the Tromsø dog collector and owner of the local dog hotel.
In midwinter — it was the first week of February — there were few dogs in his compounds, although there was one large, affable-looking but wholly terrified cat.
Outside, doing their best to frighten the cat spitless with their howling, were fifty sledge dogs, each chained to a kennel, well separated to stop their most frequent game, that of tearing lumps out of each other .
We called them huskies, as you might expect, but Odd-Knut was not happy with the name.
They were a cross-breed, Alaskan and Greenland.
Since Greenland dogs were always dogs not huskies he preferred that name.
The Siberian animals, beautiful silvery creatures I had worked with once before in Switzerland, were huskies.
He took us inside and introduced us to Kjell-Arne, a lanky, shy youth who worked for him and was told to make coffee, and Tove, the kennel girl.
Her moon-shaped face was always split with a smile, even when she was scooping up dog turds with a device the handle of which was at least two feet shorter than I would have wanted it to be.
We were shown our sledges.
Not for us the tourist sledge of the one- or two-day package visitor, a short contraption, more tea tray than means of transport.
Our sledges were long and sleek, with pine-resined or PTFE runners and compartments of wood and nylon for our kit.
First we will learn to harness the dogs, said Odd-Knut.
He took off his shoes, climbed into a chair, rolled a cigarette and poured himself a coffee.
We waited.
And three hours later we were still waiting.
The best time of day to ride sledges is at night, and shifting Odd-Knut in daylight needed explosives.
Nathan turned the conversation to the bear trap in the museum, asking Odd-Knut if he had seen it, and soon we were talking about the killing of   film on seal killing had been shown, an indictment of the Norwegian sealers.
Odd-Knut said that the locals, many of whom were in the fishing and related trades, were incensed.
They insisted that the film had been shot in Canada in 1957, despite what the voice-over said.
On Norwegian ships, if someone was a bad killer they would be locked in the holds, they said.
If Lindberg was to come to Tromsø he would be hung from a lamp-post, probably by his balls.
This last comment was the only one I could feel was definitely true.
View west from Blåmannen on Kvalöy near TromsøThe conversation drifted to whaling, where the Norwegian record also seemed lacking in compassion and common sense.
Odd-Knut found that record harder to defend, and ultimately gave up trying.
To lighten the proceedings he told us of an incident some years ago when there had still been a whaling station in the town.
A group of Germans — ‘fat Germans’, he insisted — was being shown around when an ancient whale carcass, blown big on decay gas pressure, exploded.
The visitors were covered from head to foot in over-ripe whale bits.
With great glee Odd-Knut told us that the fat Germans showered ten times every day for a week and still reeked of rotten whale.
This was not the first time I had noticed the old enmity of the Norwegians for the Germans.
Once, I had inadvertently called Nordic skiing langlauf and had been lucky to escape alive.
Old memories die hard, especially in a town like Tromsø which was home to a large contingent of the German navy.
Tirpitz lies at the bottom of the local fjord, and every year the local diving club goes down to it on New Year's Day to retrieve a handful of bits guaranteed to fuel the old fires for another year.
Odd-Knut showed us a video of the Iditarod, intriguing for what it didn't tell you which, as it turned out, was quite a lot .
He told us about the longest race in Norway; he had taken part and had done very well, finishing very close to the front of the ‘amateur’ racers (as opposed to those who race dogs for a living).
Norwegian television had followed the big race the previous year and about 100 kilometres from its end had stopped the leader to interview him.
The man was not wanting to be interviewed, but such is the power of television that he had to agree.
They did a take, and then another.
It was cold and the man's dogs lay down to rest and stay warm.
By the time the interview was over the dogs were all asleep and refused to wake up.
The sledger shouted and kicked, he  cursed the dogs and swore at the television crew The dogs slept on and the race went past him.
Odd-Knut explained the theory of dog sledging.
Keep your lines straight and taut and your dogs will go faster.
Keep one eye on them at all times to avoid problems.
If one stops for a piss the rest might catch up and if they do they will either fall straight over him so that you finish with a ball of dogs that will take forever to unwind, or they will take lumps out of him.
When feeding your dogs don't hand them their meat or they might take it from your elbow down.
When your dogs are eating it is not a good idea to pat them; if they think you are trying to take their food they will defend it with your life.
It was sobering.
At the front the sledge has a semi-circle of lathed wood hinged to it.
This piece allows the dog line the tow line — to operate in a different plane to the sledge and also absorbs some of shock of towing.
Each dog is attached to the tow line twice.
To get the sledge ready you anchor it firmly; this is vital because once you have attached your first dog he will start to tow and the whole shooting match will be long gone by the time you get back with your second dog.
To fix the sledge you use the snow hook, shaped like a double fish hook but about a foot long and wide.
You use this both to anchor the sledge during a trip, by stamping it into the snow, and at the start of each day to hold the sledge, by clunking it on to a tree trunk.
Having anchored your sledge you fix your tow line to the front hinge piece, using a karabiner.
The snow hook is actually on the end of the tow line so that in the unlikely event of the karabiner unhooking — as it did once on me — — the hook stays close to you giving you an outside chance of holding on to the team.
Next you take a lead dog and put on its harness of padded nylon; this goes over the head and the front legs poke through stitched loops.
Down the dog's back runs a nylon tape with a small karabiner at its ends, which hooks on to a tug line that is crimped on to the tow line.
Both tow line and tug line are wire encased in nylon; if they were just nylon the dogs would chew through them.
After the dog is clipped to the tug line it is clipped to a neck line so that it is held tight in position relative to the tow line.
If you are running with one lead dog then it attaches to both the front tug lines and has no neck line.
If you are running with two lead dogs then you clip one on each of the front tug lines, and neck line them together.
Now you attach your lead dog to a tree, or the sledge in front, or anything to keep your tow line taut.
If you forget, as you turn to go for another dog the lead dog, being a friendly creature, will come with you.
It will probably then go round the other side of the sledge and might even go over the snow hook line.
Give him thirty seconds and you will have knitting.
After your lead dogs are guyed out you attach the next pair, the point dogs.
there could be several pairs of these.
On one part of our trip Odd-Knut, for all sorts of reasons, ran with eight dogs.
Finally you attach your closest dogs, the wheel dog pair.
Now you are ready to go.
Now comes the dodgy part.
But we are still drinking coffee in a dog kennel.
The evening wears on and we all shuffle impatiently.
Suddenly Odd-Knut gets up and asks if we would like to go dog sledging.
We dress up like bit-part players in an epic on Scott and go out into the night where the air bites clean and deep, and the snow crunches in that beautiful cold way.
After the horror stories about the dogs I hesitate to go near my first one, but with us they are just big balls of fur.
They are chained separately only to keep them clear of each other .
I move in on a twenty-kilogram monster, all bark and paws.
Nice doggy, good doggy .
Doggy leaps up on me and tries to wash my face with a tongue like a coarse bastard file.
It bone breaths all over me.
Jesus, what does he feed them on?
That was 'orrible.
The dog seems anxious to get the harness on; indeed, all through the trip the dogs are always keen to pull and seem miserable when they are tied off for the night.
Between us we harness two teams and go out with one of us sitting in a sledge driven by Tove, one on the back of Odd-Knut's Sno-Go snow scooter, and the other tentatively riding the second sledge.
With a team in front, life is easier as the dogs follow and all we have to do is keep the tow line taut and holler the occasional encouraging word, as much to each other as to the dogs.
Riding in the sledge is an experience.
Encased in pile and nylon, hoods drawn tight, it would be easy to forget the world in a welter of sensations, were it not for the running commentary that Tove keeps up.
‘Hold on to the sledge rails here — keep a loose grip or your hands get tired — try not to keep your foot on the brake (a miniature snow hook held off the snow by an elasticated octopus grip) or your   other leg will get tired — don't shout too much at the dogs or they get confused — the occasional quiet word is helpful — on downhills brake gently if you need to so that the line stays tight.'
And there is much more advice that I did not take in, except that later I remember it when a new situation arises.
For the moment I am concentrating mostly on the fact that I am riding under the Arctic sky, a very black sky, heavily overcast, being pulled across the ice by a team of dogs.
They are silent.
Only during a stop do they howl or yelp, as the frustration of inactivity gets to them.
They are moving at good speed — we are on one of Odd-Knut's prepared training runs — perhaps topping 30kph on the level sections.
When you are held in tight beneath the sledge's nylon coverall   that feels very quick.
Occasionally the front of the sledge runner, about 2 or 3 metres in front of me, hits a hummock of snow and my face is thwacked by a handful of icy flour.
I spit it out and flick it from my eyes.
It adds to the exhilaration, bringing a smile rather than a frown.
Next backwards comes a waft of dog fart.
In the days that follow we learn about this smell, which varies from ugh ! and a turn of the head to really gut-wrenching.
Tonight it is just another sensation.
Sledge dogTaigaDawn sledging, RostadalenWhen it is my turn on the sledge the experience is incomparable.
Not like learning to drive a car, not even like riding a horse.
There is a sense of isolation from the rest of the world, a sense of the power in the dogs, and a wonderful feeling of being in control, but only just.
It is perhaps like being on top of a big wave in a canoe or on a surfboard, but to try to describe it is to fail.
The following day we packed Odd-Knut's depressed Volvo.
On its roof there were four sledges — three ordinary ones for the three of us, and a monster for Odd-Knut, built, it seemed to us, to carry everything including the proverbial.
In the back of the car was our kit.
The overspill (considerable) was packed into what space was left on the roof (inadequate).
Hooked up at the back was a double-decker dog carrier, each deck having four holes to a side, giving a total of sixteen holes.
Twelve of these were packed with two dogs in each, two dozen dogs.
I was not looking forward to the packing.
The second row of holes was at chest level.
Hands up those wanting to lift a twenty-kilogram dog into a 25-centimetre hole a that height.
In fact, the dogs could not wait to get in.
Each time we went for another animal all those left howled and fought their chains to get close to us so as not to be left behind.
As we collected a dog it would lurch towards the car, the rest falling silent in their disappointment.
Our only problem was with the doubling up.
Get the wrong number two dog in with a number one and the cuddly koala in your arms turned into megatooth.
We filled the spare holes with harnesses.
As I loaded them in there was a sharp reminder of the night before.
The harness stank of dog, that unpleasant smell which big-dog owners never seem to notice in their own house.
Here it was again, but so strong as to be an insult to the word stench.
Later during the trip I noticed that one morning the smell hadn't registered with me.
I took me a while to cotton on.
By then everything I wore smelled of it too.
With 500 kilograms of dog, about the same quantity of dog food, sledges and kit, plus the four of us on board , we made our way out of Odd Knut's drive.
The main road was ice-covered.
Why not?
Everything else was.
Odd-Knut had studded tyres and Alain Prost delusions.
Tony sat in the front.
He was used to this sort of thing, he drives a big motorbike.
When we went round the first corner at about 90kph Tony went very quiet.
It was a long trip, not helped by a tyre that cried ‘enough!’ in the middle of nowhere and required changing — a job made more difficult by the fact that Odd-Knut had no spare — but ultimately we arrived at the entrance to Rostadalen.
The snow was so deep we could make no progress, so we went around into Dividal instead.
It was late when we finally eased our stiff limbs into the night.
The sky was clear, the stars were beautiful and the snow creaked underfoot.
Our breath made huge clouds of steam which hid our faces as we talked, and we hopped about and shrugged elaborately to ward off the penetrating fingers of cold that probed at our necks and hands.
The sledges came down first and were loaded with tents, dog food and our kit.
The dogs grew noisy with excitement, and each wire door was now filled with the pressed muzzle of an anxious face.
Carefully we laid out the tow lines and attached our snow hooks, Tony to one roadside fence post, me to another, Nathan to the bumper of Odd-Knut's car.
Odd-Knut was ahead of us, so that nothing would stop him being first away.
The unpacking of the car and the packing and preparing of sledges took a long time.
It was dark, and all the fiddly jobs like clipping in the dogs or tying kit on to the sledges meant taking off gloves.
After just a minute or so, especially if we were handling metal, we would need to stop and huff on to frozen fingers, standing around with pained expressions while circulation returned.
During one such stop I looked up.
In the lead-up to the trip I had been telling Nat about the Northern Lights and how wonderful they were.
Now the sky above Dividal was filled with the most glorious Lights I had ever seen, a shimmering waterfall of green light.
‘Nat, look.’
I pointed up.
He stopped packing rucsacs on to his sledge and looked.
He did not say a word, just stared at the sky.
For once , the product had turned out to be even better than the advert.
Tony and Odd-Knut stopped work too, and there was a silent time, broken only by Tony's mad rush to find his camera and tripod.
We had chosen our visit to coincide with the full moon, but it also coincided with a period of maximum solar flare activity, and on every clear night the Lights treated us to a spectacular show in green and red.
As we watched, a man arrived on a snow scooter and he and Odd-Knut talked long and quietly.
When he left Odd-Knut told us he was Lappish, and that when asked if the trail to our campsite was piled high with snow he had said yes it was, but that he would break it for us if we were willing to pay.
Odd-Knut, not willing to spend our money and not inspired by his attitude, declined.
In that case the Lapp had said he would do it for a few drinks if we had any with us.
Odd-Knut agreed, but only if the bottle was found tomorrow rather than today.
The Lapp shrugged and left.
Odd-Knut did not know if he would break trail.
The next day the Lapp arrived for his drink, but we had seen no evidence of a trail.
At last everything was ready.
At close to midnight, when the three of us were already tired, Odd-Knut slipped his snow hook and was gone, so fast I was stunned.
Tony, over to my right, shouted something to me, released his hook and was gone.
My dogs were straining against the sledge now and yelping as if badly hurt.
I took hold of the snow hook, but to release it meant hauling in some slack on the line.
The five dogs on the other end of it were not impressed with the idea of going backwards and battle was joined.
There was a loud whoaa ! to my left and Nathan shot past.
He shouted something at me or at his dogs, I don't even now know which, and was gone into the night.
My dogs were frantic, and so was I, I hauled one last time, the line came back two centimetres, the hook came free and the dogs roared away.
from standstill to top speed was, it seemed, instant, with me fighting to stay in balance as the sledge buckled over the rough trail.
The journey started easily enough, the way going up a track that in summer is an unsurfaced road used by tourists.
Soon the going became very rough, with deep snow that constantly stopped Odd-Knut's dogs.
Frequently we stopped, turned and went back for another try to the left or right Our order did not change, with Odd-Knut out in front, then Tony and Nathan, and me bringing the line to an end.
At the back, sometimes out of sight of the others, I became engrossed in my own problems.
I was tired, very tired.
I was also sick and tired.
Sick and tired of stopping and starting, of going up banks only to go down them again, of being whacked in the face by the branches of trees that the dogs ran under, and of not knowing where we were going or why.
Why were we in this bloody forest anyway?
Why did we not just stop and camp?
Up front Tony was asking the same questions.
We were in the forest to try to get less deep snow, he was told; we were going to a campsite that Odd-Knut had prepared.
Nat turned and shouted this garbled message to me and I hooked my dogs to a tree and went forward to talk to him.
In the light of my head torch I could see that Nat was grey-faced with fatigue, his eyelids drooping, his mouth surrounded by frost that he had not had the strength to wipe away.
Snow from the trees had fallen all over us and his arms and shoulders were covered in a white dust that sparkled in the light from my lamp.
I could not see his feet as snow ploughed up from his brake when he had last stepped on it reached to about mid-calf.
I was appalled.
What right had I to bring him here and to inflict this sort of suffering on him?
Are you OK?
I asked.
He smiled.
fine, he said, this is great isn't it?
His face lit up suddenly, he wiped his mouth and shook his feet free of the snow cocoon.
Back there, he said, did you see me go over that bump?
I went right up in the air.
I could have held him tight and told him I was proud of him and that I loved him just for being there, but he would have struggled free.
So I settled for dusting off his shoulder and giving it a quick squeeze.
He smiled again, and then was gone, off in pursuit of Tony who had started moving again.
By the time I am ready to move again everyone has gone.
The dogs follow the trail, so there is no problem, but it does mean that I miss seeing the sudden three metre drop that we go down to reach a frozen river.
The bottom is reached with a mind-numbing crash that jars every bone, but at least this thaws out my brain.
We follow the river, very easy going, and then leave it to go uphill through very deep snow that means we have to push the sledges rather than ride them.
The country is more open here, with fewer trees and flatter ground.
Ahead I can see that Odd-Knut has stopped and is off his sledge.
Tony stops too.
Oh Christ, not more delay.
But no.
In the centre of the clearing where they have stopped is a Red Indian wigwam, the one  Odd-Knut erected a few days before.
We have arrived.
I look at my watch.
It is just past three in the morning, and the journey here has taken a little over three hours.
I am dog-tired, as are the dogs.
My legs are stiff with inactivity and cold and my breath freezes in front of me to obscure the view.
It is groaningly cold, possibly as low as — -225°C ( — -13°F), although we cannot be sure as Tony's thermometer is buried under a mound of tackle.
We unharness the dogs and attach them to a chain that Odd-Knut fastens between two trees.
Even when they are off the sledges the dogs are kept apart.
OK, says Odd-Knut, we must pitch the other tent and get some food.
When we have the chance we will camp Lappish style, with lavvus , the wigwam tents made of birch poles and reindeer skins, but tonight we are using a modern lavvu of canvas and aluminium poles.
Tony and I dig a platform for the tent, lowering the snow by about seventy centimetres to give us a nice protective wall.
The lavvu goes up, the canvas at the bottom held down by shovelled snow.
While we do this Nathan is off cutting birch twigs.
Odd-Knut has given him a hunting knife, and pointed him at the trees.
I go over to help and find him upright but asleep, his head against the trunk of a tree, the knife, evil-looking with a thirty-centimetre blade, half held in his hand.
I wake him gently.
We cut small branches between us and these are laid on the floor of the tent.
Next on go reindeer skins, then our own Karrimats and sleeping bags.
Nathan needs to be helped from his shell clothing he is so tired, but we insist he must stay awake to eat.
Tony and I cut wood while Odd-Knut erects a wood-burning stove in the tent.
The fire is soon going and we have tea and eat  something — God knows what.
Nathan is propped up against a rucsac with a cup, plate and two glazed eyes.
He eats mechanically, because we say he must.
He finishes and asks if he can sleep now.
I say yes and he keels over, being asleep before his head reaches the floor, his shoulders and arms still out of the bag.
I ease him into it and then make for my own.
I assume I must have made it because when the noise of movement outside wakes me four hours later that is where I am.
Lappish lavvuThe lavvu is a shambles; everywhere there is clothing, the nylon stiff with cold.
Nat's Dachsteins, dropped on a piece of exposed ground, are frozen solidly to it, have to be prised free, and will need to be thawed over the stove.
Words are exchanged, and there is a tense moment or two.
Tony, ever sensible, ever the peacemaker, suggests that we were all tired, still are, and it might all look better after a cup of tea.
He hands me a billy and suggests I get some snow for water and a few twigs to start the fire.
He also suggests that it might be a good idea if we move one at a time to avoid a ridiculous crush in the tent; I should get up and move out, then he will get up and start the fire, then Nathan can get up last.
Agreed.
Getting up is purgatory.
I have slept in a full set of thermal underwear, but the cold gets to me as soon as I leave the bag.
I hastily dress, but there is limit to how fast you can put on two or three layers of clothes.
Outside Odd-Knut is feeding the dogs in miserable weather.
It is not snowing, but there is enough wind to be chilling and the day is grey and misty, so I get little sense of where the camp is, with visibility only a few tens of metres.
I collect snow and start off for the nearest dead tree with the big knife and an axe.
I come back with an armful of dead birch to find Tony digging films out of a snowdrift near the tent.
He takes the wood and disappears back into the tent.
I amble over to Odd-Knut to ask a few dumb questions.
He answers patiently.
Breakfast is tea and muesli, the muesli made  with hot water and milk powder.
Nathan gets and goes off in search of somewhere quiet, clutching a toilet roll and anxious anticipations.
Odd-Knut makes coffee using the method we have become familiar with — chuck the coffee in a pot, add snow to taste, boil on the stove, when empty add coffee and/or snow as necessary.
After the third filling it was a treacly mixture that certainly woke you up.
Nathan returns, suggesting that you need to be in a sheltered spot for minimum discomfort; he thinks that constipation is to be feared almost as much as the wind.
Tony asks him whether he dug a hole, but he says no need, the stuff just melts its way down.
Odd-Knut is much amused by all this talk, and tells us that in Greenland the sledge dogs will eat it if they can get at it.
Will they really?
Avoiding a treeOdd-Knut produces a bottle of Wolf's paw, a local spirit drink, and offers it around.
As the nondrinker I get first go (why?) and it takes my breath away.
Tony tries and with his eyes watering declares it a good noggin.
Thankfully Nat declines.
We tidy the tent, sort our kit and the light starts to fade.
Odd-Knut thinks that it might be best to make a night trip with empty sledges, returning to the camp, especially as a friend of his is likely to arrive for the night.
We all agree.
More tea is drunk, food is eaten.
We stretch out in the lavvu which is pleasantly warm now after a day of the stove being ablaze.
Odd-Knut's friend Tom-Frode arrives, a perpetually smiling man with hands like dinner plates.
It is past nine by the time we start to harness the dogs, and the sky is a little clearer, the temperature a little cooler.
Again, when we move off the speed startles me.
Apparently, the tow given to old whalers by a harpooned whale was known as the ‘Nantucket Sleighride’; I haul back on the line, release the snow hook and take a similar ride.
We move through a band of forest and then start to climb steeply, going up over 300 metres at a good steady speed.
Nathan is behind this time which means I can have the occasional shouted conversation with Tony.
This is fantastic, he shouts.
This is unreal, he continues.
No one will ever believe us.
He's right.
It is fantastic.
Under the Arctic night sky we are going gentle uphill without effort, hauled by dogs whose only noise is a gently effort-driven panting.
The whole thing does seem unreal.
It is so far removed, not only from my normal run of experience, but from anything I have ever done that it seems beyond the realms of reality, a fantasy production, a dream come true.
A far shout calls me back to truth.
Behind me Nathan is having problems, his wooden runners sticking in the snow and causing him to go slowly.
We wait, he catches up and we go on again.
Again he falls back and at the top of the climb we wait again.
Below us the forest of Dividal is visible.
It is an illusion that the Arctic is dark in winter.
The snow is so white that it reflects any available light.
Above us there is a full moon and the light that is forcing its way between the clouds is quite sufficient to provide a picture.
The picture is in black and white — there is never enough night light for colours to emerge — and this adds to the unreal quality.
Far below us now is a hurricane lamp that Odd-Knut has hung from a tree knowing it would be visible from the hill.
Nathan arrives and Odd-Knut inspects his runners.
They need a touch of resin he decides, but as he has none it will have to wait until we get back to the camp.
To save time we hitch Nat's sledge to a tree, distribute his dogs among the three of us and put Nathan in my sledge.
He is not pleased.
With Nathan on board my dogs move more slowly, and we trail off from the others as we climb up above the tree line.
The clouds clear and the moonlight sparkles on the snow.
Ahead, as they swing away from me, the other sledges look like commas on the writing paper of the snow.
The temperature falls and Nathan pulls the nylon sledge cover up over his head, peering out through a narrow slit so as not to miss anything.
Tom-Frode, Odd-Knut and Tony wait for us to arrive.
Tom has to get back tomorrow, so Odd-Knut decides to circle the peak ahead and rejoin our outward trail to pick up Nat's sledge on the way back.
I let Nat have my dogs and sit in with Tony.
Odd-Knut lifts his snow hook out of the snow and with a swish is gone.
We follow.
From within the cover the ride is impressive; closer to the ground, I can hear thumps and bangs as well as the runners hiss.
I can hear the dogs panting ahead and occasionally I am flurried by snow kicked up from a runner.
Tony talks to his dogs all the time, a hup, hup here, a go, Brussie there, and he shouts down to me too.
We pause again and swap passenger so that Nathan takes Tony round the edge of the peak into a long and narrow, and steep valley.
The wind is whistling up this and within seconds my face is frozen.
It is so cold I am going numb.
We stop to cover our faces with our  balaclavas, haul in the drawstrings on our anoraks and clamp snow goggles over our eyes.
Because I wear glasses, there is a slight air gap and soon my eyes are watering with the cold.
The wind-chill temperature that night must have been way below the — -25°C ( — -13°F) of the air temperature.
It was a biting cold that almost turned the pleasure of the riding into a chore, or a want for it to end.
Back at Nathan's sledge he is too cold to be bothered to ride again so we hoist it on to Odd-Knut's sledge and ride on.
Nathan and I bring up the rear, and soon we are alone, with Nathan buried beneath the nylon sledge cover.
We are going down towards the forest and the Arctic night is awesome.
The trees and mountain ridges have a magnificent stark beauty.
And it is so quiet.
The dogs never bark on the move, so there is no noise but that of runner on snow, and it is a warm, comforting sound that amplifies the silence.
My goggles ice up at regular intervals and I wipe them with my glove, afraid that I will miss the trail a groundless fear as the dogs follow the pack scent.
The trail goes steeply down and the speed increases, and I let go of the sledge rail to wipe my goggles — a fatal move.
The sledge bucks on an uneven hummock and throws me off.
I hold on with one hand, landing in a fast-moving heap that upsets the sledge's balance.
It turns on to its side and as I cling on for dear life I hear a startled cry from Nathan.
Cocooned in the nylon sack, from which he could escape only with difficulty, he is suddenly on his side heading downhill at speed.
He struggles to escape, alternating shouts of Stop ! at the dogs and shouts to me to see if I am still on board .
Odd-Knut said that you must never let go of the sledge, I say again and again to myself as I am pulled through snow heaps and ruts.
Something bangs hard into me and my arm is almost wrenched free, but eventually the dogs stop, no longer interested in dragging the overturned sledge and me.
Nathan and I are quite alone, many miles from civilization and, apparently, lost, the wind having blown snow across the tracks ahead suggests that we just let the dogs lead us towards the others, a well-reasoned idea that works perfectly.
By the time we meet Odd-Knut coming back to find us we are only a few hundred metres from the camp.
The Arctic dawn is stunningly beautiful.
One day Tony gets up to watch and witnesses one of the few times when the sun travels across a blue, cloudless sky.
It moves slowly, wearily and as if to ensure that you understand that it is tired; it goes only a few degrees above the horizon, making a long, low arc.
Even its light is tired, a pale yellowy-orange, nothing like the vibrant light of the south where the tireless sun goes high and stays high.
Tony is entranced.
The low angle means that all shadows — ours, the dogs', the trees' — are long and ghostly across the ice, and the orange light wraps itself around everything so that all things seem to be part of one thing.
He shoots tree stumps and furrows in the snow.
He shoots the dog's paws, too hairy and with huge hooked nails, yellow, hard and shiny.
Eventually he turns to me smiling broadly.
That's another roll finished, he says.
God this is great.
We leave base camp on a day that is grey and oppressive, the air full of snow.
packing is miserable, nothing is the right shape to fit the sledges.
How did we get it all here?
Odd-Knut discovers that his dogs have been hauling a full, 5-litre can of chain-saw oil around.
This amuses him greatly.
It is as well the dogs do not speak English.
Wiggen, one of my wheel dog pair, a monster of a dog weighing nearly thirty-five kilograms, jumps all over me as I go for him.
Yesterday I fed him the bony scraps from my reindeer stew and he is now mine for ever .
Thankfully, he has seen this simple act as one of friendship rather than for what it really is — I am afraid of him and I want him on my side.
He paws at me, licks me, nuzzles me and I talk back.
Harnessing the dogs is routine now, with Wiggen, with them all, a mixture of soft words and cold fingers.
We are ready.
Odd-Knut slips his hook and we head for Sweden and some Lappish people he knows.
It is the first pull of the day so we all know what to expect.
Odd-Knut feeds the dogs on a high-fat, high-protein mix of cow's stomach and other offal, fish, blood and oil.
With the first morning pull the dogs become so excited that they shit within metres.
The output is an evil treacle, black and vile.
When you see it coming — remember that they do everything on the move — you jump on to the runner on the opposite side from the dog, take a deep breath and hope the runner won't kick it up.
Even the dogs don't like it and will avoid the mixture from the dog in front at all costs.
Tony always says that you can tell a happy motorcyclist by the flies on his teeth.
His latest joke is that you can tell a happy musher by the dog shit on his teeth.
I remember this and smile, clamping my mouth shut as Wiggen goes into action. Dawn, DividalWe pause while Odd-Knut peers at his map and then ahead into the greyness.
The stop sets one dog off barking and others join in.
Since I gave Wiggen the reindeer he runs with his tail up, happy to be part of my team.
I notice, in a matter of fact way, that before he wuffs his gruff, low wuff, Wiggen's ass contracts.
Jesus, he's sucking in air at the back and wuffing it out at the front.
Now, he half turns and looks my way, love for the reindeer bones in his eyes and woofs merrily at me.
No hi-fi speaker maker has ever come up with a woofer that low and resonant.
We are off again.
We take a frozen river for a long way, a bumpy ride that keeps you concentrating, and when we eventually come off it, there is a lone tree that the dogs pull towards despite our efforts.
One by one the dogs on the left of the trace anoint it, the ones on the right going frantic in their efforts to reach it.
Later in the trip we pass, lone Nordic skier.
The man jabs his left ski down as Odd-Knut goes by, gets the ski between dog and trace and is hauled over and forwards.
He falls in a heap, and as they pass every dog on the right of the line raises a leg and pees on him.
The Lapps are a curious people, pragmatic almost to the point of unfriendliness.
If you can't eat it or, better, drink it then they don't want it.
Odd-Knut tells us that in Tromsø there was a notice on the only bit of grass in the town.
It said ‘do not go on the grass’, translated literally from the Norwegian — somehow the story doesn't work so well in English.
One day a policeman stopped a Lapp who was striding across it.
I am not going on it, said the Lapp, I am coming off it.
End of discussion.
One Lapp shows me his reindeer skin boots, and shrugs when I ask him why the toes curl up.
Because they do.
In early winter, when the first snows come, he wears socks in the boots, but when it gets cold he takes them off and replaces them with grass.
The grass is harvested in summer from the bogs at the edges of lakes, and smashed flat with a knife butt.
It is very warm, he tells me, but you must replace it when it is wet.
The following day, in a temperature down around — 2O°C ( — -4°F), I am wearing loop-stitch socks and Lundhags, and he is wearing reindeer skin boots and grass.
The boots are finished with a long, broad ribbon that is wrapped around the ankle, being raised to go over the join of boot and trouser if there is a danger of wet snow going down inside.
Nathan asks how many reindeer the Lapp has and is rewarded with a piercing look.
Odd-Knut tells us that to ask a Lapp that question is like asking an Englishman how much money he has in the bank.
There has been a move by the Norwegian government to try to tax the Lapps on the basis of reindeer numbers, and almost overnight the Arctic was denuded of animals, at least on paper.
Our man is not poor though.
He has a snow scooter, and enough cash to hire a boat twice a year to move his reindeer on to an island.
We never have a satisfactory explanation of where it comes from.
Old women knit and sew outside their lavvus , bare-handed even in this temperature; one, with fat, gnarled hands, uses no gloves all day.
It is, we hear, one of the worst winters on record, with heavy autumn rain saturating the ground and early winter cold — the cold and snow that caught Nathan and I in Tromsdalen — causing the ground to freeze early.
The consequence is that the reindeer feed is buried not only under a metre or more of snow, which the reindeer can cope with, pawing away at it to reach the lichen that is reindeer moss, but under many inches of solid ice.
The animals cannot always break through this, and they struggle away, pawing and moving in frustration, pawing and moving again.
Two kilometres or so away, over the Swedish border, the conditions are worse and these Swedish Lapps have come over to find better feed.
This should make no difference with the Lapps, the Same (pronounced Sam-ay) as they now wish to be called, being all one race.
In fact, there is considerable aggravation, with the Norwegian Lapps complaining to the government, and demanding that the police be moved in to catch and deport the interlopers.
There is talk of night-time raids between groups, or harsh words and harsh actions.
Later in the year, when we visit the area again, we heard that the Swedish Lapps had fenced off an area of the Dividal National Park, with over five kilometres of wire.
The incensed Norwegian Lapps called in the authorities, who had to hire a helicopter to go in and confiscate the wire.
The Swedes were moved out, but were back the following day.
The day after that they hired their own helicopter, landed in the local village, repossessed their wire, flew it back in and re-erected it.
And how much does it cost to hire a helicopter for a day?
I lie in my sleeping bag, listening to the shuffling of reindeer hooves, and thinking this over.
Conventional wisdom tells us that it is the lure of civilization that breaks up the old life, Tromø's video games and bars pulling the Lappish kids down out of the forest into the town.
What about the effect of such arbitrary things as country borders on the way of life?
Here in a land where you expect Lapp to fight Norwegian for the privilege of staying Lappish, Lapp was fighting Lapp for the privilege of being Norwegian rather than Swedish.
We leave, saddened by the plight and determined to come for longer the next time, to stay through a winter and spring, to find out what that old woman had really been up to holding that white sheet up to the Northern Lights.
They give me a reindeer hood that they assure me will be warmer than my silk and fleece and wool.
They do not give me a carved wooden cup though, something we all covet.
You must make your own if you are to be a Lapp.
We move on next day over hard packed snow that has been wind-blown into flutes and columns.
This is the most beautiful place I have ever been, a land of snow that is so fresh and clean that to ride over it seems criminal.
I try to ride last so I can stop now and then to be alone, to look back and be glad that I have been able to come this way, but Tony has the feeling too and has bagged the back spot for the morning run.
We ride a long way and in late afternoon (sun time rather than clock time, which has long ceased to be important to us) we stop for coffee so that Odd-Knut can work out a route.
He wants to go back to the base camp before we push on towards Finland.
There is a problem that way, as he cannot take his dogs over the border.
Technically that offers no problem, as there is no border in the accepted sense between Norway, Sweden or Finland, but rabies has reached southern Finland and Norway has placed a restriction on dogs coming back.
We have no problem going in, but if we are caught or seen then Odd-Knut will not be allowed to bring his dogs back without a lengthy and expensive quarantine.
He wants to get us close enough so we can ski over the border, but needs find a road so he can field the dogs before collecting us.
He pores over a map while I collect wood for a fire and Nathan digs out a seat for us all.
Tony announces that he is off for a crumble, an expression that has taken his fancy and replaced the computerese of going for a ‘system dump.’
Relentlessly, every day, he tells us when, presumably fearful that we will follow him, camera in hand.
He comes back as Odd-Knut starts making the fire.
He uses the conventional method for these parts.
Not for him the Baden-Powell approach of rubbing two Boy Scouts together; he liberally douses the twigs with paraffin and throws in a match.
If it looks good he throws on more wood, if it looks bad he throws on more paraffin.
Blackie, his lead dog, watches passively.
I wonder if she has yet worked out that for every douse she has to pull less load; probably not, or she would be pissing on the wood.
She has, after all, pissed on everything else all day.
Odd-Knut collects a kettle of snow and has settled into Nathan's seat with a roll-up.
I sit down too.
The smoke blows in my eyes making them water and sting, so I get up, move and freeze my ass off sitting beyond the smoke in the wind up the valley.
I move again and try to write some notes, but it is cold enough to freeze the ballpoint off my biro.
Tony measures the temperature and tells me it is warming up.
No it isn't.
Give me that thing, it must be wrong.
Why doesn't it have a mark on it for absolute brass monkeys?
I sit disconsolate in the snow.
This place isn't beautiful, it's miserable — bloody cold, bloody windy and no I don't want any bloody smoked reindeer.
Tony brings me a cup of coffee and tells me that the tracks we crossed a while back were, Odd-Knut says, jarv or wolverine.
I have to admit grudgingly that this is interesting, and I trudge up the path with Tony just behind.
Why is it only me that gets the rats?
What keeps this bastard so cheerful?
Then I remember that time when the tent blew down in the snowstorm and his sleeping bag went in the slush.
That didn't cheer him up.
And there was that other time when…
My mood improves.
By the time we get to the jarv tracks I am over it, putting it down to a poor night's sleep and a wearing day that have combined so that I am feeling the cold more than I normally do.
The tracks are indeed of jarv , a shy, elusive animal that neither Tony nor I have ever seen.
Odd-Knut has never seen one either, but that is less of a surprise as the noise and smell of his dogs frighten most animals away long before he spots them.
Later in the day we spot the tracks of elk (what the Americans and Canadians call ‘moose’, although, as might be expected, theirs are bigger).
We move on, with me grabbing the back spot.
Rayo, who is running lead for me today in harness with Kaisa, gets her leg caught up in the trace.
I see it happen but wait, hoping that as usual she   will jump out from it, but it just gets worse and she slows almost to a stop.
The wind picks up some snow, or it is snowing gently, as I snow hook the dogs to sort her out.
Hey, good dog Rayo, have you got your leg caught?
There, there it's OK.
And I untangle the mess.
Kaisa, bored by the proceedings, takes advantage of the slack trace and goes over to have a look at a tree.
I let off the snow hook, Rayo heads for the tree, Kaisa leaps out of the way, Sunniva follows her round and it's back to knitting in seconds.
It takes me many minutes to sort it out, as each released dog shows marked enthusiasm for getting tangled up again.
The snow is much worse as I finally move out, and the only consolation for the time it has taken is being alone, and arriving late so that the others have already begun on the tent and wood collecting.
Evening near LiggafjelletFull moon above LiggafjelletOdd-Knut calls for a volunteer to help feed the dogs in the gathering storm and I don't step back quickly enough.
The dog food comes in frozen slabs that must be cut up with a felling axe.
Normally we heat it first and add biscuit so that the dogs have a warm, mixed meal, but tonight Odd-Knut is considering giving it to them frozen to save time.
Finally his conscience gets the better of him and we break out the large billy from his sledge and light another fire in the lea of a sledge.
It is miserable work as the snow is now falling thickly, the wind blowing hard.
We put on the billy and head for a coffee and warm, pausing at the tent entrance to brush off the snow that is heaped on our jackets and hoods.
Tony and Nathan have made tea and soup and we have some before going out to feed the first batch of dogs.
They feed from steel bowls that must be filled by dipping.
It is a gloves-off job to avoid getting them soaking wet and the combination of cold steel, snow and wind, and wet dog food is bad for the fingers.
While the first group of dogs feeds — it takes just a few seconds for them to finish the bowls, right down to the lick clean — I huff on my fingers, more hopefully than knowingly.
By the time we have fed the second and, thank God, final group of a dozen we are frozen.
Back in the tent there is more soup, coffee and a hunk of smoked lamb that goes down well.
Tony finds several packets of banana custard that is hot and sweet; it tastes bloody awful and neither Tony nor I like it, none the less he fights me for the last helping.
More tea, then more coffee.
I have a headache and am concerned that the wind has dehydrated me; it is so important to pour liquid down in the Arctic, especially in winter.
We drink some more, eat some more.
The stove warms the tent up and we become drowsy, and oblivious to the storm outside.
By the time I am curled up in my bag I am totally content, warm and well fed, exhausted but not wanting to sleep for fear of missing these moments of happiness.
The tent is warm, and I have taken everything off, even though it has been the norm to sleep in our thermals and a pile fibre hood.
What a day.
I wake suddenly in the night, aware of the others breathing and the wind banging the tent fabric.
I need a pee.
If only I hadn't had that last cup of hot chocolate.
I lie still hoping that I will be able to fall back to sleep, but knowing it is a waste of time.
Slowly I get out of the bag.
It is perishing in the tent, but I can't be bothered to dress — it will only take a moment, I tell myself.
I open the tent door, already cold.
I leap outside into the snow, stand ankle deep in the snow and strain frantically at the same time trying to remember which direction I am pointing so that I can give instructions about where not to get the snow for tomorrow's tea.
I start to shiver.
The wind howls through the trees, the wind chill temperature must be low, and I have no clothes on.
High speed sledging, SördalenNo clothes on, do you hear?
I am cold.
COLD.
Give me a c, give me an o…
By the time I am back in the tent I am on the borderline, cold enough to wake Tony with disjointed movements.
OK? he asks.
Yeah, OK.
And into the bag and who cares if I'm wet.
It takes a long time to warm up, a very long time, but then I sleep as though practising for death.
The storm rages through what is left of the night.
Lavvus have a hole in the top to let smoke from the wood fire out.
The modern version we are using has the same hole, and our wood-burning stove has a pipe that goes through it, while the rest of it is closed with a cowl that is a bitch to fix.
Last night in the cold and dark we failed to fix it properly again, and when I wake up there is snow all over us and our kit.
I look sideways at Nathan who is lying motionless in a bag covered by an inch of snow.
The snow has penetrated everywhere, hiding gloves and socks, filling boots, even packing five centimetres of itself into the stove.
Tony and I get up as quickly as we can, brushing the snow free from clothes before putting them on so that it will not melt with the heat from our bodies.
We tell Nat to stay where he is, brushing the snow from his bag to try to minimize how wet it will be.
The advantage of the temperature being so low — although it has risen several degrees with the cloud over — is that the snow is like dry flour and brushes off easily.
It was late when we woke, and by the time we have cleared up the mess it is later still.
Working outside is difficult in the fresh snow and when the wind picks up again we admit defeat and agree that we will stay another night.
We fix the cowl in the twilight and prepare the evening meal.
Nathan goes outside with the kettle, anxious for some activity, having spent most of the day inside.
We turn in, with the wind picking up even stronger and threatening to blow the lavvu away.
The rearrangement of the kit has pushed me close to the side, and just above my face the fabric cracks and bangs in the wind.
Far away we can hear the noise of the wind forcing its way up some narrow gully then bursting free to hurl itself across the plateau we crossed yesterday.
Tony tells us about his lone stay in the Westmann Islands off Iceland when I had to leave four days earlier than him.
The wind blew down the tents of the other lads he had joined in camping on an apparently sheltered spot in a hollow above the sea.
Tony sat it out — in my tent I feel obliged to tell him — listening for the noise of a train, a noise that meant the wind was coming up the defile between him and the sea.
He counted the seconds, one, two, three, four, and then it hit the tent with a fury that he had never known, he inside in his sleeping bag with his feet braced against the dome pole facing the onslaught.
He painted a vivid picture of apprehension and tiredness.
His storm lasted two and half days, leaving him ragged and with only enough energy to get to the airport to be ready for the first flight out.
Nathan asks me if our storm will last two or more days.
I say no, and hope that he doesn't realize that I really have no idea.
Tony takes the hint and decides not to wax equally lyrical about the Svalbard storm that kept everyone in the tent for seventy-two hours, unable to go out for anything .
Thank God for dome tents with two bays: you collect snow from one end for tea, pass it through the middle-man, and then deposit it at the other end.
Next morning the worst is over.
Outside there are scudding clouds, but they are high up and the sun occasionally breaks through.
Down here there is a metre of snow on the windward side of the lavvu , and I fall over a small rucsac that had disappeared.
Well, Nathan, you have survived your first Arctic storm.
Not so bad really, eh?
Go and fill the kettle to celebrate.
We pack and move on, the dogs finding it difficult to move in the fresh snow.
In desperation Odd-Knut suggests we go down on to a frozen lake, Devdisvatn, the Lake of the Dead Man.
It is an ancient Lappish name, and Odd-Knut is not sure of its origin.
There is, he says, an old Lappish church near its eastern edge; he has never seen it but he has been told of it by an old Lapp who lives near the lakes western edge.
Perhaps we go and take a look?
Sure, anything is better than manhandling the sledges through waist-deep snow.
The lake has been swept clean of snow by the wind, the sweepings making a huge bank on our side that we have to negotiate.
It is topped by a wind-blown crust that almost holds our weight as we descend.
The ride across the lake gives us our  best sledging for days, but the search for the ruin is hopeless, an endless toing and froing among trees and too-deep snow.
The last remnant of the storm hits us, thick snow blotting out the view of anything, so reluctantly we call a halt and go back down on to the lake.
The snow stops and Odd-Knut suggests we try a little fishing.
Fired by his own enthusiasm, he stops his sledge and gets out a huge snow drill, like a brace and bit but capable of boring a twenty centimetre hole.
Nathan grabs the drill: this will be great for his project.
He and Odd-Knut shovel away the snow to reach the ice, making a large hole about a metre deep, and Nathan jumps in and starts to brace and bit with enthusiasm.
The ice is thick and he is a good deal less enthusiastic when the tip breaks through.
What Odd-Knut has not told him is that the water under the ice is pressurized, and it wells up out of the hole.
Nathan is now experienced enough to know that wet feet and the Arctic are a poor mix and is out of the hole like a rabbit.
The water pours on until a few inches has collected in the bottom.
Odd-Knut rigs a fishing line and offers it to me.
He seems to think that it is fair that I should have first crack since I am the one who has carried the worms about for the last umpteen days.
On the first day Odd-Knut gave me a tobacco tin of worms and told me to keep them warm, and they have travelled the Arctic inside my second layer of clothing ever since, even sharing my sleeping bag at night-time.
Now their time has come.
And a bloody good job too.
My opinion has always been that fishermen, at least those who fish to catch and return, are on a par with the hunting fraternity.
Killing things for fun seems to me to be so immoral as to warrant no discussion at all .
It is wrong, end of conversation.
As a result I undergo a bout of conscience, taking the short rod only when Odd-Knut assures me that we will eat whatever we catch, and that we will probably not catch anything.
Odd-Knut smokes a pensive roll-up, I fish, Tony photographs, Nathan wanders off with a shovel and ice drill.
My father, a Desert Rat, tells me that in the North African campaign you never asked a man with a shovel where he was going, so I let Nat go.
Soon he is digging like a whirling dervish, the impressive show ending with another frantic leap.
Ice fishing, I find, is as cold as anything I have ever tried in the Arctic, and after a few minutes of unproductive ass-freezing I pack it in.
Tony has a go and I mooch over to see how Nat is faring.
Badly.
We freeze and drown worms for a few more minutes.
A sudden snow flurry gives Nathan his first-ever view — if that is not a contradiction in terms — of a white-out.
The two of us stand next to his second hole unable to distinguish sky and lake and cut off from the other pair.
It lasts an impressive minute or two, then whirls away.
We pack in the fishing; Odd-Knut pronounces the last of the worms dead and suggests we all come back for another go in April.
If only we could.
We camp, and to compensate for the fishing Odd-Knut suggests he will cook us another of his specialities, blåbærsuppe , a fish stew.
He disappears to collect the ingredients from his sledge, ‘Tony and I start feeding the dogs, and Nathan decides to show Odd-Knut an English dish — pancakes.
Odd-Knut has given him some eggs that turn out to be frozen.
Nat tells Tony, expecting sympathy and assistance.
He gets neither.
When he has thawed his ingredients Nat cooks the way he dug the snow hole — frantically.
Odd-Knut's soup is incredible, a mixture of different fish and shellfish.
When the meal is over we notice that the sky is clearing; now there is enough cloud-free sky to show that the Northern Lights are out.
We drink coffee outside, leaning against trees to watch the free show.
The Lights are a shimmering green waterfall that grows in intensity, then dies slowly to be replaced by a separate show in another part of the sky.
There it is a plaited rope, moving sinuously.
The colour is very bright, and occasionally there is a splash of red, rarer, at the edges.
We watch for a long time, Tony catching the show on camera, then notice that the temperature has plummeted with the clearing of the sky and turn in.
During the night I hear the harsh squeal of a fox, a long way off, answered by a staccato bark from one of the dogs.
The bark starts them all off and they howl at the moon for a few minutes.
Odd-Knut calls out sharply and they fall silent.
In the morning there is a centimetre of ice on the tent pole to the side of my head, probably from my breath while I slept.
Outside the weather is beautiful, blue sky and rising sun.
We decide to go for a ride on the lake and rush to harness the dogs.
Use Rayo as your lead dog today, Odd-Knut tells me.
OK, I say, which one is Rayo?
She is next to Kala.
Thanks Odd-Knut, thanks a lot , which one is Kala?
I hope that he will not say that Kala is the one next to Rayo.
He doesn't.
We ride across the lake on one of the best trips we have had.
The lake is flat, its hard crust free of  fresh snow.
The weather is perfect and we are now experienced enough mushers to be able to enjoy the high speeds without anxiety.
Venstre , Rayo.
Høyre , Rayo.
Go left, go right.
So good am I that I turn round on the runners to photograph Tony.
The sledge hits a bump and I am off, using my camera as a snow hook.
So much for experience.
Tony races past, laughing his head off.
Give us a lift, you miserable bastard.
Ho, ho…
They field my dogs and we ride on.
Odd-Knut finds a steep up-slope where a river joins the lake and we play for a bit going up and down steep slopes.
When we ride away from the river Odd-Knut stops sharply.
The river has curved round and Odd-Knut has drawn up a few metres from the edge of a very steep drop.
We investigate.
There is a wind-blown cornice of about one and a half metres overhanging a sheer drop of about eight metres.
I ask Odd-Knut if sledgers often go over cornices.
Again he misses the answer — which is, of course , ‘No, only once, — and says with a grave look that usually the dogs see it even in poor visibility, but in white-outs it has been known.
We call in on Odd-Knut's Lappish acquaintance — — not ‘friend’, because the Lapps rarely make real friends with non-Lapps.
He lives in a glorious wooden hut with several equally attractive out-buildings.
In a small enclosure three reindeer sniff the air, detect dog, either from the dogs themselves deliberately left many yards away, or from our clothing, and shuffle nervously as we approach.
Nathan, anxious for a closer look, goes over and the animals go mad.
We call him back.
The Lapp speaks no English and we have a stilted conversation through Odd-Knut.
Yes, it is a  bad winter, the worst he has seen in sixty-five years of herding reindeer here.
Sixty-five years?
How old is he?
He is seventy-nine.
Good God, he looks about fifty.
He has a straight back and huge arms that betray a phenomenal strength.
When he walks with us he is out ahead, large, confident strides.
How does he feel about the Swedish Lapps?
He shrugs.
How can the reindeer tell which is Norway and which is Sweden?
It is the animals that come here, and the Lapps just follow.
So he is happy to see his Swedish brothers here?
Well, he understands that those Norwegian Lapps that are closer to the border than he is might not be so keen.
Norwegian Lapps?
Does he not just see Lapps?
Don't they all talk the same language?
He changes the subject awkwardly.
Would we like some smoked reindeer (not that you can make good smoked meat now, not with all the air pollution, the acid rain and the like from the UK).
I ask what the charming little wooden shed down the track is for — tools and things?
No, he says, it is the toilet.
That's a hell of a way to go, I say.
True, he says, but it is a fine place for the smell.
Ice fishingTony has been outside photographing the Lapp's hut and comes in raving about its beauty and position.
Ask him if he would like me to send him a print of his hut, Odd-Knut.
The Lapp is puzzled.
What would he do with it?
He could put it on the wall here, explains Tony.
The man is still puzzled.
He says something to Odd-Knut who turns to Tony.
He asks, explains Odd-Knut, why, should he want a picture of his hut on the wall when he can go outside and look at it?
Tony, looks at me, for once lost for words.
We talk some more.
I am intrigued by this old man who seems so unimpressed by everything we find attractive and interesting.
Reindeer?
You eat them.
A frozen lake?
A nuisance if you want to eat fish.
A good-looking dog?
A dog is just a dog.
It is not that he doesn't care, just that his sense of values are different — not better, not worse, just different.
Outside the light is fading.
A flock of Siberian tits twitters away above us.
Tony and I pause to watch.
Not until now have we realized how much we had missed birds.
On the drive back to the camp one of Odd-Knut's lead dogs, Stig, trips in a dark section of woodland.
The point dogs catch him and one of them nips him on the leg — take that for being more popular with the boss.
By the time we get back to the tent Stig is limping badly and when Odd-Knut looks he finds he is bleeding profusely.
Odd-Knut fetches his first aid kit, and I get ours.
Odd-Knut muzzles the dog with a piece of trace line, ties its front and back legs together and lies it on its side.
The wind has picked up a bit , and there is a light snow falling.
We turn a sledge on to its side for shelter, and by the light from our head torches we examine the wound.
It is long and deep, the flesh pulled off the meat.
I clean it out with antiseptic wipes, passing them to Nathan to finish the job when Stig starts to buck and fight.
I hold him down, Nathan operates the most stable of the head torches, Odd-Knut operates the needle and thread and Tony takes the photographs.
The stitching takes a long time and hurts Stig a lot more than it hurts the rest  of us.
I wonder whether the cold is much of an anaesthetic.
Apparently not.
Operating on Stig in a blizzardStig after the blizzardIn the tent that night we eat smoked trout and Odd-Knut tells us that the previous year there was a fight on his team and after it was over and the dogs were moving again he saw blood on the snow.
He stopped the team and found that Brusie, now Tony's lead dog, had a serious stomach wound, one of her teats having been almost torn off.
He fought to staunch the blood and stitch the wound, with the dog slipping towards unconsciousness.
Finally her eyes turned grey and rolled, and Odd-Knut thought she was dead.
He worked to revive her and eventually she recovered enough to be wrapped and put on the sledge.
Exhausted, Odd-Knut cut short his trip and went home.
He was met by Kjell-Arne, his kennel boy, who told him that when he was eating his lunch he heard the noise of a dog scratching against the door.
He went out, but there was nothing there, just the rest of the dogs on their chains.
He went back in, but the noise started once more .
Again Kjell-Arne went outside, this time checking everywhere for a dog off its chain or a stray.
There was no dog anywhere.
He became very nervous, and was glad to see Odd-Knut come home.
Odd-Knut asked what time it had been when Kjell-Arne heard the noise.
It was at exactly the time when Odd-Knut feared Brusie was dying, as she became unconscious.
The next day Stig, kept away from the other dogs on a separate chain, but not under cover, is stiff-legged and looking mournful.
He gets an extra ration from Odd-Knut, who is clearly worried about him.
Stig was due to lead in the Finnmårrks Løpet , Europe's longest sledge dog race.
The Iditarod is closed to most European mushers as there is rabies in Alaska, so Odd-Knut is hoping to break into the top five of the European one, and the loss of Stig will be a serious blow.
All day Stig rides on the sledge, a real sledge dog.
He is upset at the lack of activity and howls appallingly, but when Odd-Knut tries him on the trace he is clearly crippled and in pain.
It is four months before Stig is well enough to walk properly, and by then winter is over and the race has passed, with Odd-Knut making the top ten but no higher because of the loss.
Stig makes a full recovery which is some compensation.
Our ride with Stig is the last ride we make.
The loss of the dog means that we cut short our projected trip north, and go down into Dividalen, to the south.
We go the long way; who knows how long it will be before we come this way again?
The last sunset is orange and yellow, then shades of purple.
I see the way the snow is kicked up off the paws of the dogs, the way their breath explodes around their heads.
We round a corner and the way goes downhill steeply into the valley.
The last of the light is directly ahead, painted sky between dark hills.
The descent is never-ending — I am glad — until Tony comes towards me.
Hitch to the sign over there , he points, Odd-Knut is arranging for a car.
The dogs howl and whine at first , then realize that they have finished for the day.
It is all over. Crossing a frozen lake