

Remember the Capri?
Vauxhall and Volkswagen do
Calibra takes on Corrado in battle of the affordable coupes
FIRST TEST
Five-speed automatic Mercedes SL
All the new cars at the Paris show
THIS WEEK
News More clues to Bugatti's supercar 4
Paris motor show French revelations 8
Analysis Why current cars lack concept car flair 17
Arrivals Rebirth of VW Polo range 18
Sport Which Merc driver will win WSPC title? 20
Your View Diary columnist under fire 26
England and Germany coupe final Calibra versus Corrado 32
Our Heroes Mind-blowing Bentley R 38
Formula for failure The worst F1 racing cars 42
GREAT BRITISH SPORTS CARS Austin Healey 3000 and AC Cobra: 60's flare for he-men 48
Road Test: Mercedes 300SL-24 Five-speed Automatic 54
Alpine duel Dodge Spirit versus Vauxhall Carlton 62
Heroes The man who put the quality in Cadillac 69
Running Report Metro: dented but not daunted 71
DATABASE Info 73, How Much 74, How Fast 80
CLASSIFIED 38 pages of new and used cars for sale, 85 
American dream on trial, p62
Mercedes 300SL-24 road test, p54
THIS WEEK NEWS
Bugatti — more supercar clues
Less than a year from launch, the Bugatti 110 is slowly emerging from the shadows.
Two weeks after the first ever pictures were snatched from Bugatti's promotional video by Autocar & Motor 's Italian editor Luca Ciferri (3 October), the first photographs of the car in the flesh have appeared.
Taken at its first test session at Michelin's Clermont Ferrand test track, they show the car still under heavy disguise but revealing some of the characteristics that should give it a place among the great supercars.
None of the surface panels is visible in either this or the photograph taken from the video screen.
What is apparent, though, is the car's form and its size: closer to a Porsche 911 than the mechanically similar Lamborghini Diablo.
Those factors were dictated by the new Bugatti's founder and ex-technical director Paolo Stanzani (who left the company two months ago after his unsuccessful takeover bid) and Marcello Gandini of Lamborghini Countach fame, who was finally chosen to design the exterior.
The heart of the new Bugatti had to be radical to match its nimble frame.
For Stanzani that meant a compact engine and an all-composite chassis.
Consequently the car you see in the photograph is powered by one of the neatest engines around — a five -valve per cylinder V12 with no fewer than four turbochargers to make up for its relatively small, 3.5-litre capacity.
All four wheels are driven.
Stanzani was also responsible for the involvement of the French aerospace company, Aerospatiale, which has lent its considerable expertise with carbon-fibre and Kevlar to the project.
The result is a lightweight chassis, engineered to cater for any changes in the mechanical specification.
Bugatti has been using the Clermont Ferrand race track in central France for development work, courtesy of the circuit's owner, Michelin.
The French tyre manufacturer has a key role to play in the Bugatti, and is developing the world's first ultra-high performance tyre specifically for four-wheel drive supercars.
With these photographs as a reference point we can expect a traditional Gandini shape when we see the car on 15 September next year, the 110th anniversary of Ettore Bugatti's birth.
A Formula 1-style wing is obviously part of the package — it's important enough to the prototype's aerodynamics for it not to be excluded from its testing programme.
But beyond that it's fair to speculate on a shape closer to the Countach than the Testarossa, making use of juxtaposed flat planes for impact rather than  subtly of line.
Gandini isn't alone in designing the car, though.
There is a Bertone version on the cards and it's believed both Pininfarina and ItalDesign have also put forward proposals.
Giugiaro's ItalDesign has already shown its idea with the ID 90, unveiled in Turin earlier this year.
The aerodynamic development is clearly not confined to the bodywork.
The photographs reveal substantially-sized twin venturi tunnels underneath, which suggest this is the most ambitious attempt yet to convert grand prix ground-effect to road use.
The purpose served by the two massive exhaust cowlings is less clear, but it's unlikely Bugatti would test them if they were for styling reasons only.
Between now and next September the remaining mysteries of the Bugatti's size and specification will be solved.
But every scrap of information paints a picture of an all-time great motor car.
The still from Bugatti's own video
Carbon-fibre and Kevlar chassis
V12, 550 bhp…
Mitsubishi takes on BMW 535i in UK
Mitsubishi's challenger to the BMW 535i, the Sigma, goes on sale in the UK next March after receiving its first airing at the Paris motor show.
But only 300 of the comprehensively equipped models will be available in 1991, selling for around £26,000 apiece.
The Sigma (above) has a 0.5ins higher roofline, and door pillars and window frames to European taste, unlike its sister Diamante model, which is already on sale in Japan where it has a six-month waiting list.
The front-wheel-drive Sigma is powered by twin-cam multi-point fuel-injected 3-litre 24-valve V6 engine, producing 202bhp and giving claimed performance of 140mph and a sub-eight second 0–60mph time.
For the UK, it will have a four-speed automatic gearbox only, and in-phase four-wheel steering, leather seats and air conditioning.
The car's platform and mechanicals are based loosely around the HSRII concept car displayed at the Birmingham and Paris motor shows.
At the forefront is a traction control system.
The system has what Mitsubishi claims to be the world's first ‘trace’ control device on a production car, which operates to prevent understeer from building up, allowing the driver safely to negotiate a bend.
Trace is designed principally for high-friction, metalled roads, where it predicts probable cornering forces based on the steering angle, engine speed and amount of grip available.
It then adjusts the engine speed accordingly via second throttle.
There is also a slippage control which automatically cuts power if the wheels begin to spin under harsh acceleration.
All this is linked to four-wheel steering and ESC adaptive suspension, which adjusts its settings to limit body roll and optimise tyre grip during cornering.
To complete the package, anti-lock brakes are standard.
Sigma is the car with which Mitsubishi hopes to claim a slice of the lucrative high-specification performance-saloon market where the BMW 535i holds court.
Mitsubishi is also hoping to sell a lower-spec Sigma in the UK — but only if it can secure the cars from the factory in Japan,and negotiate an increase in its UK import quota.
Mitsubishi's Nagoya works are already flat-out supplying Diamantes and the Dodge Stealth/Mitsubishi Starion GTO models with which it shares its platform and mechanicals.
Slotting in about £4000 above the top-spec Galant — the £17,699 2.0 GTi coupe — the Sigma would come without the 24-valve cylinder head, 4ws, adaptive suspension and leather interior.
It would also have a manual gearbox.
The automatic Sigma arrives in the UK next March, kicking off an exciting year for Mitsubishi.
Its next generation Space Wagon is due in Japan next month, badged for the home market as the Chariot, while the Shogun replacement makes its debut in Japan next February as the Pajero.
Both will be in Britain within the next 14 months, and the firm is planning further UK launches, including a smaller sports-utility vehicle.
DISPATCHES
UNITED KINGDOM
Russell Bray
•Fewer visitors than ever attended the recent British International Motor Show in Birmingham.
The current poor economic climate has been blamed for total admissions of only 420,000 people, some 300,000 down on the 1988 total and the lowest figure since the show moved to the National Exhibition Centre from London in 1978.
•Jaguar and GKN's joint venture car components plant under construction at Telford, Shropshire, has been approved for a European Investment Bank loan of £20 million.
This will equal half the cost of the factory, which should be up to full production of body panels by the end of next year.
•Friends of the Earth has slated new European standards for the control of diesel vehicle emissions as ‘too weak’.
The controls apply only to new oil-burners and the environmental pressure group say they simply bring Europe into line with standards set in the US 13 years ago.
JAPAN
Peter Nunn
•Mazda has set up a research and development team to investigate ways of cutting its car's full consumption by one-fifth by 1995.
Weight-saving by the increased use of aluminium for engine and suspension components is believed to be a high priority.
•Car sales in Japan levelled off in September after months of continued growth.
Total registrations, excluding mini vehicles, rose by only 0.3 per cent on last year to total sales of 503,977, leaving industry-watchers speculating on a market decline.
•The Japanese motoring industry is meanwhile considering if it should slow down its expansion into the luxury car market, due to the Gulf crisis hitting fuel prices.
California outlaws exhaust emissions
California is to introduce vehicle emission standards even tougher than the stringent levels already proposed for 1997.
They could have a profound effect upon the motor industry worldwide, since the standards can be met only with use of electric cars and alternative fuels.
Although primarily motivated by the need to combat localised smog the new standards will also reduce problems of carbon dioxide — the main ‘greenhouse’ gas.
Approximately two million cars are sold each year in California — about the same number as registered annually in the UK.
The new standards demand that by 1998 at least two per cent(40,000) of all new cars must emit no smog-producing gases at all , which means in effect that they must be powered by electricity.
By the year 2003, 10 per cent(200,000) must come into that category.
Over the next 13 years, the regulations set out to achieve a 70 per cent cut in hydrocarbon emissions.
The US motor industry is known to be sceptical over whether the timescale proposed for the new emission levels can be met.
A spokesman for General Motors in Detroit said: ‘We will need to develop advanced new technologies to meet the regulations.’
He also confirmed that the decision had already been taken to produce the ‘Impact’ electric car (above), first revealed at this year's Geneva motor show, although a firm launch date has yet to be decided.
Wet-road accidents ‘halved’
A programme designed to improve the skid-resistance of Britain's roads is cutting wet-road accidents by up to 50 per cent in some places, says the Transport and Road Research Laboratory.
An anti-skid road surface, unique to the UK, was introduced in early 1988.
At the same time a fleet of lorries equipped with a device called SCRIM (Sideways Force Coefficient Routine Investigation Machine) began a three-year programme of monitoring the skidding resistance of Britain's major roads.
So far, two-thirds of Britain's trunk-roads have been checked.
It was expected that identifying and resurfacing slippery roads would reduce skidding accidents by 1800 a year.
Preliminary figures now suggest this is an under-estimate.
IN BRIEF Road deaths increased in the UK by six percent to 1250 in the second quarter of 1990 compared to the same period for last year.
Both road traffic and the overall casualty rate per passenger mile went up by one per cent.
High-performance driving lessons for newly-qualified drivers have been started by the Tyro Driving Centre of Swindon, Wiltshire, using a dual-control Vauxhall Astra GTE 16v.
Motorway instruction is part of the course.
Mazda is to set up a centre in Belgium to train staff in sales and after-sales service.
It will be specially tailored to the needs of European markets and customers.
Volvo has won a safety award for its innovative integrated child seat fitted to all new 900-series saloons.
Last year Volvo also won the Prince Michael Road Safety Award for safety belt tensioners that operate automatically in a collision, and its 700-series car was declared the safest in an accident following crash-testing in 199 different vehicles by the American Highway Loss Data Institute.
Tougher driving tests start next April, when candidates will be judged also on their ability to reverse into a tight parking space.
It's the first change since the L-test started in 1935.
Protruding parking bump sensors that sound a warning when they nudge another car have been launched as an accessory to help drivers squeeze into tight parking spaces.
The Parkit is an arrangement of four flexible, pressure-sensitive probes fitted proud of bumpers, linked to an in-car alarm.
Jaguar Cars has made two appointments as part of plans to expand its range of vehicles and treble output by the year 2000.
Product engineering director Jim Randle now takes the role of director of vehicle and concepts engineering, and Clive Ennos becomes director of product engineering.
Sign of hope for car sales
The plunge in new car sales in Britain finally showed signs of bottoming out in September.
If this continues, the emotive two-million barrier for the year could still be broken, though last year's 2.3 million record will take some beating.
‘It seems to depend on how much credit people can afford, and at the moment it is just not enough for a new car,’ said one high-street main dealer.
Speaking at the British International Motor Show, Ford of Britain chairman, Derek Barron, predicted 2.02 million sales for 1990.
There is a huge pent-up demand for new cars, he said.
According to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, new car sales last month totalled 153,595, a fall of 10.56 per cent on September 1989.
Sales for the first nine months of the year, at 1,698,221, are now 11.52 per cent behind the same period last year.
Importers are being hard hit in some cases, with the total share of the market down from 59.94 per cent a year ago to 55.45 per cent last month.
The Volkswagen-Audi group took a heavy fall with sales  down from 1194 to 6943 .
Even worse hit was Nissan, with September sales down by nearly a half from 11,871 to 6058.
FSO sold just 99 cars compared with 480 in the same month last year.
Ford retained market leadership with its share up from a lowly 20 per cent last September to 25 per cent— a volume increase from 34,421 to 38,445.
Vauxhall just held on to second spot ahead of Rover with 24,376 sales to Rover's 23,251.
Both volumes were down, but Rover raised its market share by half a per cent to 15.41 per cent.
Peugeot saw a fall, despite pushing 205 and 405 ranges into the top 10 best sellers for the month.
Honda accepts solar challenge
Honda will enter November's 1864-mile World Solar Challenge in Australia with the futuristic single-seat prototype, pictured above, designed and created by young technicians at Honda's Tochigi R&D base in Japan.
The Solar Car, standing 225.6 ins long, 78.4ins wide and 39.4ins tall, runs on three wheels and is said to better 75mph.
Its body is made from a mixture of carbon-fibre and Nomex honeycomb, and boasts a Cd less than 0.12.
It bears an uncanny resemblance to GM's victorious Sunraycer of two years ago.
Banks of single-crystal silicon solar cells embedded on its upper body flank can generate up to 1.4kW of power, according to Honda.
These in turn are supported by an array of lightweight silver oxide/zinc storage batteries, which store energy provided by the solar cells and provide back-up power for when the sun is not shining or the car faces a gradient.
The car weighs just 308lb.
Normally, the Solar Car's small, brushless DC motor puts out 1.2kW, although ultimately output can reach 4.5kW.
The motor drives the car's single rear wheel by means of a chain.
There are 43 cars scheduled to take part in the second World Solar Challenge, which runs from Darwin on Australia's northern coast down to Adelaide in the south, using public roads.
Solar energy is converted by cells on the Solar Car's flanks to drive its electric motor and recharge its back-up batteries.
Claimed top speed 75mph
Vitara gains doors to beat US laws
Prompted by the tough new laws that penalise the import of two-door sports off-roaders, Suzuki has added two extra doors to its Vitara sports/utility off-roader in Japan.
The extra doors are neatly grafted onto the existing Vitara shell.
Called the Nomade, the newcomer sits on a stretched 98ins wheelbase and stands 16in longer than the original vehicle with an overall length of 156ins.
Standard Vitara width of 64ins remains unchanged, but height is increased slightly to 67ins.
Despite the extra size and weight of the new body, Suzuki has decided to retain the Vitara's existing sohc 16-valve engine with EFi, which, in Japanese tune, pumps out 100bhp at 6000rpm.
The Nomade will be sold in the US as both a Suzuki and through General Motors' US imports network Geo.
It's due to join the three-model Vitara line-up in the UK by the middle of next year.
Nomade prices in Japan — Y1.788 million to Y1.916 million (£6878 to £7411)— point to a UK price in the region of £10,000-£11,500.
 Peter Nunn 
The Vitara has grown to accommodate extra doors
DISPATCHES
FRANCE
Edouard Seidler
•The Renault/Volvo link-up has been officially sealed.
Volvo now owns 20 per cent of Renault's car division, with the French company owning 25 per cent of Volvo Cars and 10 per cent of AB Volvo.
Both firms have taken a 45 per cent stake in each other 's truck business.
•Renault Trucks chairman Jean-Pierre Capron, tipped as a possible successor to Renault boss Raymond Levy, joins the management group.
Secretary general Patrick Faure is to replace Paul Percie du Sert as sales manager.
There's also rumour that Levy may head a future Renault-Volvo holding company after he retires in July 1992.
•Police in Paris gave out more than 170,000 driving offence tickets last year with some 78,000 for signal violations, 24,000 fines for motorcyclists riding without helmets, 2300 for speeding and 3500 for drink-driving.
UNITED STATES
John McCormick
•Lotus's US arm is pricing its Esprit Turbo race car replicas at $125,000 (£65,800).
Twenty of the specially equipped Esprits are to be sold by US dealers this autumn.
The cars, built to capitalise on Lotus's recent US racing success, will come with a roll cage, racing wheels and tyres, racing suspension settings, six-point seat harnesses and basic instrumentation.
Lotus Esprit Turbos won four of the first seven races in the SCCA Escort series this season.
•A US Government study reveals that car makers in the US have made little or no gains in fuel economy ratings for 1991 models.
The latest figures show the average mpg of 28.1 is the same as it was in 1987.
The most economical car in the US is the Geo Metro XFi, which gets 53mpg in town and 58mpg on the motorway.
Lamborghini's Diablo brings up the rear with 9 and 14mpg respectively.
PARIS SHOW
France stands its ground
Bold concept cars from Renault and Citroen were the stars at the Paris motor show along with Mercedes' new 500E Q-car.
But glamour couldn't drown out the tough talk from French car chiefs on the threat from Japan.
Report by Michael Harvey and Peter Robinson, photography by Stan Papior
What the Paris show lacked in new cars, it made up for with intrigue and imagination, personality and politics.
With but two new cars on show — the mighty Mercedes 500E and the technologically overdosed Mitsubishi Sigma — Paris seemed set to play a soft second fiddle to Birmingham's show.
But when you put Peugeot's boss Jacques Calvet, Renault's chief Raymond Levy and Giovanni Agnelli, head of Fiat, together you're bound to get fireworks.
The pops and bangs going off around the Porte de Versailles last week signalled a European industry in panic as the date for free access to the European market by the Japanese gets ever closer.
That date is especially important for those Japanese cars built on what Levy described as ‘the Japanese aircraft carrier that is the UK, and which is pointed towards continental Europe’.
Faced with the prospect of Nissan's Washington plant in the UK training its sights on the mainland and upping exports to as much as 70 per cent of production — that's 140,000 cars a year by 1992 — the two most powerful men in French industry locked themselves behind doors and decided then and there to up the ante in the fight against the Japanese.
Levy and Calvet, both long-time advocates of a five-year acclimatisation period for Europe after 1992, are thought to have agreed to press the European Commission to deny the Japanese unhindered access to Europe until 2002, and only then if it's reciprocated.
With over 60 per cent of the French market tied up between them, the Peugeot-Citroen group and Renault could be forgiven for thinking they had little to worry about.
That's the way it looked out in the halls as they each displayed a show car as bright as any we've seen since Tokyo last year.
Renault in particular looked in good health despite its slight slip in the market this year.
It was a spirit summed up not by the hoards of identically painted Clios or the new 16-valve Chamade (both in the UK next spring) but by Laguna, the electric-blue and polished-silver roadster show car.
Its design team, led by Renault's gushing and charming design director Patrick le Quement, could not have been better pleased.
‘We will have the marketing men here next week asking people what they think,’ said le Quement.
‘And I hope they like it — Laguna is the look of the new generation of Renaults — cars designed with passion and excitement.’
That's a look we'll see emerging from the dull, old chrysalis that was Renault design in the '70s and '80s, when it takes the wraps off its first really new-age car in two years' time.
And that car — the 21 replacement — is being designed by an Englishman, Anthony Grade — of the Grades.
There was another Briton, a Welshman to be precise, involved in Laguna.
Ian Matthews (see separate story), a Royal College of Art graduate, designed the nifty interior, including its clever seat cushions that roll under themselves to shorten the reach without altering legroom.
Laguna is a near-certain bet to make it to production in some form.
Renault is the European leader in short-series production — look at Alpine's GTA and Matra's Espace — and the Laguna will come under Alpine's charge after the show.
What will emerge from Alpine may not have the sprint car look, nor the integral tonneau or open-to-the-elements driving position but it will have most of Laguna's mechanicals.
That means a modified 2-litre Renault 21 Turbo engine, double wishbone suspension and a chassis le Quement said was designed not as a chassis ‘but as a handling’(sic ).
He's got a lot on his mind right now, not least how Renault's going to cope with a future hand-in-hand relationship with Volvo.
The arrangement was formally signed just a week before the show.
The two companies' more obvious synergies, claims le Quement, extend to design and he's already given free access to Renault's Billancourt design centre to all Volvo's senior designers.
He won't have to go to the two language schools being set up by Volvo and Renault in France and Sweden to teach English to engineers and designers; le Quement was educated at a public school in England.
He will also have to start thinking about a partnership with Skoda before long, too, provided Renault gets its way in Czechoslovakia.
It won't be a question of Skoda building old R5s and R18s.
‘The future for Eastern Europe,’ he said, ‘is not in last year's Western cars.’
Across the way in the main hall dominated by Renault and Peugeot/Citroen was Activa II, a big handsome XM coupe built just for show, but thought to be the type of car BMW should have built instead of the 850i.
It's a rehash of the first Activa's super-sensitive hydractive suspension, the XM floorpan and a coupe body complete with built-in memories of the glorious Maserati-engined SM.
Citroen's design director Art Blakeslee thought the company had done the right thing with Activa II.
‘We wanted to build a car that had a rational development from a production car,’ said Blakeslee.
‘We've now got to see if people like it enough for us to want to even think about building something like it.’
That's not the official company line.
The overlords at Citroen say it's just a show car, but with Peugeot and Citroen able endlessly to vary the mix of 605s and XMs that come off the shared line at Sochoux, a third model, an XM coupe, is not an impossibility.
If it does end up in the museum however, Blakeslee said that the co-operation of advanced design, advanced engineering and production engineering departments on the Activa II will pave the way for more efficient Japanese-style simultaneous engineering to fight off the Orientals, whenever Monsieur Calvet allows them to arrive.
Calvet was in spectacular form at Paris, calling for an immediate rethink on Japanese access to Europe and outlining a five-point plan: that no new transplants be established in Europe; that those in existence have outputs capped; that quotas be maintained between 1992 and 2002 and continued after that if the Japanese don't play ball; that overall European penetration levels should stay at 10 per cent from the East and that France could keep its three per cent quota; and finally, that all Japanese cars, no matter where they're built, should be included in calculations, and the EC should assist automotive industry investment.
Not everyone shared Calvet's fear.
Speaking at the launch of the Mercedes 500E, chairman Werner Neifer was succinct.
‘Japan is our biggest export market and we have seen what protectionism has done for the US automotive industry.’
The understated 500E Mercedes saloon stole production car honours at Paris, that is if you believe the Porsche — which will build the car — definition of production: 12 cars a day, 2400 a year.
Built in left-hand-drive form only, a mere 125 a year of the 155mph saloon will reach the UK, starting around mid-year at a price expected to be close to £52,000.
Longer intake pipes for the now microchip-controlled injection system means the 5-litre, 32-valve V8 develops 354lb ft of torque, up 22lb ft, though maximum power of 326bhp remains unchanged.
Mercedes' traction control system is standard.
Even with the four-speed automatic, the 3740lb four-seater can reach 60mph in 6.1 seconds, to make the 500E quicker even than the 500SL.
New 8J×16ins alloy wheels, under subtly flared wheelarches, distinguishing the 500E from other W124s.
We saw Mitsubishi's Sigma — albeit with a different roofline and a Diamante badge — last year in Tokyo, but Paris was the ‘Europeanised’ version's EC debut and the only other new production car here.
The first of the UK's 300 cars arrives in March next year with a £26,000 price tag.
With demand for the Diamante and the Starion GTO/Dodge Stealth so high — they share platforms and mechanicals — the UK gets only one version, but it comes loaded with goodies.
The 3-litre 24-valve V6 will drive the front wheels exclusively through a four-speed auto 'box, but fitted with traction control with steering-angle input, four-wheel steer and adaptive damping.
It's the first four, maybe five, new cars that Mitsubishi will launch in the UK next year, including new Spacewagons and Shoguns.
Ferrari chose to hide its two-pedal Mondial on component supplier Valeo's stand in the faint hope of convincing people its clutchless transmission was no more than a experimental engineering car.
In fact it will be optional on Mondials by mid 1991.
The transmission uses the existing gearbox and gear lever, and retains the exposed gate operating via an electrically controlled clutch that regulates the speed of the change via the position of the accelerator pedal.
So effective is the system that 0.2 secs is shaved from the car's 0–60mph time.
Initially Ferrari estimates 25 per cent of Mondials will be ordered with the clutch, but during 1992 plans to make it available for the 348, too.
Xavier de la Chapelle was quietly enjoying his first Paris show as the new boss of MVS, now called Venturi — once the name of the car.
But his happy demeanour isn't likely to last, because not only has he got the move to a new premises in Nantes to handle, along with the updating of the 300 coupe and convertibles he'll build next year to use Renault's up-and-coming 24-valve V6, he's also got the De la Chapelle Parcours in his hands.
The Parcours is monstrous , the size of a Rolls-Royce Silver Spur with room for seven or eight, powered along in executive comfort by a Mercedes-Benz 32-valve V8.
Production plans — such as they are — call for five of the tube-framed, composite-bodied Parcours to be built next year for research, development and type approval, and for annual production after that to run around 100 cars a year.
Meanwhile, another Frenchman, Parisian florist Patrick Veyrat, despairing of finding a no-compromise sports car, decided to build his own.
The result is a mid-engined sports racing car for the road that borrows its styling from the Pininfarina Mythos.
Powered by a standard 200bhp Alfa V6, the Veyrat 630VS has been designed by French race car manufacturer, Arc, and uses a rose-jointed, double-wishbone suspension and both carbon-fibre and riveted alloy panels.
The two prototypes on display weigh just 1870lb.
Veyrat promises that by the time the first of 20 £40,000 sports cars are built by June 1001, weight will still be under 2000lb and acceleration electrifying.
At the other end of the scale GM's long-expressed desire to achieve significant sales of its US cars in Europe has finally settled down to more realistic levels.
Sales of the 20 US models imported — from a total US range of 125 — are expected to reach just over 20,000 this year, rising to 30,000 in 1991, and reaching 50,000 by 1994, half the levels first forecast.
GM's top-selling models are the Chevrolet Beretta and Corsica and Pontiac Trans-Sport.
Chrysler, meanwhile, is having more success with its Cherokee 4wd and Voyager minibus ranges and expects to move 50,000 cars in 1990, followed by a modest increase next year.
Giugiaro continues to dominate Seat's future product plans, giving the company the Latin feel deemed essential by the bosses at VW.
The versatility of his latest concept car, the Proto C — an easily converted coupe, cabrio, dune-buggy or speedster — attempts to extend the egg-shaped Proto T design theme to a front or 4wd sports car.
Seat claims the C is a feasible exercise and is seriously considering production with engines ranging from a 1-litre four to a six with 200bhp.
But the chances of Paris opening the decade with a momentous show were always dashed when the Germans held back the three most significant new cars still due this year — the new Audi 100 and BMW 3-series in a matter of weeks and the Mercedes S-Class by months.
In fairness none of them appeared at the Berlin show that began only two days after Paris, a show signalling a new frontier for the German manufacturers, who may just, in 10 years' time, give the French as much to think about as the Japanese do.
Renault set show alight with electric-blue Laguna concept sports car (above), complemented by Citroen's Activa II (far left).
Understated Mercedes 500E (left) made debut
Mitsubishi Sigma (right) joined 500E (below) as only production car debuts.
Sigma hits UK in March, costing £26,000.
Clio convertible study (above) made by EBS, which also converts R5s
Renault design boss, Patrick le Quement, poses proudly by his team's brightest creation, the Laguna (left).
Laguna borrows 21 Turbo's 2-litre unit along with double-wishbone suspension
Laguna will join GTA Le Mans (right) on Alpine's production line if car gets go-ahead.
Renault Clio (below) sat alongside 16-valve Chamade (bottom), both due in UK next spring
Venturi has busy time ahead with Renault's planned V6 to fit into convertible (above) and launch of huge eight-seater Parcours (right) with its 32-valve Merc V8
US MPVs are enjoying moderate success in Europe with GM's Pontiac Trans-Sport (above) and Chrysler's Voyager (left).
GM has radically revised its sales targets
Giugiaro (above) designs Seat's future with Proto C concept car (left), which can be a coupe, cabrio, dune-buggy or speedster.
Seat also claims a 4wd sports car is possible
Ferrari hid Mondial with clutchless transmission on Valeo stand (right).
Destined also for 348 (below right) in 1992?
Fiat boss Agnelli (below).
Veyrat (bottom) sports prototype weighs just 1870lb
Head-hunting
Richard Feast goes in search of the motor industry big wigs making an appearance at the Paris show
You can tell the heavy hitters at these international shows by the sizes of their entourages.
The bigger the wig, the longer the retinue of courtiers.
The Paris show's clear champion was the urbane Giovanni Agnelli, attended by most of Fiat's commissioned officers.
By contrast, local lads Raymond Levy of Renault and Jacques Calvet of Peugeot (on left) seemed almost provincial princes.
Calvet did, however, score bonus marks for his anti-Japan/Britain tirade.
Few other company executives were in the running, not even the cigar-chomping Lee Iacocca of Chrysler.
He's usually good value for a bit of earthy wisdom and wit but managed to miss his own press conference this time.
Pehr Gyllenhammar, the Volvo group's head honcho, is a rare show visitor.
But he consummately ad-libbed his way through a largely secret press meeting, attended by Lennart Jeansson, now one month into his new job as president of Volvo Car Corporation.
Werner Niefer, the top man at Mercedes-Benz, was on hand but otherwise, German industry chiefs were thinner on the ground than usual with the unification celebrations in Berlin.
Paris may have slipped behind Birmingham in the calendar this year but it hardly seemed to matter.
It remains a glittering international occasion.
Busy industry bosses seem to prefer the cosmopolitan chaos of Paris to the charms of Birmingham.
DISPATCHES
•Chrysler again wheeled out its ‘two-cars-in-one’ concept, the Plymouth Voyager, complete with its display, splitting and joining, splitting and joining.
It did it all day, or nearly.
‘It's done six Auto shows, and 26 stops on Iacocca's '90s tour and its never failed once,’ said its minder.
‘That is until the BBC came along.’
•Not everybody liked the Renault Laguna.
One leading designer said he liked it when he saw the front, until he realised the ‘front’ was the back.
•After the actions of one manufacturer to offer some comfort to tired hacks at Birmingham two weeks ago (Mitsubishi's ‘Survival Kit’ included ‘electronically tested articles’) the Paris show organisers offered some after-shave as part of the press kit.
What next?
A Brian Ferry record and a smoking jacket?
•Logistics worthy of the Ninth Army's move to the Gulf saw all the stands arrive, intact with exhibits at Paris having left Birmingham straight after the show closed there on Sunday night.
Some manufacturers, however, played safe and dug out old stands from the attic.
Some displays were three-years old but the general feeling was never again.
•Heuliez, specialist manufacturer of buses, coaches, ambulances and original equipment sunroofs, had two pretty little concept cars to promote the group's design and prototype-build facility.
The Scarabee d'Or is based on the upcoming AX 4wd and, says Heuliez, is a homage to the first crossing of the Sahara, led by Andre Citroen in December 1922.
The little convertible is joined by another, fixed-head version, the Agádes.
The new company also showed a new formula for a race car based around the 2-litre, four-cylinder, 16-valve engines that nearly all the big manufacturers have (See sports news).
DISPATCHES
•Alberto Fava, general manager of Fiat, launched Operazione Valora at Paris, a response to Fiat's falling domestic market share.
The plan amounts to substantial price cuts, aimed at Ford's Fiesta, which has achieved record sales in Italy.
Fiat has improved equipment levels across the board and a 1.1 Uno now casts what the 1-litre used to cost.
So far, only Italy is involved but there's a plan to widen the operation to other European countries.
•Tom Matano, father of the MX-5 and head of Mazda's Californian design studio, echoed the thoughts of many when he said of Citroen's Activa II: ‘That's what the BMW 850i should have looked like.’
•Chrysler's vice-president of Internal Operations, Joey Cappy, claims Chrysler is in a ‘strong cash position’ and will spend £8.25 billion on new products over the next five years.
•A former Ford designer, and the man responsible for the trend-setting Sierra and Scorpio, on the new Escort, ‘What do you want me to say?
It's a timid design, a commercial product, but no more than that.’
•Asked about rumours of his apparently imminent move from his position as managing director of Lotus, Michael Kimberley suggested we ask GM Europe president Bob Eaton, who has responsibility for the sports car maker.
‘He's there for as long as he wants to be,’ said Eaton.
‘And I'm not moving’, said Kimberley.
•Far from displaying its ‘import fighting’ Saturn, GM revealed it currently has no plans to sell the car in Europe because it would probably grab sales away from Opel and Vauxhall.
•Mercedes has announced a formal co-operation with tuners AMG.
Following its failure to buy the company, Mercedes has announced that all AMG cars and accessories can be ordered through its dealers.
ANALYSIS
Hooray for the lean times!
Our new world industry correspondent, Richard Feast, casts a critical eye over recent motor show offerings, and concludes that Japan's ‘lean’ production methods give them the opportunity to offer imaginative and stimulating new models
Looking at all the brightest and best on display in Birmingham, I was reminded of some comments made in the early '80s by the late Gordon Brown, then head of design for GM's European passenger cars.
I had suggested all cars would inevitably look the same, as rival designers struggled to meet the same constraints dictated by safety requirements and ever-better fuel economy.
More accommodation had to be packaged into smaller shapes, air flows had to be optimised, and weights had to be reduced.
Brown didn't see it that way.
The designer's job had only just begun, he said.
He mentioned the many shapes created by nature, pointing out how different all birds are even though they are all subject to the same aerodynamic rules.
Similarly, there are thousands of fish varieties, all subject to the same laws of hydrodynamics.
He was right, of course.
But what Brown had overlooked was the First Rule of the Conventional Car Maker: sell as many of the same cars as you can in order to make the most money for the least expenditure.
The car makers call it economies of scale.
Thus the modern saloon and hatchback has to be all things to all people.
Its design must offend no one, appeal to both sexes and all ages, social groups, nationalities.
In the process, it loses individuality.
The introduction of the Ford Sierra was a turning point.
When Ford replaced the upright (and well loved) Cortina with the rounded (and alien) Sierra, it was forced to spend a fortune on advertising and promotion to establish it in the market.
Ford was tooled up to produce Sierra in meganumbers, but the car's then-unusual shape put off many potential customers.
In the end, Sierra proved a success.
But it proved an expensive success, and in these straitened times, everybody is playing safe.
To use Gordon Brown's analogy, we are being offered sparrows and sticklebacks.
The new cars at Birmingham, and at this week's Paris show, boast a sterility of design that even transcends generations.
The all-new Sparrow Mk3, on which the company has invested so much, looks indistinguishable to the layman from the Mk2, which was little changed from the Mk1.
But there is hope.
It comes from Japan, and has been identified in a forthcoming book,The machine that changed the world.
In it, authors James Womack, Daniel Jones and Daniel Roos, writing as a team representing the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, coin the term ‘lean’ production.
It is set to become one of the buzz-words of the '90s.
Lean production, with its emphasis on team work, responsibility, flexibility and quality, embraces everything from research and development to design, manufacturing, component supplies and distribution.
Using lean production, the authors found the Japanese required just over half the engineering time, half the number of people, and only two-thirds the lead time as their European rivals to produce similar cars.
With lean production, they say, Japanese manufacturers more of less doubled the number of models they offered between 1982 and the '90s, at the same time replacing them every four years.
By contrast, western manufactures spent the '80s living off the volume generated by their existing models and their once-a-decade replacements.
Lean production has enabled Japanese manufactures to move into niches previously denied them.
It has produced luxury cars such as the Lexus and Nissan Infiniti, affordable sports cars — the Mazda MX-5 and Honda CRX — mean machines — Nissan 300ZX and Mitsubishi 3000GT — and a supercar, the Honda NSX.
Nissan has taken the whole thing one step further with its series of weird and cute limited production models.
Be-1, Pao and S-Cargo, made in small volumes and sold in Japan at premiums over the Micra model on which they are based, may not be to everyone's taste.
They are unashamedly retro in their appeal, but they could equally be futuristic.
Or just different.
Whatever the merits of their looks, enough customers loved them for them to be sold out.
And they have done wonders for improving Nissan's stodgy old image in Japan.
It is lean production at its meanest.
It is also the sort of competitive edge that wins customers — and makes competitors uncomfortable.
There is a growing band of buyers who want something more distinctive and who are prepared to pay extra for it.
For buyers, that rarity would be assured by total production of only 20,000 compared with 2 million for the model on which it is based.
The sooner car maker take this development seriously, the happier the car buyer will be.
The scope is endless.
What about a stylised Anglia built off the new Ford Escort/Orion?
A Saab 96-like model off the platform of the Vauxhall Astra?
A 90's version of the Morris Minor using the latest Metro as a starting point?
If Nissan can do it, why can't other car makers?
VW's striking Futura concept car (left) can even park itself, but all public will get is efficient but mundane Golf MkIII (right)
THIS WEEK ARRIVALS
Polo moves in on ‘hot’ brigade
Despite being only a facelift of the current range, the new Polo manages to lose its tired old image — and it comes not a moment too soon, says Andrew Frankel
The Volkswagen Polo has been reborn.
No longer is it the slow, old relative of a young family of quick and strong cars.
It may have been ignored since 1981 and left to make do with just two small engines (and thus no way of cashing in on the ever-increasing popularity of the hot supermini in Britain) but all that's changed now.
Heading the attack by the restyled and mechanically tweaked Polos is the supercharged G40 packing a 113bhp punch aimed squarely at the Peugeot 205GTi's jaw.
And if it really will do 122mph and manage 0–62mph in 8.6 secs, it's going to hurt.
But from November until the G40 arrives here next May, performance devotees will have the 75bhp Polo GT to sample.
This uses the same 1272cc engine as the G40 but without the unique G-lader blower.
With fuel injection and a catalytic  convertor (which will be standard on all petrol-engined Polos) Volkswagen claims 12.1secs for the 0–62mph dash and a top whack of 107mph.
Not enough to worry the likes of the 85bhp Citroen AX GT perhaps, but more than competition for the 75bhp Metro GTa.
Mechanically the entry level Polos remain the same, bar the adoption of fuel injection.
These comprise a 55bhp version of the 1272cc engine and, below that, a short-stroke 1043cc unit giving out 45bhp.
There's also a 48bhp, 1398cc diesel engine, but VW has yet to decide when to introduce it to the UK, although September 1991 looks the most likely time.
Three body styles — hatchback, coupe and saloon — will be imported, although the hatch will remain the volume seller, followed closely by the coupe, the only body fitted with the G40 engine.
The saloon, which only has two doors and is not sold in Germany, will account for just a tiny fraction of the 37,000 cars Volkswagen intends to export to Britain during 1991.
What's clear is that the Polo is not the all-new supermini Volkswagen would have you believe.
The styling has been rounded off at each end and VW house-style rectangular headlights have been fitted.
But seen in profile all the body shapes look similar to the outgoing models.
Under the skin, the same MacPherson strut front and semi-trailing arm rear suspension is found, albeit with revised spring rates, and even the G40 engine was seen in extremely limited numbers as part of a VW feasibility study back in 1987.
Still, although many would argue that the exterior changes have robbed the Polo of its identity and turned it into yet another Eurobland shopping car, at least it no longer looks dated.
Aerodynamics have also been improved by 10 per cent, although the overall Cd is still an unimpressive 0.35.
The biggest visible improvement is inside.
In place of the bland old dashboard there is a new instrument binnacle presenting clear, unambiguous information with real style.
Gone, too, are the cheap sliding lever controls for the ventilation.
In their place comes attractive rotary dials while the rest of the ancillary switches are similarly sourced from the Passat.
A quick blast in the G40 is enough to confirm its place in the junior hot-hatch line up.
Subjectively it feels every bit as fast as its maker claims, but what really impresses is the torque.
The way it explodes from a standing start suggests that other manufacturers plying multi-valve routes to high specific outputs should at least take a look at this alternative means of forced induction.
110lb ft of torque at 4400rpm may not sound like much, but in reality the G40 is so near this peak figure from idle to red line that the overall effect is much more impressive than a car that makes you wait until the revcounter is half-way round its scale before it gets going.
Given the unpleasant blare of the G40 motor, though, it's just as well it delivers such strong performance low down as prolonged exposure to high revs is tiresome and uncomfortable.
The chassis has mixed abilities, too.
Wearing 175/60 Continental tyres, it has nothing like the grip of a 205 GTi, nor does it have the Peugeot's steering feel.
Yet, if nothing else, it is an enthusiastic cornerer.
Once you're used to the lack of feel coming through the rim of the steering wheel, you can chuck the G40 into a corner, stabilise the understeer with a balanced throttle and belt round, gradually turning the power back on as the exit opens up.
What the suspension revisions have achieved is a fine ride.
We were invited to drive the cars in west Germany where the smooth road surface always flatters cars' suspensions, but even when we nipped into what used to be east Germany and drove on roads that did not seem to have been maintained since the war, the G40's bump suppression was admirable.
Even when the surface degenerated into an irregularly cobbled dirt track, the G40's composure was  unflabbable .
It also emerged without a squeak or rattle, which confirms that VW's solid construction standards still lead the field.
The Polo GT is less pleasing.
Like the G40, it impresses with its throttle response and low-rev urge, but while the supercharged car is merely annoyingly noisy at speed, the GT brings a headache.
Its biggest problem is a resounding thrum at 4000–4500 rpm that booms around the cabin.
Unfortunately this coincides exactly with its ideal cruising speed.
On slightly narrower 165/65 section tyres it seems to grip almost as well as the G40, while its steering seems, if anything, a tad sharper.
But perhaps it would be better to save some money and plump for the 55bhp CL version instead.
That avoids the high-rev histrionics of the GT through a quieter engine and longer gearing, making it a much more relaxing car to drive long-distance.
It also lacks the rear anti-roll bar of the GT and, with taller 155/70 tyres, its ride is even more accomplished as a result.
VW has high hopes for the Polo in this country.
Despite competing in a market that is shrinking fast, it reckons the extra appeal of the GT and G40 should increase 1991 sales by 7000 over the 30,000 sold last year.
For those looking for traditional VW strengths such as build quality, ergonomics, a fine driving position and finish, it should suit well.
But if you are looking for a 21st century Polo, you will have to wait at least three years until the genuinely all-new one.
Until then the Polo is no more than a worthy evolution of a familiar species and merely addresses the most urgent problems that nearly 10 years of standing still have created.
At last, six years after the Peugeot 205GTi, there is a sporting Polo, with better aerodynamics and a modern interior.
VW has yet to finalise specification and prices for the Polos, but it has said they will cost much the same as the models they replace.
So expect around £6000 for the most basic 1-litre car rising to around £9000 for a GT model.
In an effort to increase Coupe sales, this traditionally more expensive bodyshape will now cost the same as the hatchback.
No indication has yet been given of the price of the G40, but it will need to retail for less than £11,000 to keep the GTi in touch.
Profile reveals that new Polo owes much to old car; driving position good, as is rear entry with low lip; GT engine gives 75bhp
Switchgear is much improved; G40 engine packs 113bhp punch
THIS WEEK SPORT
WSPC
Mass clinches Mexico finale
The Schlesser/Baldi Mercedes was disqualified but Jochen Mass was on hand.
Quentin Spurring reports, photographs by Bryn Williams/ Words and Pictures
The finale of the 1990 World Sports-Prototype Championship, in Mexico City on Sunday, was a spectacular, topsy-turvy affair.
Jaguar and Nissan, as if to celebrate the swansong of their turbocars, threw caution to the winds, and took the fight to Mercedes-Benz with devil-may-care enthusiasm.
The drivers of the all-conquering Silver Arrows had to work very, very hard to overcome these challenges but the race was decided by an extraordinary series of mishaps that befell this normally super-slick team.
Jochen Mass, after a fine middle shift by his co-driver Michael Schumacher, was leading the race by 42secs with 15 laps to go, when a sudden rain shower sent the drivers scurrying to the pits for grooved tyres.
Mass, the most accomplished veteran of Sportscar racing, was just passing the pits entrance when the slight drizzle turned into a downpour: he had a torrid time out there on Autodromo Hermanos Rodriguez, spending almost 3 minutes slithering around to the pits.
Mauro Baldi in the other Mercedes was more fortunate.
He stopped at the first opportunity, and emerged with a lead of 45secs.
Mass drove his heart out in an effort to make amends for what he regarded as his mistake but Baldi was 21secs ahead at the finish.
He seemed to have clinched a seventh victory with his partner, Jean-Louis Schlesser, putting the icing on the cake of their shared world championship.
Half an hour after the finish the stewards disqualified the Schlesser/Baldi Mercedes on the grounds that it had been given a tenth of a litre more than its 246-litre fuel allowance.
Mass's mistake had been overshadowed by the tiniest error by his rival's pit crew.
‘OK, I understand that rules are rules,’ commented the surprised and generous victor.
‘But it isn't fair that two drivers can race hard for almost three hours, and then be disqualified because a mechanic took a microsecond too long to close a valve.’
Mass was being diplomatic: the hand on the refuelling rig was that of team boss Peter Sauber.
The final irony was that it was unnecessary, anyway.
In post-race scrutineering it was revealed that the car had 25 litres of fuel left in the tank.
This was the first time this season that the number one Mercedes, which suffered all weekend from a curious instability on the bumpiest section of the 2.75 mile track, did not start a WSPC race from the front row.
The ‘nervousness’ of the Schlesser/Baldi Mercedes persisted into race day.
After Brundle's Jaguar took off like a scalded cat, it was Mass who hunted it down, and soon engaged it in a lurid battle.
Several times he had the nose of his car in front, only to be thwarted by some brave late-braking by the Jaguar man.
Finally, on the sixth lap, Mass got around Brundle at the end of the long pits straight, and gave him an old-fashioned chop as he turned into Moises Solona Corner.
Baldi, who had been watching the show, now tried to find a way around the Jaguar for himself.
It took him 14 more laps before he could squeeze alongside Brundle, and run him wheel-to-wheel through the same right-left-right triple turn.
Brundle chose this moment to come into the pits.
For a while, his V6 had been misfiring, the voltage (and power output) dropping.
A new battery was fitted and Brundle continued, but only the driver was charging.
In the handover to Jan Lammers, another new battery was fitted, and then another in an unscheduled stop.
This time, the electrical system was dead when Lammers tried to restart the engine.
All the while, Julian Bailey had been maintaining a strong, gritty pursuit with the Nissan, and he was only 7secs behind Baldi's second-placed Mercedes when he made his fuel stop early on lap 31.
After the second Mercedes had stopped, Schlesser emerged from a shorter pitstop 8secs in front of Schumacher.
But it was the Nissan, Mark Blundell at the wheel, that now headed the field.
And Blundell put on a great performance, fending off the Mercedes until both were caught by Schumacher.
In the general confusion of a heady battle the German F3 champion demoted Schlesser to third.
Schlesser, in fact, was in trouble.
During the opening shift, Baldi had found the car suffering from a worsening front-end vibration.
It transpired that the left side of the nose splitter  has been damaged, perhaps when Baldi had clipped Brundle's Jaguar in one of his passing attempts, perhaps as a result of ‘trapped’ vibration from a high-speed engine misfire.
Whatever: three laps into Schlesser's shift, the splitter broke.
The handling became worse, and the airflow was impaired, so that Schlesser's water temperature began to rise.
Reluctantly, he dropped his pace.
Schumacher, setting the fastest lap of the race in the process, finally got past Blundell just before half-distance.
As the Nissan driver concentrated on bringing his car into the fuel window, prior to the final handover to Bailey, Schlesser also caught him in spite of his reduced performance.
After the second fuel stops, Mass resumed with a lead of 52secs over Baldi, with Bailey another 27 secs down and under threat from the Jaguar of Andy Wallace and Davy Jones.
Wallace, in fact, now closed down the Nissan, and had just taken third position when the rain fell.
Like Mass, both men were caught out.
Like several other drivers, they spun almost in unison, but it was the Nissan that made it back to the pits first.
Over the last few laps of the race, with all the cars on wet-weather tyres and racing in a steady drizzle, Bailey lost more ground to both the Mercedes.
He finished the race, nevertheless, still more than 20secs ahead of the Jaguar.
After a determined drive from Gianfranco Brancatelli and an unwell Kenneth Acheson, the other Nissan came home fourth, ‘Branca’ having been stranded on the grid when the V8 would not start, therefore starting dead last.
Joest Racing's factory Porsches were fifth and sixth.
Hans Stuck having survived an uncharacteristic spin during the rain with the car he shared with Jonathan Palmer.
Keke Rosberg and Jean-Pierre Jabouille, to their delight, secured a finish for the new Peugeot in its second race.
The little V10 car was hardly competitive at the 6000ft altitude, but one of the highlights of the weekend was Rosberg's all-out qualifying lap, only three seconds away from pole.
Probably with only about 430bhp at his disposal, this was an astonishing performance by Rosberg.
In the race, the 905 was delayed by tyre, ignition and handling problems but, after Rosberg had revelled in the rain, it was there at the finish, 13th.
Nissan of Bailey and Blundell put up a strong challenge and took second (above left).
Wallace and Jones gave Jaguar a deserved third, two laps behind the winner
Caught on slick tyres on a wet track, Mass seemed to have blown it (above) but No 1 Merc was disqualified for fuel infringement.
Peugeot finished 13th
Prost-Mansell rift continues
Alain Prost launched into a new attack on team-mate Nigel Mansell after the Spanish Grand Prix last week.
Far from moderating his condemnation of Mansell's start-line performance in Estoril the previous week, the world champion stuck to his allegation that Mansell had deliberately tried to push him off the track.
Despite Mansell's denials, technical data leaked from Ferrari sources appear to support Prost's contentions.
Among the most important evidence to emerge from analysis of Mansell's start are that his Ferrari was not lined up straight and telemetry on the Ferrari indicated that he had fiercely defended his position, turning right twice to close out Prost.
Mansell's reaction in Spain was forthright.
‘When the red light changed, I gave it a big welly-full.
I lit my tyres up and went sideways.
‘I admitted all this last week.
Straight after I got out of my car I went to Alain to apologise but he didn't want to accept.
That's his prerogative.
And I accept that he might have been upset but there are no polemics, so why destroy a great victory?
I won the race, I took three points from McLaren and from Ayrton Senna.’
Last week Prost admitted that his reaction to the incident in Portugal had been perhaps ‘slightly exaggerated.’
•Announcing his decision to ‘unretire’ himself and return to the Williams team next year, Nigel Mansell issued a wordy statement which posed many more questions than it answered.
Explaining his decision, he originally felt that he ‘would be very unlikely ever to have available the full weight of a team and a manufacturer to give me what should be a reasonable opportunity (to win the championship).’
However, he seems to have overlooked the fact that Ferrari gave him two race wins last year and that the Scuderia's tally of six victories this year is four more than Williams was able to score.
Van de Poele strengthens F1 claim
Eric Van de Poele scored a timely win in the penultimate round of the F3000 championship, reinforcing his claims for an F1 drive with the Modena Lamborghini team.
Despite qualifying sixth, the Reynard driver made a superb start and was in second place by the first corner, taking the lead from Gianni Morbidelli's Lola by the end of the lap.
As the circuit dried, he stopped for slicks and was not threatened until held up when lapping tail-enders.
New F3000 champion Erik Comas closed in but spun when trying to lap Andrew Gilbert Scott.
Comas recovered, although he was further delayed by Damon Hill, to finish second ahead of Morbidelli.
The remaining points went to Tamburini, Apicella and Bartels.
IN BRIEF Martin Brundle will return to F1 next year as number one driver with Brabham, the team he left at the end of 1989 to join the Jaguar WSPC team.
Mika Hakkinen won the final round of the British F3 Championship at Silverstone, beating Christian Fittipaldi and Steve Robertson after early leader Mika Salo retired.
Victory fell to Robb Gravett in the last race of this year's Esso British Touring Car Championship.
The series winner forced his way past rival Andy Rouse four laps from the finish.
‘Rubbish’ is how Ron Dennis described our recent report that Ayrton Senna had demanded a personal motorhome and other perks from McLaren in 1991.
‘It made Ayrton, in my opinion, look very cheap,’ said the McLaren chief.
‘And if there's one thing he's not, it's cheap…’
Gerhard Berger escaped unhurt from a heavy accident while testing tyres at Estoril last week.
A carbon-fibre brake disc shattered as he slowed from high speed, and his McLaren crashed into a guard rail.
Two of the Williams F1 team's senior personalities will be leaving at the end of the year.
Team manager Michael Cane and commercial executive Colin Cordy have become partners in a Formula 3000 team to be based in South Oxfordshire.
Now that Ferrari is virtually certain to stay with Goodyear in 1992, Pirelli is courting Benneton with promises of ‘exclusive’ tyres that would not be available to other ‘customer’teams.
Minardi F1 driver Paulo Barilla, who took his drive from Spain's Luis Perez Sala at last year's Japanese Grand Prix, has himself been displaced exactly one year later.
Ferrari test driver Gianni Morbidelli, 22, is expected to get Barilla's place in the last two grand prix of the season.
Comas signed by Ligier
Newly-crowned Formula 3000 champion Erik Comas is to be Thierry Boutsen's team-mate at Ligier next year.
Comas has become the most successful driver in the history of the F3000.
With six wins from the last 12 F3000 races, Comas has shown great coolness under fire.
The technological details of the 1991 Ligier-Lamborghini V12-powered chassis have yet to be decided.
The chassis will be designed by Anglo-Brazilian Ricardo Divila, but Guy Ligier received a major disappointment recently when ex-Tyrrell aerodynamicist Jean-Claude Migeot turned down an attractive offer.
•Also confirmed for 1991: Frenchman Eric Bernard and Japan's Aguri Suzuki will stay with Larrousse.
New racing formula mooted at Paris
French coach builder Heuliez used this week's Paris show to propose a new international sports car Formula — SP2.
SP2 is for single-seater — Cam Am-style — cars with 2-litre 16-valve engines, turbocharged to produce 4000bhp.
Heuliez believes that enough major car makers have such engines in production for the series to become a success on a European, and, eventually, a worldwide basis.
The car displayed in Paris (above) had a Heuliez-developed turbocharged version of Renault's 16-valve 2-litre, but all the major European manufacturers — Fiat, Volkswagen, Peugeot, Ford, General Motors and Mercedes — have similar units.
And although turbocharging is proposed, a limiting pop-off valve would restrict power to 400bhp.
The chassis in Heuliez's first SP2 car, dubbed the SP2 WR, is made from honeycombed aluminium and uses double wishbone suspension all round.
The cast-iron disc brakes work with four-pot calipers and it rides on 10ins rims at the front and 14ins at the rear.
The engine drives through a Hewland DGB 'box.
The whole mechanical package is fully enclosed in composite bodywork and weighs in at 121lb.
The pretty green-and-white single-seater is 181ins long and 72ins wide — about the size of an F3000 car — although its weight is more on par with an F1 car.
Safari Rally debut for Nissan Sunny
Nissan will enter the four-wheel-drive turbocharged rally age with its Sunny GTI-R.
It plans a four-event world championship programme for 1991, starting on its happy hunting ground, the Safari Rally.
Still devoid of a current top-line superstar as a number one driver, it plans to contest these rallies with its test driver Stig Blomqvist, gaining full experience for a full championship season in 1992.
Shown recently in full Group A form in Japan, the 2-litre Sunny GTI-R (right) will feature the smallest bodywork in top class rallying and, at 230bhp, the most powerful engine in its class in production form.
Few details of the Group A specification car have been announced, but most of its assets are expected to stem from the basic design rather than special tuning.
The most important design features are a large intercooler (mounted horizontally atop the engine) and the four throttle valve chambers with straight inlet porting.
Disadvantages may be the restricted size of the wheels (14ins are standard, 16ins for competition) and the short wheelbase (2340mm).
A major change in Nissan's plans is the intention to run the whole rally programme from Britain.
Previously, it has developed its cars in Japan and delegated the competition activities to each country.
 Martin Holmes 
Englishmen triumph in Toohey's 1000
Englishmen Win Percy and Allan Grice defied the odds to take victory in Australia's most famous motor race, the Toohey's 1000.
Their Holden Racing Team (HRT) Commodore V8, which the pundits claimed was dated and slow, outlasted a pack of Ford Sierras and a Nissan Skyline GT-R to take the flag a mere 15sec ahead of Paul Radisich and Jeff Allam, driving Dick Johnson's second Shell Sierra Cosworth.
Larry Perkins and Tomas Mezera underlined the Holden's newfound competitiveness by finishing third, after being held in the pit lane when the race was under a yellow flag/pace car caution.
Peter Brock and Andy Rouse fought back to fourth place, following an incorrect tyre choice and tardy pit stops early on in the race.
The key to the Commodore's success was their ability to run reliably and quickly for the full 621 miles.
The HRT team — owned by Tom Walkinshaw and managed by Percy — became national heroes as the first to win Bathurst in an Australian car since 1987, when Peter Brock was awarded victory after the first and second-placed Texaco Sierras were excluded.
 Ewen Page 
THIS WEEK DIARY
Eoin Young
‘I wonder what happened to all the sanctimonious talk about putting his family first?’
It was the luck of the Irish that saved Martin Donnelly.
FISA technical man, Charlie Whiting, said it all: ‘Martin survived an unsurvivable accident.’
It was the most horrifying incident I have ever seen in motor racing.
One minute the press room was abuzz with conversation in a variety of tongues, and the next minute it was hushed into a stunned, dumb silence.
There on the television monitors was a body lying alone in the middle of the track with his seat still strapped to him like a pilot's parachute pack.
It could have been a motorcycle crash.
No machine was visible.
Donnelly lay like a rag doll for minutes.
You can appreciate now that he was unconscious, but in those minutes it looked more terminal.
Only later, when we saw the photographs, did we appreciate that Donnelly must have been magicked out of the car at the precise millisecond when the car exploded on impact.
A millisecond before and he would have been trapped.
A millisecond later doesn't bear considering.
Coming just two races after Derek Warwick's phenomenal escape at Monza, Donnelly's accident inevitably brought comparison.
On both occasions a Lotus failed to negotiate a fast right-hander.
Donnelly was reckoned to be doing 150mph in sixth gear when he plunged off the road.
Whiting said the wreckage stopped from that speed in 20 metres and Donnelly was thrown a further 20 metres down the track.
Did the car do its job if it was totally destroyed?
Harvey Postlethwaite at Tyrrell felt that it did if the driver survived.
Williams designer Patrick Head said the car had absorbed 25 times the energy of the 20mph control crash tests each F1 car has to be put through.
All the legislation in the world couldn't have coped with an accident of such violence.
So Nigel Mansell has made a grand prix comeback without ever having left.
I wonder what happened to all the sanctimonious talk about putting his family first for the first time in his life?
I was really impressed with that when he told a handful of us after the British Grand Prix that he was retiring at the end of the season.
A measure of the man, I thought.
Does this mean that his family now takes second place again?
Is this a £500,000-a-month ego trip, with Williams in pursuit of the world title that, on present form, seems can only be won by a McLaren-Honda or a Ferrari — or, more to the point, by Ayrton Senna or Alain Prost?
Or has this whole summer for Mansell been a fabrication of what he really felt, a means of getting out of his Ferrari contract by saying he was quitting and then holding Williams to ransom after they had backed themselves into a corner?
He did, after all, on two different occasions (Silverstone and Monza) summon us to say that there was no way he would race in F1 in 1991…and now he is.
The Barley Mow tends to be an instant poll of opinion on matters motor racing, and before the Spanish Grand Prix when a Mansell comeback was mooted, one regular announced that he hoped it was true because Nigel was the most exciting British driver anyone could remember.
‘If only he'd keep his mouth shut when he gets out of the car and stop whingeing.
When he's in the car he's magic.
I mean, we all want to love him, don't we?
It's just that he makes it so damn difficult.
But then there's the money, I suppose.
That's six million pounds he's getting for a year!’
In the cynical world of F1, we tend to accept the number of noughts as a driver's way of keeping score, but the local bricklayer has an acute realisation of what he could afford to buy with £6,000,000!
James Hunt was the last British world champion and, after the Mansell comeback announcement, he said: ‘At least Williams knows the animal and how to control it.
At Ferrari it waited for him to put a foot wrong and there was blood all over the walls.’
Hunt thinks Mansell has done the right thing in signing with Williams.
‘Ferrari, with Prost and Alesi as a suppressed number two, has no chance.
Nigel has put himself in the right place, and there's no doubt about that.’
But I wonder how long the honeymoon will last?
When he left Williams for Ferrari, I remember Frank Williams reminiscing at his annual press luncheon that he had fond memories of Alan Jones and Keke Rosberg, but that it would be some time before he had similar memories of Nigel.
If you fancy owning the nose cone of Alain Prost's Ferrari, a piston and con-rod from the engine of Jean Alesi's Tyrrell or a steering wheel from Ayrton Senna's Marlboro-McLaren, you should really be at Jackie Stewart's special charity auction of motor sport memorabilia, which is raising funds for the Scottish Dyslexia Trust Fund.
It's called ‘Ford's Evening with Jackie Stewart and Friends’ and Christie's is starting the auction at 7pm on 17 October in George Watsons College, Colinton Road, Edinburgh.
There are also paintings and prints by Arthur Benjamins, photographs by Jesse Alexander and Michael Cooper, a couple of Jackie's trophies (second in the 1967 Belgian Grand Prix, second in an F2 race).
Rob Walker's pitboard from the 1969 Monaco Grand Prix, various helmets and team uniforms, a Brabham rear wing and an airbox engine-cover from a 1990 Footwork Arrows described as ‘slightly damaged’ with a letter of authenticity from team boss Jack Oliver.
The most unusual item offered in the auction is the special lightweight wrist-brace which Jackie wore after he broke a bone in his wrist in an F2 race at Jarama.
He was wearing this brace when he won the 1966 German and Dutch grands prix in the Tyrrell Matra.
Is the Mansell comeback saga just water off our Nige's back as he prepares to celebrate his £6 million salary with Williams-Renault?
THIS WEEK YOUR VIEW
YOUNG COUPLE
I was surprised to read A Robertson criticising Eoin Young's Diary column as being boring (‘Your View’, 3 October).
It is something I would certainly not agree with and neither would my wife, who always makes that page her first piece of reading when Autocar & Motor arrives.
So before leaping to his defence I waited until another column appeared, which I have tried to read in a less partisan manner.
Once again, though, he made the usual pithy Formula 1 comments coupled with amusing anecdotes from the IOM historic jolly, making for a well-balanced, interesting page.
No, no Mr Editor, Young must stay!
 John Aley John Aley Racing Suffolk 
More Young
Please take no notice of the letter from A Robertson.
Eoin Young's Diary is the most interesting feature in your magazine — indeed it is sometimes the only interesting feature!
 NF Robinson Ammanford Dyfed 
Less Young
A Robertson is absolutely right.
Eoin Young's Diary is heavy going.
Just because the guy can drop names we have all heard of and used to know Bruce McLaren doesn't give him the right to bore us every week.
Of course I'm being most unfair, but that's a reader's prerogative.
Give Shaun Campbell the column.
He is the most entertaining writer on your staff.
 Peter Herbert Richmond North Yorkshire 
Hard Knocks
Your report on the Escort LX (3 October) must be one of the most peculiar pieces of motoring journalism ever published.
What comes through very clearly is that your testers have a very strong anti-Ford, anti-Escort bias.
They are nevertheless honest enough to praise the good points of the car but are unable to concede that these points add up to a first-class package.
•
Among all the knocking your road testers admitted:
•Top speed not bad in its class •0–60 and 30–70 times respectable •Well-chosen ratios, change reasonably light •Light, well-cushioned clutch, snatch-free driveline •Generously shod, plenty of grip, corners with composure •Understeers mildly, positions with encouraging precision •Strong, fade-free stopping from high speed •Instruments clear and straightforward •Visibility good •Main controls well placed •Heating and ventilation work well •Decently relaxed as a cruiser
This adds up to more good marks than most cars get.
If other aspects, such as the seating, draw some criticism (in my opinion justified), well its competitors have their faults too.
You should not draw the snide comment that ‘average cars are bought by average people — it can't fail.’
This bitchy and unworthy remark tells average people like me far more about the writers than the car.
I would suggest they look long and hard at the report they have written and even longer and harder in the mirror.
They might be surprised and a little ashamed.
Usual disclaimers about having any connections with Ford.
 R Smith Braunton Devon 
The point we sought to make, Mr Smith, was that it was ludicrous to assume — as Ford has — that millions of people aspire to nothing better than an average car, and to note that the master marketeers will probably get away with peddling mediocrity yet again.
It wasn't an attack on Mr Average but the arrogance of Mr Ford.
To describe the Escort, as Ford does in its current television ad campaign, as the car that breaks the law of averages sinks the art of cynicism to new and deplorable depths.
No one 's saying the Escort 1.4LX is a bad car, just dreary and run-of-the-mill — road test ed.
…
HOLLOW NOISE
Please don't let the dismay of the pro-Ford lobby colour your judgement in future road tests.
It is a scientific fact that empty vessels make the most noise.
Your issue of 29 August was the sort that subscriptions are made of.
 M Duffin Sandy Bedfordshire 
SPORTING CHOICE
In your article on the Jaguar XK120 and Frazer Nash le Mans Replica (‘Great British Sports Cars’, 19 September) you describe the Jaguar as being cheap, costing the equivalent of £16,282 at today's prices.
So why, when choosing a ‘soul mate’, do you rush to the pedestal on which you place all foreign cars?
‘Porsche 944 Cabrio: an honest answer to the XK120.’
Why not look at British first?
A truly honest answer to the XK120 today is my 1990 TVR S2, listed at £16,645.
This is near enough to the XK120 at today's prices and really cheap in relation to the competition.
0–60mph in 6.8 secs, top speed 136mph — near enough to the Porsche?
Look also at the TVR Griffith at £22,000: 0–60mph in 4.9secs and a top speed of 150mph limited by its aerodynamically inefficient but superbly designed drophead.
I haven't even mentioned the styling, handling, roadholding and build quality.
 T Smith Rowlands Gill Tyne & Wear 
Turn to this week's Great British Sports Cars, Mr Smith.
You'll find we name the TVRs as ‘soul mates’ to the Austin-Healey 3000 and AC Cobra — ed
Write to : Autocar & Motor Readers' Letters, 38–42 Hampton Road, Teddington, Middlesex TW11 OJE or fax 081–943 5653
The editor is not bound to agree with readers' opinions and reserves the right to edit letters
Vauxhall Calibra-vs-VW Corrado G60
motorshow STAR comparison
Coupes are back with a vengeance, great to look at and better to drive.
None epitomises this spirit better than Volkswagen's Corrado, here in supercharged G60 form, but Vauxhall's super-sleek 16-valve Calibra is looking like a strong contender for the crown.
Over demanding Welsh roads, Martin Vincent referees a showdown between the two.
Photography by Peter Burn
Just as you thought the coupe for the masses had receded into a misty-eyed memory of metallic-blue Ford Capris and diamond-white Opel Mantas, along comes the Calibra; a practical yet sleek four-seater to set the high-mileage rep's heart alike.
At last, a sensible coupe with terrific looks and a main car-maker's badge to make it acceptable to the company accountant and accessible to the ordinary man or woman.
After years on the back-burner, the volume-selling coupe looks set for a comeback.
But although the sensationally styled Calibra sets the trend, it is by no means the only exponent of the field.
The Toyota Celica 2.0 GT, the Audi Coupe, and the Volkswagen Corrado are already making inroads to the UK market.
Of these, the most accomplished performer is the Corrado, available in both 16v and, with supercharger, in 160bhp G60 form.
What better way to test the mettle of the new Calibra 16v than to pitch it directly against the class best, VW's Corrado G60?
The Calibra range starts at a shade under £15,000 but, to attain the level of performance suggested by the aerodynamic styling, the 16-valve 2-litre engine is a must.
This develops a lusty 150bhp, but costs £17,595.
The Corrado in 16-valve, £16,991 form might seem its obvious rival, but to match performances more closely the G60 Corrado, armed with 160 force-fed horses, is the closer rival.
It costs a whopping £19,907 and is currently on offer only as a left-hooker, although right-hand drive will be available towards the end of the year.
Park the two coupes together and, despite the disparity in cost, it is the Calibra that exudes more class and style.
The Corrado undoubtedly has an endearing and individual appearance with neat, crisp lines, but its dumpy proportions are at odds with a price normally associated with 3-litre executive saloons.
PERFORMANCE AND ECONOMY
The cars use different methods of producing horsepower.
Vauxhall's contender takes the twin-camshaft, fuel-injection, multi-valve route but, unlike so many others, this 16-valver doesn't fall into the trap of developing all of its power at high revs.
This one, first seen in the Astra 16v, has a generous spread of torque, although its peak of 145lb ft is fairly high at 4800rpm.
A catalytic converter drops power from 156bhp to 150bhp at 6000rpm.
Nothing innovative here; just well-proven techniques kept in check by a sophisticated electronic management system to control the ignition and multi-point fuel injection.
VW's route to a high specific output for the Corrado G60 is unusual but effective.
The use of a supercharger to compress the air and fuel mixture is hardly new: the concept is almost as old as the motor car itself.
But modern refinements and materials have brought about a resurgence of the supercharger, making it a credible alternative to the turbo.
The Corrado's supercharger sits alongside the transversely mounted engine and is belt-driven off the crankshaft pulley at 1.66 times engine speed.
Pressurised air then passes through an intercooler to reduce the charge temperature and hence increase its density on its way to the inlet manifold.
The 1781cc four is a development of the Golf GTi's eight-valve unit with digital engine management and multi-point fuel injection.
Even with the standard-fit catalyst, the G60 engine develops 160bhp at 5600rpm, and a thumping 166lb ft of torque at 4000rpm, with more than 130lb ft available between 2000 and 6000rpm.
As the blower is engine-driven, boost is always on hand, so response is much faster than with a turbocharger.
But responsive as the G60's engine is, it lacks the immediacy of the Calibra's and emits a distant but characteristic whine from the compressor.
The Calibra 16v is more vocal, though, even unpleasantly so at times, and it lacks the inherent smoothness of the VW's four at high engine speeds.
But while the G60 engine is electronically strangled at 6200rpm, the Calibra 16v is willing to go all the way to 7000rpm.
Sharp tugs at the Calibra's wheel show that torque steer is definitely present when going hard through the lower gears.
The Corrado is decidedly less prone to this.
Drive one straight after the other and it is hard to tell which is quicker.
The Corrado not only has a little more power and torque, it also benefits from about 170lb less bulk.
In its credit, the Calibra slices through the air more cleanly with its 0.29Cd drag factor.
Truth is, the two cars are just about equally matched when it comes to acceleration in each gear.
In some increments the Calibra shows the way, while in others the Corrado shows the Vauxhall a lead-free tailpipe.
Both engines are extremely tractable, but the Calibra pulls hardest from ultra-low revs and beyond 4000rpm, while the Corrado wins through at the top end and lower-mid range.
Going hard through the gears places the Corrado some way behind the Calibra's sparkling showing.
Like the Golf, whose floorpan and front-suspension layout the Corrado shares, getting off the line is no problem, but there is too much space between second and third ratios, allowing the close-ratio Calibra to take the honours.
The Calibra 16v gets from rest to 60mph in 8.1secs and on to 100mph in 22secs, but the Corrado G60 can manage only 8.9secs to 60mph and falls a disappointing two seconds behind by 100mph.
That vital second and third-gear shortfall shows up most graphically in the 30–70mph increment: Corrado manages only 8.8secs, Calibra records just 7.5secs.
Flat out, both these coupes are fast enough.
Each achieves 137mph on Millbrook's bowl which means they'll nudge 140 on the straight.
Use all the Corrado's ample performance and the lead-free fuel flows through the intakes at the rate of around 22mpg, and this shows little sign of improvement even when driven more gently.
The Calibra's average of 25.5mpg is rather more encouraging, and the 14-gallon tank capacity offers a better range than the Corrado's 12.1 gallons.
HANDLING AND RIDE
The Corrado and Calibra share a basically similar suspension design — MacPherson struts at the front, trailing arms at the rear and driven front wheels — but you certainly wouldn't guess it on the road.
In their handling characteristics they could scarcely be more different.
The Corrado's chassis is first class, but watch it attacking a series of bends and it's hard to understand why.
It seems incomprehensible that a chassis with such a marked front weight-bias and an inside-rear tyre that can jump six inches clear of the ground can also provide such superlative behaviour.
And yet the driver isn't aware of these acrobatics from behind the wheel.
The fact is, the Corrado is one of the very best front-drive chassis around.
A Lotus Elan provides more grip and a Peugeot 309GTi offers more communicative steering, but for a combination of fine throttle adjustability, knife-edged balance, the ability to stay accurately on line, and high levels of security — cut the throttle sharply and it won't suddenly swap ends — there's little to touch the Corrado.
In the face of such prowess, Vauxhall's sleek coupe can only come second.
At brisk cornering speeds the Calibra behaves in typical front-drive fashion.
The front pushes wide on a steady throttle and the rears will only slide out if the power is cut suddenly on the faster curves.
But the agility and balance that should be there in such a fine-looking coupe are missing.
Not that the Calibra falls behind in all chassis dynamics.
It grips better than the Corrado on the fast sweepers, but, on tight and bumpy lower-gear corners, the VW leaves the Calibra scrabbling to get a grip on the road surface.
The Corrado also comes out on top for its firm and consistent braking — the Calibra's pedal has an excess of free travel before anything happens — but the overly heavy servo action loses the VW some points.
Both have anti-lock brakes as standard.
Also standard on both cars is power steering, perhaps a touch too heavy on the G60, a touch too light and rubbery on the Calibra.
But both are acceptably direct, although the Corrado's steering has pinpoint accuracy.
It's a shame, then, that its gearchange is coarse and sloppy.
In contrast, the Calibra's is light and quick, although the clutch action could be more progressive.
No one expects limousine-comfort from a 137mph coupe but, even so, you don't get much ride absorbency with either car.
Undoubtedly the more controlled damping comes from the Corrado, which copes admirably with undulations at speed, but show it some sharper bumps and, like the Calibra, it jolts and shudders through the shell.
Low-speed ride is jittery on both cars.
AT THE WHEEL
Sit behind the wheel of the Calibra and it could easily be mistaken for a Cavalier GSi.
That's not a bad thing, for the Cavalier has earned high praise for its instrument clarity and logical placement of controls.
The seats are excellent too, with support where it's needed and basically good driving position, adjustable for height.
Legroom is generous, and headroom reasonably good.
The smaller Corrado certainly shows its size once you're seated.
Close proximity to the body sides, the roof and the front screen makes it feel crowded, but there is actually plenty of legroom, and like the Calibra, a roomy footwell with space to rest the left foot (though don't forget the test car is in left-hand-drive form).
The instruments don't have the same clarity as the Calibra's and some of the Corrado's switches are masked by the wheel.
The seats aren't as comfortable as the Calibra's either, and the base height adjustment is restricted to the rear of the cushion only.
Despite the high trim-quality of each of these coupes, the sombre colours and black facia panels of their interiors make the cabins appear smaller than they actually are.
The Calibra's large glass area and greater interior space does lessen this effect, though, and also provides excellent all-round vision.
Visibility in the Corrado is obstructed by the broad C-pillars and high rear — made even higher by an electrically-raised spoiler.
The lights, too, appear dimmer than the Calibra's.
The Vauxhall's ventilation system offers a plentiful supply of air — better than the Corrado's — provided the fan is switched on.
COMFORT AND SPACE
For long-distance cruising, the Calibra is the better choice, if only because it has a more absorbent and quieter motorway ride.
Some tyre tumble exists, but it's not as obtrusive as on the Corrado, which also suffers from considerable ride harshness on coarse surfaces.
Wind roar is virtually absent on the Calibra but is the most prominent noise source on the Corrado.
But the Corrado turns the tables and outshines the Calibra in its unobtrusive engine, betrayed as much by the soft whine of the blower than the engine note itself.
Vauxhall could learn a few tricks here, the cacophony from the 16-valver becoming tiresome when the engine's full rev range is explored.
What's so unusual about the Calibra is that it isn't merely a two-plus-two, it's a full four-seater.
Furthermore, even a six-foot rear passenger should have no trouble finding enough leg and headroom, and access to the back presents no problems.
The Corrado also impresses in its rear passenger-space.
It still counts as a four-seater, but it's not in the same league as the Calibra for rear room where head and legroom are restricted.
The Corrado's no match for the Calibra's large and flat luggage space either because its spare wheel intrudes, but it is marginally easier to load then the Calibra, which has a very high loading lip.
FINISH AND EQUIPMENT
No quibbles on the finish of either car.
Fine build-quality is evident throughout the Calibra and the Corrado.
Paint finishes, panel fit and interior fit and finish are all of a standard expected from this price range.
The Corrado feels subjectively as though it is screwed together just a little more tightly but neither car suffers from rattles or shakes.
As expected, the level of standard equipment on both is high — alloy wheels, electric sunroof, power windows, mirrors and steering, central locking, a radio-cassette and anti-lock brakes.
The Corrado also has a multi-function computer, while the Calibra has a no-cost option of metallic paint.
VERDICT
So which is best?
In pure driving terms, the winner has to be the Corrado.
Its chassis offers terrific handling balance, great traction matched to positive brakes and accurate steering.
It feels like a thoroughbred coupe.
But the Corrado's victory is far from being so clear cut in other areas.
In refinement, equipment and build quality there's little to choose between the two, while Vauxhall's head-turner outshines the more expensive Corrado in more humdrum aspects, such as passenger and luggage space, and its motorway ride.
Add an engine which offers significantly better straight-line performance than the Corrado's and the balance starts to tip in favour of the Calibra.
Overall, the Calibra has to be the safer choice, but the more seductive charms of the Corrado G60 will woo the hearts of those who appreciate driving a great-handling car.
GMs wind-cheating coupe is more than a pretty face.
Sombre interior roomy enough to seat four comfortably but interior styling lacks charisma.
Seats supportive, instruments easy to assimilate, controls convenient.
Easy to live with
Corrado G60 is visibly smaller than Calibra but neat and trim lines exude presence.
Gloomy interior can feel claustrophobic, front legroom is plentiful but cramped in the rear.
Steering can be a little heavy and gearchange is sloppy
Vauxhall 16-valve four loses out on power to supercharged VW engine, but matches its 137mph.
Both have folding rear seats but Calibra wins on load space.
Our Heroes
PART THREE Luxury saloon 
BENTLEY TURBO R
In the third part of the series in which our road testers name the cars they rate as the best, the ultimate in luxury saloons comes to the fore.
Those worthy of a runners-up slot are over the page, but this is the car that's second to none — the Bentley Turbo R
HELL FOR LEATHER
The Bentley Turbo R isn't so much a hero as the entire cavalry.
It knows how to charge.
Zero to sixty takes 6.5secs and a BMW 750i to the cleaners.
Top speed is an improbable 143mph.
Improbable because compared to the plump, leather-lined Bentley, a barn door has the frontal area of a postage stamp.
When this wall-nosed behemoth travels at speed through Kent, leaves get blown off trees in East Sussex.
Its hugeness is heroic — the Turbo R has a real indomitable presence born of high breeding and an even higher bonnet line, a benign arrogance few tarmac-vacuuming supercars can compete with.
And, because its aristocratic bloodline is implicit, it doesn't have to shout or pretend: the Blower Bentley is all studied understatement and coolness of brow.
That's what gives the car such a delicious duality of character.
It's a hell-raiser with 24-carat cuff-links and rounded vowels, it's a freshly squeezed orange juice with a large shot of vodka — and like a Mickey Finn, the beauty of the Bentley is that you don't know quite what you've let yourself in for.
In both cases, you swallow hard.
The precedent for a Bentley imbued with the genuine bulldog spirit was created as long ago as 1982 by the Mulsanne Turbo, the first red-blooded carriage to roll out of Crewe for decades.
Far from being just another Rolls-Royce clone with winged ‘B’ badges, the Mulsanne went straight back to the first act where raw performance and driving reward shared equal billing with cossetting comfort and refinement.
Weighing the best part of two-and-a-half tonnes, the Mulsanne Turbo had enough puff to twist the speedo needle almost off the scale (a true 135mph) and drop the 0–60mph time to around 7secs.
But the Mulsanne's successor, the Turbo R, was faster still.
Moreover, it had acquired the suspension and tyres to cope with the jumbo output generated by its turbocharged 6.7-litre V8 — in excess of 320bhp and 400lb ft of tree-toppling torque.
Fuel injection and anti-lock brakes were duly introduced, followed, in 1989, by an intercooler, Bosch MK Jetronic fuel injection and ignition and a heavy duty THM 400 three-speed automatic transmission.
Now, at £108,994, the Turbo R has adaptive damping to allow crisper handling without spoiling the fluid ‘magic carpet’ ride Bentley customers continue to demand.
That's the version we've yet to test, but memories of the 1988 Turbo R remain vivid and potent.
Recollection of the day it visited Millbrook is especially spine-chilling.
On the trip there, the Bentley showed us why its cabin is one of the most pleasant and relaxing automotive environments in existence.
Leather, so luxurious you find yourself wondering whether it could really have come from a cow, finds its perfect match in glossy burr walnut.
You know people have worried over this car.
The stitching is neat, but not too neat — that human touch, again — and there's the smell; the subtle but fragrant aroma of high-grade hide is almost as seductive as the whiff of crisp £50 notes.
All this tasteful opulence sets off the large-armchair electrically adjustable seats to a tee.
The driving position can be tailored to perfection by purring motors that raise, lower and recline with hair-breadth precision.
You sit high in any case and it's just as well — you need to be able to see the big car's extremities.
Yet threading the Turbo R through traffic is never a problem.
Other cars keep out of your way and the steering, though very light, is sensibly geared and very accurate.
On the open road, it's no use pretending that the Bentley handles with the agility of a Porsche.
Grip and balance are remarkable for such a heavy car but this isn't one to hustle down country lanes.
That said, if the beefy Bentley is far from wieldy, neither is it cumbersome.
Nor heavy of foot.
Burbling with a low, sonorous suggestion of vast latent power, the Bentley's bluff nose inched into position at the beginning of Millbrook's acceleration straight.
Given the gun, it lifted all of six inches as if to sniff the wind, the massively muscled V8 growling expensively.
With its occupants pushed firmly back into their seats, the Turbo R thumped a hole in the air and lunged for the far horizon, covering the quarter-mile in a staggering 14.8secs on the way.
But then the Turbo R is an outrageous concoction of sledgehammer performance and sybaritic luxury — the world's most dignified and prestigious hot-rod.
It's larger than life in every way.
A hero.
We're big fans.
BENTLEY TURBO R
Price: £108,994 0–60mph: 6.5secs 30–70mph: 6.1secs 30–50 in 4th: 2.4secs Top Speed: 143mph Overall MPG: 15.1 Citation:For putting the fight back into Bentley and creating a form of transport that wants for nothing at all 
Turbo R has brought fight back to winged ‘B’.
Mixed with exquisitely luxurious leather and walnut interior is enough raw performance and driving reward to take your breath away
The RUNNERS-UP
That the Bentley Turbo R has withstood the challengers here speaks for its ability.
Even if these luxury saloons couldn't steal the Bentley R's crown, each has much to commend it
JAGUAR XJ6 4.0
The XJ6 is a great saloon that's become better over the years.
With the 4-litre version of the 24-valve AJ6 straight-six, however, the range has hit an all-time high.
With 235bhp and 285lb ft of torque, it delivers a top speed of 139mph and 0–60mph acceleration of 8.3secs.
The electronically-controlled four-speed automatic ZF gearbox makes the most of the engine's vitality, especially in ‘sport’ mode.
Slightly less willing to react is a chassis afflicted by over-light steering that lacks feel.
But it takes a lot to ruffle an XJ6.
And the ride is an object lesson in suppleness and elimination of vibration.
For its elegance, performance, comfort and refinement, the XJ6 4.0 is a hard car to beat at any price.
It currently costs £25,200 in basic form and is therefore one of the great bargains.
Price: £25,200 0–60mph: 8.3secs 30–70mph: 7.3secs 30–50 in 4th: 3.0secs Top Speed: 139mph Overall mpg: 18.5
AUDI V8
This unofficial ‘Mk II’ V8 is much more than the flagship saloon Audi wanted from the start and a fitting testament to a decade of technological advancement.
The V8 contains every engineering innovation Audi has made in that time: four-wheel drive, Procon-Ten, galvanised bodywork, flush glass, multi-valve combustion and an exhaust catalyst.
Its 3.5-litre quad-cam V8 delivers a hefty 250bhp and 251lb ft of torque and, thanks to the V8's sleek shape, a top speed of 144mph.
A 0–60mph time of 9.0secs is slightly disappointing but 0–100mph in 22.0secs gives a better clue to its ground-covering potential.
At least it does when you consider the Audi's terrific grip and handling, tireless brakes and great refinement.
But when it comes down to it, the V8 is more a car for drivers than passengers.
Its chassis is almost too good.
Price: £40,333 0–60mph: 9.0secs 30–70mph: 7.7secs 30–50 in 4th: 3.2secs Top speed: 144mph Overall mpg: 15.3
RANGE ROVER 3.9 SE
Twenty years old, the Range Rover is still the only serious off-roader that makes a convincing alternative to a luxury saloon.
The move to 3.9 litres means more power, a better spread of torque and a more sympathetic match for the ZF four-speed automatic transmission.
Equally impressive is the standard-fit (on the SE) Wabco anti-lock brakes, which provide superb, progressive braking.
With permanent four-wheel drive and fairly compliant long-travel suspension, handling is tremendously secure and predictable.
Ride quality benefits from the set-up, too, possessing the sort of bump absorption and suppleness rarely experienced outside a luxury saloon — no other off-roader comes close.
The SE is well equipped, roomy and comfortable — worth every penny.
Price: £31,949 0–60mph: 11.3secs 30–70mph: 11.5secs 30–50 in 4th: 5.2secs Top speed: 108mph Overall mpg: 14.6
LEXUS LS 400
Lexus by Toyota, that is.
This is the Japanese giant's exhaustively researched and meticulously executed ‘best shot’ at luxury saloon design — a car which seeks to be the best, and very nearly succeeds.
Put bluntly, the Lexus has the smoothest and most refined drivetrain in existence.
The rear-drive V8 is quick, with a top speed of 147mph and 0–60mph acceleration of 8.3secs.
It has tremendous grip, failsafe handling and a ride of exceptional quality.
Its cabin is roomy and well-planned and full of equipment.
Whichever way you cut it, the Lexus seems only one step away from world domination.
The only let-downs are cabin styling which looks as if it was lifted directly from the Corolla and an overall lack of identity.
But then you don't build character overnight.
Price: £34,250 0–60mph: 8.3secs 30–70mph: 7.1secs 30–50 in 4th: n/a Top Speed: 147mph Overall MPG: 19.7
MERCEDES-BENZ 420SE
All right, it's looking a little dated now; the steering wheel is absurdly large, even by Mercedes' standards, and someone else makes a smoother, quieter V8.
But the Merc 420Se, due to be replaced by the new S-class, can still take on all comers and hold its own.
Over-large steering wheel notwithstanding, its controls, instruments, heating and ventilation system, and driving position simply show how it should be done.
Its dynamics are exemplary, too.
While the top speed of 135mph is a little off the pace, the 0–60mph time of 7.6secs is well ahead.
Its 4.2-litre V8 is a little more vocal than some, but the noise it makes is more interesting.
nor can you poke holes in the handling or ride.
If the 420SE is this good, how good is its replacement going to be?
It must be giving BMW and Jaguar designers sleepless nights.
Price: £37,430 0–60mph: 7.6secs 30–70mph: 6.7secs 30–50 in 4th: 3.7secs Top Speed: 135mph Overall MPG: 18.4
FORMULA FLOP
For every great Formula 1 car there are as many that never rise above mediocre and a heroic handful for which even that aspiration is too high.
Shaun Campbell surveys the back of the grid for grand prix racing's biggest failures.
It's the end of life as we know it.
Arguable the strongest-ever candidate for the title of the world's least-successful Formula 1 car, the Life L190/1 with its radical W12 engine, has passed into the history books where it will be fortunate to make more than a footnote.
The Life didn't just fail, it failed spectacularly.
It didn't just fail to qualify, it failed to pre-qualify.
Most of the time it failed to make it out of the pit lane.
in Hungary it produced one of the performances, completing five laps in pre-qualifying, the best of which was 23.5secs slower than Thierry Boutsen's pole winning time.
The only surprising thing about the Life was the scale of its failure.
Nobody expected it to be competitive but it had been thought that any team serious enough to build and enter a grand prix car should be competent enough to make it last more than five consecutive laps.
Similar thoughts must have passed through the minds of spectators when the V16 BRM made its long-awaited race debut at Silverstone's International Trophy in August 1950.
Hopes and expectations were high; Britain was desperate for a car that could compete at the top level with Alfa Romeo and Ferrari, and BRM, with the backing of British industry, was the car to do it.
It didn't turn up for practice and so many questions were asked that the race organisers pinned a notice on the control room window saying: ‘We have NO news of the BRM.’
On race day, after all-night working at the factory, a solitary car turned up and the stewards gave special permission for driver Raymond Sommer to do three exploratory laps.
Then, in front of a crowd that included the Duke of Edinburgh, the transmission failed on the start-line.
As the mechanics wheeled it away, contemptuous spectators threw pennies at it.
Just about everybody drove the BRM at some stage, even Fangio.
But the supercharged 1.5-litre V16 engine was all wailing noise and no go.
Stirling Moss remarked that it had six gears but needed 16, from which you can gather that it was a bit on the peaky side.
Fifth place in the 1951 British Grand Prix, with Raymond Mays at the wheel, was the best the BRM ever achieved in a world championship event.
At the end of that year the formula changed and the V16's time had passed.
Memories of the 16-cylinder engine disaster must have faded at BRM by the mid '60s when the company embarked on another ambitious project.
The H16 engine was designed for the 3-litre formula that came into effect in 1966 and was developed from mating a pair of the 1.5-litre V8s that had been so successful in the preceding years.
The H16 was undeniably powerful and, like its '50s heir, made a glorious noise.
It was also heavy, complex and woefully unreliable.
It did manage one win, though, but that was in the back of Jim Clarke's Lotus 43.
BRM scrapped it at the end of 1967.
Throughout the '60s it seemed Lotus could do no wrong.
After a couple of unsuccessful front-engined designs in the late '50s, Colin Chapman turned out a series of fabulously successful cars that dominated the decade.
Until the Lotus 63, that is.
The 63 was one of a handful of four-wheel-drive cars that saw brief service in 1969 before they were parked in at the end of the blind alley into which their manufacturers had ventured.
The 63 made its debut at the Dutch Grand Prix, driven by John Miles, Lotus's regular drivers Graham Hill and Jochen Rindt refusing to have anything to do with it.
Miles qualified 12th (out of 13, grids were smaller then) and retired after two laps.
At the next race it was entrusted to Jo Bonnier, a likeable Swede who had won his one and only grand prix 10 years before.
Bonnier qualified 17th out of 18 — the only slower car being a 4wd Matra — and retired on lap 7.
In Germany the privilege of driving it was handed to Mario Andretti who crashed it on the first lap.
Rindt then crashed it in practice for the Canadian race and flatly refused to drive it again.
it made its last appearance at Watkins Glen — a reluctant Andretti again at the wheel — and failed to shine even in the wet conditions of practice.
it retired on the fourth lap.
Lotus had another go at four-wheel drive the following year, this time with gas turbine power The dramatically wedged-shaped 56B was a development of the car that had come within a whisker of tinning the 1968 Indy 500.
But there was a world of difference between the American ovals and the European road tracks, as the drivers soon discovered.
its dismal career ended with eighth place at Monza in 1971, Emerson Fittipaldi driving.
Lotus's next disaster came in 1974 with the Lotus 76, the car designed to replace the magnificent 72.
The 76 was a fascinating package of new ideas from the winkle-picker nose to the biplane rear wing and with an electro-hydraulic clutch in between which the driver operated by depressing a small button on the top of the gear lever.
It was meant to allow the driver the freedom to use his left foot for braking but the system was taken off the car at the end of the first practice session in its first race, the South African Grand Prix.
Drivers Ronnie Peterson and Jacky Ickx weren't convinced by the car's handling characteristics, so unconvinced they collided at the first corner.
By mid-season Lotus had given up and gone back to the 72.
The ground-effects revolution, pioneered by Chapman with the Lotus 78 and 79 designs, produced its own family of flops.
Mario Andretti, who won the 1978 world championship with the 79, boasted that the new car, the 80, would make his former charge look like a double-decker bus.
As Harvey Postlethwaite, now Tyrrell's chief designer, remarked at the time: ‘If you're slightly out in your calculations, then you're completely wrong.’
Lotus was slightly out and the 80 was an unmitigated disaster.
McLaren jumped on the ground-effects bandwagon with the M28, reasoning that the bigger the ground-effects area, the better the car would be.
After just three races the team gave up and started to work on something smaller and lighter.
Arrows produced the A2 — a weird-looking device which was promptly tagged ‘the doodlebug’.
It nosed dived into oblivion.
Ferrari profited from these ground-effects catastrophes with a relatively conventional car, the 312T4 that gave Jody Scheckter the 1979 world championship.
Its replacement, the similar-looking 312T5, was not so fortunate.
Villeneuve and Scheckter managed to score just eight points between them during the 1980 season and the reigning world champion failed even to qualify for one race.
It was the end of the flat-12 Ferrari engine and the end of Scheckter's driving career.
But Ferrari has always blown hot and cold.
In 1961 the shark-nose 156 was almost unbeatable; in 1952 it was almost undrivable.
A huge row in the Modena camp resulted in half the team — including drivers Phil Hill and Giancarlo Baghetti — walking out and forming ATS (Automobili Turismo e Sport).
Designed by Carlo Chiti, later to build some explosively temperamental F1 engines for Alfa Romeo, the ATS cars made their debut at the 1963 Belgian Grand Prix.
They qualified 17th and 20th and were both out of the race within 15 laps.
The same thing happened in Holland and ATS gave the next three races a miss to try to fix the problems.
At Monza Phil Hill finished seventh, seven laps behind the winner.
And that was the highlight.
Most motor racing fans remember the March 721X, which the ambitious young team was confident would change the face of F1.
It was instrumental in bringing the young Niki Lauda into the public eye when he dismissed it as rubbish after a handful of laps.
Lauda had it right, March had it entirely wrong.
But who remembers the Shannon-Climax?
Its one and only race was 1966 British Grand Prix where Trevor Taylor lined it up on 18th place on the grid and retired during the very first lap.
Perhaps the chaps at Life shouldn't despair.
If Lotus, Ferrari, McLaren and Brabham (remember the carpet-slipper BT55?
Gordon Murray certainly wishes he didn't) can produce flops, then there's no reason in the world why they shouldn't.
Left: the Life L190/1, also known as the Life DNPQ.
Slightly less competitive than a Hillman Hunter and a good deal less reliable it has yet to race.
A switch to Judd V8 power has not improved it
From second top to bottom: a quartet of flops from Lotus.
4wd Lotus 63 of 1969 — an unmitigated disaster.
Gas turbine 56B with Jumbo jet handling.
Type 76 failed to replaced 72. 80 flattered to deceive
Top and above left: V16 BRM was the victim of too hopeful publicity.
It looked and sounded great but rarely ran long enough to satisfy a wide variety of drivers.
H16 BRM (above) was too heavy and complex
Right: 4wd Matra MS84 defied even Jackie Stewart's ability to make it competitive.
Below: Ferrari 312T5 looked spectacular in the hands of Villeneuve and Scheckter but the other cars were quicker without the histrionics
Above: Arrows A2 ‘doodlebug’ was one of 1979's great ground-effects disasters.
It wasn't the only one.
Right: John Watson struggled manfully with oversized M28 McLaren but its career was shortlived
Right: Shannon-Cimax of 1966, Trevor Taylor driving, had a race career of one lap.
Below right: Brabham BT55 used lie-flat BMW turbo and was knee-high to a grasshopper, but was never half as fast as it looked
Right and above: March 721X was short, squat, dumpy and painfully slow.
Below right: ATS of 1963 was born out of a Ferrari breakaway group but only managed to finish one race
GREAT BRITISH SPORTS CARS
MASTERS OF THE UNIVERSE
The he-man was spoilt for sports car choice in the mid '60s but when it came to the crunch he would probably have gone for either the Austin Healey or the AC Cobra.
Brian Laban dons his chest wig and flexes the huge muscles of Britain's ultimate sports cars
In 1954 Carroll Shelby and Donald Healey went record breaking together at Bonneville and set a string of records with various versions of Healey's 100 and 100S sports cars.
In 1955 Shelby raced a works Austin-Healey in the Carrera Panamericana — and came close to assuming the title of the late Carroll Shelby when a huge accident destroyed his car and put him out of circulation for several months.
Shelby soon went back to racing, of course, and more than any other American driver up to that date he bridged the gap between European and American racing cultures.
His greatest achievement was winning at Le Mans for Aston Martin in 1959, but his racing career was ended soon afterwards by a recurrence of childhood heart problems.
With or without heart trouble, Shelby wasn't a man to settle for a dull life.
Having given up racing, he kept himself in the thick of things through his Goodyear racing-tyre distributorship and by opening a racing school at Riverside.
He also found time to pursue another ambition, to build a world-beating US sports car to ‘whip Ferrari's ass’.
Shelby didn't like Ferrari; like plenty of others before and after, he had experienced at first hand Enzo Ferrari's withering contempt for lesser mortals.
He wasn't even the first to tell Ferrari he'd be back one day with a car to beat him, but the laconic Texan did have a more-than-usually colourful way of putting it.
In the end he did it too, when he won the 1965 manufacturer's championship for GT cars with his Shelby Daytona coupes.
The Daytona was a version of Shelby's sports car dream.
Ferrari aside, he did love European sports cars.
His first ever race was in an MG-based special; he'd also raced Jaguars and Astons, Ferraris and Maseratis — and Healeys.
A large chunk of his early career was spent trying to tame a series of fearsome Cadillac-powered Allards, and his own sports car idea basically revolved around putting chap but ample US V8 power into a light and well-mannered European chassis.
In 1961 he finally pulled a deal together with the Ford Motor Co and AC Cars Ltd, and early in 1962 the Cobra was born.
Its engine was American, its assembly was completed in America, it wouldn't have happened without Shelby's American dream, but underneath it all the Shelby AC Cobra was a British a sports car as you could wish to see.
The AC contact wasn't Shelby's first; he'd been hawking his sports car plans around since the late '50s and among the people he'd contacted with a view to building his hybrid had been his good friend Donald Healey.
What's more, Healey himself would have loved to build Shelby's car but the stultifyingly conservative BMC management that was Healey's patron just didn't want to know.
I could have stayed an interesting union, but the Healey stayed a Healey and the Cobra was an AC.
In many ways they have much in common.
They're both conventional, old school sports cars with plenty of power up front, not much in the middle and drive to the back.
They're both from a generation that used separate chassis and bodies; the Healey has a boxed cruciform frame and steel and aluminium body, the Cobra an even simpler tubular ladder and that stunningly beautiful all-aluminium shell.
The Healey has independent suspension at the front, by coil springs, wishbones, and old-fashioned lever-arm dampers, and a non-independent live-axle at the back, with half-elliptic springs and a Panhard rod.
The Cobra is independent all round with lower wishbones, top links formed by transverse leaf springs and telescopic dampers.
They're both muscle cars.
The six-cylinder Healey was always known as one of the bigger-engined he-man British sports cars of its generation; the Cobra, with its lightweight, cast-iron ‘small-block’ Ford V8, the classic example of the adage ‘there's no substitute for cubic inches.’
In a way they were both already dinosaurs by the mid '60s, as legislation began to put more emphasis on efficiency and sophistication than on simplicity and brute force.
The Cobra had only been around since 1962, but the Ace, on which it was based, dated back to 1953, when it had been launched at Earls Court.
That was the same year in which the first of the classic Austin-Healey line, the four cylinder 100–4 went into production, having been adopted by Austin from a Healey design shown at the previous year's show.
By 1964, when John Chatham's pleasingly original example tested here was built, the ‘big’ Healey had reached 3000 MkIII designation, with 2012cc in-line six-cylinder BMCC series power; in early 1965, the ‘small’Cobra — like John Atkins' beautifully prepared and much-raced JA11 — had a 289cu ins (4.7-litre) Ford V8 (in place of the 260 with which the car was launched) and the original worm-and-sector.
But it still had transverse-leaf springing.
The ‘mass-produced’ Healey wasn't exactly a limo, but it was a bit bigger on creature comforts than the steadfastly spartan, hand-built Cobra.
In fact the 3000 MkIII had gone the way of many a sports car in its dotage and started to take on a softer aspect.
In June 1964,The Autocar 's testers remarked, ‘In its appointments the Austin-Healey 3000 MkIII is now more or a touring car than a sports car.
The new panel design and the trim are attractive, almost luxurious…
The ‘traditional’ British love of wood has extended to this Healey and the dashboard has walnut veneer on its two outer panels…
There are spaces in the console for a radio and loudspeaker…and a non-locking glovebox on the transmission tunnel, with a padded top to form an armrest for driver or passenger.
two small seats for children are fitted in the back, and an adult, sitting sideways, could be packed in for short trips…
Now that winding windows are fitted and a hardtop is offered, BMC ought to provide locks for the doors…’
In that final respect, the Healey was like the Cobra, but the Cobra didn't even have external door handles, just simple pulls inside which you reach in to open.
There was no space for two small children or one transversely-mounted adult, not a trace of walnut, and if you wanted to listen to a radio in a Cobra you'd have needed speakers that wouldn't have disgraced a heavy-metal band.
In November 1965 we accepted the spartan layout with good grace: ‘Climbing into the cockpit, one recalls vivid memories of the old Ace, and very little seems changed.
There is rather less footroom because of the wider transmission tunnel, with nowhere to rest the left foot, and one is faced by a very full instrument panel.’
We also noted that ‘several other aspects of the Cobra seem dated and rather crude by today's standards…
Plastic side-screens form part of the weather protection, with the rear half sliding forwards for ventilation.
The hood is a fairly flimsy affair which does not look particularly rainproof.’
If the Healey was better appointed, it has perhaps dated more.
A wooden dash, manual window winder and plenty of chrome trim look pretty quaint now, and there's no missing the period feel.
Even in 1964 we commented, ‘For as long as many of us care to remember there has been a big Healey in the price lists.
The car has been through several variations of engine size, but now like an ageing but still beautiful dowager, repeated facelifts can no longer wholly hide the ravages of time and progress.’
The Cobra on the other hand is almost timeless, not just because of its uncluttered and stunningly beautiful looks, but also because there really isn't enough to date — just minimum trim, two leather-covered bucket seats, soft door pockets and a dashboard full of instruments.
It allows a relatively modern driving position with straighter arms than the slightly foreshortened and big-wheeled Healey, but the stubby gear lever and handbrake lever down on the central tunnel are very similar car to car.
There's nothing daunting about the Healey.
It's comfortable, if a bit cramped, and this final model (which survived until 1967) was the most refined of the lot but also the most powerful and the fastest.
It's an interesting mix of gentility and potency.
We started our 1964 test with the words: ‘Sun-capped Dolomites and the distant roar and squeal of one of the works rally cars scrambling its way up the Gavia Pass — this is perhaps the image that some people have of the big Austin-Healey at work.
But there is a world of difference between those frequent winners, the former spartan works rally cars, and the over-the-counter product of today.’
True, but the 1964 road car was no sluggard.
With bigger carbs and a new camshaft, power improved from 137bhp at 4750rpm to 148bhp at 5250rpm, and torque from 158 to 165lb ft at 3500rpm.
It was only a cast-iron lump with pushrod valvegear, of course, and with no pretensions to be anything more exotic; even in 1964 we observed that ‘although this comparatively unsophisticated six-cylinder engine must now be very near the end of its development, it seems to have gained in flexibility and is virtually free from any temperament.’
That's the secret; the big Healey is just an uncomplicated, user-friendly car with little cleverness but lots of heart.
It's easy to drive, quick enough to be fun, with the reassurance of solid, almost farmyard engineering under the skin to remove any worries about making it work for a living.
Its six isn't a BMW six — not smooth and eager, but more stolid and insistent, bigger on torque than on power and with no special desire to rev more than it has to.
In 1964 we reported: ‘The big Healey's take-off from standstill is impressive.
Without tyre squeal or wheelspin, it reached 30mph in 3.4, 40 in 4.8, 60 in 9.8 and 100 in 25.7secs.
At maximum revs, 5250rpm in this case, the combined noise of the engine, cooling fan, unsilenced carburettor intakes and exhaust reaches almost Grand Prix levels and on the maximum speed runs the scream of wind round the windows and hood adds to the din.’
We didn't say, but we might well have thought, that that was what a sports car ought to be.
Then, as now, we had a car fitted with the optional Laycock overdrive, operating on third and top; then as now it emphasised the low-speed/high-gear flexibility but did show up a big gap between second and third — a gap of over 30mph in maxima.
The gearchange is short and easy, but not very quick, and the overdrive is a handy second string.
Our top speed was recorded in overdrive top, at 121mph — 10mph more than in direct top.
That's still a fair maximum for this car, and even with a lot of miles under its belt since it had any major attention (and a tendency to hang-up slightly in second gear) it will still pull 12.2secs to 60mph.
Its handling and ride are decidedly ‘period’, but ultra-safe and bags of fun.
They're justification for the ‘he-man’ tag, with heavy everything at low speeds and not much more than a token lightening up as you press on harder, but not so heavy as to wipe out the sports car's essential touch of delicacy.
The big mass up front guarantees initial understeer and the ample power to the back promises the balancing availability of power oversteer. it's very chuckable, but the harsh ride makes it sensitive to bumps and changes of surface in mid bend, and you have to be quick with the wheel-twirling to keep up on slippery surfaces.
Disc and drum brakes give good stopping power considering the car weighs over 2600lb at the kerb.
A Cobra is a bit different.
Any abilities as a road car are largely coincidental to its abilities as a racer.
Back in the early '60s, that's how Shelby contrived it, and although the majority of Cobras were road cars, that doesn't alter the fact that they're all racers under the skin.
Make no mistake, a Cobra, even a ‘small’ Cobra and even at 26 years old, is still awesome.
Beneath the graceful, almost sensual lines is a fearsome, sledgehammer power that has been described as ‘just this side of reality.’
The opening paragraph of The Autocar 's November 1965 test of a privately owned car (to much the same spec as our example) read: ‘Few readers indeed will get this far before turning to the data page which follows, for the name of AC Cobra is synonymous with performance.
There they will have seen the steepest acceleration graph we have ever plotted, with it 0–100mph time of only 14secs and an elapsed time for the standing quarter-mile of 13.9secs.’
We reported 0–60mph in 5.5secs, and 0–120 in only 23.2secs.
Even more astonishing were the intermediate figures: ‘It is important to realise just how phenomenally fast these are.
First gear, for example, gives over 60mph without exceeding 6000rpm, and around the peak of the torque curve a 20mph increase takes less than 2secs.
Corresponding times for the same band in second take only 0.5secs or so more, and even by using third they are barely lengthened by 1sec.
For all practical purposes in traffic it does not matter which gear is engaged and there is never any lack of overtaking power.’
Our third gear figures in 1965 included 30–50, 40–60 and 50–70 each in 3.4secs; even in top the same increments were despatched in between 4.1 and 4.3secs; 80–100mph and 90–110mph occupied 4.5 secs and 6.8secs in third, or 5.4 and 6.1 in top, underlining the Cobra's staggering flexibility.
They were remarkable figures then, but almost 25 years on we beat them fairly handsomely, in a car which, although in a pretty healthy stage of tune (probably around 350bhp), has nothing that any Cobra owner couldn't have bought over the counter, and which is still perfectly  useable on the road in small doses.
Well, for once a 25-year-old test with the fastest figures this magazine had ever produced at the time seems positively understated when you come face to face with the reality.
JA II impresses first with how tiny it looks for a car with such a monstrous reputation, second for the sheer physical intensity of the power when the Ford V8 crashes into life.
This isn't the velvet-glove power of a Ferrari or a Lamborghini, not even the more base power of a V8 such as Aston make, it is the bad-boy rumble of the hot-rodder's art — lots in, lots out, speed costs money, how fast do you want to go?
The tickover burbles and barks, but blip the throttle and the whole car twists with the torque reaction and the birds fly out of the trees.
It revs like a turbine and sounds like a locomotive.
it turns the skin on your arms to gooseflesh.
At Millbrook, JA 11 recorded 5.2secs to 60mph, 11.5 to 100mph and only 17.4 to two miles a minute.
The 30–60 time in third was just adrift of 1965 at 3.6secs, but the next three increments, right up to 60–80, each required only 3.3secs.
It isn't just the figures, it's the intensity, the uncomplicated brutality of it all.
At any speed, in any gear on the mile straight there is enough power to bury you hard into the thin bucket seats; every quick-fire gearchange though the massively solid Borg-Warner 'box kicks at the back end.
Our hard-chasing Mercedes 300 24v photographic car was never more than a rapidly disappearing spot in the Cobra's mirror.
We are talking major league performance here, even in 1990; in 1965 nothing road legal would even look at a Cobra in a straight line.
And don't believe all you think you've heard about a Cobra being undrivable in anything but a straight line either.
It demands respect, and it demands commitment, but it does the job amazingly well for a car on transverse cart springs and a chassis that's based on what looks no more than two parallel lengths of drainpipe.
It may be a cliché, but the compactness, the lack of weight, abundance and responsiveness of power, massively powerful brakes and rigidity of suspension all add up to a car that feels very much like a big kart.
In 1965 we described the suspension as ‘very firm, with a distinctly Vintage harshness and lots of jolts and jars.
Rough patches of road taken slowly caused parts of the body structure to creak and groan.
There is no scuttle shake nor visible signs of flexing anywhere, however, and the tubular chassis is tremendously rigid.’
After 25 years of hard use, JA 11 still has little or no creaking nor scuttle shaking on any reasonable surface and it is both light and delightfully precise.
Much as we found originally, it handles quite neutrally at modest speeds, understeers progressively beyond that, but always has the power to boot the tail away.
lifting off suddenly in mid-bend isn't such a good idea either — in short you just have to be aware all the time of how much power you have in so little car.
In fact you're unlikely to forget it.
Where the Healey is a fairly civilised blend of high-speed tourer and sporting pedigree, comfortable enough for long-distance continental holidays as well as for Sunday afternoon thrashes through the countryside, the Cobra is just a beast.
It assaults you with raw power, deafens you with engine and wind noise, roasts you in the stark cockpit.
Our two original conclusions ran: ‘Despite some dated features, the big Healey is still terrific fun to drive.
Tractable, capable of an immense amount of hard work with reasonable economy, it will have its devotees long after production has ceased.’
And of the Cobra, ‘There can be no denying that the Cobra is an extremely exciting car to drive, or even passenger in.
The acceleration is sensational and very similar to taking off in a piston-engined aircraft with open cockpit.
In much the same way, nearly all creature comforts must be sacrificed for performance — a condition which is worth it most of the time, but very occasionally not.
It is a fine-weather car for clear skies, open roads and a life away from it all.
Part of its sorcery lies in its ability to instil the same exhilaration from a short run up the road on a Sunday morning, but most of it comes from that aggressive thrust of power that is always more than enough for any driving situation.’
We were absolutely right in both cases.
Long live the sports car.
They don't build them like this any more — Healey (top), Cobra (above)
Healey cabin dominated by large steering wheel
Cobra interior starkly simple although seats were leather trimmed
No doubt about rev limit from clear Healey instrumentation
Cobra driver is faced with impressive array of instruments
2.9 litre Healey produced 148bhp at 5250rpm and 165lb ft at 3500rpm
By 1964 Healey was at the end of its development, but still loved
4.7litre Ford V8 gave AC Cobra stunning performance
AC Badge now Ford-owned, but where's the true successor
WHAT PRICE PERFORMANCE?
The performance-per-pound ratio was probably higher in the '60s than at any other time
If you can remember the start of BBC2, Prince Edward being born, the first issue of The Sun , and Harold Wilson becoming Prime Minister, you can remember 1964.
Martin Luther King won the Nobel Peace Prize and Nelson Mandela was jailed for life; Winston Churchill was 90 but the only fighting on the beaches was between the Mods and Rockers.
It was also the year in which the train robbers were sentenced and France and England agreed to the principle of a Channel Tunnel.
A 1964 pound would be worth £8.96 today, so the £1228.46 for our Austin-Healey (including overdrive, wire wheels, heater, telescopic steering column and seat belts) equates to £11,006.
That's close to the bargain-basement Reliant Scimitar 1400 at £10,950, less then the next contender, the £12,185 Caterham 1.6 GT, and handsomely undercutting any other mainstream sports car.
The working man's 47.7 hours a week in 1964 should have earned him £18.11 (say £162 a week now), but MPs were about to become markedly better off than that as Mr Wilson increased their salaries from £1750 to £3250 per annum(£29,120).
Inflation was only 4.8 per cent, but the pound was in serious trouble at the end of the year, as the bank rate went from 6 per cent to 7 per cent — described as ‘crisis level’.
Budget increases nudged a pint of beer up to 10½p and 20 cigarettes to 24p.
A year later, in the year of the Beeching Report on the railways and the abolition of the death penalty in Britain, the pound had shifted to the equivalent of £8.56 today, so £2732.24 for a 289 Cobra means £23,388 in 1990.
Even forgetting the fact that the Cobra was the fastest accelerating car you could buy at the time, that only puts it between the £21,620 Elan SE and the entry level £26,400 Excel SE, close to the £22,363 Morgan plus eight and even closer to the £23,526 Toyota Supra Turbo.
You might have had a slightly harder time finding the money in 1965 than in 1964, though.
Wages edged up to an average of £19.58, and the bank rate came down to 6 per cent, but mortgages went up from 6 to 6&1/4%.
A house that cost £5500 to build typically cost a council tenant £3.18 a week, a mortgage payer £6.37 a week and someone with a private landlord £10.09 a week.
Car tax went from £15 to £17.50.
1964 was the year of the Tokyo Olympics, where Abebe Bikila set a world record for the marathon in 2hrs 12mins 11.2secs and Ken Matthews of Great Britain won the 20km walk in 1hr 29mins 34.0secs.
Donald Campbell raised both land and water speed marks during 1964, the former to 403.1mph in July and the latter to 276.3mph on New Years Eve.
By October, Art Arfons had taken the land speed mark (not wheel-driven but official) to 544.1mph.
Faster still was the air-speed record of 1666mph set by Col Mosolov of the USSR in 1962, the rocket-powered X-15's speed of 4104mph in the same year, and Jacqueline Cochran's 1964 women's air speed record of 1429mph in a Lockhead Starfighter.
By the end of 1965, the land mark was over 600mph — at 600.6mph by Craig Breedlove, and in May Col Stephens of the USA had raised the air speed record to 2070mph.
At the other end of the scale a 12-year-old South African girl, Karen Muir, gave us a new 110m backstroke swimming record in 68.7secs — and Britain's motorways were given a 70mph ‘experimental’ speed limit.
Record-breaking, highly modified Healey at Bonneville, 1954
Craig Breedlove broke 600mph with Spirit of America in 1965
X-15 rocket-powered aircraft, launched from Boeing B-51 ‘mother ship’ screams through the sky on its way to a top speed of 4104mph
SOUL MATES
What would Healey and Cobra owners be driving today?
By the mid '60s the heyday of the hairy-chested open sports car was coming to an end, surviving only on an uneasy and temporary truce with the law-makers and the environmentalist lobby.
The big Healey was on its way out through simple old age and the ‘small’ Cobra was being superseded by the even more brutal 427 as Selby fought aerodynamic mediocrity with good old-fashioned cubic inches.
Of the 655 ‘leaf-spring’ Cobras built (including the 75 original 260s), only 61 were officially listed as being for European consumption, and of course not even all of those were for Britain.
Of the rest, over 500 are listed as road cars, so the thought of the Cobra purely as a racer is something of a myth.
it existed, in reality, because Ford needed something special to tempt people into their showrooms and Shelby was in the right place at the right time to provide it.
Equally, not all the big Healeys were Alpine Rally competitors or howling club racers, and British as the car was, the majority of the 17,700 or so MkIIIs that completed the series also went to the US, where the sun shone a bit more often.
Unfortunately, it was the same reliance on that market that also killed it, as BMC realised it couldn't economically meet the new US emissions and safety requirements of the late '60s.
That's why sports cars went through such doldrums for so many years too, and shy we think of the sudden plethora of ‘traditional’ small sports cars as a sports car ‘revival’.
It is, but it doesn't include too many cars on the hue of the Healey and the Cobra.
Big and simple are the essence, not big and luxurious or small and sophisticated, which counts out everything from Aston Martin Volante to Lotus's Elan.
They were a lot of car for the money, too, remember, with character and a few of the rough edges that are inevitable with a true specialist car.
Both take some following, and the Cobra in particular will probably never be repeated — not even with the Viper, which seems to be losing its fangs even before it's born.
If you want the same philosophy, stay in Britain and do your shopping for both cars in the same place, in Blackpool.
TVR's £17,699 2.9-litre S3 is a fine reminder of the big Healey philosophy and the new 3.9-litre Griffith, if it matches its claimed 148mph and 0–60 in 4.9seconds, could be a fine poor-man's Cobra.
Big Healey made its reputation as a rally car — here shown on 1963 Alpine rally — but most cars were sold to the US
TVR S3: 2.9-litre Ford V6 engine gives Healey-type affordable appeal
TVR Griffith: untested but claimed 0–60 in 4.9secs very Cobra-like
TEST EXTRA
Mercedes-Benz 300SL-24 5-speed auto
This SL comes with the world's first five-speed automatic gearbox but fails to live up to its high price and long waiting list
Price £63,390 Top Speed 134mph 0–60 8.6secs MPG 19.2
For Fine ride/handling balance, ergonomics, hood design Against Cramped interior, unexciting performance, steering, price 
Only Mercedes-Benz could charge £50,800 for a car that is comprehensively outperformed by a Vauxhall Calibra 2.0i 16v, costing £33,550 less, and still call it a sports car.
Truth is, of course, the 300SL-24 is much more tourer than sports car.
For although its twin-cam, straight-six 2960cc engine develops an impressive 231bhp at 6300rpm and 201lb ft of torque at 4600rpm, it has 3954lb of car to propel, giving it a power to weight ration of 129bhp/ton — unremarkable even by hot-hatch standards.
A Peugeot 205GTi 1.9, for instance, manages 143bhp/ton.
Every car that can conceivably pose as opposition to the Mercedes is faster.
And most are cheaper.
These include the 
Part of the £11,000 worth of extras Mercedes specified for the test car was the world's first production five-speed automatic gearbox, costing a surprisingly reasonable £685.35.
Details of how it works can be found in the technical focus, but suffice to say the overall gearing remains the same as the four-speed ‘box, with direct drive on fourth.
The extra ratio is geared to give a whopping 28.9mph/1000rpm, which allows a lazy 2770rpm at 80mpg.
In fact it won't even pull its red line in fourth, the 134mph maximum occurring a whisker under the 6300rpm power peak.
In fifth it's no faster, and given that Mercedes reckons it should reach 143mph, this is a disappointing result.
But you could argue that an extra 9mph on top speed is irrelevant on our increasingly crowded roads and that acceleration is what matters.
And here the SL fails to match its maker's claim of 8.3secs for the 0–60 dash, managing a consistent 8.6secs instead.
Still, for an automatic car weighing nigh on two tons in test trim, that's not bad.
Better still is the way it sweeps through the quarter-mile in 17.7secs and reaches 100mph in 22.8secs.
Impressive for its weight and power, if not for its price.
Thankfully, the engine and gearbox make a great double act.
Exceptionally smooth, the 24-valve six is near silent at low revs, yet snarls convincingly if gunned.
This creates a feeling of urgency that is cultivated by the gearbox, which has ratios close enough to support a seamless aural attack all the way from standstill until fifth is selected at something over 130mph.
Which is just as well, for the engine is happiest on full throttle.
At gentler velocities it has a distinct, almost lethargic ‘off cam’ feel to its power delivery and you usually find yourself kicking down a ratio to access proper power.
This, unfortunately, shows up the flaw in an otherwise excellent gearbox.
Regardless of whether you select economy, which lets you kick down one gear, or sport, which selects as low a gear as possible on request, there is always a marked hesitation before the lower cog is engaged.
This stands out in stark contrast to the four-speed 'box in the 500SL we tested last December.
That changed gear the split second you required it.
In less frenetic driving, though, the 300SL-24's gearbox rarely gets it wrong.
Part-throttle upshifts can be detected on the revcounter, but rarely from any jerk in the driveline.
Even if you are accelerating solidly through the gears, it waits until the needle has kissed the red line before a slick and quick upchange allows the surge to continue unabated.
Apart from the obvious advantage of quieter touring brought by the fifth ratio, the five-speed 'box also seems to have done the SL's fuel consumption no small favour.
Overall its exclusively lead-free diet was consumed at the rate of 10.2mpg, even with a thirsty catalyst as standard.
While that may not sound brilliant for the performance, it should be borne in mind that the 300E-24 saloon, weighing the best part of 500lb less and with a four-speed automatic 'box, achieved 18.8mpg while on test.
Indeed, the SL's overall economy would have been better still had it not taken an unusually dim view of performance testing, its consumption plunging to just 14.4mpg while at Millbrook.
Any owner could reasonably expect over 20mpg all the time, with the touring consumption target of 23.1mpg well within reach.
At that rate it should manage over 400 miles between petrol stations.
It's hard to believe that a car as heavy as the SL can generate such massive grip, yet retain an admirably accomplished ride.
Part of the credit must go to the 225/55 Dunlops, the remainder to the multi-link rear suspension.
On dry roads the most any sane drive will usually experience is lateral g-forces as the SL corners.
Even in the wet, it was almost impossible to get the test car's tail moving as it was fitted with Mercedes' Anti-Skid Control (German acronym ASR), which works like anti-lock brakes but in reverse.
If a wheel starts to spin, the brake attached to it squeezes just enough to keep it in check while the engine throttles back.
This does not produce the same effects as lifting the accelerator altogether; it just maintains a balanced throttle.
On the hole, ASR works very well and will undoubtedly help keep SLs out of the panel beaters.
However, it does also remove any chance of adjusting your line with the accelerator, causing artificially strong understeer that builds up as soon as the ASR exclamation mark lights up in the speedometer.
That's a shame, for it is obvious, just from how eagerly it will push its tail out if you cut the power, that the chassis has a rare agility.
Unfortunately, as we found with the 500SL, the steering fails to meet the standards set by the rest of the chassis.
Although it is direct, there is not enough feel or weight to give a proper impression of how much grip is left.
Mercedes has achieved sports-car adhesion with a comfort many luxury saloon makers would envy.
Regardless of road conditions, the SL always feels firm, but thanks to excellent damping, it can still dismiss ridges and pot holes with consummate ease.
There is not the faintest trace of float or wallow over the fastest crests or in the steepest dips; the body just maintains constant ride height throughout giving a feeling of invincible security.
However, we would advise that the £3123 worth of adaptive damping which arrived with the test car has little useful effect.
The impression of protection given by the chassis is backed up by tireless brakes, which despite the huge weight needed to be slowed, dealt with our fade test with ease.
One tester described the SL's cabin as ‘implausibly close to perfection’, and for drivers under six foot, that is exactly right.
The seats, which won a major design award before the SL even went on sale, appear to be rather flat, but support your back and thighs well.
But finding an ideal seat position is impossible if you are much over six foot, as you will never be able to get the front seat back far enough.
In a Mercedes, a marque known for providing an almost absurd amount of legroom for its drivers, this is a bad fault.
Otherwise you are pampered like only a Mercedes driver can be.
Pitting the hood down is a joy to watch.
All you have to do is press and hold down a button.
In under half a minute of whirring and clicking, the hood has unlocked itself and been folded away in its casing behind the back seats.
Raising it is just as simple.
The hard-top even uses the same mechanisms and can be attached or removed in a similar time.
This, however, is a two-person operation as the roof is too heavy and cumbersome for one.
Even with the extra switches required to operate the options available on the SL, the ergonomics never seem cluttered or complicated.
Everything is where you'd like it to be and the instruments, in particular, cram a wealth of information to one well-packaged and easily read display.
There is no escaping, though that for a two-plus-two grand tourer, the SL is cramped.
Even drivers of average height will need the seat so far back as to make it impossible to see directly behind.
With the hood or hard-top in place, accessing the tiny rear compartment requires an undignified clamber through a small gap, which is hardly in keeping with the car's suave image.
With the hood down you can lower the windows and go in over the top, but even this is far from ideal.
In effect, the SL is a three-seater, but headroom is excellent.
High-speed, hood-down progress is only to be undertaken with all windows up as otherwise the wind whips round the side and into the cabin.
Do that and — if you can forgive the incessant roar from the tyres — progress is fairly fuss-free up to the legal limit.
If you go much faster than that it gets windy very quickly, although the heater can still turn the cabin into blast furnace.
With the hood up, it's not as quiet as you might expect even though the canopy is water and air-tight.
Only with the hard-top in place does it behave like a Mercedes is meant to.
To look at and to drive it, it could be a graceful new coupe.
Naturally you expect to find the highest quality construction in the world in a Mercedes, but the 500SL we tested had numerous faults that we thought ‘undermined Mercedes' quality image and appearance’.
We are happy to report no such troubles with the 300SL-24 which felt rock solid throughout the test.
Overall the impression given by the materials chosen for the cabin is pleasing without managing to be friendly.
You might expect air conditioning, leather seats and at least a stereo when you pay over £50,000 for a car, but not if it's a Mercedes you're buying.
Alloy wheels, anti-lock brakes, electrics for the hood, windows, mirrors and central locking are all standard, but you can spend many thousands on extras that ought to be included in the list price.
Our car cost in excess of £61,000.
The public's imagination has been captured by the SL.
Regardless of model, the waiting list is at least three years long.
In many ways it's worth the wait.
It remains faithful to the 36-year-old concept behind the SL, but takes it onto a higher plane altogether.
Yet we can not recommend the 300SL-24, even with it's clever gearbox.
The reason is that we have driven the 500SL, which in its most basic form, is actually fractionally cheaper than the fully loaded 300SL-24.
It also gets to 60mph in 5.9secs and is artificially restricted to 157mph.
It has a better gearbox, an engine that is simply in a different class and actually lives up to the promise made by its sleek shape.
For all its undoubted talents, chief of which are its chassis, cabin and controls, the 300SL-24 fails to do the same.
When the Jaguar XJ-S V12 Convertible is available now, for a saving of almost £10,000 over the 300SL-224's basic price, it's clear the 300SL-24 is too slow, too expensive and too far away.
Mercedes SL can be provoked into oversteer if you cut the power in a bend (above—but, with ASR traction control as fitted to test car, all that's really on offer is artificially strong understeer (right).
SL's cabin is superb (below right) with uncluttered ergonomics and clear display
The 24-valve 3-litre (left) has impressive 231bhp power and 201lb ft torque but is does have to propel nearly 4000lb of car.
Fortunately, it is smooth and well-matched to five-speed automatic gearbox (below), which has close ratios that allow revs to stay high and keep straight-six engine ‘on cam’
TECHNICAL FOCUS
The new five-speed automatic gearbox , designated ‘W5A030’ and developed for Mercedes' six-cylinder engines, is ingenious most of all for its simplicity.
The raison d'être for W5A030 in the first place was that Mercedes' transmission engineers prefer continuously variable transmission to anything else.
But at the moment, CVT technology extends only to low-torque applications.
The gearbox is a development of the existing four-speed unit used on six-cylinder engines.
An extra planetary gear set on the end, together with a new rear casing, provides the extra, overdriven ratio.
Fourth is direct drive.
Mercedes explains that the biggest problem in developing the five-speed unit is the necessity to reduce mechanical and hydraulic losses to a lower level than had been achieved previously.
one of the major problems engineers face is that the gearbox casing acts like a giant thermometer bowl, and as the oil heats up and expands, the level in the gearbox rises in a four-speed unit by 20 to 30mm.
The five-speed has a special chamber in the rear casing accessed by a valve which opens when the oil temperature reaches 90deg C. Up to 550cc of oil is bled off into the chamber, which means the increase in depth in the main casing is reduced to 15 to 20mm.
Additional components comprise an extra electro-hydraulic control valve to actuate fourth-to-fifth and fifth-to-fourth shifts and the extra gear set itself.
But at 80mm longer than the four-speed, overall length is still no greater than that of other makes of four-speed automatic transmissions, maintains Mercedes.
The total weight of 165.4lb is also equivalent to most four-speed 'boxes.
This transmission, which can handle up to 221lb ft torque, is definitely the shape of things to come at Mercedes, and in the next two years it is likely that all six-cylinder Mercedes cars will be equipped with it.
Market demand for it has been much higher than expected and there isn't the manufacturing capacity to build both four and five-speeds for the same application.
The V8, think the engineers, can live with the four-speed and, anyway, this gearbox wouldn't be strong enough.
But, in the mid '90s when Mercedes reviews its transmissions (in service since 1979), we might see a complete move across to five-speed automatics.
PASSING THE BUCKS
Chrysler says the Dodge Spirit R/T is the fastest saloon the US can offer, and next year it will be coming to Europe.
On paper it has the price, performance and specification to worry a car as good as the Vauxhall Carlton GSi 3000 24v.
On the Alpine passes, as Peter Robinson discovered, it's a different matter
It was only high in the European Alps, on the 7992ft Furka Pass, to the accompaniment of a frenzy of wheelspin, turbo lag, understeer and a violently pulsating brake pedal triggered by an anti-lock device working overtime, that the American challenge began to fade.
But then Detroit roads were never like this.
How could Chrysler's engineers have predicted ‘the fastest saloon built in North America’— the 1991 Dodge Spirit R/T — would be tested on such challenging roads, roads where demands upon brakes, traction, handling, engine performance and suspension control are paramount?
Instead of the expansive, though often rough, Michigan highways of Motown, US, we quickly, sometimes dramatically, threaded our way up a narrow zig-zagging ribbon of blacktop that would probe the credentials of any car, regardless of its origins.
We'd taken the swiftly accelerating Spirit away from the homespun drag races of Woodward Avenue, hoping Chrysler's hype on for the R/T was well founded.
Instead, we'd uncovered, one by one, the inherent flaws that tarnish Dodge's brave attempt at building a Euro-style sporting saloon.
Here, on demanding mountain roads, the yawning gaps between gear ratios made it difficult to keep the engine spinning above the ideal 4000rpm.
Misjudge a change point, drop much below 3500rpm and the engine felt flat, even sluggish, as it waited for the turbo to come on strong again.
here, the lack of adequate damping revealed itself in float and wallow, and excessive body roll that exposed serious defects in the seats.
Here, the front wheels scrabbled for grip, slithering across a hairpin as the turbo power overtook the capacity of the American Michelin tyres to transfer such substantial clout to the ground.
Here, the lack of refinement in the drive train, the sudden jerks and snatches from the engine, combined unhappily with all the car's other short-comings.
The Spirit was exciting to drive…but never for any of the right reasons.
And here, we began to wonder aloud if it wouldn't be preferable, in the long term interests of America's domestic car makers, to leave the planned invasion of Europe to MPVs, luxury cars and convertibles.
Given Chrysler's claims for the 1991 Dodge Spirit R/T — and the fact that the company is giving serious consideration to selling the R/T in six key European markets (Germany, Belgium, Holland, Switzerland, Austria and France) from late 1991 — we felt it only appropriate to test the Spirit against one of Europe's finest sporting saloons, on the kinds of roads such a car is expected to master.
Surely not too much to ask of a model that, by its makers' own assertion, is aimed at ‘performance and handling enthusiasts’.
Until we came to the Furka I'd been impressed by the Spirit R/T, surprised by the agility of its handling, the sensitivity and accuracy of its power-assisted rack-and-pinion steering, the breadth of the uninterrupted acceleration from its powerful turbocharged engine, the lightness of the controls and the quality of the gearchange.
Could it be, I mused, as I snuggled down into the Dodge's heavily bolstered bucket seat on the autostrada running north of Milan to Switzerland, that Detroit has finally built a competent, European-style sporting saloon?
A quick glance at the specifications that Detroit's idea of a '90s performance saloon has more in common with current European thinking than the muscle-bound 7-litre American V8's of the '60s and '70s.
That's a good start.
Front-drive, a 2.2-litre 16-valve in-line four developing an impressive 225bhp, four-wheel disc brakes with an optional anti-lock device and compact dimensions by usual US standards could easily be the routine outline for a French, Swedish, perhaps even German four-door performance saloon.
What better weapon to determine the Dodge's real prowess than Vauxhall's Carlton GSi 3000 24v — in left-hand-drive Opel-badged form — an instant favourite with Autocar & Motor 's road testers and a value-for-money benchmark among sporting saloons.
At around $18,265 (approx £10,000) the Spirit's 0–60mph time of 6.8secs and top speed of 143mph make it ‘one of the world's fastest production sedans’ according to Chrysler, and exceptional value in the US, where it is expected to compete against Ford's $22,000 (£12,000) Taurus SHO.
Prices change when cars cross the Atlantic and the Dodge is expected to cost around DM42,000–43,000 (£19,000) in Germany.
But that's more the price of a Cavalier 16v 4x4 than a Carlton 24v, so the Dodge still represents terrific value.
Heavily based on a slightly stretched platform from Chrysler's ubiquitous K-car, the Mexican-built Spirit R/T is a boxy four-door, elongated at either end so that it appears rather narrower than its 68.1ins width conveys.
Our test car, fresh from the US long-lead release, was finished in a monotonous, overwhelming red that extends to all but some chrome brightwork and black frames around the windows.
Cast alloy wheels and supplementary lights in a deep bumper can't hide the Spirit's pedestrian, upright styling origins, nor its bluff aerodynamics.
Chrysler went to GM-owned Lotus to help develop its first multi-valve engine, although it's based on an existing Chrysler four.
Lotus was responsible for the alloy cylinder head, pistons and intake and exhaust manifolds, while Chrysler engineers developed all other elements.
A conventional, water-cooled Garrett TB03 turbo helps generate more than 100bhp per litre — the highest specific output ever from a Chrysler production engine.
The 2.2-litre four produces 225bhp at 6000rpm and 210lb ft of torque at 4800rpm.
Chrysler claims a broad and flat torque curve between 2800 and 5000rpm, so it's a disappointment the engine doesn't drive in this manner.
A Getrag gearset for the five-speed manual 'box is fitted into the existing case, while suspension changes follow a predictable route with increased spring rates front and rear, firmer valving for the dampers and a large rear anti-roll bar.
Tyres are upgraded to American-made 205/60R15 Michelins.
Vauxhall's Carlton also follows the multi-valve route to transform the performance, but of course forsakes the turbo in favour of a large-capacity six-cylinder engine.
Despite the disparity in execution the result is surprisingly similar.
On paper, the Dodge has a 10 per cent power advantage, with maximum torque developed 800rpm lower in the rev range.
Yet it is the Vauxhall that feels more potent low down.
Both engines are entirely tractable but, for all the clever engineering dedicated to overcoming a four-valve engine's propensity to high revs, neither feels especially lively until the tacho needle hits 3500–4000rpm.
Both require frequent use of the gearbox if they are to live up to expectations.
Wind the Dodge right out to the 6500rpm red line — there's a cut-out at 6700rpm — and the engine stays on boost, the widely spaced gear ratios are disguised and acceleration is impressive enough, without ever feeling as energetic or gutsy as the Vauxhall's.
On paper the Spirit has a tiny advantage to 60mph — 6.8 versus 7.0secs — but the Vauxhall's performance is more accessible.
The Dodge is slightly ahead on fuel consumption — 22.2 compared with 18.9mpg — but it has a much smaller tank capacity.
Mid-region performance is strong and acceleration only begins to tail off above 120mph, but the Chrysler engine lacks ultimate finesse at high revs, becoming noisy and slightly strained, while the power delivery is too often spoiled by a hesitation or jerk after a sudden lift-off or application of power.
yet the gear change itself is quicker and lighter than the long throw, rubbery device that spoils the Vauxhall.
The Dodge's clutch is also smoother in action and far lighter.
Tall gearing means the Spirit is impressively quiet at legal speeds, the isolation of the cabin from road noise being outstanding by European standards.
Only wind noise above 80mph from the A-pillars and exterior mirrors intrudes on the solitude of motorway driving.
Our Vauxhall suffered from an annoying fifth gear whine on a trailing throttle but the engine's hard-edged yet effortless snarl as it wound out to the 6600rpm cut-out is a far more satisfying sound than the Chrysler four.
If the power-assisted rack-and-pinion steering seems excessively light at low speeds its directness, with a mere 2.5-turns lock to lock, makes you wonder whatever happened to the so-called ‘sneeze factor’(ie forgiving low gearing) that was once considered essential in American cars.
The Spirit's steering is sharp and super-sensitive, requiring no more than finger-tip control, in stark contrast to the Vauxhall that always feels meaty and firm, yet with a touch of on-centre slack.
The trade-off is a shortage of feel and increase in weight when driving quickly.
It's not until the front tyres are struggling for adhesion, and screaming in anguish as the nose slithers round, that the Dodge's steering imparts any sensation of what's happening down at road level.
Instead of the tiny inputs required in motorway driving and even on minor roads, extend the R/T and you quickly discover there's a rapid build up in understeer and loss of chassis composure, even before the road surface deteriorates.
Just as the Spirit loses its way the harder you drive, so the Carlton is elevated to a higher level.
Through a fast sweeping corner, taken, say, in third gear at 80mph, the Vauxhall is noticeably quicker by as much as 10mph.
Its handling is far more predictable and involving, partly at least because its rear-drive layout encourages the loading-up of the outside tyres.
The Dodge stays flat enough but only because the tyres aren't capable of generating the lateral forces of the Vauxhall.
The taut Vauxhall suspension translates to a ride that's always firm, whereas the Dodge's softer springs give a more supple if less controlled ride.
The same applies to the brakes.
In normal usage the Dodge stops acceptably, the spongy pedal and ‘grabbing’ only occurring under duress, while the Vauxhall's brakes feel mushy but are stronger and more consistent in their behaviour.
At least the Dodge gets a proper set of circular analogue instruments.
The Vauxhall (remember it's actually an Opel) suffers from ugly digital gauges that are often hard to interpret and a digital speedometer that only reads in even numbers.
The interiors of both reflect their mundane origins but the longer and higher Vauxhall has more comfortable seats and greater space.
Standard equipment on the Dodge includes air conditioning, cruise control and a four-speaker sound system, but the bulky plastic dashboard is garish by European standards.
It's hard to see Chrysler making serious inroads into the European sporting saloon market with the Dodge Spirit R/T.
Like so many American cars the Spirit is a seven-tenths machine.
Drive it in smooth roads at regulated speeds and it makes an earnest, even laudable attempt at portraying an enthusiast's machine.
All the right ingredients seem to be there: so it's easy enough to persuade yourself the sharp steering, smooth increase in turbo power in the mid-range, quick-shifting gear change and body-hugging seats imply something of a breakthrough by Detroit.
Sadly, such is not the case.
The Dodge's superficial abilities simply crumble as speeds rise and road conditions become more challenging.
Five hundred quick miles over the Alps in tandem with a thoroughbred rival proved just how far Chrysler has still to go to building an effective contender.
Carlton's handling improves with speed, and it's the quickest through bends.
24-valve straight-six is good for low-end potency; seats are better and interior more roomy than American's; digital facia is awful
Opel-badged Carlton GSi 3000 24v is clearly ahead of Spirit R/T on the Furka pass (main picture).
Carlton (left above) is a benchmark European sporting saloon.
Dodge (left) is unmistakably American in styling
Dodge corners very flat though composure is quickly lost.
Engine is powerful but suffers typical turbo lag problems; cabin is well-equipped but seats give insufficient support when cornering hard; garish dash is saved by decent instruments
HEROES
Peter Robinson
‘Leland claimed that 250 parts in his cars were made to tolerances of one-thousandth of an inch’
Henry Martyn Leland was a perfectionist, a white-bearded, bible-quoting genius who created two of America's finest cars — Cadillac and Lincoln — only to lose both empires and die bitter and disillusioned.
Leland's secret of success was bringing a gun-maker's insistence on accuracy and precision to the production of car components.
At the turn of the century, most car parts were built individually and items such as pistons and con-rods were fitted together with files and emery cloth.
While the results worked, it made replacements almost impossible.
Leland realised that precise work equated to a better product at a lower cost.
He'd worked for firearms makers Springfield and Samuel Colt before beginning his own company in 1890, and knew that identical parts could be made to a standard that meant they were interchangeable.
After Oldsmobile's factory burned down in 1901, Ransom E Olds was forced to turn to contractors for the assembly of his single cylinder engine, and gave Leland the opportunity to prove his theory.
Using nothing more than precision machining methods, and without any change to dimensions or specifications, small machine tool maker Leland and Faulconer increased engine output by 23 per cent.
The Cadillac Automobile Company was formed in 902 out of the remnants of one of Henry Ford's early attempts at building cars, and the company's backers turned to Leland for help.
Leland's firm made the engines, transmissions and steering gear and Cadillac went from building two cars in 1902 to producing 1895 in the year between March 1903 and March 1904.
On Christmas Eve, 1904, Leland took over management of the company and merged his business to create the Cadillac Motor Car Company.
Over the next seven years Cadillac built up a reputation as a quality car maker and, in 1906, released the four-cylinder Model L. At $5000, it was six times the price of the single-cylinder runabout and as well made as any car in the world.
Leland claimed that 250 parts in his cars were made to tolerances of one-thousandth of an inch.
Cadillac's UK importer was aware of Leland's achievement, and looking for a way to prove the car's craftsmanship.
At the time most car makers claimed their parts were interchangeable.
Cadillac knew otherwise and suggested the RAC take three identical cars from its showroom, strip them down and scramble the parts.
The cars would then be rebuilt.
Intrigued by the idea the RAC drew up some rules and submitted them to other car manufacturers.
there were no takers, so Cadillac decided to accept its own challenge.
From eight Cadillacs in the London showroom, three were selected and driven to Brooklands to give each car 50 miles on the clock before they were dismantled.
On 2 March 1908, all the wheels and mudguards were removed, the engines dismantled and the bits piled into a heap.
The RAC removed 89 parts from the stack and asked for replacements from the spares stock.
Most people expected failure.
It had been calculated that a uniformity of two-thousandths of an inch was an unheard-of standard of accuracy — except at Cadillac.
When the three cars were reassembled they had different coloured wheels and mudguards.
Most observers just laughed and gave the cars no chance of starting.
The first two Cadillacs started with but one pull of the crank handle, the third took two turns.
The cars were then each driven 500 miles at Brooklands without adjustment of any kind, averaging 34mph.
The Dewar Challenge Trophy — awarded for the most meritorious performance of the year in any trial under the Long-Distance Trials Regulations — was presented to Cadillac that year, the first time the trophy had been won by a US car maker.
After lengthy negotiations, which kept raising the price, an over-extended General Motors paid $4.5 million for Cadillac in 1909, and then used the good name of Leland and Cadillac to borrow more money to expand its empire further.
Leland and this son Wilfred continued to work for the company.
In 1910 a friend was killed crank-starting a Cadillac.
Leland vowed to find some way of preventing such accidents.
Turning to Charles Kettering, who'd invented an electric motor small enough to power a National Cash Register, Leland asked if something similar could be adapted to the internal combustion engine.
The sceptics at GM reckoned it could never work — the motor would overheat and no battery could store enough energy to turn over a car's engine.
Working with Cadillac engineers, Kettering created the starter motor, using the flywheel to turn over the engine.
The starter motor worked perfectly and soon became a much sought-after Cadillac feature quickly adopted by all car makers.
The marque won another Dewar Trophy in 1912.
When the US entered World War I in April 1917, Leland suggested to GM it should begin building aircraft engines.
William Durant, who ran GM, didn't want to be involved in the war effort and ordered the Lelands not t proceed with the idea.
Leland and his son went off to Washington to see if it was possible to win a contract from the Government to manufacture engines on their own.
Given the assurance that it would, they returned to Detroit, resigned from GM and formed the Lincoln Motor Company.
Henry Leland was 74 when he won a contract to supply Liberty engines, with no more than his technical know-how, reputation and a factory site as collateral.
Lincoln built 6500 Liberty engines and employed 6000 people by the end of the war.
Ironically, Cadillac also started building the same engines soon after Leland started Lincoln.
Unlike GM, the young company had no car-making base to fall back on, so it started afresh.
When the first Lincoln was delivered in September 1920, the dealers held orders for 1000 cars.
Unfortunately the styling, by Leland's son-in-law resembled a pre=war Cadillac, though the quality of its 60deg V8 engine was obvious.
Leland's insistence on excellence meant production slowed to 400 cars per month — far too low a figure to be profitable.
The other directors wanted Lincoln to go into receivership.
While the Lelands were attempting to raise additional money, Lincoln was hit by a tax bill for $4.5 million — but it was too late.
Lincoln went into receivership and was put up for sale on 4 February, 1922.
The same day Henry Ford paid $8 million for the company, a price set by the presiding judge.
Leland claimed his company was worth over $16 million: 3407 Lincolns had been built and 241 remained in the plant at the time of the sale.
The Lelands stayed to carry on their work but friction quickly developed and, four months after the take-over the Lelands quit.
Henry Leland claimed Henry Ford had promised to reimburse all Lincoln's original creditors and shareholders.
Henry Ford maintained no such agreement existed.
Leland fought the case through the courts before giving up in September 1931, just six months before he died.
The Cadillac and Lincoln battle to be the top US luxury car continues today.
Henry Leland (standing on right) and Henry Ford (on left) witness sons Edsel (sitting on left) and Wilfred signing the $8 million takeover of Lincoln Motor Company.
Friction caused Lelands to quit soon after
RUNNING REPORT
DENTED PRIDE
Niggling faults and some rear end damage have not spoilt the Metro 1.1S for Mark Harrop
First it was the clutch, then came the brakes, and now its the seats.
Our Metro has not been a particularly healthy child and its latest illness is a pair of prematurely-worn front seats, the only set with such a problem in the whole of the UK.
At least that's what we've been told by the seat-cover suppliers, Courtaulds Textiles, which produces the terribly natty ‘Renaissance’ decor for Rover's new Metro.
No sooner had Courtaulds read the comments by our Metro's previous keeper, Jill Stanton — that the material had developed ‘bobbly sweater syndrome’(25 July) than they were inspecting the offending objects with microscopes and pronouncing themselves shocked and baffled.
They had checked similar seats that had been subjected to the rough and tumble of Metropolitan Police life, and ones that had supported over 70,000 miles, and they were all right as rain.
So into the garage the car went to have the seats changed — under warranty, of course— and the ‘bad’ pair couriered to Courtaulds for full forensic examination, results of which will be known by the next Running Report.
The operation took no more than 10 minutes and, once again, was carried out courteously and efficiently by Brunt and Davies, my wallet staying firmly in my pocket.
I say once again because they are getting getting used to the sight of G939 BKV.
At 3500 miles into the Metro's life, the Rover dealer had to sort out a badly slipping clutch and, a few miles later, replace the brake pads in a effort to cure the soggy feel of the originals.
And now a third major part has had to be changed.
This does not bode well for Rover's bright new star, maybe, but what helps the car's cause enormously is the quality of the back-up that Rover has obviously insisted on.
This was confirmed only a few days ago when yet another visit to the garage became necessary, this time through no fault of the Metro's.
Some swine had bashed the offside rear three-quarter in a very clumsy attempt to park behind me.
The driver's morals were obviously of the same low standard as his/her driving, as no apology or name and address was left.
I decided to seek the damage estimate at a dealership other than Brunt and Davies and was pleased to find a choice of three, all close by.
I was even more pleased to find that all of them could see me almost immediately, and the one I chose inspected the car as soon as I arrived and had the quote dropped through my letterbox the next morning.
The £200 estimate soon knocked the smile off my face, though, and I hope the guilty party is having trouble sleeping at night.
What looks like a fairly minor scrape would cost me the best part of a planned skiing trip at Christmas to repair if this wasn't a company car.
These tiresome but, one hopes, isolated problems aside, our Metro 1.1S is still running like a dream.
Indeed, the quality feel of the car, the ease and enjoyment of driving it, and the handling and ride rewards that its Hydragas suspension offers make it all too simple to overlook the problems.
The 1.1-litre K series engine seems to improve with every mile, providing smooth and enthusiastic performance at low revs or high speeds, and proving an ideal partner for the five-speed gearbox, which is a sheer delight to use.
Add this to steering that is not too heavy when parking and direct and communicative at speed, and a chassis that irons out most road imperfections but still allows great cornering balance, and the Metro is rarely unsuited to a journey, whether motorway or A-road, long or short.
Unless, that is, you are either over six foot or want to take more than one friend with you.
With the seat right back to fit my legs in, rear legroom is virtually non-existent, and being and tall and friendly chap (sic ), this is far from ideal.
I have to bend my head forward to squeeze in.
My eyes then focus directly between the top of the windscreen and the roof, and if I'm at the front at traffic lights, I feel like Ayrton Senna would if you blindfolded him and put him on pole position.
I simply can't see the lights.
Forget the amber gamblers, I'm fast becoming a fully fledged red and green gambler, too.
The view through the small rear mirror is rather limited, as Jill Stanton has mentioned before, and the manual wing mirrors are so stiff that trying to fine-tune them is like trying to thread a needle wearing boxing gloves.
Full marks though for the clarity of all the instruments, the relationship of the controls, pedals and wheel — although this is a little too offset for some — and the rattle-free interior.
The tyres are wearing well, fuel economy is improving and it has needed no extra oil since its 6000-mile service, which cost a reasonable £17.48.
I couldn't imagine a little car with a luxury big-car feel until I drove the Metro.
Road test editor David Vivian was spot on when he described the car as ‘quite simply a revelation.’
This car ‘wears its Rover badge with pride’ was the verdict of the first road test, and with nearly 7000 miles having been added to the car wince then, our 1.1S has substantiated that statement convincingly.
I only wish I was shorter.
DATABASE
Market Update
Toyota has increased prices by between 3.5 and four per cent on most models.
The 2.4 litre diesel Landcruiser and Corollas are up one per cent, while the Starlet,(the GL is the only model available) is up £260 to £7860.
The 2-litre MR2 range now starts at £14,505, up from £14,001, the entry-level Carina 1.6XL saloon is £10,280 at £349 increase and the Celica GT is £17,925, up by £624.
Unaffected are Supras, the 4.2-litre Landcruiser and the £18,099 Previa.
Mazda's MX-5 hard-top costs £1145.
The glass-fibre reinforced resin top has a heated screen, cloth-lined interior and courtesy light.
The Mazda's hard-top is made by TWR of Oxford and affixes using the catches for the soft-top.
Lada prices went up by three per cent on 1 October making their cheapest car, the Riva 1300SEL saloon, £3275.
The Samara 1300SL 3 door is up £154 to £1549 and the Niva 4wd now costs £7049.
The Russian manufacturer's most expensive model, the Niva 4wd Cossack, goes up from £8395 to £8649.
Alfa Romeo has introduced a 2.5 litre V6 engine for the 75, but dropped both 188bhp versions — the V6 and Veloce.
The £17,315 V6 Cloverleaf has 192bhp, and a catalytic converter is standard-fit.
Equipment includes a limited-slip differential, power steering, tinted glass, central locking and alloy wheels.
The sunroof and air conditioning are cost extras.
The price pitches the 75 V6 Cloverleaf close to the 2-litre 164 Twin Spark Lusso, which costs £17,560.
Insurance ratings for the Nissan Primera will be one higher than for equivalent Sierra and Cavalier models.
The 1.6-litre Primeras rank in group five and the 2-litre fuel-injected models in group six, according to the Association of British Insurers.
 Peter Burgess 
Mazda MX-5's hard-top costs £1145
How Fast, How Good
IMPORTANT INFORMATION:
This is how the Autocar & Motor How Fast, How Good data has been derived: 30–70mph indicates overtaking ability and is measured through the gears; 30–50mph is recorded in top gear (or fourth in the case of five-speed manual gearbox models); 50–70 mph is recorded in top.
Overall consumption is that recorded during the test period, while touring mpg is based on official Government economy figures — 50 per cent of urban cycle, plus 25 per cent each of 56 mph and 75 mph steady speed cycles.
Reprinting of results, in whole or in part, is forbidden except by permission of the publisher.
•Denotes models no longer on sale in the form tested