

BENTLEY IS BACK!
New Continental: the ‘ultimate’ coupe
£60,000 WIN A PEUGEOT COMPETITION STARTS INSIDE
Full test NEW BMW 325i
THIS WEEK
Geneva Show Nothing succeeds like excess 4
News Anti-Japanese pressure builds 13
Bentley is Back And now more than just a badge 16
Analysis What we want from this year's budget 20
Competition Win a Peugeot 205XS 24
US Grand Prix Full report on the season opener 28
Sport Revealing the defending Group C Merc 33
Arrivals Volvo's spirited but dated 940 SE Turbo 36
Arrivals Never judge a Toyota Paseo by its cover 39
Road Test: BMW 325i SE A change of direction for BMW 48
Signing Off Tony Rudd looks back over his brilliant career 56
A Weighty Problem And why composites may be the solution 60
Secondhand Spotlight Five grand buys you a 4wd family car 62
Escort Revisited Can it really be as duff as we said it was? 64
Great Concept Cars The stunning Dino Berlinetta Speciale 70
Master Stroke Golf G60 Limited — the greatest Golf yet 76
Angry Young Man Hope springs eternal in Cambridge 79
Running Report Car of the year Renault Clio joins the fleet 81
DATABASE Info 83, How Much 84, How Fast 90
CLASSIFIED 29 pages of new and used cars for sale, 94 
Full report on the Geneva show, p4
BMW 325i SE: different from its predecessor but is it better?
See p48
THIS WEEK GENEVA SHOW
No excuses needed
Excellence at any price was the theme of the Geneva show, with the new Mercedes S-class and Bentley's Continental R leading the field in a no-holds-barred battle to steal the spotlight.
Report by Michael Harvey and Peter Robinson
On the Mercedes-Benz stand all was quiet contemplation and sober judgements as the world's automotive sages basked in a recyclable, CFC-free attempt at justifying a double-glazed, 408bhp V12 monolith weighing more than two tonnes, 17ft long and called the new Mercedes S-class.
On the stand of Rolls-Royce and Bentley, however, no excuses were being made for the reawakening of one of Britain's best known and loved marques from 40 years of savage badge engineering.
As the unashamedly extravagant Continental R in the most outrageous shade of red majestically revolved on the stand to an upbeat and immensely loud recording of ‘Land Of Hope And Glory’ the last thing on anyone's mind was how the CFCs in the air conditioning were going to rip the ozone to pieces.
Two very different ways of launching two of the most uncommon cars you will ever see and at one of the most difficult times ever to hit the motor industry.
Difficult for bread-and-butter manufacturers, never mind the makers of cars so far off the scale (up to £80,000 for the 600SEL Merc and twice that for the Bentley) that by any rational thinking they belong to a different era altogether — one without recession, a war just over and all the current uncertainties.
Were they irrelevant or, worse, irresponsible?
Or did the 1991 Geneva show provide the cheer we all needed?
If it's the latter then there was plenty more at the show to warm any enthusiast's heart.
You had to look hard to find a car that didn't boast an £80,000-plus price sticker, plus a 200mph-plus top speed or, as was usually the case, both.
Those that were there seemed intended as no more than second or even third-string playthings for those untouched by the recession.
Of all the hard-hit member states, it was good old Blighty that had the most to shout about, not least because here was a good old-fashioned, honest-to-goodness motor show surprise.
And at a quarter to twelve last Tuesday, Bentley made the most of it.
Its first new-car launch for 10 years, and the first new shape to be badged solely as a Bentley since the Continental R-type of 1952, was launched with a fanfare that almost out-Victored Victor Gauntlett.
This time he had less to shout about on his Aston Martin stand — just the new two-plus-two Volante with the lower hood line.
His big bang comes at the NEC show in 1992 with the 530bhp twin-supercharged Vantage — but as a Bentley fan he was beaming nonetheless.
Gauntlett has already ordered his Continental R — in British Racing Green, of course.
Rolls-Royce will be hoping there are more where he came from.
At £160,000 the Continental R is the most expensive British production car ever.
Chairman Peter Ward is confident of selling 280 a year, split between the UK, the US and European and Pacific markets.
The dealers, said Ward, are ‘ecstatic with the price’ and, even at a time when speculating on cars has fallen flat, steps were being taken to ensure that only genuine customers had their £20,000 deposits accepted.
What's more, there's a strict limit of one car per customer.
Deliveries start at the end of this year.
Ward sees the 145mph car, which evolved out of the Project 90 Geneva show car of 1985, as ‘the finest sporting coupe in the world’, with a real four-seat cabin.
This is seen as crucial in attracting people away from the current crop of cramped top-of-the-range coupes — essential if the car is not simply to draw existing Bentley customers from the Turbo R.
The decision to show the car was taken last November, not long after Rolls-Royce insisted that an introduction was still several years away.
Ward doesn't admit it, but faced with declining sales and lay-offs at Crewe the Continental R is the confidence booster the company needs.
No sign of the Cosworth four-valve heads for the turbocharged V8, though — at least not yet.
Ward is cagey: ‘The current engine meets all emissions requirements and we are happy with it.
We are not changing it.’
And with what is still quaintly described as ‘sufficient power’ Ward is convinced of the new car's credentials: ‘I am sure the Continental R can stand shoulder to shoulder with anything else we have ever built.’
(Full technical description on page 16).
Few would doubt that the same is being said at Mercedes.
In appearance, the slab-sided yet undoubtedly highly effective new S-class disguises its massive bulk.
In light colours especially the ‘short’ wheelbase version could almost pass for a successor to the mid-range W124.
The S-class arrives in the UK in September, at prices that reflect the increased equipment levels but still make the departing model look positively reasonable.
You'll get little change from £40,000 for the 300SE, the 500SE is expected to sell for around £60,000 while the flagship 600SEL (the short wheelbase model won't be sold in Britain) is expected to be close to £80,000 — £22,500 more than the rival 750iL BMW.
Less apparent on Mercedes' stand — and consequently ignored by most show visitors — was a prototype 190 electric car.
Developed in conjunction with AEG (another Daimler Benz company) and the UK Beta Research organisation from Derby, the 190 uses high-energy sodium nickel chloride batteries that have a life of five years or 35,000 miles — four times that of normal lead-acid batteries.
as if the S-class's might and the electric 190's ingenuity weren't enough, the 500SL turned up with the superb 500E wheels, looking more covetable than ever.
Waiting in the wings is the C112 supercar, powered, we now believe, by the new V12 engine and set to make its first public appearance at the Frankfurt show in September.
In the ever more intense rivalry between Mercedes and BMW, that should have been a blast big enough to silence the boys from Munich.
On the contrary, BMW — which is to celebrate its 75th anniversary soon — greeted the announcement of the S-class with undisguised glee while sitting back to count record orders for its new 3-series and boast about production figures for its V12 — now running at 80 per day when the original target had been 10 to 15.
Even so, there was no avoiding the fact that the S-class completely overshadowed BMW's somewhat unconvincing attempts to steal some glory from the newcomer by adding some of its technical highlights — double glazing, self-shutting doors and parking proximity sensors — to its 750iL's options list.
BMW's engineering director, Wolfgang Reitzle, didn't take too well to suggestions that the up-specification of the 750iL (in the UK this autumn) was a sign of panic.
‘It's got nothing to do with rivalry.
It's the suppliers.
They are asked to develop the double glazing for Mercedes on a non-exclusive basis and they offer it to us,’ says Reitzle.
‘And why do you think Mercedes developed a V12 engine?’
BMW was rather less sensitive about the other V12 BMW engine on display, in the Giorgetto Giugiaro-designed Nazca M12 mid-engined supercar — the best car from Italdesign in years.
It was a big drawcard for almost everyone at the show, and none more so that Reitzle and his boss, von Kuenheim.
Like most at the top of the business, Reitzle wasn't going to go on the record either openly praising or criticising Giugiaro.
He knows better than that, and anyway he is rumoured to be paying the Italian genius a lot of money for his one-box design vision that forms part of BMW's long-rumoured MPV programme.
On the M12, all Reitzle would say was: ‘I cannot predict the future for that car.
For that you will have to speak to Mr Giugiaro.’
Giugiaro didn't say much either, but enough to give hope that this stunning-looking M1 successor will become available.
It's easy to see why Reitzle was impressed.
Giugiaro had taken the unusual step of displaying a chassis too, letting the world see the high standard of carbon-fibre work in his monocoque, the cockpit-adjustable anti-roll bars and the massive 14ins drilled racing disc brakes.
It's odd by current supercar standards because as BMW's 300bhp V12 engine was never meant to be a stressed item — it is carried in a subframe sling — but otherwise it looks like it could be built tomorrow.
The last truly impressive Giugiaro car — the 1988 Aztec — has just gone into production for the Japanese market at £500,000.
Giugiaro says the Nazca would be less.
Taking notes on the Nazca were Gordon Murray and Peter Stevens of McLaren Cars.
Three weeks ago McLaren announced that its ultimate supercar, the F1, which we will see at this show next year, will also be powered by a BMW V12 — a six-litre Motorsports unit.
You get the feeling that BMW likes the attention it's getting in this area — plenty of supercar glory by association without getting its environmentally friendly hands dirty.
‘We could build a supercar today if we wanted to, but we have other priorities right now.
Supplying engines to projects like this lets us compete with the supercars and avoid all the complicated polemics they create,’ said Reitzle.
Pininfarina, just across the aisle from Italdesign, is crying out for Vauxhall to take a similar level of interest in its Lotus Carlton-powered Chronos, making a second show appearance but this time as a fully engineered runner.
With its removeable roof stored in the roof it looked great, but the word from Pininfarina and General Motors Europe was not promising.
Alfa Romeo had a now-you-see-it, now-you-don't glass roof on its 164-based Proteo coupe, but a production future here is altogether more promising.
The Proteo has been engineered with a view to taking over from the SZ after Zagato builds the 1000th car late next year.
Powered by a 24-valve version of the 164's three-litre V6 and driven at all four corners via a thinking electronic centre coupling, it's a car that Alfa says it would sell for £75,000.
Its appealing rakish shape is Alfa's own work, under the guidance of Walter Da Silva, who in the past has been wrongly credited as the designer of the SZ.
The body, with its trademark Alfa knife swage and tiny headlamps, is built in a mixture of steel and Kevlar and features a beautifully effective roadster option: touch a button and the roof glass and rear windows drop beneath a complicated rear lid.
Nobody, including Da Silva and managing director Giovan Battista Razzeli, would say it would go into production, but ‘we had the courage to build the SZ’ was Da Silva's slightly encouraging line.
If it's courage it takes to put sports cars and coupes into production then the product planners at Mazda deserve a medal.
A year after the MX-5 arrived in the UK, Mazda had another niche car to present — the V6 engined but (unexpectedly) modestly powered MX-3.
The MX-3, at 166ins long, is more a Volkswagen Corrado rival than the anticipated threat to the Honda CRX.
Its design drew very mixed responses, the styling being criticised for its hotchpotch of elements from the MX-5 (taillights) to the current Toyota Celica (rear hatch) and even Nissan's 100NX (nose and headlights).
As a result, the coupe's front and rear look rather as if they were designed by different committees.
Europe is expected to get 1200 cars a month, which seems an achievable target if the expected £15,000 price is right for the V6.
If there was disappointment at the 136bhp produced by the 24-valve 1.8-litre V6, the news that the 2.5-litre version — destined first for the next 626 — slots straight in appeased those who wanted to view the MX-3 as a low cost substitute for Porsche's 944.
Towards the other end of the coupe market was Honda's Legend Coupe, making its European debut with its sister saloon.
With only a V6 under the bonnet — albeit an all new 3.2-litre 204bhp unit — driving the front wheels, Honda clearly isn't playing Mercedes' game.
Nevertheless, it has taken more than just a pinch of the new S-class's style with its first real attempt at a grille, cut down into the front bumper.
Both versions will be in the UK this April, with the saloon looking to tempt everything up to Lexus buyers with an all-in price of around £28,000 and the coupe out on its own at around £30,000.
Mitsubishi faces a busy year in the UK too.
It's only just launched the Sigma but is already pressing Japan for more volume, and pretty soon will have the new-generation Shoguns.
Thanks to import restrictions, the new range won't help Mitsubishi sell any more than 1990's record of 3700 Shoguns (with the changeover, 3000 is this year's likely figure) but with a significant price rise likely the dealers will be happy.
The new four-model range sees the end of the old 2.6-litre four.
The only petrol engine now available is the 155bhp three-litre V6.
The new range jumps in price from around £19,000 for a short-wheelbase, three-door turbo diesel to £25,000 for a long-wheelbase five-door V6.
The current range runs from £16,000 to £20,000.
The Shogun, certainly the short-wheelbase Chelsea Farmer's version, will face some stiff competition later this year from an unfamiliar source — Vauxhall.
The recreational vehicles — Vauxhall is sensitive about calling them off-roaders — are familiar; in Japan and in the US they're the short-wheelbase Isuzu Amigo and the long-wheelbase five-door Rodeo, but in the UK they're to be the Vauxhall Frontera Sport and Frontera respectively.
Built in Luton at IBC and with a range of European Vauxhall and Opel engines that take local content to 80 per cent, they'll be in about half of Vauxhall's dealers with prices just up on the Suzuki Vitara for the Sport and just below the Isuzu Trooper and old Shogun for the five-door Across Europe, GM is optimistic it can sell 40,000 and has capacity for another 10,000 should Europe's fastest-growing market segment require it.
Even Volkswagen was getting in on the act with its two concept Varios (see separate story), which could bring four-wheel-drive recreational motoring to a much wider audience.
Of more direct significance was the debut in the Passat of VW's VR6 ‘in-line-vee’ 2.8-litre engine.
Research director Ulrich Seiffert was anxious to put an end to rumours that the engine had been delayed by chronic friction and vibration problems.
‘The engine has always been on schedule, our engineers just started talking about it too soon.
There has been a slight redesign of the ancillaries for crash protection reasons and we've increased capacities to get more power, but otherwise it has been developed perfectly,’ said Seiffert.
The first production versions of Audi's Cabriolet were on show, although it doesn't go on sale until April/May in Germany and the UK launch has been delayed until summer 1992, when it's expected to be priced at about £25,000.
Released with the five-cylinder 133bhp engine only, other powerplants will become available.
Two new engines were added to the 100 range — a 115bhp two-litre petrol and 82bhp 2.4-litre diesel.
The rumoured turbo diesel is still some months away.
British buyers get their first glimpse of the new 100, in V6 form, at the end of April.
Against all expectations, the S2 Coupe has become the most popular of all the Coupes, accounting for a quarter of total production.
This is a big year for Audi.
In addition to numerous 100 variants, including a proper estate, Frankfurt will see the new 80/90 and a 230bhp turbocharged 20-valve petrol engine tied to a new six-speed gearbox that's also due in the S2 to create the real Quattro replacement.
Across the floor from Audi, Ford was making much ado of its standard anti-lock brakes on all cars sold in Switzerland, a policy Ford says is being evaluated for the UK.
The only new product on the stand was the RA2000 Escort, which now won't be in the UK until November after what Ford described as an ‘unfinished development programme’ slowed things down.
It now seems that the RS2000's 16-valve Dagenham-built engine will feature in that car only.
It's not going into the current Sierra or 1993's CDW27 Sierra replacement.
The endlessly fertile mind of Franco Sbarro came up with a two-seater, V12 mid-engined sports car whose body is mounted on the engine/gearbox unit, central beam chassis and suspension by six hydraulic links.
The hydraulics, in theory, separate the chassis from the body to provide firm suspension yet a comfortable ride.
Sbarro compared the links to hydraulic jacks that allow the body height to be changed to vary ride comfort without affecting the way the suspension functions.
It's difficult to know who's the bigger dreamer, Franco Sbarro or Willy Koenig, who is convinced he'll find 30 buyers for his 236mph, £700,000 C62 Porsche-engined, Porsche 926 race-car clone.
Thankfully, it seems that the charming Claudio Zampolli, who, two years ago, brought the first prototype Cizeta to Geneva, is dreaming no longer.
After the show had ended, the black Cizeta on display was off to the company's first client in Singapore, who'll be $630,000 lighter for the privilege of owning the world's only V16-engined production car.
Another three will be built this year and a further 10 a year later.
Zampolli summed up the curiously optimistic mood the industry found itself in, post-war, at Geneva: ‘You know,’ he said, ‘during the war I took three orders for the car.
From Arabs.’
Surprise announcement of Bentley Continental (top) stole thunder from Giugiaro's striking V12 Nazca (above)
Reactions to Mercedes S-class were mixed
Keenly priced UK-built Vauxhall Frontera is set to shake up UK recreational market from this November
New generation Shogun will be costly, but Mitsubishi is confident of its success
The two-litre 148bhp Fiat Tipo 16v is on its way at last New generation Shogun will be costly, but Mitsubishi is confident of its success
Facelifted Alpine A610…
…and Espace both pack new Renault V6 powerplant
Alfa Proteo, better looking than the SZ and every bit as likely to make production
Audi cabrio for summer '92
Ford's Escort RS2000
Pininfarina's Chronos now a runner, but not a goer
The unbalanced design of Mazda's MX-3 didn't live up to the promise of its unique 1.8-litre V6 specification
BMW aped Mercedes with this double-glazed 750iL
New Honda Legend twins arrive in the UK in April
Wacky shape of Volkswagen's two Varios the work of students, but tidies up in-house by VW's own team
Hyundai Lantra another convincing car from Korea
£700,000 will buy you a road-going 962 from Koenig
‘Twin-chassis’ Sbarro
First $630,000 production Cizeta V16 is on its way to a customer in Singapore
Italian exotica, Tokyo style
The 200mph club looked alive and well at Geneva with the arrival of the production Cizeta V16T, priced at a staggering $630,000 (£330,000), and the debut of a brand new company, Art & Tech Torino, sister company to the Japanese design consultancy in Tokyo.
The key man of the new venture is Ryoji Yamazaki, a 42-year-old who is not only financing the project through his business activities in Japan but is also acting as chief designer.
At Geneva the company showed the Sogna (in plaster model form only), a two-seat mid-engined sports car with very aggressive Bertone-like lines.
The first running prototype is expected in September and will be powered by the 455bhp 5.2-litre V12 engine from the Lamborghini Countach.
Art & Tech has outlined an extremely ambitious programme that calls for three different mid-engined sports car to be produced.
The Sogna, which in Italian means ‘let you dream’, will be built in very small numbers and it's still not clear where the powerplant will come from.
Yamazaki says it will be a V12 and that he's talking to three companies.
Of the second and third models even less is known.
And there's talk of a fourth model.
apparently a full four-seat mid-engined coupe, something so complicated from the styling and weight balance point of view that it's never been satisfactorily achieved before.
Yamazaki seems unconcerned by the fact that he's taking on problems that have defeated many who should have known better.
 Luca Ciferri 
A supercar designed and built in Turin, but by the Japanese, the Art & Tech Sogna looked the part
DISPATCHES
•One senior Mercedes-Benz executive admitted the vulgar V12 badge on the C-pillar of the S-class was a triumph of marketing over design and quickly added that it was a delete option intended for the Japanese and Americans.
•As Mercedes basked in the splendour of its opulent new S-class, the collective verdict of rival designers was decidedly less positive.
‘It's a nothing car, well done but still a nothing car,’ claimed one highly talented young British designer.
‘The grille is purely chintzy,’ maintained a colleague.
Another, senior designer from a German competitor (not BMW) stated: ‘I like the crinkled leather on the doors’, but could find nothing about the exterior to praise: ‘It's design stagnation; from some angles it looks like a Lincoln.’
All agreed it wasn't ‘a designer's car’ but a pragmatic commercial shape that may well look imposing outside a posh hotel but will never win any design awards.
Wolfgang Reitzle, BMW's head engineer, was more generous: ‘It's just right for Mercedes.
It's a well made car.’
•Estimates of the number of journalists at the S-class release varied between 600 to 700.
Many admitted to having a doze through a meaningless movie presentation that talked more of light and energy, love and space than the car.
•BMW Chairman Eberhard von Kuenheim squashed reports that the BMW-McLaren link might lead the company back to F1 racing when McLaren's contract with Honda runs out.
‘F1 is a fantastic way to spend money,’ he said, adding that a full F1 programme costs between $60m and $100m a year.
In Germany's socially responsible political climate he sees F1 as only ‘helping to destroy our reputation’.
He left no doubts about BMW's position: ‘We will not go back to F1.’
The great kit-car revival
The Mercedes and Bentley may have been the show stars; elsewhere, though, son of beach buggy was making a comeback.
Volkswagen's Vario I and Vario II were much more interesting than their wacky bodywork would suggest.
Their true significance is their separate platform chassis, which VW is prepared to sell to the world's specialist kit car builders with service back-up.
They have been in limbo since the demise of the Beetle chassis, reduced to fitting air dams and wide wheels on to standard car bodies.
You want a '90s beach buggy?
A sports car, a pick-up, a retro car?
All these, and more, will be possible on the basis of the Vario's strengthened 4wd Golf Syncro chassis.
Doors, roof and windows are thrown out.
What remains is a platform with an extra 95 pounds of stiffening, all the hard points and mechanical components.
The only limitation is the bodybuilder's imagination.
Martin D Volke, whose Volke company built the two prototypes in only three months, says the chassis and Syncro transmission is good for up to 500 horsepower.
He estimates the chassis could go into production within a year.
The project came to a head a year ago, when Ulrich Seifert, VW's head of research, and Herbert Schaefer, VW's design chief, commissioned the designs from Switzerland's Art Centre College.
The result could herald the revival of the dormant kit car industry.
 Richard Feast 
The Varios' platform, from the 4wd Golf Syncro, is a gift to latter-day beach buggy builders everywhere
DISPATCHES
•At least one of the $630,000 Cizetas will be coming to Britain this year — to be crashed.
MIRA is to host the test in order for Cizeta to get certification to sell the world's only V16 production car in new markets — including Britain.
It's unlikely to be a public crash test…
•Beleaguered Porsche is considering a plan by engineering chief Ulrich Bez to downgrade future equipment levels to make cars lighter — and faster.
Alas, we are not able to report how much cheaper the cars would be if all the current goodies decamped to the options list.
•The world's only ‘racing’ car with indicators and door-locks, the TWR-developed Jaguar XJR-15, may be driveable on public roads even more easily then we thought.
Unconfirmed reports suggest TWR is working on a road kit that will include air conditioning and drop-down windows.
•Ropeable Lotus dealers in the US were after Lotus boss Michael Kimberley's blood after the Lotus-badged Bertone Emotion made its debut at the Detroit show earlier this year.
The stunning mid-engined car — apparently the result of a hush-hush deal with Bertone that Kimberley neglected to inform the dealers about — was seen rather more as the new Esprit than a design exercise.
The result was that the dealers didn't take too many orders for the ‘old’ car.
•Meanwhile, the bloodletting at Lotus continues.
Latest to leave Hethel is Chris Peacock, parts and service director.
•VAG UK managing director Richard Ide predicted that this month will be seen as the point where car sales in Britain turned and began to pick up.
‘I feel better about the market now than I have for a long time,’ he said.
NEWS
February car sales plunge
UK new cars sales plunged by nearly 26 per cent in February in what was described by a spokesman for the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders as ‘the biggest month-on-month February drop I can remember.’
Only 124,342 cars were sold last month — the lowest February figure since 1982 says the SMMT.
Jobs are being shed as the industry fights to cope with recession at home and abroad, although the prospect of a continued fall in interest rates is starting to bolster confidence.
‘February is only a short month, so it is not going to have a devastating effect on figures, and there are now signs that the recession is bottoming out, which has to be good for the industry,’ a spokesman said.
Rover Group recorded its highest market share for seven months, at 16.29 per cent, but its sales were down 3725 to 20,260.
Market leader Ford marginally increased its share to 25.08 per cent with 31,184 registrations — a drop of more than 10,000 compared with February 1990.
Vauxhall held on to second spot with 21,679 sales (down 6994).
Luxury and performance car manufacturers were hard hit.
Porsche sold 88 cars last month (down from 320), while Jaguar sales dropped 48.8 per cent.
The top-selling car last month was the Ford Fiesta, which displaced the Vauxhall Cavalier.
Total sales for the first two months of 1991 at 287,876 were nearly 23 per cent down on the same period in 1990.
VW chief changes his tune on free trade
Anti-Japanese feeling in Europe grew at last week's Geneva show when VW chairman Carl Hahn, who was previously in favour of free trade, nailed his colours firmly to anti-Japanese campaigner Jacques Calvet's mast.
Calvet, chairman of the PSA Group, launched his most savage attack on European free trade policy at last year's Paris show.
His five-point plan, which included a 10-year transitional period and the inclusion of UK-built Japanese cars in quotas, now has the backing of Hahn.
Ford Chairman Lyndsay Halstead and General Motors Europe chairman Robert Eaton also backed the plan for a transitional period.
In Tokyo, MITI, the Japanese ministry for trade and industry, indicated that it would not approve attempts by Japanese manufacturers to make up for shortfalls in US exports to Europe.
Exports to EC countries increased 12.9 per cent in January compared with January 1990.
Asked about the reasons for his apparent about face, Hahn said: ‘You're always learning and I think in the past our view was wrong.
You have to learn from your mistakes.
Free trade has worked in Germany, but less well in the US.
In creating a single market we have to make sure we give equal opportunities to everyone, and not just create a jamboree for the Japanese.’
Another industry chief reiterating his position at Geneva was Fiat SpA chairman Gianni Agnelli, who said that Japanese penetration would be limited to 15 to 18 per cent for a transitional period, and after that all restrictions should be dropped.
‘Free trade is, after all, a big advantage to our customers,’ he said.
The harmony between Europe's big six — VW, Fiat, PSA, Renault, GM and Ford — looks more likely than ever to persuade the commission to go for a transitional period longer than three to five years.
Luca Ciferri 
Carl Hahn: ‘I think in the past our view was wrong.
You have to learn from your mistakes’
IN BRIEF Ford has announced the price of its Scorpio 24v, which is powered by a 195bhp Cosworth-developed 2.9-litre V6.
It will sell for £26,800 including VAT and car tax, with a four-speed automatic transmission, air conditioning, anti-lock brakes and a limited slip differential as standard.
Mazda's parent company , MCL, has set up a new company, Kia (UK) Ltd, to market the Mazda 121-based Kia Pride hatchback (see Autocar & Motor, 27 February).
The operation will be headed by Jeff Davies, former managing director of FSO Cars.
The longest-ever Land Rover was supplied last week to Eastern Electricity for overhead maintenance work.
Based on a Defender 130, it is 21ft long and features permanent six-wheel drive.
The British Motor Industry Heritage Trust is appealing for drawings, sketches and artefacts relating to the companies that amalgamated to form the Rover Group.
Managing director Peter Mitchell said: ‘We feel that our museum would be the most desirable place to keep this material, for the benefit of future generations.’
A three-year unlimited-mileage warranty has been introduced by Daihatsu on all its new vehicles.
The end of the Gulf war has prompted Rover Group to increase exports of its cars.
Rover currently exports about 30 per cent of its production, and models like the 200, 400 and Land Rover Discovery have been particularly well received abroad.
MPs Roger King and Sir Hal Miller are backing a campaign by Lucas to persuade the government to introduce policies to persuade more motorists to switch to ‘greener’ diesel-powered cars.
Airbag option for Volvo 400
Volvo claims its 400-series saloons, hatchbacks and coupes will be the first mid-price cars available with an airbag option from later this month.
The Volvo Supplemental Restraint System will offer a driver's side airbag as well as front and seat-belt pre-tensioners.
The full system is priced at £715, although pre-tensioners can be specified on their own for £125.
Volvos get airbag option
High-power 2.5-litre V6 from Cosworth
Cosworth Engineering has unveiled an all-new high-power V6 engine.
The 2.5-litre 90deg six, which was recently shown at Detroit's Society of Engineers show, produces a hefty 7500rpm and 184lb ft of torque at 5000rpm.
The all-alloy 24-valve twin-cam engine is described by Cosworth as being of the ‘high-efficiency’ type, and follows the ‘modular’theory — meaning that the basic design could suit anything from the three-cylinder unit to a V12.
Using its patented Low Pressure Casting technique, Cosworth has been able to incorporate a high degree of stiffness in the compact unit.
As a result, it will be suitable for both longitudinal or transverse settings, and can sit low in a chassis.
No manufacturer has yet committed itself to using the Cosworth engine, which is expected to be fully ready for production by June.
However, the company is confident that customers will soon be lining up.
John Hancock, executive design engineer for the Engines Group division of Cosworth, said the engine received a lot of attention at the show in Detroit: ‘We've talked to a wide range of people who might want to use it, or derivatives of it,’ he said.
‘It's designed to suit a production level of anything between 5000 and 20,000 units per year.
But if a customer wanted more than that, the design could be adapted.’
Details include a method of improving breathing by using an additional throttle valve in each inlet port.
It features main bearing caps that don't have to be individually matched to the block — something that could make the production process of any engine much easier.
The most interesting feature of all, though, is the hollow balancer shaft doubling as a crankcase breather, which removes oil from crankcase fumes by centrifugal force.
Cosworth is seeking customers for its 226bhp V6
New Audi 100 priced for big sales increase
Audi's new 100 makes its showroom debut in May at prices no more than four to five per cent higher than the current range.
4 The revamped line-up will initially be topped by the all-new 174bhp 2.8-litre V6 model.
Later in the year the 135mph 2.8E will be topped by a turbocharged version, using Audi's 2.3-litre, 20-valve five-cylinder engine.
It will produce 230bhp and will be mated to a six-speed gearbox.
Audi hopes to achieve high sales by keeping the price increase modest, which suggests the new range will run from around £17,000 for the 2.0E to £26,000 for the Turbo quattro.
The company aims to nearly quadruple sales compared with the outgoing model.
‘We intend to sell 12,000 units in a full year,’ a spokesman said.
Audi hopes its keen pricing will increase sales of new 100 four-fold over those achieved with the old model
DISPATCHES
JAPAN
Peter Nunn
•Rover Japan will launch the Metro and Discovery in Japan this year.
It is considering badging the Metro 1.4 as the Rover 100.
•New car sales dropped again in February, for the fourth consecutive month.
The Japanese Automobile Dealers Association says new car sales slumped 4.5 per cent over January 1990 to 474,160 units.
The biggest decline has been in the 1.3 to two-litre sector.
•Space Runner is tipped to be the name Mitsubishi will use for its appealing new people carrier, which is due in the UK this year.
•Porsche AG has opened a Tokyo office to function initially as an administration centre.
But the office will eventually be upgraded and formalised as Porsche Engineering.
FRANCE
Edouard Seidler
•PSA's R&D department is reportedly working on two new high-power engines — a V8 developing 250bhp and a 16-valve 2.1-litre turbo unit with 200bhp, slated for a future sporting Citroen ZX.
The turbo diesels in the XM and 605 are due to be uprated from 110 to 130bhp.
•Renault chief Raymond Levy says he is hesitant to conclude the present Renault-Mitsubishi-Volvo talks before the post-1992 level of Japanese imports to Europe is decided.
•Police say that cars are being stolen to be resold in car-starved east European countries.
To begin with, thieves went for the likes of Golf GTis and BMWs, but now bread-and-butter cars are also being taken.
•Matra is developing what has been described as a ‘four-wheel motorcycle’, using Clio 16-valve power.
The project is aimed at younger drivers who want totally open motoring but don't feel safe on two wheels.
ANALYSIS
At last!The Bentley that's more than just a badge
The launch of the all-new Continental R marks a big step in Rolls-Royce's plan to forge a distinct, sporting image for Bentley.
For the first time in nearly 40 years Bentley has a shape to call its own.
By Tony Lewin
‘We must build the finest sporting coupe in the world,’ exhorted Rolls-Royce chief executive Peter Ward some four years ago.
The decision came soon after Bentley's Project 90, a styling exercise designed to test customer reaction, proved ‘quite a remarkable success’ when displayed at the 1985 Geneva show.
The warm reception given to Project 90, designed by John Heffernan and Ken Greenley, provided positive proof to Ward that he was on the right track in his long-term strategy of building a separate and much stronger image for the Bentley marque.
Bentley, he argued, should forge its own identity by introducing sporting models unique to the winged ‘B’ badge.
Rolls-Royce, meanwhile, would concentrate on what it did best — building the most luxurious cars in the world.
The launch of the new Continental R at this week's Geneva show is perhaps the most important step to date in the unfolding of Ward's strategy for Bentley.
It's the first time Bentley has had an all-new shape to itself for almost two generations — since 1952, in fact, when the first of the R-type Continentals was launched in limited numbers and initially for export only.
That car, evolving through successive S1, S2 and S3 incarnations, became a major success for Bentley and did much to establish the tradition of a two-door, four-seater coupe in the group's model policy.
The direction of Bentley's evolution became clear with the launch of the Mulsanne Turbo R, which, with its huge power and improved suspension, at last re-established the marque's engineering credibility and its standing with younger and more enthusiastic owner-drivers.
The success of the strategy is again evident in the mushrooming if the Bentley brand's share of the overall Rolls Royce group registrations from six per cent in 1982 (when the original Mulsanne Turbo was announced) to virtually 50 per cent in 1989.
Bentley customers are younger but no less affluent than typical Rolls-Royce buyers; they must presumably be looked upon as good investments because they are more likely to make a repeat purchase than their Rolls-Royce counterparts.
While the process of evolving an all-new and unique Bentley coupe began as early as 1984 with the commissioning of design studies and quarter-scale models, work did not begin in earnest until 1986 when experience from the Turbo R and other developments was available.
Producing a coupe derivative, even in the limited numbers envisaged by Bentley with the Continental R, is not as easy as it used to be.
It was decided at an early stage that future designs could no longer be coach-built on separate custom-made chassis, as was the case with the now-deleted Bentley Continental and Rolls-Royce Corniche coupes (which still exist as convertibles), but would have to be built on the regular production lines at Crewe alongside the conventional monocoque four-door saloon models.
Rolls-Royce's model cycle of 15-plus years also posed something of a problem when it came to deciding tactics with the new car.
‘With our lengthy product cycle, there was no solution but to develop a very special coupe for Bentley and for Bentley alone,’ Ward says.
‘It had to be a truly British shape,’ echoes engineering director Mike Dunn.
‘Preoccupation with Cd values has led to the boring shapes we have become all too familiar with.’
The engineering brief was to achieve a 10 per cent gain in performance over the already rapid Turbo R, implying a top speed target of well over 150mph and 0–60mph acceleration in just over six seconds — a tough task, even allowing for the aerodynamic gains in the switch to the coupe shape, in a vehicle weighing at least two-and-a-half tons.
The broader objectives were to provide a vehicle that was fun to drive, docile in traffic, quiet and refined and a comfortable four-seater.
In the event, minor engineering work to the existing twin-catalyst 6.7-litre pushrod V8 has succeeded in achieving the desired results.
A new Bosch K-Motronic fuel injection and engine management system provides greater efficiency and the Continental's less restricted engine bay allows a cleaner-breathing inlet system to increase power over the mighty 333bhp of the Turbo R, though by what margin Rolls-Royce is unwilling to disclose.
A conservative estimate is that power must have grown by about 30bhp; in any case, this figure is likely to be overtaken soon when the four-valve cylinder heads known to have been developed by sister company Cosworth are installed in the car.
The transmission has undergone a major change to a four-speed unit, sourced from General Motors, and has been provided with the now-obligatory sports and economy programmes, plus a winter mode which allows the system to start off in second gear.
Third provides direct drive and fourth an overdrive, driving through a new two-piece propshaft to a 3.07:1 rear axle.
This gives a boost-regulated top speed of 145mph and 0–60mph acceleration in a claimed 6.6secs.
The maximum speed restriction is surprising considering that ZR-rated 255/60x16 Avon Turbospeed tyres are already standard equipment; it is possible that the company wants to leave space for higher-performance versions still to come.
Chassis details follow the broad principles laid down by the Turbo R, with three-stage electronically controlled dampers serving what is basically a MacPherson strut front and semi-trailing arm rear suspension geometry.
The steering and braking systems are power-assisted rack and pinion and all-round ventilated discs as before and overall dimensions, dictated by the saloon's 120.5ins wheelbase, are again comparable at 210ins long and 80.5ins wide.
Those figures make the steel-bodied Continental R a leviathan by modern standards.
Amusingly, the car is so big that when the team was doing the full-size tape and paint drawings, the normal rolls were not long enough.
Yet thanks to details such as recessed wipers and near-flush glazing, Heffernan and Greenley's achievement of a 0.365 Cd is a creditable one, especially as the traditional Bentley radiator grille and twinned seven-inch headlamps have been retained.
Much attention was paid to the precise angling of this key element in the Continental R's body concept: it comes across in the metal as very much better proportioned than the photographs suggest.
The only questionable ingredient in the package is the blistered rear wheel arch treatment, reminiscent of the outgoing Honda Legend Coupe.
Little short of a revolution has taken place inside the cabin, with the traditional Rolls/Bentley facia being superseded by a more modern arrangement siting the bulk of the instruments directly in front of the driver.
A full-length central console makes an appearance, too, carrying components such as an Alpine radio/cassette system and controls for the CD autochanger cleverly mounted in the central armrest.
The rear end of the console can be detached in order to transform the two individual rear seats into a bench accommodating three.
No less a transformation has been undergone by the front seats, which now enjoy much better lateral support, thanks to substantial side bolsters, and have electronic memory adjustment for reach, height, tilt and lumbar support.
Heating elements are also standard.
But perhaps the most welcome change of all is the resiting of the automatic transmission selector lever from the steering column to the central console; Rolls-Royce's famed electronic control is retained, though.
Unusually, the switch from standard to sports transmission modes is achieved via a button on the lever itself.
Additional equipment includes remote control central door locking linked to high-security locks and an alarm system, an optional driver's side airbag and a high-level rear spotlight.
Two new colours have been added to Bentley's paint box exclusively for the Continental: the Racing Red of the Geneva show and Ming Blue.
Production of the Continental R will begin in November, with only 70 units being allocated to each of Rolls-Royce's four main territories — the UK, the United States, Europe and the Far East — in the first year.
The likely £160,000-plus list price will of course narrow the clientele down somewhat, but particular attention will still be paid to circumvent any speculative purchasers.
Initial reports from dealers seem to indicate there will be a lot more potential takers than there will be cars.
The 12 dealers we spoke to had 54 orders between them.
‘All customers will be very thoroughly vetted,’ says marketing director Malcolm Hart.
‘Even our most loyal customers will be limited to a single car each.’
For the first time since 1952 Bentley has an all-new shape to itself with the massive Continental R coupe.
Performance is 10 per cent better than that of Turbo R
A revolution has taken place in the cockpit; the facia is modern with full-length console, and the seats are now heavily bolstered.
Transmission selector has moved from steering column to console
The budget the motorists want
Everyone has their idea of what Chancellor Norman Lamont should bring the motorist on Tuesday.
David Sutherland canvasses some alternative budgets
What news will Chancellor Norman Lamont have for the motorist when he rises in the House of Commons next Tuesday to deliver his budget speech?
With the country now in recession and the drop in new car sales accelerating quickly, Lamont has few options.
In the boom years of the mid '80s the motorist was, like the drinker and smoker, a convenient source of government revenue.
The car market was strong enough to absorb extra duties.
However, to further ‘soak’ the motorist and the company car driver would be risky.
The motor trade is still in a very precarious state, with many dealers just treading water and others going bust.
Any fiscal measures dampening demand for new cars will only increase unemployment in the motor trade.
Lamont may attempt to lay down an encouraging market for the industry.
With the Gulf war over and interest rates drifting down, he may feel that a further half per cent interest rate cut coinciding with the budget will put the motor industry and its customers in a more confident mood.
However, Lamont will almost certainly announce a further increase in tax liability on company cars.
Last year it was increased by 20 per cent across the three engine capacity bands — double the inflation rate.
For instance, after 1990's budget an employee earning £17,500 per year and driving a Vauxhall Cavalier 2.0 faced tax of £700, an £87.50 increase.
The £50,000-per-year managing director driving a Mercedes-Benz had to pay £3320, an increase of £500.
Analysts agree that Lamont has plenty of scope before he comes anywhere near equating tax on company cars with the true value of the benefit.
To buy and run the above mentioned Cavalier and Mercedes-Benz, the two drivers would have to earn an extra £4900 and £10,916 respectively (the calculations being based on cost-per-mile figures from industry analysts).
This year the Treasury rumour mill has been working overtime.
Some reports quoting ‘sources close to the Treasury’ speak of swinging increases in tax liability on company cars over two litres.
Other rumours even say that the Chancellor will impose higher purchase taxes or increased VAT on large cars, as is the case in some European countries.
But it is more likely that Treasury officials are just sounding out reaction to possible measures.
The Chancellor may decide to encourage greater use of diesel: however, he has only limited scope for any price differentiation between DERV and petrol, for since December diesel has actually been 10 pence per gallon more expensive than unleaded petrol.
It costs approximately £1.95 per gallon, unleaded £1.85.
All new cars throughout the EC will have to be fitted with catalysts by the end of 1992, so the Chancellor may feel he has room to make a political gesture and grant tax incentives on catalysed cars until that date.
Incentives already exist in Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark and Greece.
These are the possibilities, but what measures should next Tuesday's budget contain?
To find out we asked a number of interested parties for their own budget proposals.
LABOUR PARTY
According to the opposition Treasury spokesman Chris Smith, MP for Islington South, big cars would come under heavy pressure from a Labour Chancellor.
He said: ‘We would want to discourage the needless use of big gas guzzlers.
We would consider a graded road tax system, probably with a two-litre threshold.’
Smith conceded that higher taxes on big cars would have a harmful effect on the UK's motor industry, hurting Jaguar in particular, which is already suffering a severe fall in demand.
But he quoted a survey that reported that 51 per cent of all company cars were imported.
Labour would introduce green measures.
Smith said: ‘We would remove VAT form the price of a catalyst option, and would also reduce car tax by £50 on catalysed cars.’
Labour would continue to increase the tax liability on company cars ahead of the inflation rate.
INDUSTRY ANALYST
Garel Rhys, professor of motor industry economics at Cardiff University, believes the motor industry needs a boost, and suggests that car tax should be cut from approximately 10 per cent to 5 per cent.
Rhys considers it unwise to attempt radically to alter taxes on large cars, as proposed by Labour: ‘You can't just decimate the luxury car trade,’ he says, ‘Most big cars may well come from Germany but you have to consider how it would affect the dealer network.’
However, Rhys firmly believes that some regulation on the use of large cars would be prudent through increased petrol duty.
He points out that petrol is now very cheap: if, in real terms, it were to be the equivalent price of a decade ago it would cost over £4 a gallon.
And he supports the long-floated idea that road tax should be scrapped, with the equivalent revenue drawn from petrol duty.
THE MOTOR INDUSTRY
Car manufacturers are represented by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, and not surprisingly the SMMT has observed sharply declining car sales with alarm.
It also points out that while the UK is enjoying something of an export boom the industry needs to stimulate home sales to allow for continued export investment.
The SMMT is also unhappy about the amount of motor tax paid by the motor industry and motorists.
It points out that in 1989 government revenue was £18.1 billion, made up of £2.9 billion from road tax, £1.5 billion from car tax, £5 billion from VAT and £8.7 billion from fuel taxes.
During the same period the government gave the motorist just £3.8 back in road building.
The SMMT calls for the total abolition of car tax, which it says would bring car prices into line with those in Europe.
It does not propose any significant environmental measures, but it does suggest a lower duty on diesel.
It also calls for a higher price threshold for company car tax.
Car dealers are bearing the brunt of the recession, and their representative body, the Retail Motor Industry Federation, calls for the abolition of car tax.
It points out that this was introduced as a ‘temporary measure’ in 1973.
But the RMIF wants car tax taken out over five years to prevent residuals being hit.
THE MOTORIST
Clearly drivers want motoring to be cheaper, but the largest motoring organisation, the Automobile Association, puts forward strong environmental proposals in its budget submission.
It advises the Chancellor to encourage environmentally cleaner cars rather than taxing cars more punitively to restrict their use.
It calls for the abolition of car tax on catalysed cars, and a 20 pence per gallon difference between leaded and unleaded fuel.
It wants a reduction in diesel fuel duty plus a lower level of road tax on diesel cars.
Despite the general belief among cost analysts that the tax on company cars currently does not equate to the benefit, the AA says there should be no further increase.
The AA also argues that company cars promote lower exhaust pollution levels.
ENVIRONMENTALISTS
Friends of the Earth proposes a dozen green taxes, three of which would directly affect the motorist, It calls for abolition of road tax, but for the price of petrol to be raised to what it was in real terms in 1975.
The extra revenue would then be spent on public transport.
All corporate tax relief on company cars would be phased out, and new cars sold without catalysts would attract higher taxes.
‘It is scandalous that only a tiny fraction of cars in the UK have catalysts fitted.
Drivers of cars without should pay more,’ say FoE.
Chancellor Norman Lamont: likely to raise tax liability on company cars in the budget
Value of benefit of company cars still far exceeds tax
WIN ONE OF THE BEST OF 1991
THIS WEEK: A PEUGEOT 205XS WORTH £9725
The Peugeot 205XS doesn't carry a ‘GT’ badge — but it deserves to.
The 1360cc 85bhp all-alloy engine is free-revving yet willing in the mid range and, combined with a close-spaced, slick-shifting five-speed gearbox, makes for a car that loves to be driven hard but which is equally at home trickling through town.
The 205's chassis has achieved almost legendary status.
On 165/70 SR13 Michelins, the 205XS has excellent grip nd handles in a very neutral fashion.
The steering is unassisted, but that's no hardship.
As with all 205s, the balance and steering response of the XS don't come at the expense of an uncompromising ride.
The suspension is quite firm but well-controlled and remains supple at lower speeds, too.
On the motorway there's no tyre roar and very little wind noise and, provided the revs aren't allowed to stray far beyond the 5000rpm mark, engine noise doesn't penetrate the cabin too much.
Maximum power is developed at a rather elevated 6400rpm and a steady 70mph sees the engine spinning at 4000rpm, right on the torque peak.
The result is that overtaking needs less gearchanging than you might imagine.
But despite overall overall gearing that's clearly designed with performance in mind, an overall fuel consumption of 32.6mpg shows that the 205XS is still impressively frugal.
Eight years after its launch, the 205 remains among the front-runners at the top of the small hatchback class.
Its timeless shape and impressive dynamics are reflected across the range and, as a value-for-money package that's still terrific fun to drive, the 205XS takes some beating.
Indeed, the little Peugeot has achieved something close to cult status, a point highlighted by the eye-catching TV commercial for the XS.
•Like all new Peugeots, this 205XS comes with free membership of the AA and, subject to restrictions (see Rules & Regulations) will be taxed and insured by the AA.
Membership means that you can call on the AA's swift and efficient service 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
For peace of mind motoring, join the world's largest motoring organisation.
Phone free on 0800 919595 between 9am and 5pm any day of the week, call in at any AA shop or approach any of the AA sales team.
THE COMPETITION
Autocar & Motor , Britain's best motoring magazine, is giving away a range of stunning Peugeots, taxed and with full AA membership, plus a VIP trip to watch 1982 world champion Keke Rosberg drive the fabulous new Peugeot 905 in the World Sportscar Championship at Silverstone on 19 May.
All you have to do is follow the simple steps in the ‘how to enter’ box.
Each week's competitions will be judged separately.
HOW TO ENTER
Hidden in the word square are the names of more than 30 makes or models of cars.
They may be vertical, horizontal, diagonal or even spelt backwards but all are in a straight line.
a) Circle all the words you can find in the word square, count them and fill in your total in the space on the form.
b) Complete the tie-breaker slogan.
c) Fill in your personal details.
d) Cut out the coupon on this page and attach to the correct space on the entry form.
e) You may enter for all five competitions but remember, you will need the coupon printed in each week's issue of Autocar & Motor .
f) If you miss a copy, please send £2.50 per issue to Haymarket Reprints, PO Box 200, Abingdon, Oxon.
OX14 3FG.
They will send the issue by return.
g) Send the entry form, including the marked-up word square, with the appropriate coupon attached to Autocar & Motor , Win a Peugeot, 38–42 Hampton Road, Teddington, Middlesex.
TW11 0JE.
The closing date is 19 April, 1991.
RULES & REGULATIONS
1 The competition is open to all residents of the UK over the age of 18 holding current UK full driving licences, other than employees (and their families) of Haymarket Magazines Ltd, Peugeot, the AA or their agents.
2 All entries must be received by 19 April, 1991.
Responsibility cannot be accepted for entries lost or damaged in the post or offered for delivery insufficiently stamped.
Damaged, defaced or illegible entries will be disqualified.
3 Each week's prizes will be awarded to those entrants who have found the greatest number of car words in the square.
In the case of a tie, the prize will be awarded to the person who, in the opinion of the judges, has completed the most apt and original tie-breaker.
4 All entries will be judged by a panel of judges appointed by Haymarket Motoring Publications Ltd. 5 The judges' decision will be final and no correspondence will be entered into.
But out of or in connection with the competition, the decision of Haymarket Motoring Publications Ltd will be legally binding.
6 Entries will become the property of Haymarket Motoring Publications Ltd. 7 It is a condition of entry that the rules of the competition are accepted as final and that competitors agree to be bound by the rules.
8 No entrant may win more than one prize.
9 No cash alternative will be offered.
10 All prize winners will be notified by post.
11 The winning solutions and the names and counties of the prize winners will be announced in the 8 May issue of Autocar & Motor .
12 Entrants may submit as many entries as they wish, provided each entry is accompanied by the specified proof of purchase coupon.
13 AA insurance is fully comprehensive for one calendar up to a premium value of £500.
Restrictions due to driving record, age or other reason may apply.
14 The prizes are defined as: Week 1 — Peugeot 205XS; Week 2 — Peugeot 309GTi; Week 3 — a VIP trip, to Silverstone; Week 4 — Peugeot 405SRi; Week 5 — Peugeot 605SV1 
Cut out this coupon and affix to space on entry form
US G.P.
The champion comes out punching
Senna's rivals in will have to look much more convincing than they did in Phoenix if the Brazilian is to be kept from winning his third title, reports Maurice Hamilton
By the time they had reached the end of Jefferson Street for the first time, the US Grand Prix was all over.
Ayrton Senna was in the lead and that's where he would stay for the rest of the afternoon.
His McLaren-Honda, which had not turned a wheel until two days before, did not miss a beat.
You would have thought there might be a problem of some sort: just a small failure perhaps; something which would suggest that all was not well within the house of the world champions; something which would give the rest a smidgeon of hope for the remainder of the season.
Forget it.
This was as crushing a demonstration as we have seen from Senna and McLaren-Honda.
It was a brilliant display of this team's ability to cope with the difficulties imposed by introducing a new chassis and engine.
The only familiar elements were the driver and the team structure — and both performed faultlessly.
As usual.
There was talk before the start of the competition having become more intense; of the gap between McLaren and the rest having been reduced to the point where we might have a race on our hands.
That may turn out to be the case as the likes of Ferrari, Williams-Renault and Benetton-Ford get into their stride later in the season, but on the streets of Phoenix, Senna had no trouble in scoring his 27th win.
It brings him into joint second place with Jackie Stewart in the league table of grand prix victories, but there is still some way to go before Senna matches the 44 won by Alain Prost, the man the media love Senna to hate.
They started from the front row on Sunday, Senna having produced his usual stunning lap to take pole, Prost following through in the Ferrari with a lap notable for its customary smoothness and precision.
The local television station made much of the rivalry between these two, but, in the event, Prost never got close enough to even suggest the onset of further controversy.
By the end of the first lap, Senna led by 1.8secs.
By the end of lap five, the gap was 4.1secs.
During the practice, Prost had been impressed by both the McLaren and the Williams and his worst fears were confirmed as Senna pulled inexorably away and the multi-coloured Williams of Nigel Mansell began to move about in Prost's mirrors.
Mansell had started from the outside of the second row after a troubled two days with the new car.
During a slow lap on Friday, the first day of practice, Mansell had gone off line slightly and it was enough to have the Williams slide into a tyre barrier and snap off the right-hand suspension.
There were also problems with the semi-automatic gearbox and a broken constant-velocity joint, so much so that Mansell was eased into fourth place on the grid by a very impressive lap from his team mate.
Riccardo Patrese is the number two driver in the Williams team but, throughout the weekend, he drove with great aggression.
It was as though he had a point to prove.
On the first lap, the Italian veteran was edged into fifth place by Jean Alesi's Ferrari and, for the next 30 minutes, he had to work hard to win the place back.
He succeeded on lap 17 and immediately closed on Mansell who, in turn, was continuing to harass Prost.
This was something of bonus for the Williams since it had learned next to nothing during practice thanks to niggling problems associated with a new car.
On lap 21, it seemed it might have a niggling problem with its drivers as Patrese made a serious lunge down the inside and Mansell made an equally serious attempt to stop him.
Patrese left his braking too late and shot straight into the escape road, narrowly missing his team-mate as Mansell took avoiding action.
There was no hint of bitterness afterwards.
But it could be an interesting relationship as the season progresses.
Patrese, having dropped to sixth, hauled himself back into contention, passing Berger and Alesi (again) and was in second place as the pit stops began.
Clearly, the Williams-Renault was on the pace even though gearbox trouble would eventually account for both drivers, Patrese's departure being the more dramatic of the two.
The gearbox selected neutral as Patrese went through a quick left-hander, a problem which he could have coped with had the mechanism not decided to offer him, without warning, second gear half-way through.
The Williams locked its rear wheels, spun and stalled on the racing line — just out of the sight of those following.
Two cars managed to avoid him, but Roberto Moreno, holding a steady fourth in the Benetton, ran straight into the front of the Williams, doing serious damage to both.
The incident occurred on lap 50, by which time Mansell had already ground to a halt with no gears.
All of the Goodyear teams had chosen the softest race tyre available in the hope that the could run non-stop.
Prost, 27secs behind Senna, changed tyres on lap 45 and the news was quickly relayed to Senna.
Deciding that his lead was comfortable enough to make a precautionary stop, Senna came in at the end of lap 48.
Whereas Prost had been delayed as the Ferrari mechanics fiddled with the right-rear wheel, Senna's stop went like clockwork.
He was at a standstill for just 7.5secs and returned with his lead still intact.
All that stood in the way of victory was a touch of bad luck.
And, the way things had been going for Gerhard Berger, it was perhaps no surprise that it should be his McLaren which would suffer that fate.
Berger was seventh on the grid, this the result of being too cautious with one set of qualifying tyres and too forceful with the other.
At no point throughout the weekend did he seem at ease in the new car, his driving lacking the urgent but dramatically effective style seen in the past.
Stuck behind Patrese, Berger had to cope with high water temperatures and a loss of power until a fuel pump failure caused retirement on lap 37.
Berger watched the race for a while and it was tempting to speculate on his thoughts as the cars of his former employer, Ferrari, screamed by in second and third places, Alesi keeping a respectful distance behind his team leader.
On Friday, though, Alesi had been the top man as he claimed the overnight pole, but he lost any chance of keeping it with a wall-bashing incident, which came as no surprise to anyone who had watched his outrageously extrovert efforts.
Alesi's had been the first leading car to stop during the race and the merit in changing tyres became clear when he immediately set the fastest lap of the race.
As the race headed towards the final 10 laps, he was in second place, but under serious pressure from Piquet's Benetton and the fast-approaching Ferrari of his team-mate.
What happened next was tailor-made for the crafty Prost.
Powering onto the straight, Alesi lost control briefly.
Piquet, having to swing wide, then pulled alongside but Prost, without losing any momentum at all, passed them both.
It was the perfect opportunist move although, in the end, it would be made largely irrelevant by Alesi's retirement with a broken gearbox.
Prost's second place was never likely to be challenged as Piquet struggled to find grip form his Pirellis.
The tyre choice had been largely dictated by a very encouraging performance when Piquet ran with the car in race trim on Saturday.
It was hot then but on the race day it was cloudy and cool.
The drop in temperature made all the difference and the tyres chosen were too hard.
Indeed, at the end of 81 laps, they were scarcely worn at all.
Neither Tyrrell driver stopped and, while the brown paint scheme did little to flatter the Honda-powered cars, it was reliability that mattered most, Stefano Modena and Satoru Nakajima taking fourth and fifth places.
But perhaps the greatest personal satisfaction was earned by Gerard Larrousse as he watched Aguri Suzuki finish sixth in the Larrousse-Lola and poke a championship point in the eye of those who had recently stripped the French team of its hard-won rewards from last year.
Now, of course, with every race counting towards the championship, points earned on a Sunday afternoon matter like never before.
The race through the streets of Phoenix is not a useful guide to a car's potential on more conventional circuits, but the US Grand Prix did prove that McLaren and Honda have emerged from the winter stronger than ever.
Perhaps the rest will catch up in Brazil; perhaps the McLaren-Honda will be lacking on faster circuits.
But, regardless of the future, Senna already has 10 points under his belt.
And you had the impression he knew that would be the case as he raced down Jefferson Avenue for the first time.
Left: new Honda V12 performed faultlessly for Senna to score easy victory.
Right, from the top: Benetton chose wrong Pirelli tyres but Piquet drove steadily for third place.
Andrea de Cesaris reads the bad news, he failed to pre-qualify the new Jordan.
Second on the grid, second in the race, but Prost and the Ferrari were no match for Senna.
Patrese out-qualified team-leader Mansell and drove a storming race until gearbox failure caused a retirement crash
Mansell's return to Williams ended with gearbox failure before half the distance (above left).
Betrand Gachot brought the new Jordan to 10th place (left).
Tyrrell-Hondas were reliable, Modena took fourth (right)
Encouraging start for the new combinations
The new recruits — and there are many this season — handled themselves with distinction in such difficult surroundings.
Not only did Nicola Larini manage to bring the new Modena-Lamborghini through pre-qualifying and then into the race, he gave the new team more than it had thought possible by finishing seventh, albeit three laps behind.
There were impressive performances from the Judd-powered Dallaras until Emanuele Pirro and JJ Lehto retired with gearbox and clutch problems respectively.
Martin Brundle put the Brabham-Yamaha into 12th place on the grid — despite not having the benefit of special fuel for qualifying and a rev limit of 12,000rpm as opposed to the 13,000rpm-plus enjoyed by other V12 users.
The new combination was running at the finish after a lengthy stop for repairs to damaged rear suspension.
Mika Hakkinen did a superb job for the under-financed Lotus team, the young Finn impressing everyone with his mature and confident approach after stepping up from Formula 3.
The Ilmor engines ran faultlessly (any problems were associated with ancillary failures) despite the Leyton House team having a weekend made difficult by and act of sabotage on Friday evening and damage to one car when Mauricio Gugelmin hit the wall during practice.
And the Jordan team, despite the initial disappointment of losing Andrea de Cesaris when the Italian missed a gear and caused an engine failure during pre-qualifying, showed its capacity to be part of Formula 1.
Bertrand Gachot had not raced for over a year, but his relative inexperience did not show as he began to attack Suzuki's Lola in the race's later stages.
Gachot then spun after running over some debris from the Patrese/Moreno incident and the subsequent tyre stop cost him time.
He was eventually classified tenth even though engine failure to the Ford HB V8 had brought his race to a halt six laps from the end.
The old order may not have changed at the front but there are encouraging signs for the future further down the field.
Larini impressed for Lambourghini
SPORT
GRAND PRIX DISPATCHES
PHOENIX
Maurice Hamilton
•Williams was due to carry out urgent tests in England in a bid to trace and cure the gearbox problems evident in Phoenix.
•The Phoenix city authority has announced it may relinquish financial involvement in the grand prix next year and seek an independent promoter.
Bernie Ecclestone, however, feels guardedly optimistic, ‘It always takes a long time to get an F1 race up and running in the US,’ he said.
‘We have an option to stage races here in 1992 and '93 and I am hopeful we will be able to continue in both these years.’
•Long Beach Grand Prix founder Chris Pook arrived in Phoenix to show off elaborate plans for a purpose-built, multi-disciplinary stadium which is scheduled to be built near Dallas next year.
FISA has been invited to design its F1 circuit within the complex and it is Pook's belief that it will provide a permanent home ‘for one of the grands prix in the US’.
•The mayor of Phoenix said he was encouraged by the positive response to the grand prix from the city.
He judged the size of the crowd at about 35,000 — small by standards elsewhere but an improvement over attendance figures for the past two years.
•Phil Hill was honoured by the race organisers to mark the world title the American diver won 30 years ago.
•A new signal at the start of the race told drivers that the red light would come on in five seconds.
The intention was to assist drivers on the front few rows, who can spend up to 90 seconds waiting for the rest of the grid to form.
'91 Silver Arrow heralds Merc F1
Mercedes last week announced the car with which it will defend its world sportscar crown and begin preparations for an F1 assault.
An insider said last week: ‘If the new flat-12 3.5-litre engine in the car will run reliably at 17,000rpm, then we'll go ahead and build a V12 version for F1.’
Our source indicated that Niki Lauda, F1 world champion in 1975, 1977 and 1984, will be appointed to manage the F1 team and that the car will run without sponsors.
The new Group C car, the C291, carries nothing over from last year's dominant C11 and packs an all-new 3.5-litre flat 12 to comply with new regulations governing the renamed World Sportscar Championship.
Again the work of Peter Sauber, the C291 is built entirely from synthetics.
It features radiators mounted on the side, not the nose, of the car and this, in conjunction with the flat 12, allows a massive ground effect venturi section.
The new purpose-built engine and gearbox features a central power take-off and the flat 12 is of a monobloc design.
The gearbox is operated via a push-pull selector which does away with a conventional gate.
Mercedes also announced that Briton Jonathan Palmer would join the team's extra drivers at Le Mans in June.
The series starts on 14 April.
Silver Arrow (left) is all new for 1991.
A 3.5-litre flat 12 provides the power
Prost hits out at FISA disciplinary rules
Alain Prost has expressed considerable concern that FISA's strict new rules on driver discipline might result in ostensibly innocent racing manoeuvres attracting draconian penalties during the 1991 world championship season.
‘Although there are several people sitting on the FISA Commission whom I like and respect, none of them has ever done any serious motor racing,’ he warned.
‘As a driver who is generally considered as being more level-headed than most, I want to know whether there is any danger of me being banned for two months if I have an accident here at Phoenix.
Consequently, I am quite concerned about this Commission.’
Gerhard Berger echoed this concern, pointing out that FISA would have to be very careful in its application of the new driver discipline regulations to avoid creating boring races.
‘If a driver knows that any attempt to overtake the car ahead of him will risk a fine or disqualification, then he will not try,’ the Austrian said.
‘With normally aspirated engines, sometimes the difference in power output between competing cars is only around five brake horsepower.
That makes passing very difficult.’
Berger also recalled last year's Mexico Grand Prix, in which he and Nigel Mansell became embroiled in a tremendous battle during the closing stages of the race.
‘We touched wheels and nearly went off the road,’ he grinned.
‘And afterwards, Jean-Marie Balestre came over to congratulate me on a fantastic race.
‘But now I am concerned that he might have a different response this year!’
Prost (right) is worried that he could be penalised for being involved in ostensibly innocent race clashes
‘Pirate’ Indy car race prompts FISA threat
Goodyear was among a group of major companies threatened with worldwide suspension from motor sport by FISA president Jean-Marie Balestre as a penalty for supporting next Sunday's ‘pirate’ Indycar race at Surfers Paradise in Australia.
At a press conference in Phoenix, Balestre initially hinted at a conciliatory line in the dispute between CART and FISA, but then came out with the stern suspension threat, which also encompassed Indycar engine makers Cosworth and Ilmor.
Paddock opinion agreed that it was ludicrous to imagine that Goodyear would be banned from international racing, a move that would destroy F1 at a stroke.
Mercifully, Balestre subsequently retracted the ban on Goodyear, but emphasized that Cosworth and Ilmor would face serious sanctions.
Ilmor's Mario Ilien responded to the apparent inconsistency of these threats by pointing out that Fiat did not appear to be included in the ban — even though it has an official Alfa Romeo CART team, operated by Patrick Racing, competing in the Surfers event.
Mario and Michael Andretti were passing through Phoenix en route to the Australian event, confident that the drivers would not be debarred from applying for FISA international licences.
‘I will not be applying for a FISA licence until after the Surfers race,’ said Mario, ‘and I don't foresee any problems.
Drivers are professionals who are employed to race where their teams compete and I don't think they would be penalised for doing their jobs.’
Indycar teams and suppliers are still taking part in next weekend's ‘pirate’ race in Australia, despite FISA's threat to ban them from all international motorsport
Sainz easy winner in Portugal
Carlos Sainz's victory for Toyota on the Rally of Portugal last week gives him a 13-point lead in the world championship.
His main opposition came from Lancia's Didier Auriol and Miki Biasion, who finished second and third.
The anticipated challenge from Ford's Sierra Cosworths ended when all three drivers made mistakes on the first sodden day, leaving Subaru and Mazda to fill out the top placings.
Full report next week.
Sainz: still dominant
Senna buries the hatchet
Ayrton Senna struck a cautiously conciliatory note in Phoenix last Thursday on the eve of first practice for the opening F1 race of the year.
Many regarded his words as perhaps signalling that his feud with Alain Prost — fuelled to boiling point after their collision at Suzuka last October — may be cooling slightly.
‘He is one of the best,’ stated the Brazilian unequivocally.
‘His record speaks for itself.
But apart from our passion for the sport, we share nothing on a personal level.
We come from different backgrounds, from the point of view of our upbringing and our education, and approach our racing in different ways.’
Perhaps predictably, Senna was not in full support of the new point-scoring system, in which all 16 races count towards the title.
In 1988, the Brazilian won his first title when the ‘11 out of 16’ rule applied, despite Prost having a higher gross total.
‘I don't think it is the right system,’ he insisted.
‘Eleven races might not be the optimum number, but a compromise between the two would probably produce a better system.
With 16 races counting, a chance engine failure or a stone through the radiator could decide the outcome of the championship.
The system should allow for some unexpected failures, which are out of the drivers' control, to occur.’
Senna: conciliatory tone
IN BRIEF Toyota has begun testing its normally aspirated V10 WSC engine.
The engine ran in Japan last month in a development chassis based on last year's turbocar.
The definitive chassis, designed by Englishman Tony Southgate, is expected to make its debut in the last two WSC races this year.
Vern Schuppan , not content with building 50 road-going Porsche 962s, will run two rebodied, all-synthetic 962s at Le Mans this year with chassis lifted directly from the road car.
West Surrey Racing , Britain's most successful F3 team, has announced it will run Ralt chassis for its new drivers — Jordi Gene, Rubens Barrichello and Pedro Diniz — in this year's British F3 championship.
Previous WSR drivers include Jonathan Palmer and Ayrton Senna.
The Safari Rally will feature eight A-seeded drivers.
Backing up world champion Carlos Sainz in the Toyota team will be Bjorn Waldegard and Mikael Ericsson, while Lancia will have Juha Kankkunen, Jorge Recalde and Miki Biasion.
Most interest will centre on the performance of the Nissan Sunnys driven by Stig Blomqvist and David Llewellin.
Tom Sneva, a former winner of the Indianapolis 500 but out of a drive in CART racing this year, entered the Formula 3 support race at Phoenix.
The American was forced to withdraw because of engine failure.
Julian Bailey, despite failing to qualify his Lotus 102B at Phoenix, is understood to be prepared to commit himself to Lotus for the entire season — if Martin Donnelly isn't fit enough to race — backed by a personal investment of up to £75,000, earned during two years with the Group C Nissan team.
‘I'm not yet 30 and I've still got plenty of time to earn more money,’ he shrugged.
‘But I would hate to get to 40 and look back, thinking: ‘I wish I'd given it my best shot’.’
ARRIVALS
Volvo Turbo: now less taxing
A simple turbocharging job turns the lethargic twin-litre 940 SE into a spirited performer designed to stay the right side of the company car tax.
By John Simister
Volvo's turbocharged big saloon has always been a bit of a maverick.
Square-cut and staid to behold, it packs a potent punch quite at odds with its looks.
Today's 940 Turbo fits that description as comfortably as the old 740 Turbo did.
Now, however, there are not one but two turbocharged 940s.
The existing 2.3-litre, 165bhp, all-bells-and-whistles 940 Turbo is joined by a new, turbo-boosted version of the two-litre 940 SE.
This latest derivative is a cheaper and tamer Turbo, true, but as it comes under the two vital company car tax breaks points (2000cc and £19,250), its role is clear.
Making a 940 SE into a 940 SE Turbo couldn't be simpler.
The engine itself is unchanged internally, even to the extent of keeping the normally aspirated version's highish compression ratio.
The rest of the car is regular SE too, apart from the four-speed plus overdrive gearbox, borrowed from the 2.3-litre car, in place of the standard SE's five-speed item, which can't cope with the turbo's muscle.
So all that's involved is bolting a turbocharger, sourced from either Garrett AiResearch or Volvo's Japanese affiliate, Mitsubishi, to a redesigned exhaust manifold and adding new intake plumbing, including a large intercooler.
The turbocharger is water cooled and its vanes are small to keep inertia down.
This helps it to spin up to speed quickly, which reduces turbo lag and improves that all-important mid-range response, although at the expense of outright potency.
But then terrific top-end power and tarmac-scorching standing starts were not on the design team's agenda.
Flying in the face of today's ubiquitous  electronickery , the turbocharger uses nothing more than a simple spring-loaded wastegate to regulate boost, which is never allowed to build too high in deference to the engine's life expectancy.
Should the wastegate jam shut, the Bosch LH-Jetronic fuel injection senses an excess of intake air for the engine speed and throttle opening and cuts the fuel supply.
Outputs rise from the standard SE's lacklustre 111bhp and 117lb ft of torque to a much healthier 155bhp at 5500rpm and 169lb ft of torque at 3600rpm.
You pay £870 for the extra muscle, taking the SE's price from £17,475 to £18,345 (or from £18575 to £19,245 for the estate).
This seems a very fair deal, for the transformation is pretty dramatic.
Volvo's two-litre B200 engine had always been smoother than the bigger-bore 2.3, but it made no more than an adequate job of hauling the corpulent 940.
The turbo engine's pull is no better at very low revs, but once the boost gauge's needle awakens, the 940 surges forward very satisfactorily.
It's a good, plumb torque curve, which makes for easy overtaking and fewer gearchanges.
Naturally, outright performance is also much improved.
To reach 62mph from standstill needs 9.6secs instead of 12, while the maximum speed climbs from 112mph to 126mph.
These figures — achieved with a standard fit catalyst, remember — make the Volvo one of the quickest cars in its class.
But all is not perfect.
There's an irritating ‘zizz’ from the engine when revved vigorously, and the overdrive gearbox shifts less sweetly than the five-speeder.
The overdrive is a bit anachronistic, too, and calls for deft clutchwork if you are to avoid a jerk and a thump.
Is Volvo the last car maker to use an add-on overdrive?
It's hard to think of another.
Anachronisms abound elsewhere, too.
Take the live rear axle: it betrays its presence when pulling away from test, when the driveline vibrates gently, and over uneven secondary roads, when the high unsprung weight makes the ride restless.
Still, the handling is quite fun in a predictable, laid-back, rear-wheel-drive way.
You'd never call the 940 incisive; it's not a car to be rushed into a direction change.
But it's unerringly steady when you're pressing on, and lurches slightly less ponderously into a tight bend than does its more sophisticated (and independently sprung) 960 24v sister.
It takes a slippery road to make the Volvo wag its tail; over-exuberance with the throttle otherwise does nothing more than make the inside rear wheel spin the power away.
The transformations that made the 740 into the 940 — a more rounded rump with a bigger boot, a more modern, 960-like facia, bigger brakes and more front headroom — are all worthwhile, and the 940 SE Turbo is solid, well built, generously equipped and decently rapid.
No doubt it will suit company car users down to the ground.
But this does not disguise its dated feel in a world of more advanced and dynamic designs.
Interior is unchanged from standard 940 SE, as is dash save for the giveaway turbo boost gauge.
Styling is less square cut than predecessor's but still pretty ponderous compared with others in the class.
Big Volvo is well made and the finish is good
Paseo flatters to deceive
Toyota's Paseo coupe is cute and excellent value for money, but it lacks sparkle.
Peter Nunn tries it in Japan
If looks could kill, the Toyota Paseo would pass as a deadly weapon.
This has to be one of the slickest cars Japan has yet made.
The sporty 1.5-litre twin-cam coupe, known on the home market as the Cynos, is gunning straight for the Honda CRX and Nissan NX coupe — but not in the UK, because exports to this country aren't planned.
Overlook the oddball Cynos badge on the back (Cynos is derived from cynosure, or centre of attention) and the cute rear-drive Toyota coupe has plenty going for it.
It's snug, sexy and exceptional value for money at a basic Y1.07 million to Y1.331 million.
On the road, though, it'll come to a lot more than that.
But it's still able to undercut the CRX by a useful margin.
While the price is a strong ace on the Paseo pack, most people will already be sold on its looks.
Some recent Toyotas have had strong US design input, but not the Paseo.
Even though California will be one of its major markets, everything was done in Japan.
Based on the 93.7ins platform of the new three-door Tercel, the Paseo is roughly the same size as the CRX, but more practical.
It is a genuine two-plus-two, with a set of rear seats you can actually use.
The Paseo also has a conventional, if shallow, boot.
With a length of 163.2ins, width of 64.8ins and height of 50.9ins, interior space is inevitably snug.
But there's plenty of seat adjustment and the driving position is faultless.
However, the shallow roofline means no sunroof, much less the targa roof of an MR2.
Interior presentation, as well as general fit and finish, is as good as you would expect from Toyota.
The dash, in particular, is very well done, with clear gauges and logical controls.
What you don't expect is the level of NVH from the drivetrain and suspension.
It isn't serious enough to spoil your enjoyment of the car but is hard to understand from a company that spent millions developing the Lexus, the car that banished noise, vibration and harshness.
As you drive, this NVH manifests itself in the form of tiny vibrations fed back through the steering wheel and the gruff, uninspiring sounds from the SE-FHE engine.
The Paseo simply isn't as refined as it should be, although some elements of the equation, such as the smooth, light manual shift and positive clutch, are as good as you'll find anywhere and make it a doddle to drive.
When it comes to the expected sporty performance and handling, the Paseo again falls short of the mark.
Its 115bhp 1496cc engine, first seen in the Sera, is responsive to the throttle but otherwise shows little sparkle.
It revs to the 7400rpm red line, but the driver is usually forced to change up a good 2500rpm before then because it's all starting to get noisy.
While flexibility is impressive enough, an estimated 0–60mph time of 9secs makes the Paseo only modestly quick.
The suspension settings are stiffer than they are on the Tercel, and with the option of Toyota's TEMS electronic damping the spec sounds good.
But once more the Paseo flatters to deceive.
The chassis seems to be set up more for stability than agility.
So while the Paseo feel safe and secure through corners, you long for the poise and quick reflexes of a CRX.
Better news is that torque steer is almost non-existent and the level of grip from the (optional) 185/60 R14 82H Bridgestone Potenzas is high.
Understeer and roll are well contained, but for the enthusiast driver the Paseo's dull turn-in and bland steering are disappointing.
A car of mixed abilities, the Paseo combines head-turning looks with a bargain price.
While those are powerful arguments, more speed, extra refinement and sharper handling would put it right on the pace.
Rear-drive Paseo's looks are its best feature.
Interior is snug but seats four at a pinch.
Twin-cam lacks sparkle and refinement
DIARY
Eoin Young
‘I told him about his man Modena at 40–1.
Suddenly he had time to chat’
The tipsters and sporting gentlemen who frequent the stables and have the inside running from the horse's mouth as well as from the trainers and jockeys suggest that if you are seeking a handsome return on an investment you should sell your house and put the money on Alain Prost to win the world championship this year.
The smart-money crowd is saying that the revised scoring — with every race counting for title points — is tailor-made for this French Ferrari driver, who now has a more-than-willing helper in Jean Alesi to look after the business of returning the Ferrari compliment to Senna and allowing Prost to go about his business unencumbered by Brazilians wishing to use his piece of road.
Bookmakers Ladbrokes are catching up with the odds on races on four wheels instead of four legs and offering odds on Senna (11–8) and Prost (7–4) for the world championship during the week the cars were being loaded for the opening grand prix in Phoenix.
Alesi and Mansell were 8–1, Berger 9–1, Piquet 14, Patrese 20, Moreno 25, Modena 40, Boutsen 50, Comas and Gachot 66 and Capelli and Gugelmin 80–1.
Which may not rank the outsiders in the eyes of the Ladbrokes odds-maker, but if they look over the fence they will certainly be able to see the outsiders from where they have been placed.
Since I had collected a handsome pay-out from Ladbrokes a year earlier with money on Alesi I thought it only fair to 'phone Ken Tyrrell and tell him the odds.
He said he was very busy.
Then I told him about his man Modena at 40–1.
Suddenly he had time to chat.
Minutes later he 'phoned back and asked how to place a bet because he'd never done it before.
The Mastermind television quiz game turned its attention to Formula 1 motor racing when Michael Swartz took it as his specialised subject recently.
As the Young family regularly pits its wits against the Mastermind contenders with spectacular lack of success most Sundays, I was expected to do better than usual.
I flunked the first question: ‘On which circuit was the first Formula 1 world championship event held?’
I just knew it would be a trick question to start the contest and was desperately groping for a trick answer when Swartz said ‘Silverstone’ and scored his opening point.
I am ashamed to admit that I scored 11 and Martin Swartz scored 17.
Perhaps he'd like a week penning this column.
In 1950 the Alfa Romeo team drivers were known as ‘The Three Fs’— Fangio, Farina and who was the third?
Fagioli.
Who was the official winner of the 1976 British Grand Prix after James Hunt was disqualified?
Lauda.
Three teams in 1969 raced four-wheel drive — Lotus, Tyrrell-Matra and who was the third?
I said McLaren and Swartz said Cosworth which was close but wrong.
In 1961, which driver won the first grand prix he entered?
Obviously another trick question and I was still fumbling with words when Swartz said ‘Baghetti’.
No wonder he did better than me.
I was in the hotel room next door to Baghetti at Rheims that year and yet I couldn't find his name to score a point in a quiz 30 years later!
At Martin Brundle's lunch in London I discovered that Maurice Hamilton had been the Mastermind question-setter and he reported that if I thought answering them was hard, he had found setting them a good deal harder.
He wasn't allowed to use one question because the quizmasters said it was impossible to prove the exactness of the answer.
I can't see what all the fuss was about.
There were three world champions with brothers who raced on Formula 1 — Emerson Fittipaldi, Jody Scheckter and which other champion?
Give up?
Thought you would.
The answer is Jackie Stewart, whose elder brother Jimmy drove a Cooper-Bristol in the 1953 British Grand Prix.
He was the youngest driver in the field, qualified on the fifth row and was up to sixth place with 10 laps to go as leading British driver in a British car when he crashed at Copse, escaping unhurt.
Martin Brundle speaks with the disarming honesty of an F1 driver who is buying lunch in a private room at Au Jardin des Gourmets for a dozen pressmen on the day the Gulf war ended and a week before the F1 season started.
The impression I have is that once the Brabham-taming begins he won't have time to speak to us again, never mind buy lunches.
‘The car looks fantastic,’ he says.
‘But then they all say that at this time of year, don't they?’
Brundle enthuses over the potential of the Yamaha engine and the Japanese connection as a whole.
‘It looks as though Japan is where we're going to get our chances from.’
he says, using the royal ‘we’ to encompass the British drivers and teams.
‘We're never going to get financial help in Britain.’
The Yamaha is good but not wonderful at present.
Great torque, good mid-range power, but needs more at the top end.
Yamaha should take solace from the thought that Senna was bitching about the power of the new V12 Honda, later saying he had been misquoted and that there was ‘nothing fundamentally wrong’ with the new Honda.
To echo Brundle: ‘But they all say that at this time of year, don't they?’
What Brundle does do well is enthuse, but then I suppose that's his car salesman training back home.
He says they have a few pounds to trim off the engine but that will be achieved by Imola.
And he is personally trim and fit.
‘Last time I was this fit I was captaining the under-16s at King's Lynn Grammar School.’
Ken Tyrrell — anxiously awaiting a call from his bookmaker?
YOUR VIEW
PRICE IS RIGHT IN US
Your article on underpriced US cars (‘Underpriced and over there’, 13 February) fails to mention the considerable difference in prices for Japanese cars UK and US supplied.
If one compares the prices, less UK taxes and US state and federal taxes, the picture becomes much clearer.
For example: Nissan 300ZX Turbo £27,600 (UK), £17,590 (US); Toyota MR2 £11,900 (I+UK), £7570 (US); Mazda MX-5 £11,920 (UK), £7585 (US); Honda NSX £41,600 (UK), £32,500 (US).
If one shops around, sizeable discounts are available on the above list prices.
I was offered a 300ZX Turbo for £16,250 and an MR2 for £6600.
I eventually bought an MX-5 with hard-top, limited slip diff, air conditioning and option package A for £8000, some £6000 less than a tax-free UK-supplied car of the same specification.
I was offered immediate delivery on a Corvette ZR-1 for £30,500 (manufacturer's list price).
In fact, the only cars now attracting a dealer premium are the NSX and Mitsubishi 3000 GT VR-4 and I don't expect that will last.
It really is a buyer's market at the moment.
It cost me £300 for insurance and shipping my MX-5 to Amsterdam on a roll-on ferry out of Brunswick, Georgia.
No doubt the Japanese can justify their prices, but as much as I like their sports cars, I would never consider buying any of their cars in the UK.
 Capt R Rackham Amsterdam Holland 
CATALYSTS FOR F1
I read with interest the article ‘F1 changes change nothing’(13 February) in which Harvey Postlethwaite puts forward the idea of knocking 50bhp off the output of Formula 1 engines to keep races competitive.
Pump petrol is also said not to be favoured by oil companies; instead, they prefer toxic additives to exotic petrochemical cocktails to give their teams power while keeping inside the 101 RON limits.
Rather than make changes to aerodynamic efficiency to reduce speeds, why not go the whole hog and kill two birds with one stone?
The format of German touring car racing calls for all cars to run with catalytic converters.
There are pre- and post-race emission checks to see that all is well with the systems fitted.
If the format was adopted by F1, with the addition of ‘pump petrol’, engine outputs would be reduced due to exhaust back pressure and lower RON rating — say 98 RON super unleaded.
This would slow F1 — at least to begin with — and show the Green movement that F1 is not as anti-environmental as it claims.
These changes would have another effect, too.
Catalytic converter technology would be forced to advance at a much improved rate, showing that F1 does indeed improve motoring in general.
It would undoubtedly cost a lot on money to implement in the short run, as would some of the more conventional changes proposed by that Frenchman who claims to run the sport with an impartial hand.
I would be most interested in what readers and teams think of these ideas for a progressive solution to a vexing problem.
 Adrian Knight Peterborough Cambs 
FRENCH FANCY
Mr Seewonauth (‘Your view’, 20 February) criticised PSA boss Jacques Calvet for his warnings about the future of the European car industry.
Having owned three Citroens and a Renault, I am greatly impressed with the quality of French cars.
Unfortunately, though, Japanese marketing has driven these companies out of the US market.
The Japanese produce bland, artless copies of European products, totally without character: they have never given us a car like a Citroen.
Quality?
The Orientals are masters of the art of the illusion of quality, nice fit and finish of trim, while employing cost-cutting techniques deep inside the car where they are not readily apparent.
Europeans should heed Mr Calvet's warnings if it is not already too late.
When the Orientals have a UK market share that justifies their building factories on your soil, you will gradually see their way of life coming into your homes.
It has happened here in the US.
And finally, when some day Mr Seewonauth sees a new MG roadster which is a decapitated Honda Civic, will he finally realise that something wonderful has been lost for ever?
 P Michael Riffert Lititz Pennsylvania United States 
KNOW YOUR WHINE
On your long-term test of the Citroen XM 24v (27 February), David Vivian comments on a ‘curious high-pitched whine’ instead of the usual starting noises.
My Fiat Panda has a similar ignition fault which I have diagnosed to be a disengaged starter motor.
I would have thought someone of Mr Vivian's experience would have thought of this.
 A S N Warwick Liverpool 
I am fully aware of what a disengaged starter motor sounds like, Mr Warwick.
This whine was higher pitched and considerably more curious — David Vivian
FRENCH DEFEAT
In your road test of the Peugeot 605 SRdt (20 February) you comment that the only car to give it a run for its money is the Citroen XM.
This is strangely at variance with your own published figures: Peugeot 605 SRdt 33.3mpg overall, 0–60mph in 12.8secs, top speed 114mph; Citroen 2.0SD 32mpg, 12.4secs and 116mph; Rover 825D 36.2mpg, 11.7secs, 116mph.
Assuming that the only rational purpose of buying a diesel rather than a petrol-engined car is to save fuel, the Rover walks all over both Frenchmen!
 John Irving Knowle Warwickshire 
CALIBRA CHALLENGE
With reference to your test extra on the Vauxhall Calibra 4x4 (20 February), you omit to mention its most prestigious rival, the Mitsubishi Galant 4x4.
As a Mitsubishi dealer, I'd remind you that this car won the 1989 Lombard RAC Rally and came a close second last year.
Also available in coupe form, it offers four doors, superior equipment levels and a substantially lower price.
‘No rival four-wheel-drive coupe can offer more passenger comfort’— the Galant offers more rear legroom and headroom, with the added advantage of own-door access.
Nice try, but no comment.
 Bruce Robinson Norjac Lancs 
V8 FOR NEW 800?
Concerning fitting an eight-cylinder engine to the new Rover 800, would it be technically feasible to use two K-series blocks side by side?
Together they would from a longitudinal engine.
Would such an engine fit in the new car's engine bay?
Would there be power loss problems?
I got the idea, of course, from the BMW and Mercedes V12 engines.
 B S Chima Sunderland 
Rover has never denied the K-series could be ‘modulised’, and there is a long-standing plan to build a K6 engine based on two of the aborted three-cylinder Ks.
However, a V8 would be too much for the Rover 800's front-drive chassis — news ed
NO SMOKE WITHOUT FIRE
I would be in favour of making it illegal to smoke while driving.
It is amazing how often one sees a smoker tugging at his or her steering wheel with one hand while the other seeks to introduce the lighted item to those waiting lips.
And then there are all those empty packets discarded out of the window onto Britain's already polluted streets.
These people are a danger to themselves and others, are a downright public nuisance and their habits (when conducted in the course of driving) should be legislated against.
 T J Ingram Aberdeen 
OVEN-READY KIT CAR
‘Whodunnit?’ you ask on page 38 of the 20 February issue.
Well, I think it's pretty obvious.
You forgot to cover up the Anglia Television badge on the front end!
That's the giveaway.
Lotus, being in the Anglia region, has found a new sponsor and has been able, at last, to bring out its long-awaited cheap saloon — the Flan.
The idea of previewing it at Sainsbury's was an an excellent PR ploy as this is certainly its new ‘oven-ready kit car’ obtainable in a small, easy-to-carry pack from the freezer department.
Two minutes in the microwave and you have a full size saloon car ready to drive away.
I think the one you show may have risen a bit too much…
 Jeff Rix Hitchin Herts 
ELEMENTARY
What's the big mystery?
I'd even say it looks like a Mazda, notwithstanding Rover 214 wheel covers.
Anyway, the number plate gives the game away.
KM is a Kent registration number and all recent Mazda demonstrators have borne the letters AKM as the concessionaires are based in Tunbridge Wells.
 I Merrick East Grinstead Sussex 
CALLING ALL JAGUARS
I would like to ask your readers for help.
I am looking for photographs, from 1926 to the present day, of ladies or family groups in period dress together with cars, if possible Jaguar cars.
The photographs are required to form part of a static fashion show that will include a 10-set period dress display, comprising both photographs and mannequins.
The show forms part of our Jaguar Spectacular '91 on 12 May.
Both photographs and negatives should be supplied for enlargement purposes.
All will be returned to the senders after use.
Thank you in anticipation.
 Philip Livings Chatham Grammar School for Boys Holcombe Maidstone Road Chatham Kent ME4 6JB 
PATENTLY OBVIOUS
I must respectfully correct Peter Robinson's Heroes article (27 February).
Karl Benz was granted patent number 37435 on 29 January 1886, and not 1888 as was stated.
I'm sure this was a typing error but it did confuse an excellent article.
 Roger H King President The Mercedes-Benz Club 
WHAT'S THE 159 CLUB?
Can any of your more senior readers help me?
I have a car badge belonging to the 159 Motor Club but do not know what the club is, or was, and have been unable to find out.
The badge looks to be from the '50s.
Any ideas, please?
 Peter Johnson London N1 
Write to:Autocar & Motor Readers' Letters, 38–42 Hampton Road, Teddington, Middlesex TW11 OJE or fax 081–943 5653.
The editor is not bound to agree with readers' opinions and reserves the right to edit letters.
ARCHIVES
16 March 1928: ‘Probably no department of motoring is so useful to the community as racing,’ said Sir William Joynson-Hicks, the Home Secretary and chief custodian of the 20mph speed limit, on the occasion of the luncheon for Captain Malcolm Campbell on his return from America, where he travelled faster than any man has succeeded in doing on land.
(The Speediest Motoring, The Autocar)
18 March 1972: A warning that the proposed US safety and emission control regulations could spell the death of the American car industry has come from BMW's new Munich sales director, Bob Lutz.
He revealed that BMW is prepared to withdraw from the US rather than face the economic suicide such regulations would bring.
(Motorweek, Motor)
17 March 1984: Half the charisma of the Countach is what happens at journey's end.
To arrive somewhere in it is to take a shortcut to celebrity; park it, and you create an instant tourist attraction.
Some ask if they can sit in the driver's seat.
Others merely want to look at the engine.
The witty ones ask what it's like to fly.
(Feature Test, Motor)
15 March 1986: A Ford takeover of Austin Rover would have been good for Britain, according to a top Ford executive.
Although the British Government ruled out the prospect of the US company buying Austin Rover, within days of it leaking out that talks had been taking place, Bob Lutz, Ford of Europe chairman, said: ‘I honestly believe it would have been best for Britain.’
(News Week, Motor)
14 March 1990: Was this new-age motoring?
The buzz at Geneva last week was about smaller cars, wholesale commitment to environmental protection and rationalised, merged conglomerates.
Ford placed enormous faith in its tiny Zig and Zag concept cars and so did GM with its Impact electric two-seater.
(Geneva generates new change, Autocar & Motor)
Next Week
What is the greatest car of all time?
The candidates are numerous and varied — from the Model T Ford to the Porsche 911.
We've consulted the leading names in the motor industry and racked our own brains to come up with the definitive answer to one of the ultimate pub arguments.
The Renault Clio is this year's European Car of the Year but the award hasn't always been a guarantee of outstanding sales success.
Has the little hatchback got what it takes to succeed in one of Europe's toughest markets?
Read our full road test to find out.
Ford came within a whisker of pulling off one of motorsport's biggest upsets in January when the seven-speed Sierra Cosworth 4x4 of Francois Delecour and Ann Chantal Pauwels almost won the Monte Carlo Rally.
We drive the car that's reckoned to the capable of 0–60mph in less than 4secs and talk to the driver/navigator partnership that rattled the established names in international rallying.
Eberhard von Kuenheim is the longest-serving chairman of any car manufacturer.
For more than two decades he has led BMW, building it up into one of the industry's most respected and successful marques.
In an exclusive interview, Richard Feast discovers that his reputation for straight, sometimes controversial, talking is not exaggerated.
ROAD TEST
BMW 325iSE
More than just a facelift for BMW's most important model, the new 3-series marks a fundamental change of direction
For Fabulous engine/driveline, great grip, excellent ride Against Poor packaging, patchy finish, sanitised handling 
For those who thought BMW's master plan was to make one car in three different sizes, the new 3-series must be a perplexing product.
No double takes are necessary to distinguish the small Bee Emm from its virtually cloned big brothers, the 5 and 7-series.
On the contrary, its broad grille and hooded headlamps project something approaching alternative thinking on the way to express the famous Munich car maker's identity.
The tail styling, however, is demure to the point of anonymity; aesthetic continuity with the Five and Seven is eschewed for an overtly sober, slightly dainty look.
And in profile, the new 3-series has a more steeply raked windscreen, shorter front overhang and stubbier tail than any previous BMW saloon.
Whether you like it or not, this is a different look.
Then again, perhaps a scaled down 5-series would have been too predictable.
If any car needs to be a clear-cut BMW ‘statement’, it's the 3-series.
This is crucial for the mass-market mover, the car which last year accounted for 59 per cent of all the BMWs sold in the UK.
BMW isn't saying which part of the new range will sell best (the smart money is on the 318i).
but there is little question that the 325i SE tested here (an estimated £22,995) will set the standard.
More aerodynamic than before, with reduced front and rear lift, the new shape has its practical advantages.
But of equal interest must be the 5ins longer wheelbase, Z1-style rear suspension and new 24-valve twin-cam version of the previous model's 2.5-litre straight six.
Peak power is up a useful 20bhp to 189bhp at 5900rpm while torque receives a similar hike to 177lb ft at 4700rpm.
PERFORMANCE AND ECONOMY
The 325i is now a genuinely fast car.
It needs neither the approbation of ace tuner Alpina nor the motivation of an M-power badge to crack 140mph — 141–3mph on the Millbrook bowl is around 10mph faster than the old 325i could manage — or sprint from rest to 60mph in a sizzling 7.3secs.
A 0–100mph time of 19.2secs and standing kilometre return of 28.3secs, achieved with little apparent strain and the full co-operation of a lightning-quick gearshift, set the seal on the new car's cracking performance credentials.
In the two-litre to 2.5-litre saloon ranks, only the £27,060 turbocharged Ford Sierra RS Cosworth 4x4 (144mph and 6.6secs) is notably more rapid.
In fourth gear, the 325i takes 7.3secs to cover 30 to 50mph — respectable but effectively matched by the Vauxhall Cavalier 2000GSi's 7.4secs.
In fifth, though the 50–70mph increment consumes just 9.7 secs, which clearly puts the Cavalier in its place (10.6secs) and presses even the turbocharged Saab 900 Carlsson's 9.1secs.
For a normally aspirated 2.5, the 325i's showing against the clock is complete and impressive.
But to judge the BMW's performance by figures alone, good as they are, would be a travesty.
The 24-valve straight six M50 unit is a simply gorgeous thing to see, with throttle response sharp enough to draw blood, urge aplenty for safe fourth-gear overtaking, a cultured yet appealingly guttural engine note and the kind of smoothness that makes you question the worth of even a good V12.
The engine's natural urgency is efficiently harnessed by closely stacked intermediate ratios and a manageable 22.5mph/1000rpm in fifth, which strikes an almost perfect compromise between flexibility and refinement.
Just as delectable is the light, slick and superbly swift gearchange, an almost sublimely progressive clutch action and as taut a driveline as you'll encounter; driving the 325i in traffic could hardly be easier.
In these areas, BMW has never done better.
Where it should have tried harder, however, is with taming mechanical noise levels.
The 24-valve engine is appreciably noisier that its 12-valve predecessor and although it invariably sounds good, its insistence can be a little wearing.
Our overall consumption of 26.6mpg is a fine result given the zest with which the 325i performs and its relatively short intermediate gearing, though the best return of 27.9mpg suggests that some feather-footed tactics aren't as effective as some might expect.
Even so, a significantly bigger tank than before (14.3 against 12.1 gallons) has pushed the range up to a very respectable 386 miles, based on a touring consumption of 27.0mpg.
Only unleaded petrol is allowed.
HANDLING AND RIDE
As before, the 325i's front suspension is by struts, coil-springs and an anti-roll bar.
At the back, however, the old semi-trailing arm set-up is replaced with what BMW calls a ‘central pull-rod axle’— essentially the multi-link arrangement with centrally mounted longitudinal link used to great effect on BMW's now-defunct Z1 sports car.
BMW claims that this far more sophisticated (and, no doubt, expensive) rear suspension finally lays to rest the spectre of lift-off oversteer which has so bedevilled the 3-series over the years — albeit to a much lesser degree with the outgoing model which, in Sport form at least , we found to be well balanced and responsive rather than inherently tail happy.
Indeed, first impression tells you that the new car's chassis feels a little less sharp and agile than its predecessor's.
Subtle, wrist-generated steering inputs don't do as much.
The steering is slightly heavier but more damped, too.
Feel is still good but communicated in less specific terms.
At modest speeds, everything feels just a little inert and aloof.
Press harder and it becomes obvious that front-end bite and turn-in are actually very good.
Grip isn't merely better than the old car's, it's of a different order.
But, and it's a big but, what the enthusiastic driver would once have interpreted as an enjoyable adjustable cornering balance has been squeezed out of existence.
This one understeers by degrees in direct ratio to speed.
Mostly the understeer is mild but, in the dry at least, it seldom gives way to a genuinely neutral stance.
Even in the wet, quelling the chassis' instinct to run wide requires concertedly judicious throttle juggling.
And when oversteer does come you'd better be ready for it because it happens suddenly and rather messily.
An academic point, maybe, but it underlines a key difference in character and ability between new and old.
On a more positive note, the new car covers ground with a sense of stability and security all drivers should appreciate and drivers of the previous 325i could only dream about.
It simply goes round corners faster.
Also impressive is the suspension's immunity to mid-bend bumps.
It's particularly good at dismissing small pock marks and ridges.
More generally, the ride is very good.
An initial impression of firmness tends to disguise just how hard the suspension is working.
In fact, the long-travel springing is quite soft but taut damping exerts exemplary control.
Only where deep undulations coincide with a bend is there a hint of diagonal pitching, but this is more of an observation than a criticism.
On the road, the all-disc plus anti-lock braking is powerful, progressive and firm under foot though, surprisingly, the car felt slightly unstable when braking hard from 120mph-plus during the Millbrook acceleration runs.
Freedom from fade was complete.
AT THE WHEEL
The new 325i's cabin is less adventurous than its exterior, but only just.
Gone is the rather conservative ‘up-and-down’ architecture of the previous model's facia, replaced by a full-blown exposition of the currently fashionable (especially with the Japanese) organic look with its attendant curves and soft edges.
At least, this is the case for the driver, who gets a sexy wrap-around binnacle containing all the controls, dials and readouts he needs.
All the front-seat passenger has to look at is a fussily styled and poorly fitting glovebox, but more of this later.
Ergonomically, the layout is hard to fault but the space allocated for the otherwise clear and attractive instrumentation seems to have shrunk — it would have been far better to have the computer readout under the dials instead of the heater controls — and we question the need for such extravagantly styled air vents.
Most of our testers considered the driving position and seats close to perfect, but a couple of the taller specimens would have appreciated some sort of steering wheel adjustment to play off comfort against a clear view of the instruments.
COMFORT AND SPACE
More than most, BMW is very careful not to tread on its own toes when it comes to cabin size.
Working under the not unreasonable assumption that since all its saloons are equally good to drive, size does matter, the last thing it wants to do is create a miracle of packaging at the expense of an ostensibly bigger model.
Thus it is that the new 3-series gets a modest extra inch of legroom and stays conspicuously smaller than the far from roomy 5-series.
Were not the BMW's closest rival.
the Mercedes 190, also so deficient in this department, Munich's thinking on this subject might be different.
But, as it is, the 325i scrapes by as a comfortable four-seater with the proviso that four tall occupants will have to come to a front/rear legroom compromise that wouldn't even need to think about in a Peugeot 405.
Headroom isn't such a problem, though, and actual rear seat comfort is very good.
The boot is decently sized, too, and internal stowage space is generous.
FINISH AND EQUIPMENT
There are those who would tell you that BMW's reputation for first-class finish has been on thin ice for some time but, until now, we've seen little evidence to substantiate the claim.
If our test car is anything to go by, though, the cracks might be beginning to show.
The paintwork on the back of the bootlid looked decidedly patchy and certainly not up to the high standard on the rest of the car.
Inside, the glovebox lid didn't fit properly, with a much bigger gap on one side than the other.
Moreover, the quality of much of the facia and control plastic was rather hard and crudely textured.
That said, the car felt extremely solid and well screwed together, exterior panel gaps were uniformly narrow and even and all the doors shut with a satisfying ‘thunk’.
Not famed for generosity when drawing up standard equipment lists, BMW has nevertheless seen fit to provide the SE with power steering, alloy wheels, electric front windows, central locking and tinted glass.
There's no radio, though, just the pre-fit kit, with six speakers.
VERDICT
Although all the early indications were that the new 3-series was very much an evolutionary product, getting to know the 325i has convinced us otherwise.
In many ways, it's the most radical BMW you can buy, with styling that, for the time being, bucks the house style, a chassis that refuses to oversteer and a facia that follows a trend instead of setting one.
In our opinion, the driveline is the best BMW has yet made and, despite the change of dynamic emphasis, it's impossible not to derive great pleasure from this alone.
Having said all of that, there are disappointments.
One is the patchy finish of our test car (atypical we hope), another the lack of rear legroom.
More important than either of these is what the 325i has lost.
We took the opportunity to drive the outgoing model while we had the new one and were left in no doubt about which was the driver's car.
For all its grip and stability, the new model simply isn't as much fun.
But that, as they say, is the price of progress.
TECHNICAL FOCUS
The ‘central arm’ feature of the rear suspension describes the function of the front longitudinal arm mount as the central point or ‘pole’of the axle.
In other words, it's the spherical centre of the axes or intersecting lines that the track control arms move along on the inward and outward strokes of the springs.
Because of their angle and length, the two track control arms keep the toe-in position of the arms consistent and allow specific changes in camber as a function of wheel action.
As cornering acceleration increases, the increasing castor of the outer wheel and the substantial elasticity of the front longitudinal arm bearing point support the car against side forces.
This increasing castor thus compensates for any inclination of the car on the rear axle.
This ‘elastokinematic’ response is also claimed to help stability when the car undergoes longitudinal accelerations, such as under heavy application of the brakes, by creating a larger castor angle.
Front-end bite and turn-in are very good, and grip is excellent, but the adjustable cornering balance of the previous 3-series has been lost in pursuit of a more stable, secure chassis.
The new 325i goes round corners faster as a result.
Styling outside and inside distinguishes it from big brothers
Gone is the ‘up-and-down’ look of the previous 3-series in favour of a fashionably organic style.
The layout of dials and instruments is hard to fault ergonomically.
Not so rear legroom, which, despite an extra inch, still forces those in front to compromise to make it a comfortable four-seater
With the 24-valve straight six M50 engine, the 325i is now a genuinely fast car.
The figures say 189bhp at 5900rpm and 177lb ft of torque at 4700rpm; your senses say V12-style smoothness, plenty of urge and sharp throttle response.
At the other end, the boot offers a decent amount of space
THE RIVALS
BMW 325i
This is not the ‘safe’ 325i some were expecting.
Its styling is deliberately different, its cabin surprisingly derivative, its dynamic character a complete about face.
What hasn't changed is the world-beating excellence of the driveline, enhanced by the extra bite of the 24-valve engine.
Equipment is modest for the money but ability isn't.
AUDI 90 QUATTRO SPORT 20vi
For all its fine engineering and good design, the Audi 90 20v quattro offers rather less than meets the eye.
Where it's good it's very good indeed and all-wheel drive at this price as an obvious advantage.
But the 90 is a rather patchy package.
Neither pleasingly accelerative nor particularly sporting, it just about passes as a sporting saloon.
MERCEDES 190E 2.6i
Very much the unsung hero of Mercedes' 190 range, the six-cylinder 2.6 has none of the cosmetic bravura that distinguishes the 2.5–16 from its lesser stablemates.
But looks can deceive: the 2.6 (even as an automatic) is good for 130mph and 0–60mph in 8.3 secs.
Engine rivals BMW's for smoothness and chassis is very good.
Underrated.
PEUGEOT 405 Mi16i
One of Peugeot's undoubted triumphs, the 405 Mi16 is close to being the perfectly judged front-wheel-drive sports saloon.
Cornering adjustability verges on the sensational, providing huge entertainment, though the brakes are oversensitive.
Top speed of 132mph and 0–60mph in 8.0secs are competitive but cheaper 405 SRi is better value.
SAAB 900 CARLSSONi
The Carlsson doesn't accelerate quite as hard as you might expect (0–60mph in 8.8secs), but its top speed of 131mph looks healthy enough.
Its chassis dishes out 200bhp efficiently enough but betrays its age with indifferent grip and a very firm ride.
That said, it's enjoyably ‘chuckable’ and very well made.
An acquired taste, maybe, but worth considering.
VAUXHALL CAVALIER GSi 2000 16vi
Unlike its all-drive namesake, the front-drive GSi 16v is all excitement and very little finesse with wheelspin and torque steer aplenty.
Cat-equipped two-litre 16-valve engine sounds even more potent than it is but gives good economy.
In steady-state cornering, chassis has bags of grip but a lumpy ride.
Not bad value but too rough around the edges.
SIGNING OFF
From Rolls-Royce through BRM and on to Lotus, Tony Rudd's colourful 53-year career has been a monument to engineering brilliance.
Now, in the month of his retirement, he finds time to share his story with Mark Hughes
Tony Rudd retires this month after a distinguished career spanning 53 years — 13 at Rolls-Royce, 18 at BRM and 22 at Lotus.
His engineering brilliance has taken him from being Rolls-Royce's ‘infant prodigy’ to Lotus' ‘grand old man’, with a sheaf of important achievements along the way.
Three stand out.
More than anyone else, he was responsible for transforming BRM from motor racing's laughing stock into the efficient outfit that won the world championship in 1962.
His thinking over many years lead to his innovative Lotus 78, the car that pioneered F1's ground effect era, and his creative energy over the past 10 years has been instrumental in galvanising Lotus, once a car maker with a fragile future, into an engineering consultancy of huge standing worldwide.
Rudd's passion for engineering goes back to childhood, and particularly to one ‘action-packed weekend’ when, as an eight-year-old, he stayed with his maiden aunt in London.
She took him to the Science Museum and gave him an encyclopaedia, which explained how the internal combustion engine worked —‘I was intrigued immensely’.
A family link with Bira and Chula, the racing Siamese princes, pushed his interest towards motor racing.
Both of them wrote to him at school, and Rudd remembers selling the foreign stamps off their letters to buy The Autocar .
After he told them about this, they sent one letter from Siam covered with stamps: ‘Those would have kept me in The Autocar for ever, but I couldn't bear to part with the envelope.’
Chula took Rudd to various pre-war motor races, and he spent his school holidays at the White Mouse garage in Hammersmith, helping to clean their ERAs and absorbing the atmosphere.
‘I learned a lot from Chula about running a racing team,’ says Rudd.
‘He taught me that you could win without having the fastest car, by tactics and organisation.
He was in the same mould as Neubauer, the Mercedes manager: not flamboyant, but an ice-cold organiser, logical and rational.
Bira was never the same when he drove without Chula.’
From school, Rudd joined Rolls-Royce in 1938 as an apprentice in the motor car division, seeing this as a stepping stone towards an ambition that was already formed.
He wanted to be chief engineer of Aston Martin.
He admired the company's pre-war products — efficient little sports cars with something of the modern Lotus spirit about them — more than any other car, and for a long time he used Astons on the road.
Rudd spent 13 years with Rolls-Royce.
His apprenticeship took him through various parts of the motor car division until the outbreak of war, when he was transferred to the aviation side to make crankshafts and camshafts for Merlin engines.
In 1942 he was picked out by Alec Harvey-Bailey (later to become a senior Rolls-Royce figure and a good friend) to join the defect investigation department, analysing war-service failures in Merlin, Griffon and Vulture engines.
By 1944, aged 21, he was head of this important department.
After the war, Rudd had little to do with Rolls-Royce's automotive activities other than occasionally borrowing prototype Bentleys to clock up miles for durability programmes.
As assistant manager of powerplant quality, he was caught up in Rolls-Royce's efforts to penetrate the civil aircraft business with the Merlin.
But disenchantment set in because the outdated Merlin (used for the Avro Tudor and Canadair Four) clearly had little future, and the more rewarding prospect of a senior job on the new Dart engine (destined for the Vickers Viscount) kept being thwarted by delays to the project.
Feeling frustrated, he took the offer, in 1951, of a three-month posting to BRM, which was having trouble with the Rolls-Royce supercharger on its V16 engine.
Towards the and of his stint, he filled a gap in the team for the Italian GP at Monza — and saw at first hand one of BRM's famous fiascos.
Both V16s were withdrawn because of a gearbox problem in practice.
‘I stayed at Monza after the race to run a test programme,’ says Rudd, ‘and learned a great deal while Piero Taruffi, Stirling Moss and Ken Wharton drove the car, I remembered Freddie Dixon's observations, in his book on building Rileys, about sorting out suspension and chassis stiffness, so I followed some of his ideas because of Moss's complaints about the diabolical steering.
I found I could force the steering wheel a quarter of a turn and flex all sorts of things, like the casting for the gearbox mounting.’
Rudd's temporary job evolved into a full-time role as a ‘sort of chief mechanic running the racing shop at Folkingham’, and soon after he married Pam, a girl from Bourne.
His influence at BRM increased, the job growing to encompass engine development after Sir Alfred Owen (of Rubery Owen) bought the team from the ERM Trust in 1952.
Rudd got along well with Sir Alfred, in time developing immense respect for him.
The high spot of the V16 period came in 1953 at Albi, where BRM should have won convincingly but for the immense torque of the engines destroying the tyres.
Among many poor performances was the Chichester Cup, a wet race at Goodwood in which Reg Parnell's V16, its ridiculous torque curve and dreadful roadholding proving to be a hopeless combination on a slippery track, was humbled by an unsupercharged two-litre Maserati driven by Baron de Graffenreid.
‘Sir Alfred was at Goodwood that day,’ says Rudd, ‘and asked me why de Graffenreid was blowing us off.
I gave him a lecture about how the car was too heavy, going on about power-to-weight ratios.
Finally, after Wharton's crash at Albi, Sir Alfred told Raymond Mays and Pater Berthon that BRM should build a smaller, lighter car.
Since I had raised the issue, I was to go and make it — which didn't please Berthon.
‘So we made the V16 MkII using my oval-section tube as the basis.
The car was a lot shorter and 4cwt lighter.
It wasn't quite chalk and string on the garage floor because I had a drawing board at Folkingham, but the tin-bashers and fitters would look over my shoulder and make parts as I drew them.
The MkII was a bit better, but not much.’
From the end of 1952 the V16 was eligible only for Formule Libre races because of revised F1 rules.
It ran in MkII guise from 1954 to 1955, but its six wins all came at insignificant domestic races.
BRM's F1 return had to wait until the new two-litre P25 was ready for its first full season in 1956.
Rudd designed the chassis, calling it his ‘overstressed skin car’.
It could be regarded as the original monocoque, because it used a lightweight structure of four small-diameter steel tubes and a stressed aluminium skin.
Despite drivers of the calibre of Mike Hawthorn and Tony Brooks, 1956 was a disastrous season as the cars failed repeatedly, with persistent valve problems and difficult handling.
The four-cylinder engine was more reliable in 1957, but BRM took a long time to realise that the P25's air strut suspension — carried over from the V16 — was the cause of its savage oversteer.
Engaged as consultants, Alec Issigonis and Alex Moulton half solved the problem by changing the rear suspension, but it took another outsider to put BRM on the right track.
‘Colin Chapman went straight to the point,’ remembers Rudd.
‘He told us to throw away the air strut front suspension — coil springs, telescopic dampers and a lowered roll centre were what we needed.
Suddenly we had a half-decent car.
‘This was my first professional association with Chapman, but I already knew him.
There had once been a row at Goodwood when the scrutineers rejected Colin's car because it didn't have a fireproof bulkhead.
He went away and fitted a piece of cardboard painted silver.
Quite why this put the scrutineers in a dilemma I don't know, but they asked me to protest to get them off the hook.
I told them to do their own dirty work.
Chunky heard about his and we became friends.’
Although the P25 was by then quite good, Rudd realised that the front suspension could be tweaked still further.
He formed the idea early in 1958 that a new front end with very unequal length wishbones would stop the roll centre moving about.
He waited until Berthon — with whom Rudd had never seen eye to eye — took a holiday and grafted a new front end on to Jean Behra's car.
Berthon was livid at one of his cars being butchered but had to acknowledge that it handled better.
‘I bet Behra that he would put the car on pole at Monaco in 1958,’ says Rudd, ‘and he did.
I immediately considered myself God's gift to suspension design, on the basis of this one lucky fluke.
So when, in 1959, it was decided to build a mid-engined car, I was violently affronted that Berthon and his staff at Bourne would design it, and not me at Folkingham.
Knowing of my discontent, Alec Harvey-Bailey suggested that I should return to Rolls-Royce, perhaps as chief quality engineer, or head of the service department — both good jobs.
I half-did the deal.’
BRM's first rear-engined car, the Type 48, turned out to be a pig, Graham Hill recording in his autobiography that ‘the car would suddenly take a dive and dart straight into the infield out of control’.
While he mulled over his future, Rudd gradually sorted out the handling so that by July 1960 the Type 48 was good enough for Hill to put in a brilliant performance in the British Grand Prix, clawing his way into the lead after losing a third of a lap through stalling on the grid.
Rudd's spirit was returning.
‘After that race,’ he says, ‘I met Alec Harvey-Bailey by the side of the road near Silverstone and told him I would stay with BRM.
Then Sir Alfred pulled in in his Bentley and promised me a free hand to design a car that worked.
Which is how the type 56, the car with the upswept stack-pipes came into being.
‘This did not endear me to certain people at BRM.
I had a little pirate operation, which is not the way to make friends or win races.
I had my ideas worked out by the time I left for the 1960–61 Tasman series, and on the 24-hour flight to New Zealand I sat with a slide rule and drew the car as a pin-jointed structure, stressed it and arrived at all the tube sizes.’
Testing revealed the car's promise, but BRM's future looked rockier than ever in 1961.
Sir Alfred had spent enough of Rubery Owen's profits and was impatient for success; BRM would be closed down if it failed to win races in 1962.
The Sir Alfred's brother, Ernest, discovered that the 1962 budget had been spent before the season had started…
There was a huge row within the Owen family and for a while it looked as if the plug would be pulled immediately.
Only when Sir Alfred enlisted the help of his sister, Jean Stanley (wife of Louis) was BRM able to proceed for the 1962 season.
She promised her support on the condition that Mays and Berthon were sidelined and Rudd was given his chance.
So Rudd was appointed team manager and chief engineer for the season.
It was to be the happiest year of his career — the year when BRM finally came good and won the world championship with Graham Hill.
‘It was touch and go financially,’ says Rudd.
‘My first event in charge was at Goodwood — the race where Stirling Moss crashed — and I had no money.
Nothing.
But Graham won, so I could pay the wages from the prize money.
Both cars blew up at Aintree, but the start money saw us through.
All the stack-pipes fell off in the Daily Express Trophy at Silverstone, but Graham won again and that race carried a lot of money.
We won for a third time at Zandvoort, the first grand prix of the season: apart from the prize money, that moved us up a scale on the start money and suddenly I could see our way through the rest of the season.
‘Graham led from the first lap to the 97th at Monaco, and then ran out of oil.
At Rouen the fuel filters were so good that they took all the dye out of the fuel and became clogged, so we only finished second.
We were second again in a non-championship race at Reims, where I indulged in my habit of lurking at corners taking pictures of the front suspension.
‘One shot showed a problem with the lever arms on the roll bar, so we had new ones made for the British Grand Prix at Aintree.
They arrived after practice, but, like a fool, I put them on untried for the race.
They made the front roll bar so much stiffer that the cars understeered out of the race with the front tyres worn out.
We were still leading the championship, but it was becoming fraught.
‘After that I told Sir Alfred of my plans for a monocoque car for the next season, and got a sour letter back saying we had to win another grand prix before we talked about anything.
Soon Graham won the German Grand Prix, so that was grand.
Then at Monza, with modified combustion chambers, Graham and Ritchie Ginther finished first and second with pole position and fastest lap too — the lot.
‘Shortly after that I met Ernest Owen in London at a big Rubery Owen function.
We were well on top by then, but he still expected something to go wrong — he bet his Rolls that we'd lose the title.
‘Graham took second place at Watkins Glen before we went to South Africa for the last race.
We had a row with Lucas there because they had fitted fuel injection to Jimmy Clark's Lotus, despite promising us exclusive use for the season if we persevered with it.
As it turned out, Jimmy raced his carburettor car because he preferred it, and led until the Climax blew up.
Graham's win was his fourth and there we were — the music hall joke — as champions.’
Rudd designed his monocoque car for 1963 —‘it had clever tricks like inboard variable race suspension, but it was a dog’— and also he found himself committed by Sir Alfred to building a Le Mans car powered by Rover's gas turbine.
The project produced a successful demonstration run at the Le Mans 24 Hours, despite the imposition of a ridiculous timetable which gave BRM only 10 days to build the car.
A couple of grand prix wins came in 1963 and two more the following year before another highly successful season in 1965 saw three victories and a string of second places for Jackie Stewart and Hill.
But for Clark's six wins, BRM might have had another world title.
It marked the end of a terrific F1 period for BRM throughout the 1.5-litre years.
Rudd admits that he made a big mistake in designing an H16 engine, a layout previously used only in aviation, for the new three-litre formula in 1966.
Knowing that BRM's 1.5-litre V8 engine had been superior to the Climax, Rudd took the existing proportions to create an engine twice as big and with two crankshafts.
It gave enough power, but was far too complicated and weighed 500lb against the Brabham Repco V8's 300lb.
‘A number of things contributed to the end of my spell with BRM,’ says Rudd.
‘Mike Spence's death at Indy in 1968 knocked the stuffing out of me.
I was also becoming frustrated with the time I had to spend on commercial projects at BRM.
Sir Alfred was in love with the Cosworth idea of making engines for other people, but I felt we had to restore our position in F1 first.
We were at loggerheads.
‘My disillusion deepened during 1969, and by then Chapman had offered me a job.
Sir Alfred's interest was declining and Louis Stanley, his brother-in-law, was playing a bigger part.
Big Lou hired John Surtees and offered him the whole of my £27,000 budget for drivers, leaving nothing for Jackie Oliver.
Surtees was a good choice, but I never got to know him the way I did Graham Hill, Jackie Stewart and Pedro Rodriguez.
My enthusiasm was ebbing away.
‘A huge argument at Zandvoort finished it.
I had been planning to go to the Nurburgring for testing the day after the race, but I was told to return to the factory and stop the new car I was building.
It was a proper ‘wing’ car.
I met Chapman on his way to the Zandvoort prize-giving and said I'd take the job — basically to turn Lotus into an engine manufacturer — if it was still available.
Big Lou came out with a story that I'd been fired — but I resigned.’
Rudd arrived as a powertrain engineering manager at Lotus, producing Elans, Renault-engined Europas and Plus 25s at a rate of 90 a week but selling only 30 a week, largely because of terrible quality problems.
Rudd's job was to complete Lotus's new two-litre engine and set up the plant to make it.
By 1973 it was in production and selling at a good profit to Jensen for the new Jensen-Healey.
Chapman's great move up-market with the Elite/Eclat/Esprit family was already germinating when Rudd came to Hethel.
He remembers writing a document outlining the new range of M50 (Elite), M51 (a front-engined four-seater V8), M70 (a wedge-shaped mid-engined car that became the Esprit) and M71 (a mid-engined V8).
Before the four-cylinder half of this plan came to fruition, Rudd, now engineering director, hired a new recruit from Jaguar —‘a bright young man called Mike Kimberley’— to head up vehicle engineering and lead the team that put the existing twin-cam engine in the Europa.
The new four-cylinder engine — the one that still powers the Excel and the Esprit — was dreadfully unreliable at first, but went quite well by the time the Elite was launched.
Rudd also had a hand in the Giugiaro-designed Esprit that appeared in 1975, but by this time, as group engineering director, he had wide responsibilities for production cars, racing cars and Chapman's new boat-building venture.
Wanting Rudd to apply his mind to motor racing again, Chapman gave him his famous 27-page handwritten list of ‘things he needed to know for F1’.
Rudd developed his junked BRM ‘wing’ car ideas and beavered away at Ketteringham Hall with his think tank — a team that included Peter Wright, an ex-BRM colleague who fathered active suspension — to produce the F1 Lotus 78.
One of the all-time great racing innovations, it conquered all in 1978 to create F1's ‘ground effect’ era.
Rudd was then ‘left in a corner’ designing the new four-litre Lotus V8, and also produced an outline of a turbine Le Mans car that would use a Rolls-Royce Gem engine and be built with Essex sponsorship.
Nothing happened with the turbine, but the V8 got as far as running in prototype form in the James Bond Esprit, which Rudd used as his personal car for a time.
The V8 was put on ice when Lotus went through one of its regular periods of financial cramp in 1981 — but a few years later its key features were sold to GM in the shape of the LT5 engine for the Corvette ZR1.
Lotus's engineering consultancy began to take off in 1981 under Rudd's guidance.
Nurturing this side of the business — with dramatic success — has occupied most of his time for the past 10 years.
But for its profitability and burgeoning client list, GM would never have taken over and the new Elan might still be an idea waiting for the cash to build it.
‘The engineering side grew very quickly at first,’ says Rudd.
‘We picked up some customer projects — like the Metro Turbo and some Toyota work — and had a nice little business ticking away.
Soon we were making more money than the car company was losing.
I remember Chapman was amazed when I told him we might make a million profit in 1982.
Within a fortnight he was dead.’
The landmark of the post-Chapman era was the GM stake in 1986.
Prior to this, when David Wickins was in control, Rudd had played a key part in drawing Lotus to GM's attention.
A copy of a paper he had given to the British Association on ‘The car of the future’ led to his being summoned to Detroit, and to a commission to design and build it.
That car became the Corvette Indy — a sensational prototype with a mid-mounted LT5 turbo engine, four-wheel drive, active suspension, and a ‘twin-chassis’ structure.
With so many of Lotus Engineering's successes having to remain secret, the Corvette Indy stands as the company's most compelling advertisement.
Rudd bows out of Lotus with other fascinating projects under his belt, many yet to appear.
The need for confidentiality means that even he — a man who likes to tell it how it really is — clams up about the twilight of his career.
One day, perhaps, these commercial sensitivities will have receded into history and there will be a postscript to add.
Not the retiring type: Tony Rudd's outspokenness and engineering prowess ensured an eventful career with some significant names in motoring
From the top: Rudd at the Italian GP in 1962 as BRM's team manager and chief engineer; BRM's flawed H16 of 1966; BRM V16 of the early '50s, Rudd in suit
Rudd with the interim two-litre P261 in 1966 (top); Stewart and Spence await the start of Belgian GP.
Graham Hill on his way to victory at Goodwood in 1962, BRM's best year (left).
Opposite page top: P48 MkII with stopgap Climax V8.
Bottom: Lotus four-litre V8 which eventually went to GM for Corvette
A WEIGHTY PROBLEM
The use of composite materials, such as carbon fibre and Kevlar, to save weight has become part and parcel of racing car production.
Away from the race track, however, composites have been confined to the specialist manufacturer, with the major car makers playing a waiting game.
But increasing tooling-up costs for pressed steel may change that, reports Keith Howard
Simplificate and add lightness was the design philosophy attributed to that acknowledged genius of car design, Colin Chapman.
You can criticise the grammar, but the logic is irrefutable.
All other things being equal, a lighter car will accelerate harder, brake more easily and handle better than its heavier equivalent.
That's why there are minimum weight limits for racing cars.
But the trend in the motor industry at large has been in quite the opposite direction to the Chapman philosophy; cars have not become lighter over the years but noticeably heavier and more complex.
Slimming may be a theme of our age, but apparently not where the automobile is concerned.
Reversing this trend, if it is to be reversed, cannot be achieved by a new minimalism.
No one— apart from the buyer of a stripped-out Porsche special, perhaps — is going to accept weight savings achieved by reducing a car to its bare, spartan, noisy essentials.
So weight has to be shed within the car's structure without sacrificing crash-worthiness or noise levels.
Composite materials provide the obvious solution.
Composites, as every motor racing fan knows, combine light weight with immense strength — just ask Gerhard Berger, Derek Warwick or Martin Donnelly.
But they are also a world away from the technology the major car manufacturers know best — the cutting, press-forming, welding and painting of metal.
It will take more than the prospect of weight savings to prompt them to abandon this safe method.
From where might the motivation come?
According to Lotus associate director Albert Adams — a world authority on composites and the man who, 30 years ago, was told by Chapman to ‘learn all about glass-fibre’— it could be from the escalating costs of tooling up for pressed-steel car production.
To make the point, he cites the example of the latest Ford Fiesta, the tooling costs for which were a massive £700million.
Composite technology, suitably developed for mass production, might offer considerable savings on this investment.
But what are composites exactly, and how far are they from mass-production reality?
A composite is any material made up of two or more distinct elements.
Reinforced concrete is an example, and is not as irrelevant to motorised transport as you might think.
Concrete hulls, reinforced with glass-fibre rather than steel, have been used in boat building for many years.
In the aerospace and motor industry contexts, composites use different components but deploy them to similar ends.
Light, high tensile strength fibres confer stiffness and strength to a polymer resin that binds them into a rigid three-dimensional form.
The idea is a relatively new one to engineering but certainly not to planet earth: collagen, keratin, chitin and cellulose are some of nature's strong fibres and make possible everything from bones and lobster carapaces to giant sequoias.
From the references to glass-fibre and resin you will gather that GRP — glass-fibre reinforced plastic or glass-fibre reinforced polymer — is a composite.
What's more it's one that, contrary to composites' up-to-the-minute image, has a long history in the specialist motor industry.
Glass-fibre remains an inexpensive and effective reinforcement material, but in recent years it has been upstaged by Kevlar and carbon fibre, two stronger but more costly materials that owe their high profile largely to their use in formula racing cars.
They make possible composite materials which, weight for weight, are very much stiffer than metals; or, stiffness for stiffness, considerably lighter (see panel).
The ultimate composite materials capitalise on the inherent strength and lightness of reinforced resins by deploying them in a sandwich construction.
As the name suggests, this consists of two slices and a filling — or, in engineering terminology, two skins and a core.
Fibre/resin composite is used for the skins, which confer most of the sandwich's rigidity; the core is merely a light but compressively stiff intermediary that keeps the two skins apart.
It can be as utilitarian as the rigid polyurethane foam commonly used in the reinforcement of GRP bodyshells, or as elegant as the aluminium or Nomex honeycombs employed in pukka aerospace sandwich materials (as seen recently through holes in the wings of Tornado jets involved in the Gulf conflict).
Honeycomb sandwich materials represent the ultimate in low weight and high stiffness, and have revolutionised aircraft and racing car design.
But their relevance to large-scale car manufacture is minimal.
Fabricating a complex structure from them is a skilled and lengthy process, one that can be beyond even small, specialist marques — as Panther discovered with the ill-fated Solo.
Aerospace manufacturers and racing car constructors can afford the necessary time and trouble; the car majors cannot.
For a glimpse of how composite materials might make the transition to mass production, you need to look at innovations like the VARI (vacuum-assisted resin injection) process developed by Lotus.
This method dispenses with the old image of workers laboriously laying down layers of fibre in a mould and adding resin by brush.
Instead, the fibre is first place dry between male and female moulds, which are drawn together by vacuum, and then the resin is injected.
If required, the fibre can first be wrapped around a pre-shaped rigid foam core, to produce a sandwich construction.
VARI is not a new process — Lotus first used it to make Elite bodies in 1974.
But it continues to be developed, and each refinement makes it simpler and speedier.
The latest innovations, used in the production of Elan panels, are Fibreform — a patented process that allows the mat to be pre-formed, outside the mould, into the required shape — and nickel-plated moulds, which improve surface finish and allow heat to be applied to speed curing.
Curing time nevertheless remains one of the barriers to composites' mass production, even though, as Lotus's Albert Adams is quick to point out, what comes out of a steel press is far from being a complete car body.
Steel panels have to be fabricated separately, with size limitations set by platen size and press tonnage, and then welded together.
All of which takes time.
Composite bodies can be fabricated in fewer, larger components, and that makes curing time less of a drawback than it appears.
Still, the car majors are playing a waiting game.
They dabble in composites, and keep a weather eye on the developments made by the small specialists.
It will take irrefutable economic arguments, and a leap of faith, before any of them is prepared to abandon steel for reinforced plastic.
STRONG FIBRES
Three types of fibre reinforcement are commonly used in composites: glass-fibre, Kevlar and carbon fibre.
All three combine the properties if high tensile modulus and low density, but to different degrees.
As the bar chart below shows, carbon fibre has the highest modulus-to-density ratio, followed by Kevlar and then glass.
All three have a higher tensile modulus, weight for weight, than steel, aluminium, magnesium or titanium:
These figures are for the fibres alone.
In composite form the tensile modulus is reduced, but the modulus-to-density ratios for carbon fibre and Kevlar nevertheless remain markedly superior to those of the common engineering materials.
The bar chart below shows the figures for unidirectional composites, in which the fibres are all aligned in the same direction.
These are the strongest, but only along the axis of the fibres; like wood, they are much stiffer along the grain than across.
In composites where the fibres are bidirectional or in the form of a chopped mat, the ratio of modulus to density is reduced, but the composite is stiff in all directions.
In practice the superiority of composites can be even greater than these figures suggest.
For example, the flexural (bending) stiffness of a flat panel is proportional to the cube of its thickness.
On an equal mass comparison, this further favours the composites because their low densities allow much greater panel thickness.
The ranking of the fibres' modulus/density ratios is reflected in their relative costs, glass-fibre being the cheapest and carbon fibre the most expensive:
The price of Kevlar will reduce as it becomes more widely used, whereas carbon fibre is so energy-consumptive to manufacture that the likelihood is it will always be too costly for anything other than specialised use in the car industry.
Lotus's VARI process does away with laborious hand lay-up of fibres (above)
The ill-fated Panther Solo was an example of how the lengthy process of fabricating complex composite structures can present difficulties for even specialist marques
Lotus Elan body panels use a production process called Fibreform, which is a refinement of the VARI process first used to make Elite bodies in 1974
SECONDHAND spotlight
FOUR-RUNNER FOR £5000
One of the pioneers of the four-wheel-drive family saloon market, the Sierra 4x4, is now one of the best bargains around, offering strong performance and secure handling at a fair price.
Graham Nash locates a good example in Glasgow
With the awful storms of late February still fresh in most people's minds, those with four-wheel-drive cars must have found the extra traction a godsend.
While most of use were struggling to stay on the roads, the all-wheel-drive cars swanned along with barely a feather ruffled.
We're not likely to experience such treacherous driving conditions many more times this year, but the benefits of all-wheel drive in the wet or dry are still undeniable.
In search of a bargain 4wd family car, the choice is fairly limited.
In fact, there is only one car that has been around long enough to have reached an affordable price on the secondhand market — the Ford Sierra XR4x4 2.8i.
The XR was the first of Ford's new 4x4 generation, and by the standards of today's rivals is a touch agricultural.
The Ferguson-developed 4wd system, which directs power between the front and rear wheels in a fixed 34/66 per cent ratio, is effective and durable but hardly state of the art.
Scouring the dealers in a still slushy Scotland, I came across a 1985 B-plate model on offer for £4995 at Alex Ritchie Motors of 43 Nithsdale Street — south of the Clyde in real Taggart country.
The car had been washed but not valeted and its general condition suggested that the 58,160 mileage was genuine — something that the decidedly patchy service history was unable to confirm (the vehicle arrived at Ritchie Motors without a service book).
No sign of any crash repair damage was evident in the bodywork, panel alignment was good and the diamond white paintwork looked blemish-free until closer inspection revealed the truth.
Sales director Sandy Ritchie pointed out the repainted sills, which were peppered and chipped when the car was acquired.
The touching up had been well managed but elsewhere there remained a few patches of exposed metal requiring attention — just above the bumper on the front offside wing, inside the wheelarch of the same wing and around the radiator duct.
None of this was structural but it detracted from the overall impression nevertheless.
The same close-quarters examination confirmed that the underside in general, and the exhaust system in particular , were in good order but the front tyres were only marginally legal and needed replacing.
The rear tyres had a comfortable level of tread left and the seven-spoke alloy wheels were unmarked.
Beneath a surface grubbiness inside, the seats, carpets and trim were in excellent condition.
I also checked that the electrically powered bits and pieces were operating properly.
The central locking didn't secure or unlock the front passenger door and all the locks felt rather stiff and gritty.
Both electric front windows worked, albeit with a degree of sloth and a slight graunching.
Similarly, the door mirrors worked but not with any great precision.
Tributes were largely unknown to Ford's injected Cologne V6, but it is a worthy enough trooper.
It never exactly whistles while it works — if anything, it wheezes in its upper reaches — but its torquey character and outright power endow the Sierra with a fleet turn of foot, particularly in the lower gears.
I was unable to detect any knocking from the drive-shafts, protests from the power steering or ‘pulling’ from the brakes.
But in the cabin, the parcel tray bounced and the instrument binnacle zizzed.
The original XR's gearbox was never a strong point.
Clean changes were possible given a little patience, but moving from first to second was reminiscent of shovelling coal — sometime the lever slid into place, sometimes it jarred my whole body.
Double declutching helped a little.
The clutch itself, though typically abrupt, didn't slip at all and gave no cause for concern during the drive.
The suspension was much as I remembered it, crashing a bit over poor surfaces but generally sounding worse than it actually felt.
If my heart was set on buying a Sierra XR4x4, £5000 for the Ritchie Motors offering would be sorely tempting.
The car was pretty sound in most respects — well used but not abused — and the existing faults would, the dealership assured me, be rectified before it found a new owner.
However, the lack of any service history is a major drawback when buying a six-year-old car with a greater than average degree of mechanical complexity.
In the end, I would have to move on from this example to examine other XRs on offer around Glasgow.
But it would be possible that I might end up back at Ritchie Motors.
What the trade says
Sierras have a reputation for being tough and the four-wheel-drive versions are the toughest of all.
They have always had a certain macho image and reasonable new prices have ensured that residual values are sensible.
Early 2.8-litre cars are perhaps the best value around, particularly those with high mileage.
You can't get 4wd handling and muscular performance at anything like the low prices these cars fetch on the used car market.
The rear-wheel-drive XR4i, which preceded the XR4x4, is now a minor classic in the making and is in fact a far superior performer to the 4x4.
Prices for the XR4i have hardened dramatically and the best examples are starting to rise a little in value.
Sheer weight of numbers will ensure that the XR4x4 does not follow this trend and will always be available cheaply.
Anyone looking for refinement and smoothness would be well advised to look elsewhere because these cars are mechanically harsh and lumpy with a mighty thirst when extended.
Superb build quality and a good specification are bonus points and 100,000 miles or more can be expected from well-maintained examples.
Auctions are a good source of supply because many companies run them and then dispose of sound examples in the sale ring.
A full service history is essential and mechanical repair can be expensive, so shop around for the top examples.
The durability of these cars makes them a prime target for clockers and is another reason to insist on up-to-date service schedules.
Now fitted with the superior 2.9-litre engine, the latest cars will depreciate heavily in the first year — 48 per cent falls are the norm.
The rate of depreciation slows down significantly in the second and third years but still runs at around 20 per cent a year.
The lack of a complete service history makes the white 1986 C-reg car we tested too expensive in retail terms.
A mileage of 58,000 was credible and the car was clean and honest, but similar cars are available for between £4000 and £45000 around the country.
It would make around £35000 at auction and there is no doubt that this is where the best value can be had.
XR4x4 hunters would be well advised to look for cars with anti-lock brakes and metallic paint.
These options do not have any additional value on five-year-old cars but they do enhance their saleability.
John Coates 
Secondhand Sierra XR4x4s are generally good value for money, providing strong performance and plenty of grip for less than £5000.
Ferguson-type front-wheel drive system seems agricultural by today's standards but is durable and still effective
ESCORT REVISITED
Is it really as duff as we said?
A lot has happened in the seven months since Ford unveiled its new Escort range — and not much of it in accordance with its £1 billion master plan.
On the introduction of the latest S variant, editor Bob Murray assesses the range anew
Our most controversial cover last year showed a photograph of a red car going around a Swiss hairpin, with the headline ‘Ford's new Escort meets its rivals’, and then, underlined in red, ‘…and loses’.
You will surely remember the debate on the letters pages through September, as those with us and those against us spelled out their views.
What you won't know, unless you work for Ford, is just how high up the hierarchy our criticisms went, and how hard they hit.
There was what seemed to be an endless round of meetings to discuss our coverage, with Ford personnel up to and including European vice-presidents.
To pillory a car like the Escort — and it is Britain's single most important model — is plainly asking for trouble.
Especially when, as with Autocar & Motor , you're the first to report the facts, and you report them loudly.
Subsequent Escort reports from around Europe have said everything that we said on 29 August 1990.
But pretty soon into the new model's life it was clear that adverse press reaction was far from Ford's biggest worry.
The bold claim that all models were to be available from day one quickly fell flat.
The estate and cabriolet, and some versions of the Orion, hit the streets months behind schedule.
In response to our criticisms, production of all 1.4-litre models was stopped so that front anti-roll bars could be fitted, a debacle not unknown to Ford.
There were production problems early on too, which cost as many as 500 cars a day at the Halewood plant.
Even when the new models were being produced they didn't always get to the dealers: a dispute at Toleman, which distributes Fords, caused vast stockpiles.
And when they did get out, the response from the all-important fleets was lukewarm and enthusiasm from private buyers greatly tempered by the general sales collapse of December and January.
It wasn't exactly a copybook launch, though by no means was everything within Ford's control.
An advertising campaign that went on about the law of averages didn't seem to help when much of the press criticism rounded on the Escort as exactly a car for Mr Average.
Even Ford's pricing policy rebounded.
The old Escorts went up more than 12 per cent last year, the last rise coming just a couple of weeks before the introduction of the new model.
This allowed the company to crow about the new models that cost no more than the old — a favourite Ford device but by no means exclusive to the blue oval badge.
But in the market at that time the ploy was far from enough to make the new models seem like bargains.
Action came at price rise time in January, when Ford upgraded all LX Escort/Orion equipment and introduced a new L model — in effect an LX at the old price.
You expect such tactics with cars nearing the end of their life, not with models just months old.
The result of all this was that the Escort languished in some unfamiliar positions in the top 10 sales chart.
There was a marketing push in December that took it to third spot but by January the Escort was back to fifth position, behind even the aged Vauxhall Astra.
The Orion — much more a separate car in the new range and the subject of a strong advertising campaign of its own — took ninth position.
Few doubt that the Escort/Orion will eventually be this country's best seller, as yet more new versions are introduced and the new Zeta engine becomes available from the end of this year.
What we will never know is what price Ford will have to pay to get it to the top spot.
That's for the future.
What of the Escort/Orion today?
Seven months after Peter Robinson and I penned those damning words, have we cause to change our opinion?
Do the engines still lack refinement?
Are the seats still meagre, the gearchange notchy, the brake pedal spongy and the steering slow and vague?
Is the ride still inconsistent and the handling uninspiring at best and unwieldy at worst?
In seven months, has the ‘anti-driver's car’ grown into something more competitive?
ESCORT S
This side of the cabriolet, the new S is the one Escort that needs drivers on its side.
S is meant to stand for sporting but perhaps not too sporting, since both the RS2000 and Escort Cosworth are still to be put on sale.
The S was introduced at the end of January — and was thus not part of our driving story last August — but the ingredients are familiar enough.
The injected 108bhp 1.6-litre CVH engine, five-speed manual gearbox and three-door body are blended with uprated springs and dampers, 185/60 low-profile tyres and steel wheels with plastic trims and body changes that extend to a black rear spoiler and body colour bumper sections.
Plus there is an excellent range of luxury equipment as standard: power windows and mirrors (also heated), central locking, sunroof, heated front screen, heated washer jets, RDS stereo and sports steering wheel.
Impressive, but appropriate?
No, not by a long chalk.
I have thought long and hard about this, and even now hesitate before saying it.
I reckon you'd have to look long and hard through the history of the hot hatch to find a more unconvincing sporting package for your money — a hefty £10,990 in standard form.
Add options and you are left with a total of £13,190, which is the most ludicrously optimistic price I've heard for ages.
Bear in mind that, even for that amount, you get standard Escort seats, which don't locate the driver properly in an LX let alone the S. Neither do you get an adjustable steering column.
The extra goes on power steering (again, any Escort suffers badly without it), alloy wheels, anti-lock brakes, catalytic converter, body kit and a paint choice other than white or red.
The S that Ford chose to show off to the press was understandably a fully loaded one.
It was also very new, having covered just 774 miles — a key factor in the quality of any 1.6 CVH engine.
Even with so many miles under its belt the injected 108bhp engine is never truly competitively smooth and quiet, but this young engine was quite intolerable, its overall lack of refinement evident the moment you fired it up.
The mechanical harshness intrudes throughout the rev range, accompanied at low speeds by a bass exhaust which is the only sign of any sporting character, but not a very convincing one.
Nor is there anything remotely convincing about its performance; there is a feeling of some urgency from 4000rpm but the power stops as suddenly as it starts so that the 6500rpm red line is a merely a figment of someone's imagination.
The mechanical frenzy has to be experienced to be believed, accompanied in the test car by a horrible dashboard resonance in mid-range.
Ford claims 0–60mph in 9.8secs and a top speed of 116mph, so plainly your money can buy a lot more performance as well as refinement in a sporting hatchback.
Overall I thought the gearchange acceptable but, as with all models, with a very notchy feel and an unpleasant stickiness coming out of fifth.
Again, the opposition offers far slicker changes.
The brake pedal likewise; when fitted with anti-lock brakes, pedal response is woefully mushy.
True to current Ford form, there is no shortage of roadholding — but exploiting it is another matter.
A major culprit is the moulded seat, which simply doesn't locate the driver anywhere near positively enough to complement the fine grip from the Pirelli P600s.
We know that Rod Mansfield of Ford's SVE (now engineering director at Aston Martin) fought a battle to get decently shaped seats in the SVE-developed cabrio, and a huge difference to that car they make.
The S is crying out for them.
Word from Ford is that better seats are on their way this year.
The new S suspension works well.
It offers a firm, well-controlled ride that's a little noisy at low speed and thumps a bit over potholes, but it's far from bone-shaking.
But this good control, plus the fine grip and limited body roll, are badly let down in the driver appeal stakes by the steering.
The optional power system should be considered essential, if only to avoid the seriously slow (4.6 turns lock to lock, and vague with it) manual steering that's listed as standard.
In its favour, the power system is well weighted and geared, with a much more manageable three turns across the good turning circle.
This last point doesn't translate into ideal accuracy and agility, however, for apart from its detached feel it suffers a slow-motion response.
This makes the car feel tardy in quick manoeuvres and exacerbates the variable-ratio's less-than-linear response through fast sweepers.
Too often the car feels lurchy, with accurate placement largely a matter of guesswork.
Ford plainly has the experience, the people and the resources to put together a much better sporting hatch than this, even at the S's potentially appealing, and no doubt profitable, junior GTi level.
But this car has the hand of the marketing department all over it, not the engineers and certainly not SVE.
Against assorted sporting Peugeots, Volkswagens and Rovers, some of which cost less than the S depending on specification, Ford's newcomer wouldn't stand a ghost of a chance and you don't need a back-to-back group test to confirm it.
ESCORT 1.4 GLX
Fire up the 1.4 after any 1.6, even a well run-in example, and it's immediately plain that the smaller capacity, carburetted CVH is smoother and quieter, with noise, vibration and harshness levels that at least border on the acceptable.
A result is that despite the reduced power — 73bhp against 108 — the car gets along briskly enough without feeling quite so strained.
There are other anomalies with supposedly superior models, too.
The GLX I drove, again fully loaded with options including anti-lock brakes, had a firm brake pedal and Ford's cleverly adjusting steering column — two items the S could certainly do with.
But not the manual steering, which again has such an effect on the driving character of the car that it is impossible to overlook.
This is steering that manages the seemingly impossible: to be bad just about everywhere.
In town it requires vast amounts of arm-flailing lock but is never what you could call light.
In the country, it loads up and goes inert at the first sign of a corner.
There's no accurate communication through the rim, no sense of confidence in placing the car.
With the anti-roll bar up front, the car rolls less than it used to and has a jigglier low-speed ride, but it's true to say that on all models I drove the quality of ride was largely good.
But has the anti-roll bar sapped roadholding?
It felt like it in the GLX, with what can only be described as feeble front-end grip, resulting in premature and excessive understeer.
But bearing in mind the people Ford says the car is aimed at, the greatest surprise is just how cumbersome and unwieldy it feels on everyday journeys.
Some eastern European cars do it better.
ORION 1.6i GHIA
A fairly absorbent if sometimes rather bouncy ride, excellent driving position, fine equipment including a first-rate CD sound system, stronger-feeling bodyshell and good boot and cabin space allow the Orion to make a much more positive impression.
It is streets ahead of the cobbled-together old model.
You can find other good things too, even if it is only a matter of degrees.
Body roll is well contained, grip is strong (though not up to S levels) and there is a progressive feeling to the handling that the S lacks.
With these comfort-orientated suspension settings, the steering does a serviceable job, without the slight nervousness of the stiffer S.
At £13,000 plus options (like the CD), this is, short of the cabrio, the Escort/Orion flagship — thank heavens it has as much going for it as it does.
The downside is a familiar one: notchy and sticky gearchange, mushy brake pedal, rough and vocal engine (this one had done 4000 miles yet would still not rev to the red line), wind noise at speed and, of course, the seats.
When the new seats arrive, the Ghia and the S will be the first to get them.
So, it's okay by the standards of the rest of the range, but what about when faced with the real world?
Again, you don't need a twin test to know that the gap in ability, build and luxury feel between the Orion and the Rover 416 is a substantial one.
ESCORT 1.6 GHIA ESTATE
Generally regarded as the best looker of the bunch, the estate has a lot more going for it besides.
Here is an attractive, well-packaged car in a market woefully short of contenders.
The Escort estate is guaranteed a following, and overall it will be deserved.
In Ghia form it's a well trimmed and equipped car, but more than this there's a dynamic cohesion to it: somewhere along the line someone got the handling, ride and steering working in harmony rather than against each other.
Undoubtedly a major factor here is the 5ins longer wheelbase and wider front and rear tracks.
For a load carrier, the ride is level and smooth when unladen.
Changing direction won't exactly bring out the Mansell in you but the power steering — in theory the same as that fitted to the others — reacts swiftly and smoothly, and understeer is significantly less than that of the 1.4 GLX.
There's not a world of difference between the carb 1.6 fitted to this estate and the injected version: 90bhp against 108 and no vast difference in refinement, which of course says far more about the injected engine.
So here, too, is a noisy engine, but in this application its workmanlike character is not inappropriate.
The test car I drove had a serious wind noise problem, which will not be the first time Ford has heard that about the Escort, but it otherwise came across as well conceived — it's easy to load and has a completely flat floor with rear seats folded — and competent.
Even likeable.
ESCORT CABRIO
The top of the range, £15,290 convertible certainly has a likeable side, as our road test has already made plain.
Driving it again, alongside the rest of the range, this is immediately, but somewhat intangibly, the nicest Escort to drive, with by no means all the attraction being to do with the convertible top, itself an extremely effective design.
It's said the engine is the same as any injected 1.6 but in this car it feels torquier, much smoother, more eager and quieter, though this could be as a result of top-down wind roar.
But even that's far from unacceptable.
In short, it could be a different engine — until you go in search of the red line, when things still get frenetic.
Even against the estate, the ride/handling/steering/braking package is by far the most convincing, as you would expect given SVE's involvement.
It's not an easy one to get right either, with the greatly different torsional character of a convertible.
Certainly here is the only Escort variant with a degree of throttle steering available; a responsive chassis.
And this, along with a firm, well-damped ride and — hooray hooray!— properly shaped seats, means a driving experience of vastly different character from the others.
It's far from fast and there is some body shake over very rough roads.
There again, I would say that top down in this country it is fast enough, and what shake there is certainly is not accompanied by any rattles or ‘looseness’.
It grips strongly, steers reliably and the brakes have bite.
You could have fun in this car.
Seven months on, how I wish the same could be said for the rest.
Seven months on, how I wish I could say that the Escort/Orion range is at least going in the right direction .
My feeling now after driving them all again is that the direction, the aspirations of the range, are as middle of the road as ever.
Seven months on, Ford people are admitting as much, just as the clever among them are no longer feigning surprise at our conclusions.
The question now is, what will they do to improve matters?
Top: Escort and Orion line-up — not all came at once as Ford promised.
Left: Escort S is sporty but unconvincing, and far too expensive when fully loaded
The S feels to have the stamp of Ford's marketing, rather than engineering, department on it.
Against its rivals in a comparison test, it wouldn't stand a chance
Orion 1.6i Ghia offers fine equipment level, including a first-rate CD sound system.
When the improved seats arrive, the Ghia, along with the S, will get them first
Cabrio is the nicest model to drive — engine seems quieter and more eager here and the seats are well shaped.
Soft-top is simple and effective.
You could have fun in this car
Right: the 1.4-litre carburetted CVH engine in the GLX is quieter and smoother than any in the 1.6 range.
Car rolls less than it used to but roadholding seems to have suffered
THE GREAT CONCEPT CARS
THE DAWN OF THE DINO
Few concept cars have proved as significant and trend-setting as Pininfarina's Dino Berlinetta Speciale, introduced to universal acclaim at the 1965 Paris motor show.
Luca Ciferri remembers the car that presaged the immortal Ferrari Dino and which still influences the design of today's sports cars
How do you imagine a contemporary Ferrari road car?
Painted red, of course, with sinuous front wings that curve above the wheelarches, a recessed bonnet, a short roof tapering into a long, descending C-pillar and a vast engine cover terminating with a flat rear.
And you can't fail but to think of the air intakes starting in the rear part of the door and merging into the rear wing, whether they're straked, like the Testarossa's and 348's, or finely sculpted like the 328's.
These are the design clues that spell ‘Ferrari’ to the countless thousands of sports enthusiasts around the world.
And all are derived from one Pininfarina concept car — the Dino Berlinetta Speciale — which made its debut more than a quarter of a century ago at the 1965 Paris show.
‘This prototype occupies a special place in Pininfarina history.’
Those are the words of Lorenzo Ramaciotti, Pininfarina's chief designer.
‘Due to a series of fortuitous circumstances it embodies unique aesthetic, technical and even sentimental values.
It was the official debut of the Dino family on the show circuit and Maranello's first mid-engined car not conceived exclusively for racing.
The mechanicals were taken from a race car, the Dino 206P, which competed in the European hillclimb championship (a prestigious series in the 60s) but the bodywork, despite its motor show boldness, previewed a road car application.
And it was the first public result attributable to the second generation at Pininfarina, Pinin's son Sergio and his brother-in-law, Renzo Carli.’
Sergio Pininfarina himself takes up the story behind this amazing concept car.
‘At the Paris show in 1965 we started the complete story of the Pininfarina-designed mid-engined V6 Dinos and V8 Ferraris.
The Dino Berlinetta Speciale was the first; the 348tb is the most recent.’
But what were the revolutionary contents of the Speciale?
Today, it still looks interesting but far from being a perfectly balanced shape.
‘It was a sharp break with tradition,’ explains Ramaciotti, ‘without throwing the design rule book completely out of the window.
‘For years we had been trying to lower and streamline the bonnets of front-engined cars and the mid-engined configuration allowed us to obtain an extremely low nose, deeply recessed between sculpted front wings that sloped down to the headlights, which were contained in a plexiglass fairing to continue the line.
The air intake scoops, destined to become a typical Ferrari feature, appeared on the doors and rear wings, crossed by a chrome bar which acted as the door handle.
The idea, one that's been adopted many times since, was to ‘camouflage’ the door handle so it didn't interfere with the body lines.
‘To balance the sizeable front wings, the sweep of the rear wings was slightly marked on the flanks.
The car had an extremely small glasshouse with a sharply raked wraparound windscreen and a minute roof.
The engine compartment had to be outside the cockpit for acoustic and thermal insulation so we introduced a vertical backlight for good rear visibility and blended it into the fins sloping down from the roof, which gave a certain lightness to the rear pillars, This solution has become a constant feature on all Pininfarina Ferraris up to the Testarossa.
‘The rear was characterised by slightly excessive overhang — needed to accommodate the spare wheel and gearbox — terminating in a slightly recessed, clipped surface that reiterated the current thinking of Ferrari competition cars, enriched by the shaped light clusters and fine louvres.
The interior, austere and functional, refined the colour scheme and the instrumentation of the racing Dinos without loading it down with unwanted bric-a-brac.’
Ramaciotti is not just one of Europe's finest car designers (the stunning Mythos concept car was the result of his boyhood dreams) but he is also considered one of the best analysts of design in the business.
His words explain clearly where the Dino Berlinetta Speciale was radically different to the established exotic car shapes of the mid '60s.
At that time Ferrari was still producing the somewhat bland (by comparison) 330GT, the 500 Superfast and the 275GTB/GTS.
Lamborghini was still at the 350GT stage, the Miura was to come later.
And Porsche was launching a new generation of rear-engined sports cars — the 911.
Sergio Pininfarina has no doubts about the significance of the Dino Berlinetta Speciale.
‘It was more that just successful,’ he says today, looking back on what many consider his finest work.
‘It was a genuine trend-setter.
We were able to lower the nose to improve visibility and to reduce the height of the whole car because we no longer had to worry about having the exhaust pipes running under the passenger compartment.
This allowed us to revolutionise the balance of height and width.
But the mid-engined layout did give us all kinds of new problems; rear visibility, thermal and acoustic insulation of the passenger compartment, engine ventilation.
Sometimes the necessity to solve technical problems obliges you to rethink a project starting from a completely new point.
Faced with these challenges we almost had to come up with something that broke with the past.
‘When my father, six months before his death, saw the car for the first time at the Paris show — where he decided to go even though his health was not good — he fell in love with it immediately.
‘This car is like my nephew,’ he said, ‘because it is the daughter of my sons.’
‘We, the second generation of Pininfarina, had given him great joy and pride.
I think the Dino Berlinetta Speciale, together with the Cisitalia my father created in 1947, are the Pininfarina cars that represented the most significant milestones in car design.’
Today, the Dino Berlinetta Speciale remains a fascinating design, aggressive without being just a road-going version of a racing Ferrari and rich in class and atmosphere like all the outstanding Pininfarina designs.
The front wings, softly moulded to follow the profile of the large wheels, still looks terrific.
The boxed-off tail is now considered a fairly standard feature but it was a daring innovation in the mid-60s.
The sole Dino Berlinetta Speciale is now part of the permanent collection of the Le Mans car museum in France, a fitting place for a car that drew its design inspiration from the first mid-engined Ferrari sports racing cars and which shocked the world at Paris more than a quarter of a century ago.
Don't be fooled by the Bertone reflection on the bonnet; the Dino Berlinetta Speciale was unmistakeably a Pininfarina car
Dino creator Sergio Pininfarina (left), son of company founder Battista (right)
Above: second of the Dinos, the Berlinetta GT of 1966.
Below: preliminary sketches, final show version in top left corner
Unlike many contemporary concept cars, the Dino was eminently practical, even featuring a full-size spare wheel
FATHER OF THE FAMILY
Virtually every mid-engined Ferrari built since the mid '60s — from the original 206 Dino to the awesome F40 — owes its inspiration to the Dino Berlinetta Speciale concept car
The seed was sown in Paris but it was two years later, in Turin, when the first production car, the Dino 206GT, was introduced.
There was also an intermediate step — the Dino Berlinetta GT of 1966 — but this was never intended to go into full production.
The feeling of the original concept survived in these two evolutions but the more provocative of the original features were toned down and more integrated.
The front wings were less exaggerated, the rear overhang shorter and the tail a little taller.
The glass surfaces became more important, especially in side view, giving the production car a more balanced feel.
The air intake scoops took their final shape; the chrome trim that divided it longitudinally in the first two cars was finally eliminated.
The headlamps became two circular projectors housed in the wings and covered by plexiglass shells.
Proof positive of the enduring shape of the design came in 1969 when the original two-litre V6 was replaced by a 2.4-litre unit, the model designation changing to 246 as a result.
The only styling change was to the headlamps with the plexiglass shells removed.
Three years later came the 246GTS, the targa version, which looked substantially different because the elimination of the roof meant a strong roll bar had to be housed behind the seats.
The second window disappeared and the metal surface that took its place was optically softened by a group of three small air intakes.
At the 1975 Paris show, exactly 10 years after the Dino Berlinetta Speciale was unveiled, the 308GTB, the most successful Ferrari ever, made its debut.
It was a logical evolution of the Dino family but the adoption of the three-litre V8 engine in place of the V6 meant the end of the Dino name, although it features on Pininfarina's original styling model of the 308.
In the 308 the side view became more balanced to reflect the increased importance of the rear end with its new engine.
A long, sleek C-pillar gave the car a more muscular look and the side scoops became bigger and wider.
The front end, continually revised in the Dino range, was tidied up again, this time with pop-up headlamps, deleting the sole styling detail that dated back to the late '50s and early '60s.
Several version of the 308 were produced, including the GTS targa version and the 1977 Coupe Speciale Pininfarina — a study to improve aerodynamics which also housed wider tyres under enlarged aluminium wings.
In 1982 Ferrari launched the 208 Turbo (made mainly for the Italian market and powered by a two-litre turbocharged V8) and, more recently have come the ultimate developments of the original theme — the 288GTO and the F40.
The GTO, conceived to revive memories of one of Maranello's greatest cars, the 1962 250GTO, was, from a design point of view, the Coupe Speciale Pininfarina painted Ferrari red.
Only the rear pillar changed, having an external cover that lifted from the rear window surface to create a big air intake in order to ventilate the engine compartment, made extremely hot by the addition of the turbo.
Even the F40 shows a distinct family resemblance, although the lines were sharpened and simplified.
But all these great Ferraris grew out of one concept car, the Dino Berlinetta Speciale.
Look at the new 348 and try to imagine, step by step, year after year, how you should update the design features of the Berlinetta Speciale to make it more contemporary.
It's a fair bet you would end up with something very close to the 348.
‘It's a process that's very simple to explain when it's done,’ smiles Ramaciotti, ‘but extremely difficult to achieve.’
Production Dinos on display, targa GTS in the foreground (above left)
Ferrari F40, the ultimate development of the Dino theme; elegant 308 (below)
RIVALS AND CONTEMPORARIES
Before the Berlinetta Speciale most sports cars still had the engine in the front.
Things would never be the same again
If you were looking to buy a high-performance sports car in 1965, what would you have chosen?
The mid '60s were a turning point in sports car design, marking the virtual end of the front-engined sports cars in place of the new mid-engined models of which the Dino Berlinetta Speciale was one of the pioneers.
Until Pininfarina revealed his masterpiece, Ferrari was sticking resolutely with front-engined cars of which the most interesting was the 275GTB/GTS, although it didn't feature the most exciting shape.
The best-looking Ferrari of that era was the 250LM, the competition car that dominated long distance sports car racing until the arrival of the Ford GT40.
The 250LM demonstrated conclusively that the mid-engined configuration was the way ahead.
Lamborghini was still producing the 350GT, an interesting car technically but not in the front line of design innovation.
The revolutionary mid-engined (and transversely-mounted) Miura was yet to come and didn't make its debut until the Turin show of 1966.
Maserati was still producing the elegant, but already old-fashioned, Sebring, introduced in 1963 and, in 1966, produced the Ghibli, perhaps the final swan-song of the classic front-engined two-plus-twos.
De Tomaso's Vallelunga deserves the same remark as the Lamborghini 350GT — good mechanicals, insignificant shape.
The mid-engined Maserati was in the pipeline but still one year away.
At the same time there were rumbles of revolution at Porsche.
The 356 series was about to die and in its stead was coming the 911.
For Porsche, the 911 holds the same place as the Dino Berlinetta Speciale does for Ferrari — a marvellous design that could be continually updated and evolved.
US design was offering the evergreen Chevrolet Corvette but the most interesting car coming out of the US — via Britain—was the Ford GT40, originally a Lola design.
Both Nuccio Bertone and Marcello Gandini honestly admit the influence of the GT40 on the Lamborghini Miura.
Racing car design was fundamental to the most advanced road cars of the mid '60s.
Never before and, perhaps not until the Group C inspired supercars of the late '80s and early '90a have race and road car design been so closely linked.
Lamborghini Miura, Maserati Ghibli and designers Gandini and Giugiaro
Ford GT40 and Porsche 911
Master stroke
Lusty performance and razor-sharp handling are hallmarks of the Golf G60 Limited, a VW Motorsport special that rolls all of VW's best bits into one package.
Mark Harrop is impressed
Volkswagen has made 70 people very happy.
That's the number of lucky motorists the Wolfsburg manufacturer has equipped with the Golf G60 Limited, a car that was the subject of over 1000 enquiries when it was announced to dealers in Germany last year but only had a production run of 70.
Conceived as a challenge for VW's increasingly active motorsport division, it is a car whose sum is even greater than its parts.
And that's a particularly praiseworthy feat when you consider the set of parts the Limited boasts.
From the VW stock cupboard have come such mouthwatering delights as the suspension and gearbox from the Group A Rallye Golf, the four-wheel drive system from the Syncro and a supercharger for VW's well-known 16-valve 1.8-litre engine.
In this guise, a Limited driver will discover 210bhp beneath his right foot — enough to make this the fastest production Volkswagen ever — and, thanks to the clever syncro system, more than ample traction to make use of it.
What you will really love, though, is the buckets of low-down torque that the G-lader blower and intercooler create.
Not for you the deathly quiet below 4000rpm of normal 16-valves, or the back-busting thrust of a turbocharger.
Instead, from as low as 1000rpm you can bury your foot in the firewall and watch the front of the car gobble up ever larger amounts of tarmac.
The Limited gathers speed like a snowball down a hill and will continue to pump you faster and faster towards the horizon, reaching its peak power in each gear just 300rpm short of the engine's 6800rpm red line.
In a straight line, admittedly, the Limited doesn't quite set your pulse on fire like an Integrale 16v; subjectively, the Lancia's 200bhp two-litre unit seems to provide much more firepower.
Sure enough, at the track the computer reveals that the Delta breaks the 0–60mph barrier in 6.3secs, half a second quicker than the Golf.
At the quarter-mile post the Limited is only 0.3secs shy of the Integrale's 14.9secs, but the VW's better aerodynamics and 20.9mph per 100rpm gearing in fifth allow it to fly to an impressive 139mph top speed and leave the Lancia flailing in its wake.
There's even more ammunition for the Limited driver to unload in the performance-over-a-pint discussion at the local pub.
The car's tremendous torque proves invaluable when it comes to overtaking; it leaps the fourth-gear 30–50mph increment in just 6.5secs.
That's well over a second quicker than the Integrale, just under a second in front of Ford's Sapphire Cosworth 4x4 and neck and neck with BMW's masterful M5.
The Golf is certainly man enough to rub shoulders with some pretty demanding company.
Show these cars a twisty, wet A-road, though, and the Limited transforms from man to He-man.
It'd be a brave person who would be against the Golf romping out the other end in front.
The Limited's ability to stick to the tarmac, or, more importantly, the areas of tarmac you've chosen, is simply awesome.
Barrel into a tight corner, clip the apex with your foot planted to the floor and the Golf will attack the exit with almost indecent haste and staggering security.
Better still in these wet spring months, a liberal dousing of rain will do little to affect the Limited's progress.
The key to exploiting the car's handling prowess is to keep on the gas.
That way the syncro system will be pumping power to all four bits of rubber as you throw yourself into corners with all the wild confidence of a kiddie in a bouncy castle.
Enter the same bend with a trailing throttle, however, and the story is quite different — the syncro system reverts to supplying only the front wheels as in normal driving.
Push towards the limits of the tyres' adhesion, though, and you provoke little more than mild understeer and a screech of protest from the Continental Sport Contact 195/50 VR15 rubber.
Only on a long, fast bend can the tail be persuaded to step out, and then only under strong provocation and with little drama, as the drivetrain begins to feed the power rearwards.
This level of ability is matched by the performance of the brakes.
With anti-lock as standard, they respond smoothly and effectively to instruction and show no signs of fade during repeated hard stopping.
From the command centre, it is only the steering's tendency to provide a slightly blurred picture of events at the front wheels that interrupts an otherwise masterful flow of information.
But when you consider this in the context of its well-weighted precision and speed, it gives little cause for complaint.
The five-speed gearbox, borrowed from the Passat, is less inspiring.
Stirring the cogs quickly is hindered by a notchy change, and a quick second to third change will easily beat the synchromesh.
Pick your slots with care, however, and tread carefully on the throttle and you can move swiftly through the ratios, making the most of the lusty engine.
For a car with such razor-sharp handling, the Limited's ability to keep the lumps and bumps of the road away from the car's occupants is surprisingly good.
Its only weak spot is in coping with bigger potholes, which send a jarring crash through the bodyshell.
Overall, though, the Limited probably rides as well as, if not better than, a Golf GTi.
Inside the cabin, the Golf is now looking fairly outdated but the instruments are still easy to use and effective, four adults can be carried in reasonable comfort and the huge boot will swallow more than enough for a weekend away.
You also get black leather upholstery, electric windows all round, sunroof, central locking, stylish gunmetal grey paint and attractive BBS spoked alloy wheels.
These last items are the only giveaway to the car's ferocious ability.
It would otherwise pass for a much more lowly Golf and is the antithesis of the fire-breathing extravagance of the Integrale 16v — very handy when it comes to the boys in blue.
The Limited's Q-car appeal and superb under-the-skin dynamism proves to be an irresistible combination.
The 26-valve GTi pales into insignificance against this car and it's difficult to see how the three-door Rallye road car could convincingly better this Golf stablemate.
In the wake of the Rallye's poor showing on the world rally circuit, the Limited's success will be something of a boost to VW's Motorsport division.
What's more, this car will certainly not be the last hot road car development to roll out of the factory.
Just for starters there is the Corrado, the forthcoming MkIII Golf, the G40 Polo and the new VR6 engine to play with.
If the outstanding quality of the Limited is any guide, the Motorsport team is going to be bringing many more smiles to people's faces.
Figures taken at 7744 miles by our own staff at the Lotus group proving ground, Millbrook.
All Autocar & Motor test results are subject to world copyright and may not be reproduced without the editor's written permission.
Blown 16v engine is terrifically torquey
VW Motorsport's badging is discreet
Limited is left-hand drive, take it or leave it.
Leather is part of the up-spec package
Handling is flawless and grip staggering; 4wd system rewards press-on driving
ANGRY YOUNG MAN
Shaun Campbell
‘We talked about fun and cars when I was beginning to think they were no longer synonymous’
You didn't have to be an angry young man to look around the car industry over the past few weeks and despair of ever hearing any good news.
Everywhere you looked, the world of cars seemed to be touching upon affairs of great import.
And they were universally depressing.
I was thinking about his while stuck in a traffic jam the other day.
There's nothing unusual about clogged up roads in London, but this was the school half-term holidays — usually a haven of relatively clear tarmac, a glorious window of opportunity to leave home for the office a quarter of an hour later.
No anxious mums watching the clock, no tearaway teachers in a hurry, no fractious dinner ladies with their minds on lumpy custard.
But this particular traffic jam wasn't caused by a Scania shedding its load, sewer repairs or slight confusion about exactly which way one should negotiate the Wandsworth one-way system.
It was caused by the IRA, which had chosen that week to leave a couple of bombs on British Rail mainline stations.
With no trains running, people turned to their cars and you can hardly blame them.
Now, I'd rather be sitting in a car than standing on a crowded platform, but there wasn't much in the way of light relief on the radio.
Oil, that most precious of natural resources, the stuff which makes the wheels of industry turn, was at that moment being set ablaze to pollute the skies or pumped into the Gulf to pollute the seas.
For reasons best known to the fuel companies, the Gulf crisis never turned into an oil crisis, although petrol prices generally leap up and down quicker than a Tory backbencher during a Neil Kinnock speech if a dealer on the Amsterdam spot market so much as sneezes over his computer screen.
But you couldn't feel smug about filling up your tank with unleaded while all that was going on.
If you turned to domestic politics, the news was no better.
It was all economic recession, bankruptcies and lay-offs, words which disguise the hundreds, perhaps thousands, of personal tragedies of unemployment and dashed hopes.
Far too many of these were in the motor industry.
If you're the sort of person who thinks that Parliamentary democracy is a reasonably important thing, you couldn't take much pleasure from the findings of the enquiry into the way Rover was sold off.
The pragmatists will point out that Rover still exists, that it's in (mainly) British hands and that the current generation of new Rovers is the best in living memory.
But, if that's the case, why was the deal handled in such a sly and back-handed manner?
And by a minister who was never elected?
In the midst of this unrelenting wave of depression, I found myself, dressed in a borrowed dinner jacket, on the M11 headed for Cambridge, where I was about to make my first (and last) appearance as an after-dinner speaker.
The Cambridge University Automobile Club had clearly fallen on hard times, too.
I was intimidated by the whole idea of Cambridge.
Everybody I met would surely be either fabulously wealthy, extremely intelligent or both.
When I was at university (actually a rather seedy teacher training college in south-east London) nobody could afford to run a car.
One's grant disappeared into a bottomless sea of cigarettes and beer with hardly enough left over for the books we were meant to read.
But it wasn't like I'd imagined — except for the long silences when I'd been hoping for laughs.
They didn't drive around in their fathers' cast-off Rollers; they pooled their resources, picked up a MkII escort for a hundred notes at an auction and took it in turns to drive it round a disused airfield practising handbrake turns until the car cried enough.
They organised 12-car rallies around the Cambridge Fens, asking every local resident for permission to hold the event and then, when the snow caused the event to be called off, they did the same thing again.
And when the nightmare of the after-dinner speech was over, we went to the bar and had a proper conversation about cars.
Like, how do you get maximum performance for minimum money?
You buy an old Alfasud, that's how.
Or possibly a clapped-out Lancia Delta.
Some of them argued the merits of various French cars.
One student had a Citroen Visa, which I immediately assumed was the GTi version — Peugeot 205 kit in a Peugeot 104 chassis — and the sort of lukewarm hatch I can just about afford now.
The student in question put me straight by pointing out it was a Visa 10E he was running.
We talked about Hillman Avengers, 850cc Minis that screamed for help at speeds above 60mph and the importance of remembering that the Alfasud's handbrake operates the front, rather than the rear wheels.
We talked about how fast you can make a 1.1 MkII Escort run when it's only firing on three cylinders and how to make it run on three cylinders when it wants to run on just two.
We talked about what a bitch of a job it is to change a radiator on a Mini.
We talked about how Morris Marinas make the wrong noises, Fiat Stradas make the right noises and Triumph Heralds that make no noise at all because the big end is buggered.
We talked about having some fun with cars at a time when I was beginning to think the two were no longer synonymous.
This wasn't a bunch of Hooray Henrys with more money than sense.
Some were deadly serious about working in the car industry.
One was about to start work in the engineering department of Rover and was already cute enough to know what you should and shouldn't say to a journalist, especially when it comes to forthcoming developments of the K-series engine.
Another was hopeful of joining Ford — he took me to task for this magazine's criticisms of the new Escort.
And a third, whose immaculate dinner jacket couldn't conceal hands scarred and stained from rebuilding a Mini Cooper, wanted to become the world's first professional classic rally driver.
I hope he makes it.
They advised me of the best route to take home — and by the best they meant the most fun, not the quickest.
Roads with unexpected humpback bridges, tightening-radius corners and reasonably free of police and radar traps.
And they made it clear that I was extremely fortunate to be doing the job I do.
They're right, of course.
Journalism often means long hours but it's better than working.
And angry young men are just older men who haven't grown up and can only see one side of the coin.
The true face of motoring, Cambridge University style: checking out tired old motors at auctions
RUNNING REPORT
FRENCH BREED
Renault's Clio is a big hit in France, but will the Brits buy it?
Mark Bishop is running one
The Renault Clio won the 1991 European Car of the Year award last November.
At the time it was not available in the UK, and its critical acclaim came mainly from Continental motoring journalists.
Is the Clio a pan-European standards-setter in the supermini class, or does its Gallic charm lose its appeal this side of the Channel?
I'm running one on our long-term fleet to see.
Renault plans to target the 1.4 RT version at long-distance travellers, reckoning that its spacious interior, high equipment and trim levels and supple ride will enable the top-spec Clio to rival bigger cars for commuting.
As someone who lives just outside Brighton and commutes to Autocar & Motor 's office on the outskirts of Teddington, West London, it's fitting that I should be the Clio's new keeper.
My journey should also ensure that the Clio clocks up the miles quickly, helping readers to gauge the French supermini's durability.
For, as Renault itself has admitted (‘Three men and a car company’,Autocar & Motor , 20 February) the French maker's reputation for quality was a tad patchy before the 19 was introduced two years ago.
H375 DRV arrived on a cold, wet night, and my first impression was of the prodigious efficacy of the three-speed heater/demister.
I doubt that many cars — except, perhaps, for James May's Fiesta RS Turbo, which has a heated front screen — could have dispatched windscreen condensation any quicker.
Scanning the interior, I was impressed by the high quality of the trim and dash.
But where was all the switchgear?
The column stalks are fine: indicators, lights and horn on the left, wipers on the right.
But the hazard warnings, rear fog lights and rear screen demister are an arm's length away, obscured by the steering wheel, while the switch for the front fogs is hidden above my right knee.
The pedals, too, seem to have been located by someone who has yet to discover the science of ergonomics.
While the steering wheel is offset to the left, the pedals are positioned to the right.
The brake and clutch are too close together for my modest size sevens, and there's a huge foot-rest where I would normally expect a clutch pedal.
These grumbles aside, the Clio is an easily driven, user-friendly car.
It has started first time without exception so far, and pulls smoothly when cold.
The steering is light — although at almost four turns lock-to-lock, wheel-twirling can be a chore in town.
The clutch is light and progressive, and brakes are firm and the gearbox is quick and efficient.
My previous car was a direct competitor to the Clio, namely the new Rover Metro in 1.4-litre guise, and I can't help making comparisons.
The biggest area where the Renault scores is comfort and equipment.
I find the seats just as comfortable as the highly acclaimed Rover items, while rear passengers enjoy greater legroom.
For the same price — around nine grand — standard equipment is better, including remote-control central locking and a sunroof.
Renault is right about the Clio's ride.
It's superb.
Not even the yawning chasms in the road caused by freeze-thaw action during the recent cold spell can upset it.
The Metro set the class standard in this area; the Clio narrowly surpasses it, thanks to its longer wheelbase.
Noise levels are low at motorway speeds — the result of a class-leading 0.32 drag coefficient, narrow 165/65 R13 tyres and a fairly high fifth gear.
So, as a relaxing small car for long-distance cruising, it's great.
Trouble is, I still wonder whether it's going to be a match for the Metro because so far one thing seems to be missing — fun.
The engine may be  be smooth, refined and flexible in its mid-range, but for a cross-country sprint it's asthmatic.
Peak power is delivered at 5750rpm, well into the ‘warning zone’ and only 750rpm short of the point where the rev-limiter cuts in.
Not that many drivers will want to push it that far; beyond 4000rpm the 1.4 Energy unit is distinctly thrashy.
Despite anti-roll bars front and rear the Clio leans quickly in bends, and by Renault standards the steering is low geared and not as communicative as the Renault 5's.
There's not the character or eagerness of that car, or indeed the Metro.
In a sense, such comparisons are unfair.
The Renault does not claim to be sporty; rather, it is a refined, comfortable cruiser.
Certainly it's one small car which I can drive for several hours at a stretch and step out feeling refreshed.
It's also stunningly economical.
With a long journey ahead of me every morning and evening, I don't hang about, and this is the first petrol-engined car I've used that has given me over 45mpg on a run.
I've also fallen in love with the stereo.
Renault is working hard to improve the quality of its products, and I must say the panel fit and finish on H375 DRV impress me.
Our black-and-white picture does not really do justice to its chameleon-like metallic paintwork, which seems to appear as green, silver or blue according to the light.
In fact, says Renault, it's Emerald Green.
The Clio reaches us in perfect condition, excepting a few scuffs on the steel wheel trims.
At the time of going to press, Renault UK had yet to agree prices with France for the Clio range.
But if an interim price guide the company's press office supplied us with proves accurate, our 1.4RT is very keenly priced for its high specification and impressive build quality, at around £8650.
DATABASE
Market Update
Prices of the Citroen AX and BX were increased from the end of February by an average of 3.5 per cent.
The entry-level AX, the 10E three-door, is now £5550 (up £60), with the TGE and TGD models getting a radio/cassette as part of the standard equipment.
The budget BX 14TE has been dropped from the lists, but the £8390 BX St Tropez fills the gap at the bottom of the range.
Seat UK's strategic move away from advertising its cars as cheap and cheerful, and towards the ‘quality driven consumer’, hasn't prevented the Spanish manufacturer from continuing to launch ultra-cheap models on to the market.
The latest is the Ibiza 900 Designer, priced at £5199 in three-door form, or £5487 for the five-door.
Rover has introduced yet another special-edition Mini.
The latest, the ‘Nordic Blue metallic’ Neon, is based on the City with the addition of inevitable graphics, plus chrome bumpers and door handles.
The Neon also gets full-width wheel trims, passenger door mirror and opening rear quarterlights, while inside there's velour trim and a better stereo.
The price is £5570, £575 more than the City.
Ford has made an attempt to plug the gap left by the XR3i in its time-honoured fashion of producing an interim S-specification Escort.
The new model gets sports suspension, 185/60x14 tyres and XR3i engine.
Equipment includes power front windows, heated windscreen and washers, electric mirrors, sunroof, velour interior and sports steering wheel.
The cost is £10,990.
Vauxhall can be expected to start a flurry of limited-edition Astras in the lead-up to the new model's launch in September.
First to come is the Expression, based on the hatchback Merit in either metallic blue or pearlescent red.
It gets the 1.4-litre engine, five-speed gearbox, cross-spoke alloys and a sunroof.
Inside there's a unique cloth trim.
Price is £9060, or £9370 for the five-door.
Peter Burgess 
Astra Expression: first of many?
How Fast, How Good
IMPORTANT INFORMATION:
This is how the Autocar & Motor How Fast, How Good data has been derived: 30–70mph indicates overtaking ability and is measured in top gear (or fourth in the case of five-speed manual gearboxes); 50–70mph is recorded in top.
Overall consumption is that recorded during the test period, while touring mpg is based on official Government economy figures — 50 per cent of urban cycle, plus 25 per cent each of 56mph and 75mph steady speed cycles.
Reprinting of results, in whole or in part, is forbidden except by permission of the publisher.
•Denotes models no longer on sale in the form tested