

TALES OF THE TUB
Bathrooms with Aplomb
IRISH GARDENS
Join our Grand Tour
THE HEDGEHOG
Not just a prickly face
THE GREAT BRITISH PUDDING REVIVAL
TAIT & STYLE
Fashion from Orkney
Send for our supermac: under 30£
Follow the antiques trail
Goggle at gargoyles
JANE GOODALL
MICHAEL VINEY
HANNAH HAUXWELL
COUNTRY LIVING
ISSUE NUMBER 63 MARCH 1991 ON SALE 7 FEBRUARY
FEATURES
AMBASSADOR FOR THE CHIMPS
Jane Goodall, defender of the ape Anne Boston
FOX WARFARE
One farmer's fight to save his lambs Charlie Pye-Smith
THE GARDENER'S ACCOMPLICE
The discreet charm of the hedgehog Christopher Probert
FOOL'S GOLD
West Mayo in prospective peril Mary Dowey
HOLY SINISTER
Gargoyles sacred and profane Richard Rosenfeld
KING JAMES'S FRUITFUL ERROR
Round and round the mulberry tree James Driver
WRIST WATCH
Preventing and treating RSI Dr Charles Shepherd
ELEMENTAL EXPOSURE
Testing weatherproof cameras Steve Ashton
HOUSES & GARDENS
HOMEFRONT
Taking cover with rugs and throws Gabi Tubbs
EMPORIUM
Compiled by Fiona Douglas Robertson
DRAKE'S PROGRESS
Collecting aquilegias Barty Phillips
THE GARDEN PATH
Miranda Innes
THE MEETING HOUSE
Comfortable chic in Lancashire Judi Goodwin
TUSCANY IN SOMERSET
A corner of England that is for ever Italy Hester Page
FAUCET SAGA
Bathrooms with aplomb Gabi Tubbs
BACK IN THE PINK
Restoration of a Suffolk farmhouse Gillian Darley
CRAFTS
TAIT & STYLE
Felting in Orkney Katy Brown
FOOD & DRINK
ROLYPOLY, PUDDINGS AND PIE
Great British Puddings Philippa Davenport
SEAL OF APPROVAL
The history of the cork Kathryn McWhirter
FASHION & BEAUTY
BEST FRIENDS
Clothes to play in Robert Burgess
BEAUTY FROM WITHIN
Paula McWaters
REGULARS
MAGPIE
Compiled by Vicky Carlisle
BRIAN REDHEAD
NETWORK
News pages Edited by Jules MacMahon
SCENES FROM A PROVINCIAL LIFE
Michael Viney
FOLLOW THE ANTIQUES TRAIL
Bath and beyond Deirdre McSharry
ESCAPES
Wiltshire with and without children Compiled by Jules MacMahon
BOOKS
Save our neglected historic houses Marcus Binney
MOTORING
Danger; male drivers Frank Page
YOUR LETTERS
Compiled by Teph Willis
MY COUNTRY CHILDHOOD
Hannah Hauxwell
OFFERS
PURE WOOL THROW
AQUILEGIAS
WILLOW BASKET
SCARVES AND SHAWLS BY TAIT AND STYLE
BLACK MULBERRY TREE
ALL-WEATHER RIDING COAT
COMPETITIONS & TREATS
THE RULING PASSION OF JOHN GOULD
10 books to be won
WIN A BOOK OF SECRETS
IRISH GARDENS: A GRAND TOUR
Visit eight of the best Miranda Innes
STAY IN A MEDIEVAL MANOR IN GLOUCESTERSHIRE
Three nights for the price of two
FREE ADMISSION TO ANTIQUES FAIR, BATH
WIN AN OLYMPUS AF-I TWIN CAMERA
CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING
ADVERTISERS' INDEX 
Faucet saga
Drake's progress
Homefront
Buy an all-weather riding coat
Rolypoly, puddings and pie
FIRST WORDS
Happy Birthday to us!
Thanks to you, loyal readers,Country Living is now celebrating its fifth year as a monthly publication, with a circulation of 175,000.
Many people express surprise that the magazine is so young, and Radio 4's News Stand programme recently described us as ‘good old Country Living ’.
I took that as a compliment — a sign that we have become accepted as part of everyday (country) life.
In our five years we have supported many country issues and charities.
We have campaigned for better rural transport, and for unleaded petrol and catalytic converters to be made more widely available.
We have publicised the plight of arctic terns, seals, badgers and intensively reared animals.
We have tried to present both sides of the hunting and shooting debate, and will be publishing the results of last month's field sports questionnaire as soon as they are analysed.
We have supported farmers and rural enterprise through features and our Small Rural Business Award and independent food shops competition.
We are successful, but success brings brickbats.
We have been accused by some of having too many features about the south of England, by others of having too many about Scotland and Wales; of having too much mud on our boots, of romanticising the countryside, of being too green, too blue, too red, too expensive and aspirational in our tastes, too harshly realistic in our coverage of controversial issues.
Each month we take note of your letters and try to redress the balance, hoping that over the year we get it just about right.
Fortunately, as well as complaints, we have received plenty of praise and awards for our distinctive photography and excellent writing over the past five years.
Some of our best writers are on the staff of the magazine, and one of them is Associate Editor Anne Boston.
This month she has contributed a terrific interview with Jane Goodall, the intrepid watcher and champion of chimpanzees (see pages 34–36).
As well as receiving your letters, we like to meet you at the Royal Show, reader workshops and garden visits.
I hope gardeners among you will take up our offer of a grand tour of Irish gardens in June.
I went to the Wicklow Gardens Festival last year and enjoyed it thoroughly; and the welcome I received at Hunter's Hotel makes a return visit hard to resist.
Reports on Tinakilly House Hotel are just as complimentary.
Details on pages 88–92.
I was also thrilled to be invited to the wedding of Jack Woolley and Peggy Archer, a small family and village affair at which Peggy looked demure in a cream silk chiffon frock; Jack and best man Nelson Gabriel were devastatingly handsome in their grey morning coats.
We toasted the couple with champagne, sampled Jean-Paul's cake (not bad, considering how little time he had to make it) and were allowed to throw confetti over the happy couple in their BBC function room — or was it really Grey Gables?
 Francine Lawrence 
Francine Lawrence with Peggy and Jack (June Spencer and Arnold Peters)
NEXT ISSUE ON SALE MARCH 14
MAGPIE
A TREASURE TROVE OF TEDDY BEARS, TAPESTRIES, TILES AND TROPICAL FISH, PLUS A SCENTED BOOK OF SECRETS.
COMPILED BY VICKY CARLISLE
BOX CLEVER
Catriona Stewart sells her patch boxes to some of the most exclusive shops in the country, yet she still works at the kitchen table ‘with meals, toys and people all around’.
Rectangular, oval, hexagonal and so on, her range of 17 paper boxes are decorated with watercolour designs of flowers and rural scenes, and inscribed on the lid and inside with quotations or simple messages.
At £8.65, each box is hand-made with recycled paper, and finished with a matt varnish for protection.
Contact Catriona in Petersfield, Hampshire, on 0730–69112.
FRUITS FROM THE VINE
This vine-leaf bowl with its cargo of glossy lemons comes from a pottery founded in the 1920s by a member of the Bloomsbury Group, Phyllis Keyes.
After the Second World War the pottery moved to Tingewick, the Keyes family house, where it continues under the aegis of Phyllis's great-niece, Sara Johnson.
The pottery retains the atmosphere of a family business: the exclusive designs are hand-glazed with meticulous care, in colours that are themselves hand-mixed.
There is a small stock in the pottery but most of the work is commissioned.
This bowl costs £70, the fruit from £7.
Tingewick Pottery is at Upper Street, Tingewick, Bucks MK18 4QJ.
PRICKLY PROBLEMS
Hedgehogs injured on the roads and other countryside casualties find their way to 21-year-old Jonathan Hodges at The Falconry, Otter and Wildlife Sanctuary near Cheadle.
Some birds and animals come via the RSPCA and he receives funding for these; but he himself pays for the care of injured wildlife brought in by the public.
Jonathan would value help with feeding, caring and building quarters for convalescing badgers.
To volunteer, visit or make a donation, call 0538–75784.
For more on hedgehogs, see page 58.
SILKEN SEAS
Yearning for turquoise seas and sunshine skies, or just suffering from mid-winter blues?
Liz Jones's hand-dyed silk scarves, swimming with shoals of brightly coloured tropical fish, will enliven any grey March day.
Inspired by the coral coasts of Papua New Guinea (where Liz lived and worked for nine years), this aquarium on silk is made by using a rubber-based glue called gutta in the same way that wax is used in the batik process.
Choose from an assortment of shapes, sizes and colours and order from Liz (who works from a cottage near Evesham) on 0386–871159.
Prices from £20.
ROOFTOP RENOVATIONS
Traditional peg tiles have been in great demand since the storms of the past few years, so for Tenterden tile makers Spicer, the clouds had a silver lining.
Spicer's tiles and fittings are made by hand from clay, according to methods first used by craftsmen during Richard III's reign.
The unique roughened texture induces rapid weathering so that new tiles quickly blend with old ones — particularly useful for those living in ancient or listed buildings.
The tiles are available in two textures — sanded or weathered — and a variety of colours.
Secondhand peg tiles and ornamental tiles are also stocked.
For details contact Andrew and Jane Spicer on 0797–270784.
THE WOMAN'S DOMAIN
‘How happy were I if the Gods above/Would equalize my fortune wth. my Love,’
Alice Sherard wrote in her Notebook of Instructions (1675)— soon realising her aim by marrying Sir John Brownlow, heir to Belton House and its Lincolnshire estates.
Once widowed, she kept the estates within the family by marrying one of her five daughters to her nephew, Belton's male heir.
In The Woman's Domain: Women and the English Country House (Viking/National Trust, £16.99), authors Trevor Lummis and Jan Marsh intertwine the stories of seven women with the country houses they occupied.
Formidable Elizabeth of Shrewsbury (Bess of Hardwick Hall): Rosalie Chichester (an early animal rights campaigner, shown here with her Sunday School girls); ravishing Emma Hamilton (later Nelson's mistress) and others come to life through their letters and household accounts, their courtships and inheritances.
FOOLED BY GOULD?
You could be forgiven for remembering John Gould as a brilliant painter of birds — that's exactly what he would have wanted.
But in fact his skills were deployed as a manipulator and producer.
He gathered around him a circle of artists — his wife, Elizabeth Coxen, and Edward Lear among them — who learnt to interpret his clumsy sketches into lithographs, which Gould then corrected, albeit with precision and confidence.
In The Ruling Passion of John Gould (Barrie & Jenkins, £16.99) Isabella Tree has documented the life of this unscrupulous genius and assembled some of ‘his’ magnificent illustrations (these are culmenated toucans).
To win one of 10 copies, tell us on a postcard what the toucan feeds on.
Answers marked Country Living /Birds to the address on page 2 by 31 March.
MARBLING BY THE BOOK
The original method of making marbled endpapers used oil paints to produce a pattern on the surface of a tank of ‘size’(a watery, gelatinous mixture).
The resulting patterns were transferred to paper by carefully floating it on top.
Frederica Freer has cut out the messy business by photographing the endpapers of 18th- and 19th-century books from the collection in her Gloucestershire house and turning the prints into postcards.
There are 16 designs, each giving the details of the book it was taken from; a pack of eight assorted cards and envelopes costs £3.20; order on 060874–219.
CUSHION THE EFFECTS
If you fancy trying your needle at tapestry but feel daunted by mammoth prices and Bayeux complexity, Myriad tapestry kits may be the solution.
Polyanthus, poppy, magnolia and morning glory are four of six designs in the Myriad range, all inspired by English garden flowers.
Kits contain a full-colour printed canvas to make an eight-inch panel, wools, needle and instructions, and cost just £13.95.
For a catalogue, send an sae to Myriad Designer Tapestry Kits, 16 High Street, Hadleigh, Suffolk IP7 5AP.
ODDS-ON FAVOURITE
Refna Hamey is currently one of the hottest tips among artists of the racecourse; her commissioned paintings include Corbiere, Grittar and Celtic Shot.
She paints mainly in acrylics, in a pointillist style with a sponge; and also produces conté drawings on paper coloured to suit the coat of the horse.
She tries to capture a horse's character, whether it is wild or thoroughbred.
‘I like to get pictures as if the horse is about to blink or breathe, the nostrils about to expand or contract, the legs about to break into a trot or canter.’
For those not fortunate enough to own a racehorse, Refna will also paint humble family pets — dogs, cats and recently even a pet ram.
Refna's work is exhibited at the Equus Gallery in Newmarket (0638–560445) and she can be contacted in Gloucestershire on 0285–659918.
BEAR-FACED CHIC
Alfonzo (inset) reaches new heights of ursine designer chic: he wears a Cossack tunic and trousers to emphasise his Russian heredity, and his bright-red mohair fur is distressed to look as if generations of Grand Dukes have hugged him.
Teddy Bears of Witney have the original Steiff Alfonzo, made in 1908 for Princess Xenia Georgievna, and a limited edition of replicas.
The Cotswold-stone shop sells bears vintage (£2,500) and everyday (£10), and owner Ian Pout has trawled the world for the top teddies.
At £110 Alfonzo is beyond most piggy-banks, so look on him more as an investment than a bedfellow.
The shop is at 99, High Street, Witney, Oxon (0993–702616).
New (not vintage) bears are sold by mail order.
LOVE STORY
‘I feel sad when I don't see you.
Be married, why won't you?…
I will not make you bring in wood and water, or feed the pig, or milk the cow.’
Who could decline this touchingly simple proposal from a 19th-century American suitor?
It appears in a new range of books (Birthday Book, Address Book, Book of Days, Book of Secrets) published by Pavilion in time for Valentine's Day to complement Love , Penhaligon's latest Scented Treasury of Verse and Prose .
Celebrated and little-known meditations on love by Donne, Rossetti, Shakespeare, and many others are coupled with beautiful paintings that prove the power of love to inspire artists, too.
The fragrance of Elizabethan rose, flower of love, permeates each book.
To win one of 25 copies of the Book of Secrets, tell us on a postcard who wrote The Great Lover and send it to Country Living /Love at the address on page 2 by 31 March.
BRIAN REDHEAD
‘A worm may turn, but it will never turn nasty’
Please, said a friend of this journal, egged on I suspect by a green-fingered two-year-old son, will you put in a word for the worm?
Charles Darwin beat me to it, I replied.
He considered the earthworm to be the most important animal in the history of the world.
But she has a point.
The worm is not only overlooked but undervalued.
The very word, whether used as noun or as a verb, is dismissive.
Even a worm will turn, we sneer.
He wormed himself in, we hiss.
All of which is very unfair.
A worm may turn, but it will never turn nasty.
And the garden would be lost without them.
It is estimated that the worm population in the average herbaceous garden is about a quarter of a million per hectare, which is roughly a hundred thousand per acre.
And as Gilbert White, the 18th-century naturalist, said,
without worms the earth would soon become cold, hardbound, void of fermentation and consequently sterile.
What worms do is tunnel through the earth.
Although they have no bones or skeleton, they are very strong.
All segments and bristles, they can anchor one end while pushing themselves forward with the other.
The maze of tunnels they create constantly aerates and drains the soil.
But they do not simply push their way through: they eat their way through, digesting any organic material as they go.
In effect, they both turn over the soil and fertilise the soil.
Worms are hermaphrodite — each one is both male and female, so any adult pair can reproduce, duly and dually, as it were.
They need to because they have many enemies both above and below ground.
Every early bird is after them, and a mole can eat twice its weight in worms every day.
The common earthworm can be anything from four inches to a foot long, and many people claim to have seen worms 20 inches long, but that may be stretching a point.
Three years ago there were reports that an earthworm six feet long had been found in Stratton St Margaret, near Swindon in Wiltshire, on an allotment.
But when they sent the specimen to the Natural History Museum it was found to be the intestine of a hedgehog, if you will pardon the expression.
A few months later a man living in Herne Bay in Kent found a live earthworm in his garden after a rainstorm.
He said it was six feet six inches long, and he took it to Bramble Wildlife Park near Canterbury for examination.
Unfortunately, before it could be positively identified it fragmented and somebody threw the bits away.
Not that we need worms to be giants to be seduced by them.
The first World Worm Charming Championships, I recall, were held at Willaston, near Nantwich in Cheshire, in July 1980.
A local farmer's son, Tom Shufflebotham, who was then 20, charmed 511 worms out of the ground in half an hour.
He did it by gently vibrating the soil, coaxing the worms to the surface.
A great feat.
Perhaps you would like to take up worm charming, or at least worm watching.
March is the month when they begin to venture forth, having spent much of the winter lining their tunnels with fallen leaves.
They emerge at dawn and in the evening, for they are not wholly subterranean in their habits.
No more are they carefree.
They keep one end firmly in the ground while the other end explores the surface looking for anything organic.
They drag what they find into the tunnel, eat some of it and deposit the rest, which then rots and helps to feed the plants.
But all the time they forage they are alert, ready to withdraw instantly at the first hint of danger.
If you want to observe them as the light fades you must walk very carefully because they are very sensitive to vibrations and will shoot back into their tunnels at the slightest tremor.
They are also very sensitive to light, so it is no good shining a torch on them unless the beam is shielded by red plastic.
I confess I cannot really see worm watching catching on as a mass pursuit with worm watcher clubs and organised field visits, but I did hear of an infants' school where the worm has joined the tadpole as a creature for study.
And a friend in Scotland swears that he once heard a sermon preached on the wonders of creation in which the minister made much of the sanctity of the earthworm and even speculated on whether every earthworm is an individual.
That in turn apparently provoked a great argument afterwards among the students who had been in the congregation, with much quotation of Darwin and some rumblings among the creationists present.
Eventually an old gentleman who had been listening with much amusement to their discussion said that what mattered was not whether the earthworm has an immortal soul but whether it has a purpose.
And they all agreed that it has.
But that is true of all creatures great and small, not least the worm.
NETWORK
SCHEMES TO HELP THE DISABLED ENJOY THE COUNTRY, A REPRIEVE FOR SOWS, AND THE STORY OF VILLAGERS WHO BOUGHT THEIR OWN SHOP.
EDITED BY JULES MACMAHON
HARE VIRUS SCARE
Recent reports of a virus hitting hares in Britain need to be clarified, says Dr Stephen Tapper of The Game Conservancy Trust.
European Brown Hare Syndrome (EBHS), which yellows the arteries and causes liver damage, was first identified in 1986 by wildlife pathologists in Germany, after abnormally high mortality rates in hare populations.
It has only recently been recognised by MAFF experts, and media coverage has been misleading.
‘It seems the continental disease may have been in this country for some time,’ Dr Tapper says, ‘but we don't believe hare populations are in serious danger.’
The warm, dry summer of 1989 was a particularly good breeding year for hares, and was followed by a high autumnal ‘die-off’.
In many cases, ordinary infections could be pinpointed, though some deaths were left unexplained and may have been due to EBHS.
But cold weather and a scarcity of food on arable land usually brings numbers down with the onset of winter.
The high mortality rates could simply be seen as nature playing its part in curbing hare numbers.
 Henrietta Holder 
DISABLED ACCESS
Imaginative provision has been made for wheelchair-bound bird watchers at the Rutland Water Nature Reserve.
A hide designed with their needs in mind can be found not far from the car park, and a concrete ramp allows easy access.
Inside, an apron has been fixed in front of the window-slots so wheelchairs can be pushed close, giving people the chance to sit comfortably and watch many of the 250-plus bird species.
Information from Tim Appleton on 1572–724101.
Blind ‘sightseers’ are also being given extra confidence to explore the countryside.
Nottingham University's Blind Mobility Unit has devised a system that produces ‘touch maps’, raised plans formed from braillon plastic sheeting.
New symbols are used to indicate access points, pathways and other features of interest.
Many existing maps concentrate on urban areas, but the National Register of Maps for the Visually Handicapped in London (071–873 2599) is building up a library of rural maps too.
Organisations that have produced maps for their own areas can send copies to Dr A Tatham so others can benefit.
Details from the Royal National Institute for the Blind (0733–370777), The Fieldfare Trust (0742–701668) and the Countryside Commission (0242–521381).
 Christine Harris 
REPORT FROM THE REGIONS
Wootton Courtenay, a Somerset village of 90 households, three businesses (a post office, a garage and a shop) and a bus that comes twice a week, has recently won a battle to keep the heart of its community — the village shop — mostly thanks to the driving force of Stephen Parnell.
When the owners could no longer cope with the interest payments and pressure of their business, having tried to find a buyer for two years, they decided simply to close up.
With a post officer close to retirement and a garage owner struggling with ill health, Parnell was desperate not to let the quality of village life plummet.
At a public meeting last September he suggested that saying ‘they ought to do something about it’ was pointless, and boldly proposed that the only way to save the shop was for everyone in the village to club together and buy it.
Raising £130,000, setting up the share-holding/debenture scheme, running the shop and his own art gallery in Porlock, has meant that Parnell's life is not quite what it was pre-September.
‘However, it's all been worth it,’ he says.
‘All sorts of people have helped: The Rural Development Commission has lent us £10,000 to top up what we raised; all the retired, trainee and working accountants, lawyers, journalists and businessmen in the village have put in hours of voluntary work, and our grocery wholesaler Pharaoh Quirke has given us a new fascia board.’
Opened officially on 11 January by their local MP Tom King, The Wootton Courtenay Villagers' Store and Company Limited is once again on secure foundations and trading well.
Further information on how to save your village shop using community initiative can be obtained from your local branch of the Rural Development Commission.
 Katy Brown 
SOW STALLS BANNED
The good news for pigs is that the Agriculture Minister John Gummer has announced his intention to introduce regulations banning the narrow breeding stall and neck and girth tethers for sows.
Strangely enough, his announcement came just the day before Sir Richard Body's press conference on his Pig Husbandry Bill, due for its second reading on 25 January.
Mr Gummer declared that a consultation paper is being drawn up in order to put regulations under an already existing Act before Parliament by the summer.
New installations of the sow stall would be banned from this year, and current systems phased out by the end of 1998.
Under the dry sow stall system pregnant sows are kept in metal pens with concrete floors, too small for them to turn or groom themselves.
Enforced inactivity causes chronic foot diseases and other ailments.
Sir Richard Body, a farmer who has kept pigs himself for many years, explained that he intends to press on with his Private Member's Bill since it would phase out the sow stalls within five years instead of the Minister's eight years.
‘It is a coincidence that they announced it on the eve of my press conference,’ he admitted.
Farm animal welfare campaigners put it differently.
‘The action of a private member has triggered the Government into action,’ commented Joyce D'Silva of Compassion in World Farming.
‘We are really pretty delighted.
Pigs don't have a high public image and the dry sow stall is one of the worst kinds of factory farming.
Even if Sir Richard's Bill fails, Mr Gummer has been forced to bring in regulations himself.
But for the sake of the pigs we would obviously prefer Sir Richard's shorter phasing-out period.’
The British initiative should also add a major impetus to bringing in EC-wide rules, now that more humane systems exist.
Look out for our forthcoming profile of Sir Richard Body, and articles on farm animal welfare.
 Ann Boston 
CHILDREN HATCH OUT RARE TURKEYS
For nearly 20 years, Simon Young, Education Officer at the Cheshire College of Agriculture near Nantwich, has championed the wildlife cause.
And he has done it largely with and for local schoolchildren: ‘The children are my ears and my eyes and my workforce.’
The thousands of children who visit the college each year provided much of the research for the country's first Wildlife and Landscape Management Plan, now regularly consulted by major estates including the Royal Parks.
Children are now hatching rare breed turkey eggs in their classrooms (pupils from the Weaver School, Nantwich, are shown left) as part of another project — the rare breeds are vital to the turkey world as the white supermarket birds are incapable of breeding naturally.
Simon's first book,Green Wellies For All (Lion Publishing, £3.99), is published on 28 March under the pseudonym Peter Hamilton.
 Jane Fickling 
CONIFER CAMPAIGN
A local group in Dyfed is attempting to buy back 100 acres of land currently planted with Sitka spruce in order to uproot the conifers and return the acres to the original wild landscape of upland sheep farm.
Nicholas Luard of the John Muir Trust (husband of our cookery writer Elisabeth Luard) has joined forces with local people to form the Bara Ceirch Conservation Group, named after the farm on which the conifer plantation is sited.
The group is only too aware that the dangers of conifer plantations are not limited to creating great black tracts of sterile land (nothing grows beneath their dense needles).
More worryingly insidious is their ability to act as magnets to acid rain, taking it from the atmosphere and releasing it into the soil, where it leaches down and enters the water system.
Nicholas Luard and the other members of the group were particularly concerned about the planting of conifers at Bara Ceirch farm as it stands at the headwaters of the Rivers Cothi and Towy, two of the finest salmon rivers in Wales.
The plantation itself is close to a feeder stream that runs straight into the Cothi, as would acid taken in by the conifers.
The effects could be disastrous for the entire fish population, which in turn is bad news for the local industries based on fishing.
The National Rivers Authority in Wales has called for a ban on conifer plantations in sensitive areas, but Nicholas Luard and the Bara Ceirch group feel they need to act more quickly to save the river.
If you'd like to know more or offer help, contact group member Lynn Hughes, 3 Hill Close, Llangathen, Carmarthen, Dyfed SA32 8QE.
HOMEFRONT
taking cover
USE THROWS TO GIVE NEW LIFE TO AN OLD SOFA, AN INSTANT CHANGE IN DECOR — OR SIMPLY TO KEEP YOU WARM.
BY GABI TUBBS
Main picture, over whole settee Multicoloured linen throw (215x236cm), £425, by Cefyn Burgess at Contemporary Textile Gallery.
On seat, left to right Italian open-weave wool throw with contrasting binding (260x270cm), £145, from Collier Campbell.
Plain gold merino wool cloak, £60, from Elliot Fine Fabrics.
Large broken-stripe yellow and off-white lap rug in wool and cashmere (150x200cm), £170.75, from Colefax & Fowler.
Heathery lambswool and mohair blanket (152x203cm), £58.50, from Elliot Fine Fabrics.
Lime broken-stripe lap rug from Colefax & Fowler, as before.
Red-pepper, saffron and turquoise pure silk throw (91x182cm), £230, by Rosemary Atkinson
Over back, left to right Burgundy/saffron/green lambswool tartan blanket (154x180cm), £99.50, from The Scotch House.
Pastel wool blanket with patchwork effect in open weave (110x220cm), £395, by Richard Womersley at Designers Guild.
Midnight blue/turquoise/yellow tartan rug in cashmere and wool (145x180cm), £215, from The Scotch House.
Baby Lily is wearing cowl-neck cashmere jumper, £190, by Pringle of Scotland.
Above Soft cotton checked throw in cream and salmon pink (127x177cm), £39; cream textured sampler cover in pure cotton (127x170cm), £31; both from The American Country Collection
Above, top to bottom Pure silk check throw in paprika and slate (91x182cm), £230, by Rosemary Atkinson.
Black velvet-edged wool shawl with rose print (53x53cm), £95, from Collier Campbell.
Fine wool tartan shawl in yellow/burgundy/green (142x140cm), £39.50, from The Scotch House.
Richly coloured wool shawl in abstract print (53x53cm), £75, from Collier Campbell.
Fine lambswool checked blanket in brick and cream (127x127cm), £52.81, from Welstead Mills.
Thick pure wool blanket in sage and red-earth tartan (147x147cm), £59.50; fine wool tartan shawl (140x140cm), £39.50; both from The Scotch House
Left, top to bottom Fine wool throw in window-pane check (127x127cm), £35, from Welstead Mills.
Broken-stripe fringed lap rug (150x200cm), £170.75, from Colefax & Fowler.
Cotton throw with Williamsburg leaf pattern (127x180cm), £39, from The American Country Collection.
Navy and white pure wool rug by Melin Tregwynt Mill, £27.75,Country Living offer (see page 29)
EMPORIUM
CLASSICAL CORBELS AND PENNSYLVANIA PAINTS; FIONA DOUGLAS ROBERTSON REVEALS HOW TO RECREATE THE EFFECTS IN THIS MONTH'S HOMES FEATURES 
1 Settling down with a book can be a chilly experience if there's no blanket to snuggle beneath.
Our traditionally woven throw from Melin Tregwynt Mill is made of 100 per cent pure new wool and guarantees a good, warm read.
Measuring 60″ by 48″, it comes in indigo, rose or Wedgwood checks on cream.
Our special offer price is £25.75.
Order using the coupon on page 154.
2 A classical corbel makes a comely supportive device as a shelf bracket (see page 67), or a bookend.
This model (19 x 19.5cm), in high-density polyurethane, is only £28.75 from Orac Decor.
It comes primed, ready for the paint finish of your choice (we applied a rich marbled effect).
For stockists nationwide ring 0483–271211.
3 Rug-scattered floors (see page 63) are an attractive alternative to wall-to-wall carpets; for bright colours at reasonable prices, take a look at Tapetes .
Hand-woven and dyed in Mexico to North American Navajo designs, these colourfast and washable wool rugs can be made in any colour and size.
Prices start at £80 for an 80 x 150cm rug.
A catalogue costs £1, refundable with a purchase; ring 0747–870155 for further details (answerphone).
4 Exoticism is never amiss in the bathroom, where the right tiles can create the effect of an Eastern bathhouse.
The UK Tech Team has obtained permission to import hand-painted Persian-style tiles in a design that dates back over 2,000 years.
This panel of 32 costs £138 and is available from Ceramic Tile Design.
Ring 071–381 1455 for further details.
5 If you wonder how someone like Sam Fifield-Hall (page 87) keeps her flagstones looking polished, here's a tip: detergent and heavy steam-cleaning wash away the glow with the dirt, so Sam suggests a quick once-over with a broom, then a soft-shoe shuffle in sheepskin slippers.
6 1 and 4 Salvaged bathroom fittings command high prices but add authenticity.
If you want a cool Art Deco atmosphere, an original shower mixer like this costs £295 from Stiffkey Lamp Shop's bathroom section in Norfolk.
Fine reproductions are also sold: this chrome loo-roll holder costs £40.
For further details ring 0328–830460.
If zealous cleaning has taken its toll on your traditional enamel bath, the Antique Bath and Tap studio in Cheshire has a countrywide re-enamelling service .
They use the stoving technique, where the bath is put through the ovens at a controlled temperature, lower than that required for vitreous enamelling and so less damaging to old baths.
The fee is about £300 plus VAT excluding transport costs — or they can re-enamel the bath in situ.
Ring 0270–626554.
2 Based on the old thunderbox loo, this model from the Smallbone Sycamore bathroom range uses traditional lines to create a contemporary form.
Smallbone designs to individual requirements, so ring 071–581 9989 for a catalogue.
Price available on request.
3 If our shower wall on page 128 appeals to you, a marbling kit (in Carrara) by Jocasta Innes from House Style will help create a similar effect.
It's ‘marbling-by-numbers’ with the use of veining maps.
At £29.99, a kit covers four to six square metres.
Waterproof using a clear varnish.
Ring 071–377 9262 ext. 237 for details of stockists.
5 Painted American country furniture grows more popular here; copy the look with a coat of paint on old faithful pieces.
Heart of the Country in Staffordshire is importing Old Village paints from Pennsylvania, made to 18th-century recipes.
Available in a range of earth pigments, including Cupboard Blue (like the Stothert's dresser, page 66), British Red and Antique Yellow; a pint pot costs £7.50 (plus £2.50 p&p).
Ring 0543–481612 for free colour charts.
AMBASSADOR for the CHIMPS
JANE GOODALL HAS SWAPPED RESEARCH FOR INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGNING — IN AID OF HER FAVOURITE APES.
BY ANNE BOSTON
At the RSPCA's Centenary Conference in Oxford, a tall slim woman with greying hair drawn back in a pony tail, unobtrusively dressed in a shirt and slacks, came to the podium.
‘Someone in the audience has asked me to greet them the way the chimpanzees greet each other in the wild at Gombe,’ Jane Goodall began.
‘Hoo — hoo —hoo —hoo — HOO — HOO — WAAAAAH…’
Who else in that distinguished gathering of philosophers, psychologists, veterinary professors and ethologists would desert their dignity so far as to imitate an animal ?
But then Jane Goodall is an anomaly, unique in animal behaviour research.
Her 30-year study of the Gombe National Park chimpanzees is the longest continuous field project ever recorded; it has made her — and the chimpanzees — a living legend, earning her honorary degrees, doctorates and wildlife-conservation awards all over the world.
It was her research that showed how close we are in evolutionary terms to the apes: how they communicate with each other, use tools (hitherto thought to be a strictly human activity) and develop lifelong bonds of family and friendship.
Equally, her study was the first to find that chimpanzees wage war on each other, hunt and eat other animals, and even turn murderously on their own kind.
Yet Jane Goodall started out with no formal scientific training.
You have only to read her bestselling books,In the Shadow of Man and Through a Window , to recognise that by temperament she is a romantic and a child of nature.
And instead of distancing herself from her subject with the language of ‘scientific’ detachment, her message is one of passionate commitment to the primates she has studied for almost the whole of her adult life.
Jane Goodall's findings have helped to transform conventional scientific thinking about animals — which, of course, is used to rationalise how they are treated.
When she started publishing her work, animal behaviour research was dominated by theorists who contended more or less literally that to find out how a creature worked, you took it to bits.
I have good reason to remember a booklength early monograph of hers, published in the British journal of Animal Behaviour : it was almost the first text I ever read as an apprentice sub-editor.
Unlike the usual descriptions of repellent and apparently pointless tests on laboratory animals, hers was a wonderfully vivid account of her observations of wild chimps in their natural habitat.
She scandalised the academic conventions by naming all the chimps (Mr Leakey, after her mentor Louis Leakey; Mr McGregor, after the Beatrix Potter character) and referring to them as ‘he’ or ‘she’, instead of‘it’.
‘I didn't realise that animals were not supposed to have personalities, or to think or to feel emotions or pain,’ she recalls — which is just as well, since she went ahead and recorded what she observed, instead of what she was supposed to observe.
The chimps' individuality has always delighted and fascinated her, and Jomeo and Gigi, two full-blown eccentrics, are given a chapter each in Through a Window .
Jomeo is endearingly accident-prone and forever unsuccessful with females; Gigi, by contrast, is wildly popular with the opposite sex and has made up for her childlessness by becoming a universal aunt to other females' babies.
In science, the cardinal sin is anthropomorphism.
‘But is it so terrible?’
Jane Goodall asks.
‘Chimpanzees are so like us intellectually and physiologically, it's absurd to think that we can't have some kind of rapport.’
So long as the animals' behaviour is meticulously noted, she argues, empathy and intuition can be invaluable in interpreting it.
As a child she always dreamt of working with animals.
But where did the dream come from?
She shrugs and gestures heavenwards.
‘Dr Dolittle and Tarzan.
Animals always came first — every book I read was about them.’
The first animal she ever made friends with was a pig: ‘When I was small I always wanted to join a circus with a troupe of six Tamworth pigs.
Tamworths are the big ginger ones, you know?
That was my first ambition.’
If that aim failed to materialise, it was no more extraordinary than the life that followed.
Her parents divorced when Jane was 12, and she and her sister hardly knew their father.
His absence was more than compensated for by her mother Vanne, whom she obviously adores.
Vanne took the first boat trip across Lake Tanganyika to Gombe Stream Chimpanzee Reserve with Jane in 1960, when the authorities refused to give a 20-year-old girl permission to set up camp on her own.
And it was Vanne who laid crucial foundations of goodwill with the local people, treating their ailments at her camp ‘clinic’ and making lifelong friends.
Susceptible to malaria, and having recently had open-heart surgery, Vanne can no longer go out to Africa; but when Jane visits the UK she stays with her mother in Bournemouth.
When they first shared a tent in the rainforest, how could they have foreseen that the camp would be Jane's home for almost her entire adult life?
Gombe is still inaccessible by road — but despite its isolation, it hasn't lacked human interest.
When her mentor, Louis Leakey, sent out the young photographer Hugo Van Lawick to photograph the chimpanzees at Gombe, he wrote to Vanne that he'd found just the husband for Jane.
He had — and the years of their marriage and their son Grub's early childhood were spent mainly at Gombe.
After their divorce Jane worked on, helped by students at the growing research station.
In the early 1970s she met Derek Bryceson, director of Tanzania's national parks.
Two years later they married, with Jane still based at Gombe while he kept his home and work in Dar es Salaam.
Bryceson had been a wartime pilot; shot down in the Middle East, he taught himself to walk again only through exceptional determination.
The disability didn't prevent him from farming in Tanzania and going on to hold several posts in the Tanzanian Cabinet.
Jane's chimp-watching patrols were impossible for him, but he visited often until his death from cancer, which left her devastated.
Meanwhile there were tragedies in the chimp colony.
Polio, apparently passed on from a human epidemic in the region, had already reduced their numbers.
Then a four-year ‘war’ between different groups caused the death of a whole community.
Worst of all was the four-year reign of terror when a female chimp, Passion, turned killer; during this gruesome time only one infant survived Passion and her daughter's cannibalistic attacks, until they both became pregnant and the deaths stopped.
And in the middle of this came the kidnapping of four students, who had to be ransomed from Zairean rebels across the lake.
The kidnappings were a traumatic event and for some time the Gombe Stream Research Centre was closed to students.
‘It's a shock when it happens to you.
But I knew humans are capable of evil and it didn't change my view of humanity.’
Whereas the chimpanzees' warfare and cannibalism changed for ever her rose-coloured idea of them as somehow ‘better’ than us.
It took Jane Goodall years to accept the new picture.
But the scenes of violent aggression have since been mitigated by equally extraordinary examples of altruism, in which older chimps have ‘adopted’ orphans too young to care for themselves.
New problems are constantly arising.
The camp is currently terrorised by the chimp community's first and only rogue male, Frodo.
Adult chimpanzees are much smaller than human beings, but up to three times as strong.
‘I'm really frightened of Frodo.
Everybody is.
He's mean.’
While this ambitious adolescent completes his long path of challenge and conquest, he terrorises everyone in his way — including researchers, who have to observe the chimps in pairs.
‘But I always watch chimps alone and it's spoilt Gombe for me.’
At 50 Jane Goodall looks fragile and sounds softhearted, but she has learnt to be tough.
The Gombe rainforest is not the sort of Eden we might fondly imagine.
She had to scramble daily through dense thorny undergrowth, up and down ravines slippery with mud, sit for hours in pouring rain, cope with illness and poisonous insects and marauding baboons.
Her capacity for solitude and disregard for physical comforts helped her to survive.
Now she has swapped all that for a nonstop international round of meetings, negotiations, lectures, media appearances.
In September, a month after the RSPCA conference, she was in England for the publication of her new book.
At our interview at the Royal Overseas League she was about to leave for a pit-stop author's tour, with an immensely heavy bag containing a laptop computer on which she fires off requests and thank-you letters: to American Secretary of State James Baker for his introduction to President Mobutu, to the King of Spain for agreeing to host a fundraising dinner for a chimp sanctuary in Spain.
She's an unofficial ambassador, I suggest.
‘That's what I've been called,’ she agrees: ‘ambassador for the chimps.’
At the turn of the century there were chimpanzees in 25 African states.
They are already extinct in five of these, and nearly so in four more, because of habitat destruction and because chimps are susceptible to human diseases.
And they are trapped and killed for food, or sold by poachers.
Baby chimps are captured by killing the mother, which is brutally wasteful: the infant often dies, along with other chimps trying to defend the mother.
Some small captives become pets but within five years they are potentially dangerous and have to be put behind bars.
Others are smuggled abroad for circuses or tourist entertainments or sold for medical research: there are 1,500 chimps in American labs.
The Jane Goodall Institute is fundraising and campaigning for more humane treatment of these pathetic captives, as well as for those in the wild.
The work in setting up sanctuaries for threatened chimps began when she was asked by the American ambassador in Burundi to design a conservation plan.
But the funding fell through, and she was told to give up the project.
‘I said, ‘I can't.
I still care about the chimps; I've met the flipping things’.’
A researcher sent to report back to the Jane Goodall Institute kept hearing of captive chimps under sentence of death unless a place was found for them.
It was the same story in the Congo and again in Zaire.
‘I wish I hadn't been to Zaire.
I've told them I will help with advice, but I can't commit one dollar, they've got to do it themselves.’
How many sanctuaries does she hope to set up?
‘Basically, in every country where chimps need one.
In good business, what you do is raise the money and then start the project.
I've started the project and now I'm trying to raise the money.
My scientific colleagues say how can you possibly get involved when chimps in captivity live for 50 years?
I say, just put yourself in the position of one of those chimps living in concentration-camp conditions.’
Every chimp's suffering haunts her.
In Brazzaville, she came across Gregoire, ancient and emaciated, kept chained up since 1943.
All his hair had dropped out and his behaviour was deeply disturbed.
Jane persuaded volunteers to give him food and attention.
‘Gregoire now has some hair and he's put on weight!
Isn't it wonderful?’
She strongly objects to the chimps' tea party in Brooke Bond tea ads: ‘I still want to know how the chimps are made to move their mouths like that.
I know of no natural movement you could reinforce.’
Scrupulous honesty, and a strong sense of the ridiculous — she can be very funny — save her from sentimentality.
She speaks with an almost childlike directness that wins over the most sceptical audience.
And, unlike some animal lovers, she likes people.
On top of all her other commitments, she is involved in a major aid project to supply African health services with surplus American medical equipment.
She considers this ‘probably the most exciting thing I've been involved with.
It does tie in with conservation.
We're asking very poor countries to set aside land they could be cultivating food on — we have to give them something in return.’
She must find it galling to be confused, as she often is, with Dian Fossey, the American disciple of Louis Leakey who studied gorillas in Rwanda; her life and murder — probably by poachers — became the subject of a Hollywood film.
Fossey made many enemies among both her colleagues and the local Africans.
In sharp contrast, Goodall learnt about diplomacy early on, back in England after her first spell at Gombe.
The press had already scented a story, and friends at Regent's Park Zoo urged her to speak out about the zoo animals' wretched living conditions, now she had seen them in their natural habitat.
‘By pure chance I had dinner that night with Sir Malcolm MacDonald, a very experienced diplomat and former High Commissioner of Kenya.
He said, ‘Jane, is your goal to help the chimps, or is it to appear to be helping the chimps?’
I said, ‘My goal is to help them.’
And he said, ‘The President of the London Zoo is very powerful.
You don't want to put him in a corner and have him as an enemy.
Tell me what you'd like to happen.’
So I told him.
Two weeks later, the changes I wanted for the animals — shade, water, things like that — were done.
It was the best lesson I've ever had, and it came at just the right time.’
After chimps, she is very fond of pigs; she says she's planning an anthology about them.
Apart from nostalgia for her troupe of Tamworths, this is partly out of gratitude for the plasticised pig valve in her mother's heart —‘so pigs came to the fore again’— and partly her horrified response on reading about European factory farms in Peter Singer's seminal book Animal Liberation .
She turned vegetarian as a result.
‘After I stopped eating factory-farmed meat I now cannot stand the feeling of eating flesh.
Even the big fish like tuna or swordfish — they take so much longer to die, the tearing in the mouth of the hook.
I don't think I'll be eating fish much longer.
But I want to stay healthy so I can be useful.’
Zoologists today have widely accepted that Jane Goodall's field research, apart from its own merits, has supplanted much observation of captive animals, showing that their behaviour is often disturbed and even psychotic.
But perhaps her greatest achievement with the chimps at Gombe has been to show how astonishingly close they are to humanity — and so to narrow the gap between us and the rest of the animal world.
She has no difficulty in reconciling Darwin's theory of evolution with her own Christianity.
‘I can never understand why there should be a conflict between science and religion,’ she says.
‘I believe in human destiny.
I believe that we are evolving — we've done our physical evolution, I suppose, though we may eventually lose our appendix or the little toe.
But there's also a moral evolution that's been going on.
A century ago there were children working down the mines in Britain.
Today they have gone.
There is a very strong moral attitude now towards human suffering.
And that's one stage closer to seeing animals in the same way.’
The Jane Goodall Institute (UK) is a non-profit-making charity.
For details of membership, write to the Institute at 15 Clarendon Park, Lymington, Hants SO41 8AX.
In the Shadow of Man (paperback, £8.95) and Through a Window (hardback, £15) are both published by Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
‘THERE IS A VERY STRONG MORAL ATTITUDE NOW TOWARDS HUMAN SUFFERING.
AND THAT'S ONE STAGE CLOSER TO SEEING ANIMALS IN THE SAME WAY’
DRAKE'S PROGRESS
CUSTODIAN OF THE COLUMBINE, ALIAS AQUILEGIA, JOHN DRAKE HAS SPENT YEARS RESEARCHING AND EXCHANGING SEEDS.
BY BARTY PHILLIPS
PHOTOGRAPHS/JOHN GLOVER
Every spare moment of John Drake's time is devoted to the two-acre garden he has carved out in an open and exposed part of the Fens near Cambridge.
He is an architect who works in London during the week; he also runs a landscape consultancy business called Drake and Lynch; is a member of the Hardy Plant Society; and is the holder of the National Collection of Aquilegias, under the auspices of the National Council for the Conservation of Plants and Gardens.
The clue to his gardening success in such unpromising terrain can be found at Hidcote in Gloucestershire, for it was a visit there during the 1960s that inspired him to hedge in his land, making a series of compartments to protect plants from the weather.
‘Otherwise,’ he points out, ‘there's nothing to stop the wind between here and the Urals.’
The land was originally a corn field and runs in a long narrow strip, still bordered by fields.
About a third of the way along stands the comfortable red-brick house that John's father built in 1938.
The now well-established hedges of beech, hornbeam, sea buckthorn (Hippophae rhamnoides ) and an espaliered lime create a friendly environment where many different plants can flourish together.
‘I try to plant in straight lines — I don't like amoebic-shaped beds.
My father thinks they should be in curved lines.
That's the only disagreement we have.’
Seven years ago the garden was opened to the public, together with two others in the village, as a local fundraising event.
This is now a yearly fixture, as is a visit by members of the Hardy Plant Society, and a one-day opening to the public under the National Gardens Scheme.
People can also view the garden by appointment.
‘It's amazing how much you need to know, and you can't know it all.
I'm very much cap-in-hand when people come — they may know more than I do.
I would like to open in winter.
That's the time when you can work out how people deal with their roses and the pruning and there are lots of other things flowering then, too.’
Built up over the past 10 years, his aquilegia collection consists of about 130 species and hybrids, with the emphasis on species ‘to save as many as possible from extinction and allow present and future generations to know and enjoy their great beauty’.
His interest began when he first opened the garden and found that many visitors wanted seeds from his 10 aquilegias.
‘There were only about 15 varieties available then, but I did some research and came across an American monograph written before the Second World War that listed 250.
I decided to see how many I could collect, and to make them available to anyone who wanted them.’
The collection is kept in pots so the plants can be moved about — to the Chelsea Flower show or to other nurseries for crossing.
Through seed exchanges he received seeds from this country and abroad.
Aquilegias grow wild throughout the northern hemisphere, so there are plants from Transylvania, Czechoslovakia, The Sofia Botanic Garden in Bulgaria, Japan, China and North America.
There are aquilegias everywhere in the garden.
‘They seed all over the place and have the morals of tom cats, so are found in every flower bed, skulking behind hedges, peering round gate posts, naturalising in any open space.
This is Aquilegia ‘Adelaide Addison’, a white and blue granny's bonnet.
The original Adelaide's family still lives in Cambridgeshire.
And this is A. vulgaris ‘Nora Barlow’, named after a descendant of Charles Darwin.
The Barlow family, too, still lives in Cambridge.
This one is A. canadensis , orange and red.’
The next part of garden you encounter is herby and low growing, with paths and pavings.
Here the grey-green foliage of Dicentra formosa ‘Stuart Boothman’ complements an Alchemilla alpina , with each leaf outlined in silver.
There's a shrubby plantain,Plantago cynops , that makes a hairy mound with recognisable plantain heads poking out, and huge red trumpets of an Incarvillea delavayi to add a sudden burst of colour.
To the west is the tall beech enclosure in front of the house where roses and other herbaceous plants flower under the trees in June and July.
Rosa arvensis , which has tiny white flowers, is a British native scrambler and sprawler.
There is an unusual small catmint (Nepeta phylloclamys ) next to some tiny lilies that grow only six inches tall, and a viola on a tall stem that E A Bowles wrote about.
There are several clumps of the non-climbing spring sweet pea Lathyrus vernus ‘that hardly anybody grows’: it has small purple and blue flowers and helps to fill out the border.
Next to a spectacular variegated honesty that has to be sown from seed are a rare Acanthus dioscoridis and a Helleborus abchasicus .
But John Drake doesn't really want to talk about rare plants.
‘I believe in putting common stuff next to rarer things.
That makes the rare ones more difficult to find, but they aren't the main thing anyway.
What's wrong with growing some of our own native plants?
I've got some that were grown in Tradescant's time.
I'm keen on the scabious family and I'm trying to grow old wallflowers, but they are very difficult and susceptible to virus.
That's why nobody has succeeded in creating a National Collection.’
He has a great many euphorbias:E. characias with its giant yellow bottle-brush heads and brown bracts is allowed to lounge about in large clumps in corners;E. palustris , a smaller yellow one, came originally from the Chelsea Physic Garden.
Gales make it difficult to grow things actually against the house, but lavender and hellebores seem to cope.
Round the side of the house is the blue garden with the indefatigable blue centaurea rearing unkempt heads among bluebells, violets, a borage with blood-red buds, deep-purple auriculas and tall forget-me-nots.
The old tennis court was transformed, John confesses, with ‘an idea that came straight from Vita Sackville-West: four white prunuses in a white garden.
Most of our garden is open to the sky, and of course East Anglian skies are wonderful, but here you can walk in the shade.’
There are small box bushes clipped into Christmas-pudding shapes, and tall silver birches, flexing in the wind.
The lime hedge is the only part of the garden that is sprayed, to prevent the leaves being eaten by aphids.
The row of deutzia grown as a snowy hedge in rough grass is much more effective than a single bush.
‘I've tried growing interesting plants in grass but it's very hard.
We can do snowdrops, masses of all-white narcissi, crocuses, primulas, violets, cowslips and fritillaries.’
He recently planted some old apple trees (including a ‘Peasgood's Nonsuch’), walnuts, alders and two whitebeams, with a row of Norway maple (Acer platanoides ) to mark the end of the land.
The garden has been planned to make the last amount of work for those who maintain it: John himself; his father, who is now 80 and can work for only short periods; Mr Broughton, who clips the hedges, and Patricia who weeds.
John fills in a gardening diary every day and often refers back to it to find out when they mulched or did other jobs.
‘It's a very useful reference.
You have to do a lot of forward thinking.
It's silly to presume a garden is going to stand still: it won't.
We made the mistake of not putting in the trees before the hedges and it's taken them seven or eight years to get going because it's so exposed.
We don't stake anything now.
We don't dig.
We cut grass with a ride-on mower and dead head if not growing for seed.
The thing is to do a little bit often.’
AQUILEGIAS OFFER
John Drake runs an aquilegia mail-order service and is offering Country Living readers a 10 per cent discount on plant orders.
For a catalogue send 50p and a sae to John Drake, Hardwicke House, Fen Ditton, Cambridge CB5 8TF; quote Country Living as your reference when you order.
Main picture Aquilegia ‘McKana Hybrid’ x Olympica strain has spurs of the palest pink
Above John Drake kneels beside Rosa ‘Camaieux’(left) and Philadelphus ‘Beauclerk’(right)
The yellow bells and red spurs of  Aquilegia ‘McKana Hybrid’
The colour purple: an Aquilegia vulgaris seedling
The pink-and-white delicacy of Aquilegia ‘Munstead White’
Aquilegia ‘McKana Hybrid’ with golden Origanum vulgare ‘Aureum’
Euphorbia characias with a foreground of E. robbiae , hostas and Stachys lanata 
Euphorbia griffithii ‘Fireglow’ has brilliant flame-orange bracts
the GARDEN path 
BY MIRANDA INNES
FEATS OF CLAY
Weathered clay barley-sugar edgings finish off a path or flowerbed with a crisply period touch, but aside from shoving a few in your handbag next time you visit Mount Stewart, they tend to be hard to find.
To solve this problem, as well as the crying need for oast, antiqued peg, mathematical, scallop, fishtail, bullnose, ridge, hip, corner and Victorian garden tiles, Aldershaw Handmade Bricks and Tiles was born.
Also stocked are rose or lily stepping stones and decorative wall bricks, chimney pots and paving slabs, all with marvellous subtle colours, uneven hand-made character (difficult to achieve), and an unsurpassable ancient look.
Aldershaw, Kent Street, Sedlescombe, Battle, East Sussex TN33 0SD (0424–754192).
COURSE TALK
If you yearn to learn, try to join one of Clare Whately's garden courses.
Sue Phillips will be in Twickenham on 12 March telling you how to make a cottage garden, and Hazel le Rougetel will tackle roses on 14 March at Holmbush, in West Sussex.
James Arbuthnott will reveal the secrets of unusual wall shrubs and climbers at Catton Hall, Derbyshire, on 5 March.
If you are very speedy, you might just catch Norrie Pope of Hadspen Nursery demonstrating horticultural propagation at Kiftsgate (seen below) on 27 February, or James Compton (ex-Chelsea Physic Garden) growing recondite plants there on 28 February.
The price of £43 plus VAT includes lunch, wine and course notes.
For details, ring 040372–2883.
Later this year there will be special garden tours.
BASKET CASE
Don your poke bonnet and gather ye rosebuds in our basket.
Or cheiranthus or cherries or cheese for that matter; anything will look delicious laid tenderly across its rustic expanse of whippet-brown and bark-green willow.
The baskets measure an ample 15 inches by 13 inches, and 10 inches to the top of the handle, and are hand-made in Somerset by P H Coate and Son who have been at it for a century and a half.
Well, their ancestors have.
Should you want to do some withy and teasel research for yourself, you might visit their willow and wetland centre in Stoke St Gregory where they grow 50 acres of willow and harvest it every winter, when the plants are dormant and the rods measure 8 feet.
The basket costs just £17.95, inclusive of postage and packing.
The coupon for ordering is on page 154.
A BOOK AT BEDDING TIME
Frances Lincoln publishes some very desirable garden books.
Coming out this month,The Gardener's Year (£14.95) by Burkhard Mücke and John Ferguson is beautifully photographed and packed with information.
This is what they say about tackling your pelargoniums now.
‘Overwintered dormant pelargoniums (geraniums) will be ready to break into new growth and need attention now if they are to develop into sturdy, compact plants for summer display on the balcony or patio.
If you pruned them back by one-third of their height before moving them into their winter quarters, then they may be cut back once more by an equal amount.
Otherwise they should now be pruned back hard.
Always cut back to an outward facing bud so that new shoots will not grow inwards toward the centre and cross each other.
‘If the pelargoniums were overwintered in their old containers then it is best to remove them, shake off much of the old potting compost from the roots and repot in fresh compost — moderately heavy, with good drainage but not more than one-quarter peat or other organic matter.
Pelargoniums seem to flower better when rather pot-bound, so keep their roots restricted.
When repotting, ram the compost down very firmly.
You may replant in the old containers or pot up in individual pots for replanting later.
‘As soon as the stems start to plump up, new shoots will break.
From now on your pelargoniums need 15–20°C (59–68°F) warmth, moderate watering and plenty of light.’
Having neatened up your pelargoniums, you could use the prunings to increase your stock.
Your average five-year-old could achieve respectable cuttings thus: prune early in the morning and put the trimmings in a plastic bag to keep moist.
Fill pots with firmed, damp potting compost.
Trim your cutting to just under a leaf node with a sharp knife or razor blade — they should end up around three inches long — and remove the leaves from the bottom half.
Dip a quarter-of-an-inch of the rooting end into hormone rooting powder and tap off the excess.
Make a hole in the potting compost with a dibber or pencil and poke your cutting into the hole, making sure the rooting end touches the compost at the bottom; you should get six cuttings in a four-inch pot.
Water them with a fine rose and let them drain.
Then make a little airtight hood with a clear plastic bag and a rubber band and put the pots somewhere warm and light, where direct sunlight will not scorch the plants.
Ignore them, but make sure they do not dry out completely.
Move them to the cold outside world when they have made strong roots.
FOX WARFARE
IN THE MENDIPS, A SHEEP FARMER IS STRUGGLING TO PROTECT HIS LAMBS FROM THE FOXES THAT WATCH AND PREY.
CHARLIE PYE-SMITH INVESTIGATES
Three years ago John Small, a sheep farmer in the Mendip Hills, read an editorial in his local newspaper which claimed that foxes never killed lambs.
He drove down to the paper's office and presented a lamb, killed the night before, to the editor.
‘He suggested it could have died another way,’ Small recalls, ‘so I took out a knife, skinned it on his desk, and showed him where the fox's teeth had punctured the flesh.’
Next week the paper ran a piece misquoting and ridiculing Small's allegations against foxes.
Few animals inspire such extremes of love and hate as the fox, and this may go some way towards explaining why so much nonsense is written and talked about them.
To some people the fox is the worst type of vermin; to others it is a gentle creature that has been much maligned.
Both sides have a point: some foxes kill lambs, poultry and game, and some foxes are guilty of no crime greater than the dispatching of mice and earthworms.
John Small farms 1,000 acres of windswept plateau 15 miles south of Bristol.
He is an affable, humorous, softly spoken man whose 1,400 breeding ewes — mostly Kerry sheep — produce about 1,750 lambs each spring.
Every year he expects to lose around 10 per cent of his lambs.
Some 60 or 70 are killed by foxes; most of the rest die of hypothermia.
Small's battle against the foxes is never-ending.
‘If we didn't shoot them,’ he says, ‘then within two or three years they would be so out of hand that we'd have to give up sheep farming.’
Most years he and his brothers kill 40 foxes, sometimes more.
Last year foxes were unusually abundant and 27 were shot during the first week of lambing.
When I arrived, Small showed me the bodies of two lambs killed by foxes the previous night.
‘Often they'll kill a couple of lambs, take one at the time and leave one to be picked up later,’ he explained.
Small took out a knife and skinned the lambs: bone and sinew were mangled behind their necks, and there was much blood, showing that the lambs had been killed by foxes, rather than taken as carrion by crows.
Small reckons that foxes account for £2,000 worth of lambs a year (assuming £35 for a store lamb) on his farm.
The manager of the neighbouring pig farm couldn't put a figure to his losses, but thought them considerable, especially in May and June, when fox cubs start hunting their own food.
‘If they take seven piglets in a night,’ he said, ‘that's £70 lost straight away.’
At times the foxes work in pairs, one distracting the sow, or ewe, while the other grabs the offspring.
It is sometimes argued that the loss of lambs is partly the shepherd's fault: that greater care for the flock would cut down losses to predators.
Perhaps this is true of some farmers, but it certainly couldn't be said of Small's enterprise.
The two shepherdesses are up until two o'clock each morning looking after ailing animals, and Small tours the farm continually during daylight hours, checking on the progress of lambing and giving help wherever it's needed.
I went round with him twice: once just before dusk, then again at six o'clock the next morning after a filthy, freezing night.
Small shot one sheep half-paralysed by septicaemia, and brought in seven ewes that had lost lambs or fallen ill.
During the night a score of lambs had been born; several had died (most of hypothermia) and at least one had been taken by a fox.
‘They say foxes just take the weaker lambs,’ Small said, ‘but I don't think that's true.
In any case the weak will often survive if they're looked after.’
Small believes there are a number of reasons why his flock suffers such heavy fox predation.
For one thing, there is a tremendous amount of scrubland nearby — especially on the flanks of the Cheddar Gorge — and this acts as a reservoir for foxes.
For another, his is one of the largest sheep farms in the area and one of the few where the ewes are lambed outdoors.
This is ideal fox country, as there is a good supply of wild and domestic food all the year round.
‘By the time my sheep are lambing,’ Small says, ‘the foxes are probably glad of a change of diet: it's 11 months' pork from the pig unit next door, then one month's lamb.’
In the Mendips the fox is considered vermin and treated as such.
However, it would be wrong to think that foxes are a nuisance everywhere.
Surveys of sheep farmers in England and Wales have found that relatively few suffer significant losses of lambs to foxes.
David Macdonald, one of Britain's leading fox experts, questioned 400 lowland sheep farmers in England: almost half said they had never lost a lamb to a fox.
In a similar survey, Welsh hill farmers said they lost, on average, one lamb to a fox every two years.
Macdonald suggests that foxes account for just one in every 15 or 20 lambs that die on Scottish hills.
All this goes to show that generalisations about foxes are meaningless.
Apart from printing the sort of story that incensed John Small, newspapers have also helped to foster and perpetuate other myths about foxes.
One of these is that urban foxes are being dumped in the countryside.
This is grist to the horror-story mill, raising the spectre of gangs of streetwise foxes savaging the naïve livestock of the countryside.
‘About two years ago,’ explains Emyr Hughes, the NFU's deputy regional director for North Wales, ‘there were rumours that foxes were being dumped in the Berwyn Mountains.
It was alleged that a van ‘full of foxes’ had been seen.
But we never had any conclusive proof.’
Brian Toon, the public affairs officer for the Masters of Foxhounds Association, is also sceptical about such stories.
‘I've seen numerous newspaper reports,’ he says, ‘but there's no hard evidence of this happening.
Nobody has come forward with any car numbers; and nobody has reported any sudden explosion of the fox population in the countryside.’
Even if urban foxes were dumped in rural areas, they would probably do little harm.
‘If there's any cruelty involved,’ Hughes says, ‘it would be to the foxes, not to the sheep.
Urban foxes are used to scavenging; they'd probably starve in the countryside.’
In the London suburb where I live we see plenty of foxes, and I feel far greater affection for them than for the local cats or dogs.
The foxes cause little nuisance, whereas domestic pets befoul the streets, parks and gardens.
Before I visited Small's farm, I held the view that shooting foxes was always both odious and wrong.
Now I have changed my mind: Small convinced me that in his case there was no alternative.
At 11 o'clock on the night of my visit we went on a fox shoot.
Small took the wheel of a dilapidated pick-up, while two men knelt behind the cab with shotguns.
Small's nephew stood behind the firing squad and trained a searchlight back and forth as we hared across the fields.
We were looking for the reflective eyes of a fox.
It was sleeting so hard we could barely see for 30 yards.
We returned after half an hour, the three men behind frozen and miserable.
Had we seen a fox, the pick-up would have sped after it, at 40 mph or more, and the men would have shot it.
Occasionally they injure a fox and it gets away, presumably to die sometime later.
‘But on the whole it's humane and quick,’ Small says.
‘We don't think of this as a sport; it's just something that has to be done.’
In this country foxes are killed in a variety of ways: by hounds, by trapping, by snaring, by gassing and by shooting.
If foxes have to be killed, then shooting strikes me as being as decent a method as any, and probably far better than most.
Main picture John Small with his flock in the Mendip hills
Above right The red fox,Vulpes vulpes 
Above left The body of a lamb killed by a fox.
Teeth marks are just visible on the neck, behind the ears
‘IF WE DIDN'T SHOOT FOXES, WITHIN TWO OR THREE YEARS, WE'D HAVE TO GIVE UP SHEEP FARMING.’
SCENES from A PROVINCIAL LIFE
‘THERE IS SOMETHING ABOUT THE ENFOLDING DARKNESS, THE INVISIBLE WINDRUSH AND RUMBLE OF SURF, THAT POWERFULLY CONCENTRATES THE MIND.’
LIKE THE EARLY MONKS ON THE SCEILIG ROCK, MICHAEL VINEY FINDS HIS CREATIVE SPUR ON THE IRISH EDGE OF THE ATLANTIC
A while ago, a captain of industry exhorted Ireland to get up earlier in the morning.
In our nearest village, eight miles away, the shopkeepers turned in their beds and slept on: the first wisp of turf smoke might curl up at nine, the first tractor rattle in at half-past.
But we were a little ahead of the captain: winter and summer, we're up at five.
I think of him sometimes, as the birds are singing in the hedges and the rising sun glints in the windows of houses across the bay.
We are each sitting there, the captain and I (and my wife Ethna too, come to that), sipping our tea on opposite sides of this sleeping island and thinking our early, wide-awake thoughts.
His are the kind, I must suppose, that make men rich and nations prosperous.
Nothing much hangs on my own, so easily distracted by the swoop of a crow or the amazing bright green of raspberry leaves as the sun floods our hillside acre.
What we share, the captain and us, is mastery of time — the freedom to order our day in ways that make better use of it.
‘To choose time is to save time,’ Francis Bacon said, a go-getter if ever there was one.
Our own choice was made soon after our move from the city and the switch from the desk to a spade and scythe.
Finding ourselves too tired to be creative at the end of the day, we switched our lives around and put the ‘thinking’ hours first.
Against all expectations, getting up at five is actually easier in winter.
If the purpose is to write, each at our separate window, there is something about the enfolding darkness, the invisible windrush and rumble of surf, that powerfully concentrates the mind.
Like the early Irish monks on the Sceilig rock (like a prior, then, and abbess), we work in the certainty that nothing will intervene.
The screens of our word-machines glow as serenely as illuminated manuscripts.
An occasional distraction, an even more seductive glow, is the full moon hanging over the sea, right in the middle of my window.
As a child I had a Japanese black-lacquered box, inlaid with a moon in mother-of-pearl, shimmering above dark islands.
That is the scene before me now, except that the moon, riding low in its arc and viewed through the Earth's dusty atmosphere, is spuriously tinged with gold.
In spring or autumn, the moon has sometimes tempted me out to walk the shore, confident of magical encounters.
But along that bare and silvery rim of sand, any self-respecting wild thing could not fail to see me first.
And my moon-walks are mocked in the morning by the tracks of otter and fox stitched along the tideline.
If we'd been looking for an easy acquaintance with nature, we would have chosen a different landscape: something lusher and more intricate, not this bleak and famished hillside on the Atlantic's edge.
But we were drawn by the Romantic taste in scenery, what Bertrand Russell called ‘wild torrents, fearful precipices, pathless forests, thunderstorms and generally what is useless, destructive and violent’.
Thus, we fell for a prospect of grandeur and space: rugged mountains, rocky islands, vast ocean horizons — whatever negated the confinement of a city.
Here, on an acre formerly abounding in thistles and docks, we have woven our own covert of windbreaks and fuchsia bushes and make great play of raising cabbages where cabbages — or at least, where sweetcorn, courgettes and petits pois — were hardly intended to grow.
A changed view of time is one of the really momentous recognitions of the self-directed, ‘alternative’ life.
Not only does it set you free to live in the present but you had better start enjoying it, because — at the age of 40 or 50 or whatever — this is it , the future has arrived!
I was chronically frustrated by the city's killing of time: all those coffees and slow pints, all that hanging about for other people.
(‘as if you could kill time without injuring eternity,’ Thoreau said.)
I remember the awe with which I realised — suddenly, while pushing the bike up the bog road — that I now had no excuses for putting off being happy; there was no one left to blame.
‘And what do you do all day?’ asks a city visitor.
More wounding than the question is the inability to give a coherent answer.
You do so many things, it seems pointless to mention any one of them.
The flux, the flow, the drifting balance of our days needs a particular kind of patience.
Some occupations are a better preparation for it than others, and journalism, fortunately, is a job that gets you used to taking what comes.
Those callings that live to the spirit of critical-path analysis might introduce more order and efficiency to homesteading, but they could also lead one to break rather than bend.
It is commonplace for me to step outside the door in the morning intending to do one particular task, and then to come back in for a lunchtime bowl of soup having done three or four entirely different jobs of maintenance or repair.
It can be frustrating when I'm pursuing some grand design such as building a shed or planting a hedge; but I suppose it teaches that life is a process of becoming.
The easy course, in fact, in a life of ‘self-sufficiency’ is to drift from day to day, working hard but always responding to circumstances; on a subsistence holding like ours, there is always somewhere to be weeded; something to be mended or maintained.
Hard experience has taught me to be selective in my procrastination.
A midwinter day…the wind to the north, the sky in rags, hail whipping in from the islands in dark squalls.
Fragments of slate appeared as if by magic on the lawn.
Slipping for years, pointed out tactfully by our friends and neighbours, pushed back into place with the bamboo boathook, they had chosen that day to fall.
A small distinct hole is disclosed, the size of a man's hand.
It must be dealt with.
Now.
One piece of incompetence uncovers another — overlaps another, like the treacherous slates on the roof.
The ladder is broken; it has rusted through because I left it out in the rain.
The nearest one is in the next townland and my bicycle has a puncture.
I walk there and back between squalls, the long ladder on my shoulder getting heavier with every step.
Then down the lane to borrow a slating ladder, the one that hooks over the roof ridge.
My neighbour is delighted.
‘You're one of us now!
When the day is fine the roof doesn't need mending; when it's raining it's not the right weather do to it!’
Beaming, he waves me off into another wintry shower.
Fifteen feet up, the wind seems stronger and colder, the footholds more suited to the Eiger; there is no place to put anything down.
I slide the new slate on a ‘hanger’ into place, and bed it in with black, bituminous, goo.
Clinging to the roof, knees trembling, squinting through wind-tears, trowelling mastic into the crusted slope of slates, I felt, indeed, one of a great, procrastinating brotherhood.
Since then we've had a new roof, but its glossy perfection, like a blank page, says nothing about man and his lifelong bargaining with time.
‘I REMEMBER THE AWE WITH WHICH I REALISED — SUDDENLY, WHILE PUSHING THE BIKE UP THE BOG ROAD — THAT I NOW HAD NO EXCUSES FOR PUTTING OFF BEING HAPPY; THERE WAS NO ONE LEFT TO BLAME’
THE GARDENER'S ACCOMPLICE
APART FROM A DIET OF WORMS, HEDGEHOGS EAT SLUGS, BEETLES AND BUGS.
CHRISTOPHER PROBERT STUDIES THESE PRICKLY PEST CONTROLLERS
Should you hear curious snortings and snufflings from your garden after dark this spring, don't put up the barricades.
If you summon up the courage to investigate, you might find not alien creatures but a friendly hedgehog or two, emerging from hibernation and foraging for food among the shrubs in your borders.
Erinaceus europaeus — the common hedgehog to you and me — is, as its name suggests, both common and hog-like in its habits; although in some areas its numbers have been drastically reduced by road accidents and agricultural practices.
This endearing creature has a special place in our countryside lore; in the past, it was believed to suckle from sleeping cows, to be immune to snake bites, and to pick up fallen apples by rolling on them.
However, in the midst of a changing countryside, it is rural and suburban gardens rather than fields and hedgerows that now provide some of the best havens for these mammals, as they do for much of our native wildlife.
Fully developed hedgehogs can grow to a length of around 225mm and weigh between a half and one kilo.
For their size, they can be quite quick, as anyone who has followed a lively one across a garden or road will testify.
They can also climb, hence their success at moving round and between gardens in their quest for food.
Chain-link fences and creeper-clad walls present no obstacle to a determined hedgehog, and unless your garden is completely surrounded by impenetrable walls a wandering hedgehog has probably passed through.
Hedgehogs reach breeding condition during late March and early April, shortly after rising temperatures and hormonal changes provide the cues for wakening from their winter hibernation.
By May and June, courtship rituals are at their peak, with three to five offspring born five weeks later.
Baby hedgehogs do not have the spines that so readily identify their parents, but these soon start to grow.
By the time they are mature, hedgehogs can have several thousand of the modified hairs that give them their prickly appearance and an ideal form of defence against attackers.
The young hedgehogs are reared by their mothers, and at about four weeks of age they may be seen foraging with her in the darkness.
At six weeks the litters disperse, leaving enough time for some females to have a second litter in late summer.
A plentiful supply of food is particularly important for hedgehogs after hibernation and prior to breeding.
That's why hedgehogs find gardens so attractive — they are excellent sources of food.
Hedgehogs enjoy a varied diet based mainly on beetles, caterpillars and earthworms, of which there are plenty in a well-stocked, productive garden.
They will also eat birds' eggs, hen and duck eggs, slugs, millipedes, earwigs, small mammals and birds, and have even been known to attack adult hens and pheasants.
In the role of garden pest controllers hedgehogs are terrific, often devouring large quantities of garden pests nightly.
But they also take scraps thrown out for birds, together with the bread and milk put out for them by well-meaning animal lovers.
The pros and cons of feeding hedgehogs have been the subject of much debate, but scientific evidence suggests that, even if supplementary food is put out for hedgehogs, they will still hunt on their own account.
As bread and milk are not especially nutritious, if you must feed them try putting out dog food, raw mince, raw liver and scrambled egg.
Late summer and early autumn are important times for hedgehogs to build up their body weight prior to hibernation.
As winter approaches, food supplies dwindle to almost nil; if the hedgehogs did not hibernate, they would probably starve.
Hibernation lasts for between four and five months, from October until March or a little later in the north of Britain.
During this time, heart rate slows to about one tenth of the normal rate, breathing almost ceases, body temperature falls dramatically and the hedgehogs lose over 30 per cent of their body weight.
To protect themselves during their winter slumbers, they build nests.
These are often concealed under fallen logs, tucked away beneath piles of leaves in hedges, underneath garden sheds or even deep inside warm compost heaps.
Once built, the nests are lined with tightly packed leaves which act as insulation and the hedgehogs are then ready to sleep the winter away, occasionally waking and wandering about on the off chance of finding a meal.
Gardeners are often inadvertently responsible for hedgehog losses during the autumn by being over-zealous in tidying up their gardens.
Clearing away all the leaves under a hedge is bad news for hedgehogs, as is smartening up the accumulated debris behind a toolshed or summerhouse.
Some occupied nests are destroyed by bonfires later in the year, so it is wise to check heaps of leaves and twigs before lighting them.
Another potential hazard is water.
Ponds or garden pools with steep sides are lethal traps.
Small animals fall in and, despite being able to swim, cannot climb out again.
A gently sloping edge or ramp leading into the water is vital if you do not want to endanger the hedgehogs that visit your garden.
What else can you do to help — apart from driving more sensibly?
How about building a hedgehog house?
Then, even if there are no other suitable spots for hibernation, the hedgehogs will have a chance of survival.
If yours is the kind of garden that is attractive to hedgehogs — lots of cover, plenty of natural food and close to other good habitats — then you could well find your offer of a house taken up this winter.
But remember — no peeping!
You will be able to tell whether you have had a tenant when you open up the box next spring, and you may be able to hear the occupant enjoying the garden if you listen out after dark.
For more information about hedgehogs, and membership details, send a large sae to The British Hedgehog Preservation Society, Knowbury House, Knowbury, Ludlow, Shropshire SY8 3LQ (0583–890287).
They have a free catalogue of over 300 hedgehog-related items, including ‘Don't Squash Me’ stickers.
MAKING A HEDGEHOG HOUSE
Hedgehog houses are cheap and easy to build.
First, you will need some untreated 25mm-thick timber.
Using this, make a box 375mm square and 375mm high, with a lid that can be taken off in the spring so that the box can be cleaned.
Cut an entrance hole, 125mm high and 150mm across, in one side of the box at floor level.
The third stage is to construct an entrance tunnel, also made of untreated 25mm-timber.
It needs to be 450mm long, 125mm high and 150mm across, with a floor.
When complete, it should fit snugly into the entrance hole in the side of the box.
You should now have something resembling a small square igloo.
Next, take a length of piping — PVC is ideal — with a bore of about 15mm.
Drill a hole in one of the sides of the box, at the top, and insert the pipe.
This will act as a ventilation tube for the hedgehog.
Lastly, put some dry leaves and grasses into the box, filling it about a quarter full.
At this stage, the house is ready to be moved on site.
Find a quiet, well-sheltered and drained part of the garden — a sloping bank is good — or dig the box into the ground underneath some shrubs.
Cover the top with a PVC sheet and surround the house with at least 225mm of soil, leaving the tunnel entrance clear.
Make sure that the ventilation pipe is unobstructed, and that water cannot run down the pipe into the house.
Your hedgehog house is now ready for occupation.
Main picture Young hedgehogs in the next; born bald, within hours they start to develop their protective spines
Right A family of common hedgehogs —Erinaceus europaeus ; there are about 17 hedgehog species native to Europe, Asia and Africa
THE MEETING HOUSE
TIM AND PATSY STOTHERT'S QUAKER MEETING HOUSE IS APTLY NAMED, FOR IN IT DIVERSE STYLES CONVERGE AND VICTORIANA COMES FACE TO FACE WITH ART DECO.
BY JUDI GOODWIN
PHOTOGRAPHS/PAUL BARKER
Tim and Patsy Stothert are perfectionists in the art of comfortable chic.
Their home, an 1855 Quaker Meeting House at Garstang, near Preston, is furnished in what they describe as an eclectic ‘mish-mash’ of styles, from 16th century to late 19th and everything in between.
They bought the house five years ago and have almost finished the ground floor.
‘But we hit the three-year barrier,’ Patsy says.
‘Everybody is enthusiastic about a house for the first three years.
After that they think, sod it, that will do.
And we've done nothing for two years.’
Despite the authentic antiques, the house doesn't look off-puttingly formal.
‘We wanted it to look comfortable,’ Patsy says.
Every room looks welcoming and lived in.
Painted dressers are distinguished with age and use, Oriental rugs have pleasing glimpses of threadbare patches.
Even cracked pots have found a second life as lamp bases.
The children (Max, five, and Oliver, seven) play freely throughout the house — the Stothert philosophy is that the odd mark on the furniture all adds to the patina.
Tim has the kind of gut feeling for old furniture that comes from being the second generation in the trade.
His father was a dealer and he learnt his first lesson at eight years old.
‘He taught me never to look first at the things you want to buy.
Look at three things in a shop and make sure that the last thing you ask the price of is the thing you want.’
He made his first professional purchase at the age of 16, while still at art college, when he bought a plate for two shillings at Preston market.
‘I threw it away because it was totally unsaleable,’ he says, putting into practice another lesson from his father: never look at your mistakes, get rid of them because they'll annoy you.
Nowadays his mistakes are fewer, though Patsy reveals he is prone to hiding a few under the bed.
His clients are mostly dealers and decorators so he specialises in the unusual.
‘Outsize versions of things or miniatures.
Or anything extraordinary.’
He recently removed a stone lion from the top of a building in Preston with hired crane — a traffic-stopping exercise.
‘When I see something that's right, it hits me.
I've bought it in my mind before I know the price.’
But buying for his own home requires a totally different approach.
‘Things have to be very cheap,’ he says.
Far from regarding a tight budget as a restriction on their decorating, Tim and Patsy see it as a positive advantage.
‘Not having any money is a very good formula for decorating,’ Tim says, ‘because you can't afford to make mistakes.’
The Stotherts work on the theory that modest things can look good in the right surroundings, and there are plenty of examples around the house.
Six botanical prints in the drawing room were ‘kicked around and very inexpensive’.
But put in matching frames and hung alongside a pair of brackets that cost a tenner the arrangement is pleasing.
They've also been lucky: a box of curtains bought for £20, for resale, yielded the magnificent tapestries now hanging in the study.
The big advantage of old, slightly faded curtains is that they are a good starting point round which to build a comfortable, well-used look; one that is hard to achieve with brand-new designer materials.
‘The trouble with modern textiles is that they use synthetic dyes and the colours don't look right in an old setting,’ Patsy says.
It was this vague dissatisfaction with new materials that planted the seed for a second business, reproducing antique textile prints, in collaboration with London colleagues Richard and Sarah Miles.
Tim had acquired an exceptional pair of early-19th-century patchwork quilts and casually commented that perhaps they should reprint some of the designs.
The two couples spent hours laboriously unpicking the stitching until they had released the fabric squares, from which they chose five to reproduce.
Printing on pure white cotton was disastrous.
So Patsy tried dipping it in cold tea first.
The experiment worked; now all fabric is given an initial staining before the main production run, in a colour most accurately described as ‘tea dust’.
If professional textile designers had translated the patterns, they would probably have perfected the colour register — the correct alignment of the plates in four-colour printing.
But the Stotherts prefer the more haphazard look of the old wood-block printing, where colours out of line, gaps and smudges, all add to the authenticity.
Tim believes they are breaking new ground as antique dealers producing a fabric range, though in America he says the best decorators are also antique dealers, a trend which he predicts could grow here.
‘The furniture and fabrics should go together, because what you're selling is a complete look.’
When Tim helps clients to decorate they have to accept they will not end up with a ‘decorated’ house in the London sense of the word.
For him, authenticity is a higher priority than fitted carpets and designer wallpapers — and the money saved can be invested in good antiques.
The Stotherts have invested a great deal of time in their house.
The walls are simply painted but they mix their own paint meticulously, experimenting until they get the colour just right.
The study walls are a rich red to pick up the burgundy of the tapestry curtains.
The drawing room is soft mushroom: ‘Getting the right shade was difficult because anything too clean could make the crewel work look dirty.’
The floors are inexpensively tiled, though they have gone to great lengths to achieve the right effect.
Coir matting in the drawing room gives a plain background for Turkish rugs and has the bonus that the rugs don't ‘walk’.
Quarry tiles in the kitchen, dining room and hall are laid on the diagonal, on top of a timber floor.
The tiler said it couldn't be done.
‘But in the end he stood back and agreed how good it looked.’
The other area of controversy was in the kitchen, where cupboards were to be installed by John Saunders, a friend in the business.
He wanted to do his best for them with floor to ceiling units in the latest paint effects.
But Patsy and Tim wanted a few simple cupboards painted white, made to look as if they'd always been there.
‘I don't know why people need all that storage space,’ Patsy says.
‘They must be expecting a nuclear attack.’
She manages perfectly well with the original larder for storing food, and a huge Victorian cupboard to store pots.
A dresser holds a collection of old tins that once contained pills for headaches, stomach and liver ailments, concocted by Tim's great-grandfather, a manufacturing chemist who set up in business in the 1880s.
Though their value is minimal compared with some of the treasures that pass through Tim's hands, he has a particular affection for the old tins.
‘All the best antiques are inherited,’ he says.
‘They haven't been restored or retouched.
They have a very special significance.’
‘The Country House Tour’ collection of fabrics and a selection of kelim-covered furniture is available from Tim Stothert, Interior Decoration, Calder Mount, Bruna Hill, Garstang, Lancs PR3 1QB (0995–605384).
Fabrics also available from Stothert & Miles Fabrics, 8 Holbein Place, London SW1W 8NL.
For your nearest local stockist, ring 071–730 1957.
Main picture The study, with its comfortably worn Turkey carpet.
The 1820 Gillow table supports a fretted gothick reading stand; two alabaster vases on the mantelpiece are copies of Roman originals and typical ‘grand tour’ souvenirs from the 1860s.
The curtains are 1880s machine-woven copies of a design for a Turkish carpet.
Above The exterior of the 19th-century house; the conservatory was added much later
Main picture The dado in the hall was completely rebuilt using medium density fibreboard.
Top left Four Piranesi prints grouped above a concealed radiator that sports two ostrich eggs.
An ormolu hall lantern hangs in the top corner
Top right A painted cane chair and Victorian bust among the scented geraniums in the conservatory.
Above Tim and Patsy Stothert check the colour match between their new fabric, Pillar and Bird, and the original.
In the background are more fabrics from the Stotherts' range — Rambling Rose, Parrots and Palm, and Hanging Baskets
Main picture The drawing-room table is an 18th-century Chinese opium table, now used to display a 17th-century Delft vase.
Above a kelim-covered sofa, Corinthian brackets support a pair of 18th-century Chinese plates.
Top left In the kitchen the 17th-century Italian table draws the eye down to the oak dresser and a splendid Regency portrait.
The crude figure on the dresser is a tobacconist's advertising ware
Top right The painted dresser with tins advertising Tim's great-grandfather's remedies
Above The bathroom is ‘a cross between Art Deco and early Holiday Inn’
FOOL'S GOLD
WEST MAYO FACES DEVASTATION AT THE HANDS OF GOLD PROSPECTORS, BUT LOCAL PEOPLE ARE DETERMINED TO UNDERMINE THEIR PLANS.
BY MARY DOWEY
PHOTOGRAPHS/TOM KELLY
The west of Ireland has a reputation for swift seduction.
When Peter Mantle first arrived in the Doolough Valley five years ago and saw the three lakes linked by the Bundorragha River glinting in the sun, he was completely smitten.
He was a fanatical fisherman, and here on the borders of Galway and Mayo he found himself in some of the best fishing waters in Europe.
Mantle enquired about cottages for sale.
Then, on a sudden whim, he bought Delphi, a crumbling but beautiful fishing lodge, together with 1,000 acres of boggy land and as many again of river and lake.
Work began at once to restock the fishery and restore the lodge and collapsed cottages on the estate.
By 1988, a fishing timeshare scheme had been successfully launched, the cottages were rented out and the lodge was open for guests.
But, less than three years on, a barrage of unforeseen problems has compelled Peter Mantle to take on the responsibilities of a new role: that of vigorous country crusader.
To begin with, the sea-trout on which Delphi fishery's international reputation is founded have been mysteriously dying in large numbers for two seasons, and the volume of fishing business has dwindled to a trickle.
In the longer term, the rush for EC sheepfarming and forestry subsidies — understandable in an area of poor agricultural land — is giving Mantle serious cause for concern.
Over-grazed hillsides stripped of their heather are eroding into the valley, bringing down silt that will in time upset the natural balance of the water chemistry, with possible adverse effects on fish stocks.
The recent upsurge in forestry planting may be harmful too, Mantle fears, with increasingly large numbers of conifers transmitting acid rain down through their roots into waters that already have an acidic tendency.
But the threat he regards as greatest of all is the one he least expected: the discovery of gold in the mountains at his back door.
He remembers driving up the road a few years ago and accosting a stranger who was dabbling in a stream with what looked like a frying-pan.
‘When he told me he was panning for gold, I simply didn't believe it.
Then there was a great deal of talk, and we hoped it was just share-hyping.
Soon it became clear the prospecting company was trying to suppress its excitement.
It seems definite now that the gold deposits here have commercial potential.’
Glencar Explorations, the company that holds the prospecting licence jointly with a British company, Andaman Resources, is one of 20 mining concerns currently investigating gold deposits in Northern Ireland and the Republic.
As its diamond-tipped drill moves from place to place along a rock band that stretches through the Mweelrea Mountains and the Sheeffry Hills, local concern is growing.
There is scant support for a project that, if it goes ahead, cannot fail to leave its mark on a remarkable stretch of untamed countryside.
Peter takes little comfort from the fact that the exploration is now centred in an area north of the Doolough Valley, so that any future mining is likely to leave his own watershed unaffected.
He is anxious not purely for Delphi, set in one of the last unspoilt valleys in Ireland, but for the whole wild sweep of west Mayo beyond it, up to the bustling tourist town of Westport.
Goldmining is, by nature, a messy business.
With the precious metal that has been undetected for so long in the folds of these hills, disseminated through the rock in an average ratio of half an ounce to a ton of stone, the sheer volume of likely debris is worrying.
When the gold has been extracted from the crushed and ground rock, only about half of that can fit back into its original space.
There is also concern that, no matter how carefully any mining operation is conducted here, the landscape cannot remain unscathed: promises that everything will be ‘put back as it was’ when the mine is no longer profitable are considered naïve.
As a former chairman of An Taisce, Ireland's equivalent of the National Trust, says: ‘How on earth do you rehabilitate a 6,000-year-old peat bog?’
The process of extracting the gold is a still more emotive issue, since the preferred method involves sprinkling a solution of cyanide (which bonds with metals) on to the ground-up ore.
An American anthropologist, Lesli O'Dowd who has settled in Mayo and is the author of an Earthwatch special report,Gold Mining and the Irish Environment , feels that its risks have been exaggerated, but that other metals and chemicals released during cyaniding may pose a more serious toxic threat.
These would find their way, with other wastes, into a tailings pond — in every sense a depression in the landscape.
The silver-tongued apologists of goldmining maintain that fears about all these things are grossly inflated and take no account of the strict environmental controls that would be enforced.
They have a point, undoubtedly.
But Mayo dwellers are still left dreading the thought of noise, dust and vibration; of new roads built to bear heavy trucks across the hills; of perimeter fencing and security lights where once there were only grazing sheep.
Above all, they dread an accident.
The feeling is that no amount of legislative safeguards can entirely eliminate the risk of a chemical spill, wreaking havoc in this watery landscape where a network of mountain streams fed by high rainfall could quickly wash the damage into the drinking water, or down to the mussel farm and salmon fishery at the mouth of Killary harbour.
‘Our livelihoods, our environment, our heritage are all being put under threat,’ says Peter Shanley of the militant Mayo Environmental Group (MEG), ‘and for what?
For the short-term gain of a few mining companies.’
Many in the area share his view that far more jobs in tourism, aquaculture and farming are at risk, however slightly, than the number goldmining would create.
While industry sources suggest up to 200 could be employed, Lesli O'Dowd estimates the likely figure at less than a quarter of that, with perhaps as few as 10–15 jobs for local people.
Nor does it seem likely that the Irish state would benefit significantly from this goldmine in the west, or indeed any other.
Despite having some of the largest base-metal mines in Europe, Ireland has collected only £5 million in mining royalties, which have typically run at between five and nine per cent of profits since 1970.
If Glencar does apply for a licence and planning permission to mine in west Mayo it will meet opposition on two levels.
Those who anticipate that both will be granted will campaign for legislation to enforce a new schedule of environmental safeguards.
They hope it will prove so complex and costly to implement that the company may finally decide that mining in Mayo simply isn't worth the trouble.
The strategy of MEG will be more straightforward — a blunt refusal to countenance goldmining in this part of the country.
They feel their vehement opposition to gold prospecting on Croagh Patrick, the mountain of pilgrimage south of Westport, has already proved their capabilities: last May the Minister for Energy, Mr Bobby Molloy, yielded to pressure by refusing to renew Burmin's prospecting licence there.
At the same time, he ruled that the national parks in Kerry and Connemara would be no-go areas for mining.
The irony is that this victory may contain the seeds of eventual defeat.
The writer Michael Viney left Dublin 13 years ago to live a life of peace and self-sufficiency in a remote house, from whose windows he can now glimpse the drilling rig (see Scenes from a Provincial Life, page 53).
He believes it would be extremely difficult for the Irish Government, having made these special exemptions, to announce that other parts of Mayo are now to be added to the list.
But perhaps public agitation will, in the end, be the catalyst required to neutralise the threat.
Peter Mantle thinks so, and MEG is heartened by the fact that the handful of farmers in the area who are sitting on the fence and hoping to make a fast punt out of an imminent El Dorado are outnumbered by a mass of people for whom gold holds no allure.
Some are dyed-in-the-wool environmentalists, many are businesspeople with tourist interests, but many more are ordinary people.
‘The sort who would think nothing of putting their rubbish out on the side of the road,’ as one observer noted, ‘but who still feel very strongly indeed that there should be no goldmining here.
It has to do with land as well as landscape, and the right to farm in a time-honoured way.’
Gold prospecting has been banned on the holy mountain of Croagh Patrick, but a road built by the exploration company before planning permission was applied for remains as an ugly scar
Above Peter and Jane Mantle with one-year-old Camilla, and springer spaniels Jigsaw and Wino.
Their home, Delphi Lodge, overlooks Finlough.
Below The Bundorragha River flows south of the gold-prospecting area, but should mining begin locals feel it would still be too close for comfort
Above The vulnerable beauty of Killary harbour: ‘It only takes one fool to drop a barrel of chemicals,’ Peter Mantle says, ‘and we're all wiped out.’
Below Extracting the rich gold deposits in the Sheeffry Hills would disrupt time-honoured patterns of sheep-grazing
HOLY SINISTER
HORRIFYING HARBINGERS OF HELL, MONSTROUS CARBUNCLES OR MEDIEVAL FORERUNNERS OF ‘SPITTING IMAGE’?
RICHARD ROSENFELD INVESTIGATES THE DEMONOLOGY AND MYTHOLOGY OF GARGOYLES
Sloshing up the tracks in the dank woods that separate Chedworth's Roman villa from its village, high on the eastern edge of the Cotswolds, three sights await you.
Deer nosing through the far undergrowth, always standing in clearings you can never hope to reach for the ensnaring, chest-high coils of bramble.
The startling view, on leaving the woods, 40 miles clear to the Wiltshire Downs.
And, as you descend steeply into the next valley, and round the Norman church, a line of eight gargoyles — one a benign lion, one a madman in mid-vomit, one a splendid, arrogant griffon.
This is nothing compared with the spectacular catalogue of gargoyles and grotesques found elsewhere: South American lemurs; crocodile-toothed, bulging-eyed monsters; tormented faces emitting vegetation as if it were ectoplasm; demons gulping down children, baboons, and even snarling severed heads.
What, though, are they doing on churches?
Originally they were a crude if effective attempt to get the plumbing right.
They channelled rainwater away from the guttering through open-mouthed figures, which occasionally contained a short section of pipe.
This guaranteed that the water fell to the ground just clear of the walls, so protecting them against damp, discoloration and decay.
But the utilitarian function of keeping church walls dry hardly accounts for the occasionally bizarre juxtaposition of the sacred and profane: Christ and the saints among the foully contorted and pagan fertility symbols, the Virgin Mary elbowed by giants (usually depicted with both hands pulling back fierce lips).
Even the medieval church's spiritual leader, St Bernard of Clairvaux, wanted an explanation.
In 1125 he bawled famously: ‘What's the point of these ridiculous monsters to the brothers studying in the cloisters?…
There are such fantastic, varied shapes on view that it's more tempting to study these carvings than our books or the laws of God.
Heavens above, if we're not ashamed of these unclean things, at least let's regret the expense.’
Had he seen a letter from Pope Gregory in AD 601 he'd have had a better idea of what was happening.
Gregory's psychologically astute strategy for converting the English to Christianity did not involve a takeover and clear-out, replacing demons with Christ, but coexistence.
If the new religion forced too difficult and direct a choice, it could have had a sticky launch.
That's why the early church assimilated existing magical beliefs and imagery (often rooted in Celtic mythology), becoming a reservoir of the popular subconscious.
The more you hunt around Saxon or medieval churches, scrutinising the roof and tower with binoculars, the more evidence you will find of a wide range of pre-Christian beliefs.
Even Canterbury Cathedral, the citadel of English Christianity, contains a marvellous range of mermaids, demons, snarling beasts and old gods.
Furthermore, many early churches were built on pagan sites, purified with holy water, where trees and stones had once been worshipped.
(One church, at Knowlton, Dorset, stands within a neolithic monument and ceremonial circle.)
Pagan festivals were incorporated into the church calendar, fertility rites becoming Christian processions.
The yule log became a Christmas ‘ingredient’; many magic springs became holy wells, still capable of healing the sick.
In other words, the church controlled popular magic by offering its own brand.
It began to cater for all tastes.
The end result was that stonemasons had three sets of images to play with and blend, invariably at their own discretion: images rooted in earlier pagan beliefs, contemporary medieval life and the Bible.
Many pagan images accepted into the church gradually became a part of its symbolic language, even though their new meanings are not always clear.
The Green Man is a good example.
Originally he would have symbolised vegetative fertility, and possibly even the sacrificial May King.
From the 13th century on, however, he increasingly consists of a Dantean, damned, defeated face sprouting or framed by vegetation.
At his most repellent, thick tendrils and leaves coil out of the forced-open mouth, eyes, or nose, lush and relentless, engulfing the victim's head.
This motif is placed throughout churches, on roof bosses, capitals, fonts, bench ends, and even tombs.
But what does it signify?
The dark root of evil?
The Tree of Life that sprouted from the seed of Adam's mouth (according to one version)?
The natural fallen world?
Or the image of the Fallen, those who have committed the sin of idolatry?
Bamberg Cathedral in south Germany contains one of the most sinister of all Green Men.
The carver has reversed the traditional image, creating, instead of a passive victim with blankly staring eyes, an ancient, menacing face that is made of leaves, not being terrorised by them.
It is the kind of face you only see outlined high in a woodland canopy late at night.
The kind that defies logic, and horrifies.
The severed human or animal head was another powerful pre-Christian image later adopted by the church.
To primitive tribes a head, stuck on a pole at the village boundary, averted evil and brought luck.
In some churches carved heads are similarly found perched on the top of pillars, often biting into them.
Many were given three faces, the number three having long been sacred.
Until the practice was banned, the church used this image to signify the Holy Trinity.
Pagan demons also lend themselves to biblical interpretations.
The most popular suggest the evil that vigilant Christians must fight against, evil prowling beyond the sanctity of the church.
Are their open jaws the jaws of Hell, or they are the equivalent of a near-Satanic Dirty Dozen, under the command of the angels — the church's way of fighting like with like?
No one can be entirely certain.
The best gargoyles and grotesques are real attention grabbers because of their sheer vitality.
Masons invariably gave their subjects good individual gestures and/or expressions.
If they are not doing something (like having a comic scratch), their faces supply the action.
Even the demons have a life beyond their symbolic significance.
The eyes of the riled flare, literally popping out of the sockets.
A demon seizing a victim may not merely grab, but shoot its claw into the toothless mouth, throttling by the tongue.
A monster eating a child does not just gnaw its head, but holds its wrists to stop it wriggling.
With the really grotesque grotesques, the authorities may not have been quite so lenient.
Why else should so many be high out of sight of the congregation, only sharply visible to us when using a telephoto lens?
Since the stonemasons were usually allowed to create their own designs, they were also given the freedom to crack good jokes.
Some are unquestionably crude.
At St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol, there is an image of a man sitting on a privy, fingers pinching his nose against the pong.
At Magdalen College, Oxford, there is a splendid example of a couple having oral sex.
To the church's credit it has never seriously attempted to rewrite this side of its history.
Many gargoyles have certainly been destroyed, but thousands remain.
Even during the Reformation it was biblical scenes likely to promote superstition and idolatry that came down.
And where the old gargoyles are now crumbling away, attempts are being made to replace them, expensive though this is.
Michael Groser, one of the leading stonemasons in Oxford, has made several in the past.
‘A small item can cost £200 minimum, with an average size head at £500,’ he says.
He used the same tools (hammer and chisel) as his medieval predecessors, and just like them he was left to devise his own designs.
‘When I started,’ he recalls, ‘I did try to follow old patterns, but it wasn't easy, so I followed my imagination.
I found my own apprehension of form and my sense of humour very much the same as masons of around four hundred years before.
If I had an area that was wider than the height, I sometimes made a double head, with three noses.
The French did precisely the same thing.’
Five of Michael Groser's gargoyles for Oxford's St Edmund Hall are based on college fellows.
Some, in the medieval tradition, are caricatures — gently affectionate and amusing.
The Dean and his pet labrador are both depicted wearing dog collars; the bursar, with ears big enough to flap over to Christ Church, is seen tightly clenching two money bags.
But how long will they last?
‘Other things being equal, longer than the originals.
But it depends on the air.
A lot of gargoyles have deteriorated more in the last 70–80 years than in the preceding 200 years because of the pollution.
One prays they will indeed last this long.
Old churches without this rich mix of gargoyles would appear muted and reinvented, like a present minus its past, a belief without its moments of uproar and despair, or a locality stripped clean of its ghosts.
Main picture St Thomas à Becket just before his murder — one of many chilling gargoyles that line the walls of Toddington Manor, Gloucestershire.
Above A panting, pig-eared demon found at Winchelsea church, East Sussex
Above left A tortured soul writhes in contorted agony at Kilpeck church, Hereford and Worcester.
Above right A Green Man with double foliage stares down from an arch-boss in the chapter house of Southwell Minster, Nottinghamshire
Top Murder most foul?
Another of the haunted heads of Toddington Manor.
Above left A stone tribute to the craftsmen builders of Brasenose College, Oxford.
Above right Damned sinners trapped in the Jaws of Hell on a nave-roof boss in Norwich Cathedral
Top Beaked horse-heads champ an arch in St Ebbe's church, Oxford
Above A monstrous mouthful tops a pillar in Kilpeck church, Hereford and Worcester
TAIT & STYLE
COLOURS SING AND CIRCLES SPIN ON INGRID TAIT'S ORCADIAN FELTED SHAWLS.
BY KATY BROWN
PHOTOGRAPHS/NUTAN
A telephone box converted into a greenhouse stands in the garden next to Brae Studio, the old school where Ingrid Tait has her felting workshop.
There's no space in it to prick out seedlings, but it certainly won't blow over in the robust Orkney winds, and the tomatoes seem to grow perfectly well.
That telephone box represents the spirit of the Orcadians.
Alongside the splendidly untrammelled landscape, there are disadvantages to living on Orkney.
It's a smallish island, over two hours from Glasgow by air; to travel or transport freight is intimidatingly expensive; it is dark in winter and rains more than average.
But none of this prevents things from happening.
If you want to grow tomatoes but can't keep a greenhouse standing, you find something equally useful.
And if you want to run a business that involves shipping an unwieldy machine across Pentland Firth and Scapa Flow, servicing orders from London, New York and Japan, and travelling to Glasgow and London to seek commissions from the smartest fashion houses, then Back Road in Stromness is probably as good a place as any to do it from.
Ingrid spent many years at art schools in Glasgow and London during the mid-1980s before establishing Tait & Style in Stromness.
Born in 1962 in Canada while her Orcadian parents were living there, she returned to Orkney as a small child and has lived there most of her life.
As the people she designs for are ‘from south, or abroad’(Orcadians call everywhere south of Pentland Firth simply ‘south’), the balance wasn't exactly weighted in favour of settling in Orkney.
But the machine decided for her.
The machine is the crux of Ingrid's business: her innovations in the craft of felting are contributory and her designs are responsible for the sort of client who commissions her, but without the machine it couldn't have happened.
Ingrid's machine is a smaller and much-adapted version of the industrial, multi-needled monsters used in the Yorkshire weaving and woollen mills to make insulating material and upholstery fabric.
She'd been using these for years, ever since a practical demonstration by an art-school technician fired her to experiment with felting techniques.
While studying spinning in Huddersfield (as part of her degree course in textile design at Middlesex Polytechnic) there had been no time for her to try out the machine, so the then sceptical technician told her to come back later.
‘I wandered down to Huddersfield market and found some woollen scarves for £1 each.
They made me wonder if I could use pure woven wool as a base for my own technique with the machine.
I embroidered a design and laid some flax on a scarf, and put it through the needles.
The technician was more excited by the resulting effect than I was: I just thought it was a bit of fun.
But he believed I was really on to something.’
She was still at art school in London, so these massive machines were hardly accessible.
But throughout her course, and while at the Royal College of Art doing her MA, she continued to develop her felting whenever she found time to go north.
In essence, Tait & Style designs are made by laying strands of wool and teased-out flax on to woven cloth.
This is embroidered by hand, then passed through the machine two or three times.
The barbed needles pick up tiny threads and pump them through the fabric, bringing back more threads from the base fabric and welding them to the appliqué.
The result is a strongly bonded design showing clearly on the front and in a ghostly form on the back.
The realisation that the Huddersfield technician might be right came only when Ingrid was selected to show on the student stand at the Fabrex exhibition in October 1989.
With her friends, Jacqui McLennan and Freddie Robins, Ingrid had put together a collection of felted designs.
Fashion buyers clamoured.
‘It was like a jumble sale in a village hall,’ she laughs.
‘They wanted everything we had on the stand — and they were only meant to be samples.
We took masses of orders, from Paul Smith, Liberty and Whistles, and only when the show was over did we understand what we'd let ourselves in for.’
She had no workshop, nobody to help her and no business acumen.
And, worst of all, no machine of her own.
Undaunted, Ingrid took on the jobs, and through long, exhausting, financially unrewarding slog, completed them.
She did a business course at weekends, stayed in Huddersfield during the week, paid for friends and helpers to stay there too, and hired the big factory machines.
Then her original mentor found her a machine to buy.
‘It was a heap of greasy, rusting metal,’ she remembers.
But increasing despondency about the impracticality of using hired machines to carry out orders made her persevere, and the advice of friends and a local engineering firm convinced her it was worth bidding for.
These machines are so rare that one like Ingrid's, new, could cost £80,000, and she might have had to wait four years for delivery.
Once the nightmare of buying it was over (‘It was a battle of sweat and nerves.
The agent never treated me as a serious buyer because I didn't fit his image of a businessman’), the adaptation process began.
The machine was shipped to Orkney, still not in working order, while Ingrid carried on going to Yorkshire to process a big order from Paul Smith for a bold circles design on chalkstripe suiting.
Ingrid's designs have a complex web of influences.
To an outsider the light and landscape of Orkney seem crucial: the circles, dots, hazy shadows and strong lines must have some root in the stone circles, wind, and wide skies.
But Ingrid almost denies this: ‘I'd been the typical first-year art-school person, entrenched in one style that was really landscapey — all earthy colours and shapes.
Now I try to surround myself with as many influences as I can and avoid all that.
Maybe I'll go back to it one day.’
Ingrid feels more influenced by painters like Sonya Delaunay and Picasso, and by the fragments of colours and textures that she collects for reference.
The walls of her drawing/negotiating/telephoning corner in the workshop are hung with postcards and clippings; the surfaces are covered with pebbles, Celtic and Viking details and copies of Orcadian stone carvings.
Bags of coloured wools are pegged on to scaffolding near the machine and sample lengths of fabric and felted scarves are swagged about the place.
In the workshop, overlooking the sea, there is a long ex-grocery bench that came from Ingrid's grandfather's shop.
Here Deirdre MacKenna, her right-hand helper, provides an anchor for the business in Stromness when Ingrid is away.
She supervises the pre-felting embroidery, keeps an eye on stock, trains people to work the machine.
‘I sit here sewing and watch the sand and seaweed in the water down there.
What a place to earn a living,’ she says.
Deirdre is Scottish herself, so it's not as if she's new to wide skies and stirring views, but Orkney surpasses all she's known before.
‘The light here is extraordinary.
It must have something to do with why so many painters and designers are doing really good work here.
Not stuff dictated by tourists, but real, pure art and craft.’
The pursuit of excellence is evident throughout Tait & Style.
The people who work with Ingrid are carefully chosen, not for their formal training (apart from Deirdre, none of them has any) but for their eye.
They need to be spontaneous enough to translate Ingrid's abstract designs into wool and embroidery, and have a keen sense of colour and shape.
She regularly employs her grandmother, ‘who's the best seamstress I'll ever find — she teaches all the others to sew beautifully’, and, after school, a 14-year-old girl who is already showing great design ability.
Ingrid believes it was fate that enabled her to work in Orkney, near her family, with her friends, and on an island she loves.
But it is simpler than that, and less romantic.
She is canny and determined, and her talent is so special that she could be running her workshop from an oil rig in the North Sea — people would buy her work just the same.
As long as the machine could be there too.
We flew to Kirkwall with British Airways, which flies to Orkney and Shetland regularly, from Glasgow and Edinburgh via Inverness.
TAIT & STYLE OFFER
Ingrid Tait is offering Country Living readers a 10 per cent discount on her Landscape pattern scarves and shawls (see above).
They come in small, medium and large sizes and usually cost from £25 to £75.
To order call Tait & Style on 0856–851186.
Main picture Local girl Amy Colap wearing two of Ingrid's shawl designs, Dots and Stripes.
This page Dyed fleece.
Inset Ingrid Tait
Main picture Ingrid's abstract patterns, especially Ikat (far left) contrast well with Jacqui McLennan's graphic face and Freddie Robins's hearts.
Left Hanking yarn before it is dyed.
Below left Ingrid's felt shawls keep out the icy winds that whip across Rackwick Beach, Hoy.
Below right The finished effect looks random, but getting the different tensions and densities of colour right needs precision
Main picture Squaring the circle Below left Ingrid's Granny Gorie —‘the best seamstress I've ever had’— has been an invaluable source of advice Right and below right Orkney's stark shorelines, wide skies and drifting clouds are echoed in Ingrid's landscape pattern
TUSCANY in SOMERSET
SAM AND GRAEME FIFIELD-HALL HAVE CREATED A CORNER OF ENGLAND THAT IS FOREVER ITALY.
BY HESTER PAGE
PHOTOGRAPHS/MELVIN GREY
Sam and Graeme Fifield-Hall were quite happy living in the city and running a business.
But Sam harboured other desires.
She dreamt of a life in a Tuscan farmhouse, with an ancient barn built around a central courtyard, bathed in the apricot hues of an Italian sun.
At the end of a trip to Devon, a friend offered Graeme a lift to the station.
On the way, they stopped at a farmhouse that was about to be put up for sale.
Graeme's friend, an estate agent in Chard, needed to view the house before the details could be written.
‘I didn't even get out of the car,’ Graeme recalls, but he was amazed by what he saw.
‘Near the house was a barn like a castle, with a courtyard in the centre.
It was everything Sam had ever wanted — except that it was in Somerset and not in Tuscany.’
The next day he took Sam down to see it.
‘It didn't officially go on the market.
We just decided we had to have it,’ he says.
The farmhouse was rather nondescript.
It was built in 1803 but had been badly modernised over the years.
The outside stone walls had been rendered and the windows replaced and double-glazed.
‘We had to apply a lot of age very quickly.’
Sam invited her best friend down for Christmas.
‘It was the greatest incentive I could think of.
She would need at least one room that wasn't like a builder's yard,’ Sam says.
They started with the kitchen.
‘There was no natural character to the room: it was a white box with modern doors, modern units and a Rayburn that stuck out of the wall like a sore thumb.’
It had pink quarry tiles and the Rayburn was yellow; these were the features of the room she decided to work around.
They decided to use Taunton bricks, which are pink and yellow, to build the units, and heard of a chimney in Taunton that was being demolished.
‘The bricks arrived filthy black and Graeme had to scrub and wash every single one.’
He built the brick units and their arches himself.
He also built the fireplace to house the Rayburn.
‘We got up three times during the night to see if the arch was still holding up.’
Sam took it upon herself to plaster the walls.
‘I wanted very rough plaster, as a farm labourer or a member of the family would have done it.
It looked awful at first— so bad it was wonderful — but as it dried it revealed an incredible gradient of colour.’
The natural plaster was exactly the same colour as the pink in the brick, while the yellow in the brick was the same colour as the Rayburn, so it all started to pull together.
The last thing to jar the senses was a modern cupboard door.
‘I decided to crackle glaze it to merge with the French antique furniture,’ Sam explains.
Paint, varnish, more varnish and a blow-drier hastened the effect and old brown shoe polish filled in the cracks.
‘My reward came later when a neighbour dropped in to see how things were going.
‘Ooh, lovely,’ she said, ‘but it'd be nice if you stripped that door.’
I was very pleased that it was so convincing.’
The original window shutters for the front of the house were found in the barn and Graeme rehung them.
‘By the time my friend arrived I was exhausted and in a foul mood and so was Graeme.
We had almost completely forgotten about Christmas — but at least the kitchen was finished.’
Back in the city, Sam and Graeme had owned a prop hire business, lending out country antiques, backgrounds and surfaces to photographers and stylists, mostly for cookery pictures.
‘A few photographers used their own things but there was a gap in the hire business.
No one seemed to be paying much attention to the backgrounds.
I though more texture was needed, and more choice of texture.’
Sam had worked with art directors and photographers in New York.
‘They would come to my flat and borrow my things for their photographs,’ she explained.
‘We would have had a monumental amount of stuff anyway, even if we hadn't had the business.’
They travelled all over the countryside asking farmers if they could buy the rustic doors that were lying in the mud at the back of the barn.
Flemish and Spanish doors, slabs of different coloured marble, stone surfaces, panelling, good mahogany, were all snapped up for background effect.
‘And we learnt all the paint effects to produce any sort of wooden finish or marbling.’
They've continued the business, using the house as a country location, though home-making activities have often got in the way.
But their decorating knowledge was invaluable when it came to restoring the farmhouse.
In the first year they decided to dig a boating pond.
‘We dug the pond because there wasn't anything to look at and it seemed a very obvious thing to do.
You'd take a lovely walk down the field and then suddenly you'd be up to your knees in a bog.
There were seven springs in that corner.’
They kept the best of the natural wetland below the pond.
‘The pond is actually too close to the house.
The wildfowl land here, but when we open the back door they tend to fly off.
But slowly the birds have decided to stay.
We now have our own ducks and they have nested and hatched their eggs, and a male moorhen and his family have been in residence for a couple of years.
‘Every day, the first thing I do when I wake in the morning is go to the window to look at the pond.
In the summer at the end of an exhausting day, we take a drink and get into the boat and float.
No one can reach us, it's bliss.’
Turn to page 29 for decorating ideas to copy.
Main picture The larder was formerly the dairy room.
Hanging on the wall (behind the lemons) is a lethal-looking old American corn-drying rack Top The farmhouse seen from across the fields Above Graeme and Sam Fifield-Hall
Main picture The dining-room dresser is a ‘marriage’: an elm dresser top sitting on an elm coffer.
17th-century pan lids hang from the shelves.
Top Sam dried the sweetcorn and artichokes that sprout from the Italian wall-mounted jardinière.
Above At the far end of the garden room a bathtub has been planted with herbs for the winter
Main picture Flagstones in the hall have been worn smooth by years of hobnail boots.
A wooden Tudor bowl and a cider flagon cover the top of a pine haberdasher's chest; the framed crewelwork behind must have been ‘horrendously bright’ at one time, but has now faded to more acceptably gentle colours.
Above right Chinese woven grass has been laid on the guest bedroom floor.
It's thick and durable but the carpet-layers swore never to work with it again.
Above left An oil-on-leather screen shields a corner of the living room.
The Pennsylvania Dutch tole watering can might be repro but looks extremely convincing.
Inset right Graeme's cousin painted the bull.
Inset left Sam on her tractor-mower: ‘Three sheep don't eat enough grass to keep six and a half acres looking tidy’
IRISH GARDENS
A GRAND TOUR
And grand it is to be sure.
The gardens of Ireland have a special dreamlike quality, like gardens known as a child — where everything was bigger and greener, and chattering rabbits abounded.
Where sounds of humanity are muffled by the absorbent tranquillity, where vegetative abundance struggles in mysterious thickets and leaf-thatched tunnels, and moss-veiled statues stand transfixed listening for the echoing revelry of a party that ended centuries ago.
Irish gardens have the peaceful innocence of prelapsarian Eden; you are quite likely to have the place to yourself, and most have not yet plumbed the commercial depths of the pot pourri franchise.
Irish gardens are islands of perfection in a landscape of empty fields as rough and tussocky as a moulting dog.
Behind their perimeter walls lie freshly laundered flowers, verdant grass still sparkling from the last shower, yew hedges in an ecstasy of precision clipping.
The rain, and the warmth, and the general tolerance of the character of plants make for an almost threatening exuberance.
And the gardens stimulate, inspire and amaze.
 Miranda Innes 
Top left The conservatory at Killruddery, simple but beautiful.
Lounging putti watch fountains plash in the parterre, and there is a huge leafy pillbox through whose massive walls you fight to come upon a hushed round pond with lilies and a boat.
There are whispering groves, wide spreading lawns where coy stone ladies nestle in the green, and miroirs d'eau à la Courances which might reflect a sky of tender blue.
The most benignly haunted garden I have ever visited
Middle left Mount Usher — 20 ‘Robinsonian’ acres, once a potato patch and now thickly planted with trees, especially eucryphia and eucalyptus.
Embothrium even, flaming against a dark background of yew.
Very romantic, with shrubby entanglements of magnolia, maple and cornus on either side of the shining River Vartry, and an apple orchard bearded with mistletoe.
There is a strange grafted conjunction between a laburnum and a pink cytisus (best avoided), and a fernery in a secret gully reached by walking a gangplank over a rushing rivulet.
Horrors! there is an azalea walk.
But this is no vulgar skirmish of brittle nylon colours — its startling brightness is as carefully coordinated as a Zandra Rhodes gown
Left Rosemary Brown engulfed in fuchsia, geranium and festoons of Passiflora antioquiensis in her conservatory at Graigueconna.
Her garden is not huge — three acres — but there are some spectacular trees grown for their multi-coloured bark, and 80 different old-fashioned roses.
The borders are a soft fusion of pink and blue with grey and purple foliage, and in a climate that explores most permutations of grey, she adds light with splashes of primrose
Main picture Helen Dillon's Dublin garden has a richly tapestried Edwardian air with fragrant bowers and half-hidden statuary, contrasted with a perfectionist expanse of richly bordered lawn.
Here, a small clump of scarlet tulips brings a disproportionate flash of brilliance to a spring dalliance of Daphne mezereum , muscari, erythronium and Magnolia stellata 
Above The stables at Bushey Park, a stone's throw from Powerscourt.
Wreathed with white wistaria, they are half-hidden behind a ghostly phalanx of variegated osteospermum,Salvia argentea , white allium and a banksiae rose which has managed to escape predatory Wicklow deer.
The Victorian porch was transported from England on a car roof, bringing unexpected excitement to prosaic motorway travel
Left Iris, oriental poppies, symphytum and Geranium himalayense in the richly planted borders of the walled garden at Beech Park.
The Shackletons grow all sorts of rarities — black poppies from the Himalayas, celmisia from New Zealand, the waxy red Blandfordia punicea from Tasmania and a collection of alpines
Main picture Butterstream, Jim Reynold's garden in County Meath, is as lovely as anything real could be.
He has a flawless sense of colour and form, and realises an ideal balance between formal clipped structure and drifting floral ephemera, springing delicious surprises upon the enchanted visitor.
There are winding green paths through dense corridors of perennials, all plum and violet, rose-pink and silver; there are corkscrews and pyramids of box, green exclamation marks defining the Tuscan temple; there is a full and frothing white garden crisply held in check by clipped evergreens, a laburnum walk and a wooden Doric temple wreathed in clematis.
It's just too much, so it is
Powerscourt is a garden of extraordinary impact, whose grand location shaped like a vast scallop shell is echoed by its picturesque reflection in the Wicklow Mountains.
It is a spectacular site, over which the blinded hulk of a ruined mansion casts a dark spell.
This is the garden as theatre, where reclining tritons, Greek warriors and winged horses are transfixed in mid-whinny, where a tower (out of Thomas Gray by Caspar David Friedrich) rises inexplicably from a wooded declivity, where there is a sudden outbreak of brilliant Japanesery and an 18th-century grotto made from petrified sphagnum moss.
The designer of all this magnificence, one Daniel Robertson, was crippled by gout, and directed operations from a wheelbarrow, toping the while from a flagon of sack.
More recently, sans sack and barrow, J J Costin has designed a minutely documented herbaceous border.
EXCLUSIVE FOUR-DAY GARDEN TOUR FROM £349
Country Living has joined forces with Time Off, the short-break specialists, to bring you an exclusive tour of the eight Irish gardens shown here, from Tuesday 18 to Friday 21 June.
Come with us to enjoy Mount Usher whose lilies, poppies and peonies gladdened the heart of William Robinson.
The next day prepare for Killruddery, where we will tour the house and garden and enjoy lunch in the splendid conservatory.
Then explore Graigueconna, make a brief tour of Bushey Park House and gardens and hasten on to watch the sun beyond the grandiose setting of Powerscourt.
The following day we make for Beech Park with its luxuriant walled garden, and Butterstream, an enchanted blend of romance and formality.
A comparatively lazy day with plenty of time to ooh and aah.
On the fourth and last day we land in paradise: 45 Sandford Road, Dublin, the home of Helen Dillon, a gardener whose plants are encouraged and castigated like a wayward infants' class.
Choose from two hotels, an hour's drive south of Dublin, in Co.
Wicklow: Hunter's Hotel, an informal family-run coaching in; or Tinakilly House, an elegant Irish country house hotel.
Both have an excellent reputation for good food and are members of the Irish Country House and Restaurant Association.
The price is £349 per person at Hunter's Hotel; £369 per person at Tinakilly House.
It includes return British Midland flights from Heathrow to Dublin; four days car hire (including insurance and unlimited mileage and based on two people sharing); three nights accommodation (including breakfast), sharing a twin room with bathroom; admission to all eight gardens; lunch on Wednesday and Thursday; afternoon tea on arrival on Tuesday.
There are 30 places available on a first come, first served basis; the closing date is Friday 15 March.
ROLYPOLY, PUDDINGS AND PIE
PHLIPPA DAVENPORT'S RIB-STICKING RECIPES WILL TAKE YOU STRAIGHT BACK TO YOUR NURSERY DAYS
PHOTOGRAPHS/JAN BALDWIN
Puddings, like cooked breakfast, are jewels in the crown of British cookery.
By puddings I do not mean the pretty little fripperies that are offered at the end of an elegant dinner as token appeasement of our sweet-toothed leanings.
I mean serious winter puddings, steamed, boiled and baked, sticky, rich and sweet, that sit fair and square on the plate and fill you with a glorious glow of warmth and well-being.
Substantial puddings like these were once a vital fuel and restorative for those who laboured in the fields.
They were the crumbs of comfort the leisured classes craved to assuage the draughty chill of English baronial halls.
You could argue — and some do — that such puddings ought to go the way of the dodo now that we all lead more sedentary and centrally heated lives.
I disagree.
To tuck into a daily dose of pudding would be a gross indulgence, of course, but surely we still need puddings occasionally.
There is nothing quite like them for resuscitating spirits depressed by wintry gloom.
Lord spare us from puritans.
Why not allow yourself to be seduced by the voluptuous charms of a luscious pudding every now and again?
Enjoy it to the full, I say, and don't feel guilty.
More time in life is wasted by feeling guilty than almost anything else.
Great British Puddings are just cause for jubilation.
They ought to be celebrated in season.
We owe it to gastronomy to keep them alive.
Even the French acknowledge our supremacy in this field.
‘Blessed be he that invented pudding, for it is a manna…’ as the often quoted late-17th-century French visitor, Monsieur Misson, rhapsodised in a letter home.
It would be a pretty poor state of affairs if we abandoned our traditional puddings, leaving only the tourists to appreciate them.
You don't need guests, you don't need freezing weather or any other excuse to put pudding on the menu — although it is true that a good pudding shared with like-minded Billy Bunters makes for a convivial party, and if the day dawns cold and frosty it may give an agreeable edge to appetites.
Sunday lunch has a suitable sense of occasion about it and for many people it is the only time of the week when they can relax and enjoy a leisurely get-together with family or friends.
Sunday supper is another favourite occasion for pudding eating.
At supper there is more likely to be a simple salad than a roast on the menu, which has the advantage of leaving you with more room to do proper justice to the pudding.
Most days in most households are sensibly puddingless.
This is no hardship when there are fine fruits on offer instead: compotes of dried fruits as well as fresh apples, pears, bananas, citrus fruits and the first invigorating taste of early forced rhubarb.
And it means that when we cook and eat puddings we can do so wholeheartedly.
The Victorians tried to spoil the pleasures of puddings with foolish economies and in so doing brought Britain's once fine reputation to its culinary knees.
Beware being heavy-handed with flour.
Do not skimp and debase using margarine in place of butter, skimmed milk instead of cream.
Remember Eden Phillpotts' remark that: ‘No mean woman can cook well.
It calls for a generous spirit, a light hand and a large heart.’
It sums up perfectly the attitude needed to make good puddings.
Winter puddings are meant to be lavish.
They should be bursting with calorific deliciousness: butter, cream, eggs, dried fruits, nuts, sugar, jam, chocolate, treacle and other good things.
That way they will not only taste wonderful, they will also make you feel as cosy as wearing a cashmere sweater, or sitting with your toes in the Aga and a purring cat on your lap.
The virtuous and those plagued by dogs (not mutually exclusive groups) can always walk off some of the effects of a pudding afterwards.
Others may think it digestively more prudent to follow the example of Badger in The Wind in the Willows , sitting down quietly in a commodious armchair for a session with — or maybe under — the newspapers.
Do not look on these pages for lightweight and health-conscious confections.
These recipes are intended to be unadulterated bliss.
Many are old classics.
Some may take you back to the nursery.
I have dusted down others and given them sacrilegious new twists, incorporating nuts into rolypoly, for example, and using kumquats instead of lemons for old-fashioned Sussex Pond Pudding.
Complement proper puddings with proper sauces.
Lavish them with real custard, cream or a jam sauce that is generously jammy — and don't forget that Christmas Plum Pud isn't the only pudding that makes a grand entrance wreathed in alcoholic flames.
TOFFEE APPLE CHARLOTTE
It is the use of dessert fruit and the hint of lemon that make this apple pudding so good.
Quick and easy to prepare, not too heavy or sweet, it makes a fine choice to follow a roast — just leave it to cook while you eat the main course.
Serves 4–6
2–2½ lb Cox or other sharp but sweet dessert apples 1½ tbsp lemon juice and the zest of 1½ lemons 1 dozen or more thin slices of bread cut from a crusty French loaf or bloomer butter, golden syrup and demerara sugar
Butter an ovenproof dish — a very shallow dish to ensure the apples cook evenly and to allow for a good ratio of topping to filling.
Peel and core the fruit, cut it into crescent-moon slices and put it into the dish.
Add the lemon juice and zest and mix gently.
Spread slices of bread on one side only with butter and syrup.
Lay the slices, crumb side down, over the fruit, overlapping them slightly like roof tiles.
Scatter with a spoonful or two of sugar and slide the dish on to a baking tray.
Cook at 375°F (190°C) gas mark 5 for 25–30 min until the apples are hot and tender and the topping is deliciously toasty.
Serve hot or warm, alone or with yoghurt or cream.
MARMALADE PIE
Here is a pudding that offers the cook a fine opportunity to show off home-made marmalade.
I recommend it particularly for Sunday lunch with visitors from abroad whose eagerness to try a proper British pudding might grow a little faint if faced with a hefty suet pudding or steamed sponge.
Serves 8
shortcrust pastry made with 6 oz flour ¾; lb marmalade 2–3 eggs and 2 oz caster sugar
Use the pastry to line a 10-inch shallow fluted tart tin.
Blind bake it completely.
This can be done a day ahead.
If the marmalade is a low-sugar, rather runny one, you will need 3 egg yolks.
Otherwise 2 will be enough.
Beat the yolks into the marmalade until creamily mixed.
Put the filling into the pre-baked pastry case and bake at 350°F (180°C) gas mark 4 for 20 min or so until it is hot and just set.
Whisk 2 egg whites to stiff snowy peaks, gradually incorporating the sugar.
Swirl the mixture gently over the filling and bake for 15 min more until the meringue is softly set and streaked with gold.
Let the pie rest for 5–10 min before serving, or wait until it is cold, but be sure to serve it the day of making or the meringue may begin to weep.
Cream, flavoured with a tot of brandy, goes well with this.
PASSIONATE QUEEN OF PUDDINGS
Queen of Puddings is aptly named: perhaps the most delicate and lovely of all puddings.
Traditionally jam is spread between the custard and the meringue.
Grapefruit or lemon jelly marmalade makes a more sophisticated choice.
Fresh passion fruit is heretical but wonderfully aromatic.
Serves 4–5
1 pt creamy milk and 3–4 passion fruit the finely grated zest of 2 lemons 2 oz butter and 4 oz white breadcrumbs 5 oz caster sugar and 4 large eggs
Scald the milk with the citrus zest in a medium-sized saucepan.
Away from the heat add the butter, cut into dice, and 1 oz sugar.
When melted stir in the crumbs and leave to soften and swell for 10 min.
Beat in the yolks of the eggs, one at a time.
Turn the creamy custard mixture into a well-buttered pie dish of 3 pt capacity and bake at 350°F (180°C) gas mark 4 for about 25 min until set round the edges but still a little wobbly in the centre.
Spoon the ripe passion fruit pulp evenly over the custard.
Whisk the egg whites to stiff snowy peaks, gradually beating in 4 oz sugar, then pile the meringue mixture over the pudding.
Return the dish to the oven and bake for 15 min until the billowing clouds of marshmallowy-soft meringue are softly set and streaked with gold.
Let the pudding rest for 5–10 min before serving.
STICKY GINGERBREAD SPONGE
I dreamt up this one during ten stormy and electricityless days last January.
A spicy lifesaver, it is especially delicious if made a day ahead and reheated next day.
Serve with cinnamon custard or a sauce made by warming together some treacle and golden syrup with just a squeeze of lemon and a dash of syrup from the jar of stem ginger.
Serves 6
black treacle and golden syrup 4 oz stem ginger, chopped into small pieces 4½ oz butter, at room temperature 6 oz self-raising flour, sifted with 2
3 tsp ground ginger, 1 tsp cinnamon and ½ tsp allspice 3 large eggs, lightly beaten 1½ tbsp ginger wine or milk
Stand the tins of treacle and syrup in a pan of hot water for 10 min to make the contents runny and easy to measure.
Butter a 2½–3 pt pudding basin and a circle of greaseproof paper to cover it.
Put some treacle and syrup into the prepared basin, say 5 or 6 tbsp of each — don't stint — and stir gently to mix.
Bring to the boil a pan half-filled with water.
Beat the butter in a mixing bowl until creamy and light.
Add just 3 tbsp of syrup and just 4 tbsp of treacle and blend well.
Beat in the eggs, one at a time, then the flour and spices.
Add the ginger wine and, finally, the stem ginger, mixing it in very thoroughly.
Spoon the pudding into the basin.
Cover with the greaseproof paper, then with foil and tie with string.
Steam for about 2½ hr.
Loosen the pudding and turn it out to serve straight away.
Or let it mature, still wrapped, in a cold larder overnight, and reheat by steaming for 1 hr or so next day.
KUMQUAT POND PUDDING
Arguably the most satisfying of all winter puddings for anyone with a trencherman appetite is Sussex Pond Pudding.
Classic versions contain one or sometimes two lemons.
This variation on the theme is bursting with extravagant quantities of kumquats and comes to table sitting in a pond of its own sauce.
Serves 4–6
½ lb self-raising flour and ¼; lb suet scant 1 tsp baking powder and 1½ tsp cinnamon 2 fl oz each milk and water, mixed ¾; lb kumquats, washed and pricked about 5 times each 6 oz chilled and diced butter 5 oz granulated sugar
Butter a 2 pt pudding basin and a circle of greaseproof paper to cover it.
Bring to the boil a large pan half-filled with water.
Stir the flour, suet, cinnamon and baking powder together then mix in the liquid to bind.
Use three-quarters of the pastry to line the basin.
Pile the fruits into it, scattering the butter and sugar between layers.
Roll out a pastry lid, place it over the filling and damp the outer rim.
Fold the excess lining pastry over the lid and press to seal the two layers of pastry together.
Cover with the greaseproof paper, then some foil and tie with string.
Steam for 2 hr.
Unmould for serving on to a heated plate large enough to accommodate the pudding and the sauce that will seep from it.
MIDWINTER BAKEWELL
In summer I stuff my Bakewell puddings with fresh berries.
In winter I fill them with a rich and succulent mincemeat mixture.
Derbyshire folk may query the authenticity of this but I defy them not to enjoy the results.
Serves 8
For the pastry:
2 oz each lard and butter 4 oz each plain and wholemeal flour 2½ tbsp orange juice to bind
For the filling:
3 oz each sultanas and raisins 2oz each currants and flaked almonds ¼; pt hot tea plus 2 tbsp brandy or rum a good pinch each of cinnamon and allspice the finely grated zest of 1 orange
For the topping:
¼; lb each butter and caster sugar ¼; lb freshly ground almonds and 2 eggs
Mix the spices and zest with the brandy.
Pour on the hot tea and stir in the fruits.
Cover and set aside for several hours or overnight, stirring occasionally if passing.
Make the pastry and use it to line a 10-inch shallow fluted flan tin.
Blind-bake at 400°F (200°C) gas mark 6 for 15 mins, then for a further 10 min without greaseproof paper and baking beans.
To make the topping, first barely melt the butter.
Away from the heat, add the sugar to the pan, then stir in the ground almonds and the lightly beaten eggs, in that order.
Tip the fruits into a sieve (save the juices that drain from them to whip with thick cream to serve with the Bakewell) and mix them with the flaked almonds.
turn the mixture into the pre-cooked pastry case and pour the topping over it.
Bake at 400°F (200°C) gas mark 6 for 40–45 min until the topping has set to a golden crust.
Cool till tepid or, better still, serve cold.
BEST BREAD & BUTTER PUDDING
Rich and soothing, this decidedly grown-up version of an old nursery favourite owes more to Anton Mosimann than to Mrs Beeton.
I love it just as it is but it can be sauced with burnt brandy.
Crush a sugar lump and add it to the brandy in which the raisins were soaked; warm the mixture, set it alight and drizzle it over the pudding just before bringing to table.
Serves 4–5
6–8 nanny-thin, slightly stale slices of bloomer loaf 2–3 oz raisins, plumped up overnight in a few spoonfuls of brandy butter and whole nutmeg (or ground allspice) 4 large eggs and 1 pt half cream 2–3 tbsp demerara sugar or crushed coffee sugar crystals (optional)
Butter a shallow ovenproof dish or 4–5 individual soufflé dishes.
Butter the bread and sprinkle on a grating of nutmeg or pinches of allspice.
Cut the slices in half and stand them semi-upright round the edges of the dish(es) and across the centre.
Drain the raisins and scatter them between the slices.
Beat the eggs with the cream and pour it on.
Set aside for 20–30 min.
Put the dish(es) into a roasting pan containing enough freshly boiled water to come halfway up the sides.
Bake at 325°F (160°C) gas mark 3 until the custard is just set but still trembling in the centre and the tops of the bread projecting from it are deliciously toasty and crusted.
This will probably take 30–45 min depending on the size, shape and depth of the dish(es).
Sprinkle with sugar for extra crunch or drizzle with burnt brandy as described in the introduction to this recipe, and serve.
DARK CHOCOLATE PUDDING
The classiest, most chocolatey chocolate puddings are made with best quality, slightly bitter dessert chocolate that is high in cocoa solids.
This pudding also includes a little cocoa powder for good measure.
Light in texture, it is sublime served with cascades of cream poured over.
Serves 6–or just 4 chocaholics.
¼; lb each butter and vanilla sugar ¼; lb best dark chocolate, grated 1 oz cocoa powder, sifted and mixed with 3 oz freshly ground almonds 6 large eggs, separated
Butter a 3 pt pudding basin and a circle of greaseproof paper to cover it.
Half-fill a large pan with water and bring to the boil.
Beat the butter in a warmed mixing bowl until creamy.
Add the sugar and beat again until fluffy and light.
Beat in the grated chocolate.
Add the cocoa mixture and the egg yolks, in alternate spoonfuls, and continue beating until smooth and creamy.
Whisk the egg whites.
Slacken the chocolate mixture with one-third of them then fold in the rest.
Turn the pudding into the basin.
Cover with the greaseproof paper, then with foil and tie with string.
Steam for 70 min, by the end of which time the pudding will be perfectly puffed up and set with a just-molten streak in the centre.
Unmould on to a hot plate and serve straight away.
BUTTERSCOTCH WALNUT SPONGE
Miller Howe in the Lake District is the home of John Tovey's famous Sticky Toffee Pudding.
This sibling confection is steamed, not baked, nutty and almost as rich.
A friend has described it as worth putting on weight for.
Serves 5–6
For the butterscotch topping:
4 oz pale muscovado sugar 2½ oz butter and 4 tbsp cream
For the sponge:
4 oz each butter and pale muscovado sugar 3–4 oz chopped walnut pieces 1 tsp cinnamon and 2 tbsp Camp coffee essence 2 large eggs and 4 oz self-raising flour ¼; tsp bicarbonate of soda dissolved in ½ tsp warm water
Butter a 2 pt pudding basin and a circle of greaseproof paper to cover it.
Half-fill a large pan with water and bring to the boil.
Put the butterscotch topping ingredients into a small pan.
Place over gentle heat and stir until the sugar and butter have melted, then simmer for 3 min and pour into the prepared pudding basin.
For the sponge, first cream the butter and sugar with the cinnamon until soft and fluffy.
Add the sifted flour and lightly beaten eggs in alternate spoonfuls, mixing well.
Beat in the coffee and when the mixture is creamy and light, add the bicarbonate of soda and the chopped walnuts.
Spoon the mixture carefully and evenly over the topping.
Cover with the greaseproof paper, then some foil and tie with string.
Steam for 1½ hr before unmoulding and serving on a hot platter large enough to take the pudding and its moat of butterscotch sauce.
LEMON TREACLE TART
Treacle tarts filled with syrup-soaked breadcrumbs can be a little cloying.
This Suffolk version is more subtle: a creamy lemon custard with syrupy undertones.
Serves 6
1 x 8-inch shallow fluted shortcrust pastry case, blind baked and cooled 2 eggs lightly beaten with 4 tbsp soured cream the zest of 1 lemon and 1½ tbsp lemon juice 6 tbsp golden syrup 3 tbsp freshly ground almonds
Stand the tin of syrup in hot water just long enough to make the syrup thin, runny and warm — not hot.
Measure 6 level tbsp of the syrup into a small bowl that has been rinsed out with hot water.
Beat in the lemon juice and zest, then the egg and cream mixture, using a fork to blend the ingredients smoothly.
Scatter the freshly ground almonds over the base of the pastry case and carefully pour the syrup mixture on top.
Bake the tart on a preheated baking sheet at 350°F (180°C) gas mark 4 for 40–45 min until the filling is creamily set.
Serve warm, not piping hot.
If preferred the lemon treacle tart can be completely cooked a day ahead and reheated gently just before serving.
APRICOT & ALMOND ROLYPOLY
Steamed rolypoly was once served in all the best nurseries.
The baked version, with its crunchily golden crust, is still a rib-sticking favourite in diehard gentlemen's clubs.
The better the jam the better the rolypoly, and I like to gild the lily by lacing the dough with almonds and orange zest, too.
Serves 4–6
6 oz self-raising flour and 1 tsp cinnamon 3 oz each grated suet and flaked almonds the zest of 1 orange and 6 tbsp orange juice at least ½ lb dried apricot and orange jam (or other good jam, preferably home-made)
Stir together the flour, ground cinnamon, grated suet, flaked almonds and orange zest.
Mix in the orange juice to bind.
Roll out the pastry to an oblong measuring 8 x 12 inch.
Leaving a clear border of at least ½ inch all round, spread the jam thickly over the centre.
Damp the pastry edges with cold water.
Roll up the dough from one short end to the other and pinch the ends together to seal.
Slide the rolypoly on to a greased baking tray, seam side down.
Bake for 40 min at 220°C (425°F) gas mark 7, reducing the heat a little if the pudding begins to brown too much.
Serve with custard, rather than cream, in accordance with tradition.
Toffee Apple Charlotte
Passionate Queen of Puddings
King James's FRUITFUL ERROR
BY WISELY REINTERPRETING HIS ROYAL COMMAND, JAMES THE FIRST'S SUBJECTS BEQUEATHED US A LEGACY OF SWEET MULBERRY TREES.
BY JAMES DRIVER
King James I was a vain, foolish man, full of grandiose, impractical plans to impress the rest of 17th-century Europe.
Most of his many failures are, mercifully, long forgotten; but one doomed scheme — to bring England her own silk industry — has left 20th-century cooks and gardeners a rich, if somewhat neglected, legacy.
A silkworm — actually the caterpillar of the silk moth — will spin the cocoon that can yield an astonishing 800 metres of pure silk only if it is fed leaves from the white mulberry tree.
This tree,Morus alba , produces poor, almost inedible, fruit.
King James offered financial rewards to persuade people to plant mulberries to feed his imported silkworms.
Those who took his rewards, however, proved far cannier than their monarch.
Their long folk memories recalled other attempts to produce native silk over the previous hundred years — and how all of them had failed.
The unpredictable English weather meant that delivering the leaves at the right time and at exactly the right stage of development for silkworms to thrive on them was impossible.
The farmers knew this.
Far better, then, not to plant the worthless white mulberry, but rather to take the king's money and plant instead the almost identical black mulberry,Morus nigra , which since Roman times had borne delicious crops of long, purple fruit.
The mulberry can grow to a very great age, and some of those planted over 380 years ago can still be found.
These survivors, and their many descendants, provide us with one of the most versatile of tree fruits.
A mulberry is very similar in shape to a loganberry, but its taste is unique.
Even after all these years it still carries an authentic medieval flavour.
On reaching full maturity, and becoming almost black, the berries dissolve in the mouth, releasing a flood of juice that is sweet, but shot through with a sharp, vibrant tang alien to the bland, manufactured taste of the increasing number of modern hybrid berries.
Blackbirds and thrushes enjoy feeding on them, too.
If birds do look like working their way through a crop, the berries can be picked when still only a deep red colour.
At this stage they are probably too acidic for most palates to be eaten raw, but they are ideal for using in pies, tarts, jams and jellies.
A perfect way to serve them is in a tart of shortcrust pastry, mixed with three or four free-range eggs and plenty of sugar, and baked for half an hour or so in a medium-hot oven.
In choosing the best moment to collect the berries it is worth remembering that in the past growers expected their fruit to fulfil more than one function.
Along with elderberries, bilberries and blackberries, mulberries had another use as the source of a deep blue dye — spend a few minutes plucking really ripe ones, and you'll quickly learn why.
Perhaps it is because of this that an alternative method of picking was developed.
Sheets would be spread out under the tree and the trunk would be shaken vigorously.
As this must have resulted in plenty of bruised fruit it was probably invented by winemakers rather than cooks, and mulberries have an interesting place in wine history.
Until comparatively recently English vineyards had never had any sort of reputation for producing fine wines.
In Saxon times some produced no wine at all, their grapes being used for vinegar.
To make drinkable what wine was produced, the native vintners sweetened it with mulberries.
This not only took the edge off the bitter taste, but also gave the drink a warm, attractive colour that looked (even if nothing else about it was similar) something like the superior imported French wines.
Mulberries remain, of course, a marvellous ingredient for home-made wine.
The trees are traditionally planted in the middle of a lawn.
Here they can develop slowly without having to compete with other hungrier, more demanding plants.
As they grow into their compact form, their beautifully regular, heart-shaped leaves hang down from a tangle of branches to give glorious dappled shade from the hottest summer sun.
According to an old adage, the mulberry is a sure indicator of the coming of warmer weather:
When the mulberry tree grows green,
The last of winter's frosts you've seen.
It is certainly not a tree for the impatient or faint-hearted gardener.
Long after even the latest apple tree has finally broken into leaf, the mulberry's branches remain stubbornly bare.
Its buds never seem to burst until the summer is truly about to arrive.
Because mulberry trees are usually found in the centre of a lawn, not hidden away in the kitchen garden or grown in an orchard, they often provide a focus for children's play.
The song ‘Here we go round the mulberry bush’ reflects this (though an alternative theory holds that a mulberry tree was often planted in prison exercise yards, and inmates recited the rhyme as they walked round it).
The fruit is ideal for children, too.
Its zesty taste deters even the greediest from eating too much.
One tree in a school near Worcester has remained in its original position, while the buildings around it have been demolished and rebuilt over the centuries.
It bears so much fruit that it can still supply the appetites of 50 children and a large population of garden birds.
However unattractive King James was as a man and a monarch, he did leave a few noble monuments to grace his reign.
He commissioned the most famous translation of the Bible; was a patron of Shakespeare in his later years; wrote a treatise on the harmful effects of smoking; and, completely by accident, caused the revival of one of our most noble garden trees.
Deciding which achievement was the most remarkable is all a matter of taste.
MULBERRY TREE OFFER
Through our special offer you can plant your own mulberry tree for just £18.95.
A black mulberry (Morus nigra ), it will be about three feet high when delivered, ready to be planted out (with instructions enclosed).
It will grow to approx. 20 feet.
To order, fill in the coupon on page 154.
A stylised mulberry tree from the pages of a 16th-century herbal and bestiary
SEAL of approval 
WHY DO WE FASTEN BOTTLES OF WINE WITH CORK?
KATHRYN McWHIRTER POPS THE QUESTION
Corks have kept wine safe in bottles for thousands of years.
Historically, there was nothing to match them, for cork expands snugly into the quirkiest of hand-blown bottle necks.
Nowadays, wine can be sealed just as, or sometimes more, effectively with a ‘crown cork’— the crimped-edged metal cap used for beer.
Champagne ages perfectly in the producers' cellars with a cheap crown cork, and only sprouts its traditional mushroom just before it goes on sale.
The efficient, hygienic Swiss are really sold on crown corks; many of their finest wines are metal-capped.
But cork is special.
It's smart, effective, ecologically sound and it does pop in such a thirst-rousing way.
Corks first popped in ancient Greece and Rome, but then gave way to more primitive stoppers.
Medieval paintings show twists of cloth jammed into bottlenecks, or cloth or leather tied over the top, sometimes smeared with sealing wax.
It wasn't until the mid-16th century that corks began to appear again.
Shakespeare must have thought them common enough: in As You Like It a frustrated Rosalind says, ‘I prithee, take thy cork out of thy mouth that I may drink thy tidings.’
Cork stoppers were certainly common by the second half of the 17th century, though up to the early 18th century the really smart alternative was the glass stopper, which had to be ground to fit each individual hand-blown bottle.
Cork is made up of a myriad of tiny cells, each imprisoning a tiny pocket of air.
Shove it in a bottle neck, and it springs back, shaping itself to the glass.
And it stays put, not only because it's in a tight squeeze, but because the microscopic sliced-through cells all around the cork's perimeter act as an army of suction pads.
It is also inert and flavourless, water- and wine-resistant, and unaffected by heat or cold.
No other packaging material can be greener than cork.
It grows on trees and once cut grows back again and again.
Cork is the bark of the evergreen cork oak, which grows, wild or cultivated, in a narrow belt around the western Mediterranean and nearby Atlantic coasts, mostly in Portugal, quite a lot in Spain, and also in western Italy, Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica and North Africa.
It takes about 30 years from planting for a tree to grow enough bark to be harvested.
The pinkish, dusty core of the tree that remains turns to reddish-brown, then in the following year becomes grey and crusty, and gradually begins to regenerate its corky bark.
Nine or ten years later, it is stripped again, and so on for more than 150 years.
The business of turning bark into stoppers is very much a cottage industry, apart from a few modern factories.
The curved planks or tubes of cork are stacked out in the sun for three months or more to dry, then boiled for an hour or so with fungicides and antiseptics to kill off any bugs and moulds, and to soften the bark by extracting tannins and minerals.
It then spends about a month in cellars or dark warehouses to ‘ripen’ to its maximum softness and elasticity, before being cut into strips just wider than the diameter of a cork.
I always fear for the fingers of the Portuguese works who feed these strips through the punching machines that make the corks, deftly guiding faults in the strip away from the cutter.
The punched corks are graded by quality, either by machine or by chattering teams of headscarved women.
A cork doesn't have to be long to be good.
A short cork is perfectly adequate for a wine destined to be drunk within a few years.
The best cork is the smoothest and densest, with the fewest veins.
These dark veins are not just potential channels for wine or air to seep through.
They can be the source of a uniquely evil smell.
‘Corked’ wine has a powerful pong, rather like musty, mouldy walnuts, and current estimates hold that two out of every 100 bottles are affected.
A common cause, according to recent research, is the chlorine solution sometimes used to bleach and sterilise corks.
It is thought that this reacts with the woody tissue of the veins to produce trichlorophenol or TCP and that residual moulds feed on this, producing a ‘corked’ -smelling compound.
Australia and New Zealand have a special problem with ‘corked’ corks, even though they buy the best quality, because the moulds flourish in the warm, damp conditions of the sea voyage from Europe.
We've been seeing more ‘corked’ wines in Europe, too.
The trouble is, cork has been in short supply.
Recent harvests have been short and not enough trees have been planted for the future.
Cork prices have risen, and all but the best wine-makers in Italy, Germany, Spain and Portugal in particular have plumped for cheaper, veinier corks.
The EC plans a rescue attempt, with subsidies and incentives to plant more cork oaks.
May they preserve us from the hermetic seal.
BEST FRIENDS
CLOTHES TO FEEL AT HOME IN, WHEREVER YOU ARE AND WHOEVER YOU ARE WITH.
GOOD COMPANIONS NEVER GO OUT OF FASHION.
BY ROBERT BURGESS
PHOTOGRAPHS/TIM EVAN-COOK
HAIR AND MAKE-UP FOR CHARLES OF THE RITZ/JO GILLINGWATER STOCKISTS/PAGE 112
Photographed in and around Charingworth Manor, nearing Chipping Campden in Gloucestershire;Country Living would like to thank the hotel for their help in compiling this feature.
See page 112 for details of a special offer to readers.
BEAUTY from within 
THIS MONTH, ADVICE ON DIET AND SKINCARE TO KEEP YOU BEAUTIFUL FOR LIFE.
BY PAULA McWATERS
TWENTIES
Many a teenage dream has been threatened by the appearance of an untimely spot, and, somewhat unjustly, the adolescent agonies of excess oiliness and blemishes can often plague sufferers well into their early twenties.
Improved diet is the best mode of attack but rigorous skincare is also essential.
Soap and water is too harsh; try a soap-free wash cream such as Clarins Gentle Foaming Cleanser (£9 for 125ml) or Yves Rocher's Soin Clarifiant Gel Cleansing Mousse (£3.95 for 75ml; call 081–845 1222 for mail order).
The latter contains grapefruit extract which maintains an acid pH on the skin's surface and has a mildly astringent effect on open pores.
Follow with a toner for oily skin, then a light, non-greasy moisturiser like Yves Rocher's Soin Clarifiant Normalising Gel (£4.95 for 30ml).
Twice a week, use a gentle skin scrub to remove dead cells.
Make your own by mixing oatmeal and water into a paste; massage over the face, leave for a few minutes, then rinse with warm water.
By the age of 25 or so the oiliness should be settling down but you may find yourself with a new problem: laughter and frown lines must finally be acknowledged as the first signs of an ageing skin.
THIRTIES
There's still no miracle cure for facial lines, despite manufacturers' claims, but there are things you can do to delay them.
For instance, dietary care should be stepped up: drink a litre of water a day to clear your system; snack on sunflower and pumpkin seeds, a rich source of essential fatty acids; and increase your intake of raw vegetables and fruit.
Collagen, the rough semi-elastic web that keeps the lower layer of skin supple, needs vitamins B6 and C and zinc to keep it healthy.
Another help is selenium, a vital trace element: one brazil nut will provide your daily needs.
The neck and the eyes are two giveaway areas.
It's easy to forget the neck in a cleansing routine but it will soon show signs of wrinkling if neglected.
Our tester tried Nectar Elderflower Neck Gel (£2.35 for 30g; call 09603–51580 for mail order), which contains apricot and elderflower extract.
The texture and fragrance are light and pleasing.
We have 75 tubs of Neck Gel to be won; just tell us which has more vertebrae in its neck, a giraffe or a horse.
Answers on a postcard to Country Living/Neck Gel at the address on page 2 by 28 March.
For eyes, try Beauty Without Cruelty Eye Cream (£1.75 for 15ml), a light, easily absorbed moisturiser.
Rich creams are best avoided around the eyes as the skin absorbs too readily here and may become puffy.
FORTIES
As you enter your forties your skin is likely to be even drier and may now show a tendency towards flakiness, broken veins and dry patches.
Continue with the dietary recommendations above, and exercise regularly.
A cycle ride, walk or swim at least three times a week will boost your circulation and help maintain a healthy bloom.
Make the most of sleeptime by using a nourishing cream such as Boots No7 Pure Care Special Treatment Cream (£3.95 for 100ml) or B.Pure Night Cream (£6.99 for 45g; call 071–602 4026 for mail order details).
The first 500 Country Living readers to order B.Pure Night Cream will receive a free 30g tub of Face Scrub, worth £4.99.
Massage night cream into your face and neck before your night-time bath; the warmth will help the skin to absorb the cream.
Any surface oil not absorbed after 10–15 minutes should be blotted off with a tissue.
Cell regeneration slows down now, so blemishes may take longer to heal.
Speed healing by applying a vitamin E cream, like that by Nature Knows Best (£2.35 for 50g from health food shops or call 759–302595 for mail order details).
Our tester found it very effective.
If you have thread veins avoid facial steaming and don't use any toner containing alcohol.
After moisturising, disguise thread veins, blemishes and dark circles under the eyes with a good concealer.
Two of our testers recommend Rimmel's Hide the Blemish (£1.09), having used it for years.
It comes in three shades (light, medium and dark) and is easy to blend.
FIFTIES
The dangers of excess sunlight are well known but there is increasing evidence that even everyday UVA exposure can have an ageing effect on skin.
As you reach your fifties, if not before, switch to a moisturiser containing UVA filters to help prevent further damage, such as Empathy Moisturising Lotion (£3.29 for 125ml) or Cream (£3.29 for 50ml).
Both of these contain vitamins A and E to nourish the skin.
Sebaceous glands slow down now and your skin may feel very dry and taut so avoid harsh toners.
A splash of mineral water — fizzy or still — gives a good pep-up after cleansing, but don't use it straight from the fridge.
Extremes of temperature exacerbate broken veins and blotchiness.
A regular brisk walk will improve muscle tone, but in winter protect your cheeks with a generous application of moisturiser and a soft woollen scarf pulled up round your face.
And lastly, beware the bottle and the bean: alcohol and coffee both dehydrate the skin.
For a copy of The Wright Diet for Looking Good by Celia Wright, an excellent sheet of dietary advice for healthy skin and hair, send your name and address and a first class stamp to Green Farm ( CL ), Burwash Common, East Sussex TN19 7LX.
WRIST watch 
REPETITIVE STRAIN INJURY IS NOT CONFINED TO THE OFFICE.
ANYONE, FROM GARDENERS TO MUSICIANS, MAY BE AT RISK, REPORTS DR CHARLES SHEPHERD
For a ‘disease caused by typing’ £45,000 may seem an awful lot of compensation, but this is the figure awarded last year to a typist suffering from RSI (repetitive strain injury).
The term RSI covers a wide variety of painful hand and arm conditions which have two key factors in common: first, prolonged repetitive movements that result in inflammation, pain and weakness.
Second, if the condition goes unrecognised, or is incorrectly treated, irreversible damage may occur.
Doctors in the UK have recently been warned that RSI may soon reach epidemic proportions as public recognition increases and compensation becomes a reality.
Like many ‘new diseases’, RSI started life in America, as simple office trauma.
Then it spread to Australia, where it became known as kangaroo paw!
If the Australian experience is anything to go by, the cost here to government, employers and insurance companies could soon run into millions of pounds.
RSI is a genuine condition, to which anyone with employment or a hobby involving repetitive hand movements is at risk.
The dramatic increase in the problem has resulted from the introduction of the new technology of keyboards and VDUs into the workplace.
Users now sit immobile for hours on end, except for rapid and intense finger movements.
The new athletic demands on untrained muscles and tendons produce the inflammation, pain and weakness that can result in severe and permanent disability.
However, RSI doesn't just involve hi-tech professionals using keyboards.
It can affect anyone whose work involves specific repetitive movements: gardeners, hairdressers, cleaners, chicken gutters, writers and musicians, as well as the sportsmen and women whose activities can lead to aptly named conditions such as tennis elbow.
The commonest RSI is a condition known as tenosynovitis, or ‘teno’ to its many victims.
This is inflammation of the tube-like sheaths that surround and protect the tendons.
Fingers are moved backwards and forwards by these delicate sinews — flexor tendons in the palms, which bend the fingers, and extensor tendons on the back of the hand, which straighten them again.
Prolonged repetitive activity can set up inflammation in almost any tendon or sheath.
Sarah is 33 and a gifted seamstress.
Last year she decided to turn her hobby into full-time employment by opening a shop in a rural crafts centre.
As the workload gradually increased she started to notice discomfort and tingling sensations around her wrist joint, but particularly at the base of her thumb.
The pain was becoming so intense that by the end of the day she could hardly grip her scissors.
Fortunately, her GP was well aware of RSI and quickly diagnosed what is called de Quervain's tenosynovitis.
Despite a prolonged period of rest, the inflammation took many weeks to settle down — even with a steroid injection.
Sarah is now working again, part-time, but with a more varied pattern of work.
However, her RSI could become a recurring problem unless she takes careful precautions.
For many victims, obtaining a diagnosis of RSI, especially when symptoms are still vague and intermittent, is not easy.
Some GPs remain ignorant of the existence of RSI as a bona-fide illness, or even hostile to the very idea.
Because a clinical examination may not reveal anything abnormal, they may conclude the the symptoms are ‘all in the mind’.
X-rays don't reveal much, either, since the inflammation lies in the soft tissues and not in the joints.
This only adds to the suffering, because early diagnosis and appropriate treatment are necessary to prevent long-term complications.
The ideal management of any case of RSI involves a doctor well acquainted with the subject, and a good physiotherapist.
In the very early stages proper rest (using a splint) is the best way to reduce the inflammation.
Local heat, ultrasound and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can also help.
Some doctors recommend immediate intervention with steroid injections, but although these can have a dramatic effect in reducing inflammation and relieving pain, they can also create a false sense of security.
Surgery and manipulation have little or no place in the treatment of most RSIs.
Once the acute episode of RSI has been identified and treated, the next essential step is to prevent a recurrence.
Anyone who simply returns to the same repetitive activity is heading for further trouble — especially if their technique is at fault.
Claims for compensation are forcing many employers to take RSI seriously, at last, and to tackle the root causes in the workplace.
Good employers, working with occupational health advisors, should now be doing all they can to help, by ensuring that anyone involved in a high-risk activity has the most comfortable working environment possible.
For keyboard operators this means seating at the correct height and having a work station where the wrists are straight and the elbows bent at 90°.
Restructuring work routine may also involve job rotation, variation of tasks, and regular breaks from high-risk activities.
As more and more employees hear about RSI, claims for compensation are bound to rise — last year more than 2,000 people were awarded state injury benefits.
Consequently, RSI is also becoming the subject of heated debate within the medical profession.
Some orthopaedic surgeons are now adopting a much more sceptical view, as every work-related ache seems to be given the RSI label.
In Australia, where compensation claims have rocketed, RSI has even been nicknamed myalgic compensationitis.
There's no doubt that exaggeration of symptoms can become a powerful factor in pursuing compensation claims, and if bogus claims do create an RSI bandwagon, genuine cases will fail as a result.
For anyone who has been significantly disabled by RSI there are two routes that can be followed.
First, the Department of Social Security pays Industrial Injury Disablement Benefit for certain types of RSI, provided you:•are in a job regarded as ‘at risk’ of causing RSI (the self-employed are usually excluded).
•have a firm diagnosis of either tenosynovitis or writer's cramp.
Most other types of RSI are excluded.
Sporting injuries do not qualify.
•can satisfy a medical examination board that you are more than 14 per cent disabled by RSI.
(The percentage of disability determines the amount of benefit.)
Leaflet N12,If You Have an Industrial Disease , from the DSS, describes the state benefits available and how to apply.
The alternative is to take out a civil action in the courts.
Here the outcome is still very unpredictable, with few precedents to follow.
In the new-technology jobs of banking and computers, where employers are anxious to avoid publicity, most claims are being settled out of court, but as the number of cases increases, litigation could become more popular.
Obviously, legal advice should be obtained from a professional body, trade union, or solicitor well versed in such claims.
FAUCET SAGA
BATHING BELLES INSPIRED BY SCANDINAVIAN PAINTED INTERIORS, AMERICAN RETRO AND EDWARDIAN GENTLEMEN'S DRESSING ROOMS.
BY HESTER PAGE AND GABI TUBBS
BATHING Beauty 
Indulge your most precious moments in the perfect setting.
A beautiful bathroom by C P Hart, coupled with a top-to-toe skincare programme from Clarins, will transform your daily cleansing routine from a necessity into a luxury
CALLIGRAPHY/JANE THOMSON
PHOTOGRAPHS/NADIA MACKENZIE
Bathe your world in splendour.
The Duker Roll Top cast iron bath combines elegance and nostalgia with durability and convenience.
Freestanding on ball and claw feet, its excellent heat and sound insulation ensures long hot baths while the household sleeps on undisturbed by noise.
Choose from semi-matt white ‘edelweiss’, as shown, or gloss white, both supplied primed to enable you to decorate its exterior to your own taste.
Roll Top bath, £736, set of four feet, £99.35.
Clarins Body Shaping Gel Concentrate, like all Clarins skincare preparations, is based on natural and plant ingredients.
Light and invigorating, it is specifically designed to combat skin ‘sponginess’, the unsightly dimpling that can occur especially on buttocks and thighs.
Applied daily after a bath or shower, the key active ingredients, guarana, L-carnitine, silanols and caffeine, get to work on unwanted fatty deposits, firming, toning and contouring the body, while forming an invisible supporting film on the skin.
Body Shaping Gel Concentrate, 150ml, £19.
The handsome hexagonal design of C P Hart's Serie 1930 bathroom products is an inspired reinterpretation of a traditional shape.
Made in Germany to the most exacting of modern standards, each item in the suite is available in ‘edelweiss’, as shown, gloss white, manhattan grey or flannel — a semi-matt grey.
From an extensive range, we have shown the one-hole basin and pedestal, £531.30, lavatory (wc pan, cistern, seat and cover), £607.20, one-hole bidet, £270 and bevelled mirror above the basin, 800 x 550mm, £161.
Clarins Eau Dynamisante is the first skincare product which provides both beauty and fragrance benefits.
A light blend of twelve plant extracts, Eau Dynamisante combines a delightful natural fragrance with an all-over skincare treatment.
The fragrance — a fresh bouquet of citrus, chypre and woody notes — has aromatherapeutic properties to stimulate the senses, while both fragrant and non-fragrant extracts, including aloe, ispaghul, harpagophytum, ginger, coriander, horsetail and eleutherocoque, moisturise, firm and tone the body.
Clarins Eau Dynamisante, 200ml, £19.50, 100ml, £13.
C P Hart's superb variety of bathroom accessories will add the crucial touch to your choice of bathroom suite.
All styles are available in chrome (as shown) or ‘new brass’.
We have selected taps from the Liberty range: wall-mounted bath shower mixer, £324.30, monobloc basin mixer, £156.40 and monobloc bidet mixer, £150.65.
Other accessories are from Leonardo:….
And for the final soft touches to your skincare programme, Clarins Fragranced Gentle Shower Mousse and Fragranced Gentle Deodorant both bear the unique Eau Dynamisante scent.
The creamy-textured shower mousse, which contains, syndets, aloe, ispaghul and ginseng, has a dermatological cleanser to combat dryness as it cleanses, while the deodorant anti-perspirant, in an ozone-friendly spray, blends farnesol, aluminium salts and extracts of sage and liquorice to ensure that you will carry the great feeling from those first precious moments in the bathroom with you throughout the longest of days.
FOLLOW the ANTIQUES TRAIL
BATH
…
AND BEYOND, WHERE DEIRDRE McSHARRY FINDS FURNITURE AND TEXTILES TO DECORATE A HOUSE AS JANE AUSTEN MIGHT
Breathes there a woman with soul so dead that she can take a trip round Bath's exhilarating architecture without wanting to take home ‘a touch of the Georgians’— even if it's only a silver spoon?
In a recent survey, one in four visitors to Bath gave a trip round the antique shops as a major reason for visiting the city.
(Not surprisingly, the survey was commissioned by the Bath and Bradford on Avon Antique Dealers' Association.)
In my 20 or so years visiting the city I don't believe I ever went home empty-handed.
The upshot of this is that I've now become a resident, which makes a weekly tour of junk and antique shops even more vital.
My list of favourite haunts is purely personal and certainly not all-embracing.
I hope you will want to take time and make your own discoveries.
As I was helped in getting my eye in by visiting two important houses in Bath, you may wish to do the same.
One Royal Crescent, well restored and furnished in the style of 1770 by The Bath Preservation Trust, is the only house of the period open to the public.
In the second, The Holburne of Menstrie Museum (in Great Pulteney Street), hangs a fine collection of Gainsboroughs in rooms furnished with period pieces, silver and porcelain.
Similar museum-quality furniture is available in the fine shops in the streets between the Pump Room, The Circus and The Assembly Rooms.
Anthony Emm of York Street is reckoned to be the doyen.
Kit Alderson of Brock Street has taste I admire.
The aforementioned Bath and Bradford on Avon Antique Dealers' Association provides a helpful leaflet and map of its 40 or so members.
When you consider that there are 120 dealers in the are you can appreciate why Bath is second only to London for the serious hunter.
It explains the number of dealers greeting the dawn on the M4, to be in the queue outside The Bath Antiques Market each Wednesday, followed by a hard day's trawl of the shops.
Window displays on Wednesday have a special glitter.
Few complain about ‘Just looking thanks’ in a town where stock is displayed in authentic settings; where you can walk the patch in a day; where dealers make time to talk and where Bath's famous light lends allure to even the diciest piece.
And the good news is that at a time of recession there are bargains to be had: even grand dealers might discuss a discreet price reduction.
Tom Hickman, painter and former dealer, claims: ‘You can still furnish a house for a song if you know where and how to look.’
Making the most of a buyer's market, I asked dealers for their advice.
Tom Hickman says: ‘Never buy the obvious; buy what no one else wants.
Make snap decisions.
Don't hang around.
Look at the person, not the goods.
If you like their taste, take them out to tea and make an offer.
They don't make £100 on everything they sell.’
Kitchenalia, early Heal's furniture, late-Victorian light oak, fireplace equipment, textiles are good value, Hickman says.
He recommends markets, salerooms, charity shops and reclamation yards in and around Frome, as good hunting grounds.
Simon Creese-Parsons, who sells fine decorative pieces at Jadis, reckons: ‘There's never been a better time to buy.’
He believes that classic English furniture is the best buy in hard times.
‘A good dealer gives a service — everything I sell is in perfect condition and I buy back my stuff if need be.’
A French armoire with carving in high relief and a painted bergère chair are among his regular stock: he and his partner Neil Mackay now manufacture painted pieces as part of their decoration service.
Jadis is in London Road, a good place to begin.
Now in the heart of the decoration area of Bath, stretching from the London Road to the end of Walcot Street, we come on Penny Philip whose small shop is a shrine to period textiles: toile de Jouy, Scandinavian bedlinens and shawls are displayed on decorative iron furniture.
(Shawls start at around £100.)
She helps clients furnish their houses: ‘Matching is a bore: I mix florals with stripes with checks.
There's nothing like the soft texture and colour of old fabrics: learn to use and take care of them.’
A yard or so along and under the sign of Josephine, owner Clare Newbold arranges a mélange of decorative items with the surreal air of a Cocteau movie.
Garden chairs, mirrors and painted pine blend together.
Wise dealers swoop on Monday when Clare has changed the windows.
Bookshelves with an antique finish are £165 to order.
Keep on the decorative trail to Haliden at 98 Walcot Street, where Brian Dennis sells rugs on three floors.
Variations on the tribal and village rug theme range from saddle bags to carpets large enough to replace boring old Wilton.
‘And cheaper for the space,’ Dennis says.
‘People are buying Balouchs, Turkomans and Shiraz.
Most are woven of natural dyes in geometric [Turkish]or flower [Persian]patterns.
A Shiraz with a good pile is priced at £760.
‘If perfect it would cost £1,500,’ Dennis adds.
Now go uptown to the heights of Lansdown where there's another clutch of shops devoted to decorative antiques.
At 27B Belvedere, Gene and Sally Foster show good Victorian stock.
‘Away with prettiness — I like the solid masculine appeal of the library,’ Gene says, citing a console table with faux marbre top, an Arts and Crafts hallstand (£195) and a pair of heavy curtains, 10 feet long, in a stunning neoclassical print, for £95.
Next door, Paul Farnham's display is in contrast.
Stark metal pieces, a giant gazebo, French garden chairs, an urn (all in a white-painted room-setting) give a stagey Chekhovian look that decorators like.
A fine tapestry stool is £550.
Below at 38 Belvedere, Ann King has a shop like a walk-in linen cupboard stacked with embroidered bedlinen, underwear, quilts and racks of period clothes, mostly 1940s and 1950s.
Northumberland quilts to toss over chairs start at £70.
Square, lace-edged pillowslips are £25.
There's an even bigger selection of period linens and lace at Collectible Costume.
Lace curtains from £25 are a speciality.
But for la crème de la crème of ‘softs’, as the trade calls linens and textiles, drive out to Freshford, where in a former hunting lodge Elizabeth Baer keeps her magpie collection, displayed in a linen room with that authentic ‘air of pleasing decay’ so admired by John Fowler (of Colefax &).
A woman of taste and energy, Mrs Baer goes right to the source — provincial villages in France — for her fine curtains, natural linens and variations on the theme of blue (or beige or grey) and white stripes so sought after by decorators.
Kitchenalia and garden implements, including dramatic flour and bulb sieves, are a speciality and belong on the most chic garden-room walls.
Old linen glass cloths are £6 and pairs of curtains start at £200.
By appointment only, to serious collectors and decorators.
Now on to Bradford on Avon, the ancient wool town, and up the steep hills lined with stone houses, most of which seem to be antique shops.
The interiors are worth the detour.
‘You can park here and see a good deal of stock in an hour or two,’ claims Barbara Humble, who moved out from Bath two years ago.
Mac and Barbara Humble live above the shop in a house they waited 16 years to buy.
The former chairman of the Antique Dealers' Association, Mac is witty about the ways of his trade, but serious about antiques.
‘When times are hard people should buy useful things and buy the best they can afford,’ he says.
‘Quality furniture holds its price.
If it has colour and patination and is not over-restored, it's worth the money.
Take out a loan if you have to!
Invest in a good piece now: later, it will be worth much more,’ he says, gesturing towards tip worktables, fire irons, needlework samplers and silk pictures.
Four framed Victorian prints of owls are good value at £395.
At 5 Woolley Street live Richard and Pamela Nadin who deal in unusual and rather strong pieces, often with a touch of the Gothicks.
‘I like nice faded things from country houses,’ Richard says.
A chair freak — odd because he never sits down — he likes to offer a selection of good chairs upholstered in period prints, often by MacKenzie Hodsoll.
His speciality is the upholstery of Howard and Sons of Berners Street, London.
The downfilled upholstery is a bench-mark, he says: ‘You sink into it and it moulds to the body.’
One sofa measuring eight by four foot must be the largest country house sofa in captivity.
Another treasure house worth the drive is Matthew Eden's, to the east of the city, at Pickwick End, Corsham.
His taste is evident in the nicely worn country house furniture and accessories.
In the bosky garden is a selection of wire garden pieces designed by his father Robin in the 1950s.
Made locally by two craftsmen, they start at £230 for a chair.
In the opposite direction is Tilly Manor in West Harptree, which looks altogether too French to be in north Somerset.
Note the coat of arms over the door and the fine plasterwork — with the date 1659 — over the fireplace.
Good country house furniture in mahogany and pine, plus silver, brass and pictures, are on sale.
Owner Jeremy Scott has his own restoration workshop.
His policy is that everything should be properly displayed, marked and priced.
He advises: ‘Buy what is functional and decorative.
If you have a choice, buy the better piece.’
Good value today, he feels, are quality 1920s copies of Georgian originals.
Typical of the stock are six chairs in Regency style but dating from the 1950s, for £850; and a pair of delicate late-Victorian rosewood chairs at £85 each.
Spending money with dealers whose taste I like is my method of shopping, but it is always fun, and often profitable, to have a flutter at the auction rooms.
And you should make one early raid on the Wednesday or Saturday markets, which offer dozens of stalls and hundreds of bargains if you have the patience to sift through the dross.
Serious rely on the frequent antiques fairs because of the big selection.
You only have to snip out the listings in the local paper on Saturday, a column filled with auctions, sales, markets and fairs in an area that stretches from Bath to Frome, Shepton Mallet, Devizes and Wells.
The legendary Bath Antiques Market at Guinea Place every Wednesday is good value for jewellery (especially Victorian pieces), silver, rugs and ‘softs’, with a special mention for Joanna Proops's souk-like stall cascading with quilts, shawls, linens, rugs and period clothes.
If you're lucky you'll find period curtains costing much less than new.
On a platform is displayed the interesting collection of tribal and village rugs — no machine makes — offered by Craig Bale of Silk Road.
Shiraz and Afghan rugs sell at prices under £500.
Cushions start at £20 and old ikats and other textiles are good value at around £100.
Craig recommends a fine Balouchi rug in a geometric weave five by three feet for £100: ‘These natural dyes look good in period houses.’
That's the secret of Bath's success.
It makes all the shoppers feel as if they could live in the style of Jane Austen.
The second Decorative Antiques Fair will be held in the Pavilion Rooms, North Parade Road, Bath, from 16–18 May.
We have arranged a special offer:Country Living readers will be admitted free on presentation of the first page of this article (or take along the March issue if you do not wish to cut your magazine).
Further information on 0225–442215.
Below left Deirdre McSharry (left) with Penny Philip, who implores her customers to ‘pick up the fabric and feel it’.
More of her textiles are displayed top centre.
Top left Painted ware from Josephine, including two salt boxes and an egg rack.
Top right A pair of decorative 19th-century French vases and a putti centrepiece for an archway at Jadis
BACK IN THE PINK
TIMOTHY AND CHRISTINE EASTON HAVE NO TIME FOR BUILDERS WHO SANDBLAST THE PAST INTO OBLIVION.
IN THEIR SUFFOLK FARMHOUSE, CAREFUL DETECTIVE WORK HAS REVEALED THE ORIGINAL PAINTED DECORATIONS, NOW LOVINGLY RESTORED.
BY GILLIAN DARLEY
The image of a perfect Suffolk farmhouse must surely be a pink house, with a gable or two and a tall, intricate, brick chimney, the whole wrapped around by a moat and some venerable trees.
Just such a house has been brought back to life by Timothy and Christine Easton.
In addition to being a family house it is Timothy's working base for his painting and sculpture.
Timothy, a self-confessed amateur of vernacular architecture, has followed a traditional line in reinstating and enhancing the features and materials of the house.
In addition, he has pursued his own passion for the painted interior decoration of this particular kind and scale of East Anglian yeoman farmhouse — a type of house that, only a few years ago, was hardly considered worthy of notice, so complete was the obsession of historians with work by named architects.
Luckily, the picture has altered as it has become clear that in agriculturally wealthy areas, where farmers were often owner-occupiers, they lavished great attention on their houses.
Certainly the Eastons' house points to a proud history.
They had previously lived in, and worked on, a medieval timber-framed house at nearby Debenham, and had learned much from their successes and failures there.
Seven years ago, needing more space for their family (two daughters, currently both art students) and their work, they decided to move, and to take on a rather dilapidated but unrestored farmhouse.
It benefits from a lovely site, opposite the parish church and close to farm buildings, away from the village centre.
The Eastons did not rush into the task.
A year passed while they grew used to the house, learned how the light fell and how the various rooms worked.
They had fallen upon all sorts of riches, some immediately apparent but others that took some seeking out.
‘I looked for a single builder, because I wanted to work closely with someone while I was doing the ‘unpicking’ myself,’Timothy says.
He didn't employ an architect or surveyor, hoping that by being on the job and so closely involved, he ‘could control things not being removed’.
Sore experience on the Debenham house made him very aware of how easily original details can be lost in inexpert hands.
The first choice of a single builder did not work out, but Timothy Easton has high praise for his replacement, Barry Rose, from Debenham: ‘He was excellent and could do virtually anything.’
For window repairs, and those to panelling and cupboards, a local joiner, Malcolm Neeve from Saxtead, was another ‘find’.
Where window-glazing repairs were concerned, Timothy turned to Kent Blaxill, a Colchester firm with great expertise.
He decided not to go for repair grants.
‘If you are going to gut the house all in one go, this commits you to thousands of pounds worth of work.
As this house was structurally sound the remedy was to do the work one room at a time.’
On damp proofing, the local firm used actually advised doing it partially, in order not to upset the balance in the timber.
‘They did it without a guarantee, but that didn't particularly worry me.
Damp isn't a major problem; we are high on the site and there is the moat to take away any surface water.’
Timothy's interest in decorative schemes drew him to look carefully for evidence of the old painted ornament, and he found plenty.
Walls were painted to echo the close studding of the timber-framed structure, although in the form of columns with different-patterned capitals in silhouette.
The ceiling in the old kitchen was painted dark grey and etched with circles, some enclosing helixes and geometric foliate forms, while the fireplaces were surrounded by brickwork, itself painted over and ornamented in all kinds of ways.
There seems to have been a hierarchy of colours, ranging from grey, to red for the principal rooms.
It all took a lot of investigation, finding paint traces on plaster plugs in the timbers, for example, although some rooms had kept quite clear evidence of both colour and pattern.
Christine, herself a painter, and Timothy did this themselves.
The core of the house is a 15th-century hall, which retains the plan of the screens passage that divided the open hall from the service areas of buttery and pantry.
In the 16th century, an east wing was added to replace the earlier parlour, while in the 17th century a kitchen wing was built to balance it to the west.
The effect was completed by the addition of elaborate and pretty Gothick windows around the end of the 18th century.
A Victorian porch has replaced the original double-height one, which had a tiny room above it.
The ‘best’ rooms have chimney-pieces picked out in a canny false-stone effect (in fact no more than mortar) or else ornamented by rubbed and painted bricks.
The Eastons restored the ornamental paintwork, most of it imitation brickwork painted over the actual brick, and in the case of the wall paintings, have reinstated the full scheme.
As well as the painted decoration, the Eastons are fortunate in also having two good plaster ceilings.
The one in the parlour is divided into sections by bands of naturalistic vegetation in a typical 17th-century manner; above, in the main bedroom, is a simple affair, with applied plaster oak leaves.
It needed a lot of repair as two largish areas had fallen off.
‘We gathered up most of the decorative bits, and put them back into lime plaster.’
The old hair plaster proved remarkably resilient, and Timothy found a Blue Circle product, ‘Snowplast’, that was ideal for making good.
Other attractive features, which help to show the age and history of the house, are two winding back stairs with oak treads, a small amount of panelling, cupboards with a delicate dentil cornice, the pamments (great clay tiles) on several of the floors (now relaid over insulation), and a number of the original latticed tripartite windows (an oriel flanked by two small windows).
On the blank east wall the Eastons have opened up windows, following the outlines of earlier mullions.
Suffolk County Council has long been over-stretched on the conservation side, and comparable houses have suffered from lack of expert advice.
Internal sandblasting and restoration, which can obliterate all the social and architectural clues, is all too common.
It is hard to imagine the average builder, unskilled in the repair of old buildings, recognising the significance of the two cat skeletons and the pile of old clothes that the Eastons found tucked behind the chimney in the old kitchen.
Offered by past inhabitants to help guarantee their good fortune, they often turn up in old houses in this part of the world — probably unrecognised and tossed in the dustbin.
The Suffolk farmhouse was nothing if not practical.
The storage and preparation of food took place on the north side, where the Eastons have made a studio out of the old pentice, called the tempting shed, which ran along that side.
On the north-east corner is the cellar, complete with winter bee boles and a drainage channel out to the moat.
The original dairy, with copper and other traditional fittings, is now their kitchen, releasing the farm kitchen as a delightful breakfast room complete with roaring fire and well-worn pamments on the floor.
as if the house were not large enough, there are generous attics stretching right across it, offering another five rooms for expansion.
Once, these would have been an important farmhouse store for produce that needed safe keeping in a dry place.
The Eastons' sense of the history and archaeology of their house is evident in every detail, yet they are not imprisoned by that.
The farmhouse is a welcoming, fascinating building in which past and present happily coexist.
An exhibition of recent paintings by Timothy Easton is on view throughout March at The Chris Beetles Gallery, 10 Ryder Street, St James's.
London SW1Y 6QB (071–839 7551).
Main picture Timothy and Christine Easton's Suffolk farmhouse reflected in the moat that surrounds it Inset, previous page Timothy Easton, painter and sculptor Far left The shape of the internal porch in the parlour shows that the room was once panelled.
On the floor, the pamments, or great clay tiles, have been relaid over insulation Left The fireplace decoration in the kitchen chamber, now Timothy's studio, differs from that in the other rooms.
The black imitation columns were originally painted in the 17th century, and have been carefully restored
Below The parlour chamber has its early-17th-century wall studs picked out in red to denote its higher status than the other, grey-painted, rooms.
The small circles on the ‘ochred and pencilled’ fireplace were thought to give spiritual protection to the occupants
ELEMENTAL EXPOSURE
THOUGH THE RAIN IT RAINETH EVERY DAY, YOU NEEDN'T MISS A PHOTO OPPORTUNITY.
STEVE ASHTON PUTS SIX WEATHERPROOF CAMERAS TO THE TEST
The most telling personal images are captured by simple cameras in the hands of people who know nothing about photography.
We're not talking art here, we're talking memories.
For ‘simple’ read ‘automatic’; uncluttered exteriors conceal complex innards.
Light-sensitive cells govern lens-aperture and shutter-speed settings; infra-red beams measure distances to activate lens focusing; motors wind films and operate zoom lenses.
Some moments are too fleeting for clumsy fiddling.
If you venture out in all weathers, you need a compact camera that can brave the elements, too.
Armed with a dozen rolls of film, I put six cameras to the test in the rain-lashed hills of Snowdonia.
KODAK WEEKEND 35
A plastic case waterproofs this disposable camera to a depth of eight feet.
It survived a dunking in a mountain stream, and brought back a picture of a retrieving hand to prove it.
The Weekend comes preloaded with a 24-exposure (ISO 400) colour-print film, so all you have to do is shoot and wind on, then hand over the whole camera to the developers at the end.
Easy.
But the designer writing on the camera body needlessly confuses the first-time user searching for the shutter-release pad, which even adults find hard to operate.
Kodak explains that it must be stiff to resist water pressure at depth.
Picture quality from the plastic lens and relatively coarse-grained film is perfectly adequate for album snapshots.
Verdict:
Recommended for one-off use in conditions where you dare not risk an expensive camera.
YASHICA T3-AF
The T3's elegant, understated styling will appeal to those who prefer to be discreet about their photography — a noisy film-winding motor notwithstanding.
It fits snugly into the hands and is ideal for grabbing action shots with a minimum of fuss.
Discerning photographers will appreciate the quality of results possible from the f2.8 Zeiss lens.
I would have liked some manual override on exposure settings, though the fill-in flash is some compensation.
I'd happily take this camera on my adventurous travels.
Verdict:
A likeable camera capable of securing good results without effort.
OLYMPUS AF-1 SUPER
Plain looks hide advanced gadgetry.
Beginners will enjoy their success with this deceptively simple camera.
A chunky grip on the lens cover and a positive shutter-release button make cold-weather shooting easy.
Picture quality, to my eye, is in the same league as the similarly priced Yashica, yet the Olympus is lighter, smaller and includes useful extra features such as a fast-recycling flash and a quick-fire mode for those going…going…gone action sequences.
As with the Yashica and Minolta AF-SP, the 35mm lens means you have to get close to the action if your photos are to have real impact.
Verdict:
A good choice as a go-anywhere camera, provided you won't feel limited by the single lens.
OLYMPUS AF-1 TWIN
Similar in most respects to the AF-1 Super, the Twin adds a second lens of 70mm focal length, activated at the touch of a button.
I expected to pay for twin-lens versatility with loss of picture quality, but this wasn't the case at all.
This invaluable extra feature adds little to the overall weight and bulk of the AF-1, though you do lose the AF-1's fast-recycling flash and close-up facility.
I have an aversion to noisy cameras, and this one rings several decibels before it's done with selecting and focusing the lens, and winding on the film.
Nevertheless, if I had to choose just one of these six cameras to serve all my picture-taking needs, this would be it.
Verdict:
Versatile weatherproof camera capable of good-quality results.
Highly recommended.
MINOLTA AF-SP
Least expensive of all the autofocus cameras on trial, the AF-SP's design style belongs to the age of cast-iron kitchen fittings.
Looks aren't everything, of course, and that homely exterior houses some hi-tech instrumentation.
I also liked the positive hand grip and the relative quiet of the motors.
Limited specifications in automatic exposure and focusing will disappoint photography buffs, though few would detect tangible differences in the average snapshot.
Verdict:
An adequate performer if you don't want to spend more than £100.
MINOLTA WEATHERMATIC 35DL
Waterproof to a depth of 16 feet, the Weathermatic makes a sturdy companion for the unstoppable outdoor enthusiast.
In a few hurried situations I forgot to switch on, and missed the picture opportunity while trying to figure out why the camera wasn't working.
What a pity the ‘off’ switch doesn't blank out the viewfinder — a fail-safe reminder adopted by most camera designers.
The Weathermatic happily bobbed about in mountain pools, the automatic flash adding sparkle to underwater shots.
Water pressure deactivates the autofocusing mechanism, and a close-up mode will give sharp results from a subject only two feet away.
Otherwise, I thought the specifications somewhat limited for a camera of this price.
True, it has a second lens but this one is of a mere 50mm focal length — too similar to the standard 35mm lens to make much of a difference.
If you are attracted by the Weathermatic's underwater ability, remember that you are paying for elaborate waterproofing seals, not for exceptional lens quality or advanced specifications (even the self-timer and tripod bush have been sacrificed).
Under normal circumstances you will be carrying an unnecessarily heavy and bulky camera.
Verdict:
The only compact camera for the underwater enthusiast.
Serious divers will have to pay over £500 for a Nikon Nikonos underwater camera.
For these trials the six cameras, and a 35mm SLR ‘control’ camera, were subjected to 50 separate operations in a variety of conditions.
Results were recorded on film supplied by Kodak.
Overleaf is a table summarising the results, along with the main specifications of the individual cameras.
WIN OUR RECOMMENDED CAMERA
You could win an Olympus AF-1 Twin, worth £150, the camera recommended by Steve Ashton for its versatility and all-round performance.
Select the correct answer to the following question: Some cameras are fitted with a backlight button.
Does this: A Create silhouette effects; B Allow additional light through the lens; C Activate the fill-in flash mode; or D Lock the exposure settings while recomposing the picture?
Then briefly describe an occasion on which you wish you'd had a waterproof camera.
Send your answer, together with your name and address, on a postcard to the address on page 2.
Please mark your postcard Country Living /Camera.
Answers should arrive by 30 April.
Main picture The sturdy, eye-catching Minolta Weathermatic 35DL.
Inset top Braving the elements in Snowdonia, the line-up of cameras tested:(clockwise from top)
ESCAPES
COUNTRY LIVING EXPLORES WILTSHIRE, WITH AND WITHOUT CHILDREN
BISHOPSTROW HOUSE, WARMINSTER
To spend a night at Bishopstrow House is to be pampered: it is elegant gracious, the warm, mosaicked swimming pool is often empty; and playing on the indoor tennis court makes you feel worthy of eating quantities.
And the bathrooms — of course every room has one — are so deep in soft, white towels that you could happily sleep there.
That's if you're an adult, and after all, this sort of English hotel is a very grown-up place.
We went with a two-year-old, which made things rather different.
He loved the swimming pool, revelled in the spacious gardens, and enjoyed the fact that other little ones were staying there.
In a place full of precious antiques, this shows great generosity by the management.
However, welcoming children and coping with them are quite separate qualities.
Two-year-olds generally cots and, though we had asked for one in advance, we were provided with a single bed which we had to surround with cushions to make it safe.
Children also tend to want honey or Marmite sandwiches for tea and, when they want tea, they really want it.
Sadly, there was no Marmite and no honey, we were told, and we'd have to wait at least 20 minutes.
However, once he was in bed, we felt pampered again.
There's a listening service via the telephone to let parents eat with peace of mind, and nothing could surpass the service in the dining room.
The waiters, and particularly the wine waiters, are so beautifully trained that you notice only their discretion and skill — you hardly even see them filling your glass or taking your plate.
They certainly never creep round to ask if everything is all right.
They must just be confident that it is.
Tender pigeon breast salad; smoked chicken spring roll; dry champagne sorbet; monkfish with basil and crispy ratatouille: all were prepared perfectly.
Bishopstrow House, near Warminster, Wiltshire, is the place for a treat, especially if you're leaving the children behind.
An off season break costs £114 per person per night (minimum two nights) for dinner, bed and breakfast: call 0985–212312 for more details.
 Katy Brown 
THE SIGN OF THE ANGEL, LACOCK
Lacock is National Trust village whose idea of a modern house is one built in 1758.
Some date back to the 13th century, and The Sign of the Angel hotel was built in 1480 for a wool merchant.
The sanitation has improved since the merchant's time, but it's somewhere to treasure as much for what hasn't happened to it as for what has.
Though some of its flourishes are a little twee, the decor is mainly solid and unflamboyant, with chintz kept to a happy minimum.
It even has antique furniture that is used rather than just polished.
Tall claustrophobics won't like the hotel's narrow passageways, uneven floors, low ceilings and even lower beams, but everyone should love them.
All the bedrooms have private bathrooms.
The pleasantest is probably Room Three, which has a High-Spanish mahogany bed in it.
It once belonged to Isambard Kingdom Brunel and is extraordinarily large for a man so small.
Did he wear his hat in it?
The restaurant consists of a ‘little’ dining room bigger than the ‘big’dining room, and a ‘sitting’room that is a dining room, too.
The food is good — vegetables fresh from the hotel garden — but the choice is narrow: just one meat and one fish or vegetarian main course.
Silver cutlery, candlelight, linen napkins and unobtrusive service all encourage you to linger over your meal — and return soon for another.
Lacock and its presiding Angel are restful places to be in and it's easy to feel happy there doing very little.
The Hunting Lodge is good for teas and the Fox Talbot Museum has a collection of pictures by photographic pioneer William Henry Fox Talbot.
The oriel window shown in his earliest existing negative can be seen at the nearby Lacock Abbey.
If you do have the energy for some serious antiques-hunting, Bath is 12 miles away and Bradford on Avon around eight (see Antiques Trail, p134).
Double rooms with full breakfast are £40 per person per night; dinner is from £20 per person.
Contact The Sign of the Angel, Lacock, nr Chippenham, Wilts SN15 2LB (024973–230).
 David Shannon 
BOOKS
SAVE THESE HOUSES
A SERIES OF BOOKS HAS RESCUED HUNDREDS OF BUILDINGS FROM DERELICTION.
BY MARCUS BINNEY, FOUNDER OF SAVE BRITAIN'S HERITAGE
For all the gloom in the property market, there remains an insatiable demand for old buildings to restore and convert.
Every time SAVE Britain's Heritage publishes a new catalogue of historic buildings in need of new owners and new uses we are swamped with orders and enquiries.
Our latest hot seller is Nobody's Home , an illustrated catalogue of decaying buildings from cottages to castles, the sequel to last year's Empty Quarters .
An encouraging number of the properties in Empty Quarters have already been snapped up.
Grove House in Bawtry, three 17th-century cottages combined as one house in the 18th century, has been bought and restored as a private house.
Lifford Manor, King's Norton, Warwickshire, has been acquired and refurbished as headquarters of accountants Pridie Langard.
Enquiries come from people who are retiring, are moving to the country, or simply want to restore buildings as a hobby.
And there are always builders looking for cheap properties to renovate.
An increasing number of calls come from people looking for start-up premises for small businesses.
Some have special requirements, like a playgroup looking for a church hall, or the woman who wanted a redundant church in Wales for a design company.
There is a big demand for craft workshops.
Our first catalogues on properties at risk concentrated on particular types of buildings such as country houses and churches.
Many had been decaying steadily for years: their owners had no use for them and could not imagine that anyone else would.
Two things have changed this situation.
First, planning authorities have gradually begun to use their powers to serve legally enforceable notices requiring owners to carry out repairs to seriously neglected listed buildings.
Where listed buildings stand empty and completely abandoned they are able to carry out emergency work themselves and send the bills to the owners.
Initially they hesitated to do this because owners are entitled to respond with a purchase notice requiring the council to buy the building, potentially landing ratepayers with a large bill for restoration.
In fact, there is almost always someone keen to take over a neglected historic building, so when a council serves a repairs notice, or the planning committee sends a warning letter, the owners tend to realise there may be some value in the property and either sell it or repair it themselves.
Secondly, the sheer number of enquiries generated by people who have bought our reports often persuade owners to sell.
And there are now enough successful examples of sympathetically restored buildings to convince owners that restoration is feasible.
When we published our reports on country houses at risk (Tomorrow's Ruins, Silent Mansions and Endangered Domains ) we found that within two years up to two-thirds of the houses had found new owners or new uses.
Happily, these include some of the most desperate cases, like Borringdon, a once-magnificent Elizabethan house outside Plymouth which was no more than a gutted shell clinging to a precipice, but today is a comfortable country house hotel.
Llangoed Castle, in Wales, which the owner had been determined to demolish, has just been transformed into a hotel by Sir Bernard Ashley, husband of Laura.
Palladian Belford, in Northumberland, has been restored as flats by one of the Sainsbury family trusts.
Regency Grovelands, in Middlesex, another neglected wreck, is now a private nursing home.
The most recent of these reports on major historic properties is Scotland's Endangered Houses .
While there will be strong demand for almost any large house in England if it is in an attractive setting, however remote, in Scotland there are dozens of truly spectacular castles and mansions in varying states of decay.
In Scotland, unlike England, rates were charged on empty buildings and many owners simply took the roof off to avoid the levy.
Because many of these houses were little known, or stood unseen at the end of long drives, there was no pressure to repair them.
One of SAVE's most important groups of publications aims to give architects a developers a clear set of principles to adopt in dealing with particular types of buildings.
The first was The Country House: To Be or Not To Be , produced with Kit Martin.
He has successfully rescued a whole series of major houses, without a penny of historic buildings grants, by adapting them as self-contained houses and cottages.
His winning formula has been to restore the houses in stages, a wing at a time: they are so attractive and such good value that they almost invariably sell before they are completed.
His principle is to maintain the gardens and grounds as they are for all the residents, so that from outside it is not apparent that the building has been divided up.
Inside, he has always found that the people who buy the bigger houses like one or two very large rooms, while the stables and service wings at the back make smaller cottages for people working locally.
Churches: A Question of Conversion was produced with Derek Latham, an architect who specialises in historic buildings and runs his practice from a skilfully adapted church in Derby.
One of the most ingenious examples illustrated is St Luke's, in Harrogate, a handsome Victorian church on a prominent street corner, which has been transformed almost imperceptibly into 29 flats by a housing association.
A Future for Farm Buildings by Gillian Darley shows that, for all the controversy over their conversions, barns can be sympathetically transformed for a range of uses.
The latest of SAVE's publications is Bright Future: The Re-Use of Industrial Buildings , written with the architect Francis Machin, who is best known for his futuristic conservatories, but whose conversions include the transformation of my own barn into a library and office.
Here we illustrated numerous dramatic conversions of warehouses and textile mills whose open-plan layouts made them adaptable for virtually any purpose.
For those with a taste for the unusual and exotic,Pavilions in Peril remains not only an engaging armchair read, but an explorer's guide to a forgotten world of follies and garden temples.
The key to the success of SAVE's publications, and indeed our message as a whole, is conveyed in one word: photographs.
The reason we receive massive newspaper publicity for reports like Empty Quarters and Nobody's Home is that every property is illustrated.
When SAVE was launched in 1975, good photographs of endangered buildings were very scarce, but with today's improved methods of printing we can use any reasonable snapshot we are sent.
And thanks to the sophistication of modern cameras and film, automatic light metres and focusing, even the most inexperienced photographer can take a usable and very helpful picture.
So next time you see a decaying barn or cottage, stop the car, take a snap or two, and send them to SAVE with the name and address of the property.
For remarkably little effort, you may have saved an endangered building.
Above Little Potash, Potash Lane, Bracon Ash, near Norwich.
A privately owned half-timbered cottage (mostly 16th-century) with pantiled roof and porches, it has been standing empty for years
Right Hever Lodge, Reginald Road, Maidstone, Kent, was built in 1851.
Though sadly neglected, it has retained its asymmetrical grandeur and architectural riches: crow-stepped gables, fish-scale slate roof, arched windows with hoodmoulds, two-storey loggia and stair turret
DANGER MALE DRIVERS
YOU'VE HEARD THE JOKES: NOW READ THE FACTS.
FRANK PAGE EXAMINES THE MYTHS ABOUT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MEN AND WOMEN BEHIND THE WHEEL
A friend of mine was driving on the M1 when he came up behind everybody's un-favourite motorist, the one who sits resolutely in the middle land and refuses to move left, no matter how empty the inside lane.
‘I gave him a quick flash of my headlights and he immediately slammed on his brakes,’ he said.
‘So I thought if he were that kind of driver I would not get involved.
I pulled over and just cruised past him.
But he was incensed; he came alongside me and started making all sorts of threatening gestures.
‘Eventually I got a bit fed up.
The kids had been in the car and there was a water pistol on the shelf under the dash.
I picked it up and aimed it at him.
He went as white as a sheet and backed off immediately.
Now I'm waiting for the police to call, following up a report that there's some madman loose on the M1, threatening to shoot other drivers.’
This story took my mind back to a survey on driving that was published a while ago on the differences between men and women behind the wheel.
One of more than 1,000 women drivers taking part said, ‘Men have to be good at everything, especially driving…it's a big ego thing.’
There certainly seems to be a significant polarisation between the sexes in their approach to driving.
The popular folklore emphasises it.
Jokes about men driving are mostly on the macho theme: ‘Men love a fast and powerful car, especially painted red — it's a virility symbol.’
But jokes about women drivers (always told by men) are about hanging a handbag on the pulled-out choke or never being able to use the rear-view mirror because it's always positioned for make-up repairs.
Yet women drivers have the last laugh.
They get cheaper insurance rates because their accident records are better; they have fewer problems with their cars because they don't thrash them; and they probably expend far less nervous energy when they are driving, because they treat it like any other domestic activity.
‘Basically, we are just much more tolerant than men,’ says Judith Jackson, one of the tiny minority of female motoring correspondents — she writes for The Guardian and Homes & Gardens .
‘Women are less likely to react violently in a stressful situation.
We're more patient, too.
Women will wait much longer at an intersection rather than take a risk.
It drives men mad, but it's the sensible thing to do.
We generally look upon cars as tools of our trade, so we treat them sensibly and carefully.
I would sum it up by saying cars are for work, not for worship.’
Many women drivers seem to agree with Judith.
The survey, sponsored by General Accident Insurance, found that more than 60 per cent of female respondents complained of male aggressiveness on the road.
Male drivers' arrogance is almost as bad as their aggression, it seems.
One in nine of the women surveyed reckoned that male drivers ‘think they own the road’ and nearly three-quarters of them said men were too impatient.
Recent Government statistics seem to bear this out.
The number of male drivers killed in road accidents rose by 25 per cent in the first quarter of 1990, a fact blamed by the Automobile Association on increasingly aggressive driving by men.
There was little change in the number of female deaths.
The problem is that arrogance and aggression are often expressed at the expense of other road users.
Female respondents also complained that men drive too fast and are often very discourteous to others.
Sue Baker,Observer motoring correspondent, has a theory: ‘So often, when driving on a motorway, you see strings of cars in the outside lane, driving too fast and too close, the drivers trying to intimidate one another.
But you seldom see a woman driver mixed up in it.
‘I did a television report about how the traffic police in Germany take pictures of cars being driven dangerously, in order to prosecute the drivers later.
This policeman was saying, ‘He does this,’ and ‘He overtakes dangerously.’
I said: ‘Hand on a minute — you keep talking about men.
How often do you prosecute women?’
He replied, ‘Almost never — they just don't do it.’’
Does this battle of the sexes on the motorways affect country roads, too?
Talking to some of my friends, it seems to be a universal problem.
Beth Llewellin lives near Ellesmere in Shropshire, and goes there for family shopping.
‘We park on the road, which is convenient, and usually people are very good about taking their turn to get into an empty space.
But sometimes I get cut up by another vehicle as I go for a space — and it's always a man.’
Avril Boyd, who lives in Clare, Cambridgeshire, has trouble with male drivers, too.
‘There are a lot of pretty well-off farmers round our way, driving things like Range Rovers,’ she says.
‘They are all a bit‘Out of my way — I'm king of the road’.
Then we get the young yobs, driving souped-up Minis and Capris.
They drive like maniacs and totally without discipline.
It seems to be particularly bad in the country, because we are inadequately policed.
These guys seem to think all speed limits are there to be broken and they just don't believe they will ever be caught.’
But that's all about male and female attitudes.
Are there physical or temperamental differences that make men better drivers, or vice versa?
The General Accident survey makes a telling point.
Asking both men and women how many times they took the driving test before getting through, the researchers found that men had a significantly higher success rate, with 57 per cent passing at the first attempt.
For the women the figure was 47 per cent— though another 33 per cent got through second time.
Whether this indicates that men are more adept at driving, or simply more confident about the test, is open to debate.
Perhaps the most significant figures in the survey are those indicating the characteristics that men and women see in drivers of the opposite sex.
The women showed their distrust of men at the wheel by citing all sorts of objections.
‘Impatient’ was the key word — noted by 74 per cent of respondents, followed by ‘too fast’, ‘aggressive’, ‘arrogant’and ‘discourteous’.
The men responded with contrary characteristics for women.
‘Over-careful’ was almost the top-scoring quality — with 48 per cent of men choosing it, and nearly as many following up with ‘indecisive’and ‘too slow’.
But — and this is the nub of the matter — the highest score in the list of women's driving qualities, as rated by men, was for ‘safe’— 54 per cent.
And, really, isn't that what driving is all about?
LETTERS
Do write with views and news of your own country living
COMMUNITY SPIRIT?
How I disagree with P R Owen's views on the community charge (December, 1990, Letters).
Every family needs, and has a right to, a place to live in: no one needs a second home, except perhaps MPs.
For anyone else this is a self-indulgent luxury.
Those with a second home should pay at least double the community charge for the area, then they would be making some recompense for taking up properties that could be used for people who need them.
 P M Smith, Denbigh, Clwyd 
My reaction to P R Owen's having to sell his weekend cottage is good riddance.
We have recently moved to an area of Norfolk that is infested with holiday homes: our village is rendered lifeless for half the year, and local people find it impossible to afford homes because prices have been forced up by the greater buying power of outsiders.
We ourselves are to some extent part of this problem, but we do at least live and work in the village full time.
The only local people who live in the village live in cottages tied to the estate, and many cottages lie empty for most of the year while the number of rural homeless grows.
The one good effect of the poll tax may be that it forces the sale of these empty properties to people who will breathe new life into half-dead communities.
 John Woodcock, Kelling, Norfolk 
DIVINING WORKS WONDERS
I was most interested in your article on water divining (November 1990) because I was asked to practise this art in Africa many years ago.
I used a forked stick — usually willow — and was very successful in finding water 20–40 feet below ground level.
The fork would twist in my hands and cause blisters, as Donovan Wilkins described.
All sorts of theories to explain the phenomenon have been advanced, but as far as I am concerned, it works.
 G A W Partridge, Preston, Lancashire 
STYLE ON A SHOESTRING
‘Discontent and feelings of inadequacy’?
(Ann Jacob's letter, November 1990).
Come now, a little imagination and subtle poaching of the ideas of Country Living 's more affluent readers is all that is required.
Inspired by pictures of grand herb gardens, I grew some herbs from seeds and cuttings, to set up my own herb garden in front of our semi-detached house.
An old, renovated Victorian cast-iron pump provides a centrepiece.
It has now become a challenge to find new varieties of herb — at the last count there were just over 130.
My tiny kitchen has been given a rustic look by hanging up a hop bine from a farm, and a string of onions (99p) adds the finishing touch.
Let those spend fortunes on their homes who can afford it: the same look can often be achieved more economically.
 June Lewis, Bolton, Lancashire 
HOOKED ON COUNTRY LIVING
I confess!
I am a country living junkie and my appetite for magazines devoted to country life is insatiable.
There is no praise high enough for December's Country Living , surely the best Christmas magazine produced last year.
It is difficult to decide which article was best, for every one was superbly written, with wit and an ever-vigilant eye to detail.
This is what makes the magazine rare.
Your writers allow their subjects full throttle, letting them shine through the pages as the great characters they have become (witness Marwood Yeatman, Sheila Kitzinger et al).
Brian Redhead's page will be read to my five-year-old daughter and my husband on Christmas Day.
Mr Redhead could bring God to the godless: his article brought tears to my eyes.
Rosemary Verey's way of writing about gardening fills me (new to gardening and not very good at it) with inspiration and pleasure.
I spent much of my childhood in the New Forest and have watched with sadness as it has deteriorated over the decades.
My sympathies are with Marwood Yeatman, who has the right perspective on life and whose lifestyle I am now gaining myself.
 Chloë Powell, Wrexham, Clwyd 
THE PRINCE & THE POTTER
Having been aware of only detrimental media coverage of Prince Charles, I was heartened to read your profile in the January issue, which concentrated on his varied contribution to British life, especially his involvement with the conservation of the countryside.
Two years ago a young potter friend, Vivienne Newton, benefited from the Prince's Trust.
She was able to make herself a pottery workshop by joining two old telephone engineers' caravans together, and now works from her father's market garden near Livingston.
She would have had great difficulty establishing herself, but as it is she has sold her pottery successfully through shows and through galleries.
I would like to commend you for the support you give to rural artists and craftspeople, through your excellent articles — especially at a time when, due to cuts in grants, such people need all the help they can get.
 Jenny Proctor, Longriddry, East Lothian 
YOUR PROBLEM SOLVED
FRAME WORK
I have several old silver photograph frames, whose ‘innards’ have worn out so the frames no longer stand properly.
Is there a company that would make new frames using my silver surrounds?
 William Fullick, London E12 
There is a firm in Birmingham that should be able to help.
Hampton Utilities is a member of the British Jewellers Association, and its skilled craftsmen can carry out all sorts of repairs to silverware, antique and modern, including cutlery, candlesticks, mirrors and regimental medals.
Send the photograph frames by registered post to Hampton Utilities (Birmingham) Ltd, 15 Pitsford Street, Hockley, Birmingham B18 6LJ (021–554 1766), explaining what needs to be done: the company will then give you a quotation for the work.
Those who live nearby can take in items for repair, but the company will also accept commissions from overseas — even as far away as Australia.
For advice on any aspect of country living, write to Letters at the address on page 2.
We can answer only problems printed on this page.
MY COUNTRY CHILDHOOD
Hannah Hauxwell
I was three years old when we moved across the dale to Low Birk Hatt Farm.
There isn't any other place I would describe as home.
To me there is nowhere like it and never will be.
It was my life and my world.
I did not appreciate how beautiful the countryside was until I was much older.
As a child, I just enjoyed it.
The house was at the bottom of a valley near the reservoir, surrounded by rolling hills.
There were green fields as far as the eye could see.
But inside the house it was a different story; there wasn't much space at all.
Grandma and Granddad slept in one bedroom; Mother, Father and I in the other; and my two great-uncles slept downstairs.
My father had bought the farm at an auction, at what turned out to be an inflated price.
As he was the only able-bodied man on the farm, it was a constant struggle for him to make the mortgage payments.
My mother had her hands full with housework and caring for four elderly people.
I did little bits to help, like picking up sticks for firewood and fetching water from the well, as we didn't have any electricity or running water.
I also helped with the milking but was very slow.
I started using one hand and it was ages before I learnt to use two.
As I was the only child, the animals were my playmates.
We had sheep, cows, horses, dogs and pigs.
The pigs were my favourites.
Most people think that pigs are dirty and ignorant, but I had many happy times with them.
I used to love cleaning them out.
I had my own shovel with a broken handle.
I was even allowed to look after two piglets on my own; they were very intelligent and affectionate.
But I didn't get to the point of giving them names, which was just as well, because in the end they both had to go to market.
When I wasn't with the animals I spent hours playing with my favourite toy, a large piece of wood which I pretended was our horse, Dicks.
I also had two dollies, one made for me by our great family friend, Mrs Fawcett, the other stitched by my mother from an old piece of quilted petticoat.
Sometimes I would make a house out of the large old boxes stacked in the yard, and take in my dollies and set up home.
I was perfectly happy until I was sent to school at the age of five.
I was very shy and not the sharpest of children.
I didn't make friends easily, but the funny thing is that some of those I went to school with, and wasn't so close to, have become good friends in later life.
There were 30 pupils of different ages in one room, with one blackboard and one teacher.
She didn't take to me; I don't know why.
She certainly had her favourites, which is only natural, but she shouldn't have shown it.
To be fair, she was a good-hearted woman who tried to do her best.
But to this day I have nightmares in which I have to go back to school, and I'm so relieved to wake up and find that it was only a dream.
The best time was in the winter when the snow was so bad I couldn't walk the mile across the fields to school.
Sometimes on a winter afternoon it would start coming in and get so black you couldn't see.
When that happened we were all sent home early.
When I was seven my father died.
He was only 36.
He was such a nice man, very quiet and reserved.
That was a terrible time.
It meant that my mother's workload greatly increased, but with my uncles' help we struggled on.
At least we had each other.
But it also meant that when I left school at 14 it was not possible to think about finding a job or life away from the farm.
I was needed there.
Some of my happiest memories date from the time when Father was alive.
One summer, just the three of us, Mother, Father and I, set off together to start the haymaking two miles away, at a parcel of land we owned down the road.
We left the older ones to look after the farm and we took the horses.
There were lots of wild roses and foxgloves growing in the lane and you could smell the hawthorn.
We spent several nights there in a derelict house without a roof.
Those summer nights will stay with me for ever, with the moon illuminating the darkness and the birds calling to each other in the trees at sunset.
Everything came to life in the summer with the warm weather and long days.
Most of all, I remember the summer flowers.
Granddad was a gardener and grew some very nice flowers in the garden as well as all our fruit and vegetables.
We had marguerites, daisies, pansies and wallflowers.
But the best were his rose bushes, a type you don't often see now.
They were white with a lovely pink blush when in bud, and had the most powerful scent.
I have never come across anything like them again, although I haven't seen very many gardens.
My mother, Grandma and I sometimes took some of my grandfather's produce to market in Barnard Castle.
This meant taking the market bus, which was a great adventure for me.
Sometimes we did well, sometimes we didn't; the prices were not up to much.
But I remember being happy just staring at all the people passing by.
My childhood memories were a great source of strength to me after the members of my family died, one by one, and I was left to work the farm alone.
My mother was a great inspiration; she was such a lovely jolly little lady, with precious little to be jolly about.
Now, I try not to think too much about those days.
I had to leave Low Birk Hatt two years ago and move into the village, five miles away.
I have a new life now and new friends.
But my 60 years at the farm were the best part of my life, and in spirit I am still there.
 Interview by Alison Nadel 
Daughter of the Dales by Hannah Hauxwell and Barry Cockcroft is published by Century (£14.99)
Hannah Hauxwell (right) with her mother