

WORLD VISION OF BRITAIN
From the Overseas Director's Office
Dear YHA member,
ETHIOPIA THE MILLION TREE APPEAL
Last October, YHA members raised over £47,000 to plant over 800 acres — a staggering 470,000 trees — in Shone Valley, Southern Shewa, Ethiopia.
The reforestation programme, targeting to plant 7.5 million trees over a seven year period, is on its way.
Soon barren land will begin to show signs of fertility.
Then it will be possible for crops to grow on soil where, earlier, no plant life could have been supported.
And all because of trees.
The Shone Valley Reforestation programme is one of several such projects being organised by World Vision throughout Ethiopia.
You may have seen the article about the reforestation of Ansokia Valley in the October issue of YHA magazine.
It really is one of Ethiopia's few success stories over the last decade.
Now, with your help, World Vision is looking to repeat the success at Shone.
The early signs are encouraging — but there's a long way to go.
A NEW CHALLENGE
World Vision has set YHA members a new challenge.
TO RAISE THE FUNDS FOR THE NEXT MILLION TREES TO BE PLANTED AT SHONE.
It's a big challenge but I am sure that together we can do it.
It means about 1,700 YHA members raising an average of £60 to plant an acre of trees.
And, because of sponsorship, you don't have to fork out the whole £60 yourself.
Attached to this letter is your sponsorship form.
The target for each member is to raise £60 in sponsorship from friends and relatives.
Every 10p plants a tree.
Please don't leave it to others.
Even if you can't raise the full £60 please do the very best you can.
 JEFF THINDWA Overseas Director 
P.S. A YHA participant will be selected to visit the Shone Reforestation project later this year.
That person could be you!
ETHIOPIA.
AND FAMINE.
AND TREES
It is perhaps not widely appreciated the effect deforestation can have on a country like Ethiopia.
One of the main causes of recurrent famine throughout Ethiopia is the problem of massive deforestation, although in the regions of Wollo, Tigray and Eritrea it has been made worse by war.
40 years ago, 40% of Ethiopia was covered with forests.
By 1985 this figure had reduced to under 4%.
Without the vegetation, the topsoil is washed away.
Without the topsoil, water retention is negligible.
Without water retention the land becomes baked.
And, since crops will not grow on baked land, famine is the result.
All because of lack of trees.
Deforestation also affects the environment in other more complex ways.
It causes a reduction in evapotranspiration (a complicated word which means that fewer clouds are formed) and an increase in temperatures.
ALL ABOUT SHONE
The Shone Soil and Water Conservation and Afforestation Project (to give it the full name) is situated in Sike Awraka, Southern Shewa.
It is 200kms (124 miles) south of Ethiopia's capital, Addis Ababa, far from the areas affected by the civil war.
Over a 7 year period, World Vision plans to plant 9 million trees in the Shone Valley.
Each species will have been selected for certain properties:
GREVILIA ROBUSTA
(Australian silky oak) because it is drought resistant
ACACIA SALIGNA
because of its rapid growth and water retention
CASUARINA LUSTINACA
because it takes nitrogen from the air and puts it back into the soil
LEUCAENEA LUCOCEPHALIA
because as a nitrogen fixing species it protects and improves the soil
The cost for each acre of reforestation is about £60 and about 600 trees are planted to each acre of land.
The effects are both rapid and dramatic.
Within two or three years, springs come back to life, wildlife returns and crops flourish.
CARE Britain
Dear Friend,
With this letter I have enclosed a small sachet of salt and sugar granules.
Please hold the sachet in your hand as I tell you how a small handful of granules like these have the power to stop the world's biggest child killer.
You see, on the day you read this letter another 14,000 infant lives will be lost.
That is one for every minute of every day.
In 12 months a staggering total of 5 million under fives will have perished, victims of just one cause: diarrhoeal diseases spread by dirty water.
It is a terrible thought isn't it?
So many young lives wasted.
But there is something else you should know too.
It makes the tragedy even more complete, yet at the same time contains the seeds of hope.
Every one of these deaths is preventable.
The effects of diarrhoeal disease can be conquered with one of the simplest and cheapest natural remedies known to science.
One full course of treatment costs as little as 5 pence, and can save a life.
That is why the sachet I have sent you is so important.
A spoonful of sugar and a pinch of salt dissolved in a litre of water is all it takes.
And the effect is remarkable.
The sugar — salt — water treatment, known as Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORT) takes only 24 hours to work — replacing vital body fluids and salts that are lost when diarrhoea strikes.
I have enclosed a simple card which explains in more detail how ORT works.
But treatment with ORT has to begin immediately a child feels ill.
As every parent knows, any illness in a very young child is serious.
Its condition deteriorates fast.
In the hot dry conditions of Africa and India, dehydration is more than serious.
It is a killer.
Once diarrhoeal disease has set in a baby will go under in just two or three days.
That is why every minute counts.
And why it is so important that you respond to this appeal today.
You will be making a personal and lasting contribution to the ORT work I have told you about.
And to the many other ways in which CARE is helping the world's poorest people to find a way out of poverty and ill-health.
Please help, by sending a donation today.
A gift of just £12 could provide enough sachets of ORT to save 240 children.
£15 could save 300.
Do support this appeal.
With your help we can put life-saving Oral Rehydration Therapy within reach of more mothers and more children.
And save more precious lives.
Many thanks for helping.
Yours sincerely, Francis Carroll Director of Appeals 
P.S. Please keep the sachet, as a reminder of how little it takes to save a child's life.
You may like to know that the cost of these sachets have been met by a generous donor.
Thank you again for helping.
ORT is one example of the health care programmes which CARE is helping to introduce in countries as far apart as India and Peru.
CARE was formed in 1946 and helps the poorest of the poor in 38 countries in Africa, Asia and South America.
SAVE THE CHILDREN
‘The child must be protected beyond and above all considerations of race, nationality or creed’ Eglantyne Jebb — founder, Save the Children.
1923
Dear Friend,
When I've written to you in the past, it's usually been to tell you about the developments of some of our long term programmes.
This time I have a very different kind of success story to tell you.
It's a story of how five years of patience and understanding saw extraordinary achievements — both for us, and for the children of Vietnam.
Determined to see change
For many years, no outside organisation had been given permission by the Vietnamese government to establish themselves in their country.
That, of course, included us.
But we knew what life was like for the children of Vietnam — and we were determined to see change.
Try to imagine working in waist-high muddy water for 10 hours every day to earn a living.
that's exactly what life consists of for over 70% of Vietnam's labour force — and thousands of them are children.
To many — as young as 12 — farming Vietnam's sodden rice fields is their only means of survival.
And, with barely even the most basic of medicines available, each day these children are prone to the countless diseases and infections that flourish within the grimy water around them.
Ironically, for a country almost covered in water, another major concern for children's health in Vietnam is the sheer lack of clean drinking water.
Just one reason why the mortality rate for under-fours is eight times higher than our own.
As I'm sure you'll understand, when I first came to see this awful situation I was consumed with a feeling of frustration — knowing, as I did then, that it could be some time before we'd be in a position to intervene.
Naturally, before we could get involved, we first had to show the Vietnamese government that we had truly grasped the often complex problems of its country.
A time to discover what the children needed most.
We knew that our first step had to be spending time learning how we could best help Vietnam's children.
Only by doing this could we ever hope to work effectively with the government in the future.
We appointed a project co-ordinator in Bangkok.
From there, she was able to make regular visits to Vietnam — and so give us essential reports on where our help was needed most.
Her days were spent visiting countless villages, communities, clinics and hospitals.
Medical equipment was, and still is, a priority.
She soon found that hospitals and clinics were short of the most basic equipment — like sterilisers, vaccines and training books.
On reaching villages, she immediately drafted proposals for pilot projects, to help mothers provide a nutritious diet for their children.
As her reports started to come together, our excitement grew about what we could now achieve for the children of Vietnam.
A proud day for everyone
Then, at , the news that we'd all worked so hard for.The Vietnamese government agreed to let us work in their country.
It was an encouraging day for everyone.
No longer were our proposals for long term projects just reports on pieces of paper; they were real — and not just for us, but for the children of Vietnam.
The future
And that, to date, is my story.
But the story has only just begun.
The really hard work is ahead of us.
And this, my friend, is where you come in.
I want to be able to write to you again — soon — and tell you how our projects are developing — not just in Vietnam, but across the world.
With your support now, I'll be able to do just that.
Save the Children is totally committed to being wherever children need us.
Your donations mean we'll always be there, no matter what the circumstances, or how long it takes.
Please don't let this wonderful success story end here.
Yours sincerely, Nicholas Hinton Director General.
P.S. As I've shown, SCF makes sure that your donation works as hard as possible for the children that need it most.
But if you use your Deed of Covenant form every £1 you give becomes £1.33 — so your gift can work even harder.
To donate, please use your Freepost envelope.
CAFOD
On the side of people in need
The Catholic Fund for Overseas Development
March 1990
Dear Friend,
CAFOD Family Fast Day — Friday 9th March 1990
As the Lent Family Fast Day approaches I would like to thank you all again for the magnificent response to the Bishops' Appeal for Ethiopia.
But at the same time I want to stress how crucially important to CAFOD are the offerings from the coming Family Fast Day.
They will enable us to keep our promises to provide funds to over 500 development projects with poor communities throughout Africa, Asia and Latin America.
We realise that you may well make your Family Fast Day offering through your parish.
We are grateful to you and hope that this year our theme will capture the imagination of all our supporters.
Its title is —
Share the Work of Renewing the Earth
The intention is to highlight how today we in this country may join through our offerings with those of little or no material wealth in the Third World in the urgent task of making human development possible for even the poorest.
The goal is to renew the earth and to cherish it so that its fruits, its resources and its wealth may be shared by everyone — and without leaving a legacy of pollution and destruction for the next generation.
In Ethiopia, in the midst of war and facing famine, CAFOD is working with thousands of people in a dozen communities who are seeking to protect the topsoil in their fields, building irrigation channels, planting trees and learning new farming techniques so that millions of acres of farmland in their country may remain fertile.
Civil war hampers their efforts but rather than cease their work of ‘renewing the earth’ they often labour at night to avoid the constant threat of bombings from the air.
In many parts of Cambodia rice is growing and fishponds are being restocked as village communities use the funds and technical assistance that CAFOD has provided to revive their devastated country.
Adults and children spend time learning to read and write so that they may recover and renew what is best even though it is all sadly threatened again by those who destroyed it a generation ago.
In Brazil the forests are being indiscriminately destroyed and many indigenous peoples, like the Yanomami Indians, are being slowly wiped out as gold prospectors and others invade their lands, poison their rivers, and bring disease and death in their wake.
CAFOD is working with the Bishop of Roraima and the local Church to try to protect the Yanomami people, their lands and their future.
To participate in Family Fast Day is to participate in these programmes, and many others like them, whose goal is to ‘share the work of renewing the earth’.
I am also enclosing a copy of the latest CAFOD Journal for your interest.
With very best wishes.
Yours sincerely, Julian Filochowski Director 
UNICEF UK
Dear Friend
If 30 jumbo jets full of children crashed every day, there would be news headlines in every country.
The whole world would mourn.
There would be a public outcry to stop it happening.
Yet the plain fact is that this number of children are dying every day — dying from diseases we know how to cure.
And their suffering goes unreported and, for the most part, ignored.
Will you help us to reach out to these forgotten victims?
Because what you choose to do in the next few minutes could decide whether a child will live or die.
Naima, the girl in the picture on the envelope, is one of the children who needs our help.
In Bangladesh, where she lives, diseases like tuberculosis, diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus, polio and measles are rife.
To us in Britain, the names of these diseases mean very little.
Advances in health care have meant that most of them are seldom heard of here.
And today very few British parents would be seriously alarmed to be told their children had measles.
But in the developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America, parents live in mortal fear of these diseases — and for very good reason.
Around the world, they cause the deaths of three and a half million children every year.
And they leave many more crippled, blind or mentally handicapped.
Imagine, for a moment, what it must be like to be the parent of young children in a poor community in Bangladesh or Mozambique.
To dread the slightest sneeze or cough that might herald the onset of polio or tuberculosis.
To know that, if the disease does strike their children, they can do very little but wait, hope and pray.
In this country we can count our blessings that our children are not constantly at the mercy of these diseases.
But it still makes me angry to know that in other countries so many children die, so many families are bereaved, simply because they lack basic health care.
Whether or not you have children of your own, I know you will feel the same way.
Yet the answer is in our own hands, because it is now perfectly possible to immunise all the world's children against the six killer diseases I have mentioned.
That's why I am writing to ask you to take part in a great campaign: for universal child immunisation.
But the end of 1990 we want to reach a situation where at least eight out of ten of the world's children are immunised.
This is a high enough level of protection to control the diseases and prevent epidemics devastating whole communities.
It is a goal we can reach, provided we can raise the funds we need.
Governments are helping, but is isn't enough.
That's why we need the support of every friend of UNICEF throughout the world.
And already we are making heartening progress.
In war-torn Lebanon, for instance, UNICEF helped negotiate ‘Days of Tranquillity’ so that 350,000 children could be immunised during these breaks in the fighting.
In Turkey, a massive public education campaign has succeeded in immunising over 4 million children.
Village leaders and schoolteachers worked with us to spread the word about the benefits of immunisation.
And religious leaders played their part too, with Imams preaching the call to immunisation from every one of Turkey's 54,000 mosques.
And Senegal, one of the 30 poorest nations in the world has set the best example of all.
In 1985 fewer than one in ten of the country's children were immunised.
Today, with UNICEF's help, around seven out of ten are protected.
Thanks largely to our supporters around the world, we in UNICEF have put everything we can into our worldwide immunisation programme over the past few years.
Already over 60 per cent of the world's children are immunised.
Millions of young lives have already been saved.
We are within striking distance of our goal.
But there is still so much to be done.
In South East Asia, for example, still only a third of children are immunised against diphtheria, whooping cough and tetanus in the vital first year of life.
The future — the very lives — of these children depend on our ability to reach them with vaccines and health education.
That's why it is so important that we don't give up for an instant.
The six killer diseases not only CAN be brought under control by the end of 1990.
For the sake of these children they MUST.
If it seems an ambitious goal, let me ask you a simple question.
What value would you place on the life of a child?
In one way it seems absurd — outrageous, even — to measure human life in pounds and pence.
But in another way it is perfectly possible — because the cost of immunising a child against the six killer diseases, and quite possibly saving his or her life, is just around £6.
How many times have you heard people say that the greatest gift in the world is good health?
But for millions of people in the world's poorest countries, who live in fear of diseases like measles and whooping cough it is quite literally true.
My hope is that you will become a supporter of UNICEF and that, together, we can give them what they so desperately need: a passport to health for their children.
And if enough of us are prepared to give a donation — just a proportion of what we spend on our own families and friends at Christmas — we can reach that precious goal of Universal Child Immunisation by the end of 1990.
Our UNICEF field workers and medical teams have worked so tirelessly in recent years to bring immunisation to the children of the world.
Please help them go the last mile, by sending as much as you can.
Remember, every £6 you send will immunise a child and maybe save a life.
Please send your gift in the envelope provided.
Or, to join our campaign now and get your gift to us even faster, please phone 01–200 0200 and speak to one of our helpers, quoting your Access or Visa card number.
Better still, if you can, please arrange to give regularly to UNICEF's work so we can carry our campaign for better child health care into the future.
It's simple to do this now by filling in the direct debit and covenant on the back of the donation form.
And please accept my heartfelt thanks now for your concern and your generosity.
I know it will give as much joy and satisfaction to you as it will to me, to know that we have played our part in this great crusade for children's health.
With every good wish for the festive season and the New Year ahead.
Yours sincerely, Robert Smith Director UNICEF UK 
P.S. As a token of UNICEF's gratitude for your generous support, I have enclosed your 1990 UNICEF pocket diary.
I hope that as you use it through the year, it will serve to remind you of the life-saving work you are helping to make possible for children throughout the world.
In Lebanon, soldiers bring children to be vaccinated and hand out leaflets about immunisation.
Mothers queue to immunise their children at this busy health centre in Thailand
Crowds gather outside a church in the Philippines for BCG vaccinations against measles and tuberculosis.
A Turkish health team restock their portable insulated vaccine carrier
At a health post in West Java, a record is made of this child's weight and immunisation details
UNICEF AT WORK AGAINST THE KILLER DISEASES
Help us give every child a passport to health…and make 1990 the year we break the grip of the six killer diseases.
Dear friend,
For most of us in Britain, Christmas and New Year are a time of good cheer in the company of family and friends.
And, thankfully, many can afford to splash out a little on treats and luxuries.
Indeed at this time of year, hundreds of millions of pounds are spent on children's toys alone.
But for vast numbers of children in the developing world, such gifts are beyond their wildest dreams.
For them, life itself is the best gift they could receive.
In some countries as many as one child in three dies before reaching the age of five.
There is something you and I can do now to change this.
We can support UNICEF's Passport to Health campaign, to immunise the world's children against the six major killer diseases — polio, tuberculosis, whooping cough, tetanus and measles — by the end of 1990.
It doesn't take much.
The cost of fully immunising each child is around £6.
So by sharing a little of what we have, we can remover the threat of these terrible diseases which, currently, kill three and a half million children a year.
I hope you will join me in supporting this campaign.
Please give what you can.
Let's all do our best to give UNICEF the funds they need.
I know they'll put that money to the best possible use — saving precious young lives.
Thank you.
 Sir Richard Attenborough, CBE, UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador 
…and your help can save even more lives.
No matter how you choose to help UNICEF's life-saving work for the world's children, your support is vitally important and very greatly appreciated.
But of course our work will not end when we have broken the grip of the six major killer diseases.
In fact, it will only just have begun — because we will need to go on working hard to sustain that achievement.
That's why the most valuable support you can give us is long-term support — the kind that increases our regular income and helps us plan for the future.
It would mean so much to us if you would give a regular amount under Covenant, by filling in the Direct Debit form and Deed of Covenant above.
By doing this, you will enable us to claim back the tax you've already paid on your gift.
That will add 33% to its value without costing you a penny extra.
So a gift of, say £20, will become £26.67 at no added cost to you.
When you consider how much that extra amount can achieve, you will appreciate how valuable your Covenant can be.
For example, for every three children you help us immunise with your gift, your Covenant will make it possible to immunise one more — and quite possibly save another life.
We welcome Covenants of £10 or over.
The only conditions the Taxman lays down is that you give the same amount regularly for at least four years and that you are a UK taxpayer.
To make a Covenant, just complete the two forms above and return them to us in the envelope provided.
Please note the Direct Debit may only be used with the Covenant.
You can also pay your Covenant by Access or Visa by filling in your credit card number overleaf.
Remember — making a Covenant to UNICEF costs you nothing extra, but it means a lot — perhaps even the difference between life and death — to the children of the world.
THE CHILD KILLERS
The six childhood diseases you can help us prevent
MEASLES
In the developing world measles is the most devastating of all the six major childhood diseases — killing more than two million children a year.
Not only is measles a killer, but it also causes blindness, deafness and mental handicap in thousands of children every year.
SYMPTOMS
Initial symptoms resemble those of a cold, with red, watery eyes, running nose, cough, and high fever.
Greyish-white spots, leading to a red spotted rash follow.
PREVENTION
Just one dose of BCG vaccine a 9 months of age can prevent measles.
POLIO
Every year, over a quarter of a million children under the age of 3 contract polio.
Around 25,000 die.
But many more are crippled by the disease.
The virus is spread through contact with contaminated food and water.
SYMPTOMS
Polio symptoms include: cold-like symptoms, fever, sore throat, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, headache, stiffness of the neck, muscle pains in the limbs and the back and, ultimately, paralysis.
PREVENTION
Three doses of the polio vaccine at 6, 10 and 14 weeks of age are needed to protect children against polio.
The vaccine can be given at the same time as immunisations against diphtheria, whooping cough and tetanus.
WHOOPING COUGH
Whooping cough claims around 600,000 young lives each year — half of those deaths are of children less than 1 year old.
SYMPTOMS
The disease, which is caused by bacteria, is characterised by spasmodic coughing, accompanied by sneezing and fever.
Its common name is derived from the ‘whoop’ children make as they desperately struggle to inhale after a coughing spasm.
PREVENTION
Three doses of the DPT vaccine are needed, at 6,10 and 14 weeks of age, to immunise children against whooping cough.
DIPHTHERIA
Diphtheria kills 100,000 children each year.
The disease usually occurs as an acute infection of the throat, but it can affect the heart and brain of infants and young children.
It is also common in developing countries as an infection of the skin.
SYMPTOMS
Although infections of the skin and nasal passages are often mild, infections of the throat can become serious.
Initial symptoms include fever and mild sore throat.
Membranes may develop in the throat, causing death by asphyxiation.
Other complications can include paralysis of the palate, eye muscles, throat, muscles of the respiratory tract or arm and leg muscles.
PREVENTION
Children must be immunised with DPT vaccine in the first 6 months of life.
TUBERCULOSIS
Tuberculosis strikes around two million children under 5 every year and kills 30,000.
All forms of the disease begin as tuberculosis of the lung although it can affect other organs including the membranes encasing the brain and spinal cord, the bones, joints and kidneys.
Tuberculosis spreads easily and it is often passed on from older members of the family to the children.
Without proper treatment, sufferers from tuberculosis of the lung can be contagious all their life.
SYMPTOMS
Symptoms include low fever, cough, blood in the sputum, chest pain, sweating at night and weight loss.
PREVENTION
One dose of BCG vaccine provides protection against TB during childhood.
This needs to be given at birth, or as soon as possible afterwards.
TETANUS
Neo-Natal tetanus, the worst child-killer after measles, claims the lives of nearly one million children every year in the developing world.
Almost all newborn babies who contract tetanus die.
The disease is caused by unsterile methods of cutting the umbilical cord at birth or by ‘dressing’ it with ash, mud or animal dung.
SYMPTOMS
The first sign of tetanus in a newborn baby is the inability to suck or swallow and muscular spasms of the lips and mouth.
Muscular stiffness and spasms then develop throughout the body, which can be accompanied by convulsions.
PREVENTION
Pregnant mothers who are given the tetanus vaccine provide their baby with natural immunity for the first 12 weeks of its life.
Lasting immunity can be provided by then vaccinating the infant at 6, 10 and 14 weeks of age with DPT vaccine.
How every £6 you give can save a child's life.
Throughout the world, in over 120 developing countries, UNICEF is working to immunise all the world's children against the six major child-killing diseases.
It is not an easy task — and it is not just a matter of buying the vaccines.
Those vaccines have to transported to some of the most remote parts of the world and need to be kept constantly refrigerated, even in tropical heat.
Educating the people is vitally important too — because unless families understand why immunisation is so important, they will not bring their children forward to be vaccinated.
That is why UNICEF field workers and medical teams are working with local community and religious leaders in countless towns and villages to spread the word about how the six major diseases can be defeated.
The successful work that was done to eradicate smallpox some years ago shows what can be achieved.
It is ten years now since the last case of smallpox was reported.
Now, after years of hard work, we are in sight of immunising all the world's children against polio, tuberculosis, diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus and measles.
With your help we can achieve that goal in 1990 — and in doing so, we can save the lives of three and a half million children every year.
It costs around £6 to immunise one child.
That includes the cost of vaccines needles, syringes and cold storage.
Every £6 you can send will help save a child's life.
Please support our Passport to Health campaign and give as generously as you can.
Save the Children
Now Christmas is over, who will help the children?
Won't you be our friend?
Christmas is now behind us.
But before we lose the spirit of Christmas, will you make one more gift of kindness?
Wherever children are in need — month in, month out, year after year — Save the Children Fund helps with your help.
Save the Children is Britain's leading international children's charity.
Our aim: to bring help and comfort to poor, hungry, sick and needy children throughout the world.
We cannot achieve this aim without the support of friends.
Friends like the Post Office workers who have kindly agreed to deliver this leaflet for nothing….
And friends like yourself who are willing to give a child somewhere the gift of life and hope.
As this new year begins, there's so much work to be done…
Now, as a new year begins, will you help Save the Children to continue providing care and support all over the world?
Please read a little about our work, then give whatever you can.
You can be sure that your donation, however small, will make an important difference to the lives of needy children in Britain and overseas.
Working with children all over Britain
Here in Britain, Save the Children works with thousands of children every day.
And with your support, we can help give even more of these youngsters a better start in life.
Giving care and affection.
Organising community playgroups to look after the under-fives.
Offering after-school play and leisure opportunities for children with nowhere to go.
Devising ways to keep younger children out of care and older children out of trouble.
And giving young parents a source of friendly, practical advice.
Helping families to help themselves
For so many British children, growing up in an inner city area could mean missing out on so many things they need to grow up healthy and secure.
Sometimes, it's simply a question of somewhere safe to go after school while parents are working.
But there are greater problems, too.
Save the Children works all over the country to help children and their families overcome the effects of high unemployment, inadequate housing lack of community services, language difficulties and the family tensions that can follow.
Our drop-in Family Centres are a particularly important feature of our work in inner-city Britain.
They provide stimulating surroundings for the underfives and support for their parents.
Like all Save the Children's community projects, these Centres are developed in partnership with their users and parents are encouraged to play a major role in both running the Centre and raising funds.
Bringing new hope to children and parents
Overseas, too, Save the Children concentrates on long-term benefits for whole communities.
But even a small donation can make a big difference to one child's life.
In Africa, for example, it costs just 20p — the price of a cup of tea — to immunise a child against six killer diseases.
Yet every minute, six children die and six are crippled by TB, measles, polio, whooping cough, tetanus or diphtheria.
With your help we can end this needless tragedy.
And if you are a parent yourself, please spare a thought for the mothers of these children so far away.
Will you help us provide the basic hygiene and nutritional teaching they so desperately need?
By training one local villager we can bring change to a whole community.
What's more, we'll give families the economic and technical support they need to irrigate land, grow crops, raise livestock and so provide a better future for their children.
There's still so much to be done
In Britain today, and all over the world, there are countless children and their families whose future depends on Save the Children.
Will you help us to be there when they need us?
Please send whatever you can.
Just complete and detach the form overleaf and enclose it with your donation or credit card number in the envelope provided.
Thank you.
Read this vital message to you from The Princess Royal
‘Sadly, thousands of children in the world today suffer needlessly.
Not just overseas where Save the Children has built up a well deserved reputation for its long term and disaster work — but here in Britain, too.
Here, the Fund runs many family projects that are less well-known but doing work that is every bit as important.
This appeal is going out to you after Christmas.
At Christmas people give generously.
Not only to their own families, but also to charities, often in thanks for their own good fortune.
Afterwards, it's easy to forget that the important work for the children still goes on.
And still needs your support.
That is why I am asking you now to become a Friend of Save the Children.
This leaflet has been delivered free by your local postman or postwoman as a result of generous support by the Union of Communication Workers.
The Fund is very grateful to them for their help.
And to you, for yours.’
 Anne Her Royal Highness The Princess Royal GCVO President of The Save The Children Fund 
Give us a helping hand
For every £1.00 you give, the children get £1.33's worth or help.
It's easy.
It's called a covenant.
Which, very simply, means you agree to make a regular donation to Save the Children for four years or more.
We can then reclaim the income tax you — or your spouse — have paid already.
If you pay the basic rate, every £1.00 you give is suddenly worth £1.33.
That's enough to provide 100 antibiotic tablets to fight infections and sufficient vaccine to protect four children from polio for life.
When you sign the Deed of Covenant, it means you're helping us to give more help to more children.
You give
We receive
And we can buy
£12
£16.00
Laying hens to help 16 families in the Himalayas feed their children.
£24
£32.00
A doctor's stethoscope.
£60
£80.00
Enough food to give 330 children in India a nourishing meal.
£120
£160.00
Workshop tools to help UK teenagers in a high unemployment area to learn new skills.
£150
£200.00
A nurse working with sick children in Honduras for six weeks.
£250
£333.33
A solar-powered refrigerator to store vaccines which protect children from fatal diseases.
£500
£666.67
A generator providing vital power and light for a medical team working in remote rural areas.
When you consider that our work costs £100,000 a day, you'll understand why every penny counts.
Make your donation even more valuable
The most valuable way to give
Quite apart from the fact that every £1.00 you give us by covenant is worth £1.33 your contributions mean we can rely on a regular income.
So we have the financial security to meet our greatest challenge — developing long-term projects.
Why is this our greatest challenge?
Because Save the Children want to lay the foundations for a better future.
To help the children of today — and tomorrow.
That's why we spend your money on helping to build village vegetable gardens in Honduras.
Something more than emergency rations are required in a country where 80% of children under the age of five suffer from malnutrition.
And a village water supply will protect everyone from a common yet life-threatening disease like diarrhoea.
Your covenant means we help children in 53 countries around the globe.
By setting up mother and child health services.
Organising immunisation campaigns against killer and crippling diseases.
Training volunteer auxiliary nurses.
And supporting schools.
In the United Kingdom alone we run 100 projects and help 15,000 children every day, in many different ways.
You make it possible.
Please help us to make your money work even harder.
Complete the Deed of Covenant today.
And return it to The Save the Children Fund, Freepost, London SE5 8BR.
Later we shall send you another form to sign, so we can claim the tax.
Thank you…on behalf of the children.
With a covenant — every £1 is worth £1.33.
Enough to buy 133 antibiotic tablets.
A simple education — no country in the world has a future without it.
Relief schemes lead onto long-term projects, helping people to help themselves.
Your questions answered
Q. What is the minimum amount I can covenant?
A. We ask for £12 a year — to give a smaller amount please use the Bankers Order.
Q. How often do I make my donations?
A. It's up to you whether you prefer to pay monthly, quarterly or annually.
If you're able to lend us the entire amount of your covenanted donation at the outset (e.g. £100 if you decide to covenant £25 a year) we can invest your contribution as a lump sum and earn extra interest over the years and still reclaim the tax.
Just ask for more details.
Q. What if I don't have a Bank Account?
A. You can still make out a Deed of Covenant, and send the money directly to Save the Children by Postal Order.
Q. Do I have to pay income tax in order to help Save the Children by covenant?
A. No.
Provided your married partner is a taxpayer, we can still claim an extra 33p for every £1.00 you give.
However, under new tax rules, from April a husband and wife will be treated as two separate tax payers.
Therefore, your taxpaying partner will have to complete the deed of covenant in order for us to claim the tax.
Q. What if I'm in the higher tax bracket?
A. Then there's all the more reason to make out a covenant.
let's say you pay tax at 40%.
If you agree to give us £1,200 a year, the ACTUAL cost to your is only £960.
But Save the Children receives the startling amount of £1600…making your donation almost 67% more valuable.
Remember — you can help in other ways, too.
Sponsor a child
For millions of children, no money means no education.
Sponsorship will transform their lives.
When you become a sponsor, you help an individual child and receive regular reports about his or her progress.
Become a volunteer.
Your time can be as valuable as your donation.
Did you realise we've a network of over 850 branches in the UK?
Our volunteers raise millions of pounds every year.
Many have only a few hours to spare, but they enjoy helping in this way.
Leave a legacy.
We'd like to send you our free booklet ‘A Will to Leave.’
You'll find advice about making out a Will.
And we explain how a legacy helps Save the Children.
Ask for our catalogue.
Choose your gifts from our carefully chosen selection.
All profits go to the children.
Or, buy from one of our shops which are all run by volunteers.
Someone cares enough to sponsor his education.
He's lucky.
Help Save the Children
national schizophrenia fellowship
What is Schizophrenia?
Schizophrenia and related disorders are among the most disabling of mental illnesses.
Yet it is often a hidden disability, which isolates both the people who suffer from it and their families.
There are up to 250,000 sufferers in Britain today — about 20,000 of them in hospital at any one time.
(This means that it takes up more hospital space than any other single illness.)
Schizophrenia can take a number of forms.
It is difficult to diagnose, as there is no simple test.
But some experiences are common among people who suffer from it.
For example, hallucinations: hearing strange and often frightening voices.
Delusions: believing things about yourself and others which make ordinary life very difficult if not impossible, such as believing that people and even objects are working against you.
It is NOT a matter of having a ‘split personality’.
As a result of the illness, people with schizophrenia often have great difficulty in finding or keeping employment, housing, and relationships.
Without proper treatment and support, many end up homeless, unemployed for long periods, and cut off from their families.
Many sufferers do recover but frequently there are relapses.
Stress and other problems can make the illness worse.
There is no known cure but the illness can be treated — by medication backed by practical and caring support.
Founded in 1972, the National Schizophrenia Fellowship is a voluntary organisation set up by relatives of people with schizophrenia and allied disorders.
Self-help groups at local level provide information, advice and support to families and many are involved in developing housing and day activity projects.
Our advisory services answer thousands of queries from people all over the country.
We have helped with many television and radio programmes.
We organise conferences and meetings.
We have made reasoned submissions to National and Local Government and other authorities.
We need your support
Please send me more information about schizophrenia and the Fellowship, including a publications list, covenant form, and details of how to join.
I would like to make a donation to support the work of the Fellowship, and enclose a cheque/postal order
Friends of the Earth
July 1990
Within the next ten years much of the Amazon Rainforest could be wiped out.
Will you help stop this destruction?
Dear Friend,
Imagine you are driving at midday.
Your headlights are full on.
People are wearing face masks.
Others are choking on the acrid fumes.
Airports have been closed.
Smoke hangs in a yellow pall over half the country.
This is what it has been like during the dry season in Brazil for the past two years.
Thousands of fires raged out of control across Amazonia.
Millions of acres of rainforest were reduced to a desolate wasteland of charred tree-stumps.
In 1989 alone, an area nearly twice the size of Belgium was devastated.
Friends of the Earth desperately needs your help now to prevent the greatest man-made ecological catastrophe yet known: the systematic burning of the Amazon Rainforest.
TOMORROW WILL BE TOO LATE.
The tropical rainforests are the richest source of life on earth, the result of millions of years of evolution.
A four square mile area of rainforest can contain up to 1,500 species of flowering plants, as many as in the whole of Britain.
Rainforests contain tens of thousands of unique types of trees, birds, butterflies and mammals.
Many are now threatened with extinction.
The forest-dwelling people are being murdered, terrorised, infected with diseases and driven from their territories as the forests are being destroyed.
Entire tribes have disappeared as a result of forest destruction.
If the devastation continues at current rates, much of the Amazon Rainforest will have been obliterated by the end of the century, now just ten years away.
WHY ARE THE RAINFORESTS SO IMPORTANT TO US?
With all the problems facing us at home, what have the rainforests got to do with us?
In fact they are the key to our survival — and our planet's future.
This is because the deliberate burning of the rainforests pumps hundreds of millions of tonnes of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Carbon dioxide is the main cause of global warming — the Greenhouse Effect.
We now know this threatens to dramatically alter the world's weather patterns, raising sea levels and bringing floods, droughts and famines to us and the Third World.
Rainforests give us life in other ways too.
One in every four purchases from your local chemist contains compounds derived from rainforest species.
Many more life-saving drugs are waiting to be made from rainforest species.
And yet these species are vanishing at the rate of one every half hour, before we can even identify and research them.
For instance, 2,000 plants that promise to be valuable in treating cancer come from the rainforests.
A rainforest plant, the Madagascar Periwinkle, has been discovered to perform miracles in treating childhood leukaemia.
Already research has begun into chemicals from the Morton Bay Chestnut, an Australian Rainforest tree, as an inhibitive drug against the Aids virus.
Growing in the wild, plants related to our cultivated food crops provide new genetic strains.
With cross-breeding, they improve crop yields and increase resistance to pests and disease.
When we destroy this ‘genetic bank’ we may also kill our hope for feeding our planet in the future.
WHO IS LIGHTING THE FIRES IN THE RAINFORESTS?
Ludicrous as it may seem, government policies in some rainforest countries actually encourage the fires.
In Brazil, until very recently, wealthy farmers actually received tax subsidies as an incentive to burn the forest for cattle ranches.
Despite a cut back on subsidies, existing land ownership laws still encourage clearance for ranches.
But the ranches are also shortlived.
Rainforest soils are usually very poor and when exposed to the harsh sun and heavy tropical rains, their fertility is soon washed away.
When this happens, the land is abandoned and yet more rainforest is burned.
Transnational companies, particularly oil and mining concerns, are also to blame, driving new roads into remote areas to reach their concessions.
These roads open up the rainforest to waves of settlers who move into the forests and clear even more land by fire.
The crisis taking place in Brazil is happening throughout the world's rainforests.
The situation is now so serious that an area of tropical rainforest the size of 6 football pitches is destroyed every minute of the day.
WHAT IS FRIENDS OF THE EARTH DOING TO HALT THIS MADNESS?
Many people in rainforest countries are fighting to stop this terrible destruction, including Friends of the Earth organisations in Brazil, Indonesia and Malaysia.
They need our help now more than ever before to exert massive international pressure on the governments, institutions and companies involved.
So far:
we have joined with other organisations and persuaded the World Bank to pull out of a number of projects that threaten to destroy forests.
Friends of the Earth has persuaded Lloyds, Midland and Nat West Banks to re-direct their funds from a $600 million loan for destructive development projects in Amazonia;
we have written and published a new ‘Good Wood Guide’ to help stop the sale of rainforest hardwoods;
we are helping the Amazonian Indians and tribal people in Malaysia in their fight for survival by generating worldwide publicity for their cause, and campaigning to protect their rainforest lands;
we have persuaded the international paper-making giant Scott to pull out of a forest-destroying project in Indonesia;
we are persuading international companies such as BP, Shell and Conoco to make sure that their activities are not destroying rainforests;
we are researching overseas aid projects to show how the Amazon can be developed without harming the rainforest;
we are lobbying the EC to make sure its aid programmes and industrial activities are not destroying the rainforest.
These actions work.
We have proved that we can get things done.
By concentrating on the governments, banks and companies involved, and by assisting the tribal people, we can help to save the rainforests.
Your support for our work will enable us to be even more effective.
WE URGENTLY NEED YOUR SUPPORT
Remember, at the current rate of devastation, much of the remaining rainforest could be destroyed within the next 10 years.
We must act now to stop this happening.
Friends of the Earth relies on gifts from concerned people, and if you have taken the trouble to read this letter, I sincerely believe you may be one of those who will help.
Please support us today by joining Friends of the Earth.
Or if you prefer, by simply sending a donation of £100, £35, £20, £10 or whatever you can afford.
Every penny counts in the battle to save the forests.
Please reply today if you can.
The rainforests and the tribal peoples who live there have never needed your help so urgently.
Yours sincerely  David Gee Director 
PS.
If you are able to send a total of £35 or more we will show our thanks by sending you a free copy of ‘How to be Green’.
DON'T LET THE TROPICAL RAINFORESTS GO UP IN SMOKE.
IT'S UP TO YOU.
Friends of the Earth
TIME IS RUNNING OUT
Imagine a rainforest the size of England, Scotland and Wales.
Now imagine that same rainforest being totally destroyed by fire in just three months.
A terrifying thought isn't it?
It happened in Brazil last year.
Half the world's rainforests have already been destroyed, mainly in the last forty years.
And lost with the rainforests are endangered animals, rare plants and the homelands of innocent forest-dwelling people.
We must act now.
Unless we do, in the short space of one human lifetime, we will have undone millions of years of evolution.
Our whole future may depend on the rainforests.
We are the last generation who can avert this catastrophe.
THE CATALOGUE OF DESTRUCTION
The rainforests are being destroyed at a frightening rate, by burning, logging, flooding, mining and pollution.
In the Amazonian rainforests, deliberate burning is the greatest problem.
On one single day last year, a satellite spotted 8,000 fires.
The smoke this produced was so dense that it closed airports and smothered half the country.
The results of this wilful burning reach far beyond the rainforests.
Hundreds of millions of tonnes of carbon dioxide are pumped into the atmosphere each year from tropical forest burning, contributing to the ‘Greenhouse Effect’— or global warming — which could severely disrupt the world's climate.
Rainforests are the source of a multitude of raw materials with immense potential value to medical science.
Many of these will be lost forever, before they have even been named.
The Amazon rainforests alone are home to many unique animals and to one fifth of the world's bird species.
These are all under threat from the advancing destruction.
Rainforest-dwelling people have learnt to live in harmony with their environment.
Their unparalleled knowledge of the uses and properties of forest plants and wildlife will disappear with the forests.
SAVING THE RAINFOREST
Update
HOW ARE THE RAINFORESTS BEING DESTROYED?
In West Africa and South-East Asia, commercial loggers cut down hardwoods to supply rich consumer countries — but they rarely replant.
The governments of developing countries construct huge projects through foreign aid and investment.
Rainforests have been flooded for hydro-electric dams.
Roads and mining also cause widespread devastation.
But the benefits are usually very shortlived.
Transnational oil and mining companies pollute rivers and finance grossly disruptive mines.
To reach their concessions, they build roads into previously remote areas.
These roads create access for settlers and ranchers who advance yet further into the rainforest.
WHY IS THE RAINFOREST BEING BURNT?
In many countries the answer is cattle.
Existing laws actively encourage clearance of forests for cattle ranching.
and the quickest way to get the land is to burn the rainforests.
But the cattle ranches are shortlived.
When the land is exposed to the harsh tropical sun and torrential rain, it quickly becomes infertile.
When this happens the land is abandoned and yet more rainforest burned.
WHO LOSES?
The answer is brutally simple — everyone and everything.
The indigenous people who live in the forests all around the world have been murdered, terrorised and driven from their land by greedy developers.
Over 2,000 plants which are being investigated for their anti-cancer properties come from the rainforests — as more rainforests disappear, so too might a possible cure for diseases such as Aids.
Forest-dwelling animals and birds including the Jaguar, Woolly Spider Monkey and Scarlet Macaw are in imminent danger of extinction.
Many of our foods originate from tropical forest species such as rice, cocoa, fruit, maize and coffee.
Species not yet discovered could hold the answer to world hunger.
THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT
Burning tropical rainforest produces millions of tonnes of carbon dioxide each year, which contributes to global warming — the Greenhouse Effect.
Greenhouse gases trap heat and prevent its escape from the atmosphere into space.
As the world becomes hotter, there could be disastrous changes in weather patterns and widespread flooding as sea levels rise.
Living tropical forests also absorb carbon dioxide.
Without the forests, global warming will be even more devastating.
The Greenhouse Effect is now the e world's most pressing environmental problem.
One of the solutions is to protect the rainforests.
Visible light from the sun passes through the atmosphere to the earth's surface.
Heat radiation leaves earth.
Some escapes, but gases in the atmosphere trap the rest, keeping the earth warm.
A build-up of gases, including carbon dioxide and CFC's, prevents additional heat radiation from escaping, thus heating up the earth excessively.
What is Friends of the Earth doing and how can you help?
Friends of the Earth is mobilising public opinion around the world.
Already we have helped to pressure the World Bank into reviewing its road-building programmes and, most recently, to cancel a loan for a huge new dam in the Amazon.
We have helped to bring about the formation of the International Tropical Timber Organisation — to regulate the industry and to set up sustainable management.
We have encouraged the governments of Britain and the USA to reconsider their support for Indonesia's notorious Transmigration Programme.
We are working with a wide range of people throughout the world to find a balance between genuinely sustainable forestry and the outright protection of the last remaining virgin rainforest.
You can play your part.
All UK consumers have some impact on the rainforests.
Before you buy furniture, make sure it isn't made from tropical hardwoods, unless from a sustainable source.
If you travel to a tropical country, write to that country's tourist office to tell them that you are concerned about the preservation of their forests.
Don't buy curios or trophies made from wild species.
Exercise your democratic rights.
Write to your MP and to the European Parliament to insist that they act to stop the destruction of the rainforests.
Your letters really will make a difference.
And please help our vital campaigns by sending a donation to Friends of the Earth.
We rely entirely on the concern of private individuals like yourself.
Half of the world's rainforest has already been destroyed.
Burning
Road building
Flooding
Cattle Ranching
Mineral and Oil Extraction
Logging
ENDANGERED NOW
Scarlet Macaw, Amazonia, one of nature's most colourful birds.
Other imminent losses in Amazonia include the Giant Otter and the Woolly Spider Monkey.
Tiger, South East Asia.
Other creatures at risk in South East Asia are the Tapir and the Giant Atlas Moth.
In Sumatra, Rafflesia Arnoldii, the world's largest and stinkiest flower, is disappearing.
Gorilla, Congo Basin, Central Africa.
The mountain Gorilla, a uniquely social animal, is threatened by habitat destruction and poaching.
Jaguar, Central America.
One of the world's most beautiful cats is fast disappearing.
In 30 years, Central America has lost two thirds of its rainforests.
Friends of the Earth is one of the leading environmental pressure groups in the UK.
Established in 1971, FoE now has more than 270 active local groups in England and Wales, 180,000 supporters and a separate organisation in Scotland.
FoE's role is to persuade politicians and decision makers at every level that only by protecting the Earth can we protect ourselves — against pollution and the destruction of our urban and rural environment.
FoE campaigns on 12 major issues, including Global Warming, Tropical Rainforests, Water and Air Pollution, Energy, The Ozone Layer and Recycling.
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER
HOPE FOR THE FUTURE IN A CHANGING WORLD
CND
I'd like to take a few moments of your time…
We all have hopes for the future and that is why supporting CND is so important.
But our hopes aren't shared by everyone, especially those who threaten our future with nuclear weapons.
That is why I am writing to ask for your support.
Our government is making plans.
Plans for our future, without our consent.
Despite the changes taking place in Europe, it plans to station even more nuclear weapons here in Britain.
It's an illogical and dangerous policy.
But the time for Cold War policies is over.
The world is changing fast and it is the ideas of CND and the peace movement that are at the forefront of change.
We are the peacemakers.
CND is launching a new campaign as part of our overall goal of a nuclear-free world.
The time has come for Britain to cut its military spending and begin to use its limited resources for our real needs.
A ‘Peace Dividend’ for homes, hospitals and environment.
•We have commissioned a report that shows that spending money in the civil sector creates more jobs than spending money on defence industries.
•We will be briefing MPs, making sure they have accurate information, and ensuring that the ‘Peace Dividend’ is a major issue at all the political party conferences.
•We will be providing information for CND supporters around the country to show how a ‘Peace Dividend’ could benefit their local areas.
These are just some of our plans and they are ambitious.
We need to raise at least £50,000 to put our plans into effect.
One way you can support us is by sending a donation.
Now more than ever it is important to be a force for change.
Nuclear weapons are Britain's Berlin Wall.
Through the pressure of our numbers and the power of our campaigning, we too can bring them down.
We know we can succeed.
WE can get rid of Trident missiles just as we got rid of cruise missiles.
We can keep up the pressure for more treaties just as public pressure led to the signing of the INF treaty in 1987.
And we know from opinion polls that most people now want Britain to play its part too in making the world a safer place.
So play your part.
Please send us a donation and keep CND's peace message at the forefront of a changing world.
Thank you.
 Bruce Kent.
P.S. We can plan our campaigns more effectively if we have a regular income.
A Banker's Order would help us enormously and if you are able to fill in the form enclosed and send us £5 a month we will send you a FREE copy of our monthly magazine ‘Sanity’.
BY THE PRESSURE OF OUR NUMBERS…
AND THE POWER OF OUR CAMPAIGNING…
WE ARE SEEING CHANGE.
The Exile Appeal for Refugees in Britain
Refugees are people whose lives have been shattered by intolerance, persecution, torture and fear of death.
They seek a chance to rebuild their lives in safety, hoping that one day they may be able to return home.
The British Refugee Council has been working with and providing services to refugees in Britain since 1981.
There is an ever increasing need for our work.
That is why we appeal for your help.
Settling in
Most refugees have little time to prepare for life in a new country.
They arrive with few belongings, haunted by events left behind.
Often there is little respite when they get here.
How can they support themselves?
Will they be sent back?
Last year more than 3,000 refugees from 60 countries were helped by BRC workers.
New arrivals were also put in touch with groups of refugees from their own countries.
These community groups themselves provide a range of welfare and cultural services and can help reduce the isolation which so many refugees experience.
‘We don't come here for economic reasons — we come here to seek life.’
Ugandan refugee in Britain.
Refugee children
Recently a 17-year old refugee arrived in England with her three-year-old sister and applied for asylum.
Their father had been arrested; their mother was isolated in an area cut off by fighting.
Faced with this situation, the elder girl sold some family property and bought two tickets to London.
On their arrival immigration officers contacted BRC workers at the Langtry Walk hostel.
It is not unusual for unaccompanied children to travel as refugees.
Desperate parents often ask adults flying to a safe country to take their children for them.
The children are often left on arrival.
However, children do not always find it easy to get asylum.
Five children between the ages of nine and 14 who were on their way to Germany were left in London by accompanying adults.
Over a period of three weeks they were shunted back and forth between Germany, London and Cairo until the Home Office granted them temporary admission.
BRC was contacted and we found them somewhere to live and someone from their own country to look after them.
The children have lost contact with their families.
Their future is uncertain.
A refugee's story
‘I was arrested, imprisoned and tortured.
I did not expect to survive but miraculously I escaped and got out of the country.
Then my wife was taken.
She was imprisoned and tortured.
I arrived in England and applied for asylum.
I was put in touch with the British Refugee Council and given a room in one of their hostels.
They arranged English classes for me.
All this time I was desperately worried about my family.
I learned that my wife had been released but had very little money to live on.
I was fortunate to be granted full refugee status in under a year, this entitled me to bring my family here.
Again BRC was able to help.
It took a lot of organising.
I had not seen them for over two years.
Imprisonment and becoming refugees had affected us badly and we needed the support we were given.
Now I am studying to get a British qualification to continue the work I did at home.
We have been allocated a flat and I hope we can live a normal life in spite of the past.
BRC cares
Somewhere to live
Finding a place to stay is one of the biggest obstacles facing refugees on arrival.
Last year BRC hostels and satellite houses received over 500 refugees, giving priority to the disabled, torture victims, single parent families and women.
In addition to providing accommodation ourselves, BRC's team of housing workers find other accommodation for those in need.
Often we can secure the release of refugees from detention if we can find them somewhere to live.
The chance of a job
The difficulty of getting a worthwhile job is one of the greatest barriers to the successful settlement of refugees in Britain.
BRC trains hundreds of refugees each year for employment.
A home when you're old
BRC runs residential homes where elderly refugees can find the help and comfort they need.
Many still bear the scars of Nazi oppression.
Campaigning for change worldwide
On the international front, BRC spearheads the concerns of most British agencies involved with refugees worldwide.
We are in the unique position of having privileged access to information from their workers in almost every region where refugees are concerned.
At home, for example, we are seeking from the government a code of practice so that all refugees arriving here receive consistent, fair and humane treatment.
Who is a refugee?
A refugee is ‘a person who, owing to a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country’, according to the United Nations 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees.
By signing the Convention and Protocol, Britain chose to receive refugees favourably and not return them to countries where they may have reason to fear persecution.
Refugees bring with them not just a bundle of belongings but an accumulation of skills and knowledge and a real determination to make a positive contribution to their new country.
It doesn't take much to become a refugee.
Your race or beliefs can be enough.
Torture — the continuing pain
According to Amnesty International, torture is practised in more than 90 countries.
Many refugees have suffered from this and other forms of inhuman treatment.
Of course, most countries deny that they torture people.
Even this can affect refugees adversely — their stories of torture may not be believed when they apply for asylum.
Torture and other forms of trauma often result in devastating long-term psychological effects.
Victims need treatment, care and understanding.
They rarely forget the horror that they experienced.
Even those who receive treatment frequently break down in old age.
Previous generations of refugees still need our help and support.
Detained
Numbers of refugees seeking asylum in the United Kingdom are held in detention for long periods following their arrival.
Detainees are often subject to prison conditions despite the fact that they have not committed any crime.
Some asylum seekers have been detained for over a year.
Detention causes acute psychological stress; the trauma of fleeing persecution is heightened by imprisonment, isolation and the threat of deportation.
The myth of floods
It has been suggested that Britain is being ‘flooded’ with refugees.
The facts do not support such alarmist statements.
In 1988 there were 5,105 applications for asylum in the UK.
This is slightly up on the previous year but for the past five years there has been no substantial rise in the number of asylum-seekers.
Over the same period, over 400,000 immigrants have come to Britain and over a million people have emigrated to other countries.
Asylum-seekers are not a major factor in immigration terms.
Britain's generosity as a receiving country is, however, open to question.
In the same period from 1984 to 1987 we received far fewer applications for asylum from refugees than our European neighbours.
Sweden, Denmark, Belgium, Switzerland, West Germany, Austria, France and the Netherlands all received more applications for asylum from refugees than the UK both in absolute terms and in proportion to population.
From Simon Rattle CBE
Dear Friend
‘SUICIDE AGGRAVATED BY OFFICIAL INDIFFERENCE AND LACK OF CARE’ was the verdict on a Ugandan refugee who hanged himself while in detention in Pentonville Prison.
Ahmed Katangole was due to be deported, the Home Office had refused him refugee status.
Those chilling words — official indifference and lack of care — may well sum up the experience of refugees in many countries, not just our own.
But I find them particularly disturbing when related to the death of a refugee seeking asylum in Britain.
It is for refugees in Britain that I am writing to ask for your help.
The massive violation of human rights around the world — some 90 countries are believed to  practice torture — means that escape and exile is the only hope for many survivors of that oppression.
The British Refugee Council urgently needs your support for its vital work with and for exiles who seek a new life here.
Please be generous.
With grateful thanks, Simon Rattle 
P.S The target for this Exile Appeal is £125,000.
It is a lot for a young charity still to establish itself.
But it can be done — with your help.
‘It is because of you that I am living here in peace.
Otherwise I would have been sent back to my country and I do not know what would have happened to us.’
THE VEGETARIAN SOCIETY
LIVE STOCK FARMING ISN'T JUST KILLING ANIMALS
Meat is not cheap.
Apart from costing the lives of countless millions of animals each year, its production is also causing starvation for millions all over the world.
How can the production of food result in people going hungry?
Because over half the world's cereal harvest is fed to livestock being reared for slaughter, and not to men, women and children.
And it takes a full 3lbs of that grain to produce just 1lb of poultry.
Or 10lbs of grain to yield a mere 1lb of intensively reared beef.
It's a shameful waste of resources.
One that you can help to correct by rejecting meat from your diet.
Because the more people who go vegetarian, the more the agricultural industry — and it is an industry these days, as mechanical as any other — will be forced to re-assess its methods of operation and adjust its swollen meat production policy down as demand dwindles.
STARVING
A third of the world's population is starving.
15 MILLION children die every year because of malnutrition, die slowly and horribly.
And yet, this planet could supply ample food for everyone.
The problem is mis-management — a huge wastage of resources — take a look at these figures:
10 acres of land (that's about 5 football pitches) will support
61 people on a diet of soya beans
24 people on a diet of wheat
10 people on a diet of maize
2 people on a diet of cattle meat
At least ten times as many people can be supported on a cereal diet  than on a meat based diet — and that figure rockets up to 30 TIMES AS MANY people being supported by a diet based on soya protein.
This country alone could support 250 MILLION people on a plant based diet, that's almost five times the current population.
Countries like Ethiopia and India grow their own grain.
Countries like Britain take that food from where it is needed most to feed to livestock over here.
Did you know that we imported cereal from Ethiopia during the famine just so that we could have our meat?
So, next time you hear yourself say those words — I'm starving — think about what you are saying.
Are you really that hungry?
Are you really so hungry that you just have to nip into that fastfood burger joint?
THINK ABOUT THE CONSEQUENCES, THINK OF THE PEOPLE WHO REALLY ARE STARVING BECAUSE WE TAKE THEIR FOOD FROM THEM TO SATISFY OUR APPETITE.
SUFFOCATING
as if all this weren't reason enough, there's always the environment.
Tropical rainforest produces most of the oxygen YOU breathe, and right now large multi-national companies are clearing vast areas of that forest for cattle ranching.
Cattle that go to produce the basic ingredient of that beefburger.
Forests are destroyed, cattle reared and slaughtered and the land left infertile.
When that forest goes, it goes for good, and it's going fast.
100 acres of rainforest is devastated and disappears every minute of every day, cutting off our lifeblood, YOUR AIRSUPPLY.
MEAT ISN'T JUST MURDER, IT'S SUICIDE
YOU can do something about the situation, YOU can take personal responsibility for conserving the  worlds finite resources, by not consuming meat and animal products.
Cut down your meat consumption, better still cut out meat and slaughterhouse products altogether.
JOIN THE MOVEMENT TO STOP THIS WASTE & DESTRUCTION
JOIN THE VEGETARIAN SOCIETY
WE MUST STOP THIS MADNESS!
SEE INSIDE HOW YOUR DONATION WILL HELP US WITH THE FIGHT FOR THE FOREST…
The tropical rainforest tree pictured on the front of the leaflet was at least 400 years old when a chainsaw cut it down.
For centuries it was part of the richest life support system in the world.
But it was not the only rainforest tree to fall on that day.
Every day that passes 74,000 acres of rainforest in the world are burned, logged or bulldozed to the ground.
In the last 80 years half of the world's rainforests have been destroyed.
Wholesale destruction for hardwood doors, windows, coffins and plywood
Only two or three in every hundred forest trees are suitable for logging.
Yet in the course of logging over half the surrounding forest is severely damaged.
It's an immense price to pay for hardwood doors, windows, coffins and plywood.
Cattle Ranching
Hungry subsistence farmers follow in the wake of loggers.
They clear the remaining forest by fire, opening it up for their own agriculture, or to hand over to cattle ranchers.
Millions of acres of tropical forest have been cleared in the pursuit of cheaper beef for hamburgers.
Over 50% of the land cleared to produce hamburgers in Brazil has now been exhausted and abandoned.
Treasure chest thrown away
The tropical rainforests are a treasure chest of undiscovered medicines, natural drugs and chemicals, new disease resistant strains of fruits and crops.
Throwing them away is sheer folly.
Wildlife lost for ever Many rainforest species cannot live anywhere else.
They have evolved over millions of years to occupy their own niche, under the forest's protection.
While larger mammals can often adapt, many lovely birds, butterflies, moths and other insects cannot.
It's estimated that each day another three species are lost for ever.
The people of the forest
Anti-leukaemia and other drugs were only discovered when scientists talked to forest tribes.
That knowledge, handed down by word of mouth over generations is invaluable.
Yet since 1900, 90 entire forest tribes have been wiped out.
WWF is working to collect and save this knowledge.
The aftermath death, flood, famine
Cleared tropical forest soon turns to desert.
The hopes of financial reward turn to fear of disaster.
The thin soil that covers the forest floor is easily washed away.
Without plants and soil to act as a ‘sponge’, soaking up the rain and releasing it gradually, flooding is commonplace.
The forest also recycles nutrients and once it has gone all fertility goes with it.
In some countries famine has been the final ‘harvest’ of deforestation.
Ethiopia was heavily wooded not so long ago.
Its people now pay a heavy price for the loss of their forests.
Cutting down the forest is sheer madness.
There is no long term gain of any kind.
Only permanent, incalculable loss.
And burning it sends huge quantities of carbon dioxide into the air, adding to the ‘Greenhouse Effect’ that is already influencing world climates with such disastrous results.
It's got to stop, and stop now before it's too late.
OVERLEAF: How you can help us to stop the forest massacre
A living medicine chest One in four of the medicines we use, owe their origin to plants and animals in tropical forests.
Thanks to two drugs developed from natural alkaloids in a Madagascan plant, the Rosy Periwinkle, the chances of recovering from childhood leukaemia and several other cancers are now greatly increased.
Stop the destruction of the rainforest with a gift to WWF.
WWF is respected worldwide for its knowledge of wildlife and nature conservation.
And WWF has the ‘clout’ with foreign governments and large companies to bring a halt to the destruction of the rainforests.
Here's how:
Use the forests as a resource:
The rainforests are an immense resource capable of feeding and sustaining the growing populations of developing countries.
We are helping to set up protected National Parks and helping communities to ‘harvest’ the forests, so they see how much more valuable the forests are intact than cut down.
Hardwood planting:
We are persuading logging companies and governments to manage the logging of rainforests better and to grow their own hardwoods on separate plantations outside the rainforest.
But to continue this work we need your donation today.
Here's how your donation will help us to stop the forest massacre.
£18
will provide a WWF trained forest guard with a uniform.
£25
will provide enough fuel to keep a WWF forestry team Landrover going for a week.
£50
will buy enough tools and seeds to set up a tree nursery.
£100
4 gifts of £100 will pay for a WWF expert to go to Geneva to influence an international meeting discussing the fate of the rainforest.
£500
will be a major contribution to the costs of a forest resources survey in Brazil.
Recycled paper
World Wide Fund For Nature
The hardwood forest trees in this picture were at least 100 feet tall and took 400 years to grow.
Yet their death by chainsaw took only a few moments.
I am writing to tell you what those few minutes of destruction will now mean and to ask for your urgent help to stop this needless forest massacre before it is too late.
Dear Friend,
Very few trees in a tropical rainforest are good enough for logging — perhaps two or three in every hundred.
Here's what happens when loggers move in:— bulldozers clear roadways through the forest so the lorries and other equipment can get in.
Sunlight pours in on a world which has evolved to live in darkness.
Plants that can't survive in bright light die.
Birds and animals with ‘night eyes’ flee.
— as ancient hardwood trees are felled, they are dragged out by bulldozers or hauled through the front on overhead cables.
Over half the surrounding forest is severely damaged in this precess.
Yet more species of plant and animal life die out as their very specialised habitat is disturbed.
— when loggers move on, hungry subsistence farmers take advantage of the roadways.
Just a short time ago the forest was impenetrable…and safe.
Now it is open and defenceless against the machetes which slash down the undergrowth for tinder. — when the tinder is dry the fires can be lit to burn off the remaining forest to make way for agriculture or ranching (in many areas this ‘slash and burn’ forest clearance happens without first even removing the usable hardwood).
On the day you read this letter 74,000 acres of natural tropical rainforest, untouched for thousands of years, will be cleared in this way.
And in just some two years from now, perhaps three at the most, that same cleared forest ground will be abandoned.
Forest soils are so poor they can't support more than two or three seasons' crops.
Even grass grows so thinly that cattle can't feed properly.
Once the ground has lost its protective cover of vegetation it quickly turns to desert.
Where tropical forest grew only a few years ago, a vast desert is now rapidly engulfing inland Brazil spreading at a rate of several miles a year.
Clearing a rainforest in this way is sheer madness.
There simply are no long term gains to be had.
Only destruction and poverty.
And it's not just tropical countries that are affected.
Forest burning currently accounts for 20% of the world's annual production of carbon dioxide.
This is a major contribution to the ‘Greenhouse Effect’ with its catastrophic influence on the earth's climate.
Rainforests absorb carbon dioxide and produce the oxygen essential for all life, including our own.
That's why the forest massacre has got to stop.
And why it's vital that you help us to stop it.
And it has to stop now.
* Of the tropical rainforest that covered the equatorial belts of Asia, Africa and South America just 80 years ago, over half has now gone.
* At the present rate of destruction many countries whose only real asset is the forest may have none at all by the year 2,000.
It's hard to imagine a vast country like Brazil totally stripped of forest but it could happen unless we re-double our efforts now.
It's already very late in the day, but not too late.
If you will help us today, we have a plan of action which we know can work.
Here's what WWF is doing:
The forests are an immense resource capable of feeding and sustaining the people that live in forested areas.
Its produce of fruit, fish, nuts, raisins, dyes, medicines and natural chemicals are worth far more than the value of cut timber.
WWF is working to help the communities to learn how to manage their forests on a sustainable basis, so that they can benefit year in, year out.
Already we've secured two very important areas of tropical rainforest in Cameroon and Nigeria as protected National Parks.
We are helping to introduce better farming, livestock and soil conservation methods in the areas around the National Parks so the people don't feel a need to clear the forest for more land.
And we've helped people to start their own tree nurseries and grow their own trees for firewood.
Where not long ago the forest was thought of as an ‘enemy’, it is now a source of life and livelihood.
And we're working to get governments and logging companies to grow more of their own wood on special plantations so they don't need to invade the forest.
At the moment for every 100 trees felled only one is planted.
Both of these measures will be effective, but we urgently need to increase the scale of this work.
WWF is internationally respected for its conservation work.
People will, and do listen.
What we've got to get over now is the need for action straight away, not next year or the year after.
WWF have over 70 tropical forestry projects and these need your support now.
And if you will help us with a donation today, I know we can get the action we need.
Here's how your donation will help us to stop the forest massacre.
£15 will provide a WWF trained forest guard with a uniform.
£25 will provide enough fuel to keep a WWF forestry team Landrover going for a week.
£50 will buy enough tools and seeds to set up a tree nursery.
£100 4 gifts of £100 will pay for a WWF expert to go to Geneva to influence an international meeting discussing the fate of the rainforest.
£500 will be a major contribution to the costs of a forest resources survey in Brazil.
Amounts like these, and more are urgently needed.
WWF only exists because of the money we receive from our supporters.
So your donation will play a direct and important part in our work.
Please support this appeal by sending a donation today.
Your gift is urgently needed and will be put to immediate use.
If you can afford a donation of £18 or more, we will be delighted to send you our special WWF pen.
With many thanks for your help.
Yours sincerely, George Medley OBE, Director, WWF.
P.S. A rainforest tree can be felled with a chainsaw in less time than it has taken you to read this letter.
And many thousands will fall today.
Please send your gift straight away.
In the fight to stop the rainforest massacre, every day counts.
FREE With your donation
is this charming WWF Pen.
Accept this WWF pen with our thanks for your donation of £18 or more.
In the battle to save the rainforests every £1 counts.
That's why WWF will be delighted to send you our special WWF Pen as a gesture of thanks for your gift of £18 or more.
The pen comes in  it's own attractive slip case.
And because it bears our Panda insignia it will help to spread the message about our work when friends and colleagues see you using it.
Whales and Dolphins
Their future is now in your hands
Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society 19A James Street West, Bath, Avon, BA1 2BT.
Registered Charity 298656
So much in common Welcome to the awe-inspiring world of whales and dolphins.
A diverse family of warm-blooded mammals whose grace and beauty are well-known and appreciated across all five continents.
In contrast, we still know so little of the ways of life and intelligence of these magnificent creatures.
As the largest-brained animals on earth, whales are regarded by many as our ocean-going equivalents.
Certainly, they hold a very special place in human history and whether subjects of worship, art, friendship, fear, love or commercial exploitation, whales have always inspired the deepest feelings.
Over the centuries, trade in whale products helped many nations prosper; no country now generates wealth and food by taking this awful toll.
It's our turn now to give life back to whales and dolphins.
So different in nature
Despite a major international campaign in the 1970's, the world's whales are STILL in desperate trouble.
Recent surveys show previous estimates of whale numbers to be wildly optimistic.
Incredibly, certain countries continue their whaling activities against the best scientific and conservationist advice.
Thankfully, most large whales are now fully protected.
However, many of the smaller whales, such as dolphins, are not.
Hundreds of thousands of these animals are dying at man's hand every year.
Poisoned by pollution, hunted for meat, drowned in fishing nets or simply bored to death in captivity, the toll is growing by the day.
Largely unprotected and little understood, these populations of small whales need immediate investigation and protection if we aren't to repeat the dreadful and potentially catastrophic mistakes we've already made with large whales.
So how can you help?
‘Of course, all this takes a great deal of time and money.
But, most of all, it takes the will of people like you who care about whales and dolphins to make it happen.
So should we let them sink into oblivion and folklore?
Or should we give them back their dignity, their freedom and their rightful place in the natural order of the world's rivers and oceans?
Please show that you really care, either by joining the society or by supporting our work with a donation.
We are a registered charity that devotes ALL its time and resources toward the conservation and protection of every known species of whale and dolphin.
On the back of this leaflet, you'll find a few of the projects we're involved with.
Overleaf, a way to make many more a reality.
Time is running out — it's in YOUR hands.
Thank you.’
Membership benefits
Twice a year you will receive our highly acclaimed colour magazine —‘SONAR’.
Full of beautiful photographs of whales and dolphins, as well as reports from around the world.
Updates in our regular newsletter on national and international developments and activities.
Opportunities to join whalewatching expeditions.
The pleasure and satisfaction of belonging to one of the world's leading whale and dolphin conservation groups.
WHALE AND DOLPHIN CONSERVATION SOCIETY
WORKING THROUGHOUT THE WORLD
WDCS exposed the cruel trade in live orcas (killer whales) captured off Iceland in nets.
WDCS co-sponsored a study of the rare Hector's dolphin off New Zealand.
WDCS paid for vital repairs to a whale rescue boat in Massachusetts, USA.
WDCS is co-sponsoring a study of dolphins that are being harpooned off Peru.
WDCS is co-sponsoring a preliminary survey of the threats facing several dolphin species off Chile's coast.
WDCS published a special report on ‘Small Cetaceans — the forgotten Whales’ and an educational guide ‘Whales and Dolphins of the World’.
WDCS co-produced a report on the maintenance of cetaceans (dolphins and whales) in British dolphinaria
WDCS is leading the UK campaign against dolphin killing by the tuna industry.
AND WITH YOUR HELP WE PROMISE TO DO MUCH MORE 
Common dolphins (Photo courtesy of Marine Mammal Fund)
Friendly encounter with a wild bottlenosed dolphin (Photo courtesy of Brian Holmes)
Pilot whale being killed — Faroe Islands (Denmark)
Harpooned minke whale — Norway
Sean R. Whyte — Director WDCS
Humpback whale breaching (photo courtesy of James D Watt)
100% recycled paper
LIFE IS CHEAP.
WILL YOU BE A SPONSOR?
WHILE THE WESTERN WORLD BUYS LIFE'S LITTLE LUXURIES, IN THE POORER WORLD, LIFE ITSELF IS THE LUXURY.
Last year, over £900 million was spent on toys in the U.K.
Each year over a million African children die from diarrhoea spread by dirty water.
Britain ate its way through £3.3 billion of sweets in 1988.
Just £10 a month could give a child and family a chance to overcome desperate poverty.
You can help give them a more self-reliant future.
CAN YOU SAY NO TO A CHILD WHO NEEDS YOUR HELP?
Sponsoring a child means
You help one child, his or her family and community.
You commit yourself to long-term help as the only way to promote real change.
ALL the children in the target community benefit from the pooled fund of sponsorship money.
A maximum of 5% of your contribution is used to send you reports on the practical help your money provides and letters from your sponsored child.
You learn as you give, gaining new insight into the lives and needs of poor communities.
ActionAid.
Fighting poverty through child sponsorship.
Childhood should be a happy time and for many children in Britain it is.
Children in poorer countries are not so lucky.
While toy sales here have hit a record high they face a desperate shortage of clean water.
Diseases which cause our young only minor discomfort kill one in four children from Sierra Leone before their fifth birthday.
As Britain's largest Third World child sponsorship charity, ActionAid believes that long-term help — with agriculture, education, healthcare and training programmes as well as savings and credit schemes — is the only way the world's poor and their children will ever break free from crushing poverty and work towards a brighter future.
And we believe sponsorship is a key to this brighter future.
What sponsorship could mean to Kadiatu.
Seven year old Kadiatu lives in Numia in Sierra Leone.
Her people are farmers growing just enough food for themselves and a little rice and groundnuts as cash crops.
As a result of high demands made on the soil and the lack of good fertilizer, yields are low.
Kadiatu and her family live on a meagre rice diet and so suffer from protein and calorie malnutrition.
But you can help.
For through sponsorship, ActionAid is working to improve farming methods and educational facilities, and to set up a community development programme so the villagers themselves learn how to identify problems and deal with them more effectively.
Kadiatu's sponsorship money will also help pay for basic healthcare and hygiene training for her mother and other women in the village.
Sponsorship means giving direct help to assist people in their fight against poverty.
Please become a sponsor today.
What sponsorship means to the Hinch family.
Barry and Morna Hinch sponsor ten year old Baindu from Sierra Leone.
Helping a Third World child had been in the back of their minds for some time, but it was an ActionAid advertisement in their Sunday paper that spurred them into action.
The Hinches see sponsorship through ActionAid as the best way of helping a child and his or her community.
‘We chose sponsorship through ActionAid because of the personal link with a child and the fact that the money goes directly to help the child's family and village.
With ActionAid you know exactly where your money goes and the good it is doing.’
What impressed them most was that ActionAid works with the people themselves to decide how the money should be used to help the whole community.
When Barry and Morna sent off their first £10 ActionAid sent back a personal file on Baindu, and her community, plus a photograph.
They are sent regular reports on the community's progress and a quarterly paper reporting on ActionAid's work worldwide.
The Hinches see £10 as a realistic sum to pay out each month, especially with the convenience of a direct debit.
‘It's good to see that a small amount can achieve so much.’
SPONSOR A CHILD.
Please.
Baindu has been lucky.
But there are thousands of children like Kadiatu waiting for the help sponsorship can bring.
And one of them is waiting for you.
All you have to do is pick up a pen, or phone and send your first ten pounds.
Thank you.
£21.75
33p a day
Sierra Leone photos by Jerry Flynn.
LONDON ASSOCIATION FOR THE BLIND
Dear Friend,
I wonder what you will say in answer to this letter; I shall await your reply with some anxiety, for if our letters go into the waste paper basket we shall be unable to continue our many services for the benefit of those who are blind.
Although our Head Office is in London, we help registered blind and partially sighted people nationwide, particularly through our Grants-in-Aid scheme which makes over 6,000 payments a year to blind people in need.
Were it not for the support of sympathetic friends, the residents in our Homes and those who work in our factory could not be given the necessary help and encouragement to overcome their handicap, for we are dependent on voluntary help.
I expect you receive many similar requests; you cannot respond to all, I know.
But if you have the gift of sight, please close your eyes…and I feel confident you will extend a helping hand to those on whose behalf I am writing to you.
Yours sincerely  Eileen Howard E Howard (Mrs) Appeals Secretary 
P.S. Please act NOW — a cheque in the post is worth two in your cheque book!
Your donation will help in practical ways
Help in time of need
Many blind people struggle to pay their bills and provide themselves with the necessities of life.
We have an alarming number of distressing cases in our files of youngsters, families and old folk who need us.
And we can help in a variety of ways with immediate cash help…paying towards the cost of a heating bill…a rates demand…or a telephone bill, sometimes an elderly person's only link with the outside world.
Small sums of money, but the hope they can restore is priceless.
Somewhere to live
We can provide a proper home for those who find themselves with nowhere to live.
Many of the people we care for suffer from other crippling disabilities as well as their blindness.
We have sheltered accommodation, with understanding professional staff, for blind men and women who are unable to look after themselves.
And we run purpose built flats (the world's first) for those able to lead independent lives.
We can also offer short holidays for blind people in our two hotels, carefully adapted for their special needs.
Somewhere to work
We can also provide suitable employment for blind people in our modern factory in London.
It is difficult to find work these days, but for blind people it is virtually impossible.
We are able to give them the independence they so badly need, and with it self respect and dignity.
London Association for the Blind, 14–16 Verney Road, London, SE16 3DZ Telephone: 071–732 8771 
Helping Blind & Partially Sighted people since 1857
Founded in 1857 helping blind and partially-sighted people nationwide.
Registered charity 295913 A Limited Company registered in England 26688.
All year round we help blind and partially sighted people living near you!
Blindness can strike anyone at any time, regardless of who they are or where they live.
That is why London Association for the Blind extends its help to people throughout the country and is at work in your area.
An important part of this work is the provision of cash grants to visually impaired people in need.
Now we are appealing for money and we are asking the people of Oxfordshire for their help; money so that we can continue to help people in your county like John Granger…
Strongly independent all his life, John Granger didn't let blindness change his lifestyle, and although now in his nineties has only just moved into a sheltered flat in Oxford.
John likes to visit his old friends and also travels to see his brother who has had a stroke.
The high travel costs added onto everyday expenses were causing John distress and so LAB were pleased to award John an annual grant to help him keep in touch with his brother and retain his independence.
Registered as blind, Gail Thompson from South Oxfordshire also has a degenerative illness which has left her wheelchair bound.
Gail now lives with her widowed mother who looks after all her needs.
They are both on low incomes and find it very hard to cope with all the additional expenses of Gail's illness.
LAB were able to make an annual grant to Gail to help ease her financial difficulty.
Doris Howell recently suffered the shock of losing her sight practically overnight and finds everyday things difficult to cope with.
She lives in a top floor flat in Oxford and has had several accidents on the stairs leaving her very unsure about going out on her own.
Existing on a small pension, Doris can't afford a fridge and has to buy fresh food nearly every day.
LAB were happy to make a special grant for a fridge for Doris so she doesn't have to shop so often.
From household bills to fridges, we are there for those who need us.
Will you be there for us?
(Cases mentioned are factual.
Names have been changed to protect the privacy of those involved)
YOUR DONATION WILL HELP IN PROVIDING —
Cash Grants to those in need
Holiday Hotels
Residential Accommodation
Flats and Flatlets
Care Homes
Training and Employment
ALTERNATIVES TO A DIRECT DONATION
Banker's Order
Deed of Covenant
Deposited Deed
Legacy
Please tick box on coupon below for further information on the above.
Not so long ago, John Hargreaves had cancer.
If he can run for us, so can you.
Thanks to cancer research, John is now fit and well.
Since his recovery, he's been running for the Cancer Research Campaign.
The CRC depends entirely on voluntary contributions.
Why don't you help by running for us?
Write to us and we'll send you official sponsor forms, a CRC running vest, a fixtures calendar and a discount card worth 15% on selected mail order sportswear.
With the London marathon coming up, there's no better time to start.
Even if you don't win, you'll be helping us beat cancer.
Fighting cancer on all fronts.
JOIN THE RACE TO BEAT CANCER
We all know someone who has cancer or who has died of this dreadful disease.
Discovering new treatments and techniques in the fight against cancer is the aim of the Tenovus research teams.
Will you help raise funds to maintain this important research by getting yourself sponsored each time you enter an event?
Please help yourself and others to combat this killer disease.
TENOVUS FIGHTS CANCER
Barnardos
Keep fit and run for the charity which values your contribution
Make your effort go farthest.
Run for the children and young people who are disabled or disadvantaged.
Call John Girling on 081–550 8822 for your free running vest, car sticker, sweatband and sponsor form.
I WANT TO HELP!
r=it1 in every 700 people in the U.K. may have Multiple Sclerosis
ARMS has for 15 years battled against Multiple Sclerosis on behalf of sufferers, their carers and families.
ARMS range of activities includes: ½ million pound Research Programme; Education and Information; Telephone Counselling; Face to Face Counselling; Physiotherapy; Nutritional Advice; Speech Therapy; Continence Advice; Oxygen Therapy; Social Interaction.
A choice of 64 Centres and Support Groups nationwide.
I wish to help ARMS in their fight against Multiple Sclerosis.
Please send me a sponsorship package and free t-shirt as soon as possible.
NSPCC
BY LISTENING HELP US PROTECT CHILDREN
As part of the Society's work to protect children from abuse and neglect a national NSPCC Child Protection Help Line is being launched in the Spring of 1991.
A single national number, free to all callers, will be available to anyone wishing to seek advice or take action on behalf of abused or neglected children.
WILL YOU HELP US RAISE £6 MILLION TO FUND OUR NEW SERVICE?
Please send me a free Running Vest and Sponsor Pack.
GREENPEACE
LONDON MARATHON
Against all odds, Greenpeace has brought the plight of the natural world to the attention of caring people.
You can help us even up the odds.
Get sponsored for Greenpeace when you run.
For sponsor forms and information please write to:
OR RING OUR HOTLINE ON: 071–704–8101
Quote the code DS002 to receive a FREE running vest (state M, L or XL).
AGAINST ALL ODDS
The Malcolm Sargent Cancer Fund for Children
Patron H.R.H.
THE PRINCESS OF WALES
The Fund was launched on March 26, 1968 as a lasting and practical memorial to the much-loved British musician whose name it bears.
Over 1000 new cases are accepted by the Fund each year.
Grants are made for warm clothing, heating bills, beds and bedding, nourishing foods, convalescent holidays, etc.
One of our Social Workers has written:‘Mrs. Young was deeply grateful and delighted by the morale grant for Mark.
When she told him he spent hours studying catalogues and brochures deciding how to spend it.
As Mark has a fascination for all things electrical, he decided on an electronic watch that ‘spoke’ the time.
Despite his overall fatigue and discomfort, Mark wore it proudly and explained and demonstrated how it worked to everyone involved in his care.
I certainly feel it was a great delight to him during the last days of his life.’
All funds raised by runners in sponsored marathons or ‘fun runs’ are gratefully acknowledged and help to provide convalescent holidays, travel expenses and little luxuries for our children.
A red cotton T-shirt or running vest is available at a nominal charge of £1.00 together with sponsorship forms.
Run for Shelter
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE ARE HOMELESS IN BRITAIN and many more live in unhealthy or dangerous conditions.
YOU CAN HELP THEM.
When you run get sponsored for Shelter!
The money you raise will give practical help — and hope — to homeless people.
RUN YOUR MARATHON ON BEHALF OF INTERMEDIATE TECHNOLOGY
Intermediate Technology enables poor people in the Third World to develop and use technologies and methods which give them more control over their lives and which contribute to the long-term development of their communities.
Contact Debbie Smith at Intermediate Technology, for your sponsor form and T-shirt.
CHATSWORTH HOUSE OBSTACLE RACE
SUNDAY MAY 19th 1991
START 19 NOON
6 miles with obstacles.
Teams of four.
Entry fee £4.00 per team member.
Souvenir to all finishers.
Prizes to winning teams.
Family day out with fundraising stalls and the delights of Chatsworth House.
All proceeds to the British Deaf Sports Council.
Assisted by INPRINTS SCREENPRINTERS and LIONS INTERNATIONAL
NATIONAL ASTHMA CAMPAIGN
ON APRIL 21ST, RUN FOR SOMEONE WHO CAN'T.
Taking part in the marathon could be out of the question for many people with asthma.
They have to live with the fear of sudden attacks that leave them struggling to breathe.
And every year asthma kills more than 2,000 people.
That's why we need your help to raise money for urgent medical research.
Send off the coupon for your free T. Shirt and sponsorship form.
And get out there and run for those who can't.
Birthright
Research for healthier babies and healthier women
‘Babies — I'd run a mile’
How often have you heard that said by men and women in their teens and early twenties?
Yet when you have your own baby, it's all so different.
Only then do you understand the heartache of women whose pregnancies end in disaster or those who can't have the baby they want.
Birthright's medical research tries to overcome these problems and many more.
So say thank you for the health of your baby by supporting Birthright when you run.
TORTOISES WANTED
CAN YOU HELP?
In fact, it's not just tortoises we want, we'd also love a few hares, a few gorillas and lots of colourful clowns.
In the last London Marathon an equally strange collection of runners gave the One Small Step appeal a great boost.
In 1991, with your support, the appeal could pass its finishing post.
BIG REWARDS!
One Small Step is building a laboratory that will help keep many children from lives spent in a wheelchair…please help to make this possible for our kids and run for them in the next London Marathon.
LONDON MARATHON '91
Run for us, so we can run for them…
By running for Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital Fund you could help support the research desperately needed to save children's lives.
Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital Fund
RUNNING TO HELP REBUILD LIVES
‘A very special, personal kind of care’.
That is what we provide in our residential homes for elderly people.
And in our psychiatric rehabilitation centres for men and women of all ages recovering from mental illness.
Both groups need very special care — yet so often they are the forgotten people in our community.
Loneliness, fragile health and homelessness are just a few of the problems they face without our help.
All our residents receive a very special, personal kind of care.
But we need your help to continue our work.
There is no better way to help people in need than through supporting Care.
Will you please consider running to help us rebuild more lives and show that you, too care?
For further information, sponsorship pack and free T-shirt, please contact: Liz O'Sullivan  
2Care*
*Care for the Elderly and Hope for the Hurt Mind
Support Disabled Sports
Help people with disabilities to enjoy participation in their sport by running and raising funds in 1991 for The British Sports Association for The Disabled.
The charity that provides the opportunities and facilities for disabled people to take part in sport.
We need YOUR support to enable us to continue with our work.
Please pledge your support below and we will send you a Running Vest or ‘T’ Shirt and sponsor pack.
HOMES FOR HOMELESS PEOPLE TRUST
We are the only charity that actually houses single homeless people on a national basis.
We have 26 member groups throughout the U.K. working on the frontline of homelessness.
So, every penny that we receive goes towards cost-effective direct provision for the single homeless.
NSE NATIONAL SOCIETY FOR EPILEPSY
1 in 200 has Epilepsy
We provide short term medical assessment and rehabilitation of those newly diagnosed, and long term care if necessary.
We are foremost in research and have an acclaimed information service.
We must raise £1,200 per day to continue our vital work.
Please help us to help them help themselves.
I'D LIKE TO HELP.
I'VE BEEN ACCEPTED FOR London Marathon…(other events)
Please complete form overleaf and we will send you a free vest and sponsorship package.
RUNNING FOR STARLIGHT
The Starlight Foundation grants wishes for critically/chronically and terminally ill children.
We shall soon see our 500th wish come true and are now organising a wish-a-day.
But we need YOUR help to ensure we never say no to any of our ‘special children’.
Please help us.
For free T-shirt and sponsorship form please reply to:
New York could be only 26 miles away
If you run for St. John Ambulance in the 1991 ADT London Marathon
As a runner you'll be familiar with the work of St. John Ambulance volunteers.
YES VOLUNTEERS!
It seems we do such a professional job many people don't realise we are funded by voluntary contributions and not by the Government.
Our ambulances, First Aid Units, uniforms and even our Vaseline is paid for by donations.
So if you have a place in this  years ADT London Marathon or indeed any other running event please raise money for St. John Ambulance.
And remember…we can only be there ‘Providing You Care!’
Win a Trip to the New York Marathon
The runner who raises the most money for St. John Ambulance in the 1991 ADT London Marathon will win a trip to the New York Marathon (including guaranteed entry, return airline ticket, accommodation and transport to and from the Marathon).
Win a Trip in St. John's Hot Air Balloon
Anyone who raises money for St. John Ambulance in the 1991 ADT London Marathon will be entered into a prize draw to win a fantastic trip in our very own hot air balloon.
After all we might as well put all that hot air you produce to some good.
To run for St. John Ambulance simply complete the form below and send it in to our Marathon team.
We'll send you a special St. John running vest and a leaflet giving you hints on fund raising.
Could this be stopped with a Phonecard?
During the last four decades, the natural habitats of Britain's wildlife have been ravaged by modern farming methods, urban sprawl and pollution.
140,000 miles of hedgerow, 95% of traditional hay meadows, 40% of natural woodlands and 60% of wild heathland have all been destroyed.
As a result, the otter, barn owl and red squirrel are now virtually extinct in many parts of the country.
To protect those that remain, The Royal Society for Nature Conservation is running the British Wildlife appeal, chaired by Sir David Attenborough.
The aim is to raise £10 million, and to help with this, British Telecom have donated £100,000 to the appeal.
As well as this donation, British Telecom have produced three special Phonecards depicting the otter, barn own and red squirrel in order to help raise awareness of both the appeal and the plight of British wildlife.
Each Phonecard comes in a special wrapper giving you the information you'll need to add to British Telecom's donation, with the money that's raised going towards protecting the natural habitats of all endangered species in Britain.
These animals cannot speak for themselves.
But, by buying one of these new British Telecom Phonecards, each one of us will have the chance to speak on their behalf.
British TELECOM It's you we answer to 
CONCERNED FOR OUR COUNTRYSIDE?
Help the Woodland Trust protect Britain's heritage.
The Woodland Trust is dedicated to protecting one of the most important features of Britain's heritage — our native broadleaved woodland.
We already care for over 400 woodland areas, and in addition to saving, on average, a wood every week we're planting thousands of trees each year to create new woods.
By joining one of Britain's fastest growing conservation charities you can help conserve and improve Britain's landscape for present and future generations to enjoy.
Membership starts at £8 and you'll receive regular newsletters, a car emblem and a guide to Woodland Trust woods which are free for you to enjoy.
EXCLUSIVE OFFER
Join now and we'll send you a quality reproduction print of a beautiful woodland scene, FREE.
We ask everything of him.
We ask just £6 of you.
Every time a lifeboatman puts to sea, he risks his life.
Becoming one of our members helps reduce those risks.
Because your £6 helps buy him protective clothing and helps us provide him with the best equipped boats.
All of which will make his task safer to undertake.
And as the lifeboats are run entirely on voluntary contributions and membership fees, the £6 you give to us is vital.
For men who never question whether they should go, is £6 too much to ask?
Royal National Lifeboat Institution
40 PAGES OF GIFTS, CLOTHES AND TOYS FROM AROUND THE WORLD
From beautiful alpaca wool jumpers to a handcrafted rocking chair — from puzzles that'll confound to a traditional tribal face mask…
There's no other catalogue quite like the OXFAM Christmas catalogue.
Because no other catalogue offers such exciting gifts from all over the world — at such value for money prices.
And there's a very special offer for you if we receive your request as a result of this notice.
You'll be entitled to a free pack of thirty Christmas cards worth £4.95.
We'll send all the details with the catalogue.
So reserve your OXFAM Christmas catalogue now.
SAVING HISTORIC HOUSES IS NOBLE.
LIVING IN ONE IS SUBLIME.
Dating back to medieval times, Britain's historic houses are one of our greatest treasures.
However, but for the work of Country Houses Association many would have been lost to the nation.
We are a charity dedicated to their preservation.
One of the ways we achieve this is by creating apartments within the houses, based on a monthly charge from £600 per person together with a returnable loan.
Included in the monthly charge are all meals, central heating, hot water, maintenance and cleaning.
For more information simply return the coupon.
COUNTRY HOUSES ASSOCIATION
What's it worth to join the RSPB?
The future of our wild birds and environment is under threat.
Heathlands, hedgerows and woodlands are vanishing.
Moorlands are being destroyed marshes drained, streams cleared and river banks cut back.
Every year, countless agonising deaths occur through the pollution of rivers from factories or oil spillages at sea.
On land, the use of pesticides is endangering both our birds and their food.
What is the RSPB doing about it?
Backed by thorough research, we press for new laws and policies to create a healthier, richer future.
We have established over 100 nature reserves.
We have saved many birds (like the Avocet) from extinction in Britain.
But action costs money.
To continue this vital work, we urgently need your help.
Please help us in the Action for Birds today.
IF YOU CARE, THE RSPB WILL ACT.
CAPTIVITY DRIVES TURTLES UP THE WALL.
This pet turtle will continue walking into the glass until its snout is bloody.
He exists, stressed and traumatised, in complete conflict with his biological program, literally dying to be free.
The Reptile Protection Trust wants to ban the trade in pet turtles.
Money raised would fund our campaign to lobby relevant authorities internationally and engage in public education.
If you would like to help the Trust or find out more, send £2,30 for our fact sheet and booklet, ‘Reptiles: Misunderstood, Mistreated and Mass-Marketed’.
If you want to keep turtles happy, don't keep them at all.
THE REPTILE PROTECTION TRUST