

THE WEDDING OF THE CENTURY
No marriage has had the exposure of this one.
It was the wedding of the century, the fairy tale that excited, fired and fascinated people all over the world.
Millions poured on to the streets of London on 29 July 1981 to be able to say they were there on the day, to tell their children and grandchildren what it was like.
Hundreds of millions more watched it on television and can remember the dress she wore, the horse-drawn carriage she arrived in, the kiss on the balcony of Buckingham Palace, the cheering, the music, the colour and the happiness.
For Lady Diana Spencer, just twenty years old, it was the most thrilling day of her life.
She walked down the long red-carpeted aisle of St Paul's Cathedral a commoner.
She returned a Princess.
It was all her dreams come true.
She had married her Prince, the man she loved.
They would have beautiful children and live happily ever after.
But it was not quite so simple.
As she took her wedding vows, Diana was saying goodbye to the life that she had taken for granted for twenty years.
Saying goodbye to the freedom to walk down a street on her own, to browse through the sales, to decide on the spur of the moment to visit friends, or meet for a drink in the pub.
She had married not just the man, she had married his job, and all that it involved.
She had married a man for whom duty always came first.
She had married a large, closely knit family.
Worse still, she had married into a life so public that at times she felt there was no place on earth where she could escape from the prying eyes.
The Prince had high hopes on that July day too.
He had spoken earnestly, some years before, about finding the right girl to marry, about not letting his head be ruled by his heart; but come the day, he had married because he had fallen in love.
At the age of thirty-three, he had found someone to share his life and passions with; someone to help shoulder the burden.
Someone pretty, witty and sexy, who made him laugh and feel young and carefree.
But it was not to be quite as he had hoped either.
Their ten years of marriage have been fraught with difficulties that neither could have foreseen.
They have had to learn to live with one another, to adjust, to get used to each other 's habits, hobbies, friends and relations — the most crucial and critical period for every newly married couple — but they have had to do it all under the full glare of the media.
Every step, every look, every word has been quoted, scrutinized and analysed.
They have been spied on by the paparazzi, betrayed by trusted servants, embarrassed by indiscreet friends, and have had to endure a constant torrent of innuendo, gossip, lies and half-truths in newspapers, magazines and books — none of which are they able to repudiate.
29 July 1981.
Newly married, Charles and Diana on the steps of St Paul's Cathedral
At times it has looked as though the difficulties might have proved insurmountable, the strain too much.
The media seemed to be willing the marriage to fall to pieces.
The adulation that had greeted Diana in the early days began to turn sour.
‘Revelations’ from a bitter ex-valet branded her a tyrant with a heated temper who had swept into the Prince's life and, like a spoilt child, banished trusted staff and old friends and even stopped the Prince from hunting and shooting.
Charles, said journalists ‘in the know’, was being ‘pussy whipped’ by a petulant and jealous wife.
Any attempt to redress the situation backfired.
The couple invited newspaper editors to a series of private lunches at Kensington Palace, to appeal to their better nature, but to no avail.
The editors revelled in the honour, ate their lunches and went back to their offices to continue publishing every last tit-bit they could find.
The Prince and Princess allowed the television cameras into their home, so the public could see for themselves that they were a close and happy family.
After a hour of simpering sycophancy from the presenter, the Prince took the viewer into his garden, where he said he loved to sit and think and talk to his plants.
That was it.
The loony Prince.
Every time he tried to make any kind of serious statement or speech for years thereafter, people came back to the plants.
They were worrying times.
Diana took the criticism to heart, avidly read what was being said about her and became depressed and despondent.
Charles worried about the effect it was having on her; and grew angry and frustrated on his own behalf, that no one seemed interested in the ills of the world.
All they wanted to do was poke fun at him, look at the cut of his suit, or his hairstyle, or measure his bald patch.
Ten years on, however, Charles and Diana have come through it.
They have found a new enthusiasm for life, a new determination to be the people they are and behave as they will.
They have settled down, sorted out their personal problems, adjusted their lives to accommodate each other, found a way to cope with the pressure and emerged with a very strong successful partnership.
Furthermore, the strength they have built into their marriage has brought confidence to them both.
Diana has made the transition from girl to woman and has become secure and fulfilled; Charles has confronted the spectre of middle age and doubt, and emerged certain.
He has not just found a role for himself, which was something he had agonized over for years, but has used his position to lead an assault on the ills of modern society; to try to alter people's basic thinking, not just in an effort to improve their lives, but to persuade them of the need to preserve the planet for future generations.
After years of being thought a crank, he is at last being taken  seriously.
Where once he felt like giving up, he now has the zeal and determination to push further and harder and keep on going until there is real change in the way mankind behaves.
1990 in Hungary.
Ten years on their problems are behind them
The Prince's contribution is unique.
It is unlike that of any politician, environmentalist or businessman, however committed and well intentioned they may be.
He has taken up the challenge to lead.
He no longer simply makes meaningful speeches that stir things up.
He believes we are at a deeply significant turning point in human history and if we are to come through it we have to change not just the way people behave, but also the way in which they think.
He is convinced we have to adopt entirely new value systems, change our philosophical orientation and spiritual thinking; stop behaving as though the earth is here for mankind's personal convenience and learn to regard ourselves as one small part of a much larger whole.
He knows precisely where he is going now and is fit and eager for the challenge.
He no longer fears ridicule or criticism; instead, his fear is that people will not act swiftly enough, that human nature has locked itself into a process of acquisitiveness and materialism, and that three hundred years of our industrial society have alienated people from the aesthetic values mankind once possessed.
These are his own thoughts; the Prince is nobody's puppet.
The press scoffed at his walks in the Kalahari Desert, at his fascination with lost and ancient tribes; but experiences like that, plus a lifetime of travelling all over the world, seeing underdeveloped and overdeveloped countries and every kind of political regime, has brought him to this viewpoint.
Time and again he is savaged for speaking on subjects about which his critics claim he knows nothing.
In fact, his education is encyclopaedic and eclectic.
He reads and digests material on a vast range of topics and picks the brains of most of the leading authorities.
He trawls for advice and information from dozens of people, who find themselves invited to Kensington Palace quite out of the blue.
The Princess has her own area of interest.
Her concerns are much closer to home, much more for people and individuals than cosmic matters, which provides a perfect foil for her husband.
She has spent much of the last ten years establishing herself and securing her home base, and it is only now that she is beginning to realize her potential.
She has grown into an elegant and gracious woman, but lost none of the spark that made her such an endearing young bride.
She wins hearts everywhere she goes, and, with a quick aside, puts everyone instantly and skilfully at their ease.
She also goes anywhere she wants.
She has emerged as independent, resourceful and resilient.
With no qualifications and precious little experience, she has taken on the job of Princess of Wales and is turning it into a significant career — and at the same time has brought up two small boys.
Five years ago people might have thought her greatest contribution had been to the British fashion industry.
No longer.
She has turned into a champion of the underdog, gone out on a limb to support unglamorous causes like AIDS victims, drug abusers and the mentally handicapped.
She has worked tirelessly and helped raise millions of  pounds for the charities she has taken on.
She is now growing into a confident speaker, prepared to say what she thinks.
Whereas once her every outfit hit the headlines, it is now her every word — and they are very much her words.
In this respect, she has learnt a great deal from her husband.
Like the Prince, she requests and gathers together information and reading material on all of the subjects she has taken on.
People who meet her in the course of a briefing or a visit are constantly surprised by her knowledge, the intelligence of her questions, and her retention of what she has read — often on quite scientific subjects.
Added to that is her instinctive feeling for people — what to do and say that will please them most.
She is in the good news business and a master of the art.
Diana wins hearts everywhere she goes
Between them, the Waleses have established a way of operating over the last ten years that is unmistakably their own; and quite unlike any other branch of the Royal Family.
Their homes, both in London and in the country, epitomize their attitude.
They are comfortable, friendly, lived-in places; elegant, not grand.
The furnishings are pretty, a mixture of modern and antique, and the rooms are full of light and colour, with large vases of flowers and pot plants liberally scattered about.
Children and dogs run around and climb on the furniture.
Their sons are noisy and mischievous and don't always do what they are told, and in every respect are normal, healthy, confident little boys.
There is formality when there has to be, but everyone who visits either house is immediately put at ease.
They have achieved the same in the way they work.
Traditionally, members of the Royal Family play a passive role.
Wherever they go they are escorted by a vast armada of local dignitaries, including the Lord Lieutenant, the Mayor or Mayoress, complete with the chains of office, the Chief Constable of Police and every last member of the town council.
This mass of people, all dressed in their Sunday best, bedecked with badges and brass, hovers like a human shield, while the Royal in question inspects whatever is on show, shakes a few select hands and exchanges benign pleasantries, before being whisked away in a grand black limousine.
The Prince and Princess have each, in their own way, reversed the order of play.
They deal with the dignitaries in the politest possible way, but it is clear to everyone that it is not the dignitaries they have  come to see and talk to, but the ordinary people.
They very swiftly get down to basics, ask pertinent questions, build up a rapport, and do so away from the rest of the party, away from the reporters and press cameras.
This is where they do such good, where they really make a visit worth while and where they learn what ordinary people think, need and feel.
Washington D.C. 1986, with Vice-President and Mrs Bush.
Charles has taught Diana how to handle state occasions
They are very much a two-career couple and, although the work overlaps from time to time, they have two very distinct careers, which take them in different directions.
Diana has learnt a phenomenal amount in the last ten years — much of it from her husband.
He has taught her how to handle state occasions, how to deal with foreign potentates, when to speak and when not to, how to manage tiring tours and how to cope with the strains of travel.
He has helped her with her public speaking, suggested ideas, discussed her concerns and boosted her confidence when it was low.
Diana has helped Charles by bringing him into the modern era, teasing him and leavening his spirits, and keeping him young and abreast of young people's thinking.
She too has given him confidence and relieved some of the loneliness of his position.
It is a successful and formidable double-act.
They may not have found quite the soulmate in each other that they had been looking for, but their relationship has made up for it in other ways.
It is now a caring and loving one, in which they both feel free to be themselves, and the trust between them is absolute.
They are still irritated and frustrated when their privacy is invaded and still upset by hurtful articles in the press, or inaccurate stories.
They argue from time to time, they get tired and cross and let stress get the better of them, like any other couple, but the union is essentially a happy one.
Against all the odds it has worked, and this is a measure of just how strong they both were as individuals when they came to the marriage ten years ago.
Their union has not only survived the rigours of a decade, but has come out at the other end stronger than ever.
It is that strength, both individually and collectively, that will ensure that if the monarchy survives into the twenty-first century, it will not just be as ‘a privileged irrelevance’, but as a very potent force for good.
A LOVE MATCH
It was a love match.
Despite all the scheming and matchmaking that went on behind the scenes, when Charles and Diana took their wedding vows on 29 July 1981, they were undoubtedly in love.
Diana had been in love with Prince Charles for several years, since their first meeting when she was a sixteen-year-old home from school for half-term and he was her elder sister's boyfriend.
He had come to Althorp, their family home, for a pheasant shoot.
He later said his first impression of her then had been, ‘What a very jolly and amusing and attractive sixteen-year-old.
I mean great fun — bouncy and full of life and everything.’
In truth, he was very much smitten by Sarah at the time and he would scarcely have noticed the rather nondescript little sister who fell passionately in love that day.
That was November 1977.
It was the year of the Queen's Silver Jubilee and the Prince, just twenty-nine, was drawing to the end of his first year as a full-time working member of the ‘family firm’.
He had been through school and university, he had travelled the world, he had completed five years in the armed forces, he had flown fighter planes and helicopters — and for nine months had had command of a mine hunter in the North Sea.
On the romantic front he had had a string of engaging and pretty girlfriends, not least of all the vivacious flame-haired Lady Sarah Spencer.
He had been in and out of love, but never found quite the right girl at quite the right time to make him a wife.
Diana was nothing more than a schoolgirl, unworldly in the extreme.
She was popular with the other girls at West Heath and enjoyed her years there, but she was never very promising academically, and her reading was almost entirely limited to Barbara Cartland romantic novels.
Outside the classroom she fared better.
She consistently won swimming cups and also the school dancing competition one year.
She took up the piano and, according to her headmistress Ruth Rudge, ‘made phenomenal progress for someone who started late’; and although she never made it into any of the school teams, she loved tennis.
During her last year she joined the Voluntary Service Unit and visited an old lady in Sevenoaks once a week.
None of it was remarkable, but it all added up.
In her last term she won the Miss Clark Lawrence Award for service to the school: a special award, not necessarily given, ‘for  anyone who has done things that otherwise might have gone unsung’.
Diana, pulling faces, was still the girl he remembered, great fun, bouncy and full of life
After meeting Prince Charles, Diana went back to school that November day to have a second shot at her O levels, which eluded her yet again, and the following month, at the age of sixteen and a half, she left for good.
Next stop was finishing school in Switzerland, where speaking English was a punishable offence.
In theory, she studied domestic science — dressmaking and cooking — and took a pitman's correspondence and typing course.
In practice, she learnt to ski; but it was the first time she had been away from her friends and family, the first time she had been on a plane, the first time she had been abroad, and she was desperately unhappy.
After just six weeks she returned home and refused to go back.
By the time she and the Prince were engaged two years later, she was still no better educated.
She had been a mother's help to a family in Hampshire, she had babysat through an agency in London, and had taken on cleaning jobs.
She had done a three-month cookery course and, as a last-ditch attempt to acquire some proper qualifications, she had enrolled as a student teacher with Betty Vacani, in Knightsbridge, who ran dancing classes for tiny tots.
This had not worked either.
finally, in the autumn of 1979, Diana found the perfect job, working part-time as an assistant in a small kindergarten in Pimlico, for a friend of her other sister, Jane.
It left plenty of time for shopping and meeting friends, two of her passions.
Unlike the Prince, she had had no love affairs when their friendship began at the beginning of that year.
She had a wide circle of friends, all from the same social set, ex-public school, most of them with parents living in the country.
She had her own flat, at Coleherne Court off the Old Brompton Road — bought with money that had been put into trust until her eighteenth birthday — which she shared with girlfriends.
It was prettily furnished by Diana and, although the hallway was a jumble of bicycles and tennis racquets, the rest of the flat was remarkably clean and neat.
Diana could never go to bed and leave a mess behind, however late; she would always tidy up and wash any dirty dishes.
Diana and her friends were a clean-living set — none of them smoked or drank much — and when they went out, it tended to be in a group.
They would go to one another 's flats, have supper in a bistro, go to a film, or sit at home with bowls of spaghetti, chatting and watching television.
At weekends they would go off to the country.
Within her own social set, Diana was confident and happy.
She was quite unsophisticated, but always good company at a dinner party, guaranteed to get everyone talking and laughing.
She was fun, and people liked to have her around because she was easy and undemanding and always had a quick reply.
But she was no intellectual and, apart from a passion for the ballet, which she used to attend with her grandmother, Ruth, Lady Fermoy, she was like any ordinary teenager.
She spent her time shopping, reading women's magazines, listening to pop music and watching television.
On the face of it, she and Prince Charles had very little in common when they re-met in 1979.
Quite apart from the intellectual and educational differences, they  did not even share the same hobbies.
Charles was a compulsive horseman; Diana didn't ride.
The Prince loved opera; her love was ballet.
He hated pop music; she enjoyed it.
Her sport was tennis; he had never played.
For this reason, some of the Prince's closest friends were against the marriage; they feared that with so little in common it could never work.
But there was more to Diana Spencer than met the eye.
Beneath the giggling, bubbly little-girl exterior was strength and depth; an uncanny maturity and a sensitivity that belied her years.
For all her privilege and wealth, life had not been easy and the experiences of childhood had left an indelible mark.
Diana's parents had had an unhappy marriage.
Her father, Earl Spencer, at that time Viscount Althorp, was the perfect gentleman to all who knew him, but not so gentlemanly behind closed doors.
Her mother, Frances, stayed with him until she had produced the son he so desperately wanted, but when Diana was just six years old her mother left home.
She had met and fallen in love with Peter Shand Kydd, a wallpaper millionaire, seen a chance of happiness, and taken it.
What she had not known was that in leaving home she would have to forfeit her four children.
There was a messy divorce and, in the subsequent custody proceedings, custody of Sarah,
Jane, Diana and Charles was granted to their father.
Johnnie Spencer had called upon some of the highest names in the land as character witnesses, including his ex-wife's own mother, Ruth, Lady Fermoy.
Of all the children, Diana was the most affected by the sudden loss of her mother.
The two older girls had already begun boarding school, so were away for most of the time, and Charles was only three and easily amused by the nanny.
It was Diana, aged six — old enough to understand she had been left, but not yet old enough to understand why — who felt so bereft.
The security she had known was suddenly gone, her small world shattered.
During that period everyone rallied round, particularly her two grandmothers, Ruth, Lady Fermoy and Cynthia, Countess Spencer.
She became close to both women and, although she still saw her mother from time to time and still has a very strong relationship  with her that has not been diminished by the divorce, a special bond was forged with the two older women.
When Countess Spencer died in 1972, it was another loss for Diana to cope with.
Diana with her mother, Frances Shand Kydd.
The marriage to Earl Spencer had not been a happy one.
Prince Charles had had similar experiences.
His grandmother had been like a mother to him for most of his childhood.
Obviously there was no broken family in his case, but his mother was always either busy or away, even before she became Queen, and her parents stepped into the breach.
It was his grandparents he spent his first Christmas with.
He was with them again for his second Christmas and his third birthday.
He was even with them the night the King died in 1952.
It was his grandmother he spent his fifth birthday with and that same year his parents went off on a tour of the Commonwealth, which took them away from him for six long months.
To the small child standing on the dockside waving goodbye it was a minor bereavement every time.
As a result, Charles is closer to his grandmother in many ways than his own mother.
Diana, likewise.
The Prince and Princess's grandmothers have been the best of friends for most of their lives.
Ruth, Lady Fermoy and her husband Maurice knew the Queen Mother and King George VI when they were still Duke and Duchess of York, before the abdication.
They remained friends and, when Maurice Fermoy died in 1952, Ruth became the Queen Mother's lady-in-waiting.
There is no doubt that the two old ladies did a little plotting to marry their favourite grandchildren off to on another; but without the events of 1979 their dearest hopes might never have come to be.
If the Queen Mother provided a mother figure for Charles, it was his great-uncle, Lord Mountbatten, who became a father substitute.
His own father, Prince Philip, was in the Navy for much of his childhood and the relationship between father and son was in any event a difficult one.
Prince Philip was frankly disappointed in his first born and took no pains to hide his feelings.
Charles was too sensitive for his liking, too intellectual, too philosophical, and although Charles adored his father and has spent a lifetime trying to please him and be as he would like, he has never really succeeded.
As a result, he grew up with very little self-confidence.
There is no doubt that Charles has done a great deal that his father has been proud of and has excelled at sports like polo that the Duke of Edinburgh played when he was younger, but the Prince never felt he was good enough.
In his wisdom, Lord Mountbatten saw what was happening and, after his retirement in 1965, concentrated his attention on the young Prince and became a vital figure in his life.
Charles adored him and had done since he was a small child.
Uncle Dickie, as he was known to the whole family, was a dynamic, tyrannical figure, full of energy, drive and ambition, who aroused strong passions in everyone who came into contact with him.
He was a national hero, he had been Supreme Commander in South East Asia during the Second World War, the last Viceroy and first Governor General of India, first Sea Lord, and finally Chief of the Defence Staff.
Born in 1900, the same year as the Queen Mother, he had spent twenty-three years at the top, he had travelled all over the world, he had stories and memories of escapades and people and was a colourful raconteur.
To Charles he was an indispensable source of wisdom and experience and he relished the time spent in his company.
Mountbatten saw Charles for what he was and liked what he saw, and for the first time the growing Prince was given some real sense of his own worth.
His great-uncle took Charles under his wing and prepared him for the job ahead.
No one could have been better suited for the role, nor taken to it with more enthusiasm.
He became friend, teacher, mentor and confidant.
Charles spent many a weekend with Mountbatten at Broadlands, his home in Hampshire, where he felt totally at ease.
The Prince took his problems to Broadlands and also his girlfriends.
It provided the perfect sanctuary and Mountbatten was always there with time and interest to talk and advise.
Charles with Lord Mountbatten in 1976 — a vital figure in his life
By 1971, however, Charles was in the Navy and much of his time was spent at sea.
‘As you know only too well,’ he wrote after leaving Broadlands on one occasion to embark on a six-month cruise, ‘to me it has become a second home in so many ways, and no one could ever have had such a splendid honorary grandpapa in the history of avuncular relationships.’
The affection was entirely reciprocated.
Mountbatten missed Charles enormously when he went off on long trips and felt lonely and deprived without his increasingly regular visits.
‘I've been thinking of you —— far more’, he wrote, ‘than I had ever expected to think of a young man — but then I've got to know you so well, I really miss you very much.’
And in his diary he wrote, ‘It's lovely having him here, we've had so many cosy talks.
What a really charming young man he is.’
The advice that came out of those cosy talks, however, was not necessarily heeded.
On one occasion, for example, Charles flew down to Broadlands to consult Mountbatten about a speech he had written for the Gandhi centenary tribute.
The older man read the text overnight and came up with some suggested changes, all of which the Prince ignored.
‘He very politely pointed out in each case,’ recalled Mountbatten, ‘that it was not the way he would have phrased it, and so it remained virtually unchanged.
I thought it was really splendid.’
But on the subject of women, the Prince did take his honorary grandfather's advice.
‘I believe, in a case like yours,’ wrote Mountbatten, coincidentally on St Valentine's Day in 1974, ‘the man should sow his wild oats and have as many affairs as he can before settling down, but for a wife he should choose a suitable, attractive and sweet-charactered girl before she met anyone else she might fall for.
I think it is disturbing for women to have experiences if they have to remain on a pedestal after marriage.’
As fast as the Prince could comply, however, the press were trying to marry him off.
‘I've only got to look twice at someone,’ he said in desperation, ‘and the next morning I'm engaged to her.’
It was not only intensely irritating, but it also frightened many women off, and made the normal process of two people getting to know one another quite impossible.
Thus having Broadlands to use for this purpose made life very much easier.
While happy to welcome any number of beautiful women to his home, Lord Mountbatten secretly cherished hopes that Charles would marry his granddaughter,
Amanda Knatchbull, and by 1979 was busy plotting ways of bringing them together.
A visit to India being planned for the Prince the following year seemed the perfect opportunity.
Mountbatten proposed that he and Amanda should accompany Charles, so he could show ‘the two young people I love so much…the country which means so much to me’, but the Duke of Edinburgh thought this a bad idea.
He thought it a mistake for the Prince to make his first visit in the shadow of such a  legendary figure.
David Checketts, who was Prince Charles's private secretary at the time, was also dubious.
‘You think I'll take over the whole show, don't you?’ accused Mountbatten.
However, terrorists determined the issue.
On 27 August 1979 Lord Mountbatten, on holiday in County Sligo in the Republic of Ireland, was brutally murdered.
A fifty-pound bomb, planted in his fishing boat, exploded as he set off out of the little harbour of Mullaghmore to inspect lobster pots.
He had with him his daughter and her husband, Lord and Lady Brabourne, their fourteen-year-old twin sons, Nicholas and Timothy Knatchbull, Lord Brabourne's elderly mother, and Paul Maxwell, a local lad who enjoyed helping with the boat.
Miraculously, Lord and Lady Brabourne and one son, Timothy, survived.
Lady Brabourne senior was pulled out of the water alive, but died in hospital the next day.
The rest of the fishing party were killed.
Mountbatten's ‘execution’, claimed the IRA faction responsible, ‘was a way of bringing emotionally home to the English ruling-class and its working-class slaves…that their government's war on us is going to cost them as well…
We will tear out their sentimental imperialist heart.’
Many hearts were torn out that day, among them the Prince's.
He was in Iceland, fishing with friends, when he heard the news and flew straight to Windsor Castle, to a father who was still unable to help.
Charles was overcome with grief; he felt shocked, frightened and alone.
He had lost the greatest friend he would ever have.
He had lost the one person who believed in him, the one person whom he could trust with his innermost thoughts.
Life, as he told his friends, would never be the same again.
Any prospect of romance with Amanda Knatchbull was killed that day too.
But in the weeks that followed they became very close and clung to one another in their loss.
After the funeral Charles retreated to Balmoral, where he watched the BBC obituary of Mountbatten over and over again, and walked the lonely moors.
He was joined there by Amanda's brother, Norton (now Lord Romsey), and his fiancée, Penelope Eastwood; and although the cousins had never been especially friendly before, a strong bond grew between them as they talked day after day, trying to make sense of it all.
A year before his death, Charles had written to Lord Mountbatten, once again thanking him for his help.
‘I was deeply grateful for our conversation yesterday morning and being able to pick your brains on the subjects was an immense help.
As I said to you yesterday, I have no idea what we shall do without you when you finally decide to depart.
It doesn't bear thinking about, but I only hope I shall have learnt something from you in order to carry it on in some way or another.’
‘FOR GOD'S SAKE, RING ME UP — I'M GOING TO NEED YOU’
Had Lord Mountbatten lived, there is a good chance that Diana Spencer would not have become Princess of Wales.
He might have foreseen the problems that would ensue after their marriage, seen that there was a gulf between Charles and Diana that would be difficult to bridge and advised against it.
But Mountbatten was gone and no one would ever quite fill the void he left.
His death quite literally shattered the Prince and for a time he lost all sense of purpose.
While Mountbatten was still alive, Charles had begun working on many projects and had become enthused by what he could do to help the young and the disadvantaged; he was fired by what needed to be done in the inner cities and keen to find ways of defusing racial tension.
Some of his staff disapproved of the direction he was taking, and four months before Mountbatten died, his private secretary, Sir David Checketts, resigned.
He was replaced by an even greater traditionalist, Edward Adeane, who also had reservations about what the Prince was doing.
But Mountbatten had backed up Charles.
He more than anyone appreciated that if the monarchy was to survive, it needed to be updated.
It could not afford to be seen as a drain on the taxpayer and it should be relevant to the times.
After Mountbatten's death, Charles no longer knew where he was going.
He grew withdrawn and introspective.
Help came from a number of sources, including his own deep faith, but there were individuals too.
The Queen Mother was one.
She understood his grief and his sense of loss and loneliness — she had been there herself, after the King's death — and she knew about the feelings of despair and the long, long time the scars would take to heal, but she also knew about the importance of carrying on.
Another source of support was Sir Laurens van der Post, who had also known Mountbatten, and who had been a Japanese prisoner of war in Java.
This extraordinary  man, explorer, farmer, writer and mystic, taught Charles to seek the depth and strength within himself, to use the experience of Mountbatten's death, to use the suffering and learn from it: to grow in the spiritual sense; and above all, to ensure that his great-uncle had not died in vain.
Had Mountbatten lived, Diana may never have become Princess of Wales
Rumours of a royal romance were rife in November 1980
Charles rallied.
The year before Mountbatten died he had taken over the reins of the United World Colleges (UWC) from his great-uncle.
This movement, co-founded with Kurt Hahn, founder of Gordonstoun, was a passion of Mountbatten.
Its aim was to promote peace and international understanding through education.
Lord Mountbatten had spent ten years tirelessly promoting the dream, talking about it all over the world, often in the highest places, inspiring everyone around him and shamelessly raising money to build more colleges.
At the end of his ten years there were three: in Canada, Singapore, and the original one,
Atlantic College in Wales.
Charles had taken over the role of president determined to make a positive contribution.
Van der post reminded Charles that to slow down, even for a while, would be to give the terrorists what they had wanted.
The Prince knew his friend was right.
He had had 2,500 letters from members of the public expressing their grief, sympathy and admiration for a man who they felt had in some way belonged to ordinary people and understood them.
Charles knew he had to fight for them.
Mountbatten had wanted him to be a leader of men.
Now was the time to do it.
The Prince had come to know Van der Post in Kenya two years before, when he had been his guide on safari.
He is a remarkable old man in any setting, but in the bushveld of southern Africa, where he was born and has lived for much of his life, he was in his element.
Every evening the small party would sit under the stars and listen to his stories of life in the African interior, his extensive travels and explorations, his war years and his friendship with the Swiss psychologist Carl Jung.
The Prince felt he was in the company of someone very special, took great delight in time spent talking to him, and was inspired by all that he heard.
Guided by his new-found friend, Charles studied Jung and also the work of economist and philosopher E. F. Schumacher, who wrote a book entitled Small Is Beautiful ; over the years the Prince has found many of the answers he was searching for.
Charles put on a brave face to the world, but secretly he was in turmoil for many, many months; and one other person who helped see him through this period was Diana.
They had re-met, after that first encounter at Althorp, at Sandringham in January 1979, when the Queen had invited Diana and her sister Sarah (whose relationship with the Prince was well and truly over) for a weekend's shooting.
It was not a surprising invitation.
Their other sister, Jane, had married Robert Fellowes, a member of the Queen's permanent staff, the year before; and, given the rest of the Spencer family's connections with the Royal family, the surprise was that she had never been invited before.
Both of her grandmothers had been ladies-in-waiting to the Queen Mother.
Her father had been an equerry to the Queen and to King George VI before  that; and before her grandfather died in 1975 and her father became the Eighth Earl Spencer and moved to Althorp, the family had lived in a house on the Sandringham Estate.
It was where Diana was born and had spent the first fourteen years of her life.
Diana arrived at Sandringham that weekend having just been through a most traumatic period.
Her father, whom she adored, had collapsed the previous September with a cerebral haemorrhage and had lain in a coma in the National Hospital in Queen Square, London, for nearly four months.
No one expected him to live.
To make matters worse, he had a new wife, Raine, formerly Lady Dartmouth, a formidable woman who became fiercely protective.
She set up a bedside vigil, had special drugs imported from Germany, played him his favourite music and discouraged everyone else from visiting, including his own children.
Her steely determination, however, had worked, and that very weekend Earl Spencer had been released from hospital and moved into a suite at the Dorchester Hotel, until he was strong enough to be moved home to Northamptonshire.
It had been a difficult time for everyone, but especially Diana, who was perhaps closest to her father of all the children.
Charles took to Diana that weekend and began seeing her on a regular basis when they returned to London.
She was only eighteen and still quite unsophisticated but, after all the glossy and sophisticated women he had gone out with, that was part of her appeal.
She was fun and easy to be with, natural and down to earth, yet she was sensitive and courageous in the way she had coped with her father's illness.
She had no expectations and made no demands.
The Prince could relax, be himself and simply enjoy her friendship.
He would ring her up every couple of months or so and invite her to the opera, or to dinner and no one paid any attention to this.
After Mountbatten's death, Diana's qualities were especially appealing.
She was there with the warmth, sympathy and understanding that few others could offer.
She instinctively knew what he was going through, drawing from the experience of her own troubled past; and he found himself growing increasingly fond of her.
The media, in the meantime, were clamouring for him to marry.
It had been a preoccupation for several years, but now it was becoming intense.
Even his father  had started badgering him.
He had a duty, he was reminded, to secure the line of succession, to produce an heir to safeguard the monarchy.
He was over thirty: it was no longer an intrusion into his privacy; it was rightly a matter of public concern.
He must stop dallying with film stars and floozies and get on and find a wife.
Diana with her father.
No one had expected him to survive a massive cerebral haemorrhage
Charles looked around for a suitable candidate and nudged, no doubt, by a couple of doting grandmothers, found Lady Diana Spencer.
She was eminently suitable, well liked by everyone and was ready and waiting.
What had begun as a schoolgirl crush had grown into a profound and romantic desire to be Charles's bride.
She had no ambitions for a career.
What she craved was the security of marriage and was only too pleased when Charles began to take her seriously during the summer of 1980.
They saw a great deal of each other, but, because Diana was so much younger and usually just one of a party, no one who saw them together ever suspected she was a girlfriend.
It was not until September when she was spotted with Charles on the banks of the River Dee at Balmoral by the royal reporter, James Whittaker, that anyone was any the wiser.
At that point life changed more than anyone could have foreseen.
The press laid siege to Diana's flat in London and followed her every move until the engagement was announced five months later.
They were testing months.
Diana had no form of protection, and no help in dealing with the press.
She had never been exposed to anything like it before, and initially she found being the centre of attention quite amusing.
The sight of dozens of photographers leaping to their lenses every time she opened her front door made her giggle.
She enjoyed giving them the slip, as she sometimes succeeded in doing.
On one occasion she packed up her car as if about to go away for the weekend, then sauntered up the street, leading the press to believe she had gone to buy a packet of  Polos.
By the time she reappeared, she had been up to Scotland and back, to spend the weekend with Charles at the Queen Mother's home, Birkhall.
With Prince Andrew and Charles at a polo match.
What Diana craved was the security of marriage
She coped with the press with astonishing skill for someone who was just nineteen years old, and was always painstakingly polite.
But as time went on, it became less of a joke.
Journalists rang her day and night, even in the early hours of the morning.
They kept up a twenty-four-hour vigil outside Coleherne Court, and plagued her at the kindergarten.
They followed her wherever she went.
Stories appeared that were untrue, newspapers quoted things she had not said and she began to feel panicky.
Charles was worried she might be scared off.
Her mother was so worried she wrote to The Times asking, ‘Is it fair for any human being, regardless of circumstances, to be treated in this way?’
In the House of Commons sixty MPs tabled a motion ‘deploring the manner in which Lady Diana Spencer is treated by the media’, and ‘calling on those responsible to have more concern for individual privacy’.
And the Press Council called senior editors to the first extraordinary meeting convened in its twenty-seven-year history to discuss the matter.
Despite all this, nothing changed.
The public's fascination with ‘Shy Di’, as she was dubbed, was simply insatiable.
In February the engagement was announced and Diana was rescued.
She now came under the giant umbrella of the Royal Family and at last the palace was able to give her full protection.
A personal bodyguard was assigned to her and has been with her day and night ever since.
Gone were the last vestiges of normality.
As she left Coleherne Court she left a poignant note for her flatmates, giving them her new telephone number: ‘For God's sake ring me up — I'm going to need you.’
March 1981, Diana's first official engagement.
The press still followed her every step
AFTER THE HONEYMOON
Diana meant every word of her note.
Friends have been of paramount importance to her in the last ten years and she has not deserted them.
She may have become an international superstar, wined and dined with kings and presidents, prima ballerinas, film idols, pop legends and sporting heroes; she may be ferried around in motorcades and private yachts and planes; and she may be given priceless jewels to wear.
Yet the people who truly matter in her life are the friends she had when she was an ordinary teenager.
These are the people who have seen her through the difficult times, who have helped her adjust to the life before her and who have kept her in touch with the real world.
‘Here is the stuff of which fairy tales are made,’ proclaimed the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Robert Runcie, to a packed cathedral, on that famous wedding day.
Before him sat Queen Elizabeth II, the Queen Mother and every member of the British Royal family; and most of the crowned heads of Europe, innumerable monarchs from Africa, the Middle East and Asia, including the 25-stone King of Tonga, for whom an extra-large chair had been specially made.
There were 160 foreign presidents and prime ministers, dozens of high-ranking diplomats, civil servants, local government officials, members of the armed forces, politicians and industrialists.
’ Here is the stuff of which fairy tales are made.’
The wedding millions flocked to see
Back at Balmoral, Charles and Diana were classic newly-weds
Yet seated side by side near the front — ahead of Nancy Reagan, America's First Lady, and many other dignitaries — were those three girls from Coleherne Court:
Ann Bolton, Virginia Pitman and Carolyn Pride.
There were other friends too and people she had grown up with.
Not far behind them sat David Thomas and his wife, a jeweller who had looked after the Spencer family for years and sold Diana several pieces: but he was still ‘just a humble jeweller’, and was expecting to be tucked away behind a pillar at the back.
This has to be a mistake, he had thought, as they were directed ever closer to the front.
It was no mistake.
Humble jeweller or not, as far as Diana was concerned he was a friend.
To their surprise, all the workers from Althorp were there too.
They had been told by Earl Spencer that there were sadly insufficient tickets for him to invite them, but  Diana used her own allocation to ensure they were there.
State occasion or not, it was her day and she wanted to be surrounded by her friends.
Relaxed and happy aboard the Royal Yacht Britannia at Gibraltar, at the start of their honeymoon in the sun
She may have been just twenty years old, and secretly terrified, but she would only have one wedding in her life, and she was determined to make it her own.
And for all the pomp and ceremony, for all the formality and precision, the security and the months of planning, for all the cameras and lights, it was still a touching and surprisingly intimate affair.
The couple were determined their honeymoon should be too, despite equal determination on behalf of the world's press to keep them company.
After a few days at Broadlands, they flew to Gibraltar to join the Royal Yacht Britannia for a two-week cruise in and around the Mediterranean.
For two weeks the press flew from one Greek island to another, like migrating birds, at the slightest rumour.
They set to sea in boats and cruisers; one newspaper even hired a Lear jet, which flew over the area day after day.
But thanks to the ingenuity of Edward Adeane, who planned it all, no one found them.
It was the first and last time they have had such privacy and they returned to Balmoral to join the Royal Family for their traditional September break, tanned, relaxed and obviously very much in love.
Within days of arriving they held a press  conference, on the understanding that the press would thereafter leave them alone, and it was the most informal such occasion anyone can remember.
They were classic newly-weds, unable to take their eyes or their hands off each other, laughing and joking and clearly very happy.
For two weeks they managed to evade the press.
It was the first and last time they have ever had such privacy
Their honeymoon had been ‘fabulous’, said Diana, bubbling over with enthusiasm and dying to tell the world.
She could ‘highly recommend marriage’, she said.
‘It's a marvellous life, and Balmoral is one of the best places in the world.’
The last year had been like a dream, a fairy tale; but suddenly, as the cameras retreated and the curtains drew on another quiet Balmoral evening, with the Queen insisting on formal dress for dinner, as she does every night, the dream began to dissolve.
The honeymoon was over and the reality of what she had taken on began to dawn.
Diana had known she was marrying into a close family, but she was unprepared for how claustrophobic it would be, or how dull she would find long spells in their company, with their passion for dogs and horses.
She had also known that Charles would have to see his mother just as regularly after they were married as before: there were matters of state they had to discuss, and discuss in private.
It was part of the job: his mother was sovereign, he was her heir and they would share secrets that no one else could ever know.
Rationally, Diana understood, but emotionally, the Queen was still her mother-in-law and the relationship was as difficult as for any new wife.
Their weeks in Scotland were an anticlimax.
Her husband, who had been so attentive in the sunshine, was back on home territory, in the place he loved best on earth, surrounded by the people and the activities he loved most.
He was also back to the daily pile of paperwork and would be closeted with secretaries for much of the day.
When that was done, he would be off fishing, thigh deep in the River Dee for hours on end, or shooting.
Diana did not especially care for either of those activities and she did not ride, which kept the rest of the family amused.
Not surprisingly, she grew bored and lonely.
She longed for something to do other than trudge the glorious, heather-clad grouse moors.
The weather did not help.
It rained almost every day, and she began to feel imprisoned.
She railed against the formality and the dreariness  of it all, balked at the routine; her mood swinging back and forth, from tears and misery to elation.
She wanted to go home, but it was out of the question.
There was no alternative but to grin and bear it.
With the Queen at the Braemar Games.
The honeymoon was over
Returning to London was not the cure.
Diana had been blaming the Highlands for what was a far more fundamental malady.
Charles had been a bachelor for thirty-two years.
He had a house in Gloucestershire and another at Kensington Palace, and staff who had been with him for years, accustomed to his simple and masculine lifestyle and accustomed to ruling it.
He had a well-established routine in his life.
He would rise early to work at his desk and return to it after a day's engagements, often until well past midnight.
His sports and hobbies frequently took him away for the best part of the weekend; work also ate into parts of Saturday and Sunday.
For the remainder of his free time, he had an established circle of good friends, whom he saw regularly.
Most important of all, when duty called, Charles was there.
Whether it was the Trooping of the Colour, a state visit, or Remembrance Sunday, whatever the time or day of the week, the dates were in his diary and he was on parade without fail and without question.
It never occurred to Charles that Diana would find any of this odd or difficult to accept; but her upbringing had been entirely different.
She had never had any real discipline in her life in the way Charles had.
She had done as she pleased.
If she wanted to give up on something she did.
She had never been pushed academically, although there is no doubt she had the intelligence to have done far better than she ever did.
She had walked away from finishing school and she had walked away from Miss Vacani's; and her parents had never sought to interfere with her freedom, or impose restrictions on her.
Charles, by contrast, had known nothing but restriction and discipline.
His life had been ruled by others from day one.
He can never remember a time when he didn't have a detective to guard him, or private cars, planes or trains to transport him.
He had never been able to lose himself in a crowd, or dash off somewhere suddenly on a whim.
He had lived in castles and palaces, and been attended by courtiers, soldiers and valets.
Diana had never had any real discipline in her life.
Charles had known nothing else
Much as his parents might have wanted Charles to have a normal upbringing, it was impossible.
They sent him to proper schools — the first royal child not to have been educated by private tutors — but he was never just another pupil; he was never allowed to forget the accident of birth that set him apart.
He grew up in the public spotlight, never free from prying eyes and press comment, never sure when a trusted friend would betray him, or when a casual remark to a stranger might blow up in his face.
Sent away to prep school at eight, he was lonely and homesick and no sooner had he settled in than he moved to public school, to Gordonstoun, a bleak and desolate place on the windswept north-east coast of Scotland, with a regime to match.
For the first three years he endured abject misery.
At the point when he began to enjoy himself, he was sent off to go through it all again in Australia, in order that the Commonwealth could be seen to have played some part in his education.
For six months he lived in even more spartan conditions at Timbertop, in the Australian bush.
Again he had to prove himself, this time to 135 tough young teenagers aged fourteen and fifteen who were not impressed by his title.
It was a crash course in survival, and in learning how to get on with people; but when he made friends there, he knew, probably for the first time in his life, that he was liked for who he was and not what he was.
His three years at Cambridge were some of the happiest of his life and also the most normal.
Apart from having a detective, who lodged in the room next door at Trinity, he lived like everyone else — except that yet again his course was interrupted.
In the midst of his second year he was sent off to the University College of Wales at Aberystwyth, for a crash course in everything Welsh prior to his investiture as Prince of Wales in the summer of 1969.
It was not an easy transition.
Prince Charles had a rough reception and a difficult, at times terrifying three months at the hands of extreme Welsh nationalists.
Groups like the Welsh Language Society and the Free Wales Army were said to be training freedom fighters in the mountains and he was barracked everywhere he went.
A. J. P. Taylor called the decision to send Charles to Aberystwyth a ‘sordid plot to exploit’ him.
‘Mr Wilson’, he said, ‘is imposing on Prince Charles a sacrifice which he would not dream of imposing on his own son., It was indeed a sacrifice and one from which many a twenty-year-old would have turned and run.
So intense was the hatred in the town that, shortly before Charles was due to arrive, the principal of University College, Dr Tom Parry, had advised the visit be called off.
Never before had the Prince encountered such anger and hostility, nor been exposed to such real and persistent danger.
His mentor during the stay was the Secretary of State for Wales, George Thomas (later created Lord Tonypandy), who became a lifelong friend as a result.
He knew that it was no use shielding Charles.
He had to face the enemy.
Charles needed no pushing.
One particular day, having struggled through an ugly crowd of protesters to the safety of the Welsh Office, the Prince announced he was going back out to talk to them.
‘I would advise against it, sir,’ said George Thomas.
‘I know you would,’ said Prince Charles, ‘but I'm going.’
‘In that case, sir,’ said the Secretary of State, ‘I'm coming with you.’
Sometimes it worked, sometimes they simply shouted abuse, but his greatest success was when he addressed the Welsh League of Youth Eisteddfod at Aberystwyth in Welsh, having studied the language for just six weeks.
It was a hostile audience.
The League had already declared that it would boycott the investiture and, when he stood up to speak, a hundred or so extremists began shouting and jeering, and dozens had to be dragged off by the police before he could be heard.
Undaunted, he spoke for seven minutes to an audience of 5,000 people and won considerable respect from some hard-bitten nationalists, including Gwynfor Evans MP, president of Plaid Cymru.
‘His performance was amazing,’ he confessed, ‘I have never heard anyone who has taken to Welsh so recently master the language so well.’
The investiture went ahead on 1 July and was a splendid and dramatic piece of pageantry; it was also strangely moving.
As he knelt at his mother's feet, the sovereign invested her son with the symbols of office, ‘by girding him with a Sword…by putting a Coronet on his head…and a Gold Ring on his finger…and also by delivering a Gold Rod into his hand, that he may preside there and may direct and defend those parts to hold to him and his heirs…for ever’.
‘I, Charles, Prince of Wales,’ responded the Prince, ‘do become your liege man of life and limb and of earthly worship, and faith and truth I will bear unto you to live and die against all manner of folks.’
With that, he took the letters-patent from his mother, rose to his feet, gave her the kiss of fealty, and took his place on the throne to her right.
A trade-union organizer from mid-Wales spoke for many an onlooker that day.
‘I am not a royalist,’ he said, ‘I am a socialist and I wouldn't cross the street for the Prince myself.
But I'll tell you this, that young man has done more for Wales already than we could dream of.’
At the age of twenty-two, the Prince's life was still being ruled by others.
After university it was announced that he was going into the armed forces.
‘It is pointless and ill informed to say that I am entering a profession trained in killing,’ he said in his defence.
‘The Services in the first place are there for fast, efficient and well-trained action in defence.
Surely the Services must attract a large number of duty-conscious people?
Otherwise, who else would subject themselves to being square-bashed, shouted at by petty officers, and made to do ghastly things in force ten gales?
I am entering the RAF and then the Navy because I believe I can contribute something to this country by so doing.
To me it is a worthwhile occupation and one which I am convinced will stand me in good stead for the rest of my life.’
These sort of sentiments had never crossed Diana's mind.
In no way had she ever been prepared for the life she was now expected to lead and Charles had some difficulty in understanding her feelings.
For all his altruism, he is intrinsically self-centred.
Having been waited on hand and foot for most of his life and had people  jump whenever he called, he has never really had the opportunity to be anything else.
He had thought Diana would quietly fit into his routine.
Diana, for her part, thought she would become a wife and mother; but, with all the servants and secretaries who surrounded the Prince, including a valet who selected and prepared his clothes for the day, packed for him and even did his personal shopping, she felt superfluous, and just a little jealous.
Some of them were loyal and trusted men who had been with the Prince for years and, as well as relying heavily upon them, he liked them.
They enjoyed their position of confidence and some were a little resentful at having the boat rocked by the arrival of the Princess.
Some of the Prince's friends were also somewhat put out at having their cosy relationship altered by the distraction of a young wife.
They had enjoyed his single status and the attention he devoted to them, and frankly did not want the intrusion of a newcomer.
She, in turn, found some of his friends hard-going.
She disliked the intimacy he showed towards some of them, was resentful of the memories they shared of which she was not a part, and felt excluded.
She also found it intolerable to have her husband's old girlfriends around.
Apart from a handful of friends that were his own age, like Nicholas Soames and Lord Romsey — who were still fourteen or fifteen years Diana's senior — most of the people Charles enjoyed seeing were older, with the result that Diana frequently found she was socializing with her father's, or even grandfather's, generation.
They were often men of learning, like Sir Laurens Van der Post or the historian Sir Harold Acton.
She was quite out of her depth and, frankly, bored.
Her own friends were poles apart from his.
They were young, rich and ambitious, typical Hooray Henries, with Sloane Ranger girlfriends; Charles found them just as unsympathetic as they found him.
It was no different from the situation that most couples face in the early days of their marriage, when they discover they don't like each other 's friends.
The way they dealt with it was no different from any other couple either, except that every move was being monitored by the media.
Diana was accused of banishing the Prince's friends.
LEARNING THE JOB
Diana's first public engagement as Princess of Wales was, appropriately, a tour of the principality, and it was obvious from the very first day that she had an extraordinary talent.
Whatever personal problems she and Charles had were put to one side and they gave the people of Wales a visit to remember.
She plunged into the crowds, who had turned out in their thousands to greet her, as though she had been doing it all her life.
She instinctively knew what to say to people and whose hand to clasp hold of.
‘My dad says give us a kiss,’ shouted a little boy at the first stop in Rhyl.
‘Well then, you had better have one,’ said Diana, and bent down to kiss him on the cheek.
She noticed one woman in the crowd was blind, and sought out her hand and squeezed it.
‘What nice shiny medals,’ she said, spotting a hunchbacked old soldier at the Deeside Leisure Centre.
Then to his beaming wife, ‘Did you polish them for him?’
And when the rain poured down in Carmarthen and the streets were like rivers, still the crowds stood out and waited.
They were soaked right through to the skin and shivering in the cold.
Diana looked half-frozen herself and battled with a useless umbrella; the feather on her hat began to flop, yet she stayed and chatted for longer than ever, as if to reward the people for their patience.
‘Now I've seen her, she's everything I thought she would be,’ said one woman.
‘She's the flower in the royal forest.’
The Prince was bursting with pride, and amused to find himself redundant.
At each stop they would take one side of the street each and he could not help notice the disappointment on people's faces if they got him rather than her.
He was left apologizing for not having enough wives to go round.
‘Do you want me to give those to her?’ he would ask when people desperately pointed bunches of flowers in her direction.
‘I seem to do nothing but collect flowers these days.
I know my role.’
In three days they covered 400 miles.
It was exhausting but exhilarating, not least of all because, in the middle of it, Diana learned that she was pregnant.
It could not have been more exciting news and everyone was thrilled, but her small and newly  gathered staff took a deep breath.
They had only just recovered from dealing with all the correspondence and presents from the wedding; six days later, when the pregnancy became official, lorry loads of letters, bibs and baby boots rained down upon them.
Diana had gathered together a small staff who were learning the ropes as fast as she was.
The principal members were a private secretary, Oliver Everett, who worked for the diplomatic service and was recalled from Madrid to set up her office; and Anne Beckwith-Smith, a specialist in eighteenth-century English painting, who worked at Sotheby's and was brought in as full-time lady-in-waiting.
The task was to set up the office, get a system going to deal with the fan mail, gifts and general correspondence, liaise with dress designers and process the requests for patronages as they came in.
Within her first year Diana had been approached by 150 charities.
She had chosen just five to start with, most of them to do with children, which seemed appropriate, and the Welsh National Opera, which was also fitting.
Fond as she is of children, however, they are by no means her only interest.
The Princess found herself pigeon  holed for a long time as a result of those early associations, but they were nevertheless a useful apprenticeship.
In Wales, the crowds turned out in their thousands to greet their new Princess, and they were not disappointed
Charles had his own household to deal with his affairs which he had brought together when he came out of the forces.
David Checketts was his first private secretary, a former squadron leader in the RAF who had been equerry to the Duke of Edinburgh, and was the perfect person to help the Prince make the transition from the armed services into a full-time working member of the ‘family firm’.
He had left in 1979, when he felt he was no longer the right man for the job, and the Honourable Edward Adeane had replaced him.
The man who ran the office was Michael Colborne, a chief petty officer whom Charles had become friendly with aboard HMS Norfolk , during his early days at sea.
He was a trusted friend and one of the few people ever to have been in the Prince's employ who spoke frankly to him, and when asked would give an honest, if sometimes unwelcome, opinion.
Quite often Colborne would get an equally honest and unwelcome reply.
The Prince has a fierce temper, which Colborne often caught the brunt of.
On one occasion Lord Mountbatten had found him licking his wounds and asked if the Prince had been upsetting him.
‘Bear with him, Michael, please,’ said Mountbatten.
‘He doesn't mean to get at you personally.
It's just that he wants to let off steam, and you're the only person he can lose his temper with.
It's a back-handed compliment really, you know.
He needs you.’
It was Colborne as much as anyone who took Diana under his wing in the early days.
They shared an office from the engagement to the wedding and he was a fatherly shoulder to cry on when the going was tough.
Edward Adeane was not the man for the job.
He was a brilliant lawyer, with a first-class brain, but very little tolerance of lesser intellects.
He detested the commercial world and, although he was much the same age as the Prince, had no time for the young.
He could no more understand what went on in a twenty-year-old's head than fly to the moon.
When Diana once asked him what the capital of Australia was, he was rendered totally speechless.
Charles took on the job of improving Diana's geography and also of teaching her the tricks of the trade — how to handle the different sorts of engagements, how to remember names and avoid missing or offending anyone, how to pace herself, how to address people, what sort of questions to ask and how to steer clear of banana skins.
Dealing with people came naturally and was in many ways the most important part of the job, but there was more that could come only with experience, and Charles was there to pass on some of the things he had learned over thirty-three years, some of them the hard way.
There was no job specification for the Prince of Wales and no guidelines for a Princess of Wales either.
Their roles have just evolved.
Charles had been moved early on by the plight of disadvantaged young people and much of his energy had gone into that.
He had formed what later became the Prince's Trust while he was in the Navy, and the grants that went out in the early years were paid for, anonymously, out of his naval allowance.
Candidates had to write down what they felt would most help them improve their lives and these suggestions were forwarded to the Prince in the diplomatic bag to wherever he happened to be in the world; he then chose whom the money should go to.
The scheme bore the unmistakable stamp of Kurt Hahn and his trust system that Charles had seen in operation at Gordonstoun.
Applicants were given cash grants, usually no more than £75, and trusted to use it for the purpose they had proposed -such as buying a bicycle to do a newspaper round, obtaining equipment for a camping trip, or acquiring the wherewithal to learn a new skill or a sport.
There was no bureaucracy, no strings: it was a straightforward gift.
It would challenge young people's sense of responsibility, he hoped, and show these troubled teenagers that someone trusted and believed in them.
It paid dividends and, as the scheme grew, many of the beneficiaries came back in order to help others.
As he went about the country talking to young people involved with the Trust,
Charles could see at first-hand the tension that was building up in the vast depressing wastelands of the inner cities, where young people had no work, no ambition, no feeling of belonging, no pride in their surroundings — nothing, in fact, to get out of bed for in the mornings.
In addition, there was racial tension.
During the Queen's Silver Jubilee Year in 1977 Charles had encountered a typical scene.
He had been visiting a youth club in Lewisham, where twenty-four members, all black, had recently been arrested on mugging charges.
As he arrived he was met by a rabble of noisy, angry youths.
The one at the front, shouting loudest, was wearing a badge saying ‘Stuff the Jubilee’.
Charles walked straight up to him and asked what was wrong.
When the boy told him how the police had made the arrests, the Prince called the division commander, whose men had arrested the twenty-four, to listen to what the boy had to say.
Charles suggested they get together at a later date to sort it out.
This is precisely what happened.
The twenty-four were tried by a court of law in the proper way, but the black community and the police began a dialogue that led to far better relations between the two than there had ever been before.
The Prince paid the price.
He had been seriously out of line, he was told; meddling in dangerous and delicate situations where he had no business; going way beyond his brief.
The criticism hurt, but it was from encounters like this that Charles discovered what his position as Prince of Wales was all about.
It gave him, he realized, a unique ability.
He could bring people together who would not under normal circumstances converse; and once they were talking, of course, there was hope.
The fearsome riots that swept the inner cities in 1981, in Brixton first, then Toxteth and Hansworth, Moss Side and Bristol, came as no surprise, and convinced Charles that this was the area where he could be of some use.
Ignoring his advisers, he concentrated his efforts in finding ways of improving life for the young people living in those areas.
Edward Adeane disapproved.
Charles was taking the job a long way from the safe arena of charitable patronage and ribbon-cutting and into politically dangerous areas, where constitutionally, he ought not to be.
Adeane was also unhappy about his association with Operation Raleigh, an ambitious round-the-world sailing venture, the second he had been involved with, run by the explorer John Blashford-Snell.
The idea was to take young people from all sorts of backgrounds and countries, including the inner cities, and give them ‘the challenges of war in peacetime’: a combination of adventure and community service.
The Prince was becoming enthused, and as he grew more confident about the area he had targeted and took on more projects, he began to make increasingly serious and significant speeches.
At this point another problem reared its head.
Diana had captivated the country and the obsession with her was showing no signs of abating.
The media simply could not get enough.
Whenever she accompanied him, whether to a glossy film premiére or a major speech, they reported on the clothes she was wearing, the hairstyle, the hat, the jewellery, whether she looked well, or strained or too thin.
What Charles said in major speeches which he put a great deal of time and thought into, seldom went farther than the four walls he spoke within.
The nation, it seemed, was far more concerned about the cut of Diana's coat than the crisis in society.
Diana had captivated the country; Charles was proud, but Diana was beginning to upstage him
She started a craze for pearl chokers, which had not been seen in years.
Culottes and ethnic jumpers, which she wore on her honeymoon, flooded the shops.
And there was scarcely a shirt to be found that did not have the high necks and ruffles that she favoured in the early days.
Women even cut their hair in the same style.
The Prince had had an inkling of what was to come in Wales, when the crowds had been so eager to see Diana that they could scarcely hide their disappointment if Charles and Diana took one side of the street each and they were on the side of the street he took.
Then, he had been quite amused and content to joke about being nothing more than a flower bearer, but he was not so happy when it became a regular occurrence.
With the exception of his mother, he had never played second-fiddle to anyone.
Every member of the Royal Family enjoys star status; they are used to being the centre of attention and there is strong unstated rivalry between them.
In the normal course of events they will only be seen en masse after the Trooping of the Colour and on Christmas morning at Windsor; and the wisdom passed from experienced staff to newcomers is never to put them on stage together.
The situation became quite delicate.
Proud though he was of his wife, Charles could not help noticing she was stealing the limelight.
Even when he went to engagements on his own, people would ask why he had left her behind, where was she?
For some reason, the public expected Diana to be with him wherever he went.
Yet they never expected the Duke of Edinburgh to accompany the Queen everywhere, or Mark Phillips to be seen with Princess Anne.
The confidence he had gained from having a loving wife was being undermined by a feeling of rejection from the public.
Subconsciously he was beginning to resent her; and there were flashes of anger when he accused his staff of paying her too much attention.
The solution was to operate independently, to abide by the unwritten rules of royal management and not let the Prince and Princess get into a position where they were competing for the limelight except when the occasion was pure entertainment.
But on 21 June 1982 the problem temporarily dissolved when at three minutes past nine in the evening, Diana gave birth to Prince William.
PARENTHOOD
Having children so early in their marriage was a mixed blessing.
Diana had felt unwell for much of the early part of her pregnancy, and was not quite herself, which made the process of settling down to married life all the more difficult.
But William was a much loved and much longed-for baby, and the Prince and Princess could not have been happier.
Charles had taken an active interest from the start.
He had wanted children for years: not having them had been the one drawback to marrying late.
He had had to make do with friends' children, many of whom were his godchildren.
He found them enormously relaxing to be with.
Like animals, they are great levellers — not remotely impressed by a string of titles — and he always found he could build up a good rapport with them.
Having his own was his greatest wish and transformed his life.
He went along to Diana's breathing classes to prepare for the birth and was there by her side in the private Lindo Wing at St Mary's Hospital in Paddington when William emerged after sixteen hours of labour.
It was the most exciting, extraordinary experience he had ever had, and for a long time afterwards he would bend any ear he could find on the subject.
Even at formal dinners where weighty matters were being bandied about, he would seek out other young fathers to swap stories with them about the thrill and magic of childbirth.
Both Charles and Diana were determined that their children were going to have normal, happy childhoods.
They were convinced there should be no long periods of separation.
Nannies were inevitable and, within their social set, also very much the norm; but the choice of Barbara Barnes to look after William was an indication that it was going to be a relaxed regime: she had no formal training, never wore a uniform and liked children to call her by her Christian name.
Most important of all, she had a healthy sense of humour.
There was no way that any nanny in the Wales household was going to become a substitute for either parent.
Charles became as adept at changing nappies and bathing William as Diana, and, even when he was small, both spent as much time as they could with him.
Thus when they flew up to Balmoral for the first time after his birth, the entire family travelled together, despite the merchants of doom who insisted they should  never fly together in the same plane lest it crash and kill both heir and second-in-line to the throne.
On landing, it was Charles who carried the baby-basket off the plane and the nanny carried the bags.
When they set off the following year on a tour of Australia and New Zealand, William, as well as two nannies and acres of baggage, went too.
Charles and Diana are both very fond of the Antipodes — Charles feels particularly at home there after his months at Timbertop — but it was a long and exhausting tour.
They were away from home for six weeks and in that time covered thousands of miles, made over forty flights, attended a multitude of receptions, galas and banquets and shook more hands in walkabouts than could ever be counted.
Once again, everyone wanted a glimpse of Diana, everyone wanted to touch her.
Being able to return to William in the evenings brought back a sense of reality and made a difference to the whole trip.
Parenthood affected Charles dramatically.
It focused his mind on the future and about the world that his small and fragile son would one day inherit.
It made him re-evaluate his philosophy, his life, and gave him a whole new perspective.
He entered, as he explained to me later, what Carl Jung would probably have described as ‘the middle period’.
The press interpreted it as encroaching lunacy.
It began with a speech to the British Medical Association.
It was a glittering occasion, their 150th anniversary, and Charles was president.
Agonizing over what to say, he was suddenly struck by inspiration.
‘The most extraordinary thing happened,’ he explained, ‘I was sitting here (at his desk in Kensington palace), and I happened to look at the bookshelf, and my eyes settled on a book about Paracelsus.
So I took the book down and there was my speech; and the response to it was extraordinary.
I've never had so many letters.
I've been a great believer in intuition ever since.’
His speech dealt the BMA a devastating blow:
I have often thought that one of the less attractive traits of various professional bodies and institutions is the deeply ingrained suspicion and outright hostility which can exist towards anything unorthodox or unconventional.
Perhaps we just have to accept it is God's will that the unorthodox individual is  doomed to years of frustration, ridicule and failure in order to act out his role in the scheme of things, until his day arrives and mankind is ready to receive his message.
A protective Prince angrily telling photographers to leave his wife alone at a polo match
Leaving hospital with Prince William.
Charles was thrilled to be with Diana at the birth
I would suggest that the whole imposing edifice of modern medicine, for all its breathtaking successes is, like the celebrated Tower of Pisa, slightly off-balance.
It is frightening how dependent upon drugs we are all becoming and how easy it is for doctors to prescribe them as the universal panacea for our ills.
Wonderful as many of them are, it should still be more widely stressed by doctors that the health of human beings is so often determined by their behaviour, their food and the nature of their environment.
The speech sent shock waves through the medical profession, but the Prince had hit a nerve and, for all the criticism that was heaped on his head in the aftermath, the letters from the public told him he had been right.
Furthermore, it was spoken from the heart.
Charles believes in the Platonic ideal of a healthy mind in a healthy body, plenty of exercise, self-help and positive thinking.
He strongly believes that if there is a chance someone's suffering can be helped by an alternative method, then why not let them try it.
A year later another professional body, also celebrating its 150th anniversary, had its feet kicked from under it.
Charles had long been interested in architecture — he had grown up with beautiful buildings and visited hundreds more all over the world; he had read extensively on the subject and, by the very nature of the job, had seen a multitude of buildings, especially in the inner cities, that not only looked ghastly, but that people clearly found ghastly to live in.
Becoming pregnant so early in their marriage was a mixed blessing.
The Trooping of the Colour in June 1982
So, as the architects comfortably settled back into their chairs cradling their after-dinner brandies in preparation for some regal platitudes, the Prince launched into a stinging attack that left them reeling.
It was time they stopped designing buildings without a thought for the people who had to live in them, he said.
The proposed extension to the National Gallery looked like ‘a kind of vast municipal fire station — complete with the sort of tower that contains the siren.
I would better understand this type of ‘high-tech’ approach if you demolished the whole of Trafalgar Square and started again with a single architect responsible for the entire layout.
But what is proposed is like a monstrous carbuncle on the face of a much-loved and elegant friend.
‘What have we done to our capital city?
What have we done to it since the bombing of the last war?’
And of the proposed Mansion House Square project, he went on, ‘It would be a tragedy if the character and skyline of our capital city were to be further ruined and St Paul's dwarfed by yet another giant glass stump better suited to downtown Chicago than to the City of London.’
Charles had savaged the soft underbelly of yet another hallowed institution and has not been forgiven to this day.
Once again, however, he discovered he had struck a chord with ordinary people, people who had felt they were unfit to pass judgement on modern buildings because they lacked the qualifications.
And although many architects still find it hard to say Charles's name without curling their lips, most of them do admit that by bringing the whole subject into the public domain, architecture has had a much-needed shot in the arm.
In 1984, however, they were admitting nothing.
They were furious, as Charles had known they would be.
He had not made the speech lightly, a considerable amount of thought and soul-searching had gone into it, and it was against the advice of most of his staff that he went ahead with it.
Community architecture had come about as a reaction to the tower blocks of the 1960s which were clearly not working: they had led to vandalism and mugging and terrifying isolation for the people who lived in them.
Charles had recently met a number of community  cities, made such perfect sense and was so inspirational that he felt compelled to bring it to a wider audience.
Arriving with Prince William in Alice Springs, Australia, at the beginning of a long tour in 1983
There was one more group dealt a glancing blow by the Prince around the same time: and this was Britain's farmers.
Lawrence Woodward, director of Elm Farm Research Centre, a small newly formed charity set up to research and develop organic agriculture, wrote to Prince Charles asking if he would speak at the first organic food conference to be held in Cirencester in January 1983.
Charles could not, but sent a message instead; not the tame few words that Woodward had drafted for him, but something much more forthright:
For some years now modern farming has made tremendous demands on the finite sources of energy which exist on earth.
Maximum production has been the slogan to which we have all adhered.
In the last few years there has been an increasing realization that many modern production methods are not only very wasteful but probably also unnecessary…
I am convinced that any steps that can be taken to explore methods of production which make better and more effective use of renewable resources are extremely important.
Even if it may be some time before they are commercially  acceptable, pioneer work is essential if our planet is to feed the teeming millions of people who will live on it by the twenty-first century.
A touch of tenderness at Newcastle Stadium, New South Wales
I shall be watching the practical results with interest to see what might be applicable to our work in the Duchy of Cornwall, for I am sure that there will be lessons that we can learn.
The conference had nothing like the coverage of either the British Medical Association or Royal Institute of British Architects festivities, so its impact on the public at the time was negligible; but it marked a significant turn in the Prince's own farming methods, brought environmental concerns slowly into consumer consciousness and in the long term dealt a devastating blow to the agrochemical industry.
The Duchy of Cornwall, where Charles had promised to apply the lessons of organic agriculture, is one of the largest estates in Britain, about 130,000 acres in all, of which the greater part is on Dartmoor.
The remainder is farmland, mostly in the West Country, plus forty-five acres in south London, including the Oval cricket ground.
The Prince inherited it upon becoming Prince of Wales and will lose it if and when he becomes King.
In the meantime, it is his only source of income and he has to pay for everything out of it, both his personal and official expenses, including the upkeep of his and Diana's homes, their household, their wardrobes, the children's schooling, the official cars, and the cost of entertaining.
He also pays 25 percent of that income to the Treasury in lieu of tax.
Neither he nor Diana receives a penny from the Civil List.
The only expense that is paid for is air transport, when they use aircraft of the Queen's flight, the Royal Train, and the Royal Yacht Britannia .
The title Duke of Cornwall and the estate to go with it dates back to 1337, when Edward III created it to give his eldest son, the Black Prince, an income and somewhere to live; it was he who decreed that it should always go to the eldest son.
So if there is no son, as during George VI's reign, it is held by the monarch.
When Charles came of age in 1969, the Duchy had been in abeyance for thirty-three years and was seriously rundown; much of it was yielding nothing.
Although administered by a council, which met three times a year to review policy, it had undergone none of the post-war modernization and investment that had rescued the rest of the farming industry from the crippling effects of war.
No one seemed to have realized that Charles would need an income when he came of age.
Land stewards had become autonomous, farm buildings had fallen into disuse, land had been poorly managed, properties had been allowed to run down and rents had gone unreviewed.
If the Prince was going to be able to live off it when he finished his naval career and support the wife that everyone seemed so desperate for him to acquire, something radical had to be done.
So in 1972 a new secretary was appointed for the task, Anthony Gray, who worked away for some years and helped set it on its feet again.
Once he came out of the Navy, Charles became a little more involved, but it was not really until the end of the decade, after Mountbatten's death, when he was looking for a real job to do, that Charles took up the reins himself.
In so doing he found  another character, John Higgs, who became central to his development.
Charles and John Higgs clicked, and it was largely thanks to the relationship struck up with him, and the sheer personality of the man, that Charles became wholly and genuinely enthused by every aspect of the Duchy.
Charles had said he wanted a practical farmer on the council who knew something about estate management, and John Higgs was the man found for the job.
He had been the estate bursar at Oxford, and there was little about farming, estate management, rural development and conservation that John Higgs did not know.
He was a grey-haired dynamo of a man, bursting with ideas and good humour, who was not afraid to speak his mind to the Prince of Wales.
When Tony Gray retired in 1981,
Higgs became secretary.
Charles had known next to nothing about farming.
The Queen has a large farm at Windsor, which the Duke of Edinburgh manages, and another at Sandringham; and she herself is very knowledgeable about livestock and pedigrees, as is the Queen Mother.
But Charles knew very little and nothing at all about management, business and finance.
His education had not prepared him for this in any way.
John Higgs gave him a crash course.
He inspired the Prince, worked alongside him, coached him in the ways of business, schooled him in the art of responsible land management, encouraged him to try out new ideas, and helped turn the Duchy from a non-profit making concern into one that five years later had made net profits of £1.46 million.
With a wife and child to support Charles needed to make the Duchy profitable.
The family in Auckland, New Zealand, in 1983
HIGHGROVE
Having set the Duchy on the road to providing an income for the Prince of Wales, the next task had been to find him a house and, of all those short-listed in the summer of 1980, Charles chose Highgrove.
He had specifically wanted somewhere with a farm and Highgrove had 410 acres; also, to be within easy range of his friends and relatives, and again it fitted the bill.
It was a few miles outside the pretty market town of Tetbury in Gloucestershire; two hours from London down the M4 motorway, with easy access to Wales and the West Country; close to Princess Anne's house, Gatcombe Park; his friends, the ParkerBowles; and not far from Windsor.
It was also not far from Cirencester Park, Cowdray Park and Smith's Lawn for polo.
What is more, it was in the midst of Beaufort Hunt country and the Prince was hunting two or three times a week during the season.
What it was not, however, was either very large or very grand.
It had been previously owned by Maurice Macmillan MP, son of the late Conservative Prime Minister Lord Stockton, and the Duchy paid over three-quarters of a million pounds for the property.
From the security point of view it was uncomfortably close to the road, and had a public footpath (which has since been re-routed) running across the garden, no more than two or three hundred yards from the house, but the Prince liked it.
He especially liked the old and rare trees that had been planted in the garden by a previous owner, Colonel Mitchell, who bought the house in 1893.
He was a great expert, founder of the arboretum at Westonbirt nearby, and he filled every vista with a dazzling display of ornamental and specimen trees, which the Prince has since added to.
Owning a home of his own was a huge pleasure, but greater still was the pleasure of having a garden of his own.
All the royal residences have magnificent gardens and he had grown up appreciating them, but they are tended by gardeners: neither the Queen nor the Duke of Edinburgh is interested.
The gardener of the family is the Queen Mother, whose gardens at her Scottish hideaways, the Castle of Mey and Birkhall, are stunning, and it is she who over the years has made them so.
So Charles had the will but not the way and called on his friend Lady Salisbury to help.
Mollie Salisbury had designed several gardens for friends, as well as her own at  Hatfield House in Hertfordshire, and she was only too delighted to help plan a garden from scratch.
When Charles moved in to Highgrove there was practically no garden at all, just acres of lawn and some box hedges.
There was also a walled kitchen garden, which had been let go to grass, and a large hole had been knocked into one of the walls to let the tractor in to mow it.
With Mollie Salisbury's help, Charles designed his entire garden, and furthermore, with the assistance of just one gardener, he dug it, manured it and planted it too.
He discovered in the weeks and months that passed a real passion; a task that was not only deeply therapeutic, but one that he also found he could do rather well.
Lady Salisbury describes him as ‘a natural plantsman’.
What Charles also wanted now he had a garden of his own was wild flowers.
The greatest wild-flower expert in this country is Dr Miriam Rothschild, who had known Charles since he was a child, and was also a friend of Mollie Salisbury.
She ran the Royal Society for Nature Conservation, founded by her father in 1912, of which the Prince is patron.
In conjunction with her passion for insects and butterflies, on which she is a leading authority, she had a scheme underway to reintroduce wild flowers to the countryside.
She still travels the world, tirelessly delivering papers at scientific gatherings and converting anyone she comes across on the way.
Charles was one such, and he invited her to Highgrove to work her magic.
She is no romantic.
Although she enjoys the aesthetic value of wild flowers, her reason for encouraging their widespread growth is principally scientific.
A vast range of plants are used in medical preparations and as research continues new species are found to have beneficial properties.
If a species is allowed to become extinct, however insignificant it may have appeared to be, that is one potential medication lost to mankind for ever.
At that time it was the idea of looking out over fields of swaying poppies and cornflowers that appealed to the Prince.
On a strip of land between the house and the kitchen garden over ninety species of wild flower now grow.
More grow alongside the drive and are a lasting pleasure to him.
The garden was and still is his paradise and his pride and joy, and whenever Charles has the time he will put on a pair of old trousers, find a spade and get down to some real manual labour.
He now has two gardeners working full time: Dennis, a grand old boy who has scarcely been out of Gloucestershire in his life — and has been looking after foxhounds for the Duke of Beaufort for most of it; and Trevor Jacobs, a younger and professionally qualified horticulturist.
Dennis presides over the walled garden, which supplies the kitchens at Highgrove and Kensington Palace and grows all the weird and wonderful varieties that the Prince acquires and delights in surprising his guests with.
He had ten varieties of carrot in the ground when I visited, including a purple carrot that has not been grown since the eighteenth century.
The entire garden is organic; and any new idea that the Prince picks up in his travels, he immediately tries out at home.
The walled garden is divided by stone-chip paths with neat low box hedges, and there are flowers and  herbs growing alongside the vegetables.
In the middle there is a little pond with a fountain, and the golden carp that swim in it are so tame that they come at the sound of Dennis's voice.
Dennis also looks after the fruit cage and the greenhouse, where he grows scented plants for the house, like stephanotis and jasmine.
He works from dawn to dusk and then, for recreation, goes home to his little cottage in the grounds and tends his own little garden, growing prize specimens for the local show.
William and Harry have a tree house to play in in the woods at Highgrove
Trevor takes care of the rest of the garden, plants up the giant tubs that sit outside the house, helps the Prince plan new features and site new trees and additional flower beds.
He also weeds the existing beds, prunes the roses and, as well as all the other seasonal jobs, cuts the lawns and hedges.
There are dozens of hedges, which the Prince is growing in order to create topiary; there is also an avenue of trimmed and rounded golden yew trees leading the eye, in classic style, to a folly at the foot of the park.
It is an exciting garden, the hedges and paths divide it so that you come upon different parts almost by surprise, such as the scented garden, the woodland garden, built around some of the trees that Colonel Mitchell left behind him, with a sturdy wooden tree-house for the children, and the patio garden where the Prince sits and does paperwork during the summer months to the soothing sound of water, which springs from a sculpture he commissioned of stone whales.
The folly was a gift from the Sultan of Oman, just one of the many presents that now adorn the property.
The giant wrought-iron entrance gates, for example, came  from the people of Tetbury, the fruit trees espaliered against the walls of the vegetable garden were presented by the Worshipful Company of Fruiterers and the herbs came from a women's institute in Sussex.
The small heated swimming pool hidden from view near the rose walk was a wedding gift from the Army.
In the gardens of Kensington Palace; but Charles was happiest in the gardens of Highgrove
The whole estate is a reflection of the Prince's philosophy about the countryside.
He has built a new cowshed in the last year, and it is of brick and Cotswold stone — in keeping with the existing buildings.
The dry-stone walls have been repaired in the traditional way; fences in the fields to keep the animals back are wooden post-and-rail, there is no barbed-wire to be seen; and where the Prince has planted new trees in the parkland, they are all protected from the livestock by solid wooden guards, not the plastic sort most farmers use.
Sheep graze within view of the house and also a herd of Aberdeen Angus, and a number of horses, some with foals.
To complete the idyllic farmyard scene, chickens, a mixture of varieties, strut and scratch about the driveway and the fields.
Charles was keen to use his estate at Highgrove as an example for the rest of the Duchy.
In bringing it up to date and making it profitable, he had to tread warily, for although it was made up of land and property, it was essentially about people.
Rents needed to be brought up to a realistic level, housing stock modernized, particularly in some of the rundown areas of Kennington, and surplus sold off, without souring relations with his tenants.
So he began to involve them in some of the decisionmaking about how their environment might be improved, their needs met.
He called meetings to solicit their views and thus began his own experiments with what was effectively community architecture.
On the rural side he had 180 tenant farmers, each with between 50 and 130 acres apiece; and just as the Prince wanted the goodwill of his urban tenants, so too in the country.
So he and John Higgs made frequent forays into the countryside giving farmers no more than twelve hours' notice of the intended visit.
Higgs insisted on this so their wives would not be caught in curlers; but the idea was that Charles should see the farms and the farmers as they really were, not spruced up and on parade.
Charles wanted the farmers to talk frankly to him so he could learn about their lives and problems, and put what he learnt to good effect.
A frank talk was a help, but it was no substitute for knowing what it was like to have to milk cows at the crack of dawn every morning or mend fences, or battle with the elements, and so he began a series of annual stays on Duchy farms.
He spent a week working alongside the farmer, mucking out cattle yards, feeding pigs, dipping sheep; and living as a guest in his house.
Charles thoroughly enjoyed the experience and it was a rare opportunity to see how ordinary people lived.
The media, once again, saw it as further indication of encroaching madness.
The Prince feels he has a responsibility as a landowner to set an example to others, always to take the humane or the conservationist route above the straight commercial.
Early on, working in tandem with John Higgs, he had brought in the Farming and Wildlife Advisory Group and the Nature Conservancy Council to look at all the  farms on the estate to make sure they were farming with conservation in mind.
His preoccupation with conservation has grown over the years, but even then it was nothing new.
It was a subject Charles had been actively concerned about for most of his adult life.
It had even been the topic of his first public speech in 1968.
He had grown up with a love of the countryside.
The Royal family are country people, their interests and off-duty activities are all to do with the countryside, and the Prince always had a good knowledge of its workings; but it was not until after he became chairman of the steering committee for Wales that he discovered the danger it was in.
He said:
We are faced at the moment with the horrifying effects of pollution in all its cancerous forms.
There is the growing menace of oil pollution at sea, which almost destroys beaches and certainly destroys tens of thousands of seabirds.
There is chemical pollution discharged into rivers from factories and chemical plants, which clogs up the rivers with toxic substances and adds to the filth in the seas.
There is air pollution from smoke and fumes discharged by factories and from gases pumped out by endless cars and aeroplanes.
Waste is yet another problem.
When you think that each person produces roughly 21 lbs of rubbish per day and there are 55 million of us on this island using non-returnable bottles and indestructible plastic containers, it is not difficult to imagine the mountains of refuse that we shall have to deal with somehow.
The speech might have been delivered last week.
In fact, it was twenty-one years ago, in February 1970.
Even more prophetic words were to follow:
The list is longer, but what I am getting at is that it is going to be extremely expensive to cut down this pollution.
In the end it will be the general public, as consumers, who will have to pay.
Are we all prepared to accept these price increases for the sometimes dubious advantage of seeing our environment improved?
Are we prepared to discipline ourselves to restrictions and regulations that we feel we ought to impose for our own good?
If we are not, then this meeting and the whole of Conservation Year will have been a gigantic, costly and splendid waste of time.
Twenty-one years ago there were very few people who shared the Prince's point of view.
Those who did were mostly long-haired, bearded and dressed in open-toed sandals.
Even in the early 1980s, the press saw his adherence to the theme as one more idea to mock.
Charles, however, was determined to use the farm at Highgrove as a model to put his ideas into practice.
After delivering his message of support to the organic movement at Cirencester, he held a seminar at Kensington Palace to air the issues, and he and John Higgs subsequently went down to Elm Farm to investigate the possibilities of employing organic methods on the home farm.
The basic philosophy involves farming as far as possible within a closed system: in a nutshell, growing crops to feed  the animals and using the manure those animals produce to fertilize the soil in order to grow more crops.
The use of soluble chemical fertilizers is banned, as are hormone stimulants.
The animals must be reared in humane conditions, which means that intensive operations — like battery henhouses or veal units — are forbidden.
Modern farmers now endeavour to dominate nature by using chemicals that ensure growth.
The organic farmer works with nature, recognizing the intricate and holistic properties of agriculture, so that growth is encouraged and problems averted not by introducing an outside agent, but by structuring and adapting the system.
This philosophy appealed to Prince Charles and he was keen to give it a go, but, like everything else in the Duchy, the home farm had to pay its way.
John Higgs had reservations.
He felt a lot of hot air was talked by some of the purists.
Nevertheless, he agreed to visit West Germany on the Prince's behalf, where the movement was far more advanced, and report back.
He returned after a very jolly trip, with a ten-pound carrot and a giant pumpkin, which he sent to Prince Charles.
‘We found as much wind in Germany,’ said the memo attached, ‘as there is in this pumpkin.’
Wind notwithstanding, Charles decided to go ahead and experiment, initially on an eighty-acre block of land at Highgrove; this has proved so successful that, by the end of 1991, all the arable land on the farm will be up to organic farming standards.
John Higgs, alas, did not live to see it.
He died after a very short and sudden illness in June 1986.
Charles was shocked.
He had lost another close companion, another friend, one who had helped and guided him and given him such pleasure.
Before his death the Prince knighted John Higgs, and went specially to St Thomas's Hospital to perform the investiture at his bedside.
THE CHARITABLE PRINCESS
A myth abounds that women just need to be told they are going to meet the Princess of Wales and they go into labour.
It no doubt helps if they are already pregnant; but the notion is not as fanciful as it sounds.
In July 1984 the Princess had agreed to become patron of a small medical research charity called Birthright, which had been set up initially to try and minimize the dangers of pregnancy and childbirth.
Diana's first visit in her new role was to open a new research centre at King's College Hospital, which dealt with the problems of high-risk babies; this had been funded by Birthright.
It was the first centre of its kind, and was offering treatment to women who had suffered problems with previous pregnancies — women who had had handicapped babies, for example, or stillbirths.
The Princess had said she particularly wanted to meet mothers who had had a treatment known as chorionic villus biopsy, which was a very exciting breakthrough.
It is a means of discovering at just eight weeks of pregnancy whether the foetus is normal.
Birthright had funded its development in Britain, and this was its introduction at King's College Hospital.
The charity's national organizer, Vivienne Parry, set about finding some mothers-to-be to meet the Princess; but as fast as she found them, they went into labour.
This happened with no less than eight.
On the morning of the visit, her final hope, a woman whose baby was due the following day, rang Vivienne to say she was getting pains.
‘Well, cross your legs,’ said Vivienne, now desperate, ‘and get down here right away.’
The woman did as she was told, met the Princess, and went into labour in the car on the way home.
This mother was a perfect example for the Princess to meet.
Her first baby had been born with a genetic disease and had died, but the disease had not been diagnosed until she was pregnant with her second child.
Fortunately, it was born healthy.
When she became pregnant for the third time she was given an amniocentesis, the only form of testing available at that time.
It meant she didn't know whether the foetus carried the disease until she was twenty-one weeks pregnant, by which time abortion is very difficult both physically and emotionally.
The new treatment had meant that this woman was able to establish that her fourth baby was healthy when she was only ten weeks and two days into her pregnancy.
September 1985.
Childbirth was no less magical the second time around with Prince Harry
It was a triumph of modern science, and the new patron could not have been more impressed — although being seven months pregnant herself she was a little bit squeamish at the sight of the giant ten-inch needles used in the procedure.
Whether Diana's interest in Birthright was planted by her obstetrician George Pinker, who was then its president, or by several of her friends who have had problems and become involved, her decision to add Birthright to her list of patronages marked a turning point in its history.
In 1984 Birthright had an income of £600,000, and very few people had heard of it.
The research it funded all took place in laboratories inside hospitals and there was nothing tangible to show for it.
Diana opened the first research centre that treated patients.
She went on to open more and more all over the country.
She met ‘miracle’ babies and, at the less glamorous end of the scale, opened a cervical-cancer unit.
In fact, it was the extra revenue she brought in at the baby end that enabled the charity to open up units for cervical cancer, and fund other research into unappealing but equally vital conditions.
Through her involvement, Birthright has leapt from being a fringe charity into a major one.
Its income is now £1,500,000 a year and rising fast.
Nothing could give the Princess more satisfaction.
Her preference is for small charities where she feels she can do some good, and where she has some natural interest.
The British Deaf Association (BDA) was another such charity.
This had  been one of the 150 organizations that had written asking for patronage when Diana became engaged, and had been turned down.
Then, quite out of the blue at the end of 1983, they had a letter from the Palace saying that the Princess had decided she would like to be their patron.
It was no coincidence, perhaps, that its president was the Marquess of Salisbury, married to Mollie Salisbury who had spent so much time helping with the garden at Highgrove.
The Princess has a curious effect on pregnant women.
Diana visiting the Birthright unit at St Mary's Hospital, London
So Diana was among friends, but she was still enormously nervous on her first visit to the BDA headquarters in Carlisle.
This was the beginning of her determination to learn sign language, which has been more of a boost to the deaf community over the years than any other gesture.
Liz Scott-Gibson, who is now director of sign language services for the BDA, subsequently went to Kensington Palace to teach the Princess; and on a later visit, to a school in Durham, Diana surprised everyone by being able to communicate to the deaf people she met without an interpreter.
Ever since, she has been delighting deaf people she encounters by communicating in their own language.
Dr Barnardo's was another charity she took on at about the same time; this charity has left its old orphanage image behind, and the Princess feels her connections with it have been fruitful.
As with all her involvements, though, it was a gradual process.
Diana was still the new girl in those days, very much learning as she went along, shy and unsure of herself, and leaning heavily on others for support and guidance.
But Diana's impact on fund-raising was evident from the start.
She only had to shake a hand to increase the revenue and bring more publicity to the organization than any amount of money could buy.
Her presence was enough to make front-page news.
This was also true, of course, of the Prince.
He may not have attracted the cameras in quite the way the Princess did, but he certainly brought recognition and respectability to every company or organization whose threshold he crossed.
The prestige  they reaped from a visit was incalculable.
This was one aspect of his life that Charles found hard to come to terms with, especially during this period when he was evaluating and reassessing his role in life.
For someone with his intellect, his was an intensely frustrating position.
He was famous, people flocked to catch a glimpse of him, they stood for hours in the freezing cold in the hope that he would choose their hand to shake — for no better reason than an accident of birth.
Charles constantly felt he had done nothing to earn it; there was no feeling of satisfaction in a job well done.
He had not won an election, sung an aria, or even built up a business empire.
Diana immediately wanted to learn sign language after her first visit to a school for the deaf
He was famous simply because he happened to be the Prince of Wales; and in his darker moments he felt that charities and organizations only wanted him because of his name.
The most useful contribution he could make was to turn up on the right day in the right uniform, cut ribbons, and make cosy speeches.
When he did try to make some real contribution to society, it seemed that all he got for his trouble was The Prince was too sensitive, too intelligent, to play the part mapped out for him, the part that his courtiers were there to help maintain.
He longed to do some real work that would give him some satisfaction at the end of a day, yet there seemed to be nothing for him to do.
He began to question the ethics of his whole position.
His was one of the richest families in the world.
He knew nothing but privilege.
He lived in beautiful houses, travelled the world in the greatest of comfort, and wanted for nothing.
This is how monarchs and their families have lived for generations, without ever questioning that it should be so.
Charles was undergoing serious doubt.
His Prince's Trust brought him into contact with the real world.
He repeatedly met people whose lives were desperate.
Their living conditions were grim, their education was minimal, and their prospects for the future were bleak.
It was not just the inner cities.
There were no jobs for young people in rural areas; rising property prices meant that they were unable to find housing in the villages in which they had grown up.
The problems did not stop there.
During 1981 the Prince had been patron of the International Year of Disabled People, and met yet another vast group of people who suffered enormous hardship and prejudice, and whom society did not seem to care about.
While grain mountains grew in the West, millions of people in the Sudan were dying of starvation.
Practically nothing had been done for the environment since 1970; people had simply built more cars, more roads, more factories, and thrown ever-increasing tons of chemicals on to the land.
It had turned out to be exactly as Charles had forecast, ‘a gigantic, costly and splendid waste of time’.
There was so much to do; there were people out there whom the system was failing; there was a world that was being poisoned.
But what could he do about it?
He felt impotent, uncertain about what he should be doing, what was expected of him.
With the exception of Michael Colborne, everyone within the palace was telling Charles that he should not be getting involved.
Adeane had strongly advised against the controversial speeches of the past year, especially the one to the architectural profession.
He disapproved of the Prince's involvement in Operation Raleigh; he  even felt that Charles's youth and inner-city work was politically border-line and unwise.
Adeane counselled against it all, and was backed by the Duke of Edinburgh.
Colborne was pulling the other way: he said there was a social revolution going on outside the palace gates; he believed young people needed leadership as they never had needed it before, and the Prince was the one who could lead them.
Uncertain which route to take, and lacking the confidence to follow his instincts, the Prince turned in on himself.
He retreated to Highgrove and took out some of his frustration on the soil and the polo field.
At other times he revelled in the distraction of his children.
‘Have a good weekend, sir,’ said Harold Haywood, secretary of the Prince's Trust, one Friday night.
‘Well, I was hoping to do some digging,’ said the Prince, ‘but it's so hard that I can't get the spade in.
So I expect I'll be nappy changing instead.’
Nappy changing it was, his detective confirmed, while the nanny had the weekend off.
There was a new baby in the house by this time.
On 15 September 1984 Charles was once again by Diana's side at St Mary's Hospital when Prince Harry came into the world.
The magic was every bit as exciting the second time around as it had been with William.
Charles was fiercely proud of his wife and son, and felt that if there was any point to life at all, this was it.
This was another bone of contention with Adeane.
As a bachelor, Adeane had no concept of the intense pleasure fatherhood had brought the Prince, and no understanding of why he should want to spend so much time at home.
It seemed that when the Prince was not at home, he was playing polo.
Adeane's function as private secretary appeared to be little more than the job of arranging the Prince's schedule around polo and the children's bath times.
The press had noticed too.
They had calculated that in one particular three-month period Charles had had fifteen engagements, Princess Anne had carried out fifty-six, Prince Philip, forty-five, and the Queen, twenty-eight.
The tabloids were calling Charles work-shy and lazy, and the Duke of Edinburgh told him to pull his socks up.
Colborne conceded that he was fighting a losing battle; a battle against the entire social structure within the palace and the snobbery and jealousy of the Old Guard that surrounded the Prince.
Colborne's departure was a shock to Charles.
He was the one person within his household who had told him the truth; he had been his eyes and ears in the community, voiced the opinions of the man in the street.
At times he had been his conscience too — when the Prince had lost his temper or been rude to someone, Colborne would write him a note and tell him so.
He was devoted to the Prince, but he had served him for ten years and his wife had scarcely seen him.
He was now fifty, and he felt she deserved more from her marriage.
He left just a few days before Christmas in 1984.
Less of a surprise was Edward Adeane's departure the very next day.
Charles summoned Adeane, they had yet another blazing row, and Adeane returned to the more predictable workings of the Bar.
He had been an excellent courtier of the very  best tradition.
His misfortune was that Charles was not a traditional Prince of Wales.
It was not only his staff who found Charles difficult during this period.
He is a man whose emotions are close to the surface, and who plunges into profound troughs.
Although the arrival of Harry was a break in the gloom, the Prince was a prickly man to live with.
He was tortured and temperamental and hugely demanding of everyone around him.
Diana was sympathetic, but did not fully understand his unrest, nor his frantic soul-searching.
She was twenty-three and simply too young to comprehend the feelings of middle age — let alone those of a middle-aged Prince .
Besides, she was very wrapped up in a world of her own.
She had two delicious babies, she was a Princess, a star, and the world was her oyster.
She was having a ball.
Admittedly, there were times for her when it all became too much, when the intrusion and the invasion were a strain.
But there was a flip side to the coin.
When she was dressed and made up and prepared for it, she enjoyed the attention, she enjoyed being photographed, and she found the sight of her face on the covers of magazines and newspapers enormously exciting.
She loved wearing beautiful clothes and priceless jewels, and was thrilled to meet her favourite pop stars and actors, go to rock concerts, ballets, operas and glittering film premiéres.
It was exciting to travel by private plane and helicopter with courtiers standing to attention, to be driven in a limousine the size of a small house, and to stay in palaces and castles in the lap of luxury.
It was a far cry from life at Coleherne Court, where there was no one but herself to do the washing, ironing and vacuuming.
Sometimes she had to pinch herself to make sure it was not all a dream.
Diana had been very young when she married Charles, and not just in years.
She had seen none of this glamorous life; she had seldom even been to smart restaurants, let alone banquets and star-studded receptions.
Despite her wealth and connections, her life had been quietly sheltered.
She knew nothing of the drugs or drop-out culture of her generation.
She dressed in clothes that her mother bought her, such as tartan skirts and matching jumpers, and seldom wore  make-up.
Hardly a head would turn if she walked into a room.
She watched television, listened to music, and dreamed about favourite pop stars — just like any normal teenager.
Diana loves dressing up, wearing priceless jewels, and going to film premiéres
In the first four years of her marriage that life had been turned on its head, transformed out of all recognition.
She was famous the world over, in a way that no member of the Royal Family, not even any Hollywood legend, had ever been.
People flocked in their thousands to see her, they hung on her every word, watched her every move on television.
In the same space of time she had married, embarked on a new and totally alien job, had a baby, celebrated her twenty-first birthday, and then had a second child — all momentous events in anyone's life, without the other pressures she was having to cope with.
They had been very heady years.
Much as she might have wanted to help, Diana was in no position to give Charles the attention he needed.
In many respects she found him an enigma.
She understood his need for sport, because she too enjoyed exercise; what she did not understand was his need to punish himself with such dangerous activities.
In the summer months it was polo, which he played unremittingly three or four times a week.
In winter he put his polo ponies out to grass at Highgrove, and got his hunters into peak condition.
Again, three or four times a week he would push himself to the limit, galloping across the countryside with the hounds, risking life and limb in another of the most physically exacting sports known to man.
At other times he craved solitude and took himself off to Balmoral to fish, paint and stalk deer.
Diana found his obsessions puzzling, and not a little hurtful.
She could not understand why he should want to spend so much time away from home and his family.
Charles played polo unremittingly three or four times a week.
Diana found his obsession hard to understand
DIFFERING INTERESTS
The Prince's behaviour was no reflection on Diana or their children.
In those difficult months and years Charles was unaware of anyone but himself.
He had reached a crossroads in his life.
He had lost many of the people who mattered to him, and he was unsure of himself and his abilities.
He knew he had a duty, but a duty to do what?
To open buildings and preserve the royal status quo?
Or to try and improve the lives of the people who would one day be his subjects?
Diana had married no ordinary man.
Charles had never been carefree, never been allowed to be childish or make mistakes like his peers, never had friends to call on and pour his heart out to.
His had been an isolated and lonely existence, despite the people perpetually at his side.
He would never be able to settle down to married life like a suburban husband.
He was a man apart, a man desperate to be of some use, driven to understand the purpose of life and his role within it.
Charles enjoyed the time he spent with his wife and children, but the events of the last four years had been no less momentous for him, and his way of coping with the stress and tensions in his life had always been by testing himself physically.
He is not a natural extrovert; leadership was thrust on him from a very early age.
The trials of his childhood and teenage years turned him into the perfect Prince, but they did not alter his fundamental nature.
public speaking is something he enjoys today, but it was a gruelling experience in the early days, as were walkabouts.
City life, even in the environs of Kensington Palace, is a trial to the Prince; he feels suffocated by London and longs to escape to the country and be at one with nature.
Polo is the Prince's game because it was his father's game and also Mountbatten's; and it is the ultimate test.
‘I am one of those people’, he has said in the past,’ who must take exercise not only to be able to give of my best, but just to survive — I mean, I can't function without it.
If I can have a game of polo I feel five hundred times better in my mental outlook.
But without some form of exercise I'm afraid to say I get terribly jaded and — well, not depressed, but below par.’
Polo requires tremendous fitness, and 100 per cent concentration.
It is a dangerous game, as he discovered yet again in the summer of 1990.
But the Prince has always enjoyed flirting with danger, like his cousin, Prince William of Gloucester, who was killed in a plane crash in 1972.
Charles had pushed himself to the limit in the armed  forces and had insisted upon doing the full training that his fellow officers did — despite protests from his superiors.
He had done the Royal Marines commando training, he had insisted on parachute jumping and escaping from a tank in 100 feet of water in a simulated exercise — an exercise that killed two men over the next two years.
Sometimes his superiors did put their foot down.
There were a few exercises they forbade, and would never let the Prince pilot supersonic Buccaneers or the Sea King anti-submarine helicopters; but he did qualify for membership of the exclusive Ten Ton Club, by flying at more than 1,000 m.p.h. in a phantom scrambled from Leuchars in Fife, which he had taken over Balmoral before going supersonic off the coast of Scotland.
Unknown to most people, he had also driven a Formula Two racing car belonging to world-champion racing driver Graham Hill around the track at Thruxton — and come perilously close to disaster.
He had lost control on the wet surface and spun right off the track.
For the Prince it was the beginning of a love affair.
In a gondola in Venice, April 1985
But these were the things that made life worth living.
Charles hated the feeling that he was being wrapped in cotton wool; he felt cheated when he was not allowed to do what other men did.
If he could confront physical danger and win he could go to bed feeling that he had achieved something with his day.
Horse riding was his route to this feeling.
It was ‘the sport of kings’ after all, and however dangerous, Charles was determined that no one was going to take that pleasure away from him.
His other necessity in life was solitude.
He had needed it ever since he was a child.
Even as a schoolboy he had taken himself away from the crowd for long lonely  walks, and sat in the silence of the small chapel in the grounds at Gordonstoun.
Of all the community services on offer, he had chosen the coastguards, which involved nights spent quietly in a hut on the cliff tops watching for shipping; and the hardest part of all the trials he endured in the Navy was being marooned on a ship for months on end with no opportunity to be alone.
Charles would never be able to settle down to married life like a suburban husband.
On the Royal Yacht Britannia in 1985
The Prince is no hermit.
He enjoys the company of others, likes nothing better than a good dinner surrounded by friends, and large noisy get-togethers with his family.
His interest in people in the street is very genuine too.
He wants to know how they live, how they think.
Many are the times he has held up busy working schedules because he has become fascinated by someone he has encountered in a crowd.
Polo is a team game, hunting is a gregarious activity, and he uses it as such.
He chats to people in the field, remembers faces, and will pick up on topics discussed in a previous conversation.
He actively seeks out company at times, but on other occasions he needs to be completely alone.
To take stock, to recharge his batteries, and there is no place on earth he would rather do it than in the Highlands of Scotland.
He is surrounded there by everything he loves; he can walk for mile upon mile and meet nothing more taxing than the occasional sheep; he can fish one of the best salmon rivers in Britain; he can stalk deer, a sport he finds fascinating as well as challenging; and he can paint.
Charles took up watercolour painting nearly twenty years ago, and it has become one of his greatest pleasures.
‘The great thing about painting’, he says, ‘is that it is your own individual interpretation of whatever view you have chosen.
Because it obliges you to sit down and make a careful observation of the chosen subject, you discover so much more than by just pointing a camera.
As a result, you become increasingly more aware of the quality of light and shade, of tone and texture and of the shape of buildings.
In short, it has revolutionized my life and, through the requirement of intense concentration, it is one of the most relaxing and therapeutic exercises I know.’
The Prince is genuinely modest about his artistic talent, perpetually apologizes for his amateurishness and longs to be more skilled; and, as with most things, he finds he  becomes much better with daily practice.
Balmoral is one place where he can do that.
’ If I have a game of polo I feel five hundred times better in my mental outlook.’
Diana with Charles at a polo match in Melbourne in 1985
The Prince's other favourite place to paint, and indeed to be, is Italy, which, for all his travels, he had never visited until the spring of 1985.
It was a visit filled with promise and excitement, and one that he and the Princess obviously enjoyed.
They were going to the home of opera, to listen to some Verdi, Puccini and Donizetti; and to see at first hand the fine art and architecture that he had studied and only previously heard about or seen in books.
They were to look at the sculpture of Michelangelo, and the frescoes on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.
Charles had longed to visit the Basilica in Rome, to see Venice in all its glory; to walk across the Ponte Vecchio in Florence, virtually unchanged since the sixteenth century, and to visit the villages in the Tuscan hills, intact after hundreds of years.
He had heard so much about it from the Queen Mother — who as a child had been there every year — and from so many other people that he had felt it was a part of his education that was sorely lacking.
The high spot of the tour, however, was to be an audience with the Pope.
Charles had planned to take part in a private Mass with the Pope, but was forbidden at the last moment after strong protest to the government from the Church of England hierarchy.
It was an official state visit, so he and the Princess were ruled by the Foreign Office and, in this case, overruled.
Charles was intensely angry and upset.
He has a deep religious conviction, which tends towards the ecumenical, and this would have been a perfect expression of his beliefs and also a personal and rewarding spiritual experience.
It was not to be.
Instead, they had a forty-five-minute audience, which Diana was extremely nervous about — more so than at any meeting  with any leader before or since.
However, it turned out to be a very relaxed meeting, so much so that when the private session was over and the press were invited in to take photographs, the Prince said to the Pope, ‘Let me introduce you to my press corps.’
From Rome they flew down to join Britannia in Sicily for the remainder of the tour, where the Prince's artist friend John Ward was waiting.
‘If my grandmother can take Sir Hugh Casson to Venice,’ he had said some months before, ‘can I take you?’
Charles and Diana had a very relaxed audience with the Pope on their Italian visit
Charles had met Ward several years before, and, as well as seeking his advice as a teacher, had commissioned several paintings from him.
Shortly before the wedding Edward Adeane, Charles's private secretary, had been in a dining club with the artist; he pushed a packet of cigarettes across the table towards him.
Written on the back were the words, ‘My boss wants you to draw his wedding’.
Not long afterwards came another request, this time in a slightly more orthodox fashion, for John Ward to paint the Princess.
He has since painted Prince William's christening and Prince Charles himself, and the portraits all hang in pride of place in the privacy of Kensington Palace and Highgrove.
From Sicily they sailed up the coastline to Venice together.
Every day the Prince and Princess went off on official business, to look at churches, visit hospitals and meet people, and the minute they were back on board the royal yacht, Charles would  quickly change into some comfortable clothes and sit on deck with his sketchbook and teacher, until the very last minute before the bell for dinner.
The deaf children of the Molfetta Deaf School in Trani were proud to have been singled out for a visit by the Princess
The trip was a revelation.
Diana was not so enthused by the architecture, which Charles delighted in, but there was no doubting the warmth of the welcome — they were greeted everywhere as ‘Carlo e De ’— and the sheer beauty of the place and the warm weather lifted everyone's spirits after an English winter.
Diana also enjoyed the attentiveness of Italian men, whose appreciation of good-looking women and elegant dressing is second to none.
She visited hospitals and schools, even a school for the deaf, where she boasted that she was President of the British Deaf Association.
The children didn't understand at first, but when it was later explained to them, they were enormously proud that she should have singled them out for a visit.
It was one of the most enjoyable tours they had had.
With the prospect of William and Harry joining them for a holiday afterwards, Diana was in good heart.
For the Prince, it was the beginning of a love affair, one that has taken him back to Italy on many occasions.
He has found friends there.
He stays with the historian Sir Harold Acton, in Florence, and the fabulously rich Frescobaldi family; and spends his time painting and soaking up the culture of the land that bred so many great artists.
Last year he was invited to hold an exhibition of his work at Urbino, in central Italy, at the house once owned by the Renaissance painter Raphael, which he had visited a few years before.
It was the first time that such an offer had ever been made; initially, he was loath to put his sketches on public display — but he was also flattered.
Finally, after some ‘agonizing’, he agreed ‘on the grounds’, as he wrote in the introduction to the catalogue, ‘that I have a passion for Italy, her people, her countryside and the way in which art quite naturally seems to invade every aspect of life, thereby producing an atmosphere that is totally irresistible’.
He sent the paintings but none were for sale.
As he explained in Urbino, ‘These sketches are very much a part of myself and I am sure those who paint themselves will understand how hard it is to part with something into which, when inspired, you have poured your heart and soul.’
He is also concerned about being unable to control their value on the open market, with individuals making money out of what had originally been a means of raising money for charity.
Sir Hugh Casson had helped Charles and encouraged him with his painting for many years, and is impressed by his skill.
He said of the Urbino exhibition:
The works on show are as relaxed as the setting — they speak quietly — no drama, no rhetoric — and their message is clear that The Prince of Wales, like every serious artist, paints not just what he sees but what he is…a man obviously happiest in the open air, preoccupied (like all Englishmen) with our landscape and our weather (itself as misty, mid-toned and lacking in extremes as the English themselves).
He draws inspiration from ordinary scenes and simple places that he knows and loves.
He obviously has heeded Ruskin's advice not just to look at things but to ‘watch’ them.
Diana does not paint, and could not have shared her husband's absorption.
Her interests are almost all active ones; and to be with someone whose idea of a holiday is to sit stock still for three hours at a time, with a small box of watercolours and a sketch pad and ‘watch’ things, was beyond her.
Fishing held no appeal for her either.
Nothing could be more boring, to her mind, than standing on the banks of a river for hour after hour, sometimes the entire day, hoping for a fish to take.
She had neither the patience nor the inclination.
Diana needs people; unlike the Prince, she is not much good at being on her own.
As a child at Althorp, a big and lonely place where she often had no other children for company, she would go into the kitchen to chatter to the cook and the cleaners, and even the delivery men who dropped in.
She loves talking to people, and keeping in touch with what is going on in their lives.
As such, she is a compulsive user of the telephone, and rings everyone, especially friends and family.
She is also a great letter-writer, a hangover no doubt from years at boarding school, where she had to write to both parents every week.
She writes as she speaks, a flow of news and thoughts in large, generous handwriting, with affectionate endings, such as‘Lots of Love’ or ‘All my love’— even to members of her staff.
People are her lifeline; they would have been whoever she had married.
She loves the country and Highgrove is home, especially with the children, but she needs to know the city is not too far away, with shops and cinemas and friends to meet up with.
The idea of being marooned at Balmoral for months on end is her vision of purgatory.
So after a brief visit to Balmoral in the summer, Diana soon established a pattern of leaving Charles to it and returning to London and her friends.
This was quite the most sensible arrangement; it was more fun for the children too.
Their friends were either in London or around Gloucestershire, and they had very active social lives, particularly after William started kindergarten in September 1985.
Charles, in the meantime, would invite people who he knew shared his enthusiasms to keep him company.
He went off to Italy one year with his cousin and fellow-artist, Lady Sarah Armstrong-Jones.
He went fishing with his friends of old,
Lord and Lady Tryon.
Kanga, as she is better known, was an ex-girlfriend and has remained a trusted friend.
Lord and Lady Tryon had a house in Iceland where Charles had frequently been a guest before he was married.
In fact, he was fishing on a fiord nearby at the precise moment when his detective brought him the news that Lord Mountbatten had been killed.
The Tryons, in return, have frequently joined him for some fishing at Balmoral.
The Prince is also very keen on deer stalking, another pull to keep him in the Highlands for as long as he can manage.
He is not especially fond of killing animals but, as a countryman, he sees culling deer as a necessity.
If they were allowed to breed at random and each live life to its natural end, in the absence of any real predators, they would overrun the land, destroy the habitat in an ever-desperate search for food, and upset the eco-system.
A good stalker only singles out weak animals from a herd, or those that are past their best.
Finding the right animal may involve tracking the herd for miles across steep and inhospitable terrain, and waiting  patiently for the right opportunity.
It is a skilled sport, best done by people who understand and admire their quarry and are fit enough to pursue and outwit it.
This is not one of his solitary pursuits, however.
He is usually accompanied by a stalker and gillie, local men who are familiar with the herds and their habits, and who know the country like the back of their hands and can help lead those doing the shooting to the right place.
They take ponies to carry the stags down the hill — nevertheless, it can be a long and exhausting day out.
Prince Charles has been deer stalking since he was a child and takes great pride in a clean kill.
He finds it far more challenging than shooting either grouse or pheasant, which he has also done plenty of.
There have repeatedly been stories that Diana's disapproval had stopped Charles shooting, but these rumours are quite untrue.
Diana was brought up with it, just as Charles was, and is a fair shot herself, although she does not shoot any more.
She is nevertheless perfectly happy to go out with the guns and take the boys.
The fact was that Charles gave up shooting for a few years because he had simply grown bored with it: it was too easy to blast away overfed birds frightened into the air by a band of beaters.
He still joins in the traditional New Year shooting at Sandringham, but, apart from that family outing, he seldom bothers with shooting birds nowadays.
If given an invitation to stalk, however, he jumps at it.
He is frequently a guest of Colonel Sir Donald Cameron of Lochiel at Achnacarry, his 80,000-acre deer forest near Fort William.
Trudging back one evening, having been out all day and having had no luck, Charles spotted a large heap of rocks on the hillside above them, and asked what it was.
Told that it was a fox's cairn, he insisted on climbing up by himself to have a look at it, and was gone for about twenty minutes.
Meanwhile, darkness began to fall.
When he finally rejoined the others he was carrying several samples of rock, and there was very little light left.
The party still had to cross Loch Arkaig by boat to meet up with his security men who were waiting with a Range Rover, and were clearly becoming worried.
They  switched on the car's headlights as a beacon; but, all of a sudden, as the Prince and his companions were half-way across the water, the lights swung round and moved away as the vehicle set off down the glen.
Charles feels the strong pull of the Highlands, but Diana seldom stays for long When they landed there was no choice but to start the ten-mile journey to Achnacarry Castle on foot, so they set off, even though they had been walking all day.
just then they saw the lights come hurtling back up the rough track towards them.
In the confusion of explanations and apologies that followed, one of the security men rounded on the stalker for keeping the Prince out so late.
Charles defended the man stoutly, and asked instead, what the hell the driver thought he had been doing careering up and down the lochside like that.
‘All you're doing is wasting petrol,’ he said.
Another stalking host is Lord King, British Airways supremo, who has a hunting lodge in the Borders.
Lord King is a friend from the fox-hunting field, another sport that Charles would defend on the grounds of control and conservation.
farmers encouraging foxes to live on their land encourage a whole range of other wildlife that enjoys the same habitat, as has been done at Highgrove.
If the farmers did not want the foxes, they would plough up those areas, and some of those other species might entirely disappear.
To which the Prince would add that it is a traditional and historical part of the English way of life, and one that is not, contrary to public opinion, exclusively for the rich.
Most hunts are made up of a complete cross-section of society, the only qualification being an ability to ride.
Once again, Charles does not hunt because he enjoys killing foxes.
He hunts because he finds it exciting to ride a horse at speed and over such unpredictable obstacles.
He seldom hunts in Gloucestershire because he finds the large expanses of flat and open farmland boring.
So although he has gone to some trouble to leave tracks across his own land at Highgrove specially for the local hunt, the Beaufort, he hardly ever joins them.
He much prefers riding with the Quorn in Leicestershire, where there are more hedges and gates to jump.
He particularly delights in riding near the front of the field so that he can watch the hounds at work — something that fascinates him.
The Prince's defence of blood sports, which so many of his friends find indefensible, is a curious inconsistency, and one on which he is not keen to be challenged or criticized.
Spike Milligan, the ex-Goon, who has been a friend for years, is a veteran anti-blood sports campaigner.
He once said that the Royal Family had inherited the problem of hunting and shooting; it was in the blood.
The label ‘Hunting junkies’ was not well received by his friend, the ‘Trainee King’.
SEARCHING FOR A ROLE
The greatest cause of the Prince's despondency had been the feeling that he served no useful purpose.
Friends considered him so depressed during this period that they were even beginning to think the unthinkable — that he might give up and turn his back on society and all its ills, and do what he would have really chosen to do with his life: be a country squire.
But in September 1985 he joined forces with a man who was to play a large part in changing all that.
Stephen O'Brien is a remarkable man, liked and respected by everyone he comes into contact with.
His main mission in life for the last ten years, as chief executive of an organization called Business in the Community (BitC), has been to cut unemployment and regenerate the inner cities.
BitC is a charity, set up in 1981, to breathe life back into Britain's dying towns and cities.
It is a partnership between business, central and local government and trade unions, based on the American experience.
The idea is simple: communities with high unemployment and economic depression can be turned around if the companies that operate in those communities can be persuaded to become involved in them, invest in them, and train and recruit people from within them.
The motivation is self-interest.
If the community itself becomes prosperous, the people living in it will have more money to spend on the goods and services being provided by the companies.
Everyone benefits.
O'Brien had approached the Prince at the end of 1984 because he wanted support for a particular project, called Fullemploy.
It was a training programme for young unemployed blacks in the inner cities, and O'Brien, knowing that Charles already had an interest in this area through the Prince's Trust, thought it was worth seeing if Charles would help.
The Prince was more than keen to help; as a result of that approach he convened a meeting, known as the Windsor Conference, which is still widely regarded as one of the most significant advances ever made in race relations.
Between them they brought together in a hotel in Windsor the chairmen of sixty major companies in Britain and a crowd of bright, articulate members of the black community.
The black community did the rest.
They designed the agenda, ran the conference, and for twenty-four hours the white chairmen were their guests.
They mixed, talked and ate together and discussed the problems of unemployment among black youths.
Many people still felt that Diana spent an inordinate amount on clothes
Prince Charles addressed the conference, saying that racism was a problem of the white society and not the black.
It was a failure to recognize the potential of the black community and a failure to use it.
The Prince and Stephen O'Brien hit it off well from their first meeting.
They shared a common vision, and a very genuine concern for people, their needs, and the quality of their life.
O'Brien is much the same age as Charles, and a man of huge industry and enthusiasm whom Charles is able to spark ideas off.
He is not impressed by the Prince because of who he is, but because of the man he is: because of his gift for talking to people, his tenacity and his courage in confronting problems that other men would shy away from.
The risk that he took in bringing the whole Windsor Conference together was enormous.
Nothing of its kind had ever been done before, and it could have blown up in his face.
So when the invitation to become president of BitC arrived shortly afterwards, Charles accepted with alacrity.
The invitation could not have come at a better time.
He had been hit by a new wave of depression.
He and Diana had just returned from an exhausting tour of America, plugging Britain and British industry at every turn.
They had endured an embarrassing fund-raising dinner, for which rich Americans had paid 5,000 dollars a ticket, only to discover on their return that the Confederation of British Industry had done nothing to follow it up with any kind of sales drive.
‘What's the point?’ said Charles.
‘I'm no good at anything.
It's all a waste of time.
But BitC was an outfit with drive, enthusiasm, and a determination to make the sort of changes in society that Charles had been trying to make for years.
Here were people who shared his ideals and had the financial support of government and industry, while his endeavours had to rely on the begging bowl.
And here were people who wanted him not just for the name on the letter-head, but because they thought he could make a positive contribution.
Here, as it has turned out, was an organization where he has found he is seriously good at something, and where all the disparate strands of his life have come together with extraordinary clarity.
‘The day you think I am not useful,’ he said to one of BitC's directors, ‘tell me.
I want to be involved in the growth of something.
I don't just want to open things and be seen trundling around.
I can go to all the dinners and banquets on earth, but it's not going to make any difference to the world.
What I want to do is be part of something that does.’
Despite his pessimism, the Prince has, of course, made a considerable difference, if not to the world, then certainly to a number of individuals living in it.
One such group was the disabled community for whom he had set up the Prince of Wales Advisory Group on Disability.
Under the chairmanship of Bill Buchanan — who, like the group's then director, Nancy Robertson, is wheelchair-bound — the committee highlighted five major areas of neglect for disabled people: access, housing, employment, independent living and prevention.
They are steadily working through them.
The first was tackled in a way that was to set the pattern — a devastating technique  that the Prince has used time and again: bringing people together who would not normally meet.
In some cases they may be diametrically opposed.
In this instance he invited the top private housebuilders, designers and architects in Britain to a lunch at Kensington palace, and put them together with members of his advisory group, two of whom were in wheelchairs.
They called for four changes in modern house design: sloping paths in the landscaping rather than steps, lower concrete thresholds, wider doors to let wheelchairs through, and a downstairs lavatory.
The result was certainly an improvement.
Sir Laurie Barratt of Barratt's Homes set his architects to work at once and, after a few initial hiccups, the message has filtered through.
The Prince of Wales is an irrepressible font of ideas, a classic entrepreneur.
In another area, he had long cherished a dream to provide some sort of community service for young people in this country.
Most people, he felt, have an altruistic streak in them — irrespective of social background, culture or experience — and they should have the opportunity, at least once in their lives, to work together with others for the benefit of the community.
He had watched the effect that team spirit had had on the young people who had been on Operation Drake.
Many more youngsters had been dispatched around the world in Operation Raleigh, and he felt there must be a way for every young person to experience these kind of benefits.
This was the way.
So he wrote to George Thurstan, an ex-marine who was running the Drake Fellowship; this was a scheme set up by the Prince in the wake of the inner-city riots, to give young people from those areas adventure training.
Why, asked the Prince, was Britain the only country in Europe that did not have some kind of community service.
The answer was that community service was a political minefield, and had been rejected as unworkable every time it had reared its head.
If you put young people to work digging ditches, the argument ran, you were keeping other people out of employment; and what young people needed was not bogus work but real jobs.
It was a red rag to a bull.
‘Stop telling me reasons why it can't be done,’ the Prince thundered, ‘and get on and find a way.’
Bureaucracy and red tape make him angrier than almost anything else.
‘Set up a pilot scheme,’ he demanded.
So, doing as they were bid, discussions were duly held with everyone concerned; just six months after the Prince's letter landed on George Thurstan's desk, a pilot scheme opened for business in Sunderland.
Twenty-one days later the Prince arrived to see what was going on.
What was going on was such a success that the idea was launched nationwide five years later, in April 1990, as Volunteers.
‘It's an opportunity,’ says the brochure, ‘to spend some time doing voluntary work.
It's not for no-hopers.
It's not another source of free or cheap labour.
It's not for do-gooders.
It's not for ethnic minorities, or ethnic majorities.
It's not for the unemployed.
The handicapped.
Or Young Offenders.
It's not for anyone in particular.
It's for everyone.
In general.
And that includes you.’
The schemes are locally run on a franchise basis, by voluntary organizations, schools or employers, and the hope is that in the first phase, up to 1993, 10,000 people aged between sixteen and twenty-four — immediately dubbed ‘Charlie's Army’ by the press — will join full- or part-time programmes of about twelve weeks.
The brochure continues: ‘A lot of things will happen to you during your time with the Volunteers.
You'll become part of a team.
You'll learn new skills.
You will probably do things that you have never done before in your life.
And may never get the opportunity to do again.’
The activities include befriending the elderly or taking them on day trips, re-creating trails and footpaths in National parks, organizing and running barge  holidays for mentally handicapped children, and ‘greening’ inner cities by developing disused allotments.
The greatest cause of Charles's despondency was the feeling that he served no useful purpose
Seeing his ideas — which were greeted with such a chill at first— take off, was a tremendous boost to the Prince of Wales.
But that was not until 1990.
The gloom and despondency of the 1980s was destined to last a little longer yet.
More trouble appeared in the shape of an ill-judged television film, which Charles and Diana agreed to make for Independent Television News in 1985: seemingly innocuous, with a bland, not to say sycophantic, interviewer in the shape of Sir Alastair Burnet.
They allowed the cameras into Kensington palace and Highgrove but in the space of two evenings' viewing they came perilously close to destroying that magic ingredient that is so essential to the monarchy: its mystique.
In times when there are ever-louder grumblings about the money that is spent maintaining the Royal Family, it is imperative that the public has its belief confirmed that they are special, and in some way different from the rest of us.
Allowing the public into their homes for a peep at family life, which left us feeling they were not particularly special, was a dangerous gamble that backfired.
Showing the Princess in conference with one of her dress designers did nothing to allay the view that she spent an inordinate amount of money on clothes; and broadcasting the Prince's remark that he talked to the flowers in his garden was a bad mistake.
What was said tongue-in-cheek was received as confirmation of everything that had gone before: the Prince of Wales was seriously out of his tree.
He can laugh about it now, and has referred to it in many speeches since to very good effect; but at the time it hurt.
Not only that, it was brought up time and again by the media and used to undermine the serious work that he was trying so hard to do.
Charles bitterly regretted having allowed the cameras in.
But at the time he had no one with the expertise to guide him, and was very easily influenced by the persuasive arguments of the last person he spoke to on any given subject.
He lacked the confidence that has come in the last three or four years to make decisions and stick to them.
He was also crying out for an efficient office.
After Edward Adeane's departure, David Roycroft, who was a career diplomat from the Foreign Office, had held the fort until a successor could be found, but the whole set-up had always been curiously amateurish.
The right hand never knew what the left was doing.
People got through to the Prince who should not have, and those who should have didn't.
Letters were lost, and time and again Charles would discover that his staff had failed to show him a document or letter, or turned down an invitation on his behalf without ever showing it to him.
When Adeane left, Charles had definite ideas about the sort of man he wanted to replace him, but it was six months before the right man could be found.
He wanted someone of high calibre, with business and administrative skills, who was outside the traditional courtier mould yet compatible with the Old Guard already in situ .
Most important of all, he wanted someone who was sympathetic to his views and who would not be over-protective.
The difficulty was that a man of this calibre  would almost certainly have to be prepared to take a substantial drop in salary.
No one gets rich working for the Royal Family.
It was a headhunter who found Sir John Riddell, a successful investment banker in his early fifties.
The Prince needed sound advice, particularly as he moved into more and more controversial areas.
He could not afford to make mistakes; all his life he had been at pains to learn and understand how ordinary people live and had delved into the seamier side of human nature, but he was still very unworldly.
He was surprised to find, for example, that men who make their living out of reporting news and gossip should go away from a private lunch with him and the Princess and talk about it.
He was even more baffled when he tried to convert some of his Duchy property in Kennington into small units for single teenagers — a group that finds it notoriously difficult to find accommodation — and met with vociferous local anger.
It took the left-wing blunt Liverpudlian Cathy Ashton, at BitC, to explain it to him.
‘The trouble is,’ she said, ‘that you are inevitably in the position of people being able to say, ‘It's all right for you, you don't have to live next door to those punks and weirdos.’
Charles had simply thought he was being philanthropic.
Again, on the flight home from Melbourne at the end of their Australian tour in 1985, Charles hand-wrote a long and frank letter about his thoughts on a wide range of issues, including the Greater London Council — a politically explosive subject —— and had entrusted it to the common mail, without apparently thinking it unwise.
And he once passed on to BitC an invitation he had received requesting him and the Princess to open the conference of a Brent Women's Association, with a note saying, ‘Do you think I should do it?
C.’ The answer was a categorical no: one of the items on the agenda was ‘Police Brutality in Brent’.
A ROCKY PATCH
Charles and Diana may not have had many interests in common when they first met, but one that they did have, and have enjoyed together throughout their marriage, is skiing.
But yet again, this was another area of their lives that was mismanaged.
Given the media's obsession with Diana, it was hardly likely that they would allow the couple the luxury of a week alone in the snow.
Somebody should have seen the inevitable scramble coming, but no one did.
The result was chaos: their first skiing holiday ruined by the press, who turned the icy mountain roads of Liechtenstein, where they were staying, into a re-run of the Monte Carlo rally.
To escape the posse of photographers and television crews that were always lying in wait, they would set off at high speed along treacherous tracks, with Europe's press in hot pursuit.
The lesson was learned, and in subsequent years a photocall has been organized for the first day, when the Prince and Princess pose sweetly for the cameras on the understanding that thereafter the media will go home so the two can holiday in peace.
They were posing for just such a photocall at Klosters in February 1986, when the photographers suddenly noticed another figure standing in the background, dressed in a Davy Crockett-style fur headband.
‘It's Fergie,’ someone said, and within seconds Charles and Diana were left staring at an empty patch of snow where a moment before dozens of photographers had been elbowing one another for the best position.
They had lit upon Sarah Ferguson instead, who was hotly tipped to be announcing her engagement to Prince Andrew any day, and her appearance in Klosters was their dream come true.
So was it Diana's.
If her own marriage had been the result of some matchmaking, so too was Andrew's marriage to Sarah later that year.
She herself was principal matchmaker.
Diana had met Fergie through polo.
Sarah's father, Major Ronald Ferguson, is Charles's polo manager, so she was frequently at Smith's Lawn, the Guards' Club in Windsor Great Park, where Charles was based, and inevitably she and Diana often sat chatting while the Prince played polo.
Fergie was not, strictly speaking, Diana's type; she was certainly not like her old friends, nor indeed many of the friends she has  made in the last few years.
She was larger than life, she had seen the world, she was game for anything, she was jolly and vibrant, spoke her mind; all in all, she was fun to be with.
Having known the Royal Family all her life, she was easy to talk to, and was one of the few people who knew what Diana was talking about when she spoke about her day-to-day life.
In short, they became friends, and as time passed Diana thought her a good match for her errant brother-in-law.
It worked, and at first it seemed a perfect arrangement.
Everyone seemed to like Fergie; she was so natural, so unspoilt, and she brought a breath of fresh air wafting through the corridors of Court.
For Diana, it was like having an ally in the camp, and Balmoral was much more enjoyable that year with Fergie about.
She was not alone any more in feeling oppressed by the strict formality, the strict time-keeping; after-dinner games were more lively — and she was no longer the only one who wanted to giggle at the sound of the bagpipes that played them out of the dining-room after dinner every night.
To begin with, Sarah Ferguson deflected the attentions of the media too.
But as time passed, she became a dangerous influence.
Emboldened by what she saw her friend get away with, Diana felt able to loosen the shackles a little.
She had been in the royal straitjacket for five years and, like most women who marry and have children when they are very young, she began to realize what she had been missing out on.
Without Fergie's influence, for example, she would never have gone along to the Berkeley Square night club, Annabel's, as she did on the night of Prince Andrew's stag party, with Fergie and comedienne Pamela Stephenson, both of them dressed up as policewomen.
It was unusual company for her to keep in any event: delightful though Pamela Stephenson may be, her public image is not altogether regal, and Charles has always recognized the need to choose his friends, particularly those in showbusiness, with care.
Before Fergie appeared, Diana would never have poked an umbrella into the rump of a gentleman friend at Ascot.
She might have done it in private— she is fun and without question, a little flirtatious —— but Diana had understood from the start that her public image had to be beyond reproach, and it always had been.
Now she appeared to be unconcerned what  people thought.
She was spotted driving about London late at night on her own, having apparently slipped out without her detective.
It was the paparazzi who trailed her, but it could so easily have been terrorists.
One thing they have enjoyed together throughout their marriage is skiing.
In Liechtenstein in 1985
Diana met Sarah Ferguson through polo, and they became firm friends
The tide of affection in which the public had held Diana since she first came to their notice had begun to turn.
They began to criticize and mutter doubts about the stability of the fairy-tale marriage.
By 1987 she and Charles seemed to have reached an all-time low, if not in their marriage, then certainly in the public's perception of it.
It began in Klosters again, with the famous photocall, this time a foursome of the Waleses and the Yorks, ending with Diana and Fergie wrestling to push the other off balance.
With Diana in the snow, Charles looked distinctly unamused and drew the session to a close.
There were reports of Diana playing tricks on Charles too — changing jackets with a friend, so he would attempt to take home the wrong woman; and there were reports that he spent his evenings at home in the chalet while Diana danced the night away with friends in a disco.
The Princess left Klosters on her own.
Back in London, her name began appearing in the gossip columns.
She had been, it seemed, to endless dinners, parties and weddings on her own, she had been spotted at local cinemas with friends, sitting in the stalls alongside ordinary members of the public, and she had been seen on the town, at pop concerts, and in restaurants, with handsome young men.
Two names in particular appeared with enough regularity for people to talk.
That of Philip Dunn, a City banker; and cavalry officer David Waterhouse, a major in the Lifeguards.
The fact that in every instance she was chaperoned, at least by a detective and usually by a group of other friends too, never seemed relevant.
The tabloids seemed hell-bent on knocking Diana off the pedestal they had put her on, determined to prove, or invent if necessary, that she had a roving eye.
In April the Prince went off to the Kalahari Desert for a few days with Sir Laurens Van der Post, to see for himself the society that his friend had written and talked about so much.
No sooner had he come back than he left Diana and the children at home yet again, and went to Italy on a week's painting holiday.
Rumours that the marriage was in trouble were gaining substance, particularly when by the end of the summer the press had calculated that Charles and Diana had spent only one day in six weeks together.
He had been in Scotland with Kanga, so they said.
Diana had been in London with the children, leading a hectic social life.
On the one occasion when they had met in those six weeks, it had been to visit flood victims in Wales, in the town of Carmarthen, which had been hit by the freak October hurricane.
Charles flew down from Aberdeen, Diana arrived from Highgrove; but instead of going home together, at least for the night, they went their separate ways.
By the end of the year even the serious newspapers were discussing the constitutional implications of divorce.
Once again there seemed to be no one around the Prince and Princess with the foresight to see that the situation was becoming seriously out of control.
A simple statement to explain why Charles was staying away so long would have been better  than nothing.
Left with nothing, the press could only draw the conclusion that the marriage was indeed close to disintegration.
All they needed was the proof, and when a photographer hired by a down-market Sunday newspaper caught the Princess of Wales emerging from her friend Kate Menzies's mews house during the early hours of the morning with David Waterhouse, and fooling around in the quiet road, they thought they had it.
Diana was distraught.
She and her detective rushed over to the photographer and she pleaded with him to hand over his film, and tell nothing of what he had seen.
He surrendered the film, but, not surprisingly, he went straight back to the newspaper and the story was headline news.
That was the turning point.
The Princess was given a serious fright.
She had been having a little innocent fun.
It was a way of releasing some of the strain and tension of her life.
She enjoyed being with her friends; their conversation was lively and interesting, they belonged to the real world — the world she had left behind.
She could relax with them and pretend for a while that she was still one of them.
She was flattered by their attention and affection, but it was wholly innocuous.
She knew that, and Charles knew that, but the public were evidently beginning to think otherwise.
The public, of course, had only the word of the press to guide them, and although there was more than a germ of truth in what the tabloids reported, this was by no means the first autumn in which the Prince had spent weeks without his wife and children.
Ever since William had started school, Diana had had to be based in the south.
Charles had chosen to stay in Scotland because it was the perfect time of year for all the activities he enjoyed there.
It was not pure holiday.
Paperwork and a fleet of secretaries and staff go with him wherever he goes, and Balmoral is no exception.
So his remaining north of the border for the autumn of 1987 was no indication, in itself, of the state of their marriage.
The Prince was infuriated by the reports.
He had long since given up reading the tabloids.
As he explained when I met him, he became so angry when he read what they had to say about the Princess that he wanted to ring the editors and complain, but realized that, rather than spending every day on the telephone, a simpler solution was to stop reading them.
For some years, therefore, he has only read The Times .
But even The Times was giving space to the possible consequences of a royal divorce.
It made him even more depressed.
What right did anybody have to hold forth about his marriage?
What business was it of theirs anyway?
This was the final straw.
He felt that he had given enough.
For thirty-nine years he had devoted himself to the British public.
He had been through hell in the course of duty; he had made sacrifices that would be asked of no other human being.
He had been made an object of fun and a target for abuse.
He was wrong whatever he did.
If he spoke out, he was accused of poking his nose into matters he knew nothing about; if he stayed out of it, he was accused of slacking and taking too many holidays.
He was ridiculed for his speeches, and mocked for his concern about the inner cities.
Most hurtful and unfair of all, though, he had been the butt of jokes about his appearance for as long as he could remember — everything from his ears to his hairline.
He had had to fight for everything he had done, fight the people who wanted to wrap him up safely and wheel him out for a bit of ribbon-cutting and ceremonial.
It would have been a lot easier to have done nothing.
His job as Prince of Wales, after all, was simply a job of waiting and preparing to become sovereign.
He could have followed in the footsteps of some of his more notorious predecessors, by gambling, drinking and scandalizing society.
Or he could have opted out altogether.
What he had done, he had done because he wanted to make some contribution, pay back to society the great debt he felt by being born to such privilege.
He had given everything he had.
Was it too much to ask that he be allowed some privacy in his life?
If his marriage was in trouble it was because he and Diana had not been given a chance.
His wife had been plagued by the press from the beginning, and coping with the stress of it all was simply too much.
Nevertheless, the fact that the matter had come to such a head did have a sobering effect on them both.
The press had no right to pry and push and sneak about in their private lives, but it was undeniable that if their marriage were to fail, it would open up an entire can of constitutional worms that the monarchy could well do without.
Their marriage was not like anyone else's.
They could not afford to let it fall apart.
Braving the cameras and the columnists, and the experts who'd been brought in to analyse every glance and nuance of their body language, they faced the world, and slowly worked at healing the rift between them.
For Diana, coping with the life she had taken on, and with motherhood, was simply too much
SAVING THE ENVIRONMENT
When an organization invites the Prince or Princess of Wales to make a speech on their behalf, it is customary for them to write a draft, incorporating any appropriate facts and figures or particular message that they want conveyed in the speech.
The Department of the Environment provided just such a draft when they invited the Prince, as the United Kingdom's patron of the European Year of the Environment, to open the Second International Conference on the protection of the North Sea in November 1987.
It was a prestigious event, attended by ministers and top delegates from all over Europe, and the speech delivered to the Prince's office was straightforward and bland, essentially a pat on the back for Britain in all she was doing to keep the North Sea clean.
The Department had underestimated their speaker, and in so doing had made an embarrassing mistake.
Charles took one look at the proffered platitudes, which he knew to be absurd, and set about writing an alternative.
As with his architectural assaults, he trawled for information from a wide range of experts in the environmental field, including the pressure group Friends of the Earth, whose director at that time was Jonathon Porritt.
Armed with some facts and figures, he confidentially approached a number of very senior civil servants within the Department of the Environment.
All the advice he had been getting, he told them, was that Britain was in fact very culpable in North Sea pollution issues.
The speech he had been given was way off the mark, and he would like the truth.
The truth he got, but, when he rose to his feet at the splendid Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre to declare the summit open, no more than a few people present had any inkling of what he was about to say.
The Secretary of State, Nicholas Ridley, was certainly not one of them.
The Prince spoke as follows:
The North Sea was once one of Europe's great highways.
This ‘silver sea, was also, and still is, one of the world's richest fishing zones — as well as a playground for sailors and a source of inspiration for poets and painters.
But over the past century we have made it into a rubbish dump.
The effluents we  pour heedlessly into its waters are a threat to its delicate ecological balance.
Some argue that we do not have enough proof of danger to justify stricter controls on dumping or to warrant the extra expenditure involved.
They say we must wait for science to provide that proof.
If science has taught us anything, however, it is that the environment is full of uncertainty.
It makes no sense to test it to destruction.
While we wait for the doctor's diagnosis the patient may easily die.
We do not have a lot of time left in which to act…
We know enough to know that these things are not good for our life support system or for our quality of life, and that our activities have damaging effects on our wildlife.
Therefore, how we decide to use our oceans and waterways in future is probably one of the most important choices for this particular generation.
The Prince could not have hoped for a better platform.
The effect was explosive, and deeply embarrassing to the government's position, which for years had been obstructive — to such an extent that Britain had long been known as ‘The Dirty Man of Europe’.
Demands for action to clean up sulphur dioxide emissions from power stations, widely believed to be responsible for the ‘acid rain’ that was killing forests, lakes and rivers — not just in Scotland, but as far afield as Germany and Scandinavia — were brushed aside on the grounds of inconclusive evidence; a similar attitude was taken towards the radioactive discharges from the nuclear reprocessing plant at Sellafield.
The government had never been prepared to take any action without incontrovertible proof of a direct relationship between an industrial process and a particular pattern of death, disease or environmental damage.
If the Prince of Wales had not stood up and spoken as he did that day, the government might have remained entrenched on the subject for considerably longer than it was.
It was something of a turning point for the Prince too.
He had trod a very narrow path, fraught with danger; had he been wrong on any detail, it would have spelt disaster.
Speaking his mind about the medical profession, even waging war on the architectural establishment, was a very different matter from denouncing the government's attitude to pollution.
He had come close to the mark in his various schemes for the inner cities, but he had always taken great care not to overstep the boundary.
It was imperative, as he knew, not to get embroiled in politics, and he had been utterly furious when it appeared that architect Rod Hackney had done it for him.
In October 1985 the Manchester Evening News ran a story, immediately picked up elsewhere, that Charles had confided in Hackney about his fears for the future, of a country divided into the ‘haves’ and the ‘have-nots’, of ‘no-go’inner-city areas, and racial minorities alienated from the rest of society.
Charles was in Australia when this particular bomb dropped, but he still felt the full effect of the fall-out.
There were angry calls from Buckingham Palace and Downing Street and, in the House of Commons, Labour's Shadow Home Secretary was treating it as a gift from heaven.
Charles nearly always re-writes the speeches that are prepared for him
The North Sea summit was a first.
The Prince had never publicly been so outspoken on such a politically sensitive subject, but it was something he felt he could not ignore.
He believed it was his duty to speak out.
He has devoted time and energy to people because it is the people who will one day be his subjects, and he feels a sense of responsibility towards them; but he will also be King of the British Isles, and has a responsibility to safeguard those Isles for future generations.
Everything he had seen, read and heard told him that Britain was in grave danger from the excesses of industrialization, and nothing very significant was being done to halt the process.
The problem had not appeared overnight; he was not leaping feet first into a situation that he had not thought about.
Prince Charles had been talking and gently agitating about the subject for many years.
It was now seventeen years since the Countryside in 1970 Conference, when he had talked about ‘the horrifying effects of pollution in all its cancerous forms’.
It was all those problems, and a few more, that were now fouling up the North Sea and other parts of Britain.
His North Sea assault gave the environmentalists a powerful and unique spokesman; it made the government sit up and take notice; and it speeded up the long and painful process of making the public aware that there was a very real problem to solve, which was going to involve personal sacrifices.
Another instance of Charles's outspokenness was his attack on the proposed Paternoster Square development.
This turned him into a hero of the silent majority.
He discovered that night, in what has been called his ‘Luftwaffe’ speech, that his was not a voice in the wilderness; instead, he was speaking for the man on the Clapham omnibus.
The occasion was the annual dinner of the Corporation of London's planning and Communication Committee at the Mansion House, when Charles seized the opportunity to say a few words about the plans for the redevelopment of Paternoster Square.
This is the area to the north of St Paul's Cathedral, where there is a 1950s development, which he described as ‘the prototype for all the windswept urban squares dreamt up in the fifties and sixties’ that amounted to ‘the rape of  Britain’.
The whole lot was to come down and make way for a million square feet of office space, and the company developing the site had held a competition to find a master-planner.
Seven architectural practices were invited to enter, and it was awarded to Arup Associates.
Charles had been given a view of the plans some months before and had been appalled.
‘I must confess I was deeply depressed,’ he said later.
‘It didn't seem to rise to the occasion.
This site is next to our great national cathedral — the very heart of the capital city.
What place in Britain could be more important?
This was something that I felt I had to speak up about.’
Speak up he did, to dramatic effect.
As he began his speech, his hosts at the Mansion House dinner looked on in disbelief:
It is not just me who is complaining.
Countless people are appalled by what has happened to their capital city, but feel totally powerless to do anything about it.
The Queen is a proud mother, but sometimes she feels Charles is too outspoken
What have we done to St Paul's since the bombing?
In the space of a mere fifteen years, in the sixties and seventies, and in spite of all sorts of elaborate rules supposedly designed to protect that great view, your predecessors, as the planners, architects and developers of the City, wrecked the London skyline and desecrated the dome of St Paul's.
Not only did they wreck the London skyline in general.
Charles's attacks on modern architecture made him a hero of the silent majority.
After attacking earlier plans, he laid the foundation stone of the National Gallery extension
They also did their best to lose the great dome in a jostling scrum of office buildings, so mediocre that the only way you ever remember them is by the frustration they induce.
Can you imagine the Italians walling in St Mark's in Venice or St Peter's in Rome?
You have, Ladies and Gentlemen, to give this much to the Luftwaffe: when it knocked down our buildings, it didn't replace them with anything more offensive than rubble.
We did that.
Large numbers of us in this country are getting fed up of being talked down to and dictated to by the existing planning, architectural and development establishment.
And at street level, just look at Paternoster Square.
Did modern planners and architects in London ever use their eyes?
Surely here, if anywhere, was the time and place to sacrifice some profit.
If need be, for generosity of vision, for elegance, for dignity; for buildings which would raise our spirits and our faith in commercial enterprise, and prove that capitalism can have a human face.
The Prince had become older and wiser since his previous attacks.
He had considered what he would say long and hard, he had had discussions with a wide variety of architects, planners and journalists, eighteen of whom had attended a meeting at Highgrove in September.
He had trawled for views and ideas, as has become his method.
At least twenty-five professionals made an input to the speech.
It caused a furore nevertheless.
Most of the architectural establishment were outraged, and lost no time in condemning the Prince.
They did not mince their words.
One developer said his speech was ‘as welcome as a bad smell in a space capsule’.
The architect Richard MacCormac said, ‘I believe there is a danger that classicism is being used as a cure-all architectural pill, when architecture has got a lot more to it than just putting in columns and capitals.
If Prince Charles wants to go on in this exhorting role, he has to understand architecture.’
Richard Rogers described the Prince's actions as ‘very vicious — and very questionable democratically’.
The best way to deal with him was ‘to starve him of the oxygen of publicity’.
‘As I anticipated,’ the Prince said, ‘there was rather an interesting row after I said all that.
But it instantly became clear that I wasn't speaking just for myself.’
What Charles craved was a return to classical architecture, to buildings that were sympathetic to their surroundings, that were well proportioned and sensitive to human feelings, and not purely functional.
Of the Paternoster Square development, what he wanted to see, he said, was ‘a roofscape that gives the impression that St Paul's is floating above it like a great ship in the sea’.
Waiting in the wings, as he knew, was just such a scheme, which had been produced by a young architect called John Simpson.
A plan of it had appeared in the  Architects' Journal the previous Friday, and it also appeared in The Times the morning after the Prince's speech.
At that time classical architecture was largely confined to the world of country-house building, and the majority of architects exhibiting were older men.
By 1987, however, the classical style of architecture had started being used on large-scale developments also, and the average age of the architects doing this kind of work had dropped.
Over half the exhibitors were in their thirties and forties, an age that was becoming of increasing significance to the Prince.
He was greatly cheered to find so many young architects designing the new classical buildings of which he so much approved.
John Simpson had also been appalled by the competition entries for Paternoster Square and, at a very late stage, had managed to get hold of a copy of the brief —— to provide office space and car parking — and had sat down with a number of colleagues to draw up a scheme of their own.
The Arup scheme had been a modernist design, which essentially built a wall around St Paul's and squeezed in as much office space as possible behind it.
John Simpson and his associates wanted to try and reunite the cathedral with the rest of the City.
Any new buildings, they felt, must relate to the cathedral and be a part of the City.
Initially, they simply put together a series of guidelines, concerned with scale, height and the street network between the buildings, which amounted to two sheets of paper that they sent to the developer.
Nothing came of it; the developers were not interested in the Simpson ideas.
Undeterred, Simpson went on to produce an ‘alternative’ scheme, which, thanks to the Prince's involvement in bringing the whole issue into the open, went on public display alongside models of all the official proposals in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral.
The Arup scheme held centre stage, but the public, whose views were for once solicited, showed a very definite preference for the Simpson plan.
It became a matter for public debate, newspaper articles were written, television programmes made, and the London Evening Standard sponsored Simpson's planning application to the City.
Neither Arup nor the developers stood a chance.
The site has changed hands several times since then.
It is now owned by the Paternoster Association, which is made up of British, American and Japanese interests.
It now seems certain that St Paul's Cathedral will not be surrounded by a modernist wall, but by a sympathetic series of buildings in the best classical tradition.
RELATING
It would perhaps be too trite to pretend that the Prince and Princess's marriage was saved by Diana's involvement with Relate (formerly called the Marriage Guidance Council).
It certainly might have helped Diana to listen and learn from counselling sessions, where other couples' problems are aired and discussed; but there is no doubt that by taking on the role of patron at a time when the world was prophesying doom for her own marriage was an exceptionally brave thing for her to do.
As 1988 progressed it became obvious that Diana had matured immeasurably.
She had relaxed, and found new confidence.
She seemed to have come down to earth, leaving behind the soap-opera image that she had once appeared to be caught up in.
Any whiff of scandal had evaporated, and she now threw herself into a hectic work schedule.
So too did the Prince.
The various strands of his life were beginning to come together.
He had plunged into the den of architects once more, and been suitably bloodied.
He had also set the cat among the pigeons on the environmental issue.
The relationship with BitC was working well and, as he began his fortieth year, the future was looking positive.
It was the start of a new improved relationship between the royal couple.
Whatever had gone on in those weeks apart, whatever course of action their friends had counselled, a minor transformation had occurred.
The warm familiarity was back, and they appeared to find pleasure and amusement in each other 's company.
A trip to Australia for the country's bicentennial celebrations was a good start to the year.
Diana not only ostentatiously wore outfits that she had been seen in before — to knock a few criticisms on the head about the money she spent on her wardrobe — but she also seized the opportunity to kill off a few more misconceptions.
Visiting a music school in Melbourne, the royal couple looked in on a cello class that was in full swing, supervised by a delightful seventy-eight-year-old professor, Henri Touzeau.
Knowing the Prince played the cello, the professor asked whether he would like to have a go.
Charles had once been able to play quite proficiently, but was very out of practice.
He had taken up the cello at Gordonstoun, when his housemaster, Bob Whitby, could stand the noise of the bagpipes — his chosen instrument — no longer.
For Diana to become Patron of Relate was an exceptionally brave thing to do when the world was prophesying doom for her own marriage
‘No, not at all, thank you,’ said the Prince, and, even when pressed by the professor, he would not be moved.So the professor turned his attention to Diana, and invited her to play the piano.
Scarcely pausing for thought, she sat herself down at the keyboard and, without so much as a sheet of music to look at, launched into Rachmaninov's Second Piano Concerto, blushing deeply to the round of spontaneous applause.
The professor was filled with praise.
The Princess, he declared, was ‘very accomplished, a very sensitive player and shows great musical ability.
She played with such warmth.’
Her grandmother would have been proud.
Before she was married, Ruth, Lady Fermoy, trained as a concert pianist under Albert Cortot at the Paris Conservatoire.
It certainly knocked the ‘Disco Di’ image firmly on the head.
Not only does Diana play the piano at home, she invariably has a background of classical music playing in her sitting-room and in her private study.
At a gala concert of the Philharmonia Orchestra to inaugurate an International Conference on Cancer Nursing, she was sitting in the dark of the Royal Festival Hall playing the movements on an imaginary piano on her knees.
Her taste has changed as she has grown older.
She still likes pop music, especially the singers and groups she grew up with, like Neil Diamond, Dire Straits and Duran Duran, and thoroughly enjoys the rock concerts she attends, but she now finds classical music more soothing to read and work to.
Also, she is busy educating herself about opera.
When Diana became patron of the Welsh National Opera, one of the original five patronages she took on when she became Princess of Wales, she confessed that she did not know very much about opera — and that her principal love was ballet.
‘But  my husband is going to teach me,’ she said ‘and I am going to teach him about ballet.’
With this in mind, she had taken Charles with her when she went to see them perform for the first time.
It was a production of Carmen, at the Dominion Theatre in London in December 1983.
Although based in Cardiff, the Welsh National Opera tours extensively, and for the last twelve years has had a regular season in London too.
This was an ambitious, complex production, and, thanks to a particularly officious fire officer, it teetered on the brink of disaster.
It gave Brian McMaster, the company's managing director, the worst night he has ever had.
Listening to counsellors help others no doubt helped their marriage.
Visiting a Relate centre in Worcester
The fire officer inspected the set at about 6 o'clock on the evening of the performance, as fire officers normally do, to put a flame to the scenery to ensure it is properly fire-proofed.
The same production had been playing in six or seven theatres in Britain already, and no fire officer in any of those places had found any problem.
This fire officer, however, refused to allow the use of a sizeable proportion of the props, around which the entire show was structured; and, although the Prince and Princess of Wales were arriving in one and a half hours' time along with five Cabinet ministers, and the cast would have no time to rehearse without the props they relied upon, he was not to be budged.
‘Everyone's concentration on stage completely went,’ recalls Brian McMaster with a nervous chuckle.
‘It was the worst performance we have ever given.
That night must have set the arts in Britain back years.
The Princess was very kind though.
She said she enjoyed it.’
She also went up on to the stage afterwards to meet the singers, and endeared herself to them all when one of the chorus asked, ‘Why don't you come and audition for the company?’
‘Well, my husband says I've got rather a good voice,’ she responded.
That has yet to be tested in public, but the evening certainly did not put her off —— she has been an ardent fan of the Welsh National Opera ever since.
She has also made a concerted effort to improve her knowledge.
Her old flatmate Carolyn Pride, who has since married and become Carolyn Bartholomew, has been instrumental in this.
She is extremely musical.
She was studying at the Royal College of Music when she  moved into Coleherne Court with Diana, and then went on to become an opera singer, pausing only recently to have a couple of children.
She has taken Diana to Covent Garden on innumerable occasions in the last few years.
They go quite privately; they buy tickets for the Grand Tier and, although a detective goes too, no one knows the Princess of Wales is in the house until they find themselves sitting behind her.
Diana's principal love has always been ballet.
At a Bolshoi ballet performance in London
Diana much prefers sitting in the body of the auditorium where she can see what is going on on stage.
In most theatres, including Covent Garden, the view from the Royal Box is one of the worst in the house.
She prefers the auditorium, even when she is there in an official capacity, as John Young, chairman of the National Hospital, discovered to his dismay.
The Princess had become patron of the hospital, where her father made his miraculous recovery after his cerebral haemorrhage in 1978, and in May 1988 she had agreed to attend a gala performance of The Magic Flute at the London Coliseum.
John Young, a larger-than-life figure, had automatically assumed the Princess would sit in the Royal Box, and had sold tickets in the belief that everyone in the theatre would have a view of the Princess.
No, he was firmly told, the Princess would sit in the Dress Circle.
He protested.
people were coming from all over the country to see her, and anyone sitting at the back of the stalls or the upper circle would not catch a glimpse.
‘I got a bloody nose over that,’ he says.
‘I was told to mind my own business.’
It was a demonstration of Diana's new-found confidence.
At one time she might have wanted to sit among the crowd, to escape from the prying eyes, but she would never have had the confidence to say so.
Her assurance has obviously come with age and experience, but there is no doubt that her first major public speech marked a turning point.
It was the day she received the Freedom of the City of London, at the Guildhall in July 1987 — a terrifying ordeal by anyone's standards.
She had to stand up in the midst of a certain amount of pomp and ceremony and address a large audience, which included her own family, her husband, the Prime Minister, the Lord Mayor and a host of City dignitaries, many of them accomplished public speakers themselves.
In the early days Diana had had some guidance from Sir Richard Attenborough.
He had been able to teach her some of the ploys that actors use to control their breathing when they are nervous, and project their voices so they can be heard.
For the past six years, however, she had done little more than declare things open, or say a few words of thanks in public.
It was clear that she had picked up a lot from the Prince's own style, especially the self-deprecating wit.
Diana began her speech:
I am rather unsure of my qualifications for such an honour, but I feel deeply grateful and flattered to be joining the many famous people who have received the Freedom of this great City, including my more illustrious and worthy ancestor, the third Earl Spencer.
I know my Spencer ancestors built their wealth in the sixteenth century on the rearing of sheep, and I believe one of the benefits of receiving the Freedom of the City is that Freemen, or Women, are able to drive sheep across London Bridge and through the City of London.
I promise I will give you good warning before I avail myself of this privilege.
My connections with the City are, as I have said, rather tenuous, but it is nearly six years ago to the day since our wedding, when yet again the traffic in the City was brought to a standstill.
Since that July day I have visited the City on numerous occasions…connected directly or indirectly to asking the City for help with fund-raising.
Perhaps now is an opportunity of thanking everyone for their generosity and to say how greatly I know it is appreciated by the charities and organizations concerned.
‘Be always ready, according to your power to relieve the poor and help the distressed…’ is a quote from The Rules for the Conduct of Life , a copy of which is given to all new Freemen — or perhaps it should now be Freepersons.
Sitting in the audience was Diana's father, Earl Spencer, who had always been very proud of his daughter, and only too happy to tell the world so.
‘She's very genuine, she's very beautiful and she's still very much in love with Prince Charles,’ he told Woman's Own , in a bid to rebut rumours that the marriage was in trouble.
‘Charles and Diana have their rows’, he said, ‘what couple doesn't?
But they are nothing out of the ordinary.’
Of the rumours, he said, ‘Diana finds them very hurtful because they are not true.’
And on the other burning question that was asked time and time again — whether she will have more children — he said, digging an even deeper hole for himself:
‘She'd love a large family because she knows the joys of it.
She likes the atmosphere of a large family.
I'm quite sure she'd like to have several more children yet — five seems a good number.
‘There are times when I wish she could have a couple of years off to bring up her children, be at home with them, and not worry about anything else apart from them and her husband.
Instead, it's a bit like a non-stop circus.’
Royal reporters have been speculating on a new pregnancy for years, and members of the public have been no less nosy.
Visiting Aberdeen one day a woman in the crowd said, ‘When are you going to have another baby?’
‘I'll have to ask my husband about that,’ replied the Princess.
There have been several false alarms in the tabloids, but at the end of 1986 reporters thought they had a scoop.
It was during Diana's trip to the Gulf with the Prince, when they suddenly spotted her obstetrician, George Pinker, in Bahrain, among the guests at an official dinner.
But Diana was equally surprised.
‘George, what are you doing here?’ she asked.
The answer was that he had flown out quite coincidentally to attend a wedding.
The Princess would like more children.
She would dearly love some daughters to be able to pass her jewellery on to and, coming from a large family, she enjoys the atmosphere that plenty of children create.
The Prince would no doubt also like to have more children, but he is very torn over the question of population control.
Having witnessed the horrifying poverty and hunger in countries where there is just not enough food to feed the teeming masses, he feels depressed and worried about the future.
In most areas of life, he tries to practise what he preaches.
The Prince and Princess had both been on particularly good form throughout that Gulf tour, and were reduced to giggles on several occasions, none more so than during a desert picnic.
Wherever they went a box of Kleenex tissues lay in wait for Diana, and for Charles, a mysterious red briefcase.
And there in the middle of the desert, in a tent hung with persian carpets, were the ubiquitous tissues and the briefcase.
Opening it up Charles found a telephone inside, but was still none the wiser.
They were both on particularly good form throughout the Gulf tour of November 1986
Diana has always been in danger of getting the giggles at the least appropriate moment, and age has done very little to cure her.
The smallest thing can set her off, and the customs in the Middle and Far East did not help.
In the Gulf, in addition to the Kleenex, everywhere they went, no matter what time of day, they were given little cups of very strong coffee to drink.
In Japan, the custom of taking their shoes off everywhere, sitting on the floor to eat, and having an elaborate tea ceremony at every port of call, finally cracked her up.
In Thailand, in 1988, she and Prince Charles once again had to go barefoot.
Charles has had years of practice and had already encountered all the customs and forms of national dress that amuse Diana so much.
But his sense of the absurd is no less than hers.
for most of his life he has been stuck with a reputation for finding the Goons funny, but nothing since that era.
Far from it.
He and Diana attended the gala opening of Barry Humphries' show,Back With A Vengeance , in aid of the Royal Marsden Hospital, and both were in hysterics.
In it, Humphries plays his outrageous Australian creation, Dame Edna Everage, and Prince Charles kept slapping his knees with merriment and rocking with laughter.
Also, at the Gala Night of a Hundred Stars evening at the Mayflower Theatre in Southampton, a mime artist came on stage and found himself struggling with a sticky audience.
His humour was just not working.
Suddenly, great guffaws of laughter that went on and on broke the silence, so much so that people began to stretch forward to see who they were coming from.
It was none other than the heir to the throne, blissfully unaware, and convulsed with mirth.
Diana has always been in danger of getting the giggles at the least appropriate moment
THE WISHING WELL APPEAL
The Princess of Wales is never kept waiting.
It is simply not etiquette.
Elaborate arrangements are made everywhere she goes, with split-second timing, to ensure that there are no embarrassing hold-ups.
Father Christmas, however, operates in much the same way, and when both celebrities were planning to meet up, in December 1987, to deliver Christmas presents to sick children at Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital, there was no competition.
The Princess stood out in the cold and waited.
The year before, she and the Prince of Wales had been sent an unusual gift.
It was a book, specially written, printed and bound, the only one of its kind, about the historical links between Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital and the Royal family.
The old Victorian hospital, which has performed miracles on thousands of sick children from all over the world in the intervening years, had reached the end of its life.
Some £30 million was needed to rebuild it, and the hospital was planning a massive appeal.
An archivist digging through the files had discovered a collection of fascinating links between the hospital and the Royal family since Queen Victoria became its patron in 1852.
At that time, 21,000 children under the age of ten died in London every year, almost half the total deaths in the capital.
The gift was by way of an invitation for the Prince and Princess both to become patrons of the appeal; it was the idea of professional fund-raiser Marion Allford, who had been brought in as the appeal director.
No male member of the Royal family had ever been directly involved with the hospital before, but she feels strongly that when children are in hospital it is the parents' problem, not just the mother's, and so the request was specifically for them both to be patrons.
They agreed, although they made it clear that they were not prepared to involve William or Harry in the exercise.
So in October 1987 the Wishing Well Appeal was officially launched by the Prince, via satellite link from Highgrove.
He was particularly pleased to be patron of Great Ormond Street, he said, because he had been there himself as a child.
On one occasion doctors had come to Buckingham Palace to take his tonsils out, but on the other occasion he had been what he called, ‘a blue light special’; he was rushed to the hospital with acute appendicitis, where the nurses, he said, had spoilt him rotten.
Named after the fountain that originally stood in the  hospital garden, where children threw coins to wish for good health, the Wishing Well Appeal became one of the most successful fund-raising campaigns ever conducted.
In well under the two years they had allowed themselves, the appeal had a total of £54 million with a further £30 million promised by the government.
In a fifteen-month period either Charles and Diana, or both, had attended eleven special events for the appeal, and held several private receptions in addition.
Diana greets Father Christmas outside Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital before delivering the presents
They had hosted a cocktail party at Kensington palace, for example, for the heads of all the major national clubs and associations with large memberships; these habitually adopt a charity to support each year.
The Prince made a short speech about the needs of the hospital, and then both he and Diana went round the room and spoke to everyone individually, with the result that the Wishing Well Appeal spread like wildfire.
The emotive logo — the crudely drawn child's face with a big blue teardrop rolling from its eye — became familiar to every family in Britain.
Donations were pouring into the appeals office in the basement of Great Ormond Street at the rate of £2 million a month.
So fast, in fact, that they had to call a halt to it.
But December was a day for the children.
Diana waited outside the main entrance of Great Ormond Street holding a clutch of excited little hands for a good five minutes before the Wishing Well song, which pop star Boy George had specially recorded for the appeal, struck up; and then Father Christmas, in the shape of a heavily disguised Jimmy Tarbuck, juddered round the corner on his sleigh, pulled by two little white ponies.
The sleigh was piled high with presents donated by the Variety Club, which he and the Princess then took into the hospital and distributed to the children inside.
Diana always makes an effort to talk to children at their level
It was the Princess at her best; completely natural and giving each child her undivided attention.
When she is doing anything with children, she always squats down to their level, touches them and listens to them, and the response she gets in just a few moments with each is quite extraordinary.
Having delivered the presents, however, her next stop was the basement, which had been hastily and frugally fitted out to house the appeals office, with its six telephone lines and fifty cramped volunteers drafted in to handle the money as it flooded in.
It was very basic indeed, and only by dint of preparation for the royal visitor did it have any carpeting on the stairs.
Yet the volunteers had been beavering away down there for two months, working well into the night on many occasions, and were to be there for many more months to come.
They were the unsung heroes of the whole appeal.
Diana had said she would look in to say hello to give them a morale boost, but when one of her staff saw the route she had to take to get there they said she could not possibly go.
It was positively hazardous.
The only access to the basement was down a flight of steep steps, and involved ducking under a low ceiling.
‘Nonsense,’ said the Princess, and set off down the stairs at a spanking pace.
Diana has grown increasingly fit over the years.
Like the Prince, she takes a great deal of exercise, and frequently leaves the people who escort her on visits around the country struggling to keep up.
She is also hugely inquisitive, and unless they have planned their route carefully, and can keep safely abreast of her, Diana is quite likely to open interesting-looking doors to see what is behind them.
Something else the organizers have to consider is the Princess will never skip a bed in a hospital ward, or a group of people in a room.
The Royal Marsden Hospital, the country's leading cancer hospital, discovered this very early on.
If Diana has to walk through a ward with twenty beds in it, she will stop and talk to the occupant of each and every one, and the time keepers just have to get ulcers.
It is far better, they have realized, to limit the tour.
The Prince is rather easier to keep tabs on, but there is always the unforeseen to disrupt even the best-laid plans.
Just last summer he was visiting Fort Perbrook, in Portsmouth, built in Napoleonic times, where an excellent youth-training  scheme was being run and he was to address a seminar.
The Fort was a warren of underground tunnels and batteries and in every way a security nightmare, and the Prince's staff and members of BitC (also involved in the outing), who had done the recce, realized they had to get the Prince away from the youth schemes and down into the safety of the seminar very quickly.
Diana laying the foundation stone for the new Royal Marsden Cancer hospital in Fulham, London
As the helicopter came down to land, to their dismay they saw that the organizers had not only laid on about fifteen different activities for the Prince to inspect, including mountain-bike scrambling; but children from no fewer than five primary schools were gathered together in great banks to greet him.
In thirty-eight minutes flat he was supposed to be addressing a very high-powered seminar on enterprise.
The Prince became fascinated and vanished from sight into the mountain bikes, and it was twenty-four minutes before anyone could extract him and move him on.
Visiting a school in Doncaster in December 1989, Charles was on another very tight schedule, again with BitC.
He had exactly eight minutes to hear a report back from business leaders who had been looking at inner-city schools.
As the royal party came through the school gates, however, an entire youth brass orchestra, who again had obviously been at the ready for several hours on a cold wintry day, burst into life in the playground.
The Prince, of course, had to go and say hello, and disappeared once again , emerging ten minutes later having had a long discussion with the chief brass player.
Many of Charles's ideas sprang from a memorable visit to Boston in September 1986, when he had been invited to speak at the Harvard 350th Commemoration Ceremony.
It was an opportunity to talk about education and America, an irresistible combination as far as he was concerned, for which he happily interrupted his holiday at Balmoral.
There was no pool of academics or professionals contributing to this talk; it was a speech very much from the heart, and the thoughts expressed — mocked by the tabloids, needless to say, as philosophical ramblings — are still very relevant today.
‘I have heard a great deal about Harvard — who hasn't?
After all, it has produced a cornucopia of leaders for the United States in many fields, not to mention the fact that six Harvard men have become president of the United States.
I have also heard of Yale…
‘I confess that I have not addressed such a large gathering since I spoke to 40,000 Gujerati buffalo farmers in India in 1980, and that was a rare experience.’
He moved on to the ‘enduring significance and value of the Anglo-American relationship’.
‘We must beware lest unscrupulous people exploit these areas of misunderstanding and divert our attention from the really important task, which is our common defence of the kind of freedoms we hold so dear: the freedoms for which this noble university so proudly stands and for which so many of its sons gave their lives in foreign fields.’
‘Perhaps, too, as parents you may be wondering, like I do frequently, whether the  educational system you are confronted with is the right one to produce the kind of balanced, tolerant, civilized citizens we all hope our children can become?
The next day the Prince was leading a small group of businessmen he had brought over from Britain, including Stephen O'Brien, to look at a scheme called the Boston Compact, evidence that the United States had woken up sooner than anyone else to the dilemma of falling educational standards.
It was a simple enough idea.
Businesses in a central location are, more often than not, short of labour.
Very often there are schools, just across the road, full of children who will very probably become unemployed when they leave because they will not be equipped to fill any of the jobs that are available.
So, the businessman goes across the road to the people running the schools, and says, ‘These are the jobs we want filled, if you can teach the children these skills we will give them priority if they come to us for a job when they leave.’
The Prince wanted BitC to try the same idea in Britain.
So, in due course, a pilot Compact, or Education partnership, was launched in the East End of London, linking four schools with eighteen local businesses.
There are now over forty Compacts in operation, which are succeeding — as much as anything by involving parents in the deal.
It has been working miracles.
Parents who previously took no interest in their children's education have suddenly become motivated.
In London, the Compact has been so successful that children who would previously have left as soon as they reached the school-leaving age of sixteen, are deciding to stay on at school to take further exams.
The companies who thought they were buying themselves employees to stack their shelves or deliver mail are getting nothing of the sort.
They are all rather proud of the outcome; and the Prince is delighted.
The Prince now has a strong team behind him, which is more in tune with his activities than ever before, and better qualified.
Sir John Riddell went back to the City, and was replaced by Major General Sir Christopher Airy, recently retired from commanding the Household Division, admirable qualifications for the job.
The Prince also has three assistant private secretaries — Peter Westmacott, who is on secondment from the Foreign Office, and advises on diplomatic niceties; Commander Richard Aylard, retired from the Navy, who is Comptroller of the Household, and the Prince's resident environmental expert; and Guy Salter, with business expertise.
It is a stronger team than the Prince has had before, but still understaffed, given that, as well as finding material for his speeches and meetings, they also have to research and organize his day trips and foreign tours, liaise with the press office and the Princess's assistant private secretary, Patrick Jephson, over their diaries, as well as handle the colossal amount of mail that arrives by every post.
It is a punishing job, and Charles is no easy man to work for.
He is a perfectionist, and he is impatient.
Yet, at the same time, he inspires extraordinary loyalty.