

Eileen was dead.
Her body lay at the rest in the chapel downstairs, the light filtering in through lancet windows on her oak coffin and the dark-stained, hand-carved pews.
They had taken him down in the lift and he had stood there looking at her face, peaceful and still.
He had stooped to kiss her cold cheek and smelt in the hollow of her neck the waxen odour of death.
Her features, serene, composed, invested mortality with mystery and beauty.
Later, he stood there again and watched his mother's tears.
His father, gaunt and grey, supported her with strong, clay-hardened hands, his face set in bleak endurance.
Their grief sharpened his guilt.
It was he who should be lying there and not Eileen.
He had known for some time that it was inevitable.
Sister Cooney had been the first to hint it to him.
After his last visit, he had gone to her and begged to be told the truth.
‘I'll ask Doctor Staples for you.’
‘The truth is what I want — nothing else.’
‘The truth is sometimes hard to accept,’ Sister Cooney had said, her sharp face kindly and concerned.
Later, when she had consulted Doctor Staples, she returned, looking grave.
‘All I can tell you at the moment is that she is on the danger list.
You were on it yourself once.’
She looked at him hesitantly.
‘You know there are different forms of this disease?’
‘Oh,’ he said apprehensively.
‘What form has Eileen?’
‘The name wouldn't mean anything to you.’
‘I'd like to know it, all the same,’ he said, as if the knowledge could somehow enable him to come to grips with it and defeat it.
‘Acute miliary tuberculosis.’
It had been a simple matter after that to slip down to Mike Quinn, who was an acknowledged authority on all aspects of the disease by virtue of his ownership of one book, and borrow his Encyclopaedia of Human Ailments .
Back in bed he found the relevant passage:
Acute Miliary Tuberculosis is the most virulent form of this diseases.
spreading by the blood, the bacilli become established in every part of the body and thus overcome the patient, not so much by local damage as by the great general toxaemia, which produces symptoms not unlike those of typhoid fever–irregular fever, rapid pulse, dry skin and all the evidence of raging pyrexia, leading to delirium and coma, followed almost inevitably by a fatal termination.
He saw her alive just once more.
About eight o'clock in the evening he was summoned to her bedside.
‘She's been calling for you,’ Sister Duggan told him.
He found her lying with a cold compress on her forehead, the pupils of her eyes strangely dilated.
They seemed to look through and beyond him and to focus — if they focused at all— on something infinitely remote.
The fingers of her left hand, which lay outside the clothes, picked compulsively at the blankets.
When he took her hand in his, it was flabby, soft and tremulous.
Sometimes her lips moved and she muttered something in a low tone.
He spoke her name and bent over to listen.
Her head turned slightly towards him and she fixed him with that blind, unthinking stare.
‘Eileen,’ he called.
Her lips moved, but she made no sound that he could hear.
‘Eileen,’ he said again.
‘Do you hear me?’
‘Richard…
‘The words came faintly.
‘Where's Richard?’
‘I'm here, Eileen,’ he said.
Her head turned away and she began to mutter incoherently.
‘She's been like that most of the afternoon,’ Sister Duggan, who was standing by at the foot of the bed, told him.
‘Father Furlong came a while ago and anointed her.
She's been a little easier since.
But she keeps asking for you.’
He sat looking at her, with the numbed conviction that she was dying.
It seemed to him that the essential Eileen had already receded from her eyes.
There was no recognition in them, no awareness.
She began to mutter again and he leaned forward to listen.
Amongst the jumble of words, he distinguished his own name and the word ‘home’.
‘Eileen,’ he said, ‘I'm here.’
She turned languidly towards the sound and spoke very distinctly.
‘It's late, Richard.
We'll have to be going home.’
‘Yes,’ he said and pressed her hand, ‘we'll go soon.’
It was an exchange they had had a hundred times during childhood at the end of some day's adventure in remote fields.
Twilight and mystery were woven into the words — along with fear and a reluctance to accept the inevitable.
They were the last words they spoke to each other.
Almost  immediately she lapsed into inertia and lay there, as if asleep, but with her eyes open and staring.
‘She seems easier now,’ Sister Duggan said, as she gestured to him to withdraw.
In the morning, Matron, a large, comforting presence in navy blue, came with Sister Cooney to speak to him.
‘You must prepare yourself for bad news,’ she told him.
‘Is she dead? he asked bluntly.
‘She's in a deep coma,’ Matron said.
‘We don't think she can
‘She's tranquil,’ Sister Cooney said.
‘She's in no pain.’
‘How long…?’
‘It's impossible to say — not very long.’
Eileen lingered on through the morning and the brown September afternoon, her life twirling like a hectic-stricken leaf on a thin stem.
It was evening and the corridor was loud with the homely rattle of teacups when Sister Cooney came to tell him she was dead.
Now they were gathered in the chapel for her final journey home.
The coffin had been fastened down and lay on trestles, honey-coloured in the slanting light, awaiting its removal.
The undertaker, a fat man with a bunch of keys hanging from the index finger of his right hand, stood whispering to his father and Michael.
His mother, a crushed figure in black, sat beside him in a pew.
On the other side of him sat Liam, bewildered and broken.
‘She was so young,’ his mother had whispered over and over again, until he wanted to shout at her to stop, ‘so young, and all her life before her.’
They had stood about his bed, caught for a moment in a frieze of grief, all of them welded by tragedy into an awareness of their common flesh, their common loss.
‘A few months ago she was in her full health and it was you we were worried about,’ Michael cried.
The undertaker was looking at his watch.
Death was his business and it had to be organised efficiently.
Grief was the climate in which he worked and he had inured himself to it.
On the whole it was a profitable venture.
Nobody wanted to be mean at such a time.
An undertaker's bill was paid and not questioned.
‘She was always so…alive!’ his father said.
They had sifted minutely through the circumstances of her death.
Always at the end, they took refuge in some single statement that they repeated again and again.
It was a statement that summoned up some private vision they had of her, the simple words swelling to become a vehicle for all their feelings about her.
Some friends and neighbours had come to accompany her home.
They stood about deferentially at the back of the little chapel, not wishing to intrude on the privacy of the family's mourning.
At a nod from his father, the undertaker beckoned towards a group of men who came forward with subdued eyes, eager to express their sympathy in the one manly way that was open to them.
The undertaker selected four of them and they bent willingly to the coffin, easier in their minds about the embarrassments of grief, because now they had something they could do.
They lifted her gently onto their shoulders and moved down the chapel.
‘She was talking about the cherries,’ he told Michael.
‘It was the last thing she talked about.’
‘You only have them a few years, after all,’ his mother cried.
At the door, she embraced him in wordless grief.
His father put his ann roughly about them both.
‘I don't like leaving you here, son,’ he said.
‘Poor Richard!’ his mother said.
‘We're all forgetting about you.’
The fat undertaker had closed down the tailgate of the hearse and stood about on the gravel, twirling his keys.
It was over an hour's journey home at the pace funerals travelled, and the coffin was due in the parish church at six.
He looked at his watch again and wondered if it was time to intervene.
Matron and some of the nurses were standing by.
They came forward again to shake hands and sympathise.
Sister Duggan had Eileen, s few belongings in a case and handed them to Liam.
‘I was looking after her chickens for her until she came home,’ Liam had cried in the chapel.
Michael took the case from him and led him away to the hired car.
‘What are we going to do at all!’ his mother cried, as his father led her after them.
‘God is good,’ his father said ritually.
‘In spite of everything, God is good!’
As he looked at them walk away, something hard in him revolted and he cried inside himself.
There is no God.
There is no good.
There's nothing but disease and decay and death.
He watched their departure through a spreading mist, and when the last car had gone and the avenue was silent except for the long sigh of grass, he allowed himself to be taken back to his room.
Sounds from the corridor intruded on his grief.
People still walked about and talked and laughed.
They were eating, sleeping, defecating, or otherwise engaged in some momentous enterprise.
Eileen was dead and it meant nothing to them at all.
hike a herd of antelope, grazing indifferently while one of their number was being savaged by lions, they would go on, singing and clapping their hands and making a great  noise against the darkness.
Eileen was dead and it made no difference at all.
It was quiet when Vincent slipped out of bed.
There was no sound except breathing and soft, nocturnal sighing from the darkness beyond the verandah.
He had watched until the night nurse had left the office and now he was as sure as he could be that she had gone below for a meal.
Bulbs in pale globes lit the corridor at intervals, the light reflecting off shiny walls.
When he passed the entry that led to the bathrooms and toilets, he became more circumspect.
It would be hard to give a satisfactory explanation if he were found in that part of the house so late at night.
He stood at the ornate head of the stairs and listened.
There was no sound at all.
He tiptoed swiftly down the stairs, keeping close to the wall.
When he came to the bottom, he stood again and listened.
Then he put his head out slowly and looked up the corridor.
There was no one in the office.
He was about to step across to the darkness of the recess and Lily's room when he heard footsteps and the sound of voices below him in the tiled entrance hall.
He recognised the loud bray of Doctor O'Connor-Crowley.
She was grumbling about being called out at such a late hour.
Whoever was with her was explaining that it was an emergency.
He stood listening as they crossed the hall and waited for the sound of the  lift gates closing.
But instead, he heard them begin the ascent of the stairs.
He daren't go back or they would see him.
He heard his name whispered from the recess and stepped lightly across into the gloom.
A hand caught his and drew him quietly into the room.
They stood in the darkness behind the open door and listened to the foots steps.
Vincent felt his heartbeat quicken, and tightened his grip on Lily's hand.
They stood there, breathless, as the steps came nearer, stopped for a moment outside then turned up the corridor.
‘That was a near thing,’ Vincent whispered.
They listened as the sound receded — not moving, thrilled by the danger of discovery and by their nearness.
They laughed a little hysterically, and whispered to each other to be quiet and then laughed again, drunk with the joy of touching hands and the scent of their bodies in the dark.
‘I told you we'd meet in spite of them,’ Vincent said.
It was the eve of Lily's departure to Seapark.
Vincent had put in a request to visit her and had been refused.
It was strictly forbidden for male patients to visit anyone except close relatives on the female floor.
‘You'll have to wait now until she's gone,’ Lily said.
‘Close the door, then.’
‘No.
These doors are always kept open.’
They moved together in the friendly darkness, opening their arms to each other.
It was something they had dreamed of many times.
In their minds it had been prefaced with romantic dialogue and protestations of love.
But now it seemed as natural as the confluence of two rivers and needed no words at all.
Their bodies, meeting at many points, spoke of hunger and human need and deprivation.
‘We'll meet again, Vincent, won't we?
‘Yes, of course, we will!’
‘Sometimes I think we'll never see each other again.’
He pressed his face into her hair.
It smelled fresh and newly washed, and curiously stamped with her youth, her beauty, her frail mortality.
A moist breath of autumn and ripeness came to them through the open window.
There was a brittleness in the sound of wind through the trees that spoke of fall and ruin.
Their ears, attuned to the corridor, caught the whisper of distant movement.
‘It must be Elsie,’ Lily said.
‘Did you know she's back?’
‘No,’ Vincent said.
‘When?
How is she?’
‘Yesterday.
She had a haemorrhage just before she came in.
I'm afraid she may be having another.
She complained of spotting in the afternoon.
That's probably why the doctor's here.
She's a different Elsie — very down in herself.’
‘God,’ Vincent groaned, ‘what hope is there for any of us!’
They clung together in silence, the dread of their disease and its mortal power oppressing them.
‘Maybe the ones that die quickly are the lucky ones,’ Vincent said with a surge of pessimism.
Outside they heard footsteps and voices on the corridor.
Suddenly the light in the recess came on.
‘My God!’
Lily hissed.
‘They're coming in here.’
She sprang guiltily away from Vincent, pushing him off balance.
He stumbled backwards and struck a bed screen that crashed to the floor, bringing him with it.
Lily screamed in flight.
There was a rush of feet from outside.
The room light came on and Nurse Bodkin and Doctor O'Connor-Crowley stood in the doorway.
Vincent picked himself up slowly and rubbed his ribs.
‘What's the meaning of this?
Doctor O'Connor-Crowley rasped.
Vincent looked at Lily who was standing beside her bed, twisting the tassel of her dressing gown between her fingers and crying.
His first feelings had been of shock and then fear.
He was aware of the need to conciliate, to plead, to attempt to explain.
But the sight of Lily's tears and the arrogant tone of the doctor's voice pushed him into truculence.
‘It's not what you think…‘he began.
‘Don't be insolent,’ the doctor snapped.
‘Get back to your floor and report to me in the office at twelve tomorrow.’
‘Oh, no, Doctor, please,’ Lily cried, as the threat to Vincent's future, inherent in the command, became clear to her.
The innocence of the encounter, and the sharp pitch of emotional stress to which it had brought him, were significant factors in Vincent's response.
His voice, when he spoke, instead of being conciliatory, was angry.
‘She's going away and we may never meet again.
I came to say goodbye.’
‘That's all…we were doing,’ Lily cried, ‘saying goodbye.’
‘At this hour of the night!’ the doctor sneered.
‘We asked for permission during the day and couldn't get it,’ Vincent protested.
‘You know the rules as well as I do.’
‘Rules!’
Vincent shouted, casting off all restraint, ‘I'm sick of your rules!
We may never see one another again, but nobody cares, because there's no provision for it in the rules.
We may die and no one here will worry too much — as long as we do it according to the rules!’
Lily covered her face with her hands and began to sob.
Nurse Bodkin bustled over to her and put her arm around her shoulder, making soothing noises and easing her into a sitting position on the bed.
‘That's quite enough,’ Doctor O'Connor-Crowley shouted.
‘Get back to your floor at once.
I shall deal with you in the morning.’
Vincent looked towards Lily, who raised her eyes and looked back at him sadly.
Her mind was full of fears about his future.
What decisions, made arbitrarily and in anger, would be handed down to him in the morning?
What would happen to him if he were sent packing?
With his head lowered, Vincent walked out and padded heavily up the stairs.
He stood on the verandah in his own ward and stared out into the darkness.
Underneath, someone was awake and coughing.
The lights of a car came probing around the comer of the building, cutting a wide swathe through the Hackness and disappearing like a will-o'-the-wisp through the trees.
In bed, his mind kept turning in an endless loop, living and reliving what had happened.
When the night nurse came and flashed her light curiously over him, he pretended to be asleep.
He was surprised eventually by the cold greyness of morning, and sat up, despairing of rest.
As soon as it was bright enough, he took out notepaper and wrote two letters — one to Arty and one to Lily.
Then he retrieved his clothes and suitcase from the locker-room, dressed himself and packed his case.
Arty was still asleep, one arm hanging loosely over the side.
Vincent resisted the temptation to wake him and tell him everything.
He simply put the letters on Arty's locker and turned away.
It was seven and the night nurse had already begun her round at the other side of the house when he slipped downstairs.
Lily's door was still open.
It was not easy to pass without looking in.
But it was best to leave her undisturbed.
Arty would see that she got his letter before she left for Seapark.
Breakfast was being prepared in the kitchens.
He smelled  frying bacon and heard the chatter of women as he walked across the tiled hall and let himself out through a side door.
The morning air was sharp and bracing as he turned down the avenue.
He walked a little uncertainly, unused to the solid earth under his feet.
The smells from the grass and the hedges were strange and fresh and exciting.
When he turned to look, it seemed to him that the hospital was moving away from him like a phantom ship, butting through the September mists.
Since the interview in Matron's office, Sister Cooney and Doctor O'Connor-Crowley had barely been on speaking terms.
Doctor Staples, in his brisk way, had dealt with the matter summarily and to the full satisfaction of neither.
‘In so far as the patient was being phased off this treatment,’ he had begun, pointing with the back of his pen to certain entries on Commander Barnwell's chart, ‘it would be technically correct to say that there has been a minor error.’
Minor!
Sister Cooney seethed silently under her blotched skin.
How minor would it have been if the poor man had died?
Error!
Doctor O'Connor-Crowley rolled the offensive word down the corrosive reaches of her mind.
She did not make errors.
‘What error?’ she asked truculently.
‘The patient received the same amount of air as he was given the previous week.
Phasing out required a gradual reduction — at least 100 ccs less,’ Doctor Staples said.
‘That was my point entirely,’ Sister Cooney said.
She could not — and did not try to — hide the triumph in her voice at being thus vindicated.
‘On the other hand,’ Doctor Staples said, ‘it would be  unscientific to assume that this had anything to do with his lung collapse.
‘Post hoc— propter hoc’ is bad logic.’
‘Precisely!’
Doctor O'Connor-Crowley said.
‘He already had had similar amounts — and more, much more — and nothing had happened.’
Doctors!
Sister Cooney sneered to herself.
Covering up for each other as usual—‘dog does not eat dog’, their sole code of ethics.
‘There was an error,’ she insisted.
‘There were several errors,’ Doctor Staples said, ‘and one of them was this unseemly wrangle in front of the patient.’
‘He was barely conscious,’ Doctor O'Connor-Crowley said.
‘All the more reason why he should have been having the full attention of you both,’ Doctor Staples said sharply.
‘I dislike incompetence,’ Sister Cooney told the room in general, ‘wherever — and in whoever — I find it.’
‘Ladies!’
Doctor Staples had an edge of impatience in his voice.
‘I'm afraid I find you both culpable in this.
As the patient is now out of danger, I don't propose to take the matter any further.
You may consider the incident closed.’
‘Of course the old rip was negligent,’ he conceded to Sister Cooney later.
‘I know all about her and her refills — 100 ccs more or less mean nothing to her.
She might as well be pumping a bicycle!’
‘Sister Cooney is inclined to exceed her authority,’ he allowed carefully to Doctor O'Connor-Crowley when they were alone.
‘She's a stickler for accuracy.
We all have to keep on our toes when she's around.’
‘Impossible woman!’
Doctor O'Connor-Crowley complained.
‘I suspect her trouble is menopausal,’ Doctor Staples confided, smiling inwardly at his own two-faced diplomacy.
A melancholy came over Arty when Vincent left.
He began to  grow morose.
He sat for hours staring into a hand mirror, tilting it this way and that and bending his head.
He took to long fits of massaging, until his scalp glowed a wealed pink and his arms dropped from exhaustion.
His concern began to spread from his hair to his skin.
He examined it for blotches and blemishes, and subjected any irregularities to the most rigorous scrutiny.
Mid you know,’ he asked Phil, who had been trying to solicit his help all morning in the writing of a very important letter, ‘That cancer can start as a little discoloration — even a tiny wart or mole?
‘Is that a fact?
Phil showed a diplomatic interest in the hope of gaining Arty's favour.
‘It's like a time bomb you carry round with you,’ Arty said, ‘and the alarm mightn't go off for twenty-five years.’
‘Is that a fact, now?
Phil said again.
‘And it might go off tomorrow!’
Arty examined a freckle on his nose with deep suspicion.
‘Isn't it a wonder, now,’ said Phil, seizing the chance to turn the conversation his way, ‘That shaggin' chancer of a Dagg from Belfast didn't claim his dirty water could cure cancer too!’
‘Did it do you no good at all?
‘No more nor if it was duck's piss!’
‘Piss is supposed to be good for warts,’ Arty said.
‘Did you ever hear that?’
‘No,’ Phil said.
‘Listen, Arty, I'm writing to this Dagg fellow.
Would you —‘
‘Some warts are cancerous,’ Arty said, laying the mirror aside and getting out of bed.
‘Would you tell me what to say to him?
‘You're only wasting a stamp, Phil.
You'll never get your money back.’
‘God, Arty, you promised to help us!’
Tell him it made your mickey fall off and you'll sue him for loss of your wife's affection,’ Arty shrugged indifferently, as he drew on his dressing gown and headed for the bathroom, where there was a larger mirror.
‘Christ, Arty, watch your language!’
‘Wrap up a sausage and send it to him for proof,’ Arty called as the door swung to behind him.
‘You're a terrible man altogether!’
Phil complained, mourning the ending of a conversation that had begun to interest him.
The ambulance that took Lily away brought Frank back.
It was a shrunken Frank, whose body seemed to have contracted out of sympathy with his shrivelled spirit.
He lay, propped up by pillows, his face a slaty waste of sagging flesh, with lines of tension around the mouth and dull eyes.
A long bandage was fixed to the bottom of the bed and he was encouraged and bullied to pull on this several times a day, and hoist himself forward and perform exercises to rebuild the muscles of his butchered back.
After a few feeble and dispirited attempts to rotate his shoulders in a circular movement, or raise and lower his arms, he subsided with a groan and lay slumped until the nurse helped him up again and the torture continued.
‘You must keep trying, Mr O'Shea,’ Nurse Bodkin urged.
‘What difference does it make?’ frank looked at her out of his sunken eyes.
‘That's what you say now,’ Nurse Bodkin said briskly, guiding his fumbling, unmotivated fingers towards the bandage.
‘But what will you be saying if you see yourself in a month's time with a list on you like the Leaning Tower of Pisa?
What will Mrs O'Shea say?’
What would Kitty say?
He knew well what Kitty would say.
Though it wouldn't make the least bit of difference to her what  way he looked, she would not let the occasion pass without punishing him sharply for still being alive.
She would survey him coldly with eyes that spat venom — Look at you with the gimp of an old scarecrow on you, they would say.
A fine thing you're going to be to warm a woman's bed at night.
Her voice might be saying something different but that, in essence, would be the message.
Kitty had that facility for slipping the knife in, even when on the surface she might only be talking about the weather.
He wondered what she was doing at that very moment.
It was something he seemed to have spent a great deal of his life wondering.
Into his twilight existence her face floated like a mirage.
He saw her coarsening features through the bottom and sides of a raised glass.
He saw her eager body arched to welcome some casual stranger, her passion loosed in that spendthrift laugh that would never ring for him again.
‘Why the hell didn't I die and be done with it!’ frank said bitterly.
‘Mr O'Shea feels very sorry for himself.
It's not like him at all,’ Nurse Bodkin reported.
‘It's a touch of postoperative melancholy,’ Sister Cooney said.
‘We'll have to snap him out of it and keep him to the exercises or he'll ruin himself.’
She closed the manilla folder she was working on, and with a firm set to her finely whelked face, she strode to his bed.
‘Mr O'Shea,’ she said sternly, ‘you haven't been doing your exercises properly.’
‘What's the use, Sister,’ frank said listlessly.
‘It's not yourself I'm worried about.’
Her voice was harsh.
‘It's the others.
Think of the bad example you are to anyone on the list for surgery.
What hope can they have, if they see you slumping about like a filleted herring, wallowing in self-pity?
I'm ashamed of you.
A man in your position should be giving a lead.’
‘The poor schoolmaster must live his life in a glass cage and do nothing that would scandalise the parish!’ frank grumbled.
‘That's more like it,’ Sister Cooney eased her face into the makings of a smile.
‘I'm glad to see there's some spirit left in you still.’
‘Damn little, then!’
Frank said.
‘Come on, now,’ Sister Cooney urged.
‘Try stretching down to touch your toes.
That's a good one to build up the muscles.’
She stood at the bottom of the bed and reached out her hands to catch his and pull them forward.
‘God!’ frank groaned, as she relaxed her grip and eased him back.
‘It's like being on the rack.’
‘It gets easier as you go on,’ she encouraged.
‘Try again.’
‘I couldn't.’
‘You must,’ she insisted, taking his hands.
‘Don't pull me,’ frank pleaded.
‘I'll do it myself — if you'll give me time.’
He lifted his hands feebly and, leaning forward, dropped them languidly on the blanket in front of him.
His body followed his hands a little, pushing them forward, until his head slumped down and he lay there, breathing laboriously.
From the bottom of the bed Sister Cooney eyed the limp hair on his thinning crown.
‘God!’ she said.
‘Now, try again — only put more effort into it this time.’
Frank fumbled for the bandage, caught it and eased himself cautiously back into a sitting position.
She stood beside him, pressing his back down as he leaned forward again.
‘Good!’ she said.
‘You didn't die yet.’
‘No such luck!’
Frank groaned.
‘It gets easier with practice,’ Sister Cooney said.
‘Now, hold your two hands forward in front of you like this, as if you were going to dive.
Then put as much of a stretch on them  as you can and move them apart and backwards, as if you were swimming.’
She stood and watched his weak attempts to comply.
‘Back,’ she directed, ‘further back — much further back — back until you can't go any further, until you feel your chest is going to split in two.’
frank dropped his hands and would have fallen, had she not steadied him and guided his fingers back to the bandage.
‘A little rest,’ she said briskly, ‘and then we'll try again.’
‘If this old body has anything to try with,’ Frank gasped.
‘Do you know what I feel like?
I feel like a maggot in a carcass.
I know I'm alive.
But everything around me is dead.’
‘The body is tougher than you think,’ Sister Cooney said.
‘It needs driving, that's all.
It's a sophisticated kind of machine and, like a machine, you can't afford to let it get rusty or it'll seize up.’
‘God!’
Frank protested.
‘If this thing of mine is a machine, it certainly needs oiling.’
‘That's what I'm trying to tell you.’
Sister Cooney smiled.
‘Come on, now.
We'll try a few more.’
‘The tinnitus you can expect, I'm afraid,’ Doctor Staples said, ‘and the vertigo too — a little deafness even.
Have you felt any deafness?’
‘I don't think so,’ Richard said.
‘Well, you may have a little.
All these are side effects of the streptomycin.
So don't be too worried.
Is the ringing in the ears bad?’
‘Disconcerting more than anything else,’ Richard said, hearing, even as he spoke, the tiny tintinnabulation, faint as fairy bells.
‘And the PAS, of course, brings on nausea and discourages eating?’
‘Yes — especially in the morning.’
Every morning since the new treatment had started he had been wakened to the thermometer and a medicine glass, half-full of a yellow, foul-tasting mixture that curdled in his stomach and sat there all day in a poisonous knot, waiting for the smell and taste of food to release its venom again.
‘You're not having a very happy time, are you?’
Doctor Staples said.
‘I'm not complaining,’ Richard hurried to assure him.
‘I just thought that…as it's new…you'd like to know…,
‘Everything!
Absolutely everything!’
Doctor Staples said.
‘No detail is too small.
As a matter of fact, I'm preparing a paper on the side effects for the medical association at this very moment.
The treatment is prolonged.
You understand that?’
‘I wasn't expecting any instant miracles,’ Richard smiled.
‘The prognosis is quite good, though — very encouraging, in fact,’ Doctor Staples said.
Anything, Richard thought, would be better than sawing half a man's chest away.
He had seen Frank's mutilated back when they had both been down for screening, and had been deeply shocked.
There was dignity, at least, in the way Eileen had died.
Thank God she had been spared the ordeal of surgery.
It was the first time since her death that he had been able to think of it with anything like acceptance.
There had been long weeks when he lay sunk in gloom and introspection.
During the rest hours and at night, he had turned his face to the wall and cried over their shared youth and all the bonds of sun and blowing grass and long evenings full of the sound of tumbling rooks that tied their lives together.
Occasionally he had gone in to sit by Commander Barnwell's bed and seek comfort in his sea-scoured face and calm eyes.
‘Dreadfully sorry, old chap!’ the Commander had said  when he first heard, Lis voice wheezing and whistling in his throat.
Richard had nodded his head and looked at the floor and said nothing.
‘It was so untimely,’ the Commander said passionately after a long silence, ‘so very untimely.’
Richard nodded again, and again there was silence.
‘Must come for all of us one day.’
The Commander stirred fretfully in bed and rearranged the blankets.
His breath, after the exertion, came in startled gasps.
‘What's life,’ he said with a pessimism that fed Richard's gloom, ‘only waiting for the end.’
Arty's melancholy had deepened.
He sat with his hand mirror all day and every day.
He bent and twisted himself before it, jerking suddenly this way and that, as if he were lying in wait for disease, determined to pounce on it before it could strike.
He pestered anyone who came along to look at his back and examine it for spots.
The other patients began to avoid him, to look at him oddly, to wonder about him.
One morning after breakfast and a prolonged peering into the mirror, Arty broke and screamed at Phil, who had come across to borrow a newspaper.
‘Keep away from me, Phil!
Keep away!
It's contagious.’
‘God bless us and save us!’
Phil exclaimed in alarm, ‘What's wrong, Arty, boy?
‘Smallpox!’
Arty cried.
Phil looked at him queerly and began to back off.
‘Keep your old paper,’ he said defensively.
He turned away, and when he had got a safe distance, he began to whistle — a moist whistle that said he wasn't really disturbed at all about Arty's strange behaviour.
‘Here's the bleedin' paper!’
Arty flung it across to him.
‘Only keep away!’
‘I think I'll go across and have a chat with that young fallow who came in the other day,’ Phil said in a conversational tone to no one in particular and rushed out to Sister Cooney's office.
‘God, Sister,’ he poked his head around the jamb of the door, ‘That Arty fellow is acting terrible strange.
He says he has some disease.’
‘Isn't he in the right place for it?
Sister Cooney smiled and looked up at the board in front of her as the bell rang.
‘There's somebody ringing in your ward now.
Maybe it's him.’
‘That fellow do have forty different diseases a day lately,’ Phil said.
‘You never know with him whether he's coddin' or in earnest.
I don't think he knows himself sometimes.’
Sister Cooney pressed a button on the panel and stood up.
‘We'll soon find out,’ she said briskly.
‘He do be usin' cruel bad language lately too,’ Phil complained piously.
She shooed him back to bed in front of her and he went meekly enough, entering with studied indifference, tapping his fingertips together as he went.
He threw his dressing gown casually on the chair and — with never a glance at Arty — jumped between the sheets, picked up the newspaper from the floor beside the bed, opened it out and peered over the top, his ears tuned to the conversation.
‘Well, Arty.
Something wrong?’
Sister Cooney asked.
‘Smallpox, look!’
Arty pointed his finger to hi s open mouth.
‘Listen, Arty Byrne,’ Sister Cooney said crossly, ‘I've no time for joking.
What's wrong with your mouth?
‘Looh ah ih!’
Arty's voice thickened and blurred into animal grunts as he tried to speak and extend his tongue at the same time.
Sister Cooney examined his tongue critically.
‘There's nothing the matter with your tongue.
It's perfectly normal.’
‘Spos — uk!’
Arty said.
‘Draw in your tongue and speak normally.’
‘I said look at the spots.’
‘There are no spots.’
‘There are — hundreds of them.
I've been watching them multiply all morning.
My tongue is covered with them — uk.’
‘Put in your tongue,’ Sister Cooney ordered.
‘It's smallpox.
You'll have to isolate me,’ Arty told her.
‘Smallpox!’
Sister Cooney's voice was scathing.
‘Do you know what smallpox is?
If you had smallpox, you'd have a rash.
Let's see your chest and abdomen.’
Briskly she unbuttoned his pyjama top and examined him.
‘Not a trace.
Not a thing.’
‘That's what I'm trying to tell you,’ Arty said, with a touch of desperation in his voice.
‘The rash is on my tongue.’
‘You can't have a rash on your tongue.’
‘But I have — uk!’
Arty said again.
‘Keep in your tongue, please.’
Arty closed his mouth and began to brush the heel of his open hand against his left temple in a repeated gesture of frustration.
Sister Cooney was surprised to see tears in his eyes.
‘I knew you wouldn't believe me,’ he said.
‘If it makes you feel any better, I'll get the doctor to have a look at you when he comes.’
As soon as she had gone Phil was out of bed again and, with a half-fearful look at Arty, put on his dressing gown and sauntered out to spread the news.
‘That Byrne fellow is gone loony,’ he told whoever would listen to him.
‘And it wasn't today or yesterday he began either, if you ask me.
Hid I ever tell you about the letters he used write to ones he didn't know from Adam — mad letters about him being an airplane pilot?
God, you meet all kinds in a place like this!’
When Doctor Staples came, he examined Arty and listened patiently to his self-diagnosis.The doctor neither confirmed nor denied that he was suffering from smallpox — which pleased Arty immensely.
‘Yes,’ he agreed, ‘I think we should shift you.
We'll move you to a room of your own — put you under observation.
Would you like that?’
‘Yes,’ Arty said.
‘I think it would be safer.’
Tell me this,’ Doctor Staples asked, ‘you've been depressed lately, am I right?
‘Yes,’ Arty said, feeling that at last he had someone who understood hi m and was taking his case seriously.
‘Well, we can do something about that straightaway and at the same time keep you under observation.
How would that suit you?
‘Fine!’
Any was relieved.
When a week passed and Arty's condition had not improved, Doctor Staples returned with a worried frown.
‘We may have to send you out to…another hospital…for some treatment.
You wouldn't mind that, would you?
You'd go out in the morning and be back again in the afternoon.’
‘What hospital?
Arty asked.
‘We'll have to arrange about that,’ Doctor Staples said vaguely.
‘Get in touch with Hearne,’ he told Sister Cooney, when they were back in the office.
I think a course of electroconvulsive therapy is what young Byrne needs.’
‘The mental hospital?’
Sister Cooney looked concerned.
‘Yes, but don't tell him that — not for the moment, anyway.’
‘Poor fellow!’
Sister Cooney said.
‘He's normally in such high spirits.’
‘That's a characteristic of manic-depressive psychosis, isn't it?
Doctor Staples said.
‘Periods of elation followed by bouts of depression.
Delusions of physical disease are common in the  depressive part of the cycle.
We'll just have to see what a course of ECT will do for him.’
The following morning, Arty was taken by ambulance to the huge Victorian red-brick pile on the edge of town — a massive structure set well back in the fields and surrounded by a high wall to protect the sensibilities of the sane from too close a confrontation with one of society's more disagreeable problems.
He was brought back a few hours later, dazed and dreamy, with a dull headache and no very clear notion of what had been done to him or why.
All he remembered was being strapped to a couch, the sudden fear, the cold touch of electrodes to Lis head, and the convulsive shock before the blackout.
Elsie Hogan, her young face wasted and gaunt, was lying in bed reading a letter.
She was in a ward with strangers now.
Lily was gone.
Mrs Doran was gone too, slipping off one wet October day with her husband, her eyes — even as she said goodbye — filled with the anticipation of familiar fields and deep pastoral quiet.
Elsie had wept for kind Mrs Doran and for her husband, that strange, silent, sympathetic man, lifting his feet cautiously as he sidled across the polished floor.
There was something strong and elemental in them that would outlast a world in flux.
The letter was from Lily, in neat, sloped handwriting, like careful embroidery.
It's all different here.
Everyone's on the ground floor in chalets–wooden chalets in fields of grass.
The atmosphere is different too.
There's more hope here.
In Ardeevan we just lay and rotted and nothing ever happened between Doctor Staples's weekly rounds–except that someone died.
A lot of people are on streptomycin now and there are new operations.
Did I tell you I may have to have surgery?
Elsie let the letter drop and sighed.
It was the atmosphere that  was killing.
No one ever knew what was to happen next, as Lily said.
The place was full of rumours and gloomy talk, most of it ignorant and ill-informed.
She felt herself drowning in disease, like the fly she once found floundering in the filth of her sputum mug.
Vincent came to see me and stayed all day.
He looked very well and was full of talk of making his way in the world and starting a business some day.
He's in England now–a place called Warwick.
He's got a job in a factory.
He's saving three pounds a week and putting it in the post office at hoe.
He writes every week without fail.
Do you remember how you were on to me to write to him?
No need for that anymore…
Elsie put away the letter and cried.
She did not know why she was crying.
It wasn't like her at all.
A flurry again in Commander Barnwell's room.
A running and ringing in the darkening afternoon, urgent voices on the phone and the grind and clang of the lift as it came and went.
Next door, Richard heard and wondered.
Something heavy and metallic was wheeled in.
Oxygen?
Collapse again?
Outside on the corridor, the rumours were beginning to spread.
His heart — his other lung — both lungs — the poor man was having a haemorrhage.
His door was closed.
That was a bad sign.
When the doctor had come and gone and the place was quiet again, Richard put on his dressing gown and tiptoed across.
There was no response to his quiet knock.
He opened the door and looked in.
The screens were around the bed and the draught from the door set them billowing like sails.
In the hall light, he had the odd notion that the Commander was afloat on a full and soundless tide.
He stood uncertainly, listening, wondering if he should go any further or retreat before someone came along.
There was a strange silence about the room that puzzled him.
He  coughed mildly to test its depth and the sound was spirited away and absorbed into the stillness.
‘Commander,’ he whispered and stepped forward towards the bed.
The door snapped shut behind him.
There was no sound, no movement from the bed.
Outside, the wind whistled thinly along the fluted tiles and stirred the open window sash.
He pulled the cloth of the screens aside and peered into the dimness.
The Commander was lying on his back.
His head rested on the pillow at an unusual angle, the chin tilted abnormally high, so that, from the foot of the bed, Richard was looking into the dark pits of his nostrils.
There was nobody with him — and that was odd.
He was just drawing the screens apart to step inside, when the door opened.
Sister Cooney came in and snapped on the light.
Even as he turned in alarm, he carried with him, trapped on his retina, the picture of the Commander's face, hollow and empty.
‘Richard!
What are you doing here?’
He stared wordlessly at her, seeing only that pale, withdrawn face.
‘You shouldn't be in here,’ Sister Cooney said.
There was compassion and no reprimand in her voice.
‘The Commander!’ he said in a shocked tone, whose grief took him unawares.
‘He, s dead, isn't he?’
‘Back to your ward now, like a good fellow.’
Sister Cooney took him by the arm and he went with her, unresisting.
‘I was talking to him this morning,’ he said.
‘Look.’
He pointed to his locker.
‘He gave me that book.’
‘You'd better get into bed.’
Sister Cooney, noting the way he trembled, helped him off with his dressing gown and tucked him in.
‘He is dead, isn't he?’
She nodded without speaking.
‘He gave me that book only this morning —Jane's Fighting Ships .
It lists every ship in the British Grand Fleet in the First World War.’
‘I'll get you a warm drink and a hot-water bottle,’ Sister Cooney said.
‘The poor man had a seizure,’ she continued, busying herself at the blankets.
‘It was to be expected, you know.
He never really recovered from that setback he had.’
‘I was talking to him this morning,’ Richard said again, wondering why he could not control his shivering.
‘He was all right then.’
‘It's a shock, I know,’ Sister Cooney said.
‘We were talking about the Battle of Jutland.
He was showing me the ships that were lost in the battle.
He was always talking about Jutland.
He was there, you know.’
‘It was the way he would have liked it,’ Sister Cooney said.
‘Quick in the end.’
‘He was to go and live in Falmouth,’ Richard said.
‘He told me it was all fixed up.
Mrs Barnwell…
‘He stopped and looked at Sister Cooney.
‘Does she know?’
‘Not yet.
We haven't contacted her yet.’
‘She was coming this evening.
He said she was coming.’
‘Poor woman!’
Sister Cooney said.
‘She knew, of course.
She was expecting this.’
He saw the Commander's pale face, the nose pinched and sharp, the eyes expressionless, like the windows of a deserted house.
Was that what she was expecting?
When he had taken the tea and lay warmly wrapped and no longer shivering, Sister Cooney left him.
He lay with his eyes closed, conscious of his own body, conscious of the body in the other room, and the difference now between them.
He expected to die, but the expectation was always of something remote, deferred.
He wondered if the Commander had known, if Eileen had known.
He found himself praying for Eileen and the Commander and all the dead, wherever they were.
Death, whatever it was, was a reality, a more important reality than life, if one were to judge by its duration.
Its mystery somehow diminished life, or did it enlarge it by making life and its purpose more mysterious still.
It certainly did not diminish God or lessen His reality.
In the face of such mystery, God was much more than just a protective wing to creep under.
Later, when Mrs Barnwell came, Sister Cooney took her in to see Richard.
She extended her thin, cold hand and accepted his commiseration.
‘He was always a free spirit,’ she said.
‘Clover Lodge didn't suit him at all.
He felt landlocked in the middle of all those fields.’
‘He talked of moving to Falmouth,’ Richard said.
‘Yes.’
Mrs Barnwell turned momentarily away.
‘It was all arranged.’
She shook his hand again before leaving and he lifted the book from the locker.
‘I'd like to return this,’ he said.
‘It was his.’
‘You keep it,’ Mrs Barnwell said.
‘Sister tells me you were his friend.’
'He was a good friend to me,’ Richard said.
‘Misfortune,’ Mrs Barnwell said, ‘makes friends of us all.’
‘I don't see any great change in you,’ Kitty O'Shea told her husband.
‘You look much the same as you always looked.’
‘How would you know?’
Frank asked.
‘You haven't really seen me for years.’
‘You haven't been that long away.’
Kitty smiled, wilfully misunderstanding him.
It was her smile that always did for him.
It hinted at intimacies  once shared and now denied.
It stirred the man in him even as it gored him.
It was a trap from which he could never escape.
‘Or is it that it doesn't seem long? he continued bitterly, knowing the futility of carping, but being unable to stop it.
‘Wy did you come at all?’
‘To see my lord and master, what else!’ she laughed.
‘It's a long time since I was that — if I ever was.’
Frank's mind went back to that torrid summer when they had melted into intimacy.
He had climbed through her window in the sweet nights, nights that would torment his memory for ever with the perfume of darkness and intrigue.
Even then she had taken the initiative.
‘You like me, don't you? she had asked, her long hair loosened for sleep.
‘You know I do.’
‘Well, then, what are you worried about?
After that he had worried about nothing at all.
He had been a cheerful fellow in those days and life was as inconsequential as a laugh on the wind or the carelessly squandered words of a song.
Her red hair was a beacon in the night — a flame in which he had long since been charred.
‘Well, whose fault was that?’
Kitty took up the challenge again.
‘Mea culpa !’
Frank said.
‘Mea maxima culpa !’
‘Christ!’
Kitty exclaimed in exasperation, ‘Wy do schoolmasters always have to talk like that?
I often wonder if they're men at all.’
She looked at him in disgust.
He would take that too, as he took all the rest.
Why couldn't he rise up and assert himself, shout at her, curse her, take off a great belt with a brazen buckle on it, like some muscular labouring man and beat hell out of her?
You could have respect for a man who lusted after you and fought for  you and took you.
But none for this milksop, who backed away and threw little delicately-barbed darts and had such reliance on the supremacy of reason and words.
‘Why do you come at all?’
Frank added.
‘You haven't come all this way just to tell me you despise me, have you?’
‘As a matter of fact,’ Kitty said in a carefully careless tone, ‘There is something you ought to know before that busybody Condon gets on to you about it.’
‘Father Condon?
About what?
‘You haven't had a visit — or a letter from him, then?
‘No.
What's wrong?
Are you in some kind of trouble?
Don't tell me you're…,
‘What kind of a fool do you think I am!’
Kitty said impatiently.
‘It's nothing like that.’
‘What, then?’
‘I can just see him looking down that long nose of his and saying in that sanctimonious voice: ‘there's something you ought to know, Mr O'Shea…’
‘What should I know?
Frank asked, his mind braced against shock.
‘A lot of gossip!
That's all it is,’ Kitty said carelessly.
‘People can never mind their own business.’
‘What should I know?’
Frank insisted.
Kitty took out her cigarettes and lit one nonchalantly.
She drew in deeply and exhaled through her nose, then snapped the cigarette briskly from her mouth and pointed it at him with a flourish.
‘You remember I had to get in a barman to help with drunks and keep a bit of law and order about the place?
‘I remember,’ Frank said bleakly, with the familiar sensation of being sucked into a morass.
‘Is it O'Gorman you're talking about?
‘Tom, yes.’
Her use of the Christian name angered him.
She had never used his own for years — he was always ‘you’ or ‘your man there’.
‘Tom, Dick or Harry,’ he said, ‘what does it matter!
So yourself and O'Gorman have been up to something?
You don't expect me to be surprised, do you?’
‘I knew you'd jump to conclusions,’ Kitty said.
‘Do you want me to tell you or not?
‘Better you than Father Condon, I suppose,’ Frank said, staring at the blankets.
‘It's not what you think, mind!’
‘Nothing is ever what I think.’
‘I — we — thought it a good idea at the time, with the late closing and it so hard to get people off the premises — and all the cleaning up to be done afterwards…‘
‘Thought what a good idea?
‘That he should live in.’
‘A very good idea!’
Frank said bitterly.
‘So — convenient and everything.’
‘Will you listen to me!’ she hissed.
‘Will you listen to me!’
Frank raised his eyes angrily.
‘There's been one thing understood between us for years and that was that you were to be discreet.
You owe me that much — if nothing else.
Never on the premises.
That was our agreement.’
‘You're getting it all wrong,’ Kitty said.
‘He's not that kind of fellow.’
‘I hope he keeps his door locked at night, then, if he isn't,’ Frank said venomously.
‘As a matter of fact, he does.’
‘I won't ask how you found out,’ he taunted.
The locked door — if it was really true — made him feel more despondent than ever.
It would intrigue and challenge her.
‘You, re just like old Condon,’ she said, ‘coming poking about in his sly way.’
‘It's no business of mine, of course!’
Frank said sarcastically.
‘I soon put the run on that fellow,’ Kitty continued without comment.
‘It's not right for a married woman to have a man in the house and he not her husband,’ he says.
‘It's a cause of scandal.’
'that makes two of us, Father,’ says I, thinking of that whey-faced housekeeper of his.
‘Haven't you a woman in the house that's not your wife!’’
She laughed in her careless way before drawing on her cigarette.
‘For your own sake you should get rid of him — or make him live out,’ Frank said quietly after a period of silence.
‘Why the hell should I?
‘If you don't know yourself, there's no use in me telling you.’
‘Bloody hypocrites, the lot!’
Kitty said.
She crushed her cigarette in the ashtray and stood up to go.
‘So, now you know,’ she said.
She looked so competent and self-assured, so hard, so distant from his own thought and feeling that she might just as well have been a stranger, passing by without a glance in the street.
The only thing that linked them was the embarrassing albatross of a marriage in whose death both of them had been guilty.
A Christmas tree had been set up in the corridor with fairy lights that winked on and off.
There were balloons in all the wards and coloured paper that hung in drooping loops.
The light came strangely rich through gaudy lanterns and shone on a brave display of Christmas cards.
On Christmas Eve a candle-lit procession, led by Matron, came to sing carols.
The wind from the verandah set their long cloaks billowing and the candle flames aflutter.
The sound, blown faint from distant wards, was melancholy with memories of other, happier Christmases.
On the day itself there was a special menu and paper hats were distributed.
In the afternoon there was dancing on the wards.
Beer, stout and a furtive drop of spirits were in circulation.
Sister Cooney watched the festivities develop with a benign eye.
A sprig of holly with three berries was taped with sticking plaster to the wall over her desk.
From time to time she glanced a little apprehensively at the numbered board with its blank bulbs.
An emergency at a time like this could spoil everything.
Looking in at the observation ward, with its partly screened beds, she hoped that Mike Quinn — poor man — wouldn't take it  into his head to go in a hurry.
Downstairs, too, there was young Elsie.
From Arty's room came the sound of an accordion.
He was sitting on the side of the bed, his head slightly tilted, his eyes closed.
His foot tapped the floor in time to the music.
Ted Nugent leaned his shoulder against the doorjamb, looking in at him.
‘Can't you play something a bit more lively?
Ted called.
Arty opened his eyes slowly and inclined his head towards a notice on the door — a notice he had put there himself.
‘Can't you read?’ he asked.
‘KEEP OUT — SMALLPOX,’ Ted read and laughed.
‘You don't really believe that, do you?
Arty closed his eyes again and concentrated on the music.
‘Hey, it's Christmas!’
Ted called, as he turned to leave.
‘Can't you play something cheerful?’
‘I can only play the way I feel,’ Arty said.
Jack Carbery had put on his blue serge suit for the occasion and sat in the middle of a few friends, his collar stud gleaming, and the apple in his throat bobbing about like a cork on water as he drank.
Jack was in a cheerful mood.
He had a good roof over his head, clean sheets, enough to eat and a bottle of stout in his hand.
‘Do you know what it is?’ he enquired, wiping his mouth reflectively with the back of his hand.
‘There's a power of good men gone since this time last year.’
‘Ah,’ said Joe Connors, a dark little man who reached forward with spatulate fingers for the corkscrew, ‘There's only a few of us left.’
They began to make a head count, lingering over the names with relish, proud of being survivors.
Carbery took a pack of cards out of his pocket and dealt them for Twenty-five.
He tilted his head as he dealt, to keep the smoke that curled up from his  cigarette out of his eyes.
‘I suppose Mike out there will be the next to go,’ he said in a pleasant conversational tone.
‘Let him hould his hoult till the day is over, anyway,’ Joe said.
‘He have no business dyin' today and muckin' up everything.’
Phil sat on the side of Frank's bed and talked.
‘That Arty have it cruel bad, whatever he have,’ he said.
‘I was down there to see Rim and he hardly spoke to me.
He have a notice on his door.
Do you know what it says?’
‘I know,’ Frank said wearily.
‘I heard all about it.’
‘But you haven't heard the worst.
He says now it's typhoid he have and it's all my fault.’
‘Your fault?’
Frank began to show some interest.
‘He says typhoid comes from pellucid water —‘
‘Polluted,’ Frank suggested.
‘Well, some kind of water, anyway.
He's trying to make out that I gave it to him when I gave him a spoonful of that…stuff…
I got from that shagger in Belfast.
He says it was just dirty water and I poisoned Rim.
Did you ever hear the like of that?
No wonder they're sending him over to the mad house for th’ electric.’
Frank looked at Rim sardonic ally.
He didn't like what he saw.
There wasn't much subtlety or human sympathy about Phil.
He was an overgrown child who never saw beyond his own narrow world.
‘Any fellow that'd pay a pound a bottle for dirty water — water that could very well carry typhoid,’ Frank said severely, ‘should have his head examined too.
A touch of th’ electric would do Rim no harm at all.’
Phil got up from the bed abruptly and turned away with an awkward gesture — his usual response when he felt insulted.
‘You'd want to mind who you'd be talkin' to in this place,’ he protested.
‘You'd want to mind who you'd be taRing the cure from, too,’ Frank said.
Richard, wearing the new dressing gown and slippers that had been his mother's practical present, stood at the window, looking out over the bare countryside.
The river, swollen and bloated, lay heavy on the sunken fields.
Everything was stark and colourless — a predominance of mud and slate washes — just like his life.
‘They're dancing up front.
Why don't you come and join them?
He turned to see Nurse Lambert smiling at the door.
Her butterfly cap sat at a saucy angle on her black hair.
‘Who am I to dance with?’
He smiled back at her.
‘Me!’
She held out her hand in invitation.
‘Aren't you on duty?’
‘Who cares!
It's Christmas.’
‘So it is,’ he said, his smile fading.
‘Well, come on, then!’
He took her outstretched hand — very soft, very feminine — and allowed her to lead Rim away.
Out on the corridor, Nurse Bodkin was hovering hopefully near a suspended piece of mistletoe.
‘Happy Christmas!’ she called invitingly to Ted Nugent as he passed.
‘God, Nurse,’ Ted exclaimed virtuously, ‘There's nothing for a hot-blooded sinner like me to do when he sees you coming, except close his eyes and pray for continence.’
‘Go on out of that!’
Nurse Bodkin crowed with delight.
‘You men are all the same.
A girl wouldn't be safe with one of you.’
‘That's not our fault,’ Ted said complacently.
‘If your nature is fire, all you can do is burn.’
Nurse Bodkin pointed overhead and simpered.
‘Aren't you going to honour the mistletoe?’
Ted made a loose grab at her before continuing on his way.
When he was at a safe distance, he turned and cal led.
‘You're a terrible woman altogether to be leading a fellow on like that!
I'd better go before you tempt the two of us into dismantling and abusing the sacred structure of the Sixth Commandment.’
In the back ward a fiddle had struck up.
Two or three couples began to dance.
The rest sat and watched.
‘More women is what we need,’ the men cheered as Nurse Lambert and Richard walked in.
‘It isn't safe to come in here.’
Nurse bodkin winked in delight as she waltzed past.
‘Dance, Nurse, dance,’ the men roared, surrounding Nurse Lambert, who was young and attractive and popular.
‘Later,’ she smiled and held out her arms to Richard.
He was disturbingly aware of her as they moved off.
Her arms, which were bare to the elbows, were freckled and lightly downed in the artificial light.
He began to wonder about her life outside the hospital.
‘Do you like dancing, Nurse?’ he asked.
‘Yes, I do,’ she said.
‘And don't call me Nurse.
My name is Keelan.’
‘That's an unusual name.’
‘It shouldn't be, then.
It's Irish.
Caol and fionn — slender and fair.’
‘Well,’ he said, eyeing her dark hair, ‘it half suits you anyway.’
‘Nobody's perfect,’ she laughed.
As soon as the dance ended she was swept away by somebody else.
Richard sat on a bed and watched her for several dances before claiming her again.
‘I thought you were never going to rescue me,’ she teased.
Just as the dance was finishing she drew him towards the door.
‘Let's get out of here before the mob swamps us again.’
Richard opened the door and they slipped away.
Their going was noticed and raucous cheers followed them.
Out on the corridor, Keelan took her stand under the mistletoe.
‘Well, aren't you going to kiss me?’
Richard put his arms awkwardly about her and brushed her lips with his.
‘Happy Christmas!’ he said.
‘Maybe it will be — yet!’ she laughed and, taking his hand, led him into a storeroom and closed the door.
Sometime in the early evening a bel 1 rang and there was a flurry about Mike Quinn's bed.
Screens were pulled, lurching and swaying on screaming castors, the curtains swelling like sheets in a squall.
Sister Cooney came, a calming influence, with a syringe in a kidney dish.
Later she was seen phoning from the office.
A nurse remained by the bed monitoring Mike's pulse.
An hour passed before there was another flurry, this time from the corridor.
The voice of Doctor O'Connor-Crowley, like a racing-engine snarling through the gears, bore down on Sister Cooney, who sat writing in the office.
‘Inconsiderate!’ she roared.
The office door shuddered behind her, and a baying, as of hounds savaging each other, filled the suddenly silent wards.
Presently they erupted like twin explosions to examine Mike Quinn.
‘This man is dying,’ Doctor O'Connor-Crowley shouted.
‘There's absolutely nothing that anyone can do.’
She snapped the screens together as she emerged.
The sound was as final as the closing of a coffin lid.
She looked down through the wards where the festive celebrations had momentarily stopped.
On a sudden impulse she was  off, shouting as she went, ‘What's going on here?
Why aren't you people in bed?
This is a hospital — not a hotel.
Sister!
Sister!
Who gave these patients permission to have alcohol?
Who authorised this?
Back to your wards.
Back to your beds.
What, in God's name, has anyone here to celebrate?’
When everybody was suitably chastened and miserable, she left, cannonading down the corridor in great rolls of receding thunder.
Near the stairhead she met Phil, who was emerging from a game of cards in one of the single rooms and had missed all the theatricals.
‘A Happy Christmas, Ma'am,’ Phil oozed — the day that was in it and a little whiskey fortifying his courage.
‘What's happy about it, you stupid little man!’ she cried.
‘Don't you realise that it's the last Christmas most of you in here are ever likely to see?’
‘Wasn't that a terrible thing to say to anyone?’
Phil poured complaint into the receptive ear of Sister Cooney, as he sought comfort at her door.
‘Don't mind that one,’ she soothed.
‘Here's a bit of news that'll cheer you up.
Her tour of duty is almost done.
She'll be leaving for good before the New Year.
What do you think of that, now?’
‘We'll celebrate for a week,’ Phil exulted.
‘We might even take longer!’
Sister Cooney smiled.
‘Happy Christmas, Phil!’
At tea-time the momentum of the day — or what was left of it after Doctor O'Connor-Crowley's intrusion — petered out and things began to sag.
People sat about, replete and vacant.
Ghosts of other Christmases began to walk and nudge.
Downstairs, Elsie Hogan, the bloom of youth scoured from her skeleton, lay waiting for the haemorrhage that would end it all.
Her hair clung in damp strands to her forehead, emphasising  the whiteness of her face with the starkness of a black border on a mourning card.
Behind his screens, Mike Quinn gagged on ropes of his own phlegm but was considerate enough to hang on a little longer.
Everyone was asleep before the night nurse came on Rim, hunched and still, a smile on his wasted features in the soft halo of torchlight.
Frank looked up in surprise when Matron walked in.
The morning was her usual time for coming, a flurry of nurses preceding her, squaring comers of blankets, clearing lockers, thumping pillows, crisp and antiseptic as they swept through.
Then in their wake, a stately schooner under full sail — Sister Cooney bobbing like a fretful tug in attendance — she hove in sight, a strongly-timbered woman, solid and soundly ballasted.
‘Someone to see you, Mr O'Shea,’ Matron said, a concerned look on her face.
Frank sat up, a faint alarm bell ringing in his head.
It would have to be some unusual visitor to be thus announced by Matron.
‘Is anything wrong?’ he enquired.
‘Inspector O'Connell wishes to speak to you,’ Matron said gently.
‘I'm afraid you must prepare yourself for a shock.
He has some very distressing news.’
‘Kitty!’
Frank exclaimed.
‘What's happened?’
‘Your wife has had…a very serious…accident,’ Matron said hesitantly.
She beckoned to someone outside and a garda inspector walked in.
‘Where?
How?
How is she?’
Frank raised himself laboriously in the bed, before subsiding weakly into the pillows.
‘Perhaps,’ the inspector said, when the introductions had been made, ‘you would leave us, Matron.
I think it might be easier on Mr O'Shea if I spoke to him alone.’
‘Of course,’ Matron said.
‘Ring for Sister or myself if you need us.’
The inspector accompanied her to the door and closed it carefully after her.
He laid his cap, containing his gloves, upside-down on the locker.
‘What happened?
Why are you here?’
Frank asked.
‘Your wife…‘the inspector began.
‘Is she dead?’
The inspector looked at Rim keenly as he spoke, measuring his words, gauging the reaction.
‘There was a fire…‘he began.
‘Oh my God!’
Frank covered his face with his hands.
The inspector's evasive reply was sufficient answer to his question.
‘We did all we could,’ the inspector said.
Frank began to shake his head violently.
‘Not dead!’ he said.
‘She can't be dead!’
‘I'm sorry to have to bring you this terrible news,’ the inspector said.
He turned away to face the window, a tall man with grizzled, close-cropped hair.
There was silence in the room for some time as he waited for Frank to regain his composure, to ask the inevitable questions.
The gutter beneath the window, he noticed, was half-choked with a black silt, the residue of dead leaves.
‘How did it happen?’
Frank asked at last.
‘We're not sure.
We think an oil heater may have overturned — or perhaps it was left too close to some curtains.
It started in the bedroom.
The fire brigade from town was on the scene within twenty minutes of the alarm and got it under control very quickly.
But when we broke in, they were dead.’
‘they?
‘O'Gorman, the bartender, and your wife.
Smothered — the two of them.’
‘The two of them…
‘Frank echoed the words, then lay with his head sunk on his chest, a man in a stupor.
Silence again in the room, a long, agonising silence.
‘Would you like me to call someone? the inspector enquired, looking at him anxiously.
‘Smothered, you say?
‘Mercifully, yes.
The fire hadn't touched them at all.’
‘Who raised the alarm?
‘One of our men on patrol.
He noticed the flames and the smoke.’
The inspector coughed apologetically and placed his hands together, uncertain how best to say what had to be said next.
‘There's…something…else,’ he began slowly.
Frank lifted his head and looked at him, waiting for him to continue.
‘…something you should know.’
‘Yes?
‘The…ah…manner in which they were found would seem to indicate that both had been drinking heavily.
There were a number of bottles and glasses in the room.
The doctor found a very high alcohol content in their blood.’
‘Oh, God!’
Frank moaned.
The inspector looked at his sunken head with compassion.
It was a distressing part of his duty to have to tell people things they were better off without hearing.
‘They died in their sleep,’ he said.
‘There's something you're leaving out,’ Frank said suddenly in a harsh tone.
‘Isn't there?’
The inspector sighed with relief.
He had been wondering if the  man suspected, wondering how he could prepare Rim for the final crushing rev elation.
‘What do you mean? he asked carefully.
‘They were together?
‘Yes.’
‘In my wife's room?’
‘Yes.’
‘In bed together?’
‘It seems so.
Yes.’
‘Christ Jesus, damn the whoring pair of them!’
Frank cried and tumed away, covering his face with the blankets.
Richard read of the fire in the newspaper on his way back from the county hospital.
It was the kind of tragedy that so often called for sympathy — a momentary sympathy and thrill of horror, mixed with shamefaced satisfaction that it had happened to someone else -before one passed on to less disturbing news.
But it was different when someone you knew was involved.
It couldn't be dismissed so easily.
He had become friendly with Frank since he had moved into Commander Barnwell's room.
He had helped Rim with his exercise.
They had talked.
‘Dreadful, isn't it? said Keelan Lambert, who was accompanying him.
He tried to imagine what it would be like to get such news.
Husbands and wives were bound by deep ties-like two branches grafted together.
He remembered little things — childhood images trapped in memory: his father's hand laid momentarily on his mother's as they sat at table; laughter from their bedroom at night; his mother straightening his father's tie and drawing her finger in a delicate gesture along his cheek.
‘The poor man was just beginning to pull round after his operation,’ Keelan said.
Richard touched his finger reflexively to a light dressing on the left side of his neck where it met the collarbone.
The wound was beginning to smart a little.
‘Giving you trouble, is it?’
Keelan asked.
‘Stings slightly.
That's all.’
To supplement the work of the new drugs, Doctor Staples had decided that the phrenic nerve in his neck should be temporarily crushed.
This would relax the diaphragm and push up his lung.
The introduction of air into the peritoneal cavity would push the lung up even further and give the diseased part a chance to rest.
‘The operation didn't take long, anyway,’ Keelan comforted.
‘You could hardly call it an operation — ten minutes on the table and a local anaesthetic,’ Richard replied.
He laid aside his paper and allowed himself to be lulled into a rhythmical vacuity by the swaying of the ambulance.
Through the glass in front, he watched the greying head of Marty with the topped end of a cigarette behind his left ear.
Keelan was a soothing presence beside him.
Their bodies touched gently and came apart as they rounded a bend.
Their steadying hands met along the seat.
She let her fingers linger on his and smiled.
‘Don't look now,’ she squeezed his hand, ‘but old spoilsport is watching in the mirror.’
They laughed in shared amusement.
He felt suddenly happy at being alive.
It was something he had not felt for a very long time.
Frank's door was closed when he got back and there was a notice on it saying that he was not to be disturbed.
He was under sedation, Sister Cooney informed Rim, and was best left alone until he had absorbed the shock.
The following morning Richard was taken down to the treatment room and given his first induction of air.
The experience  was enough to keep him preoccupied for some time.
He spent most of that day wrestling with discomfort and nausea.
Whenever he sat up, the preserve on his chest was intense.
His stomach seemed to be floating on a rising tide that compressed it against his sternum.
At the back of his mind was the fear that he had been given too much air, that his lungs could not sustain the pressure, that they would collapse as Commander Barnwell's had collapsed.
The notice was off Frank's door by the time he was able to move about again and the door itself was open.
It was late afternoon, with the darkness already lurking in the comers, when he went in.
Frank was lying back on the pillows with his eyes closed.
Richard was about to slip out again, when he stirred and opened them
‘I hope…
I haven't disturbed you,’ Richard said awkwardly.
‘No,’ Frank said in a tired voice, ‘not at all.’
‘I…read about it in the papers,’ Richard said, not knowing how to begin.
‘I'm very sorry.’
Frank grasped his proffered hand and said nothing.
‘It must…have been…a dreadful shock.’
‘God help us all!’
Frank said and turned his head away.
He roused himself with an effort, sniffed and shook his head vigorously.
‘Sit for a little, like a good fellow.’
Richard sat on the side of the bed and looked at the floor.
‘It's a strange world, isn't it? he said.
‘Youth is the best time,’ Frank said quietly after a while.
‘There's still hope then.’
‘Yes.’
The room was full of darkness now, except for a bright triangle near the door where the light from the corridor fell.
‘I was twenty-three that summer,’ Frank whispered.
‘There'll never again be a summer like it.
Never!’
Richard sat helplessly and listened to him cry.
There was nothing he could say, nothing he could do.
Like the sun peering from behind a cloud, Arty began to brighten and beam again.
The notice came down from his door.
One day it was there and the next it was gone.
Neither Sister Cooney nor the doctors made any comment, but its disappearance was noted.
Ted Nugent, as might be expected, showed no such delicacy.
‘How's the typhoid or whatever-it-was, then? he asked.
‘I could have been a little hasty in my diagnosis,’ Arty allowed with an embarrassed smile.
‘I'm no doctor, you know.’
‘You can say that again!’
Ted laughed.
‘Hey!’
Arty said, anxious to change the conversation.
‘Do you remember Vincent Finn?
‘Sure.
What about him?
‘I had a letter from Rim.
He's in a sanatorium in England.’
‘What could he expect — running off like that!’
Ted was indifferent to Vincent's fate.
‘The fellow was out of his…
‘He stopped carefully, remembering Arty's condition.
‘He had no sense.’
‘He may be coming back, you know,’ Any said, ignoring or not noticing Ted's remark.
There was something about the prospective return of Vincent that cheered Rim.
‘He says the doctor over there is trying to arrange it.’
‘Coming back here?
He must be off his…he must be joking!’
Ted said.
The letter from Lily came on the morning of the funeral.
It lay around the office for a day or two, until someone had time to open it and send it back with a brief note, giving the time and circumstances of Elsie's death.
The letter itself had been short, its tone bleak.
Lily was on the point of having what might yet prove to be only the first stage of a thoracoplasty.
There were complications that she didn't understand — something to do with the fluid they kept draining off, something arising out of the chronic empyema.
The doctors were so evasive that it was impossible to get anything definite from them.
She now suspected that they had known long before and were breaking it to her gradually.
She was very depressed and pessimistic about the future.
Vincent was getting treatment again.
She spent most of her time in tears.
She was sick with worry about everything.
It's like being caught in huge sticky web–the more you struggle, the more entangled you get.
Did you ever feel that it would be nice to give up struggling and close your eyes and sleep and never wake any more?
She lay propped up in pain and wondered when it was she had begun to loathe her body — she who had always been so proud of her figure and liked to pirouette in front of the glass after stepping from her clothes, admiring the slim smoothness of her thighs, the trim concavity of her belly, the neatness of her breasts, her skin with the sculptured texture of marble, her neck slender as the stem of a wineglass, and the bound-up hair in which fire lurked and leaped.
Pain was a living organism grafted into her.
It gnawed at her like a ravenous animal.
It burned and raged through her like a fever, until she began to imagine that she was no longer herself, no longer human at all, but the heart of fire, the savage tooth, the embodiment of the very essence of pain.
What was she now but a maimed thing, repugnant and ugly, which no love could ever be large enough to embrace?
There could never now be that bridal night she had dreamed of, that uninhibited leap into love and happiness.
Vincent had sworn that he would love her to the grave and beyond.
What would he say, what would he think, what would he feel, if he saw her now?
It was as if the operation had excised her will to live.
She lay, apathetic, dull as the lustreless droop of her hair on the  pillows.
She had been taken back to Ardeevan and put in one of the observation wards.
But for her there was no sense of homecoming.
Mrs Doran was gone, Elsie was dead.
If Elsie could be taken so easily, what hope was there for anyone?
What was the use in struggling?
Better to surrender quietly to that hell of pain, to slide into it, to crumble and fold like burning straw, to merge and coalesce and become one with it, until, phoenix-like, she floated away on the other side, whole and free.
When her mother came and sat beside her, twisting her fingers nervously and pulling on and off her gloves, lifting and laying down her basket in agitation, Lily rallied a little.
Her father, a neat, spare man, sat on the bed and stroked her hand and said very little beyond the commonplace, putting all his affection and concern into that quiet gesture.
He scrutinised her face anxiously as she listened to her mother, and when her eyes turned languidly towards him, he smiled and stroked her hand more earnestly.
But when she turned back to her mother again, his face resumed its worried, searching frown of concentration, his ear attuned below the level of conversation to the pain and weariness in her voice.
Once, moved beyond composure by something he heard or saw, he rose abruptly and stood with his back to them, facing out over the sodden countryside.
Behind him his wife's voice went on, chiding gently about the fruit that had remained untouched on her locker, the meals returned uneaten.
‘You'll have to try and eat, dear, to make yourself strong again.
If I peel an orange now, will you eat a little— just to please your father?
He took the day off from work specially to come with me.
He's worried about your not eating.’
When they had gone, Lily cried for them in their helplessness, feeling, for all her weakness, stronger than them, realising that  it was easier to contemplate one's own death than the death of someone loved.
Something in their need of her pulled her back from the seductive slide into oblivion.
She would have to exert her will and fight against the pain-consuming darkness, if not for her own sake, then for theirs.
Old Barnwell is dead.
Mike Quinn is dead.
Elsie Hogan is dead.
Every week, somebody dead.
It's enough to drive any body off his rocker.
Talking of which, you'll laugh when you hear I went a bit bonkers myself for a while.
I don't know what came over me.
The Strange and Singular Lunacy of A. Byrne, you could call it!
Anyway, I'm OK again.
I got this notion that I'd some terrible disease–as if the Con wasn't terrible enough–and everybody would catch it off me.
The worst thing about it was that nobody would believe me until it was too late.
The old fellow even came to see me, so you know how bad I was.
seeing him, of course, didn't make me any better.
He just sat there, scratching his head with those black fingernails and telling my mother there was never anything like that on his side of the family.
It was all her fault, if you could believe him.
Maybe it was, too, because anyone would want to be a little round the bend to marry him…
It was easy now to write to Vincent about his father's visit in a flippant, amusing way, but it hadn't been like that at all.
‘You'll disgrace us all,’ Arty's father had said.
‘What will people say?
It's bad enough to have a son of mine in this place.
But getting treatment in the mad house!’
‘Wasn't I born and reared in a mad house?
Arty had retorted harshly.
‘What do you mean, boy?
What do you mean?’
‘He means nothing at all,’ his mother had intervened, ‘except that you've upset him.
Will you leave the poor fellow alone?
The doctor said he wasn't to be excited.’
Then his father was off on another tack.
‘It’ s them doctors is all  to blame.
I want a word with them fellows.
I want to know what they meant by sending a son of mine to —’
‘I'm no son of yours,’ Arty interrupted.
‘Are you out of your…? his father stopped and looked in a startled manner at his mother, who had given him a sharp dig, then began to cough.
‘I think you're looking much better today, Arty.’
His mother had stepped in to fill the embarrassed silence.
‘Have you put on some weight?’
Did I tell you Madeleine came to see me again shortly after you left?
She's better to talk to than write to, if you know what I mean.
I hardly ever write letters any more.
I got fed up of all that daft nonsense.
You were right about pretending.
She loves music and says she'd like to sing in a band.
If I was outside, she said she could telephone me every day for nothing, if I gave her the number of a phone box and arranged to be there for a certain time…
Madeleine's second visit had been before his long slide into melancholy.
During the succeeding weeks he had not written — except to send her an enigmatic note warning her to keep away.
Her response had been a spate of anxious letters which he had let accumulate in his locker.
When the cloud lifted, he had taken them out and read them.
Moved by her obvious concern, he had written to explain that he had been through a bad time, but was better now.
Madeleine replied with the news that she had been promoted and was moving to a town not twenty miles away.
‘I'd be able to come and see you oftener — if you'd like me to, Arty.’
He pondered the implications of this for a few days, uncertain whether to welcome it or feel alarmed.
It would mean telling her everything — and telling the full truth about himself had never been easy.
It would also mean giving the signal for the relationship to develop.
Did he really want it to continue?
Something in  the loneliness and fear he had experienced during his ordeal told him that he did.
She knows all about me being bonkers and everything and doesn't seem to mind.
she's coming to see me again soon.
Meanwhile his health was improving.
As soon as the visits to the mental hospital had ended, he had been put on streptomycin and PAS, like several of the younger patients.
The reputation of the new drugs had preceded them and a ripple of optimism ran through the sanatorium, though Doctor Staples had been careful to stress that they were still in the experimental stage.
But it would have taken a lot more than the doctor's understandable caution to dispel the general euphoria.
Richard was having a lean time.
He was in a state of perpetual nausea.
The ringing in his ears persisted.
He was sore from constant injections.
He could neither lie nor sit comfortably, and when he walked about, the pressure under his collarbone was intense.
Still, there was reason for optimism.
He had put on weight.
The sputum had decreased and for two successive tests had been negative.
Three negative reports in a row would be a strong indication that the disease had been arrested.
All that remained after that was to continue the treatment until the lesions calcified.
So for him the next test — whose result he was awaiting — would be crucial.
Meanwhile there was Keelan Lambert with whom he was developing some hind of tentative relationship.
She was stationed now on the male floor and visited him frequently — sometimes in the line of duty, sometimes for a few minutes when her work was finished, often — as now, when she should have been elsewhere — for an illicit cigarette.
‘Congratulations!’ she said, as she blew smoke carefully through the open window.
‘I saw it on your chart.’
‘Saw what?’
Richard had laid aside his book to watch her, standing there with that bright, scrubbed freshness young nurses always seem to have.
‘Your third test.
It's negative.’
He smiled back at her, shaking his head, pleased but wary, in case it might be premature.
‘Are you sure?
‘Of course I'm sure.
I told you I saw it on your chart.
You don't seem very excited.’
‘I am excited,’ he laughed, ‘way down somewhere.’
‘That's the funny thing about you,’ Keelan said.
‘There's such a lot of you way down somewhere.
You take life very seriously.’
‘Wouldn't you, if you were in my position?’
‘I suppose so.
Anyway, it's good news, isn't it?
‘Great!’
‘You'll be out before you know where you are.’
‘Will I?’
‘There you go again,’ she chided, ‘looking for trouble around every comer.’
‘There you go again,’ he laughed.
‘It's always summer and you're walking through fields of daisies.’
Since Christmas his feelings about Keelan were ambivalent.
He was flattered by her interest.
In the desert in which he found himself, her youth and beauty shone like some exotic bloom.
At times he felt tender and protective towards her, but sometimes he surprised himself by the hatred he felt for her, because she was healthy and free and had no need of him.
For her the world was full of young men whose bodies were untainted by disease and these — he persuaded himself — were the ones she really craved, having no care for him at all, except some morbid interest  in a diseased thing, which, presently, she would thrust aside with a disdainful shudder.
Sometimes, when he thought he might die, as Eileen had died, some deep and insatiable curiosity about life and living in him, some craving to take with him a deeper knowledge of women and their essence made him long to lie in love with her, to taste the sweetness of her mystery, to see the world just once from a vantage point where the lost and lonely flesh that is man and woman comes together in a healing synthesis.
An inquest had been held and a verdict of accidental death returned.
It was reported in all the newspapers.
But nowhere was there a mention of the exact circumstances in which they had been found.
Frank was grateful for that, at least.
Votes of sympathy were passed and the matter forgotten.
For a long time he was obsessed by the image of them in bed together.
It floated mockingly through his sleep and came like a mirage between his eyes and the daylight.
He saw them laughing carelessly together, ruttish and brutal in their casual coupling.
He saw their tangled limbs relax and slide into sleep, arms trailing.
He saw the spilled spirits and the creeping flames.
What had been her last thoughts?
Triumph after conquest?
Warm animal feeling of satiety?
Relief at the momentary quieting of a tyrannical appetite?
Disgust and self-loathing?
She would never find now whatever it was she had been looking for from life.
Neither would he, because all he had ever wanted was her love.
He prayed that she would be forgiven for being herself and following her nature.
He had tried to forgive her; there was nothing else he could do.
He prayed he might be forgiven whatever deficiency in him  had contributed to her waywardness.
All his life he had sought her pardon for the failure which she either could not or would not spell out for him.
He raked through their life together, looking for clues.
But nothing presented itself.
Was it some insensitivity in his nature that had failed to respond to the nuances of the relationship, some obtuseness of perception that had prevented him from seeing, as it still prevented him from understanding?
In an effort to distract him, Sister Cooney had encouraged Doctor Staples to draw up a new and exacting regimen of exercises for him which she would supervise herself.
She had him out of bed, touching his toes, bending and swaying with outstretched arms, leaning this way and that, rotating his hips, raising and lowering his shoulders, until his mind was numbed and he obeyed her commands like a robot.
Much of the exercise was done in front of a mirror so that he could see for himself and correct the sag on the right side where his ribs had been removed.
There was always the danger of curvature of the spine.
To correct the curve it was necessary to stretch the concavity and contract the convexity — in furtherance of which he spent a good deal of his time moving across the floor in a peculiar creeping posture, which Doctor Staples referred to as ‘Klapp's crawl’.
He threw himself into the exercises with a hind of despairing frenzy.
If he kept himself occupied, there was less time to think.
Sister Cooney urged him to it.
She was in each morning like a circus trainer to put him through his routine.
She cracked her whip and he responded.
There was something brutal and, at the same time, patient and caring about her single-mindedness.
There was method in her toughness which he recognised and appreciated.
She was pushing his body to the limits of its endurance to divert and ease the strain on his spirit.
When the  exercises finished for the day, he relaxed into numbness, his mind free and floating on a gently rocking tide.
More and more, as the days passed, he returned to that early summer, sealing his mind agaInst what followed.
There was a hind of peace in forgetfulness.
But all the time, he was aware of the shutter in his memory; behind it, monsters prowled.
They were in the office, reviewing charts and assessing progress.
‘Richard Cogley seems to be coming along nicely.’
Doctor Staples lifted his eyes from the chart.
‘We'll send him for another x-ray when he's completed his course of strep.’
‘He's made a remarkable recovery,’ Sister Cooney said.
‘Yes.
Maybe we'll be able to count him as one of our successes yet.’
She opened another chart and handed it to him.
‘What do you think of Frank O'Shea?’
Doctor Staples held the x-ray up to the light.
‘He's quite a lot of muscle to build up there yet.’
‘He's very determined — makes a great effort with the exercises.’
‘Good!’
‘Tragic — about his wife — wasn't it?’
‘Worse even than it appeared,’ Doctor Staples said knowingly.
‘She was a lively piece, from what I hear — flying her kite all over the place.
I believe she and the barman…
‘He raised his eye brows and stopped.
‘I was wondering about that,’ Sister Cooney said thoughtfully.
‘But how can anyone be sure?
‘I have it from the coroner himself.
They were found in…ah…compromising circumstances.’
‘Poor man!’
Sister Cooney said.
‘Does he know?
‘Unfortunately — yes.
He had to be told.’
He lifted his hands in a helpless gesture, then, letting them drop, he picked up the next chart.
‘Did we -by the way-get some communication about that chap, Finn?
‘There is a letter somewhere,’ Sister Cooney searched until she found it and handed it to him.
‘They want to know when we'd have a bed.
It seems he's fit to travel.’
‘I'm in two minds whether we should have him at all.
Fellows like him unsettle other patients.
How do we know he won't discharge himself again after a week?
‘It wasn't the usual hind of thing.’
Sister Cooney had sympathy for Vincent, who, until his departure, had been a model patient.
‘You remember the incident of the girl and Doctor O'Connor-Crowley?’
‘Oh, yes, that…
‘Doctor Staples said vaguely.
‘There's a bed vacant in Ward 4.’
‘I have somebody for that — chap of seventeen.
Finn will have to wait his tum.
Interesting case this one.
Working in a flour mill.
Lung coated with the stuff.
It's essential to get him in straightaway.
Boy called James Reville.
I want him in this evening.
You'll have to shuffle people around and give him a room to himself — isolate him.
It's not TB, you see, but just as deadly for all that.’
February was wet, with gales that howled up the valley and rattled the glass doors leading to the verandah.
The floor-covering near the doors was dulled with damp, like the bloom on a plum.
Because the rain blew in gusts, the doors were usually closed and the glass clouded and wept, and the  world closed in and nothing existed at all except a diseased crew, buffeted and windswept, butting their way through the void.
Yet there was a sealed-in-cosiness when darkness fell early and the lights came on.
The wind fretted and slapped, like the brush of an animal body against the glass.
It beat at the stonework and screamed about projections.
It hammered glass and roof with vicious bursts of hail.
The glass itself was converted into smudged mirrors which enlarged their ambience and distanced them from the storm.
It was the kind of weather Jack Carbery loved, when he could lie for hours, securely wrapped, and sleep — to wake again with the comfortable feeling that a warm meal was near and, after it, a pipe or cigarette and casual conversation with his friends.
There was nothing he had to do to earn it, or nothing to threaten his security, except a too-rapid recovery, which he daily prayed against and which a good God would surely not allow — at least until summer came in and clothed a scarred earth with kindliness.
His chronic disease, which erupted periodically like a benign volcano, was his insurance policy.
He saw the new drugs as a threat to his well-being, and lived in dread of the day when they might be prescribed for him.
It was pleasant to lie and think of other Februaries and see himself abroad at dusk in the fields under a chilling rain, standing in a cart hunched up against the storm, bending and rising and bending again to toss turnips to the streaming cattle, listening to their soft thud in the mud and the straining of the horse as his hooves sucked and sank, the cattle lowing plaintively and the sharp crunch of their scooping teeth.
Then back to the farmyard to untackle and fodder the horse, to strip off his own thatch of soaked sacking, and milk cows by the light of a lantern that swung from a hook in the roof and smelled sharply  in contrast with the milky smell of steaming cows and the less agreeable smell of fresh dung.
Supper at the kitchen table — bread coarsely cut and buttered, with none of the little refinements that were considered necessary for the family, who ate in another room.
His clothes steaming as he bent to light a cigarette from a blazing splinter on the open hearth.
Then out to his bed in a loft over the cowshed, leaving the family to draw in together in a cosy, alien-excluding unit around the flaming and hissing timber, to lie and smoke by the light of a candle and think o better days in the orphanage and wonder in unembittered fashion — for he had been happy there — about the mother who had abandoned him and the even shadowier lover who must have abandoned her.
No one was likely to recommend that a hopeless old chronic like him should be put on the new drugs at this stage, because they were still in short supply and there were many more interesting patients on whom to experiment.
But Jack didn't know that and, even if he had known, it would only have given him a false feeling of security, because the threat from streptomycin, when it came, was not of a hind that he could have imagined or foreseen.
The first week of February had barely passed when Doctor Staples fired a warning shot across his bows.
‘Beds!
Beds!
Beds!’
He bustled in one day, rubbing his hands, a fashion of his when he had something unpleasant on his mind.
‘What am I going to do for beds?
Do you know how many people I have waiting for that bed or yours, Jack?
Carbery looked at him warily, his eyes pleading not to be involved in such dangerous speculation, and shook his head slowly without speaking.
‘Half a dozen, at least.
Isn't that right, Sister?
Sister Cooney looked sympathetically at Jack, but was constrained to nod in agreement.
‘I could empty out this whole ward and fill it before evening with four new patients — four I could help, Jack; four that need help and need it now.’
Jack looked at the blankets and said nothing.
‘It's the new Health Act — with free hospitalisation for infectious diseases,’ the doctor explained to Sister Cooney.
‘It's the new treatment as well.
GPs have cottoned on to it and are clamouring for beds.
They're building new sanatoriums — Ardkeen, Sarsfleld's Court, Merlin Park -but until they're open, the pressure is on.’
He flicked through Jack's chart and snapped it shut abruptly.
‘Put him down for x-ray, Sister, and we'll see.’
When they were back in the office again, Sister Cooney drew the matter down.
‘That poor man has nowhere to go,’ she said.
‘He's no family.
The people he's staying with don't want him.’
‘We're running a sanatorium, not a retirement home,’ Doctor Staples said harshly.
‘Malingering is a luxury we can no longer afford to subsidise.’
‘We can't throw him out in this kind of weather.’
‘No, I suppose not,’ Doctor Staples sighed.
‘Maybe we could fix him up in the county home,’ he said thoughtfully after some reflection.
‘Get on to them, Sister, will you?
Sometimes after the exercises, Sister Cooney stood and talked, while Frank lay back in bed, his breathing like the wind through dry leaves, and a rusty flush on his cheekbones.
Frank was an easy man to talk to.
He listened — at first with a curious air of detachment, as if he was an observer from another civilisation, or someone whose own experience had come to an end, someone  who was waiting to embark on a journey and looked at the world with vacant eyes, his mind already in transit.
Hers was a friendly and comfortable presence and he was grateful to her for it.
he was surprised at himself, at first, for feeling grateful, for being able to feel anything at all .
He was surprised at himself for looking forward to her arrival and the hard, punishing exercises; for feeling anxious, if her coming was delayed; for hoping she would linger a minute afterwards and talk about the weather or some unusual flurry on the corridor.
The first time she brought him flowers — a posy of crocuses in a glass jar — he suddenly and unaccountably wept.
She excused herself hurriedly and left, returning with a great bustle to announce her coming, when she had given him time to compose himself.
He was sitting up, holding the jar in his cupped hands, admiring the delicate curve of the petals.
‘It's a long time since anyone brought me flowers,’ he smiled apologetically.
‘They're nice, aren't they?’
Sister Cooney said.
Then, without a pause, but with a sharp change of tone and inflexion, she was the starched, crisp, efficient Sister.
‘Now, if you'll hop out of bed and slip on your dressing gown, we'll start.’
Vincent had written to tel 1 her that he was coming back.
He wondered how she was and why she wasn't writing.
He was worried about her silence.
It wasn't like her.
He would be coming over by boat and a male nurse would come with him as far as Dún Laoghaire.
He could travel well enough on his own, if only they'd let him.
But that was the way they did things over there— well-meaning but fussy.
She would have to drag herself out of her lethargy and write.
Some patients got others to write for them when they were low, but there was nothing Lily wanted to say to Vincent that she  could ask anyone to write.
She seemed to lack all will or decision.
In the early days after the operation, when she was tightly bound in a many-tailed bandage to which weights were sometimes attached, and with drainage tubes still trailing from her, she had managed to scribble notes to him almost every other day.
Now, more lightly bound and sitting more comfortably in what the doctors called ‘Fowler's position’, she found many reasons for indecision and delay.
The irreversibility of her mutilation lay like a fallen tree across her spirit.
She no longer combed and preened herself.
When the nurses — who, to encourage morale, insisted that every patient, however ill, should wash — came to help her, she submitted with an indifference that alarmed them.
She suffered meekly the humiliations of the bedpan.
Something in her that had, at first, revolted in anger and frustration at her own helplessness, now shrivelled and atrophied.
She would lie for hours — days even, for she had lost all interest in time — in an abstraction of pain, her bruised mind slipping and struggling and relapsing into a slough.
The future, which once had seemed to her a long, grassy vista into distant sunlight, was now a black impenetrable vapour, blowing towards her menacingly, like some poisonous gas, and threatening to envelop her.
She would have to write to Vincent.
His name broke into syllables, fragmented further into letters, and whirled, like flecks of butter in a chum, round and round in her mind.
Round and round, intermittently, through the days it spun, crystallising now and again — before breaking apart once more— into the essence of him, an image, like sudden flashes on a screen, of his diffident smile when they first met, the touch of his hand on her elbow as he guided her to a seat down that summer lane.
What could she say to him except that she felt her life — their life together — slipping away; that whether she survived or slid  wearily from her broken body, there was no longer any prospect of happiness for them; that he should forget her and make his own world without her?
The letter, when she came to write it-painfully, word by word over many days — was quite different to what she had intended.
I love you and that's all I know–all that's worth knowing.
If only we realised in time, we wouldn't waste our lives on trash. why is the best thing in the world tied to the least lasting?
If only I could see you–just once? all our drams, Vincent, where are they?
Our end is like our beginning–we know nothing
She read it over many times, letting her tears fall unchecked on the page.
She hoped Vincent would understand, would draw consolation from the knowledge that her life had not been empty, because her love would live on, wanning with its humanity a cold and, possibly, hostile universe.
Arty was sitting up in bed, his hair shining from a liberal application of something that looked and smelled like perfumed vaseline and came from a jar labelled Easi-Gro.
Over his pyjamas he had put on a new Fair Isle pullover which had been his mother's Christmas present.
He was busily pruning his nails with a pair of scissors and trying to make up his mind about the proper degree of flippancy to adopt for his conversation with Madeleine, when the romance of his afternoon was suddenly eclipsed by the strident voice of his father, grating like a rusty wheel on a dry axle.
‘I was looking for you all over.
Since when did they move you down here?’
‘What are you doing here?
Is it the end of the world or what?’
Arty looked at him without welcome.
‘I was expecting a visitor.’
‘A lady, God help us, by the dolled-up look of you.
Isn't your father visitor enough for you?’
He wiped his drooping moustache with the back of his hand.
Arty had a whiff of his alcoholic breath as he leaned forward to sit.
‘Are you on a booze-up or what? he asked belligerently.  ‘that's what I get for coming to see you and your mother in bed with the flu,’ his father protested indignantly.
‘Is she all right?
There was concern in Arty's voice — a concern that seemed to annoy his father.
‘I was ten times worse myself and got over it on my feet,’ he said in casual dismissal, opening his raincoat and reaching inside for a cigarette.
‘You don't smoke, I suppose.’
He waved the box vaguely in Arty's direction, extracted a cigarette, lit it and immediately started to cough.
‘You'll kill yourself with those things,’ Arty said in a tone in which hope was mingled with disgust.
‘Devil a much you — or anybody else — would care!’
Arty acknowledged by his silence the truth of the remark.
‘Why did they shift you down here?’
His father leaned back and blew smoke towards the ceiling.
Arty looked round at Jack Carbery and the five others who had been moved to the ground floor with him.
‘Shortage of beds,’ he said.
‘This used to be a recreation room.
People are dying to get in here now.
Did you know that?
‘God, you're a gas tum!’
His father's laugh changed quickly into a prolonged cough.
‘Dying to get out of here too,’ Arty said.
‘Don't push your luck,’ his father advised, rubbing his eyes with his finger.
‘Tel 1 us,’ he continued, ‘a butty of mine came in here last week, Sandy Cooper — you know Sandy from Chapel Lane?
Where would I find him?
‘Upstairs,’ Arty said, feeling suddenly cheered.
‘Maybe you'd better go up and see him — now.’
‘No hurry,’ his father said.
‘He won’ the going any place, will he?’
‘Listen,’ Arty pleaded in desperation, ‘will you do me a favour and feck off up to see him I told you I was expecting someone.
Sandy'll be delighted to see you.’
‘That'll be a change from my son, won't it?’ his father chided.
‘Sure, I'll go up to Sandy, but first I want to see this great one you're expecting.’
He raised one end of his moustache in a sardonic grin.
‘It's nobody you'd know,’ Arty sniffed shortly.
‘Nobody I'd know!’ his father mimicked.
‘Is she a black woman or what — you're so ashamed of her?
They both looked up together as the door opened and Madeleine came hesitantly forward.
‘This is her!’
Arty hissed.
‘Now, will you go?’
‘God, you're doing all right for yourself,’ his father's rasping voice filled the ward.
Madeleine stood to look around, then, seeing Arty, smiled and walked towards them.
‘Where'd you pick her up? his father whispered as he stood and raised his hat in a gesture that was too elaborate.
‘Sshhh!’
Arty said, a cloud on one side of his face, while the other turned with a smile to greet Madeleine.
‘Hello!’ he said.
‘Hello, Miss!’
His father nodded agreeably and settled his hat back on his head.
‘Goodbye!’ the dark side of Arty hissed.
‘You'll find your man upstairs.’
His father brushed the chair he had been sitting on and, with a flourish, invited Madeleine to sit down.
He showed no inclination to leave.
‘How are you, Arty?’
Madeleine smiled, then looked in an enquiring way towards his father.
‘This is…my father.
He's just going,’ Arty said ungraciously.
He was twisting his fingers and not at all at ease.
‘Pleased to meet you, Miss.’
His father extended his oil-blackened hand for her to shake.
‘Pleased to meet you, Mr Byrne.
My name's Madeleine.’
She shook his hand firmly and sat down.
There was a pause as they looked at one another and adjusted their minds to the needs of conversation.
Arty's father was the first to speak.
‘What line of business would you be in?
I'm in bicycles myself.’
‘He's a first cousin to Sir Walter Raleigh,’ Arty ventured and laughed nervously.
‘He's a real comedian, this fellow,’ his father appealed to Madeleine, ‘isn't he?’
Madeleine laughed and looked in amusement at Arty.
‘Would you be in the bank or that? his father probed.
‘I'm a telephonist,’ Madeleine said.
‘Give us a ring sometime!’
Arty was getting more and more desperate.
‘On the wireless he should be,’ his father said.
‘Much Binding in the Marsh or something like that.’
‘Don't forget your man upstairs,’ Arty pleaded.
‘Terrible weather, isn't it?’
Madeleine said conversationally.
‘Did you come far?’
Arty's father asked.
‘Your man is in Ward 4,’ Arty prompted.
‘He was enquiring about you.’
‘Tryin, to get rid of me.’
His father looked at Madeleine archly.
‘You'd better mind yourself with this fellow.
Doesn't want his old man around doing gooseberry.’
‘I don't know which of you is the greatest joker,’ Madeleine laughed.
Arty's father stood up and patted his hat lower on his forehead.
Two's company,’ he said.
‘A man knows when he's not wanted.’
‘Any sensible man would,’ Arty said sourly.
His father opened the lid of Arty's sputum mug and dropped the butt of his cigarette inside.
‘I'll see you on the way back.’
‘No need to hurry,’ Arty told him.
He leaned over to catch his father's sleeve and hissed, ‘No feckin' need to come back at all!’
His father ignored him and smiled graciously at Madeleine.
‘On the telephone, eh?
I could never get the hang of them things at all.’
‘You get used to it,’ Madeleine said.
‘We'll be seein' you, then.’
‘Not if we can see you first!’
Arty spat.
At the door his father turned to wink familiarly at Madeleine.
‘Mind what I said, now, girlie,’ he grated in a raucous roar that turned all heads.
‘Your man there is a quare hawk, I'm tellin' you.
Look at him — throwin' his eye up your skirt — and it no time at all since he gave up wettin' the bed!’
Most of the hour Richard spent pacing up and down the corridor, stopping at windows to look out between the buildings at bare trees and transparent hedges.
By the end of February he was on a second hours' exercise, and Sister Cooney, who had watched his restless pacing and had seen that he was bored, found him some light work to do.
‘That library is in a right mess since Jim Kielthy took it over,’ she said.
‘You're a fellow who's fond of books.
How would you like to arrange and classify and catalogue the lot?’
‘I'd love to,’ he said.
‘Good!
I'll fix it for you with Matron.’
The following day she was back with a hard-covered, exercise book and a pot of glue.
‘Everything's arranged.
Your first hour — or as much of it as you care to spend there.
The book is for the catalogue.
The glue is for pasting the various classifications on to the shelves.
Kielthy won't trouble you, by the way.
We've…ah…,’ she smiled, ‘retired him on pension.
Jack Carbery will take on the distribution of books.
Jack's a good careful fallow.
You can explain to him about your system and he'll put the books back where he found them.’
‘Right!’ he said.
‘When do I start?’
‘Now if you like.’
Her smile broadened.
‘I'll have Nurse Lambert take you down in the lift.
Matron says she may give you a hand today — or, indeed, at any time when things are slack on the wards.’
Richard blushed like a schoolboy.
‘I'll send her down to you,’ Sister Cooney laughed.
At the door she could not resist a parting shot.
‘I suppose you could classify her under ‘Romance’.’
There was a skittishness about Sister Cooney lately, he noted.
She was more than usually cheerful.
He wondered if it was the promise of spring.
‘hike all nurses, you're a martinet at heart,’ Frank gasped.
He stopped swinging his arms and stood with hands on hips, looking at her, his head and shoulders heaving.
He sat down on the bed and let his arms sag.
‘Thanks, Sister — for the push and all.
I needed it.’
He felt grateful to her for dragging him out of the pit and back into the daylight.
It was a drab light and there was no great cheer in it, but it was, at least, better than the dark.
He joined his hands and sat looking down at them, watching his thumbs circle each other like wary combatants.
‘There's something I'd like to tell you,’ he began slowly, ‘That is, if you wouldn't think it an intrusion.’
‘You don't have to tell me anything.’
Sister Cooney sensed that he was about to confide something that he might later regret.
Patients — under the stress of emotion — sometimes did that.
‘It wasn't much of a marriage, you know,’ he said after a while.
‘Are you sure you want to talk about it?’
‘That made it worse, you see.
There was nothing to hold on to.
You have more to reproach yourself with.
You feel more guilt.
You think of all the things you might have done and didn't.
You feel like a climber who unties the rope when he finds it irksome and, because of your carelessness, someone behind slips and falls to his death.’
‘Frank,’ Sister Cooney said quietly, ‘I know all about your wife's death.’
He raised his hand to his mouth in a gesture of dismay and held it suspended there a few inches from his face.
‘All?’ he whispered.
‘All.’
‘About herself and…
O'Gorman…too?’
‘Yes.
So you know and I know that you, of all people, have nothing to feel guilty about.’
Frank covered his face with his hands and sat rocking himself backwards and forwards, like a child seeking comfort in a healing rhythm.
‘Who else knows? he asked.
‘Doctor Staples — no one else.’
He lowered his hands and looked at her.
‘I'm glad you know.
I wanted to tell you.’
He gestured helplessly — an awkward, futile action without grace in it.
‘You mustn't think badly of her, though,’ he added.
‘No — and you mustn't ever again think badly of yourself.’
‘You see, I knew her.’
Frank allowed his tears to flow unchecked.
‘Nobody else did.
Nobody else at all.’
There were fears that the chronic empyema, which the thoracoplasty had been expected to cure, would recur on the other side.
Lily had experienced pain there and her temperature fluctuated  wildly.
Doctor Staples had examined her carefully, then called for cannula and trocar and performer the aspiration that she had been assured would never again be necessary.
He drew off some fluid and relieved the pressure, then went back to the office, where he shook his head gloomily as he pored over the report that had come back with her from Seapark.
If the thing persisted, her only remaining lung would collapse under a bag of pus and she would die, because she could no longer breathe.
Lily lay in mild shock afterwards, while nurses fussed about her with hot-water bottles and held a cup of strongly sweetened tea for her to sip.
Her mind was capable of thinking of nothing at all.
She felt battered into numbness by the sustained assault on her diminishing reserves.
She felt her spirit shrivel in her, withdrawing in alarm from the coldness of her extremities.
Her eyes were closed against the glare of lights overhead, but still their dazzle came through.
It occurred to her hazily that her own condition was like that of a bulb she had once seen when the power had been suddenly cut down and the light had dimmed to the faintest red glow in the filament.
The library was a comfortable brown room with tall windows to floor level and doors opening on to the terrace with its crumbling balustrade and ornamental urns.
The books were housed in mahogany bookcases which covered the walls from floor to ceiling.
In the centre of one wall there was a Palladian mantelpiece in grey marble and above it a shield, bearing the coat of arms of the Challoner family.
The room had one long table with half a dozen chairs ranged around it.
The carpet was a faded red.
The floor at the edge was stained a dark oak.
A few cane chairs with bright cushions stood near the windows, whose heavy drapes matched the carpeting.
To open the door and step inside was to leave the atmosphere of a hospital.
This, and the musty smell of books, was its chief attraction for Richard.
On the shelves, the books themselves were in a chaotic jumble, stacked in piles, or stuffed in, spine first.
The disorder pleased hIm.
There would be hours of satisfying work in sorting and rearranging.
‘Did you ever see such a mess!’
Keelan laughed.
‘Where on earth are we going to start?’
‘We'll clear one shelf onto the table here, and then we'll see.’
‘We may as well start at the top, then.’
She dragged over a  stepladder, climbed it, and began to hand him books.
When the shelf was cleared, she stepped down and asked, ‘Now, what?
‘We'll make a rough division into fiction and nonfiction for a start,’ he said.
‘We can subdivide later.’
They sorted through the books and divided them into two lots.
Then they replaced the nonfiction temporarily, as the volumes came to hand, and started on the second half.
The sight of her body, poised above him as she stretched and leaned, distracted him, and he stood to watch her, until she turned with a questioning half-smile to hand down another bundle.
‘Perhaps you've had enough for today?’
Keelan was suddenly gone and Nurse Lambert was in her place.
‘You sit there.
I'll put the nonfiction back with the rest.
We can leave the fiction on the table until tomorrow.’
On the way up in the lift she was herself again and kissed him hurriedly between floors.
But it was Nurse Lambert who stepped briskly out of the lift and escorted him to his door.
He was not sure which he wanted her to be and was still puzzling about it next day when she called to take him down.
She was a pleasant girl, but he didn't really know her.
He felt now that it was impossible to know other people until one saw how they reacted in extremity or under pressure.
He had known very little about himself until he was face to face with death.
Eileen's death had made the lot of them aware of depths in themselves and in each other that they had not known of before.
‘Are you going back to university?’
Keelan asked as they worked.
‘You're talking about a world that seems light years from here.
I can't even begin to think about it.’
He walked over to the window and tapped on the glass.
‘I'm a goldfish in a bowl,’ he said.
‘That may or may not be reality out there.
I don't know any  more.
The whole thing may be an illusion.
Do you realise I haven't walked on grass for almost a year?
‘It's still the same grass.’
‘But I'm not the same person.
I don't mean just physically — that, too, of course.
I'll never be the same again,’
‘Why not?’
‘Because so many things that seemed important aren't important any more.’
What was important now?
People, friends, someone to love — and beyond that nothing at all.
Frank folded the brief letter from his solicitor and put it back into its envelope, before tossing it negligently aside.
‘That's that!’ he said with an expansive feeling of well-being.
‘As of Friday last, I am without house or home — and I never felt better.’
Sister Cooney looked at him with a polite, questioning smile and waited for him to continue or change the subject, as he thought fit.
‘I've sold out, lock, stock, and barrel — particularly barrel — because I hated that pub,’ he explained.
‘It's something I always wanted to do.’
‘You've sold the lot?’
‘The pub, the land, everything!’
‘But where will you live?
‘Hotel, guesthouse, somewhere…‘he said vaguely.
‘Anywhere — as long as it's not Moyalla.
I'm tired of country villages where everybody lives in everybody else's pocket.’
‘What about your job?’
‘Time enough to worry about that.
I could always retire on disablement pension, find some quiet town, a town on a river, where there'd be some fishing.
I might buy a little business, maybe a newsagency — pipes, tobacco, a few books, stationery, fishing tackle.
There'd be time to read, have a chat with people, walk in the sun, make a new life.’
…
I could have belted him with a bicycle chain.
What's the use in having ould fellows, when you don't need them any more?
If they had any understanding or decency in them, they'd die and leave you in peace.
Mothers are all right, I suppose, you'd miss them fussing about the place, but ould fellows are like that hind tits of a cow–no good for use or ornament.
all they ever do id booze and belch and kick up a stink and take the best seat at the fire.
There ought to be a law against them.
Madeleine said she didn't mind, but you could see his lordship was going down like a dose of castor oil.
Still, she didn't puke outright and that's something.
But the afternoon was done for.
She's a grand girl, though.
She's coming again soon.
About Lily, all I know is that she's not well.
She hasn't been for a long time.
But don't worry.
The news that you're coming soon will lift her out of it.
Mrs Moore sat with Lily's pale hand in hers and talked with desperate gaiety about the coming of spring.
What she did not say — what she could not say — was that the cold high days with their lengthening light terrified her.
Their brittle and unsettling promise had already crept into the dark comers of her house and laid bare its emptiness.
Winter had been a huddle of darkness and hoPe, but now spring laid its probing finger on the hidden dust and called for recognition and ruthless change.
Already it was whispering at the roots of grass, inciting it to rise, breathing on sheltered primroses, preaching its false gospel of resurrection and renewal, while underneath, the rot continued, the trampled snail returned to clay and beauty drew sustenance from a grave.
She looked at Lily's shrunk and sanded face, abstracted on  some pinnacle of pain, and saw it lanced by the fierce thrust of grass and sucked dry by the brutal assault of flowers.
She clasped her daughter's hand in despair, as if she would pull her back from the falsely-beckoning light.
The faint pulse of Lily's wrist under her fingers was a knife-twist in her heart.
‘Don't give in, love!’ she whispered fiercely.
‘Don't give in!’
Lily's hand fluttered negatively in her own and a harrowed smile, fleeting as a wind's breath, stirred her lips and then they stretched back again into a tense, bloodless rictus.
Mrs Moore hadn't understood much of what Sister Duggan had told her about the recurrence of fluid and the aspiration that was again necessary.
But she understood well enough that her daughter's life was slipping away.
She sat on the bed, as on the sand of some ebb sea, surrounded by a vast loneliness.
Early March with crows tumbling and swooping about the verandah after flung crusts, scraping the air in hoarse conflict.
Jack Carbery, fully dressed, sat on a chair beside his bed, looking up at them.
The world, he thought, was a competitive place and the weakest went without.
His cardboard suitcase lay ready, and he looked stiff and awkward in his shiny suit of blue serge and clumsily knotted tie.
He watched as a homemaker, winging high, dropped its bundle of thin twigs and pushed itself into a steep dive to join the scramble.
At half-ten the ambulance would arrive to bring him to the county home.
He took out of his waistcoat pocket a large watch which he had bought years before from a cheap-Jack at a fair.
It was a quarter past.
The watch was reliable.
It kept good time.
He had paid ten shillings for it.
It was the kind of thing a man might pass on to his son some day — if he had a son.
He noticed a ragged old crow fall away from the raucous  throng and glide to the ground.
It stood about patiently until a crust dropped, then approached it with a sideways hopping motion and began to tear it.
The old and the weak had to counter strength with cunning.
Jack stroked the watch affectionately with his finger and returned it to his pocket.
Its strong beat had been a friend beside his ear at night as he lay thinking, or when he woke to have a quiet smoke in the darkness.
With his few belongings it was home to him wherever he went.
Its stopping would be like a death in the family.
Doctor Staples had got him a place in the county home.
There was a little work to do, fetching and carrying about the kitchens, for which he would get ten shillings a week.
It would be enough to keep his pipe pleasantly burning.
More crusts fell from the vicious scramble overhead.
The old crow selected the largest one and dragged it to safety, out of the way of a pair of young birds chasing them down.
He would get to know the cook and ingratiate himself by being agreeable and doing her favours.
It was the best way to make a snug billet for himself.
There was nothing to be got from being disagreeable or testy.
It would be important to be on the right side of the nuns too.
A punctilious attention to prayers and strict religious observance would win their indulgence.
There was a good living to be had for a shrewd man in an institution.
He was best to be free of the humiliations and the uncertainties of the farm.
Patients were flocking in for the new treatment.
He no longer resented the loss of his bed.
The future was more secure than he had ever dreamed possible.
He would be back from time to time, but never again as a mendicant.
His illness would stand to him in the other place too.
With his history, no great physical demands could be made on him.
When the ambulance arrived, Sister Cooney came down to see him off.
‘Well, Jack, how do you feel about your new home?
‘Fine, Sister, fine!
God is good.
He never closes one door but he opens another.’
He lifted his suitcase, which was light enough, and held out his hand.
Sister Cooney took it and shook it warmly.
‘They'll look after you well there,’ she smiled.
‘If they don't, let us know and we'll get on their track.’
She accompanied him out to the ambulance and closed the door behind him.
As it slid down the avenue the old crow, which had risen and was circling warily, dropped down again to its crust.
Sister Cooney stood and watched it in mild amusement, before turning and walking thoughtfully inside.
‘Well, well, well!’
Frank laughed.
‘I never knew this Kielthy character was an atheist.’
‘What makes you think he is?’
Richard laid an armful of books on the table and strolled over to where Frank was sorting through a shelf.
Frank drew out a heavy copy of the Douay Bible and held it up.
‘Who else would put this under fiction?’
He brought the Bible over to the table and sat down.
It was pleasant to be among books again.
He liked their feel and smell.
It had been Sister Cooney's idea to take him down to help in the library.
He was on an hour now and making good progress.
Cogley was a nice quiet chap and they got on very well together.
‘Have you seen his censored list?’
Richard asked.
‘I found them wrapped in a brown-paper parcel with ‘Dirty Books’ scrawled on the outside with a purple pencil.’
‘What kind of books did the learned Jim censor?’
Frank smiled.
‘Would you believe,The Way of All Flesh ?
‘The title bothered him, I suppose,’ Frank laughed.
Light splayed from his glasses as he looked up, glasses that  brought into the room high-scudding clouds and an airy scrawl of branches.
‘What was the thora like?
Richard asked suddenly, impelled by the curiosity that drives people to stare at and question the survivors of some calamity.
Frank rubbed his cheek thoughtfully with the heel of his fist before replying.
‘Actually,’ he said, ‘it's like so many things in life — something you go through with once, because you have to.
But you'd die rather than face it again.’
‘Who's talking of dying on a fine day like this?’
They looked up to find Sister Cooney standing there.
There was something youthful and springlike about her crisp, starched stance.
She glanced at the book-laden table and at the general disarray.
‘I'll have to send for Jim Kielthy to clear up this mess,’ she laughed.
‘I might have guessed that too many cooks…‘
‘Actually, what you're looking at is creative disorder,’ Frank protested lazily.
‘We've been making great progress.’
‘I can see that!’
There was some nuance of intimacy in her tone that made Richard look up in surprise and then look at Frank.
What he saw surprised him even more.
It seemed to him that he had intercepted some secret communication between them.
Sister Cooney picked up a pile of books and began to replace them on the shelves.
‘Enough for today,’ she said.
‘Any more progress like this and we'll be back where we started.’
She tumed to Richard, ‘Oh, that reminds me,’ she said.
‘I've some good news for you.
Doctor Staples says you may take a turn on the walks from now on.
Half an hour will be enough to start with.
You may take a stroll before you go up, if you wish.
Frank and myself will put the rest of these back.’
Richard looked out at the sun and the trees with a quickening heart.
For so long he had wondered if he would ever walk abroad  again.
Sister Cooney opened the French windows and he felt the air sweet on his face.
‘Half an hour and no more,’ she said.
‘And when you come in, take the lift back up.
You're in no condition yet to tackle the stairs.’
It was strange walking out after so long.
It was like entering a new element.
The free play of air around him defined and set the limits of his body in a way that he had completely forgotten.
The exposure was a little frightening at first and instinctively he kept close to walls.
Stepping off the concrete path onto gravel was a new sensation and he felt himself slide and stumble.
The gravel came up, hard and irregular, through the soles of his slippers.
Walking on it safely was a skill he would have to relearn.
He stepped back onto the concrete and came round to the front of the building where the flowering cherries were just coming into bud on the lawn.
He stood and looked at them sway, feeling a unity with them as his body swayed to the same light breeze.
A desire to touch them, to feel the smooth hardness of living wood again, brought him across the tarmacadam to the grass, which felt spongy and cool under him.
There was a sensuousness about it that filled him with a desire to run shouting across it, to roll in it, to bury his face in it and sniff life out of its roots, to draw up his childhood from the green stems, to lie supine and shade his eyes from the sun and dream himself back into nature.
He had forgotten how things smelled.
He pulled a fistful of grass and crushed it to his face.
He sniffed at the warm bark of the cherries.
He punctured the skin with his nail and tasted the sap.
He chewed ribs of grass and swallowed green saliva.
Out on the path again, he plucked and crushed a bay leaf and retired into the fragrance of his cupped hands.
Wherever he walked, spring came at him with a rush, overwhelming him with sensation.
He  felt like an infant staggering uncertainly out of doors for the first time into the infinitude of the universe.
At the decaying gate-lodge the ambulance stopped and Vincent got out.
It was the last of several stops on the way down from Dún Laoghaire.
His stomach still felt queasy and he was grateful for the fresh air.
He leaned against the door of the ambulance and drew in the mossed and woody scent of trees.
The call of rooks was loud in the pillared light, a call that was answered antiphonally, like receding echoes, from many quarters.
The sun had brilliance but no heat.
Somewhere near was the gurgle and trickle of water.
‘All sight if I walk up a bit? he called to Marty, who was leaning forward with his elbow on the wheel and his open palm supporting his chin.
‘As far as the last bend,’ Marty said.
‘You're not supposed to be out.
You wouldn't want to get me into trouble, would you?’
‘Just to the bend — to clear my head.
It's the last I'll see of the outside for a long time.’
He turned and walked slowly up the avenue.
His legs were weak.
There was no elasticity in them and nothing at all of the swelling sap, rising around him.
‘How bad it would be,’ Marty told himself callously as he watched him go, ‘to have your bed and your bellyful and no worries at all!’
He had been up since five to meet the boat from which he was being exploited.
Vincent stood and wiped cold sweat from his forehead.
Twigs fell among the trees as the rooks rowed and ranted.
He pulled a sticky brown bud from a drooping chestnut and peeled it naked.
He held it to his nose and smelled its furry warmth, then spun it away from him with a twinge of regret at having torn it so  wantonly.
He was barely aware of the feeling.
It was no more than a shadow on his deepening melancholy.
Out of the same melancholy he grabbed irrationally at a whole branch, wrenched it off and tossed it among the trees.
In some frustrated way he felt in himself a deep affront at the prodigality and profuseness of life around him.
The rooks in their frenzy of building were an affront too.
There was nothing for him but a painful irony in their raucous clamour.
They were slaves of their own chemistry, following a blind biological urge.
What was in store for them and their young but the fox's maw, the poisoned grain and the angry scatter-shot of the farmer's gun?
Above him he heard the purr of engines, the slow, measured movement of cars in procession.
Another funeral.
He stood aside and leaned his back against the wire paling as the hearse came round the comer.
Whose turn was it this time?
He wondered if it was anyone he knew.
Look, he wanted to shout at the tumbling rooks, here is the only certain reality.
How efficient the place was — a model clearing house for death, turning out its yearly quota of corpses.
He blessed himself and dropped his eyes as the hearse passed.
There was a wreath of laurel, intertwined with daffodils, on the coffin.
People were walking after it — a young man about his own age with blank, staring face, a sobbing woman supported by her husband, and a girl, whose expression, as she passed, startled him.
It was some young person in the coffin — son or daughter snatched prematurely.
The girl's expression, her appearance, the set of her head?
He stepped out to have a better look.
The sudden movement brought him into the path of a mourner, whose elbow struck him a glancing blow and sent him reeling.
The man caught his arm and steadied him.
‘Are you all right?’
‘I thought I recognised somebody there,’ Vincent said.
‘Whose funeral is it?
‘A neighbour of mine,’ the man said.
‘Nice little girl she
Vincent felt his stomach heave with apprehension.
‘What was her name?’
‘Gold bless us and save us!’ the man said.
‘There's a power of young people after coming dead out of that place above.’
‘Her name?
Vincent pleaded.
The man looked at him with a kindly face.
He was short and middle aged and carried his cloth cap in his hand.
‘A daughter of Paddy Moore of the Com Market.
That's who she was.’
‘Lily!’
Vincent cried.
‘Yes, Lily,’ the man said.
Vincent turned away and staggered to the wire and hung limp across it, his body trembling.
He heard with awful clarity, above the shuffle of feet and the soft roaring of cars, the croak and caw of rooks and their tattered scuffling overhead.
Lily!
The two of them holding hands in a summer lane.
The scent of her hair in the darkness.
Lily dead!
All our dreams, Vincent, where are they?
‘She must not be dead,’ he shouted mutely.
‘If Lily is dead, there's nothing left at all.’
He pulled himself up and turned and ran down the avenue after her corps, past slow-moving cars, whose occupants stared at him curiously.
He brushed aside new-bursting buds that slapped at his face, until he stood by the rust-eaten iron gates, watching the hearse accelerate down the road.
The cars passed out, one by one, and sped after it.
‘Hey!’
Marty called from the ambulance.
‘Get in.’
Vincent walked out into the middle of the road and stood  there, his eyes fixed on the distant comer around which the hearse had disappeared.
A car stopped beside him and a friendly voice called, ‘Going to the funeral?
Vincent stared at the man blankly.
‘Are you coming or not?
The man was getting impatient.
Behind him, cars were beginning to stop.
Vincent looked at him, as if seeing him for the first time.
‘The funeral,’ the man said again.
‘Do you want a lift?
He opened the door and waited.
as if in a trance, Vincent got in and sat down beside him.
The man let out the clutch and the car moved off.
The pale fire of spring daffodils warmed the room where Frank sat and read.
Now and again he looked up from his book, stared at them intently and smiled.
Even when he bent his head to the page, they came between him and the words.
Their light, like the tail of a comet, spread spectacularly across his mind.
After a while, he laid his book aside and sat there, his head tilted back, his thoughts adrift.
Soon he would be going out to start a new life.
It was an unexpected bonus for a man of fifty-one.
It would be foolish to expect too much after his experience, but there was an excitement in it, all the same.
He had cut himself loose from the past and had good hopes of making a comfortable landfall.
What was comfort only a roof over your head, a full belly, a fire, books to read and nothing on your mind?
Health too, of course.
‘You remember our last conversation here?
Doctor Staples smiled.
‘That was several lifetimes ago,’ Frank said, ‘But I remember.’
He was seated again in Doctor Staples's office, watching the doctor examined his x-ray on an illuminated screen.
‘I told you then your chances were good.
I can now tell you that you have exceeded our expectations,’ the doctor said.
‘You consider it a success, then?
‘Certainly I do.
You've done particularly w ell at the exercises.’
‘It was one hell of a job, then,’ Frank said, remembering the agony of the early days.
‘Was, is and will be,’ Doctor Staples reminded him.
‘It's something you'll have to continue for the rest of your life.
To ease off at any stage would undo all the good work.’
‘I don't mind it now.
I've got used to it.
I rather like the whole penitential routine.’
‘That's the spirit!
Now, the next thing to talk about is when we can let you go.’
He had been there so long, had been so doubtful — and, until recently, so indifferent — about seeing the outside again that the mention of discharge took him by surprise.
‘You mean I may go soon?’
‘Yes, in a week or two.
We'll have another x-ray, do some final tests and let you off.
You'll have to report to the clinic regularly, of course— every week for a while and then once a month.
If all goes well, you may be able to go back to school when the new year starts in the autumn.
How do you feel about that?
‘I'll have to think about it,’ Frank said vaguely.
He had practically made up his mind that he would never go back — certainly not to Moyalla and probably not to teaching.
But there was no point in bothering Doctor Staples with the complexities of his private life.
‘What I mean is you should have a reasonably clean bill of health by then,’ Doctor Staples said.
He was tired of teaching, had already given too much of his life to it.
He was tired of respectability, tired of the constant tug-of-war to pull the lively minds of children out of the fields and hedges, where wisdom and philosophy began, into the abstractions of formal learning.
Too often he  had seen education serve no better purpose than to impose limits of caution and doubt on vision and imagination.
Far too often the village teacher was expected to be the creature of his employer, the school manager.
His public utterances were examined for heresy, his private life combed for scandal.
The good teacher was a safe man who spoke in mealy-mouthed platitudes, steeped himself in orthodoxy, made obeisance to all the right quarters, allowed his intellect and judgement to fossilise in the interests of…what?
His own security — a quiet, mindless life.
‘Where will you go?’
Sister Cooney asked.
‘Into town for a bit.
I'll get a room somewhere: hotel, guesthouse.
What do you think?
‘Guesthouse, maybe -less noise and you'd get more attention.
What you need is rest and good food.’
‘Guesthouse, then,’ Frank assented cheerfully.
‘Would you like me to make enquiries?’
‘If it wouldn't be too much trouble.’
It was no trouble at all.
Within a few days, she was back with news of a suitable place.
She had found a retired garda sergeant and his wife, whose family had grown and scattered, leaving them with a large house and room to spare.
They could offer him full board with a bedroom and sitting room on the ground floor for three pounds a week.
‘It would be like having a flat of your own without the bother of preparing meals.’
‘Just what the doctor ordered,’ Frank said.
‘Mrs Keane is a comfortable, homely person.
I think you'll like her.
The sergeant is easy-going.
He likes fishing.
Books too — they've a great lot of books.’
‘Anyone who likes fishing and books is all right with me.’
It sounded a pleasant, civilised household to settle in until he  had time to look around him and decide about the future.
So, everything had been arranged.
‘Will you come and visit me?’
Frank asked tentatively.
‘Are you just being polite, now, or do you mean that?’
Sister Cooney looked at him closely.
‘Of course I mean it.
Otherwise I wouldn't ask.’
‘Patients sometimes feel under an obligation,’ she explained, ‘and then, when the time comes, they regret it.’
‘I'm not like that at all.
You should know that.’
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘I think I do.’
‘You'll come, then?
‘I'd be delighted to.’
‘I'll tell you what we'll do.’
Frank took off his glasses and began to polish them in the sheet with enthusiasm.
‘On your first evening off, we'll go out and have a meal -just a little celebration.
How about that?
‘A little celebration would do you good,’ Sister Cooney said, hiding her pleasure.
‘Lazarus rising from the dead and all that?’
Frank laughed.
Arty sat in sombre mood, thinking of death.
Vincent had not tumed up and he wondered what he could possibly say to him when — or if — he did.
Death made little sense at the best of times.
Death of the young made no sense at all.
He sometimes wondered about his own death, but beyond thinking of himself on some long-distance collision course with annihilation, he could not imagine it.
He had seen so many people die.
At first it had been harrowing, but he had grown used to it.
It was possible to view the death of others in a detached way, even — if one were honest — to take pleasure in it.
There was the satisfaction of being a survivor, the morbid distinction of being first about with the news.
it made eating and doing a little more exciting to know  that someone else had just ceased doing these basic human things for ever.
He looked up as Phil strolled in, and the sight of him, standing there so ludicrously, so needlessly alive, made his mind veer like a weather vane in a high wind to a more frivolous way of thinking.
Phil, with his soft, sprawling face, looked like an excrescence — an unhealthy toadstool, swelling with yeasty exuberance out of decayed wood.
‘Hey, Phil,’ he called, ‘did you ever think of dying at all?
Phil looked at him with bulging horror and searched around the metallic ward for some wood to touch, drumming his fingers at last in relief on the top of the locker.
‘It's not right to be joking about things like that,’ he said.
He wondered if the effects of ‘the electric’ were wearing off and Byrne was going out of his mind again.
‘It'll come one day and you'd be as well to be prepared.’
‘I trusts in God,’ Phil said.
‘What more can I do?’
‘Make your will.
I'm going to make mine.
Will you witness it for me?
‘It's not lucky to make a will.
Don't you know that?’
‘We'll make two,’ Arty said, reaching for some writing paper.
‘Tell you what, Phil, I'll leave all I have to you, if you leave me your entire estate.’
‘What estate?
‘Your tenements and hereditaments, as the lawyers say, your pleasure gardens, your fishing rights and the family jewels.’
‘Quit acting the cod, will you!’
Phil said crossly.
‘If that's the way you take it,’ Arty said, ‘I'll just have to leave it all to the ould fellow.’
‘What have you to leave to anybody?
Phil sneered.
Arty whistled cheerfully as he pretended to write.
‘Last will and testament of Arthur Byrne, deceased…‘
‘It's not right, I tell you,’ Phil said.
‘To my revered father, whose massive intellect has been a formative influence from my tenderest years, I leave, will and bequeath…‘
‘It's not natural for a son to be makin' fun of his father,’ Phil protested.
‘That's where you're wrong, Phil ould son!’
Arty laid down his pen and geared himself up for argument.
‘It's the most natural thing in the world.
I read an article in Readers Digest about this very clever fallow called Freud.
Do you know what he said about fathers and sons?’
‘Some daft fellow, I suppose,’ Phil scoffed.
Mow would I know what he said?
‘He said it was natural for every son to want to kill his father and marry his mother.’
Phil blessed himself quickly before speaking again.
‘The dirty Communist!’ he cried, his voice trembling with shock.
‘That class o’ talk is against the Catholic Church — against all the laws o' God and man.
That book should be banned.
People who say things like that should be locked up.’
‘Freud was a genius,’ Arty said, ‘The cleverest man of his day.’
‘He was a blackguard and no Catholic, whatever else he was!’
Phil said.
He stood up to indicate thai the conversation was at an end and that he had no wish to be involved as a partner in such blasphemous and heretical talk.
When he had gone, Arty, smiling to himself at what he considered a victory, got out of bed and set off for the bathroom to wash his hair.
He took with him a towel and a bag, tied at the neck with a drawstring, a bag that bulged with jars and bottles, containing shampoos and pomades and lotions.
He whistled a tune as he strolled down the corridor.
Baldness, he told himself — and smiled at his own joke — was a receding problem.
Madeleine seemed to like him as he was, so why should he worry about something that wasn't important any more?
It was spring outside.
Sunlight lay on the grass.
He stood at a window and looked down over the trees, where rooks were crossing sticks in a light sway of air.
Like them, he was a survivor.
It was possible to think of a future away from this place.
EPILOGUE
Green thickened the hedges again.
Brown husks littered the paths under trees.
High above, the wind played a delicate tune through crumpled foliage.
Spring roared like fire through the grass.
It was a year since he had come up this steep, winding avenue.
He might have died — there was so little of his old self left.
He would be going out soon, but an umbilical cord would still tie him to this house of death.
Once a fortnight, he would come up the avenue and round that last bend and — with a tightening in his bowels — see it there, becalmed in the grass.
The spirits of Eileen and the Commander and of all who had died there, would crowd about him more densely than the blown petals of the flowering cherries.
Then voices would cry in the falling sigh of wind around its gables.
An old Ford, with straight back and matchbox rear window, laboured up the avenue.
He stood aside to let it pass.
In the back seat a thin face stared ahead.
It might have been himself a year ago.
When he came within sight of the front door, the car was parked outside and two men helping a third up the steps.
The young man leaned heavily on them, his head sagging loosely.
At the door Nurse Lambert stood waiting with a  wheelchair — crisp, starched, bright as the April sunlight.
She waved to him, before turning and wheeling her patient indoors.
The young man had seemed vaguely familiar.
He wondered what hIs condition was and whether he would survive.
Would he pull through and, like himself, fall in love — or imagine he was falling in love — with his nurse?
He wondered if falling in love with the nurse wasn't a necessary stage of convalescence.
Out here in the open, with the world large around him and light beckoning from beyond the horizon, it was not easy to fit Keelan into whatever lay ahead for him.
Inside it had been different.
With the universe narrowed to the four walls and death abroad in the corridor, she was womankind — the other half of reality.
Not to know her, not to love her (at the very least, not to want to love her) was to deny oneself the totality of experience.
Could he still love her when she had ceased to be a symbol and walked in the lesser light of her own individuality?
It was something that he would have to find out.
When he went upstairs, she was waiting for him.
‘You look different in your clothes,’ she said, ‘almost like a stranger.’
‘You'd look different out of uniform.
You'd be almost a stranger too.’
‘We'd both be strangers, then, if we met outside?
‘Maybe we would.
I don't know.’
‘You'll be away home in a short while.’
‘I'll be back for refills.’
‘They're always different when they come back,’ Keelan said.
‘Things look different from the outside.’
‘I've been wondering about that,’ he said.
‘It's the way of the world,’ she said with a wry smile.
There was something sad about the exchange — and a finality that he, by no means, approved of or desired.
There was still the possibility that when they did meet outside, it would be a  beginning, and not the end that neither wished for, but both half-expected.
‘Time will tell,’ he said.
‘Whatever happens when you go out,’ she said after a silence, ‘you must mind your health.
Don't be like poor Vincent.
You saw him coming in, didn't you?’
‘So, that's who it was!’ he exclaimed.
‘I thought he looked familiar.’
‘Poor fellow!’ she said.
‘He's in a bad way.’
When she left him, he stood at the window for a long time, looking out over the newly-awakened countryside.
Below him in the valley, the river slid by greening banks, the infinity of space mirrored on its smooth surface.
He looked upwards.
Clouds uncoiled from the south-west with unhurried grace.
Above and beyond, the depths receded endlessly, mystery layered beyond mystery for ever.