

Lebanon leader builds cabinet.
By Reuter in Beirut
LEBANON'S new President, Mr Rene Muawad, yesterday worked to weld old militia foes into a cabinet to govern his divided country while fellow Christians, demonstrating against him, shut half of Beirut.
Supporters of General Michel Aoun, staged noisy street protests in the Christian enclave.
About 1,000 marched on the French embassy to denounce support for the Arab peace plan which brought Mr Muawad to power on Sunday.
‘France has deceived us,’ one poster said.
Another charged that Lebanon's Christians had been let down by President Franois Mitterrand.
Gen Aoun rejected the Arab peace pact for failing to ensure a clear, rapid timetable for the withdrawal of Syria's 33,000 troops from Lebanon.
Mr Muawad, a pro-Syrian Maronite Christian, met deputies in the village of Ehden in the Syrian-controlled north to consult them about forming a cabinet, due to be announced this week.
Analysts said Mr Muawad faced the task of uniting militia leaders who have been fighting each other for 14 years.
Mr Muawad has said nothing about the composition of his cabinet, but is expected to include Mr Selim el-Hoss, Prime Minister in a rival administration to Gen Aoun.
The anger expressed in East Beirut reflected a sense of betrayal in the Christian camp.
About half the deputies who defied Gen Aoun's attempts to block the presidential election are Christians like Mr Muawad.
Lebanon's presidential palace in Ba'abda is held by Gen Aoun, so Mr Muawad was expected to base the government in Syrian-held West Beirut.
Mr Muawad was quoted in the Syrian daily, al-Thawara, as saying he would work to promote ties with Syria.
‘Although Lebanon and Syria are two countries they are one people of the nation…which was partitioned by colonialism.’
PAGE
Pentagon could axe electronic warfare system.
By Mark Tran in Washington
PENTAGON budget officials are contemplating cancellation of a hi-tech joint Navy-Air Force electronic jamming system scheduled to be fitted in more than 2,000 new fighter and attack planes.
They blame budgetary pressures, persistent teething problems, and cost overruns.
The Airborne Self-Protection Jammer was described by the world's top electronics experts in the 1988-89 edition of Jane's Avionics as possibly the ‘most significant US electronic warfare system in the current decade.’
But under intense congressional pressure the Defence Department says that it will kill the programme next year unless the services manage to iron out serious flaws.
The electronic jammer programme is at least four years behind schedule and may cost at least $1 billion more than estimated, according to one Pentagon report.
Still, the Pentagon has yet to bite the bullet and recently awarded $419 million in contracts to Westinghouse and ITT Avionics Division, which have developed the system, to build the first 100 production models for installation in the aircraft.
After 13 years of development the latest flight tests showed that the system, which costs an estimated $9 billion, was ‘marginally operationally effective and marginally operationally suitable,’ according to a recent declassifed navy report.
Defence experts say the services in their perennial pursuit of hi-tech gadgetry have once again dug a hole for themselves.
‘These systems work well if they know the parameters of Soviet radar very well.
On the other hand they can fail catastrophically.
Simpler systems don't attempt as much, but are not going to fail so badly,’ said an analyst with the Centre for Defence Information, Mr Steve Kosiak.
Tests of the ASJP, to be installed on new models of the F-18, F-16, and F-14 fighters and the AV-8B Harrier, have been disappointing.
They reveal that the system has problems detecting, identifying, or jamming some enemy radars already in existence for decades.
The jammers, at a cost of $3.5 million per plane, are designed to identify radars, single out the most dangerous ones and then transmit electronic signals to deceive or interfere with the radars of the hostile air defence weapons.
The poor results have led to rifts within the Pentagon between military programme chiefs who want to persevere with ASJP and budget officials who want to cut losses now.
Current problems with avionics systems also threaten to seriously undermine the effectiveness of America's latest sophisticated bombers.
Development of the avionics system for the bat-shaped B-2 bomber is at least two years behind schedule and the system may not be fully developed by the time the aircraft is to be deployed in the middle of the next decade.
The intercontinental B-1B bomber's electronic countermeasure system will never have the full capabilities touted by the Reagan administration.
Indeed, because of deficiencies, the Air Force has had to change some of its plans for the bomber and may have to dish out an extra $1 billion to correct the problems.
Politicians and unions fear unrest over 600,000 arrivals Bonn ‘will benefit’ from refugee influx.
By Anna Tomforde in Bonn
WEST German economists are optimistic about the country's ability to absorb the hundreds of thousands of refugees from Eastern Europe this year.
They say the refugees will enhance productivity and economic growth.
This optimism, however, is not shared by many politicians and trade union leaders.
An estimated 600,000 German immigrants — ethnic Germans from Poland and the Soviet Union, and East Germans — are expected to settle in West Germany this year, making a 1 per cent growth in the country's population.
According to Mr Dieter Brauninger, an economist at Deutsche Bank in Frankfurt, the newcomers could not have arrived at a better time: a period of dynamic growth, when gaps created by the fall in the birth rate in the past two decades need to be filled.
‘In the medium and longer term, we are optimistic that both productivity and consumption will rise, which in turn will have a beneficial effect on investment,’ said Mr Brauninger.
Economists believe that the boost to the labour force may be worth an additional 1 per cent a year in the early 1990s.
Such optimistic forecasts are described as ‘dangerous’ by the Federal Labour Office.
It says economists are ignoring the difficulties of integration, especially of ethnic Germans with large families and language problems.
However, the president of the labour office, Mr Egon Franke, said this week that unemployment among refugees — which has risen sharply in October — was still only a temporary phenomenon.
‘The opportunities remain good, but miracles can not be expected overnight,’ he said.
The influx coincides with a boom in the building sector, which has been spurred further by the need for housing for the refugees themselves.
Yesterday, the Bonn government announced a DM8billion (£2.7billion) package for housing construction for East German refugees, whose number has reached 190,000.
The number of ethnic Germans who have arrived so far this year is put at 260,000.
With accommodation increasingly hard to find, school gymnasiums, boats, converted cargo containers and some air shelters are now being used to house the refugees.
Sociologists agree that ‘economic integration’ of the refugees poses a minor problem compared with the ‘social aspect’.
The high motivation, skills and adaptability of the new arrivals create social tensions that will be expressed in economic jealousy.
Recent warnings from politicians of all parties that the influx cannot continue indefinitely are therefore seen as being based primarily on fears that the established parties stand to lose votes to the extreme right, notably the Republican Party.
The trade unions fear that wage demands may have to be lowered because of the refugees' greater flexibility and readiness to work for less money.
A key factor behind the superficial perception that the new arrivals are ‘taking jobs’ from West Germany's 1.8million unemployed is that West German workers are less mobile and flexible.
‘The problem here is that in West Germany we have an increasingly split labour market,’ Mr Brauninger explained.
Despite high unemployment in some areas there were large openings in sectors such as the electronics and engineering industries in the south.
The gap was being filled by the arrivals.
Nonetheless, short-term unemployment among the refugees is likely to remain high.
At present, about a third of the arrivals are unemployed.
Leader comment, page 22
Brittan steps into row on German unification.
By John Palmer in Brussels
SIR Leon Brittan, the senior British EC Commissioner, yesterday said that the European Community should welcome East Germany into the EC providing it was part of West Germany.
Sir Leon's intervention into the political minefield of intra-German relations followed the call earlier this week by his West German colleague, Mr Martin Bangemann, for a trade agreement between the EC and East Germany.
Sir Leon, who was giving the Grenada annual address in London yesterday, said that German reunification was becoming inevitable.
‘It is natural for some of the countries of Western Europe to view the prospects of German reunification with anxiety,’ he said.
‘But such anxiety will not stop it happening if the Soviet Union should ever allow it to happen or be unable to stop it happening’.
In a passage which is bound to be seen as highly controversial in the present situation in East Germany, Sir Leon said: ‘If Germany's partners give the impression of being opposed to reunification this will only increase what is at present a small risk: that some in Germany may be tempted to seek reunification on the basis of doing a unilateral deal with the Soviet Union, involving the setting up of a new unified German state outside the Community.
In other words, opposing reunification will make it more likely to occur in the form which we would least want’.
This is in contrast with Mr Bangemann's declaration on Monday that West Germans should not be asked to choose between their desire to overcome Germany's division and their support for greater European integration.
Mr Bangemann explicitly appealed to other European leaders not to suggest that German reunification was an immediate political issue or one which could be decided without dramatic changes in the political and security situation in Europe as a whole.
Sir Leon said the Community should, in effect, support the integration of East Germany into the Federal Republic as a precondition for East German territory becoming part of the European Community.
‘The Community as a whole should make it absolutely clear that it would warmly welcome East Germany joining West Germany on the basis that it was not admitting a new member state to the Community, but simply recognising the extension of the territory of an existing member’, he stated.
‘For that to be possible, it would, of course, be essential for what is now East Germany to accept fully both the liberal democratic institutions of the Federal Republic and the rights and obligations involved in being part of a member state of the European Community.’
Although Sir Leon's approach will be welcomed by the nationalist-minded rightwing in the Federal Republic, it is unlikely to be endorsed by many ministers in the present Bonn coalition nor by opposition parties.
South holds key for Gandhi in close election.
By Derek Brown in Madras
EVER since independence, Indian elections have been won and lost in the north.
But in this month's poll, the southern states will play a greater role than ever, and perhaps a decisive one.
The four main states — Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Kerala — between them elect 129 members of the Lok Sabha, the lower house of parliament.
Pondicherry has just one MP.
The Prime Minister, Mr Rajiv Gandhi, was advised when he called the elections that his Congress Party was likely to win some 70 seats in the south.
That forecast, from party sources and from the intelligence bureau, which has become a wing of the Prime Minister's office, was crucial in the timing of the election, at least a month before it was expected.
Mr Gandhi needs to win at least 200 seats nationally to be reasonably certain of being called on to form the next government.
That is far short of a majority in the 543-member Lok Sabha, but with the opposition still technically divided into half a dozen factions, it would make Congress the biggest single party, and President Venkataraman would have to turn to it.
In that event, a hung parliament is bound to include large numbers of non-Congressmen who will shamelessly desert to Mr Gandhi, to be on the winning side.
Thus, with Congress under heavy pressure in its traditional heartland of the Ganges Plain, the southern results could be the key to Mr Gandhi's chances of continuing in office.
But according to observers, the Congress estimate could be optimistic — not wildly so, but enough to tip the balance in what may be the closest Indian election.
The ruling party's best chances of making gains are in the states of Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.
In the former, the opposition is badly split between followers of Mr Ramakrishna Hegde, the charismatic former chief minister who heads the challenge for Janata Dal, and anti-Hegde dissidents.
The Janata Dal was formed last year in an attempt to unite the national opposition.
But there remains in Karnataka a substantial rump of the old Janata Party, which gave the country its only brief and disastrous respite from Congress rule from 1977 to 1979.
The two factions are now bitterly at odds, which gives Congress an excellent chance of a clear sweep.
In the last election in 1984, it scored 24 wins out of 28.
In Andhra Pradesh, the autocratic rule of the former film star, Mr N.T. Rama Rao, has led to a steady haemorrhage of defectors from his Telugu Desam party to the Congress.
Last time, Congress got just six seats out of 42 in a state it once claimed as its almost exclusive territory.
This time, it could get 15 or even 20.
These gains could be balanced out and even reversed in the remaining states.
Kerala has only 20 MPs, 17 of them Congress.
But now the state is ruled by a non-Congress coalition and Mr Gandhi's men are divided.
All elections in Kerala are notoriously close calls — in the last poll for the State Assembly, the winning left coalition scored just 0.79 per cent more than its Congress-led rival.
Congress was banking on at least 12 seats here, but most observers think they will be lucky to get 10.
In Tamil Nadu, the ruling party has done an audacious deal with a faction of the former regional force.
This group is led by Ms Jayalalitha, a former film star, and, more important, a former mistress of the late Chief Minister, Mr M.G. Ramachandran.
Overall, the south presents nothing like as bleak a picture for Congress as the north, at this stage of the campaign.
But it is universally accepted outside the ruling party that there is no question of a return to the golden days of 1980 and earlier elections, when Congress used to scoop up four-fifths of the seats.
Regional pride, the growth of language and caste-based movements, suspicion of the Hindi-speaking north, have eroded the support which national parties used to enjoy.
Aoun sees start of a revolution.
By David Hirst in Beirut
LEBANON'S newly elected President, Mr Rene Muawad, yesterday continued to try to form a government of national unity, but the Christian leader General Michel Aoun declared that a revolution had begun in his country.
Gen Aoun said Mr Muawad was no more than ‘a former deputy’ of a parliament which he had dissolved.
The whole Arab League peace plan, he said in effect, belonged to an existing order that was going to be swept away.
Mr Muawad began his consultations in his own fief in the Syrian-controlled northern part of the Maronite Christian heartland.
But he is expected to move soon to predominantly Muslim West Beirut.
While the implacable opposition of Gen Aoun is the main obstacle in his path, there are plenty of other difficulties.
The Druze leader, Mr Walid Jumblatt — who, like others in the Syrian camp, is far from happy with the Taif accord — accused the Arab League envoy, Mr Lakhear Ibrahimi, of interfering in Lebanon's internal affairs, almost as if ‘he wants to become prime minister himself’.
At a press conference yesterday, an ebullient and seemingly confident Gen Aoun reiterated that there was ‘no president’ in Lebanon, only a ‘dissolved parliament’, and that he headed the ‘only legal, sovereign and independent’administration.
That had always been the constitutional position, he said, but the big demonstrations of the past few days had proved that he had a popular mandate too.
The demonstrations marked ‘the beginning of a revolution’.
Evading questions about how he proposed to resist the will of virtually the whole Arab and international community, he said that Lebanon had not gone through 15 years of civil war, and given thousands of martyrs, for the dishonourable settlement the world was offering.
And he warned that if there was not an honourable settlement, that would ‘explode the whole region’.
Asked about apparent defections from his cause, he claimed never to have said that he was counting on anybody.
Outsiders had proved to be ‘crooks and liars who covered their positions with empty slogans’.
Lebanon had put its case to the Arabs but they were ‘unfair to us, so we turned them down’.
As for the rest, ‘no one can expect us to sign our own death sentence.
That is suicide.
Let those who give us such advice sign it themselves.’
Reuter adds from Washington: President George Bush yesterday angrily denounced followers of Gen Aoun and said a partition of Lebanon would be totally unacceptable to the world community.
Nationalists wreck regional celebrations of revolution.
By Reuter in Moscow
MOLDAVIAN nationalists fought police yesterday as growing unrest in the Soviet republics wrecked regional celebrations of the 1917 Bolshevik revolution.
Mr Yuri Roshka, a spokesman for the Moldavian Popular Front, said that several thousand people clashed with police after clambering over tanks and other military vehicles preparing to move into Lenin Square in Kishinyev.
Several people were hurt in the melee, Mr Roshka said.
The military parade was cancelled and members of the republic's leadership fled from the raised viewing podium.
Separatists tried unsuccessfully to disrupt a military parade in Lithuania.
Traditional celebrations in Georgia and Armenia were also cancelled.
Mr Roskha said of the trouble in Kishinyev: ‘Several thousand people from the Popular Front and other groups broke through cordons of police and climbed on to the tanks and armoured personnel carriers, waving banners and chanting slogans.
‘When they got through into Lenin Square, the leadership of the republic climbed down from their viewing podium and ran off.
The main thing was that the parade by the military vehicles did not take place.’
Mr Roshka said that several members of the 30,000-strong crowd were injured and several others detained by police.
Soviet strikes point to crisis of morale that threatens future of perestroika Broadcasts of parliament get more viewers than Agatha Christie films It is the first November 7 since the revolution that coal miners have been on strike.
By John Rettie in Moscow
SOME people believed that the Soviet Union had nothing in particular to celebrate, observed Mr Boris Prokhorov, of the official Soviet news agency Tass, yesterday.
Commenting on the 72nd anniversary of the Russian Revolution, in the openly frank vein that is the hallmark of glasnost, Mr Prokhorov went on: ‘Well, one may think so, looking at the industrial down-swing, inflation, transport malfunctions, coal miners’ strikes and semi-barren shelves of shops.
Yes, all this exists.
These are the realities of the truly not easy days of our perestroika.’
But for Mr Prokhorov, there is another side to things.
‘The first genuinely free elections were held in the Soviet Union,’ he pointed out.
‘The first Congress of People's Deputies was held and became a political sensation.
The first ‘real’ Supreme Soviet began to function.’
And, he added, the broadcasts of parliamentary sessions attracted more viewers than films based on Agatha Christie novels.
Besides that, Soviet troops had withdrawn from Afghanistan and a whole range of nuclear missiles had been destroyed.
Mr Prokhorov said that the answer to the contradiction between political renewal and economic crisis lay in Marxism, which ‘teaches us that the superstructure is more mobile than the base, and that it is the first to react to a change of conditions.’
He saw the political system as the superstructure and the economy as the base, which would change more slowly.
While there may be some truth in this analysis — a revolution from above — it fails to account for a far deeper malaise in Soviet society: a crisis of morale.
The anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution, celebrated on November 7 because the new Soviet state adopted the Western calendar, is the country's greatest national holiday.
This year, however, there is something different in the air.
It is, as far as can be remembered, the first November 7 since the revolution that coal miners have been on strike — the very core of the working class who made the revolution possible.
Up in the desolate Arctic region of Vorkuta, site of perhaps Stalin's most infamous Gulag camp, miners in nine of the area's 13 pits have been on strike for more than a week against dismal living conditions, and the bureaucracy of the Communist Party and Soviet government.
Among their complaints are not only that government promises to improve their conditions, after last July's pit strikes, have not been met.
They also have political demands — notably concerning article six of the constitution, which entrenches the Communist Party's monopoly of power.
In this the miners are at one with the demonstrators who set up another first in Moscow yesterday — the first rival march to the parade in Red Square which officially salutes the revolution.
Most of these demonstrators appeared to be intellectual, or at least what might be called middle class.
But the loss of faith in the Communist Party is now so nationwide that workers and intellectuals can be making the same demand to deprive it of absolute power.
What they have not yet done is to form a united organisation, or political party, to press that demand.
This loss of faith goes far deeper among the young than the old.
The old remember why the revolution was started and many still hold the original ideals dear, whatever may have happened in between.
The middle-aged may want to preserve an order they are accustomed to, or perhaps their careers.
But for the young, it is rather a question of the scales falling from their eyes, and having nothing to believe in any more.
And discovering that they have been told lies all their lives.
At a meeting in the Kremlin last Saturday, General Vladimir Kryuchkov, head of the KGB and one of the newest members of the politburo, implicitly admitted the lies that had been told about the role of the secret police in Stalin's repression.
But he said it would be quite wrong to say that the country's history had been one long mistake since the revolution.
His was the party's explanation: that Stalin was the one who distorted everything, and that Leninist ideals of socialism should be reinstated.
That, too, has been the message of this Revolution Day — back to Lenin and 1917, to a ‘radical renewal of socialism’ as one slogan put it.
But, of course, led by the party.
Can the party do it?
And if it can, do enough people believe it can?
Mr Prokhorov should have the last word.
‘The main thing is perhaps the fact that we are now having a fresh look, without blinkers, at ourselves and our country,’ he said.
Voters queue for miles in Namibia poll.
By Patrick Laurence in Windhoek
THOUSANDS of Namibians stood in long queues, stretching nearly a mile in some cases, as they waited to vote on the first day of Namibia's five-day pre-independence election yesterday.
The length of the queues in Windhoek and Katutura, two of the most densely populated urban areas in Namibia, triggered conjecture that the poll might have to be extended an extra day.
Namibia's more than 700,000 residents are voting for a 72-member constituent assembly to draw up an independence constitution and prepare the way for full independence next year, perhaps as early as April.
Voters left two dominant impressions as they queued in the hot sun — their determination to cast their ballots in the first free election since Germany began the European conquest of Namibia more than a century ago, and their orderly, disciplined behaviour in the searing heat.
One of the first Namibians to cast his vote was the Swapo leader, Mr Sam Nujoma, aged 60.
As he entered a polling booth in Katutura, a black township outside Windhoek, he said: ‘Today, we are finally burying apartheid colonialism.’
Mr Nujoma, wearing a pin-striped shirt and double-breasted jacket, was accompanied by Mr Andimba Toivo ja Toivo, Swapo's secretary-general.
Asked for his thoughts on armed struggle now that he was voting, Mr Nujoma said: ‘The colonialists imposed the war on us.
When we used the barrel of the gun, it was to facilitate the end which was the ballot box.’
Earlier, the director of the United Nations Transitional Assistance Group (Untag), Irish-born Mr Cedric Thornberry, described the election as freer than any poll that has been held in West Belfast.
Mr Thornberry, who comes from Belfast, expressed two anxieties about the election: first, whether the technical arrangements made for the election would proceed smoothly; second, whether the use of symbols on ballot papers to enable illiterate voters to identify the party of their choice would work satisfactorily.
On the first issue, he said: ‘We — and the South Africans — are stretched alarmingly…stretched very thin.’
If something did go wrong, if tempers flared and violence broke out, they could be hard put to control it.’
The election is being administered by the South African-appointed Administrator-General.
It is, however, being scrutinised by UN officials.
Untag has 2,800 officials — including 1,100 policemen — scattered throughout Namibia to keep an eye on proceedings at 358 polling booths.
The symbol of each of the 10 contesting parties is printed on ballot papers for the illiterate voters who account for 60 per cent of the electorate.
One problem relates to a tactical blunder by Swapo.
It allowed a splinter party, Swapo-Democrats, to appropriate and register the symbol which Swapo used for nearly 30 years, a hand holding a flaming torch.
Swapo went into the election with a symbol which was only weeks old: a man with a raised fist.
The dangers of confusion for illiterate voters is compounded by two factors.
Firstly, the Swapo-Democrat emblem is placed just above the Swapo emblem on the ballot paper, meaning that it will be seen first.
Secondly, the raised fist in the new Swapo emblem is inconspicuous in the reduced size needed to squeeze Swapo's new symbol into the box on the ballot paper.
For all that, observers are unanimous that Swapo will emerge with a clear majority.
Its virtual monopoly on the allegiance of the Ovambo, who account for more than half Namibia's population of 1.3 million, all but guarantees Swapo more than half the voters.
That was conceded in an interview yesterday by Dr Kenneth Abrahams, a member of the National Front and a former Swapo man who was thrown into jail by Mr Nujoma.
Even if Swapo fails to get the two-thirds of the vote it needs to write its own constitution, it will have little difficulty in persuading one or another of the smaller parties to work with it.
It would thus still have a two-thirds majority in the constituent assembly.
‘Some used electric sticks, some beat us over the head with handcuffs, some beat us with rifles’.
MY religious name is XXX from XX nunnery.
My lay name is XXX.
I was born in Nyantren.
I am 18 years old.
On the evening of April 16, 1988 at about llpm we left the nunnery and stayed the night in a cave below.
The next morning we left for Lhasa where 12 of us demonstrated for one hour.
Why did we demonstrate?
For Tibetan freedom and for thousands of years of long life for His Holiness the Dalai Lama — and because the Chinese should leave Tibet.
After completing three rounds of the Barkhor we left to return to the nunnery separately.
On the way about 40 soldiers stopped us and we were all arrested.
We were taken to the XX hospital where they took many photos and asked questions.
We were then immediately all put into one prison vehicle.
We were kicked and shouted at and then thrown out of the vehicle.
We were then taken to Gutsa Prison.
There were three soldiers for every nun; they tied our hands and took us to a small room, two soldiers pushing each nun.
All of us were beaten very severely.
Then they attacked us one by one with electric sticks while our hands were handcuffed behind our backs.
Outside the door we were made to kneel on the ground.
Again there were about 30 soldiers.
Some used electric sticks, some beat us over the head with handcuffs, some kicked us, some pulled and pushed us, some beat us with rifles.
Then they tied blackboards around our necks with small, black Chinese letters on them and took photographs.
Then we were interrogated one by one: ‘Why did you demonstrate?
What was the aim of the demonstration?’
I said: ‘First, Tibetans own Tibet and therefore the land of Tibet belongs to Tibetans.
Secondly, His Holiness the Dalai Lama should be given the ownership of Tibet.’
Another question was: ‘Who asked you to demonstrate?
Who was behind you?’
I answered: ‘No one asked me.
We came by ourselves.’
‘If no one is behind you, how do you know what to do, as you are only 18 years old?
Who is behind you?
You must tell us.
Tell us!’
At this moment they beat me very badly.
Then I almost lost consciousness.
I was lying on the ground almost like a dead body.
At this moment about 11 people came up to me with two dogs.
Some of these people were on my left, some on my right.
They beat me with belts and electric sticks and ropes and rifles continuously for one minute.
Blood and white mucus came out of my mouth.
I could not speak although I was conscious.
At this moment two people grabbed me to try to make me get up but I could not get up, so they kicked me and stamped all over me from head to toe.
Another two or three men touched my body all over with about 11 burning cigarettes, continuously for two hours.
The Chinese used their belts so much that the metal buckle came off.
They broke a chair over me.
Then they had to stop for a rest because they were so tired.
After that dogs bit me on the feet.
Blood came out and my clothes were all ripped.
Then they took me to a room where I was in solitary confinement.
They gave me food with stones and yak dung, but it was still not enough and they put it in a urine container.
They gave me water in a small, broken cup.
Whenever the soldiers saw us they spat at us.
In the room there was no bed or mattress; nothing.
Every day we were interrogated and beaten.
I did not recover from the wounds inflicted by the dogs for two months, but because of His Holiness the Dalai Lama and kunchok sum [Buddha, his teachings, and the monastic community]I recovered.
After two months nine of us nuns were released.
So, from our nunnery four including me stayed in prison…
After eight months the Chinese said we were going to be tried, but one month before the trial we were released.
March 2, 1989
South Africa's rebel policeman sets up union.
By Reuter in Cape Town
THE rebel Coloured policeman, Mr Gregory Rockman, has formed South Africa's first trade union for police and prison warders in a renewed challenge to white authority.
‘We are ready for any onslaught that the white authorities might try to launch against us,’ Mr Rockman said after the first meeting in his home on Monday of the Police and Prisons Civil Rights Union.
Mr Rockman, a lieutenant in the segregated Coloured suburb of Mitchell's Plain, announced the formation of the union days before a disciplinary hearing that could end his career.
He said that he had been charged with 10 counts of breaking police regulations by talking to reporters about police brutality.
A police spokesman said that Mr Rockman could face penalties ranging from a verbal reprimand to demotion or dismissal for ignoring a written gag order served on October 27.
He also has refused to halt publication of a book, due in December about his struggle against discrimination within the police force and by officers.
Mr Rockman became a folk hero in Cape Town's mixed-race suburbs after he flouted police discipline on September 6 to tell reporters about the alleged violence of white riot squad officers.
He said that they behaved like ‘wild dogs’ when they broke up a peaceful placard demonstration by schoolchildren, beating them with whips and clubs.
About 30 policemen and warders swapped stories during the inaugural meeting about discrimination and brutality in their services.
Warrant Officer Peter Loggenberg, a prison warder for 16 years, said he was motivated to join the union because he objected to the imprisonment of Coloured juveniles alongside adult prisoners.
‘They are not in the same cells, but they come together in the trucks going to court and in the exercise yard where they are often subject to physical and sexual abuse,’ he said.
Several members of the prison staff said they expected to be victimised for helping to form the union.
PAGE
Communists plot survival tactics.
By Michael Simmons
THE Communists of Poland and Hungary are refusing to lie down and die.
Having been rejected after holding sway for so long, they are now seeking new ways of making friends and influencing people.
The leadership of the Polish Communist Party has this week approved changes committing it to altering its name and participating in free elections within a multi-party system.
It was not plain sailing and orthodox and ‘liberal’ Communists will be at each others' throats — at local level — until they hold a full congress next January to determine new policies once and for all and to approve new leaders.
Some party members are already disssatisfied with Mr Mieczyslaw Rakowski, who became leader only in August, for the way he went immediately to Moscow when the party was in trouble rather than work out a Polish solution.
According to these members, Mr Aleksandar Kwiasnewski, a ‘liberal’ who is much younger than Mr Rakowski and had a rapid rise in the last phase of the Communist government, could replace him.
The new party name is also a subject of debate.
At least 70 alternatives have been submitted, with that of Polish Socialist Labour Party the front-runner.
The new party would drop the old insistence on the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Whatever the changes, the new party could have a difficult birth.
It has been confirmed this week that political parties will no longer get financial subsidies, and the party urgently needs new sources of money.
Its newspaper, Trybuna Ludu, lost 1.7billion zloties (£382,500) last year; this year it is expected to lose nearly five times as much.
In Hungary, Mr Karoly Grosz, general secretary until last month of the now defunct Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party (HSWP), wants to reorganise the party and start a new Communist newspaper.
Mr Grosz, seen by many Hungarians as a discredited hardliner, added that there was a need to propagate Communist ideas in Hungary.
He seems to be cashing in on the goodwill of those who regret the party's ‘new start’ last month when it renamed itself the Hungarian Socialist Party (HSP).
One objective of Mr Grosz is to see that the HSWP holds its party congress, as in ‘normal’ times, early next year.
The HSP leadership says, however, that since there is no HSWP, there can be no HSWP congress.
Red Star seeks tender mercy.
By Reuter in Budapest
HUNGARY'S Parliament is asking for tenders to remove a giant Communist star from the dome of the building as the country returns to multi-party democracy.
The Hungarian news agency MTI said yesterday that the 1.6 tonne steel star would be replaced by a weather vane.
Two months ago the government ordered the removal of all red stars from public buildings.
Since then the Communist Party has disbanded itself and all Stalinist elements have been removed from the Hungarian constitution.
MTI said church restorers had shown an interest in winning the contract.
De Klerk begins fresh round of discussions.
By David Beresford in Johannesburg
THE new South African administration of President F.W. de Klerk is holding talks across a wide spectrum of political opinion in what appears to be a fresh effort towards constitutional reform.
President De Klerk is expected to meet the neo-Nazi leader, Mr Eugene Terrebanche, while his Foreign Minister, Mr Pik Botha, is to hold talks in Umtata with the rebellious leader of the Transkei homeland, Maj-General Bantu Holomisa.
The meeting with Mr Terreblanche —‘ET’ as he is popularly known — is seen more as a public relations gesture than a meaningful initiative.
The leader of the Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging (Afrikaner Resistance Movement) has been largely discredited in far-right circles by the recent scandal over his relations with an glamorous English-language newspaper columnist.
He asked President De Klerk for a meeting after the National Party leader's recent talks with prominent anti-apartheid activists.
General Holomisa recently dealt himself into South Africa's reform game by moving towards a loose alliance with the outlawed African National congress and by announcing plans for a referendum on the ‘independent’ homeland's possible reincorporation into South Africa.
Mr Botha is expected to deal with both issues in Transkei tomorrow..
Talks are also being held this week between two cabinet ministers and the general secretary of the South African Council of Churches, the Rev. Frank Chikane.
The Development Minister, Mr Stoffel van der Merwe, and the deputy foreign minister, Mr Leon Wessels, are to have talks with the church leader on the maltreatment of blacks in the Ciskei.
Meanwhile The South African authorities are also facing a challenge from the rebellious Cape police lieutenant, Gregory Rockman, who is setting up a police trade union in South Africa.
He made his announcement as his commanders prepared to begin disciplinary proceedings against him for his denunciation of racism and brutality in the force.
Tibetan nuns defy might of China.
By John Gittings
OUT OF the throng of Tibetan pilgrims on the sacred Barkhor street in Lhasa a few weeks ago emerged six young women in maroon gowns and bare heads.
The pedlars of shawls and prayer wheels and bottles of Indian hair-oil scattered, knowing what would happen next.
The six women — all nuns — cried out ‘Independence for Tibet’ and began to walk with short but determined steps around the clockwise circuit of the Barkhor temple.
They did not get far.
As the official indictment says, ‘officers on duty from the Lhasa Public Security Bureau seized them on the spot with the swiftness of a thunderbolt’.
The nuns were charged with ‘splittist activity’ and condemned to three years' labour for being ‘extremely arrogant’.
For a group of young nuns to challenge the full authority of the Chinese state, visibly expressed by the tin-hatted martial-law troops standing guard only a hundred metres away, is an act of calculated defiance.
In view of the treatment handed out to previous women demonstrators, it also displays remarkable courage, but it is not an isolated act.
The ‘heroic nuns’— as they are described in the clandestine leaflets of the Tibetan resistance — have staged at least 12 protests in the past two years.
Nuns, and lay-women, were prominent in the 1959 demonstration before the Dalai Lama's flight to India, and during the 1969 Cultural Revolution.
The story of their latest protests is beginning to be pieced together from documents brought by travellers to Hong Kong and the West.
A list of the 14 nuns who demonstrated in March this year gives their ages between 18 and 32, with an average of 23.
Four of them were arrested.
‘In prison they were intensively tortured, including electric sticks to the breasts and being beaten by rifles, sticks, handcuffs and chains.’
It goes on to state that the cell had no electricity and no floor covering, the prisoners were allowed few clothes and they received only two meals a day, one consisting of a single very small momo (steamed bun) and the other of a small cup of wormy vegetables.
It also alleges that they were forced to put their heads into a bucket of urine and excrement.
Tibetan sources claim that two nuns who were seized after the March demonstrations were held in cells with male prisoners and raped.
One, who had an electric prod inserted in her vagina, has disappeared since their release and it is feared that she has committed suicide.
The written accounts suggest an array of special ‘female’ tortures, including the use of dogs, lighted cigarettes, electric prods and stripping prisoners naked.
One young Lhasa lay-woman, a secondary school teacher, was sentenced to two years' jail for writing a manifesto.
She was so badly tortured that the authorities had to send her to hospital.
They first extracted a written guarantee of good conduct from her uncle and aunt, who are now required to pay for the medical treatment which, if successful, will allow the woman to return to prison.
Nuns have been prominent in all the large demonstrations which culminated in the March 5 to March 7 demonstration this year and the imposition of martial law.
But they have also staged their own protests.
One was held in December 1987 and another five during 1988.
Despite the repression, seven protests have been staged so far this year.
It used to be possible to complete three circuits of the Barkhor before being detained.
Since martial law was imposed, with army checkposts everywhere, and a heavy plainclothes police presence, protests last only a few moments.
Nine nuns leapt on to the stage of a Tibetan opera at the Yoghurt festival in the Norbulinka Park on September 2 and were quickly seized.
According to more than one witness, one of the nuns had her shoulder broken.
Several came from Shung Sep nunnery, a day's walk from Lhasa, which had also supplied the heroic nuns of the March demonstration.
Another was seen later with a breast wound.
Others came from Ani Tsangkhang nunnery in Lhasa.
Although this has a militant reputation, the abbess is a Chinese appointee and nuns have been known to climb out of windows to take part in the demonstrations.
The nuns are young because fresh recruitment — of monks as well as nuns — was stopped during a decade of suppression and allowed only after reform in 1981 initiated by the then Communist Party secretary-general, Mr Hu Yaobang.
Mr Hu, whose death in April this year sparked off the student democracy movement in Beijing, was forced to resign in 1987.
The charges against him included that of being too soft on the Tibetans.
Most nuns come from the Tibetan countryside and may join the nunnery in their early teens or even when they are as young as nine or 10.
They reflect a tough tradition among rural women of shouldering a heavy economic burden and speaking their mind.
Their stand is not explicitly political, but the strands of secular and religious commitment to an independent Tibet, led by the Dalai Lama, are closely woven.
Women were active in March 1959 when thousands of Tibetans demonstrated in Lhasa believing that the Chinese were planning to kidnap the Dalai Lama.
Members of the Women's Patriotic Association — originally set up by the wife of the Chinese army general as a pro-Beijing front — gathered on March 12.
One participant, Rinchen Dolma Taring, wrote in her book, Daughter of Tibet: ‘The Lhasa women had made many anti-Chinese posters and when I joined them they were lined up around the Barkhor shouting slogans, ‘From today Tibet is independent’ and ‘China must quit Tibet’.
‘Our women were more fierce than our men.
It was frightening to walk through the Barkhor, where Chinese soldiers with machineguns were watching us from the roofs.
All the shops were shut and no one was on the streets except the shouting women.’
In 1969, the destruction of monasteries and suppression of monks and nuns during the Cultural Revolution led to another desperate rising, largely unknown to the outside world.
Its most famous leader, according to the only available account, was a Buddhist nun who led more than 1,000 people in an attack on government offices in the western suburbs of Lhasa.
Defeated, the rebels fled to the mountains overlooking the Lhasa valley.
Blockaded by Chinese troops, the leader was captured and executed at a public meeting.
Some say that more people died that year than during the rebellion 10 years before.
The nuns' tales reveal that inhuman treatment was already standard practice before the declaration of martial law in March.
An Amnesty International report, published in February, documented torture of Tibetan men as well as women.
More first-hand accounts which have reached the Tibet Information Network in London have not been translated for lack of funds.
After recent mass arrests and tortures in Beijing, it has become even more difficult to claim that the government is unaware of the excesses committed in Lhasa.
Official doctrine, first proclaimed by Chairman Mao Zedong 40 years ago, insists that the state is entitled to use all the dictatorial weapons at its disposal to suppress its enemies.
In Tibet this means suppressing a growing number of brave young people whose only crime is to write a leaflet or shout a slogan.
The latest news from Lhasa is that six more nuns were arrested in mid-October.
They had committed the ‘counter-revolutionary crime’ of celebrating the Dalai Lama's Nobel Peace Prize.
Police yesterday arrested about 20 Tibetan women demonstrating outside the Chinese embassy and demanding independence.
Policemen struggled briefly with the women as they tried to get into the embassy.
Asset deal ‘could free hostages’.
By Simon Tisdall in Washington
PRESIDENT Bush suggested yesterday that a US decision to return millions of dollars in frozen assets to Iran could help secure the eventual release of US hostages held in Lebanon.
At a White House press conference, Mr Bush said: ‘I carry the fate of the hostages with me every single day.
So of course I hope that Iran will use what influence it has to get those hostages released.’
Asked whether the US return to the Bank of Iran of $567million held since the 1979-1980 Tehran embassy siege could become a catalyst for the freeing of the eight Americans, the President added: ‘They owe money…and vice versa.
I'd like to get this underbrush cleaned out now.
I think they have made some positive statements but I don't know whether it will work that way or not.’
Mr Bush's remarks followed talks last week in The Hague between the State Department's legal adviser, Mr Abraham Sofaer, and Iranian officials, at which the return of funds was agreed.
The US still holds $243million to cover unresolved claims against the Iranians by North American banks.
Billions of dollars of Iranian assets remain frozen under former President Carter's 1979 edict.
A tribunal in The Hague is slowly resolving each country's claims against the other, including Tehran's demand for the return of $12billion in military equipment and spare parts which the regime says were paid for but never delivered.
State Department officials denied on Monday that the Iranian funds issue and that of the hostages held in Lebanon were linked.
But Mr Bush's remarks yesterday clearly indicated that the unfreezing of some of the assets was a gesture which certainly would not harm the hostages' prospects.
The Bush Administration has been extremely cautious in its relations with Iran, which has consistently denied that it controls the hostages' fate.
Last month, Iran's new leader, President Hashemi Rafsanjani, offered to work for the release of the American hostages held by Islamic extremists in Lebanon along with 10 other foreigners.
In return, Mr Rafsanjani sought the return of assets and/or help in locating three Iranians kidnapped in Lebanon.
US analysts speculated yesterday that Mr Bush's unscripted remarks reflected hope within the Administration that the election of the reputedly ‘moderate’ Mr Rafsanjani signalled a change of mood in Iran.
Tunisian leader shuts out main opposition force.
By Peter Hiett in Tunis
PRESIDENT Ben Ali of Tunisia has ruled out legalising the main opposition force in the country, the Islamic Fundamentalists.
The announcement came as a shock because they and other political observers had expected Mr Ben Ali to announce moves towards liberalisation in a speech he gave yesterday marking the second anniversary of his coming to power.
Mr Ben Ali had indicated some softening of his position towards the fundamentalists in an interview with visiting Arab journalists on Monday, saying that they had been offered the chance to open their own newspaper.
The President's announcement is bound to anger the fundamentalists.
Even standing as independents in April's elections, their candidates won about 13 per cent of the vote.
Only one other opposition party managed to break the 1 per cent barrier.
Embarrassingly for Mr Ben Ali, who likes to trumpet the virtues of Tunisian democracy, all the seats went to his own RCD party.
Since then, the fundamentalists have been waging a steady war on the government, at one point demanding the resignation of the Education Minister because of his plans for reforming the teaching of Islam in schools.
There was no comfort either in Mr Ben Ali's speech for the other opposition parties which, after their poor results in the elections, had been looking for government help.
There have been suggestions that they might be given state funding, or that some RCD members in the Chamber of Deputies might resign to allow the other parties a look in.
But Mr Ben Ali said he had already done enough for them.
He also told them to stop complaining about the electoral system.
Mr Ben Ali had a few minor constitutional changes to offer, but the absence of substantive concessions to the opposition parties has taken some of the gloss off his big day.
French army on catwalk for military style fashion parade.
By Paul Webster in Paris
WITH a swing in its step and pop music to match, the French army paraded its new uniform yesterday in traditional fashion-show style that hinted at love rather than war.
The uniform, designed more for seduction than aggression, was created by Mr Pierre Balmain who won a pre-podium skirmish with designers Lacroix, Lapidus and Cacherel.
Nearly 200,000 khaki uniforms will be traded in before 1991 for the Balmain number in a colour known as terre de France, a wordplay on the army's role in protecting French soil.
The exact shade was kept secret until yesterday's parade at the equivalent of the Army and Navy Club, but there was nothing in camouflage manuals to describe the exact tint.
‘Perhaps it would be best described as pearly-grey with a hint of bronze,’ an army spokesman said.
‘I think it's the nicest colour in any European army.’
The relaxed style was less of a surprise because Pierre Balmain also designed the new national police uniform.
This replaced the jacket with a windcheater and the kepi with a Chicago-style police cap.
Much of the same inspiration could be seen in the army uniform, although soldiers will be allowed to choose between the kepi and a beret.
The uniforms were greeted with applause as nine models, including three blacks, marched along the podium.
The West Indians were brought in, according to the official notice, ‘to bring out the new colour scheme’.
Women models displayed an air-hostess style ensemble of jacket, jupe-culotte, three-cornered hat and shoulder bag, before a series of other changes were revealed.
Soldiers will be allowed to abandon their jackets in the summer for the first time and wear an almond-green shirt with epaulettes.
Before the show, the uniforms were approved by 93 per cent of serving soldiers, but it needed a practised eye to seek out details that distinguished the new gear from smart civilian clothes.
The martial air, according to one general, was discreetly detectable in an apparently superfluous top pocket in the windcheater.
‘You have to have somewhere to fix your ribbons,’ he said.