

Extra charge prompts moan.
By Nick Pandya
THE Consumers' Association has complained to the Office of Fair Trading about building societies which charge an additional fee to borrowers who choose their own buildings insurance policy.
The association has found that mortgage lenders are charging fees of up to £40 to those borrowers who choose their own buildings insurance policy.
Not all lenders charge, but among the ones which do the fees levied are completely arbitrary.
Some societies have a one-off fee of between £5 and £40, while others have an annual charge of between £1 and £25.
Complaints about these charges are the second most frequently lodged with Building Societies Ombudsman, Stephen Edell.
Concert parties- and how the Swiss roll in…
Saturday notebook.
By Ben Laurance
CONCERT parties sound so homely.
Other share-dealing terminology rings immediate alarm bells: insider dealing sounds fishy and the term fan club has a threatening sound — there are too many football connotations.
But concert party?
It conjures up images of Victorian family evenings round the piano.
How curious, then, that such a phrase should suggest something illegal.
How curious that it should be enshrined in the Companies Act.
How curious that last week's suggestion that a cabinet minister might have a link with such activities should bring the threat of damnation from a prominentlibel lawyer.
Let us be quite clear about terminology.
Just what does a concert party mean?
News that an investor has bought a significant stake in any company is likely to lift that company's share price.
The holding could become the platform for a bid.
Or it could be sold to someone else planning an assault.
And as we all know, bids push up share prices.
Hence the rule that anyone buying five per cent of a company must say so publicly.
The fact that one person owns a big chunk of shares is price-sensitive information.
We should be told.
A concert party simply describes an alliance between two or more investors.
Two business people may be chums.
They may work together.
Their respective companies may often work in tandem.
There is nothing wrong in that.
But if each buys, say, three per cent in a target company, then the five per cent declaration rule applies.
They are in concert so together they have six per cent.
From the market's point of view, this is no less significant than the stake's being in one pair of hands.
Being in a concert party whose members are buying shares is neither wrong nor against the law.
The illegality comes only if those buyers conceal their relationship.
Four people could each buy almost five per cent of a company.
As long as they pretend they have no alliance, none of the four needs say a word about the share-buying.
The stock market has no inkling a big stake is being amassed, so the target's share price need not rise.
Then one of the four buys the stakes of the other three: suddenly, that single investor emerges with almost a fifthof a quoted company; the stake — a high platform for any a potential bidder — has been built far more cheaply than if one person had bought alone.
This is where the Department of Trade comes in — and indeed where there is a tenuous and innocent link with Cecil Parkinson and last week's huffy statement from his lawyers.
If there is a suspicion that a group of individuals is buying shares in concert without declaring their ties, the DTI should investigate.
The best-known current investigation is into share-buying in companies where Mr David Abell's Suter engineering group has been active.
(As the Guardian showed last week, Mr Parkinson's unwitting connection was through having had his money used to buy 50,000 shares in Newman Industries — since renamed Avdel — where Suter's stake-building eventually prompted a takeover.)
But consider two things about any DTI inquiry.
First, to show something was amiss, it has to show there was an undisclosed agreement between two or more investors who built up separate stakes and then pooled resources.
The lack of disclosure is the easy bit: either our party-members told the world or they did not.
But did an agreement exist in the first place?
How on earth can such an agreement be shown to exist?
Maybe the parties foolishly signed a pact which then found its way into the hands of the DTI.
(Let's face it, this is unlikely.)
Or perhaps the DTI anticipated their wrong-doing and so planted a bug to record the conversation at which the agreement was struck.
Again, it's far-fetched.
Without proof of an undisclosed agreement, it is impossible for anyone to bring a successful prosecution.
From this follows the first point: the existence of illegal concert parties is enormously hard to prove.
Second, the British way of doing things makes it hard for a company to discover the identity of a suspected concert party-goer hiding behind a nominee.
Yes, there is section 212 of the Companies Act.
That allows a target company to demand the identity of the owner of shares registered in a nominee name.
If the nominee refuses to co-operate, the company can strip the shareholding of its votes.
But what use is that where a concert party is suspected?
The very purpose of a concert party is to allow the building of stakes (with an s) which will be later pooled on one person's hands.
If the heat is put on one shareholder, he, she or it can simply sell to the individual intended all along to emerge eventually with the key stake.
The 212s and threat of disenfranchisement does no more than hurry the process along.
In the case of the DTI inquiry into Suter-related companies, one name repeatedly emerges as the manager of various shareholdings — the Swiss-based Sterling Trust.
Buying Sterling Trust shareholdings has helped Suter build predatory stakes in various companies — including, incidentally, Avdell where Mr Parkinson's money was invested.
Official records show little except the names of Sterling Trust's directors.
David Abell has said he does not know who is behind Sterling.
His only known connection is that both he and Sterling have held shares in Winchmore, a small London company under DTI scrutiny.
Forget Suter and Mr Abell.
The important point is this: is the use of an overseas company like Sterling (where inquiries about the real ownership of shareholdings in threatened companies are met with a polite but firm snub) acceptable within a legalframework trying to ensure fair play?
In the Alexander Howden case, for example, Swiss authorities showed themselves surprisingly willing to lift the veil on bank accounts in Geneva or Zurich.
When America's Securities and Exchange Commission investigated insider dealing ahead of the takeover of Santa Fe, the Swiss also helped.
Yet still it appears impossible to discover the ownership of shares held through a minor Swiss bank which were used to help a second division British company build up stakes in several third division British companies.
That information could clear Mr Abell's name — assuming, as he says, he knows nothing about the control of shares held through Sterling Trust.
At Geneva airport, there is an advertising hoarding welcoming travellers ‘to a city where money talks but wealth whispers’.
Sometimes, even a whisper would be welcome.
Saunders wins round in fight for legal aid.
By Financial Staff
FORMER Guinness chairman Ernest Saunders yesterday won another round in his battle to secure legal aid to fight the multi-million pound civil action brought against him by the company.
Two High Court judges ruled that a Department of Social Security assessment officer had taken an ‘erroneous’ view of the regulations which govern the means test for legal aid.
Lord Justice Watkins, sitting with Mr Justice Garland, also rejected criticism made by Mr Justice Henry at an earlier hearing that Mr Saunders had set up a trust fund to render himself less likely to face litigation and reduce his ability to pay legal costs.
The court, the judge said, had more material before it than did Mr Justice Henry.
There was nothing to suggest the reduction in capital was brought about with the deliberate intention to obtain legal aid to which he would otherwise not be elegible.
Lord Justice Watkins added: ‘I would not accept that he did so to deceive his creditors, present or future.’
The judges ordered DSS officer Alan Scaife to reconsider Mr Saunders' case after he had ‘effectively barred’ him from receiving legal aid because he had put £407,000 into a trust for his children.
The cash represented his half share from the sale of the family home in Buckinghamshire.
Mr Scaife decided that Mr Saunders, now unemployed, had deliberately deprived himself of cash resources.
But he never went so far as to say that his intention was to qualify for legal aid, the court said.
The DSS argued that intention did not matter and under legal aid regulations they were entitled to treat Mr Saunders as having a notional £407,000.
However, Lord Justice Watkins disagreed and said he saw no difficulty in imposing upon the assessment officer the duty to discover what intention lay behind the reduction of capital.
To refuse legal aid was a serious step.
Assessment of capital very much influenced that, and it was ‘of the highest importance’ that it was at all times a proper influence.
Mr Saunders was not in court but his son James said: ‘This is a very fair and just decision.’
The DSS is considering whether to appeal.
Mr Saunders has already been granted legal aid of up to £275,000 to defend himself against fraud charges in the criminal courts, but he may have to pay whole or part of that money back if the trial judge so decides.
He also owes between £300,000 and £400,000 for legal advice received so far.
Coats cuts in Cornwall.
Coats Viyella says St Austell in Cornwall will lose 290 jobs when it closes its Van Heusen shirt factory there in February.
The work will be transferred to the group's factories in Northern Ireland although some workers may find jobs with the group in Plymouth.
Last week, Coats Viyella announced nearly 200 job cuts in the North, blaming a combination of pressure from high interest rates, the strong pound and cheap imports.
The group is closing the St Austell plant despite recent capital investment and numerous employment initiatives.
It says it cannot get or keep skilled labour.
Service industries, like new supermarkets, have increased in the area and while these may not pay better, people prefer the working environment so high staff turnover has put the factory at an increasing economic disadvantage.
The company has set up a job search unit to help employees find other jobs and hopes part of the reduction will be achieved through natural wastage.
Europe lifts Unilever.
Walls' ice cream and other frozen food sales in Europe featured prominently in the Uni-lever combine's third-quarter sales and profit growth of around a sixth.
Influenced by the lower pound, earnings jumped by 22 per cent during the period and over the nine months.
The big US cosmetics acquisitions came in and washed their interest cost face.
Shareholders in the British half of the Anglo-Dutch group benefit from both the profit and exchange rate gains with an interim dividend increase to 4.51p a share, from 3.89p.
European sales jumped by 18 per cent to just over £3billion for the quarter, and on a similar rise the enlarged US activities passed £1billion, the global total moving above £5 billion.
The US operating margin was narrowly the highest, but the rise of over half in interest charges limited the rise in pre-tax profit for the whole group to 10 per cent, at £427million.
The nine-month gain was 13 per cent.
Earnings were 14p for the quarter, just under 1p coming from currency changes, taking the running total for nine months to 39.4p net a share, against 32.3p.
Detergents made progress in the US and in the rest of the world the performances in Brazil and India are singled out.
In short…
WHITBREAD Investment Company, the offshoot of the eponymous brewing empire, increased its income 9 per cent to just over £7million in the six months to the end of September.
WIC's investments include a 47 per cent stake in Abingdon brewer Morland, currently the focus of takeover speculation.
AQUASCUTUM held sales only a hairsbreadth short of the corresponding figure at £23.6million in the six months to July 31, but pre-tax profit slid to £616,000, from £809,000.
After a lower tax burden, earnings were 0.3p down at 1.44p and the interim dividend stays at 1p net a share.
The markets.
Banks were particularly strong on further reaction to Thursday's debt provision moves at Lloyds and Natwest, removing worries of possible rights issues.
Barclays, whose exposure to Third World debts are lower than most, led the way ahead with a 22p gain to 518p.
Oils rallied several pence now that the anticipated lower-earnings from BP and Shell are out of the way.
Unilever helped sentiment by revealing third-quarter profits at the top end of expectations.
The shares recovered 18p to 637p.
Wellcome, reporting full-year results next Thursday, advanced 11p to 705p.
BZW think the figures will be largely academic, but there will be plenty of interest in the prospects for the anti-Aids drug Retrovir.
Gilts, after four days of rising quotations, softened an eighth as the pound took a breather.
SEAQ volume at 5pm was 480.7 million.
Main changes: Unilever 637p, up 18p; Rothmans Intl, 617p down 21p; Wellcome 705p, up 11p; Barclays Bank, 518p, up 22p; NatWest, 334p, up 10p; Bremner, 65p down 13p; Burmah, 688p, down 8p; Abbey National, 157p up 8p.
Tokyo: Prices firmer.
Nikkei index: 35,663.20 (35,657.42).
Hong Kong: Prices closed narrowly lower.
Hang Seng index: 2,776.86 (2,781.44).
Frankfurt: Stocks surged broadly higher in active trading.
FAZ index: 634.84 (623.07).
Paris: Prices were little changed in moderate trading.
CAC index: 507.2 (507.7).
Details of the charges faced by the accused 1.
Conspiracy to contravene Section 13 of the Prevention Of Fraud (Investments) Act 1958, contrary to Section 1 (1) of The Criminal Law Act 1977.
NatWest Investment Bank Limited, County NatWest Limited, UBS Phillips and Drew Securities Limited (then Phillips & Drew Securities Limited), Charles Villiers, Jonathan Cohen, David Reed, Nicholas Wells, Martin Gibbs, Christopher Stainforth, Paul Smallwood and Timothy Brown.
Between the 1st day of July 1987 and the 15th day of October 1987 conspired together and with other persons fraudulently to induce persons to enter into agreements for acquiring or subscribing for securities, namely shares in Blue Arrow plc, by making statements which they knew to be misleading, false or deceptive or by dishonestly concealing material facts or by recklessly making statements which were misleading, false or deceptive namely: 1.1 By failing to notify the Company Announcements Office of the Quotations Department of the International Stock Exchange by way of a Class 2 announcement (as provided for by Section 6 of the Council of the Stock Exchange's admission of securities to listing) following the purchase of shares in Manpower Incorporated for a consideration in excess of 5 per cent of the consolidated net assets of Blue Arrow; 1.2 By concealing the fact that the level of Acceptances of provisionally allotted new ordinary shares in Blue Arrow was 38.04 per cent at the expiry of the offer by way of rights issue at 3pm on September 28, 1987; 1.3 By concealing the fact that 54,625,000 new ordinary shares in Blue Arrow were taken up after 3pm on September 28, 1987; 1.4 By falsely stating that, in connection with the rights issue of 504.4 million new ordinary shares in Blue Arrow, acceptances had been received in respect of 246.5 million shares which represented 48.9 per cent of the rights issue.
2.
Conspiracy to defraud, contrary to common law.
NatWest Investment Bank, County NatWest, UBS Phillips and Drew Securities (then Phillips & Drew Securities), Charles Villiers, Jonathan Cohen, Stephen Clark, Elizabeth Brimelow, David Reed, Nicholas Wells, Alan Keat, Martin Gibbs, Christopher Stainforth, Paul Smallwood and Timothy Brown.
Between the 14th day of September 1987 and the 8th day of January 1988 conspired together and with other persons to defraud such persons who had or might have had an interest in dealing in shares in Blue Arrow, or National Westminster Bank, or in dealing on the Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 share index, namely: 2.1 By dishonestly concealing holdings of 19.39 per cent of the share capital of Blue Arrow; 2.2 By falsely stating that all remaining shares not taken up in the rights issue by existing shareholders had been sold in the market; 2.3 By falsely representing that 33,315,528 shares in Blue Arrow held by County NatWest Securities were held for the purposes of market making; 2.4 By falsely representing that 34,069,433 shares in Blue Arrow held by Phillips & Drew Securities were held for the purposes of market making; 2.5 By dealing off market with Union Bank of Switzerland in 28,201,743 shares in Blue Arrow when by reason of their connection with that company they were knowingly in possession of un-published price sensitive information; 2.6 By creating a false instrument, namely a letter of indemnity dated 5 October 1987 from Nicholas Wells on behalf of County NatWest to Union Bank Of Switzerland; 2.7 By engaging in a course of conduct which created a false or misleading impression as to the market in the shares of Blue Arrow for the purpose of creating such an impression and thereby influencing persons who might deal in those shares; 2.8 By purchasing and retaining 2,150 Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 share index put option contracts to cover a risk of £51,500,000 whilst concealing from the market the true position in relation to the rights issue and the subsequent placing of shares in Blue Arrow, where Blue Arrow and National Westminster Bank were both component parts of that index.
2.9 By transferring 1,000,000 new ordinary shares in Blue Arrow from NatWest Investment Bank to County NatWest Securities to account for a similar holding by Handelsbank NatWest and falsely representing that those shares were held by County atWest Securities Limited for the purposes of market making; 2.10 By failing properly to account for the acquisition, distribution and disposal of 66,600,000 shares in Blue Arrow held by NatWest Investment Bank and County NatWest in the records required for accounting purposes by NatWest Investment Bank and County NatWest; 2.11 By failing properly to account for the acquisition, distribution and disposal of 34,069,433 shares in Blue Arrow held by Phillips & Drew Securities in the records required for accounting purposes by Phillips & Drew Securities; 2.12 By falsely representing that County NatWest had become interested in 9.5 per cent of the issued capital of Blue Arrow on December 17,1987 and that the board of Blue Arrow had been informed of that interest; 2.13 By concealing the true position in relation to the rights issue from the Bank of England, the International Stock Exchange, National Westminster Bank and/ or the board of directors of Blue Arrow; 2.14 By falsely representing that the rights issue had been honestly and successfully completed by reason of their general skill, competence and diligence.
Rock on for lower rates.
THE latest crop of reduced rate home loans include a low start mortgage from the Northern Rock Building Society.
It is available on home loans of between £40,000 and £150,000, where payments are deferred on 20 per cent of the loan in the first year and 10 per cent in the second.
Borrowers start making repayments on the full balance in the third year.
The unpaid interest is rolled up and added to the total debt.
Meanwhile the Britannia is offering 0.6 per cent off its base mortgage rate of 14.5 per cent to borrowers who need at least £40,000 which cuts the rate of its Superloan mortgages to 13.9 per cent(APR 15.60) for the first year of the loan.
And the Greenwich is offering mortgages of at least £30,000 at 13.45 per cent for the first year.
Centralised lender National Home Loans has a cap & collar deal where the mortgage interest rate will not rise above 14.49 per cent or fall below 10.99 per cent over the next five years..
New bond from Lloyds.
ON the savings front Lloyds Bank has a fixed-interest bond paying 11.7 per cent net on minimum deposits of £5,000.
The interest will be paid after six months from the date of opening.
If you are prepared to tie up at least £1,000 for two years the National & Provincial has launched Security Bond III which currently pays 11.75 per cent net.
The society pledges to keep the rate on the new bond at least 4 per cent net above its Ordinary Share rate for 2 years.
The Bristol & West's Vantage Bond, which locks up your cash for 12 months, pays a fraction more at 11.8 per cent net but needs a minimum opening deposit of £5,000.
For those savers who are prepared to lock up their minimum deposit of £5,000 for six months there is the Interest Assured Bond paying at least 11.5 per cent net.
Meanwhile, the Wiltshire-based Regency and West of England has come to the aid of small savers with a minimum of £500 to invest.
Its fixed-interest bond pays 11.50 per cent net provided the money is tied up for at least 12 months..
Key move on cards.
BANK of Scotland has introduced Keycard Plus, a new multi-function debit card which guarantees cheques up to £100, accesses cash machines and effects payments at point of sale terminals for both Switch and Eftpos card systems.
The bank has simultaneously raised the cheque guarantee limit to £250 for its Premier Visa cardholders..
In the money.
EDINBURGH-BASED fund managers Stewart Ivory has added the Managed Cash Fund to its stable of unit trusts.
The fund invests in money market deposits with a range of banks and financial institutions.
The minimum investment is set at £500 with an initial charge of 5 per cent plus an annual fee of 1 per cent.
Meanwhile the Unit Trust Association has published its Customer Code which explains what to expect from an investment in unit trusts.
Free copies of the leaflet are available from UTA, 65 Kingsway, London WC 2B 6TD.
Salut! as long-running French drinks feud comes to an end.
By Lisa Buckingham
THE LONG-running feud between two of France's wealthiest drinks dynasties has been resolved with the decision to merge liqueur group Cointreau with Remy Martin, one of the country's leading makers of cognac.
The merger, creating an organisation with sales of more than £600million a year, ends a 20-year battle for control over Remy, the third largest cognac firm and the supplier of Krug champagne.
It also follows a spate of takeovers for all the other big cognac houses in recent years when market leader Hennessy fell to LVMH, Seagram acquired Martell and Courvoisier was purchased by Allied-Lyons.
Remy, which lost out to Martini last year in a bid for Benedictine, is the world's third largest cognac firm and the only one which is still family owned.
The Heriard-Dubreuil dynasty holds a 51 per cent stake in the group whilst the Cointreau family, headed by Max Cointreau, owns the remaining 49 per cent.
A stalemate at Remy led to the group establishing a separate distribution company Remy & Associes — which recently gained a second market listing for 33 per cent of its shares — in order to find new finance for expansion.
‘They are both extremely attractive targets but because of the family control neither could have been taken over without consent and, to date, the families have shown no inclination to sell out,’ said one Continental drinks watcher.
It is understood that both companies will continue to operate independently and that will mean that arrangements such as Cointreau's joint venture with GrandMet's IDV as well as Cinzano will remain in place.
Although there appear to be few operational savings planned from combining the two groups, three major benefits are expected to result from the merger:
A united management means it is less likely that disaffected family members will seek to realise the value of their shareholdings; their financial and political clout should improve as each of the families ceases attempts to undermine the other's access to finance for expansion, and; two separate distribution networks working together should mean the companies can gain additional contracts from non-competitive brand names.
Remy, which last year acquired the Heidsieck champagne business, has an annual turnover of around £340million which is expected to rise to roughly £450million in the year to next March.
Cointreau is slightly smaller with annual sales in the region of £300 million.
Cointreu is said to be the seventh most popular liqueur in the world.
Court ruling means planes stay grounded.
By Financial Staff
TWO planes used by the financially troubled Paramount Airways will remain grounded over the weekend after the Court of Appeal last night overturned a court ruling just two hours before freeing the aircraft.
The aircraft have been held for a week because Paramount owes Bristol and Birmingham International airports £1.7million.
A High Court application by the airports for their continued detention was succesfully contested by Paramount's administrator, supported by two creditors.
But the appeal judges later approved an agreement between the two sides in the dispute, allowing the airports to continue the detention of the planes until £350,000 security is paid into court or until a full appeal hearing takes place in ten days time.
The court was also told that a sale of Paramount was expected to be completed in the next fortnight for £1.5million.
.
By Teresa Hunter
YOUNG Abbey National savers Benny and Laura Grant will soon be losing the Abbey habit after missing out on the flotation cash distribution to young investors — due to the advice of the society's staff.
Mr Adrian Grant opened accounts for both his children when they were born.
Benny, eight, now has around £850 in his, while sister Laura, four, has £520.
Although Mr Grant, of Barkingside, Essex, had made it clear these were children accounts he was twice advised his name should be put first.
Minors could not qualify for free shares under the terms of the recent Abbey conversion to a public limited company.
Instead, they were to receive 5 per cent of their balances by way of a cash distribution.
Mr Grant visited his branch before the flotation to ask whether his children would get the cash distribution and was informed they would.
However they received nothing when the cash distribution took place last week.
Mr Grant says: ‘I am absolutely appalled by this.
My children should have grown up into loyal Abbey national customers.
‘I cannot understand how any financial institution can rob two small children of their rights, when all we did was follow the Abbey National's advice all along.
An Abbey spokesman said it was common practice to advise that a parent's name should be put first for an account of a very small child.
But the distribution rules said shares or discounts had to go to the first named.
French farce locks in unitholders.
By Margaret Hughes
as if volatile markets aren't enough to contend with, private investors who invest in unit trusts primarily to minimise the risk of equity investment have found just how uncertain that too can prove.
The 12,000 unitholders who have invested in any of the 11 funds managed by Dumenil Trust Management, the French-owned unit trust group, found themselves this week locked into their investments when the fund managers suspended all dealings because they believed there was an error with pricing.
But it appears that pricing is not the only problem affecting investors in the Dumenil group.
IMRO, the City watchdog responsible for regulating fund managers, has revealed that it was already probing Dumenil's administration following complaints from investors that they were receiving their income late.
Guardian reader Peter John, who has holdings in Dumenil's Swiss, French and Spanish funds, claims he failed to receive any dividends in June and November as he expected.
After receiving a letter last week informing him there would be no dividend from his Swiss holding, he decided to sell.
However, as he posted his letter on Monday, he has been caught in the suspension trap, and it could be at least a month, before there is any prospect of seeing his money.
He said: ‘I only have a few thousand invested, but it is very worrying when you cannot get your money back, and there is no way of knowing how long it might be or how much I will get back.’
On the same day investors in the somewhat better known Gartmore heard that their fund management group was to be the latest to change hands.
Present owners British & Commonwealth announced that it hoped to raise an estimated £130 million by putting it up for sale.
Gartmore investors will have to wait until the end of January to know who the new owners will be although it will almost certainly be an overseas based group.
Gartmore management is anxious to assure unitholders, along with investment trust, pension and offshore investors that it is ‘business as usual.
‘Chairman and chief executive Paul Myners claims that Gartmore would only be sold to a party acceptable to the management.
It was, he said, essential that the new owners keep the 80-strong management team in place.
Experience with other fund management takeovers would however tend to suggest otherwise.
Dumenil fund managers have called in accountants Touche Ross to investigate the pricing problems and say they are ‘optimistic’ that they will be resolved within this time frame but are giving ‘no guarantees’.
The fund managers have said that any investors who have suffered because they bought or sold at incorrect prices will be compensated.
But there will be no compensation for those who might have wanted to deal during the suspension period.
Imro chief executive John Morgan rightly describes the supension as ‘extremely disturbing’ for unitholders but is hopeful that with Touche Ross on board the administration difficulties will be resolved along with the pricing problem in the time available.
As thoughts turn to booking a place in the holiday sun, Money Guardian looks at both the costs and savings of taking a break.
Getting away with an investment
The Holiday Property Bond aims to point you in the direction of a vacation.
Jill Papworth reports
Leon Brittan defends telecom move.
By Peter Large Technology Editor
PROTECTION of national telecoms monopolies by European Community governments ‘is not to be tolerated,’ Sir Leon Brittan, the Commissioner for competition policy, said in London yesterday.
Sir Leon was defending the compromise proposal that emerged at a meeting of the Community's industry ministers this week, whereby the Commission might grant temporary exemptions to countries facing problems in opening their markets.
He said that the Commission ‘has not wavered one iota’ in its determination to ensure competition.
The state telecoms monopolies wanted to retain their privileged positions, and that meant extending their privileges, since new technologies and services were springing up on every hand.
In too many cases telecoms authorities had persuaded their governments to defend them from the provisions of the Treaty of Rome.
‘And that is not to be tolerated.’
Key pensions victory for lucky 13 million New proposals are good news for employees, but a disappointment for directors.
Mihir Bose reports.
A MAJOR victory has been won in the long-running battle to protect the rights of approximately 13 million members of company pension schemes.
This week Social Services Secretary Tony Newton announced a wide ranging series of proposals that will strengthen the rights and privileges of company pension scheme members.
However these proposals may remove a very attractive pensions option for directors of small companies.
Trade unions, the Industrial Society, and the Occupational Pensions Advisory Service have been campaigning for years to improve employees' rights over their retirement income.
Major concerns included the millions of pounds of benefits lost because of difficulties claiming pensions earned early on.
Company takeovers, where a predator may try to raid the fund, were another area of concern.
Among the package of proposals meant to safeguard members of company pension schemes, Mr Newton plans to have a tracing service based on a register of pension schemes to help people track down pensions held with their previous employers.
And those who change jobs or whose firms get taken over will now get extra protection.
The proposals also have a safeguard in takeovers, where a preadator often has his eye on a rich pension scheme.
Employers will not be able to make bulk transfers of employees from one scheme to another unless certain conditions are met.
This should put a stop to the sort of attempt made by Hanson after it had successfully taken-over Imperial.
However the government has not gone as far as it might have.
It is not going to require all schemes to increase pensions in payment by up to a maximum of 5 per cent a year.
But then not even the Occupations Pensions Board, whose report has lead to the current proposals, suggested that.
The government hopes employers will do it voluntarily.
There is also to be a pensions ombudsman with statutory backing.
However the Occupational Pensions Board called for a pensions tribunal and Tony Thurham, chairman of the Association of Pensions Lawyers, said: ‘Many pensions lawyers would have preferred a tribunal since it would probably have had greater powers and more staff.
Despite this, these are impressive and long-needed safeguards for members of company pensions.
But directors of small companies who can have their own special pension arrangements will find that most of the benefits of such schemes have been removed.
These are schemes which have generally less than 12 members.
The most attractive feature is that the directors can borrow back half the money in the scheme and invest it in their business.
The Revenue has for some time been concerned about what is done with the money.
Two years ago a consultative document from the Inland Revenue proposed that the loan-back be limited to 25 per cent.
But the government is now proposing that all schemes, including small ones, should not be allowed to invest more than 5 per cent of their money in their employer's businesss.
Small schemes were created in the 1970s as a result of an Inland Revenue concession but once these government proposals are enacted that concession will become history.
The Revenue conceedes that it will mean the virtual end of some 15,000 small schemes with £3 billion in assets.
Sections of the pensions industry who advise such schemes have already started to protest.
But the Department of Social Security confirmed that the government is serious about this 5 per cent limit applying to all schemes and ‘envisage no exemption.’
Money Guardian is edited by Personal Finance Editor Margaret Hughes
Winter in the sun and save money.
By Morag Campbell
NOW is the time of year when tour operators' thoughts turn to tempting the over-60s — and increasingly the over 55s — to spend their winters in the sun.
The brochures claim it can be cheaper than staying at home.
And anyway, the thought of spending January and February in Spain or Portugal for as little as £10 a day seems attractive in its own right.
But if you want to escape the British winter and make substantial savings you have to plan ahead.
Obviously you will save on heating bills, petrol, and if you book in all-inclusive holiday, on what you would otherwise have spent on food at home.
Even if you spend the winter in a self-catering apartment, you may be able to save money by shopping in local markets and finding prices cheaper than at home.
But there are other less obvious savings which can be taken into account if you are prepared to write a few letters and fill out a form or two.
If you run a car, you are entitled to a rebate on your Road Find Licence for every complete month your vehicle is off the road.
But ‘off the road’ means just that.
Don't go off to the sun and leave it parked in the street.
Whether you have paid your £100 fee for the full year or £55 for a six-month licence, you entitled to a rebate of £8.33 for each whole month left on the licence disc.
Be sure to apply before the first of the calendar month when you want the rebate to start.
If you apply on December 1, for instance, the rebate will not start until January 1 and you will lose a month.
Ask at your main Post Office for rebate form V14.
You may also get a rebate on your car insurance, provided it is off the road for at least 28 days.
Investigate whether your insurance will be partially suspended — that is leaving you with cover for fire and theft — entirely suspended or completely cancelled.
Remember, however, that on your return to the UK you will not have immediate use of your car.
Your Road Fund Licence and insurance will have to be renewed and getting these organised may well take a week or two, especially if your car is over three years old and your MoT certificate lapsed during your absence.
The AA doesn't offer a rebate on its breakdown and rescue services.
The RAC will suspend your membership while you are away, but only once a year.
If you are away for several weeks your phone bill should be much lower than normal and you will automatically receive a Low User Rental Rebate.
Some water authorities will give you a rebate on your water supply while you winter abroad.
But they will make a charge for disconnecting and reconnecting which may negate the saving unless you are out of the country for several months.
If you rent your TV and video you can save money by suspending or even cancelling your contract for the period you are away.
Since an empty house is more of a challenge to burglars and squatters than one where there is lots of activity, you can't expect a rebate on your house and contents insurance — in fact your insurance company may even charge an extra premium if you are away for more than30 days.
Finally, if there is a demand in your area for short-term property letting, you may be able to make a profit from renting out your home while you are away.
If the possibility appeals, make sure you take advice first from an accountant on the tax implications and go through a reputable property agent to handle the short-term rental contract.
Saga publishes a booklet, Saving and Spending on Longer Holidays Abroad, which not only details the savings householders of any age can expect to make while they take an extended holiday, but also gives advice to pensioners on how to ensure they get their pension while they winter abroad.
It is available from: Saga PR, The Saga Building, Middelburg Square, Folkestone, Kent CT20 1AZ.
(Tel: 0303 47523).
PAGE
Wall Street trading probe.
Allegations that recent sharp swings in share prices on Wall Street were aggravated by traders manipulating the stock and futures markets are being investigated in New York and Chicago, writes Mary Brasier in New York.
The New York Stock Exchange and the Chicago commodity exchanges are looking at programme trades carried out last July which may have flouted market rules and contributed to sudden movements in both the Dow Jones index and the S&P 500 futures index.
Ford head retires.
Ford of America stressed yesterday that there would be no ‘significant’ changes in the way the company was run after announcing that Mr Donald Petersen, chairman for the past decade, is to retire.
Burmah mum.
Burmah, where Dutch industrial group SHV has built up a 9 per cent stake, refused to comment on rumours in New York that it was preparing a bid for American-based Quaker State Corporation which makes motor oils.
NYSE fire shut-down.
The start of trading on the New York and American Stock Exchanges was held up for an hour yesterday after a fire, caused by an electrical fault, broke out in the building housing the exchanges' computer systems, writes Mary Brasier in New York.
Last night, the Dow Jones Industrial Average added 21.92 points to 2,625.61, a 0.84 per cent rise.
ConsGold break-up.
Hanson yesterday began the break-up of the Consolidated Gold Field's empire when it sold ARC Construction to its management for £6.3million.
ARC Construction last year had a turnover of £75 million and pre-tax profit of £350,000.
De Savary approval.
Peter de Savary's Canvey Island development has won approval from the local planning committee which voted 15 to one in favour of the plan to build a new community, against the advice of its chief planning officer.
Pembridge declares.
Roland Franklin's Pembridge group yesterday declared unconditional its £697million break-up bid for the Sellotape to Basildon Bond group, DRG.
Plea for more power stations.
By Patrick Donovan and Michael White
BRITAIN faces the prospect of a huge energy shortfall of up to 25 per cent by the middle 1990s unless new generating plant is brought on stream to replace the abandoned Pressurised Water Reactor programme, sources claimed last night.
As pressure grows on Energy Secretary, Mr John Wakeham to increase competition in the privatised power market by breaking National
Power's generating monopoly, ministers have been warned that more power stations must urgently be brought on stream to meet projected demand.
The Government is also facing growing pressure from its own right wing to inject a more competitive structure into the generating industry in the wake of this week's withdrawal of nuclear power from the privatisation package — by breaking up the proposed duopoly of National Power and PowerGen.
Tory backbenchers who never liked the duopoly solution are determined to get the Energy department to unpick its handiwork, either by making National Power and PowerGen, more evenly sized companies or insisting that one or more new generating firms should be allowed to compete in the British market.
The loss of the PWR programme, coming months after the decision to scrap three major coal burning power stations, will reduce projected power supply by 13,000 mw — around 25 per cent of total supply — by the middle of the next decade.
Fears of an energy shortfall will lend new weight to calls by PowerGen, the smaller of the two Central Electricity Generating Boards, to take over a bigger share of the power market.
The company has appealed Mr Wakeham in a bid to dilute the market share promised to National Power which will retain a near 50 per cent interest in British generating plant even without its nuclear plant.
A Department of Energy spokesman last night said that there were ‘no plans to restructure the offer’.
PowerGen, backed up by representations from more than 70 independent generating companies, has told ministers that National Power will monopolise the market.
Meanwhile, National Power Chairman, Lord Marshall is planning to resign on Monday.
He spent yesterday finalising terms of his payoff package with Treasury officials.
It is understood that British Petroleum chairman, Sir Peter Walters has been shortlisted to take over the job.
Sir Peter, stands down at BP in spring next year.
.
By Mihir Bose
INVESTMENTS could soon be sold like whiter-than-white washing powder if the latest Personal Equity Plan launch is anything to go by.
With much-ballyhoo, Scottish Mutual has announced the introduction, from December 1, of what it describes as the first ‘risk-graded’ Personal Equity Plan.
Investors will have a choice of three unit trusts: an income trust, a growth trust and an opportunity trust.
The income trust will invest in between 60 and 70 UK stocks — mainly blue chip companies like ICI — and will seek to maintain at least the current dividends levels in all but ‘the worst possible economic circumstances.’
The growth trust will invest in a broad spread of between 60-100 UK stocks and the opportunity trust will invest in no more than 40 stocks which are special situations — smaller companies, possible bid targets, or short-term prospects.
Income trust is considered the safest, growth is a bit more risky and opportunity the chanciest.
The investor has to choose how much of their £2,400 will go in each of them.
Anyone who feels he can afford to risk the lion's share of his £2,400 could have most of it in the opportunity trust.
Switches can always be made although a charge of £10 plus a 1 per cent bid/offer spread would be payable.
But what Scottish Mutual means by risk is volatility, and that idea is under fire.
Christopher Poll, managing director of Micropal statistics service warns: ‘People are confusing volatility with risk.
The result is that this whole question of measuring risk has became a mess.
‘Volatility is only the first stage in measuring risk.
To the average investor risk is the loss of capital value whereas to the academics risk is calculation of a deviation from an index.’
Scottish Mutual is asking investors to choose which type of unit trust they think will be more volatile.
Other unit trust managers have been using statistical tools to measure volatility as an aid to investment.
Micropal measures volatility for all unit trusts which have been going for three years.
Anything under three years, except money market funds, says Mr Poll, does not provide a proper statistical sample to measure volatility.
The risk-graded investment — be it under Scottish Mutual's calculations or the statistical tools used by other unit trust managers — can be no more than a guide.
The idea that there is an investment-equivalent of the detergent that washes whiter than white just does not work.
Meanwhile, other PEPs are coming on to the market.
Henderson Financial Management has launched an Investment Trust Equity PEP which will invest in Lowland Investment Company plc plus a selection of five quality UK companies.
The quality shares could include Hanson, Fisons, MRPC, Whitbread and LASMO.
Commercial Union is also looking at top flight equities and/or unit trusts with its CU Quilter Personal Equity Plan.
For confused investors, there is Shaw & Co Ltd's Private Client PEP Club.
A £60 joining fee and yearly management fee of 1 per cent of the value of the investment within he PEP gets clients a range of advice and options on their PEP investment.
£1.1m bail for eleven in Blue Arrow case.
By Peter Rodgers City Editor
TEN City executives and a solicitor were yesterday bailed for a total of £1.1million after appearing at Guildhall magistrates court on charges of conspiracy to defraud in the Blue Arrow rights issue.
Bail was set at £100,000 each on condition that the defendants surrender their passports, do not discuss the case with a list of potential witnesses, and notify police of any change of address.
The defendants are to appear again on January 12.
Reporting restrictions were not lifted.
The 11 were arrested on Thursday morning and charged — along with NatWest Investment Bank, County NatWest Securities and UBS Phillips & Drew Securities — on 14 counts of conspiracy to defraud persons dealing in the shares of Blue Arrow or NatWest Bank or in options on the FT-SE 100 index.
The three companies and eight of the defendants were also accused on four counts of fraudulently inducing purchases of shares in Blue Arrow and NatWest Investment Bank, County NatWest Securities and UBS Phillips & Drew Securities.
The main charges relate to the creation of a false market in Blue Arrow shares between mid-1987 and January 1988, by giving a wrong impression that an £837million rights issue and placing of Blue Arrow shares had been successful.
One charge related to dealing in options on the FT-SE 100 and alleges that the accused bought options with a face value of £51.5million while concealing the failure of the rights issue.
Blue Arrow and NatWest Bank were component parts of the FT-SE 100 index.
All eleven including former County NatWest chairman Mr Charles Villiers, the firm's compliance officer, Ms Elizabeth Brimelow, County's finance director Stephen Clark and Mr Alan Keat, a partner in City solicitors Travers, Smith Braithwaite, left court immediately.
One of the defendants, former County NatWest chief executive Jonathan Cohen, later issued a statement through his solicitors ‘vehemently denying’ wrongdoing.
He said that in detailed investigation over 18 months by National Westminster Bank deputy chairman Sir Philip Wilkinson and by two Department of Trade inspectors ‘my actions and behaviour were exonerated completely and no ground for criticism or fault was found.
In these circumstances, the bringing of criminal charges in this way is, I believe, unfair and utterly baseless.’
Twenty suspects in Ferranti fraud.
By Lisa Buckingham
FERRANTI, the troubled defence electronics group, said yesterday it has identified around 20 people involved with the alleged £215million International Signal & Control fraud against whom legal action may be launched.
The company, which has just concluded preliminary talks with 13 potential predators and is poised for big cuts in staffing costs, pledged to try to recover all the money lost through the ISC affair.
The FBI and Britain's Serious Fraud Office are investigating the scandal at its US offshoot, which is alleged to date back to 1983 and involve bogus defence contracts with Pakistan, China and South Africa.
A Ferranti spokesman would not give details of the individuals or organisations against which legal action may be taken but said: ‘We would hope in the not too distant future to take the necessary legal action to put everything right.’
Progress on the ISC inquiry came as a mystery investor emerged in the company and as staffing cuts were introduced in an effort to offset the ISC losses and an overall decline in defence business.
Delaporte Establishment — the nominee company which emerged earlier this week with a significant shareholding in merchant bank Morgan Grenfell — yesterday disclosed a 1.13 per cent Ferranti stake.
The company denied huge redundancies at its Edinburgh plant although it admitted ax-ing Sunday and overtime working, banning non-essential recruitment and introducing voluntary early retirement.
If these strategems failed, redundancies of up to 400 people might be sought.
Ferranti's move came in the wake of complaints about a market turndown from rivals such as Racal and Thomson CSF — the French group which may bid for Ferranti with British Aerospace.
Yesterday it was also disclosed that Thorn EMI had failed to sell its defence business after trying for five months.
Joint ventures or mergers are now being sought.
.
By Teresa Hunter
THE deal between the Cheltenham & Gloucester and Guardian building societies announced this week has changed the face of society mergers.
Guardian members are to receive an average £520 cash windfall for voting ‘yes’ to the merger at a special meeting in December — the first time a bonus of this size has been paid out on a simple merger operation.
The Abbey National gave itsmembers a bonus in the form of 100 free shares when it became a public limited company in July.
However, this would not have been worth as much as the Guardian payout to the average investor.
There have been some 35 building society mergers over the past five years.
Although some bonuses have been paid they have been less than 1 per cent.
But the C&G merger plan could mark a turning point.
If Guardian members receive an average £520 for giving the nod to a plan to allow their society to remain a mutual — and to continue operating much as it has since the turn of the century — what price a vote to convert?
Now, other conversion plans could well depend on the size of the hand-out rather than the principles involved in surrending mutuality.
It is puzzling why the C&G's managing director Andrew Longhurst feels he needs to pay Guardian members 4 per cent of their balances to get them to agree to the merger.
C&G's 1 million-plus members, who will also have to approve the merger at a special meeting, will receive nothing for voting ‘yes’.
More than 75 per cent of those voting must be in favour.
The Guardian, which has 80,000 investors, 35,000 borrowers and assets of £1 billion, is an unusual case in that its reserves are higher than those of many societies.
The C&G claims the cash distribution is merely designed to bring the reserves of the two societies in line.
However, as a major reason for the merger must be to improve the C&G's capital position, it is curious for it to give away quite so much money.
It estimates the bonus and the mortgage discount will cost £42 million.
The mortgage hand-out will cost a further £5 million.
Guardian chairman Vic Dawson has announced that all the society's savers will receive 4 per cent of their balances on every account held.
This differs from the Abbey National share allocation, where just one share allocation was permitted per saver, regardless of the number of accounts held.
As the average Guardian balance is £13,000, this gives an estimated average tax-free payout of £520.
Guardian borrowers will enjoy a 0.5 per cent discount for one year, giving a saving of £250 on a typical Guardian mortgage of £50,000.
The normal merger procedure is to ask members of the society being transferred — in this case the Guardian — for permission to merge.
Members of the society which remains unchanged are not asked for their views.
However, building society merger rules, allow for a maximum 1 per cent of assets to be distributed among members in this case.
A larger distribution requires the consent of the members of the smaller society as well as those of the larger one.
Halifax general manager David Gilchrist says: ‘It has always been the belief that this process of consultation would be extremely cumbersome and costly.
However the C&G plan could well show that such mergers are possible.’
The Guardian distribution also has the advantage over the Abbey National share allocation in that it is tax-free and net of all osts.
Abbey National investors were forced to incur costs selling their shares.
Guardian investors will also receive hand-outs on a pro-rata basis.
The Abbey's share distribution caused much feeling with many investors.
And now societies still interested in the conversion possibility will be carefully weighing up the reception given to the Guardian scheme compared with Abbey's.
Alliance & Leicester's general manager Peter White confirmed that his society remains committed to the possibility of converting to a PLC, once it finds it is unable to carry out its strategic plans as a mutual.
It denies that its proposed purchase of GiroBank necessarily postpones the conversion plans.
He said: ‘I could push the button today and we could convert in six months.
There are a number of options available for a cash distribution.
We would certainly strive for the most equitable route.
But in the Guardian's case they are fortunate to have such high reserves.’
The Halifax's name always remains in the frame as a conversion possibility.
Mr Gilchrist points out the strategic difference between the Abbey and the Guardian distribution.
He says: ‘The flat hand-out is appropriate if you are seeking to mobilise the maximum numbers to vote.’
The Guardian only needs to seek agreement from 75 per cent of those who vote, while the Abbey had to secure the vote of 20 per cent of all eligible investing members, with 75 per cent of those in favour and a majority vote in favour from eligible borrowers.
TSB hangs up on a telephone banking scheme.
By Teresa Hunter
THE TSB, the bank which likes to say ‘yes’, has followed the Midland into direct banking — but it has said ‘no’ to launching a comprehensive telephone banking package.
TSB Direct will offer personal loans, mortgages and insurance advice to the TSB's seven million customers and customers of other banks who wish to apply.
There will be two direct channels — a fast-answer telephone service for sophisticated customers and a postal service for the less sophisticated.
The TSB claims it will offer better and cheaper financial services than can be bought over the counter in TSB branches.
Essentially three loan packages are available for different income groups.
They are: TSB Choice, which tailors interest rates to individuals credit scoring, UDT Direct, primarily for existing customers of the TSB's finance house, and TSB Direct.
Although there is some confusion, it seems UDT was designed for those earning more than £8,500, TSB Direct, for those earning £10,000 plus and TSB Choice for those earning more than £12,000.
Pilot tests have been carried out for much of this year with both the Choice loans package and direct access, but TSB Direct was formally established on November 1.
TSB Direct managing director Philip Haynes said an all-singing all-dancing banking service, like Midland's First Direct, could follow — but only when he believed there was something ‘demonstrably better’ about a direct bank account compared with a traditional branch-based account.
He argued: ‘We don't believe the market is ready yet.
We prefer to convert customers a piece at a time.
Our research shows that people are happy to buy loans direct.’
Midland believes that following 40,000 inquiries for First Direct in October, it will open 4,000 to 5,000 accounts during the first month.
But customers who deal direct are cheaper in the long run to process than those who buy through branches.
Therefore TSB Direct claims it will offer cheaper products than are available through the branches.
TSB Direct also claims loans can be turned round in five days from application.
However bank statements and a mortgage statement will be required.
TSB Choice is the fast-answer telephone service.
It tailors interest rates to match each individual customer's financial position.
But, broadly, charges are 21.9 to 25.3 APR for unsecured personal loans.
Secured loans will cost 17.8 to 19.9 APR, and the mortgage rate will be 14.75 per cent.
UDT has been selling car loans through the mail for more than 60 years and it will continue to sell loans through the post.
Its interest rates on unsecured loans range from 24.6 to 28.3 APR.
The cost of a loan secured against your home is 18.5 APR.
The third Direct package again will be promoted primarily through the mail.
It is designed for those who are not quite as sophisicated as Choice customers.
Its unsecured loan rates will range from 22.8 to 24.6 APR.
Secured loans will range from 18.5 to 20.9 APR.