

ONE MORE increase in interest rates means yet another deluge of incentives from housebuilders aimed at enticing buyers out of their shells.
Discounts, buy-backs, chainbreaking, free carpets, mortgage subsidies — the list gets longer as the stock of unsold new homes rises.
But how effective are these bribes?
Recent research suggests that buyers are unashamedly mercenary in screwing the most out of a builder.
But they insist that the money goes into their own pockets.
Free legal and survey fees come top of the list, according to findings by Research Associates Stone.
Most unpopular are subsidies to attract a buyer to take over an existing home so the seller is released to trade up.
First-buyers can be excused for favouring discounts and cheap mortgages, because they have no existing place to unload.
Others should realise that their selfishness may be making their problems worse.
Most people can find cut-price deals which reduce mortgage payments to levels considered acceptable when prices were booming, so the cost of moving is not as severe as high interest rates might imply.
But they cringe at the idea that someone else may benefit at their expense.
Buyers will bargain hard to cut the cost of the house they want, but dig in their heels rather than reduce their own asking price.
That, as much as the cost of mortgages, is why the system has frozen solid, with hardly anyone buying or selling.
Most people sit tight rather than lose a slice of what they see as their rightful ‘profit’.
And they look down their noses at schemes devised by builders which may offer £100 a month to encourage a potential purchaser of their existing home.
Unless a lot of people start looking beyond the bottom of their pockets, many houses will remain unsold for at least another year, because the Government is unlikely to bring interest rates down until the run-up to the next general election.
It is a worry that will have builders scouring this report for ideas, although at £295 a copy it is unlikely that any cost-conscious home owners will take the trouble to read about their prejudices.
Selling Houses in a Difficult Market, by Research Associates Stone (tel: 0785 813164)
ESTATE agents' boards are the unsightly flotsam on a rising tide of home ownership.
They clutter streets, smother blocks of flats and deface many homes.
Just about everyone hoped they would disappear without trace when that tide ebbed and frenetic buying and selling ground to a halt.
Instead, they have beached in a large stain across Britain's front gardens.
Anyone with a home proving difficult to sell — which means just about everyone — will be resigned by now to a peeling, semi-permanent board mated to the gatepost.
Flat-dwellers have probably forgotten what the front of their block looks like behind the forest of advertisments.
But be warned: if you own more than one sign, PC Plod could be knocking on the door with a warrant one day.
Strict regulations brought in this year banned multiple boards and restricted the size to something around the measurements of a large tea-towel.
Agents know they could face fines of up to £400 for breaking the rules, but many keep taking the risk because they relish the free advertising.
And they will never pass on the fact that owners could be liable to the same punishment.
The problem arises mainly in the South, where it is customary for sellers to appoint several agents.
The new rules forbid more than one to put up a sign, a rule usually ignored by whoever is second or third on the list.
That sign must also be no more than half a square metre in area and all signs should be removed within two weeks of a sale being completed.
Central London councils like Westminster and Kensington & Chelsea have cracked down on agents because they face particular problems through large blocks of flats permanently smothered with signs.
‘Hit squads’ make regular weekend forays to pull down signs and fill notebooks with names.
But the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors is angry that some other local authorities are letting agents get away with murder.
It feels that cowboys are being allowed to give everyone else a bad name by scattering illegal signs.
Spokesman Jim Sutton says they should be ‘prosecuted with vigour’, but he reminds owners that they could be liable to the same fate if planners ever get tough.
Westminster environmental protection officer Sid Geake says the council has just about cracked the problem of multiple signs, but is now going even further to curb the blight.
Most of the city is covered by conservation areas, so it is asking for special controls on large swathes where even single signs would detract from the historic appearance.
Parts of Maida Vale and Bayswater have already been subject to controls.
The council wants to renew these and extend them to the whole of those districts and also bring in Pimlico and Westbourne.