

Rover believes in catching them young as Judith Jackson discovered in Swindon The body shop Motoring.
THE Rover plant at Swindon is not a pretty place.
But behind this typical example of dreary industrial architecture, much is going on which should encourage us.
For Rover is busy introducing young people to engineering.
Engineering is not a glamorous pursuit, nor does Swindon produce the final glossy motor car which might lure potential workers.
But the pressings which come out of the plant for Cowley and Longbridge are essential.
In an area where unemployment struggles to reach 3 per cent, school leavers are spoiled for choice, so it is in a spirit of enlightened self-interest that the Swindon managers have embarked on programmes designed to tempt young people into engineering.
Ray Fletcher, the personnel manager at Rover's Swindon plant and Graham Spaull, the training manager, are concerned that to many youngsters engineering means long hours, tedious jobs and dirty hands.
Part of this myth is perpetrated by educationists who have been no nearer a press shop than a picture in a newspaper; parents also see their offspring in cleaner, more ‘respectable’ jobs.
So the success of 20 youngsters on a two-week work experience programme in the Swindon plant on Monday is crucial to the future of engineering in general and the motor industry in particular.
There will soon be a severe shortage of young people for any industry, so the motor industry needs to stake its claim fast.
This latest group of teenagers at Rover come from local schools.
Many may have already been to the Saturday morning Skills Club which introduces Swindon schoolchildren to a workshop, supervised by senior instructors and apprentices and teaching simple engineering skills.
The club, open for four hours on a Saturday morning, is enormously popular, particularly with girls who show an affinity for craft skills.
Ray Fletcher sees these programmes as getting realism into schools.
‘We want the students to understand what we do — that these days engineering is a very sophisticated and hi-tech business which can be both interesting and rewarding.
It is vital for the industry to have young, skilled workers and that won't happen unless we encourage them.’
Local schools profit too.
Dorcan School, just down the road from the plant, is about to open a Rover Room, dedicated to technology and funded by Rover.
Supervised by Rover apprentices, the pupils ripped out an old lecture theatre and are in the process of replacing it with a multi-purpose room which, it is hoped, will help to bridge the gulf between industry and education.
Patrick Hazlewood, of Dorcan School, agrees that teachers have a lot to answer for when it comes to explaining engineering to students.
‘Teachers are often not aware of the possibilities and so links with local industry are extremely important.
We devised a sort of Great Egg Race for the children — Rover gave us some materials which would normally have gone on the scrap heap, lent us a hall and judged the competition.
It was a marvellous day and anything like that brings industry closer to the community.’
WORK shadowing, a technique usually used for pupils to follow managers around their daily tasks, takes on a new aspect at Swindon, where teachers shadow apprentices on the press lines, and Rover management teaches in local schools.
Does it work?
Last year Rover took on 30 apprentices at Swindon and this year the figure will be 64.
What all the programmes indicate is that it takes commitment and enthusiasm on the part of Rover, the schools and their pupils, if such initiatives are to produce the engineers of the future.
And that engineering can be fun.
Bad Housekeeping.
By Dulcie Domum
MRS BODY'S mother-in-law, otherwise known as Tracey's Gran, dies in the middle of Neighbours, revealing herself as a woman of sensibility.
Spouse unable to refrain from observing that Mrs Body's body will soon be a-mouldering in the grave.
Recall, with misgivings, that what attracted me to Spouse originally was his wit.
Harriet plucks me by the sleeve and whispers, ‘Mummy, what will Tracey's Gran do now she's dead, if she wants to go to the loo?’
Explain that loo becomes unnecessary — one of the many benefits of death.
Beyond time-share salesman, too.
Do not intend to join the older Mrs Body in Limbo quite yet, though.
Have got into nice little routine of Life Class every Thursday night and several naughty lunches a week, now Harriet is full time at school.
Naughty lunches usually wholefood take-aways eaten in Tom's friendly old nest of a bed.
Though wholewheat pastry in my opinion more suited as building material than sustenance.
Next naughty lunch, however, in country pub The Trout as Tom has big job on in nearby Pratworth Hall.
In meantime persevere with Truffaut season on Channel Four.
Cannot help feeling Truffaut's real talent lies in desserts: the conjuring up of trifles, and that what I want from cinema screen is more like roast beef.
Mere beefcake, in person of Gerard Depardieu, not enough.
Though addition of Depardieu to ingredients would certainly improve any film, or indeed trifle.
Go to bed wishing I could have bestowed an extra twenty years' active life upon Bunuel and Jane Austen.
Have frightful dream in which Elizabeth Bennett marries Mr Darcy, loses a leg, plays the piano in the nude and is pursued by flock of symbolic sheep from room to room of vast baroque mansion.
Awake fatigued and wonder about damage done to subconscious by education.
Eventually weekend shudders into oblivion.
Perk up at thought of dear Tom snatching hour to gaze into my eyes over Ploughman's Lunch at The Trout.
Whistle theme from The Trout as drive with carefree panache towards Pratworth.
Autumn tints splendid, and pub cosy.
Choose seat next to blazing log fire with back to light.
(When alone in Tom's attic recently, found his passport and discovered that when he was born I was already at Grammar School, doing Domestic Science — in vain, as it turned out).
Order large glass of dry sherry and feel its warmth penetrate toes, making up for rather painful new shoes.
Scrutinise ankles.
Fairly sure they at least are untouched by time.
Toes, however, dreadfully mangled.
Cannot understand why smallest toenails have turned to quartz and wish they would become pink and smooth again.
Pub fills up.
Chaps in tweed.
Expect Tom delayed by Lord Pratworth.
Some detail about old lead piping.
Order glass of white wine, forgetting head like sponge.
Must not drink any more as have to drive home and collect children en route.
Lurch to bar for peanuts.
Return with nonchalant air woman enjoying deliberately solitary lunch, but bark shin on chair.
Clock's fingers whizz round to 1.45.
Palpitations.
Fat bald man asks if he may join me, with unpleasant leer.
Give what I hope is curt nod, though double chins seem to go on flapping for ever.
Appetite has been replaced by anxiety; bread by kapok, Stilton by soap.
Fat bald man asks if it is not a bracing time of year.
Feel in urgent need of bracing and hear myself laughing loudly to show how relaxed I am.
Order large Perrier and hiccup mournfully for half hour while fat bald man laments Nigel Lawson.
Mentally remove five stones of body weight from Lawson and discover he could become Mr Darcy.
Worthwhile project for his retirement: profit not profiteroles.
Stagger out to car park as it is two thirty and, alone in car, ambushed by silly tears.
Have been stood up.
Possibly because of Pratworth heiress: Caroline, or Charlotte.
Drive eccentrically back to Rusbridge.
Answering machine winks cheerfully, but it is only Mrs Body excusing herself from work tomorrow because of the funeral.
Wonder if this might be right moment to make arrangements for my own.
Hunting dirty rats, nit wits and lousy comparisons.
JAMES Erlichman (‘A lousy way to treat a child’, Environment Guardian, November 3) must know the dictum of Paracelsus: ‘The dose alone makes the poison.’
An occasional application of lindane at a concentration of 2 per cent to kill headlice is certainly likely to be more effective than breaking their legs with a nit comb and avoids the discomfort of literally feeling lousy.
The materials available to our grandmothers were either more toxic or less effective.
I am reminded by the recommendation for dealing with bed bugs published in The Vermin Killer in 1680 —‘Take gunpowder, brush it well into the bedstead, light it, and keep the smoke in.’
Presumably if it didn't kill them it gave them a very nasty headache.
The trouble with Quassia (Letters, November 7) is that the extract is unstable, so you need to boil the dry chips for two hours and strain off the liquid each time you need to use it.
Most schools had regular visits from ‘Nitty Nora’.
In the ones where the classics were taught she was Diana —(The Huntress).
The main ‘problem’ caused by the pesticide that is questioned by Mr Erlichman in his article is that millions of people are alive today throughout the Third World who would otherwise have died from insect-borne diseases or from starvation because insects destroyed their crops.
Louse-borne typhus has killed more people than have died in warfare.
Do let us have a balance of such benefits against any alleged remote risks of lindane accumulating in the body fat of those who have the luxury of body fat.
The truest ‘greens’ are those who recognise that we need to be protected from aspects of the environment, of which the rat and the louse represent the unacceptable face.
P.L.G.Bateman.
(Director), Rentokil, Environmental Services Division, Felcourt, East Grinstead, West Sussex.
Morality and the modern.
ISUGGEST any of your readers who are confused about the aims of modernism (‘The underbelly of an architect’, November 4) should read Pevsner's Pioneers of Modern Design.
This is the clearest and most concise account of the rejection of fussy Victorian historicism.
I suspect that the current hostility towards modernism has to do with feeling reassured by what is old (we tend to value the patina of age regardless of quality)— and the sense of stability that this lends to our institutions.
There are many impressive Victorian buildings here in Hebden Bridge.
There is also the legacy of cramped, poorly lit housing.
It should be remembered that the modern movement was responsible for great moral and social improvements when one looks sentimentally at the past.
Andrew Hawkins.
10 Linden Road, Hebden Bridge, West Yorks.
Law Report.
A child's welfare must come first:.
Court of Appeal Re L (a minor) Before Lord Justice Balcombe and Mr Justice Harman August 25 1989
WHEN a court is determining whether a natural mother is unreasonable in withholding consent to her child's adoption, for the purposes of section 16 of the Adoption Act 1976, the court must judge the mother's reasonableness objectively, but must not simply substitute its own views for that of the mother.
A reasonable parent, however anguishing the decision, would put his or her own child's welfare in the forefront of the decision.
The court has to decide whether the mother's refusal was outside the band of what a reasonable mother might do.
If a judge, applying the correct test, comes to a decision which he is entitled to reach on the evidence before him, an appellate court will not interfere with that decision.
The facts.
The parents were married in 1983 when the mother was 17, and D was born in January 1984.
The parents separated from time to time and the father also served a prison sentence.
In 1986 the local authority became concerned about injuries which D had sustained and they obtained a place of safety order.
D was placed with long-term foster parents with a view to adoption, and the mother's access to her was suspended.
In 1988 the foster parents applied to adopt D. The parents refused to consent to the adoption.
In May 1989 Judge Wroath made an adoption order and ordered that the parents' consent to the adoption be dispensed with on the ground that it was being unreasonably withheld.
The mother appealed.
The decision.
Lord Justice Balcombe said the way in which section 16(2) of the Adoption Act 1976 was structured was that an adoption order ‘shall not be made unless’ the parent is withholding consent unreasonably.
The decision of the House of Lords in Re W [1971]AC 682 was the leading authority by which all lower courts were bound.
Lord Hailsham said the test was not culpability, callousness, self-indulgent indifference or failure of parental duty, but was the test of reasonableness in all the circumstances.
Reasonableness was to be judged by an objective test, although the court was not entitled simply to substitute its own view for that of the parent.
It was very difficult for a court to say what a reasonable mother would have done in circumstances which are almost hypothetical.
But Parliament had said that that was what judges had to do.
The court should not substitute its own decision for that of the parent but had to say whether the parents' decision was outside the band of reasonableness.
The welfare of the child was important in that sense, and the reasonable parent, however anguishing the decision, would put his or her own child's welfare right in the forefront of the decision.
In the present case the mother said that D was secure with the foster parents and that custodianship would be enough.
She said it was unnecessary for the legal relationship of parent and child to be broken when the child was already secure in her new family.
What the mother was really saying was, ‘I accept that D's immediate future lies with her foster parents.
There is no immediate prospect that I can ever have her back, but I would like to keep the door open for that.
In any event, something less than adoption, that is custodianship, would be enough’.
Giving her reasons for that the mother said that she wished access to be resumed at some point in the future, that D remembered her as the natural mother, and there was a bond between them which would be cut off or damaged by adoption.
She thought adoption was not right for D because ‘adoption involved merely a loss to D — there is no real gain from it to her’.
She said D was too young and that adoption should be postponed.
His Lordship said that the court fully understood the mother's feelings.
Any judge found cases of this type difficult because, whatever the decision, somebody was to be grievously hurt.
The child's welfare was the first consideration and then other tests had to be applied.
Judge Wroath was fully aware that he must not apply his own decision as to what D's welfare required.
He adopted the right test and asked whether in the circumstances this mother's decision was within the band of what a reasonable mother would do.
He was entitled to say that it was not.
The Court of Appeal should not interfere unless it was satisfied that the judge was wrong in law.
Judge Wroath had applied the right test and come to a decision which he was entitled to come to on the evidence before him.
The appeal was dismissed.
Appearances: Paul McCormick instructed by Anderton & Co, Portsmouth for the mother; Barry Coulter instructed by Sherwin Oliver Portsmouth for the foster parents.
Shiranikha Herbert barrister