

Wonder boy's eyes on Wembley.
Paddy Agnew charts the progress of the new wild card in Italy's World Cup pack.
AT FIRST glance, this boy would appear to have everything.
Roberto Baggio, the new ‘wonder boy’ of Italian soccer, is not only an outrageously talented footballer, but he is also intelligent and responsible, a player who on his own initiative has made a series of public anti-violence appeals.
On top of all that, he is blessed with terrific good looks.
This afternoon, in his home town of Vicenza, the 22-year-old Baggio will win his sixth Italy cap when he lines up to face Algeria in a game which Italy's manager, Azeglio Vicini, hopes to use as valuable preparation for next Wednesday's Wembley confrontation with England.
Baggio, however, the brightest new star in the Italian firmament, is also a problem for Vicini.
Until last September Vicini had no doubts about the likely composition of his 1990 World Cup side (injury permitting, of course).
In particular his midfield seemed very settled, with Fernando De Napoli on one flank and Roberto Donadoni on the other, and with Giuseppe Giannini calling the shots from a central position behind that pair.
Complementing the midfield, in the ball-winning, chasing and hounding role, was either Nicola Berti or Carlo Ancelotti.
All that was before Baggio's Five Greatest September Days.
On the Sunday he scored twice for his club, Fiorentina, against Diego Maradona and Napoli.
On the Thursday he scored twice for Italy in a 4-0 win over Bulgaria.
In both games he scored brilliant individual goals after running half the length of the pitch.
After the Napoli match the Italian press was hailing the birth of an authentic champion.
After the Bulgarian game he was being likened to such legends as Rivera, Mazzola, Zico and even Maradona.
Some pundits were, rather foolishly, speculating that he might prove to be better than all of them.
One month later Baggio was, as they say in these parts, ‘re-dimensioned’.
In Italy's 1-0 loss to Brazil in their prestige encounter in Bologna, young Baggio rarely looked much better than your Uncle Jimmy in a Sunday park game, let alone like Zico, Maradona et al.
Despite that disappointment, Baggio remains something of a media favourite.
His silken touch, his ability to play off either foot, and his pace make him an obvious crowd-pleaser.
Thus, partly against his own will and out of a sense of fair play, Vicini gives Baggio another chance against Algeria this afternoon.
Given a good performance today he will clearly be in line for a place at Wembley.
Given a good performance at Wembley, Vicini's ‘Baggio Problem’ will have reached epidemic proportions.
Three serious question marks stand between Baggio and a first-choice place in Italy's World Cup team: One: as a small, light, ‘technical’ player, is he simply too fragile for an Italian midfield?
After all, Italian midfields have been able to look after themselves over the years.
Two: who has to go to make way for him?
Giannini as playmaker or Donadoni on the flank?
The argument is complicated by the fact that Giannini, after some poor performances for Italy, was one of the best Italians against Brazil.
Three: will Vicini change his four-year-old schemes to allow in Baggio?
This afternoon's game may answer some of these questions.
For the time being, Baggio seems to be more in opposition to Donadoni than to Giannini, since the last mentioned has always seemed to be a favourite son of Vicini, one of that select group of players who matriculated along with the manager from the Italian under-21 side to the senior team.
It appears that Vicini will recall Donadoni (back from injury) for at least the first half at Wembley.
As for who plays in the second half, that could depend on this afternoon.
It might be argued that the Algerians hardly present a severe test.
That, too, was what the West Germans thought prior to their opening 1982 World Cup finals game in Spain.
Soccer almanacs record the final score that day as 2-1 in Algeria's favour.
The Algerians were denied a second-round place in 1982 only because of their inferior goal difference to both Austria and Wst Germany.
The Algerians, too, remain in contention for ‘Italia ‘90’.
Next Friday they play Egypt in Cairo in a play-off match.
Having held the Algerians to a 0-0 draw in the first leg of the tie, the Egyptians start favourites.
However experience is on the side of the Algerians.
Not that those considerations need worry Baggio, who has bought 52 stand tickets so that his entire family can watch him today.
In front of his own people (he was born near Vicenza), he will wish to erase the unhappy memories of two years' inactivity caused by serious knee injuries.
He will also want to prove just how much he has matured both as a player and as a man.
He claims that adopting certain Buddhist practices and yoga techniques has helped him find peace of mind.
Some indication of the new, mature Baggio came last weekend when, on his own initiative, he drove up to Genna from Florence to visit Ivan Dell ‘Oglio, a young Bologna fan hospitalised with serious burns after a bomb attack on a train before last June's Fiorentina v Bologna game.
After spending some time with the injured fan, Baggio said that if there was any violence during last Sunday's game between the same two sides he would ask to be substituted.
With an eye to Wembley next Wednesday, Baggio admits that he would love to play in what he and many of his team-mates regard as one of the ‘temples’ of world soccer.
‘People say that Donadoni, not me, will be playing.
Myself, I always want to play, and then Wembley Stadium has a fascination all of its own.
Who wouldn't want to play there?’
Over to you, Signor Vicini.
Brave Emeruwa resurrects his Wasps career.
By Ian Malin
SIX years ago Francis Emeruwa launched a promising career when he scrummed down with four Wasps colleagues in the London Division pack against the All Blacks.
For the All Blacks, nothing much has changed since that dank November day as they put various British sides in their place.
For Emeruwa, life has been turned upside down after an ankle injury in a sevens match in 1984.
The Nigerian-born flanker suffered such awful complications to the infected ankle that he considered legal action against one of the hospitals that treated him.
Two operations were needed to save his foot, and playing rugby again seemed as unlikely as Newport beating the All Blacks.
But this afternoon the 28-year-old makes the most spectacular comeback since Reggie Perrin when he lines up against Nottingham.
Emeruwa, a teacher, takes his place in a new-look Wasps back row which includes the former Cambridge University captain Steve Kelly and Mark Rigby, while the former England centre Kevin Simms plays his first Courage Clubs Championship game of the season.
Wasps jointly lead the First Division with Harlequins and Bristol, who meet today, and Bath, Saracens and Gloucester.
At the other end of the First Division the whipping boys, Bedford, who have conceded 190 points in their four games, include the 17 ½ stone No.8 Steve Harris at inside centre against Orrell.
Civil servant warns Close of crisis of confidence.
YORKSHIRE's cricket committee, chaired by Brian Close, is threatened with a vote of no confidence at the annual meeting at Sheffield City Hall in the New Year, writes David Hopps.
Robert Hand, a Leicester-based civil servant and Yorkshire member for 10 years, intends to move the vote unless ‘positive steps are taken to put things right’ at a meeting of the full committee on November 28.
At that meeting Close's committee will make wide-ranging recommendations, most crucially on the captaincy and a possible team manager.
Ali Bacher, managing director of the South African Cricket Union, has denied claims that dissenters within his committee still want the tour by Mike Gatting's unofficial England party aborted.
In Perth, a sixth-wicket partnership of 136 between Martin Crowe (87) and John Bracewell (86) lifted New Zealand to 271 for seven on the first day after they slumped to 97 for five against Western Australia.
Golf: Only small beer for leader.
By David Davies in Marbella
UNTO each pair, a plan.
The Benson and Hedges Mixed Greensomes Trophy, being played at Aloha, Marbella, has made its professional participants think a bit, for life is a little more complicated this week.
‘We thought about the format,’ said David Llewellyn, ‘and we decided that the rule for the day was to keep two balls in play off the tee.
In the end, though, we mostly played my partner's tee shots, because we could find hers.’
His partner, and captain, was Mickey Walker and her steadiness, combined with flashes of flair from Llewellyn, got them round in 69, three under par, for a two-round total of 137, one shot behind the leaders.
They were Gillian Stewart and Carl Mason, also round in 69 and also with a plan.
This involves a change of character for Mason, who has decided to become, in his words, a lager lout.
This merely involves a couple of beers in the evening, not even light training for the real thing of which Spain has seen far too much.
But it has worked.
Mason is relaxed and the two retained their overnight lead.
They reached the turn in level par, having birdied the 5th, where Stewart chipped to four feet, and bogeyed the ninth.
They were 18 feet away in two but then, said Mason, ‘I forgot it was downhill’ and he ran his first putt eight feet past the pin.
However, he holed from 40 feet at the 11th for a birdie before Stewart played the stroke of the round at the 12th.
She was faced with an eight-iron shot out of fluffy rough, with trees impeding her backswing.
Not only that, there was the auto-suggestion of two tiny Spanish brats splashing about in the pond in front of the green, fishing for lost balls.
The ball had to be struck perfectly and Stewart, who has an enviable rhythm at all times, concentrated on maintaining balance.
‘It's easy to just have a go at shots like that,’ she said, ‘but you hit a better shot if you stay in balance.’
She got the ball on the green, par was saved, and to celebrate Stewart holed from 25 feet for a birdie at the 14th.
She also holed from 40 feet for a birdie at the short 17th, but it was Mason who preserved their lead.
His drive was 173 yards from the 18th green; Stewart's 201 yards.
As both players would have needed a five-wood to reach the green, Mason elected to play.
As he had done in the first round, he reached the green and they got their par.
Llewellyn, relentlessly cheerful throughout his episodic golf career, has supplied the light relief for Walker this week.
The green at the 14th is so severely sloped that he knew he would need to leave her below the flag, and did so ‘by about two light-years’.
Realistically, it was about 40 feet but, said Llewellyn, ‘straightforward really’.
He had talked Walker into it, and she holed the birdie putt.
An eagle at the 16th, where Llewellyn hit a three-wood 250 yards to 10 feet from the hole, tied them for the lead, but they dropped a shot at the last.
Cricket: Yorkshire puddings face a championship bout Frank Keating gets a sneak preview of the war of words between two battling Tykes.
NEXT Tuesday evening, Yorkshire Television were hoping to transmit a debate on the latest calamities befalling the county: Brian Close, chairman of the club's cricket committee, versus the representative for the Wakefield district, Geoffrey Boycott.
Last night Brian Walsh, the Yorkshire chairman, did his best to put a block on the whole sorry business, but not before enterprising Guardian hacks were able to obtain a leaked copy of a classic example of the high-class cut and thrust of the debate.
It begins with John Helm of Yorkshire TV introducing the speakers: Helm: Right, gentlemen, we haven't won a championship title since 1967, but both of you know the rules — three falls or one submission and any knockdown and the one still standing retires to a neutral corner.
Close (growls with gum-chewing menace): If he wants to jive, he'll fall in five!
(Cheers and counter-cheers).
Boycott (fixes wan, wonky, ever-righteous grin in place): I am the People's Champ.
C: Chump, more like, lad.
B: My Wakefield branch is an improvement on Yorkshire's worst season in history — second bottom in the championship.
C: Wrong.
We were dead bottom in 1983 — when tha were playing.
B: In ‘83 we won the Sunday League, though.
C: No thanks to your snail stuff at top of order, lad.
B: No, ‘83 were a grand year.
I got me 2,000 and averaged 55, which were about 20 more than anyone else.
And all thanks I got was to be sacked at end of summer — though only for a few months, that is, 'cos of the revolution.
C: Aye, not the first nor the last you caused, neither.
B: If you'd left me as captain, none of it would have happened.
Since me you've had Hampshire, Old, Illy, Bairstow, Lamb and Hartley — and 10 bob to a tanner young Carrick will be smoked out within the fortnight, right?
Bet he'll play traitor and move to another county just like you did.
C: No other county would have you when you were sacked.
B: 'Cos I'm Yorkshire through and through.
Somerset?
Where's that?
We'll be signing that darkie, Viv Richards, next.
If I don't get me oar in, that is.
C: But in your autobiography, lad, you suggested we should play an overseas star.
B: That was before I was cognisant of the fact that my Wakefield caucus would only have one in over my dead body.
So they've changed my mind for me.
That's democracy, see.
C: So on the overseas-darkie-star issue, suddenly you and Fred Trueman see eye to eye?
B: Trueman!
What does he know?
Spends more time at Old Trafford than Headingley now, he does.
If that isn't traitorous to Yorkshire, what is?
C: Ee, lad, you're a po-faced poser, aren't you?
B: You, too, you madcap driver.
You'd rather have a day out at York racecourse than at Headingley if truth were known, wouldn't you?
C: Steady on, this is a public meeting.
Keep your hair on.
B: Look who's talking, baldy!
All them double scotches have made your hair fall out.
: I've more natural hair up my nostrils than you have in that knitted rug of yours.
B: Right, you started it.
If you want to get personal then two can play at that, and I swear on my lifelong friendships with the late Mrs Gandhi, Brian Clough and Michael Parkinson that I will burn my brand new membership card of the NUJ on the square at Headingley if you can name me the full Yorkshire team you're chairman of.
C: Give over, lad, easy peasy.
Right, Moxon, Metcalfe, Carrick, good old Arnie of course…er, that stocky lad who doesn't move his feet properly…um, let me see now: um, oh yes, that fellow who keeps getting backache, and then that off-breaker who can't turn it, and that so-called seamer with the funny hairstyle who just can't bowl at all …
B: For once, I agree with you there, Closey, old pal — and do you know, the buggers don't even practise, don't even know how to practise.
Why, I still have a long workout in my net every morning even before our first cuppa ginseng.
C: What net's that, Geoffrey, your hairnet?
B: Mr Chairman, I protest…(cheers).
C: See, told you I'd stuff him in open debate.
(Audience begin riot).
Roll captions.
Fade to black.
The Absolute End.
Fouroux plays a desperate hand.
By Martyn Williams in Lille
THERE have been few hiding places for the French coach Jacques Fouroux since the embarrassment of defeat against Australia at Strasbourg.
His team, World Cup finalists and dotted with household idols, were taken to the cleaners by a bunch of Australian students and farmers in the first Test, and the second Test at Lille promises to be not only a trial of Fouroux's incumbency as coach but also his tactical shrewdness in selection.
In dropping Pierre Berbizier (his captain and until last Saturday his likely successor as coach), Serge Blanco, Laurent Rodriguez and every commentator's nightmare, Jean Condom, Fouroux's guillotine has been severe.
Nine fancied Frenchmen were disposed of, yet, rather than introduce a new regime, Fouroux has opted in most cases for rejuvenated blood.
Erbani, Lorieux and Carminati in the pack are no strangers to the international arena with 75 caps between them, but Fouroux and his assistant coach Daniel Dubroca hope that the French will show willingness and enthusiasm for battle and put behind them the inept and inexplicable performance witnessed at Strasbourg.
Whereas Bob Dwyer, the Australian coach, was the man being criticised and under pressure before the Strasbourg match for lack of success and for Randwick club favouritism, he has been able to announce an unchanged team.
Fouroux, the subject of many a cartoon in the French dailies, battered, bruised and confused alongside a yawning French cockerel, knows that failure at Lille will sharpen knives, of which there are many, and increase the demands for a return to traditional French flamboyancy.
‘We simply did not play rugby at Strasbourg,’ explained Dubroca.
‘Our players were bad and tired because you must remember that we have toured in New Zealand, played the Lions, and now Australia.’
He insisted that it was not the end for Berbizier and company, only a rest.
At half-back, Thierry Lacroix and Henri Sanz are relatively inexperienced compared with Australia's linchpins Lynagh and Farr-Jones.
Brendan Nasser and David Carter are well capable of disrupting French attempts at fluidity, but France's problem is possession and if Lorieux, Devergie and Erbani (a back-row man at lock) cannot provide authority, then Lynagh will surely punish Fouroux's selection at full-back of France's most capped centre, Philippe Sella.
There is more than a hint of desperation in this unlikely selection.
Altogether France will field three international hookers and four players out of position.
In the past the French have defied logic and answered their critics, but a second defeat by Dwyer's emerging Wallabies could well summon a black-hooded anonymous henchman.
FRANCE: P Sella; S Weller, J-M Andrieu, F Mesnel, P Lagisquet; T Lacroix, H Sanz; P Ondarts, L Armary, D Bouet, D Erbani, T Devergie, A Carminati, A Lorieux, E Champ.
AUSTRALIA: G Martin; I Williams, J Little, T Horan, D Campese; M Lynagh, N Farr-Jones; M Hartill, P Kearns, T Daly, P Fitzsimmons, T Gavin, B Nasser, R McCall, D Carter..
The Soviet national team will play six matches in Australia next March.
Boxing.
Frank Bruno heads his Terry Lawless stablemate Gary Mason in the latest International Boxing Federation heavyweight rankings.
Bruno is rated as the No.7 challenger to Mike Tyson, with Mason, the British champion, at No.8.
The American Evander Holyfield tops the list of challengers.
Glenn McCrory, at cruiserweight, and Dave McAuley, flyweight, are the only British champions in the list, with Michael Watson at middleweight the only Briton regarded as No.1 challenger for a title.
Billy Hardy is No.2 bantamweight and Herol Graham No.3 middleweight contender.
Soccer
Jack Charlton has given the Swindon winger Tony Galvin permission to pull out of the Republic of Ireland's World Cup squad for next week's final qualifier in Malta.
Even though the Irish need a point in Valetta to clinch their first appearance in the finals, Charlton has agreed for Galvin to stay behind to play for the Second Division side in their Littlewoods Cup third-round second replay at Bolton.
Rugby Union
Kevin Ellis of Bridgend flew to the south of France last night to act as emergency cover for the Wales B team's scrum-half Andrew Booth.
The Cardiff and Cambridge University player twisted an ankle during training and will undergo a fitness test before tomorrow's game against France B in Arcachon.
Grobbelaar under renewed pressure from Hooper.
By Cynthia Bateman
THE Liverpool manager Kenny Dalglish has included two goalkeepers in Liverpool's 15-man squad for today's game at Queen's Park Rangers.
Mike Hooper, who replaced Bruce Grobbelaar for 25 games last season, is in ‘on merit’, the manager said yesterday.
Hooper's inclusion is seen as a move by Dalglish to introduce the fear factor after three defeats in four games, in which Grobbelaar let in six goals, including four at Southampton.
That was Liverpool's heaviest defeat since Hooper conceded four at West Ham in the Littlewoods Cup last season.
The last time the 25-year-old Hooper was given a chance was when Grobbelaar contracted meningitis early last season.
The reserve goalkeeper held on to the place for four months, and was selected for several weeks after Grobbelaar returned to action with the reserves.
The Zimbabwean was so uncertain of regaining his place that in December he submitted a written transfer request.
It was refused, and by mid-January Grobbelaar, who has been with Liverpool for nine years, was again Dalglish's first choice.
Steve Nicol will be back in the defence today, but Dalglish must also be concerned about his strikers.
Liverpool have scored only twice in the past four games, and Rush, with six this season, has not hit the net since the middle of September.
Meanwhile John Aldridge, released by Liverpool at the start of the season, is apparently on song with his new club Real Sociedad, scoring in their defeat of the Spanish champions Real Madrid at the weekend.
Manchester City last night signed the Blackburn Rovers centre-back Colin Hendry for £700,000, of which £200,000 goes to his former club Dundee.
Hendry turned down earlier chances to join Chelsea and City when they would not meet his personal terms.
Guys and drolls Seventy summers.
By Tony Harman THE LAST November 5 was a perfect night for a bonfire.
The flames shot straight up into the sky, dispersing whatever fog was in the immediate area, and we sat around on bales, as we have always done, while some members of the family let off fireworks in the background.
As always, other people wandered in who were nothing to do with us.
You heard the odd voice in the darkness which you didn't know.
November 5 has always had a special significance for me.
Perhaps it is because I was married on November 5, and all the way down to a miserable, wet Bournemouth where we spent our honeymoon, there were village bonfires set out ready.
And if November 5 is one's wedding anniversary, one could hardly forget either event.
In times gone by, there were always lots of hedge trimmings available at the beginning of November, and it was easy to make a bonfire — with a big family you want a big bonfire.
Nowadays, the machines chew up the hedge trimmings so that they don't require burning; you just plough them in.
As well as the hedge trimmings, November 5 was used as an occasion for clearing up the farm and burning whatever was left lying about which wasn't any good.
Hemp bags with holes in them, paper, broken bits of wood and, I expect, old implements and things which would now be quite valuable.
I remember November 5, 1953, when a tendency to clear up had rather a disastrous consequence.
Our fourth child had been born 10 years previously and I don't expect anyone believed there would be any more, but my wife and I thought we were getting too old too quickly, so we would have another two; and on November 5 that year my wife went down to the bonfire which was already alight and saw on top of it a dropside cot she had been keeping, and which had served the four children, a relatively new carricot, and other items of that sort.
She didn't know what to do.
She protested that they shouldn't have been put on there without her authority, and the farm chaps laughed and said, ‘You won't be wanting that again.’
She could hardly say, ‘I've just been told that I'm pregnant again,’ because it was only a matter of a week or two.
And so new cots and other things had to be bought the following June.
The nature of bonfire materials has changed over the years.
The hemp sacks with holes in have all gone, being replaced by plastic bags; they burn too, but with a nasty, acrid smell and lots of smoke.
And we've got a new source of burnable material to replace the hedge trimmings: lots of things are delivered on pallets, wooden pallets, not all of which are returnable.
And there always seems to be some shed which has been taken down somewhere, yielding very inflammable material, so we show no signs of running short.
If this annual clear up round the farm didn't take place, we should be in a hell of a mess by now.
Each year since the war — they were too young before that — the children have made a guy.
Each succeeding generation has made a guy in the semblance of somebody they didn't care for.
Because bonfires were banned during the war, Hitle wasn't burnt until 1945 when he was already dead.
They burnt on occasion a couple of Popes, or perhaps the same Pope twice; it wasn't anti-Catholicism, teenage daughters just objected to something he had said.
They wouldn't have dreamt of burning Pope John, for instance, he was far too nice.
But to show how ecumenical they were, they also once burnt an Archbishop of Canterbury; several Prime Ministers; Enoch Powell; Richard Nixon; Stalin; all sorts of people, even poor Mr Heath, not so much because he was a villain but because it is so easy to make a guy in the semblance of Mr Heath.
We used to cook potatoes and sausages in hot ashes after the fire had burnt down.
Now they bring them out ready-cooked.
I don't know whether it is just the advance of modern technology within the family, or whether it is because the type of material the fire is built with nowadays wouldn't let them taste quite so good.
Anyway, they taste much the same, and last year beetroot soup was added to the menu.
But for me, all the time, it is a reminder that for 49 years it replaced wedding anniversary celebrations, and the memory of all those bonfires on the way to Bournemouth on a drizzly November afternoon, all those years ago.
Tennis: David Irvine sees the French Open champion continue to confound his doubters at Wembley Chang thriving in fast company.
SINCE Michael Chang won the French Open in June, the suspicion has grown that, although the 17-year-old may have the game and resilience to thrive on clay, he lacks the power, size and serve to handle the game's big hitters on faster surfaces.
The theory would appear to be borne out by his subsequent record: only one further final appearance, at Los Angeles, and eight losses to players ranked below him on the computer.
Until they met yesterday in the quarter-finals of the £275,000 Silk Cut Championships, their first encounter since the semi-finals in Paris, the Soviet No.1 Andrei Chesnokov believed that Chang was more susceptible to power on carpet and cement.
After losing to the little Chinese-American again, this time by 6-3, 6-4, he admitted that he had changed his mind.
‘Now I know he is a tough tennis player on any surface,’ he said.
‘I tried to attack him but I didn't have enough patience.
Now I think it was not the right way.’
At under 10 stone, Chang certainly has the look of a lightweight.
Yet he passes with such unerring accuracy and hunts every ball with such determination that his opponents can rarely claim a winner until the umpire calls the score.
This was seen to notable effect at 3-3 and deuce on Chesnokov's serve in the second set.
He punched a volley which almost drove Chang into the court surrounds, yet the American not only reached it but responded at full stretch with a perfect lob; quick-witted as well as fleet-footed play.
Yet, as a match, it left something to be desired.
Chesnokov's tendency to go for winners produced a flood of errors.
‘I told myself ‘Don't rush, don't rush’,’ he said, but evidently he was not listening.
Chang felt that the surface, which offered an unusually high bounce for an indoor court, suited a baseliner like himself.
At the same time he said he had had to select his shots wisely to get the better of Chesnokov.
With 80 per cent of the seats in the arena again empty, it might have been a good opportunity to bus in the LTA's young hopefuls to see for themselves what success in the game requires.
At least they might have learned something about attitude, which John McEnroe believes to be the root cause of Britain's tennis predicament.
‘For some reason I hate to lose,’ said Chang, ‘and that makes me more of a fighter.
When I don't achieve something that I want to achieve, I'll just keep on until I do.
Like when I used to play a seeded player, I didn't think ‘OK, I'm going to lose to a seed’ but ‘All right— this is my opportunity to beat a seed’.’
He was not prepared to preach to the British —‘I don't really know too much about them’— but he did say that no one could expect success without putting in a great deal of hard work.
Guy Forget, the French left-hander who missed five months of the summer season after knee surgery, claimed his semi-final place with a 7-5, 6-3 victory over Robert Seguso.
It was not the American's day.
Earlier he and Ken Flach were forced to default their doubles quarter-final because of Flach's ankle injury.
Forget, eager after his long break, was delighted to reach his first semi-final in a Super Series event for three years.
‘I was very loose,’ he said.
Ten days ago his wife gave birth to a son.
‘I wanted to win for them.
On the other hand, if I'd lost I could have gone home quicky.’
The mighty continue to fall at the Stockholm Open.
On Thursday Boris Becker, the defending champion, lost to Jan Gunnarsson in the third round.
Yesterday it was the turn of Andre Agassi.
The fourth-seeded American looked sluggish as his serve was broken twice in the first set by the unseeded Swede Magnus Gustafsson, who went on to win their quarter-final 6-2, 7-6, clinching the tiebreak 7-4.
Gunnarsson, clearly feeling the effects of his epic match against Becker, was thrashed 6-3, 6-0 by Mats Wilander, who will meet Gustafsson in the semi-finals.
The 18-year-old Soviet girl Elena Briuhovec yesterday defeated Austria's Beate Reinstadler 6-2, 6-4 to win the LTA Challenger women's tournament at Swindon.
Table Tennis Soviet flair is still missing..
By Richard Jago
ENGLAND scored their second big win in two days over the Soviet Union when they won 4-2 at Bexley Heath last night.
It was more emphatic than the 5-1 win on Thursday because little more than two hours after the start England had already achieved a 4-0 winning lead.
The visitors regained some pride when the Mazunov brothers won the two dead matches.
But so far neither has shown the tremendous flair with top-spin attacking that made them a major force in the world championships in Dortmund only seven months ago.
They have two more matches in which to do so.
Carl Prean and Alan Cooke in particular set out to magnify the Soviet shortcomings.
Prean, still unbeaten, showed that he is performing as well as at any time in his career when he outplayed Andrei up to 20-17 in the second game and then comfortably recovered from the disappointment of missing four match points to go on to a 21-8, 22-24, 21-13 win.
Kiwis deserve belated fruits Paul Fitzpatrick on New Zealand's quest for recognition.
THE New Zealand Rugby League tourists must envy the amount of publicity — and the financial rewards — currently being enjoyed by their countrymen from the unsullied ‘amateur’ world of Rugby Union as the latter grind their remorseless way around Wales and Ireland.
Earlier in the tour Hugh McGahan, the Kiwis' captain, expressed his surprise and delight at seeing his men given comparable prominence to the All Blacks — in some northern editions of the papers at least.
But in truth their tour, the English section of which ends with the third Test at Wigan today, has been persistently downbeat.
They must accept a share of the blame.
Basing themselves at York might have suited their training schedules and their travel arrangements, but it has been less than ideal for their public relations.
A quiet life is not necessarily a rewarding life.
That might not have mattered unduly, but their early form was so ordinary that a lack of impact off the pitch was compounded by a comparable shortage of flair on it.
They had been underestimated, as the first Test proved, but the damage had been done and the attendances for the first two Tests were depressing.
The optimist would point out that the aggregate attendance for the two Tests so far — 31,310 — compares very favourably with the aggregates for the first two Tests of 1980 (17,977), and 1985 (28,097).
But for a game that imagined it was losing its club-orientated mentality, a game convinced that the staging of high-class football in comfortable surroundings would bring in the punters in their thousands, Old Trafford and Elland Road were bitter disappointments.
Wigan's less grand Central Park should offer belated compensation.
Caution would probably be advisable until every spectator has been counted, but it will be a disappointment if the crowd falls short of 20,000.
What is happening, too late unfortunately, is that the Kiwis are starting to demonstrate what a fine squad of players they have.
Confidence has risen markedly since the defeat at Elland Road; the parts are falling neatly into place and some of their football in the last three games against Hull, Widnes and Featherstone has been exhilarating.
Poor France, where the Kiwis will spend the next three weeks, are now likely to suffer the consequences of this improvement.
Conversely, the French can use the two forthcoming Tests to show that reports of the imminent demise of the game there have been grossly exaggerated.
No New Zealand player has made an impression on this tour comparable with the impact made by many individuals in 1980.
Those tourists arrived with little reputation.
They went back respected, admired and ready to take New Zealand Rugby League into one of its finest eras.
There has been no Fred Ah Kuoi, Gary Prohm, James Leuluai, Gordon Smith or Dane O'Hara this time, no Gary Kemble, Graeme West, Mark Graham, Mark Broadhurst or Kevin Tamati.
And indeed it will be hard for any future Kiwi tourists to recapture the freshness of football that one associates with that side.
But when the present tourists have gone and we have seen the last of Gary Freeman and Duane Mann, Esene Faimalo and Francis Leota there will be a sense of regret.
And for those insular fans who shunned them in their thousands at Old Trafford and Elland Road, a sense of guilt would not be inappropriate.
A day to stay in one peace Talking Point.
By David Lacey
TODAY being Armistice Day, it would be nice to think that this afternoon's League programme can be completed without the police having to separate fighting footballers.
The odds are that it will.
Thankfully the brawl between Arsenal and Norwich City players at the end of last Saturday's match at Highbury was a rarity; hence all the fuss.
But it was hardly unique.
Last Boxing Day there was a similar incident at The Dell when Southampton played Coventry City.
The teams were involved in a goalmouth scrap and a player from each side was sent off.
In both cases the home team had been 2-0 down at half-time, Southampton fighting back, literally, to force a draw, Arsenal a win.
The Football Association did not feel it necessary to charge Southampton and Coventry with bringing the game into disrepute.
Yet with eight sendings-off in all that day there was a case for ending the old year by taking a stand on players' behaviour in time for the new.
One suspects that Arsenal and Norwich are facing disrepute charges partly because of TV coverage at home and abroad and partly because between Saturday afternoon and Monday morning various sections of the media had built up a fine head of steam in demanding that the FA take action.
Lancaster Gate awoke on Monday to find itself accused of doing nothing almost before it had had time to consider doing anything.
Ugly though it was, the fight at Highbury needs to be put into a general sporting perspective.
It hardly fell into the same category as the calculated thuggery of the last Lions tour or the almost casual butt which recently reduced the Great Britain Rugby League team to 12 men.
Nor did the players start fighting before the kick-off, as happened when Chile played Brazil in the World Cup.
The FA has taken the extraordinary step of bringing the clubs to book because of the tightrope football is walking between the laws of the game and the law of the land.
Had Saturday's scenes at Highbury taken place in Glasgow, some of the participants might be preparing to face the Sheriff's Court accused of disorderly conduct and conduct likely to cause a breach of the peace.
Similar motives prompted the FA to ban an Arsenal player, Paul Davis, for nine matches last season after a TV news camera had spotted him punching Glenn Cockerill behind the referee's back with such force that the Southampton player's jaw was broken.
Davis was on the Arsenal bench last Saturday — and stayed there.
There may be those who feel that, if the police had to charge anyone with causing a breach of the peace, they should have arrested the referee, George Tyson, whose two controversial penalty decisions against Norwich raised the temperature of the match.
But this raises the fundamental issue of players accepting referees' decisions.
Last season a referee allowed himself to be wired up for a League match at The Den to record some of the things he had to put up with from players.
The visitors were Arsenal and, while it still seems unfair to single out teams in this way, the intensity of attiude recorded by the referee's hidden microphone made it easier to understand what happened last Saturday.
Instead of coming down on players who, like Bryan Gunn, the Norwich goalkeeper, give rational views of incidents to newspapers, the FA might do better to examine the irrational attitudes created by some of those running the teams.
It might also be an idea to wire up a linesman one day to record the 90 minutes of bile emanating from both benches.
In their defence the managers are entitled to protest that the pressure for success, or at least avoidance of failure, comes from the boardroom and ultimately the supporters.
With three managers sacked in three days this week the point is a valid one.
But why is it that the League's longest-serving manager, the fan-bashing, clown-chasing old iconoclast at Nottingham Forest, has one of the best-behaved teams?
Ian Butterworth yesterday became the second Norwich player, after Gunn, to be punished by the club for newspaper comments about the brawl.
The nature of his punishment was not revealed.
WEEKEND HIGHLIGHTS.
Coventry v Southampton Having just won at Liverpool for the first time, Coventry ought to be in the mood to take Southampton even though the latter have lost only once in a dozen games.
Coventry, however, have not won at home in the League since mid-September and are without the suspended McGrath, Gynn taking over in midfield.
Southampton, moreover, have Rideout back in their attack after injury.
Crystal Palace v Luton Palace are again leaking badly at the back, hence the attempt to sign Martyn, Bristol Rovers' highly regarded young goalkeeper.
But he will not be there today to face a Luton side who have Wegerle, Williams and Black available after injury.
Burke may be back in the Palace defence, and Dennis is in their squad.
Derby v Manchester City Derby could do with a win after taking only one point from their last three League games.
But City have picked up a bit with a draw at Chelsea and a comfortable win against Crystal Palace, and with the suspended Morley replaced by Oldfield, who knows where the goal is, they will be confident today.
Everton v Chelsea Everton will be keen to get Sunday's humiliation at Villa Park out of their systems, but they still have injury problems, with Watson out and Whiteside doubtful.
Pointon should be back and the newly signed Beagrie may play, but Chelsea, the present First Division leaders, will probably field an unchanged side and if Dixon's revived form continues they should not lose.
Manchester U v Nottm Forest Tomorrow's television match is unlikely to produce another eight goals for the viewers, but it should be more of a contest as United strive to find a blend and a pattern against Brian Clough's tightly organised team.
Danny Wallace, recovered from a hamstring injury, replaces Sharpe in the United team.
Millwall v Arsenal Arsenal still have to find their form of a year ago but they continue to pick up points at regular intervals, and with Marwood fit and Groves recovered from a virus they should have the resources to beat a Millwall side again lacking Briley and looking for their first League win since September 23.
Norwich City v Aston Villa This should be one of the day's better spectacles.
With Rosario fit and Townsend available, Norwich are well equipped to improve on a home League record which has seen them win one game and draw the rest.
Villa's jubilation at last Sunday's result was cut short at West Ham on Wednesday and they are without Gage today.
But if Cowans is in form they could extend their unbeaten League run to six games.
QPR v Liverpool Draws at Nottingham Forest and Wimbledon offered QPR a modicum of encouragement but they have still not won a League match for seven weeks, which is hardly the sort of record to have when Liverpool are the visitors, even though Kenny Dalglish's team have lost three of their last four games.
Nicol should be back for Liverpool after missing three matches with a neck injury and Hooper, the reserve goalkeeper, is also in the squad.
Trevor Francis is keeping the QPR team a secret even from his own players.
Dalglish does that every week.
Sheffield Wed v Charlton After sliding towards the relegation area, Charlton have started to put another run together with seven points from three games.
They are unlikely to find easy pickings at Hillsborough, Wednesday having just won at Forest and with King and Sheridan making their first home appearances.
Worthington, his hernia operation postponed, should be there too, helping to take the strain.
Tottenham v Wimbledon Spurs have lost only one of their last seven League fixtures and that was at Anfield.
Wimbledon's win at Hillsborough was important for morale, but last week's goalless draw with QPR at Plough Lane only satisfied the nihilists.
Spurs have to decide whether to recall Stewart to their attack or stick to a successful formula.
West Ham v Newcastle Back to the Second Division grind for West Ham after Wednesday's ebullient win against Aston Villa in the Littlewoods Cup.
A win today would put pressure on the top three, but Newcastle will regard the draw as a safe option after being held at home by Middlesbrough last weekend.
Dillon is their only doubt.
The Hare shirt of Leicester fits comfortably on Liley Mike Selvey on a Tiger earning his stripes and kicking the goals at Welford Road.
IT HAS long been a precept at Leicester Rugby Club.
A successful recipe, as Mrs Beeton advocated, begins with catching your Hare.
It seems almost like the beginning of time when visitors to Welford Road first saw dear old Dusty tee up the ball, meticulously pace his couple of steps back and sideways, pause, take a deep breath, glance at the target and then, slick as clockwork, sidle up and caress the ball between the posts.
It became a way of Leicester life.
But Hare today, gone tomorrow.
After a lifetime and a zillion points, the inconceivable happened: Dusty notched up a record and retired to his farm.
Suddenly there was a gap, as if a favourite comfortable armchair had been removed from its cosy place by the fire.
It is strange, as Betjeman said, that those we miss the most are those we take for granted.
But wait.
What's this?
Suddenly another Tiger is burning bright.
For while Hare was playing out his dotage, the backroom was at work.
Word reached Peter Wheeler, the Leicester coach, of a young lad at Wakefield, a full-back, a slick-running full-back at that, who not only could kerplonk the ball like a metronome between the posts but could do it with either foot.
Well, they just had to have him, hadn't they?
This season John Liley, 22 years old, has been a revelation.
In 10 games he has scored 136 points, the most in the land by some way.
Twenty-seven of those came in the first match, against Pontypridd; Bedford took a similar caning and Coventry only four points less.
Six times he has burst into the line and over for a try.
Now, of course, he is going through the inevitable comparison with Hare, and it is hard following a legend.
There was even early, ridiculous talk of his passing Hare's incredible 438-point record, although at the equivalent stage last season the maestro had 17 more points.
‘I can't win really, can I?’ says Liley.
‘If I score points and do well, then I'll be set against Dusty.
If I don't match up then they'll say, oh, Dusty would have done this or that.’
You have to sympathise, because all he wants to do is establish himself in his own right, in his own style and ultimately be recognised for that.
He cannot hide the pride, though, that he has in following Hare at Leicester.
He had only had the single season at Wakefield when the approach came.
‘When Peter invited me to the club I knew that Dusty was retiring and that there would be a place up for grabs.
I was keen to give it a go because Leicester are one of the top clubs, and so it wasn't something I could refuse, was it?
In fact it's the best offer I've ever had, and in any case I always knew I could go back to Wakefield if it did not work out.
Better to have a go and fail than not to have a go at all.’
So he went, hopping into his car and driving to Leicester every Monday and Thursday night for training, and Saturdays to play.
‘It's a round trip of 190 miles so that's almost 600 miles a week.
I've got a new car and it's already got 23,000 on the clock, and three-quarters of that must be to the club.’
Luckily it is not far to the swimming pool where he works.
He found the club welcoming, helped by the fact that it was a path south previously trodden by another Leicester stalwart, Les Cusworth, whom Liley remembers watching as a lad of seven or eight at Wakefield.
Liley spent a season playing in the second team with just half a dozen first-team appearances before the opportunity came this season, and so far it has gone remarkably well.
The style of play suits him.
‘I haven't had to change, really.
It's similar to Wakefield, only quicker.
I like to run the ball and come into the line.
I enjoy that.’
He also enjoys the training, which is just as well because it is so competitive.
‘It's a lot keener than I'd been used to, because here you are not guaranteed a place.
It's very thorough, and if you are not producing the goods on the field you have to do it in training or you'd be out.
It's as simple as that.
They push you, and I like that.’
But it is as a kicker that he has made his name.
He uses the soccer method, but unusually for a rugby player, or soccer player for that matter, has the facility to kick well with either foot.
He cannot think of anyone else currently playing who can do that.
‘I've always been able to do it, probably because I used to play soccer.
I started using the technique at Wakefield and carried on ever since.’
Basically this involves using the right foot to draw the ball into the post from the left side of the field and the left foot to do the same from the right side.
Only for distance — 30 metres or more and where the advantage of the draw is negated — does he favour right over left.
It is eminently practical, and he thinks he may have started a trend.
‘Dusty was such a wonderful kicker that he didn't need to employ it.
But now he's retired I've heard that, when he plays in the odd charity match, he has a go now.
It's quite flattering, really.
They'll all be at it soon.’
Rugby League: World Cup points give tasty Test an extra flavour.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
WITH only five sides in contention, it should be possible to devise a World Cup which takes less than three years to complete.
The last tournament ended with Australia beating New Zealand in Auckland last year in a game which created enormous interest in New Zealand.
But the formula which brought them together was widely, and justifiably, condemned as unwieldy and tedious.
Someone must have thought it was a bright idea, though.
The whole weary process started again in Auckland in July and continues today at Central Park where Great Britain meet New Zealand in the third British Coal Test.
This game — with the series level at 1-1 — was in no need of additional stimulus, but even the cynics will have to concede that the reward of two World Cup points has heightened the flavour.
It can be taken for granted that Australia will be one side contesting the 1992 World Cup final and that Great Britain or New Zealand will be the other.
But which one?
New Zealand have already suffered one World Cup defeat.
A second loss would be worrying for them — motivation enough to ensure that the errors of Elland Road are not repeated.
Great Britain, for their part, will be looking to recapture the many admirable qualities which brought them that improbable victory after Steve Hampson's early dismissal reduced them to 12 men.
Hampson is now serving a suspension, which means a recall for Alan Tait, who would have played at Elland Road but for injury.
The other major change sees the very useful Joe Lydon on the bench.
Since both sides in this series have now played exceptionally well and exceptionally badly, today's game is absorbingly poised and tantalisingly unpredictable.
Conditions are likely to be the heaviest of the season so far and the side — the pack particularly — that controls the ball and makes fewer mistakes could carry the day.
We saw in the first Test the damage of which Gary Freeman, working behind dominant forwards, is capable; in the second Test, behind a pack tackling itself to a standstill, Shaun Edwards dictated.
Both seem sure to be leading figures again.
GREAT BRITAIN: Tait (Widnes); Ford (Leeds), Newlove (Featherstone), Loughlin (St Helens), Offiah (Widnes); Edwards (Wigan), D Hulme (Widnes); Skerrett (Bradford N), P Hulme (Widnes), Platt (Wigan), Powell (Leeds), Goodway (Wigan), Gregory (Warrington).
Replacements: Lydon (Wigan), Fox (Featherstone), Hobbs (Bradford N), England (Castleford).
NEW ZEALAND: Kemp; Iro, Bell, Williams, Mercer; K Shelford, Freeman; Todd, D Mann, Faimalo, Sorensen, Stewart, McGahan.
Subs: Sherlock, Clark, Leota, Kuiti.
Referee: G McCallum (Australia)..
Athletics: Tunstall leads England's Euro Cup challenge.
THE European Community Cross Country Cup competition comes to Britain this weekend for the first time, with races at Hartsdown Park in Margate tomorrow, writes John Rodda.
British runners have for years plundered the prizes on the Continent most weekends of the winter.
The races are usually staged in smaller towns.
The Euro Cup competition links together a series of Continental races, with a points-scoring system producing an overall winner.
Last year Roger Hackney, the Olympic steeplechaser, took the top prize and Tim Hutchings was among the individual winners in the Christmas Day event at Ninove.
This is not, perhaps, the best year for Britain to act as host to open the series, for the entry tomorrow is clearly affected by Commonwealth Games training schedules as well as the fact that the English Cross Country Union has not found a sponsor who can provide the money for trust funds that might have enticed more prominent athletes.
Among the leading challengers from the home countries in the men's event will be Steve Tunstall, who stormed through the beginning of the cross country season a year ago with victories at Durham, Cardiff and Mallusk but was clearly weary when it came to the championships.
Paul Dugdale, Kevin Forster, Richard Neuraker and Craig Mochrie are among the other entries.
The Belgians are likely to provide the individual winner in either Vincent Rousseau, who dominated the Euro Cross from 1984 to 1988, or Joes Maes, a runner-up to Hackney last year.
A strong challenge will come from the Dutch, who include two strong contenders, Aart Strichter and Toni Dirks, in their line-up.
In the women's event, Jill Hunter, Alison Wyeth and Susan Dilnot are among the entries, with Markeen Redners, winner of the overall competition, leading the overseas challenge from Belgium.
The main events are at 12.25 (women) and 1.30 (men) in a day's programme comprising 12 races, the first of which is at 11.05.
Boxing: McDonnell fights back.
By John Rodda
JIM McDONNELL will return to boxing in the new year with determination similar to that he showed against Azumah Nelson in their world title fight last Sunday.
McDonnell, stopped in the final round, spent two nights in hospital under observation having his heart rate and pulse carefully monitored.
The pain which Nelson's blows caused has now receded and the bruises will go when he takes a week's rest in Spain.
But the wounds inflicted by the media will, it appears, take a long time to heal.
McDonnell, his promoter Barry Hearn and trainer Darkie Smith clearly believed that going into the final round McDonnell had a chance of winning the super-featherweight title on points.
Not many impartial observers agreed — two of the three judges had him trailing — and the trio showed their displeasure with such sceptics at yesterday's news conference.
Smith said that some of the reporters had been drinking before getting down to the job of covering the fight; Hearn is considering litigation.
All three thought it right that the fight continued in the eleventh round when McDonnell's right eye was all but closed, though the fighter admitted he could not see from that eye.
The only gain from what at times were acrimonious exchanges may be that the British Boxing Board of Control will renew its vigilance in the protection of its licensed boxers, before a campaign to stop boxing takes on a more menacing shape for those involved in the business.
Men like McDonnell are too brave for their own good.
Scottish round-up Nicol doubt.
By Patrick Glenn
ANDY ROXBURGH, Scotland's national coach, spent last night anxious over the availability of Steve Nicol, the Liverpool midfielder-defender central to his plans for the crucial World Cup match with Norway on Wednesday.
Nicol has strained neck muscles and, although a member of Kenny Dalglish's squad for today's match against QPR in London, he is unlikely to play.
‘The problem is with heading the ball,’ said Roxburgh.
‘The other day he seemed perfectly sound and was tried out, but as soon as he headed the ball he was in pain again.
‘Of course we don't want to lose him.
We are already without Gary Gillespie and Richard Gough, and Stevie is full of experience.
But we may have to prepare ourselves for his absence.
‘If Steve doesn't play for Liverpool he is obviously unlikely to play for us.
But if he and the club feel he is close enough to soundness to allow him to travel and let us decide, we will do that.
If it is a straightforward call-off, I would have to think of a replacement.’
Roxburgh named only a 16-man pool last week.
Twelve arrived in Glasgow yesterday, with Dave McPherson (Hearts), Pat Nevin and Stuart McCall (Everton) and Nicol on duty today, and the Manchester United pair, Jim Leighton and Brian McClair, facing Forest tomorrow.
McPherson plays for Hearts against Dundee at Tynecastle in the only match in the Premier Division.
The Edinburgh side can go top on goal difference ahead of Dunfermline if they win by at least two goals.
Whether or not Ray Wilkins is to stay with Rangers or return to one of the London clubs chasing his signature will be known on Monday.
Graeme Souness, the Ibrox manager, has promised a statement then.
Nicol injury worries Roxburgh.
ANDY ROXBURGH, the Scotland coach, spent last night worrying about Steve Nicol, the Liverpool midfielder-defender who is central to his plans for the crucial World Cup match with Norway on Wednesday, writes Patrick Glenn.
Nicol has strained neck muscles and although he is in the squad to face QPR today he is not certain to play.
‘The problem is with heading the ball,’ said Roxburgh.
‘The other day he seemed perfectly sound and was tried out, but as soon as he headed the ball he was in pain again.
‘We don't want to lose him.
We are already without Gary Gillespie and Richard Gough, and Stevie is full of experience.
But we may have to prepare ourselves for his absence.’
Roxburgh named only an 18-man pool last week.
Twelve arrived in Glasgow yesterday, with Dave McPherson (Hearts), Pat Nevin and Stuart McCall (Everton) and Nicol on duty today, and the Manchester United pair Jim Leighton and Brian McClair facing Forest tomorrow.
McPherson plays for Hearts against Dundee at Tynecastle in the only match in the Premier Division.
The Edinburgh side can go top on goal difference from Dunfermline if they win by at least two goals.
Soccer.
The Greek champions, AEK Athens, have been banned from European competition for a year because of their fans' misbehaviour in a European Cup match at home to Marseille this month.
Judo.
Karen Briggs, the world bantamweight champion, has undergone surgery on the shoulder she dislocated in the world championships final in Belgrade last month.
Damage to the joint and tendons was more severe than expected, but the 26-year-old from Hull still hopes to compete in January's Commonwealth Games, which feature judo for the first time.
Boxing.
Noel Quarless, the Liverpool heavyweight, knocked out the American Phil Gilberti after only 2min 58sec at Everton Park sports centre last night.
Rowing.
Nottingham County seek their sixth straight win in the Fours Head from Mortlake to Putney which starts at 1.30 this afternoon, writes Jon Leyne.
The Nottinghamshire quadruple scull will lead off a procession of 500 crews.
Their strongest challenge is likely to come from a Leander quad containing the Olympic gold medallist Steve Redgrave.
Bishop fires Tranmere up into top place.
TRANMERE went back to the top of the Third Division on goal difference last night as they extended their unbeaten home League run to 26 games with a 2-1 win over Walsall.
McCarrick put them ahead in the eighth minute and they should have settled it in the 67th when Muir had a penalty saved, but Rimmer made no mistake from the spot to level the scores in the 83rd minute.
Tranmere's reply was instant and decisive, Bishop volleying the winner from a free kick.
Crewe's 2-1 win over Mansfield was their first in 10 games but they cut it fine, Cutler scoring the winner two minutes from time.
Southend's players flew off for a week's break in Spain after a 2-1 win at Halifax which put them five points clear at the top of the Fourth Division.
Ling and Martin were the scorers, and their goalkeeper, Sansome, saved a penalty before Juryeff's late consolation goal.
Andy Roxburgh, the Scotland coach, spent last night worrying about Steve Nicol, the Liverpool midfielder-defender who is central to his plans for the crucial World Cup match with Norway on Wednesday.
Nicol has strained neck muscles and although he is in the squad to face QPR today he is not certain to play.
Ian Ridley.
SUPPORTERS are merely necessary evils to some clubs, it seems.
The idea of their having a say in the running of a club appears to make officials recoil with horror.
Take Birmingham City, who you might think could hardly afford to alienate more of their fans.
In an attempt to widen share ownership, Matthew Cole, Blues fan and co-editor of the fanzine Tired and Weary, last year offered to surrender 49 of his 50 shares in the club, for just the small cost of the re-registration, to 49 other fans.
Surprisingly, some cynics might say, 49 people did take up the offer and the details were sent to the club to effect the paperwork.
Twelve months on, the club have yet to do so, despite numerous requests to the City secretary John Westmancoat.
‘We suspect they don't want fans to become shareholders and bring up awkward matters at the annual meeting,’ says TaW's other co-editor, Steve Beauchamp.
‘They seem to think we are troublemakers but we have women, children and people over 70 years of age.’
Mr Westmancoat gave a ‘no comment’ when contacted about the issue this week.
He was being given the right of reply, it was pointed out, at which point he put the phone down.
THE appearance of the former Wolves defender Derek Jefferson in last week's column prompted a golden memory of 1975/76 from Iain Woods of Great Barr, Birmingham.
In those days Jeffo was assisting in the University of Warwick's soccer training.
‘During one practice session,’ writes Iain, ‘I perpetrated the highest, latest and crudest tackle of my life on the first XI's star player, a footballer of considerable skill.
As I stood back to admire my handiwork, Jefferson stood back, shaking his head in disappointment.
‘Not good enough, son,’ he said.
‘He's getting up’.’.
ANOTHER hard-man of the Seventies, Liverpool's Tommy Smith, recently surfaced in a tabloid newspaper, berating Nayim of Tottenham for an ‘Oscar performance’ when collapsing after being elbowed by Barry Venison in the televised match at Anfield.
‘How can anyone justify such shameful behaviour?’ lamented Smith.
How indeed, writes P Kevan of Liverpool, who recalls a similar incident.
This one involved the very same T Smith, who claimed he was hit by a bottle thrown from the crowd as Liverpool's European Cup Winners' Cup hopes were ebbing away against Ferencvaros in Budapest 15 years ago.
Our reporter, Paul Fizpatrick, wrote at the time: ‘Smith, perhaps too theatrically, fell as if poleaxed.’
Paul added that it rekindled memories of a Borussia Moenchengladbach v Inter Milan tie which had to be replayed after a similar incident two seasons earlier.
Neither the referee, who booked him, nor Uefa accepted Smith's version of the event.
He was later suspended for two European games for ‘unsporting behaviour’.
ARECENT mention in this column of Brian Clough's belief in ‘clean sheets and good habits’ recalled, for Peter Gibbon of Sheffield, programme notes from a Sheffield Eagles Rugby League match.
As a result of the closure of Owlerton Stadium, they stated, supporters would ‘have to put up with a certain amount of incontinence’.
LAST of the wine.
Many readers kindly recommend their favourite labels, Leicester's Peter Sjobergundy (Oliver Beamish, London E5) and Liverpool's Sammy Chablis (Mick Clark, Stockport), for example.
Others pointed to younger grapes such as Veuve Clicottee (Matthew Mainstone, Brighton), Vin den Hauwe — limited shelf life —(Michael Booth, Doncaster), Azay-le-Rideout (Colin Draper, Sheffield) and Cotes de Rushillon (Tony Heslop, Liverpool).
Tony also suggests that the Luton ground, where Kenny Dalglish regularly enjoys a good wine, should have an Application Controlee.
Chick Fowles of London SE3, moreover, feels that Charlton should have a Relegation Controlee.
And if Sheffield Wednesday (Owlsace — Ian Johnson of Vanlose, Denmark) are consigned to an early Graves, Peter Godfrey of Chorley thinks Ron Atkinson will get the Barsac.
Alan Duffy of Whitley Bay, who once returned a bottle in a restaurant because it was Alan Corked, says that Newcastle fans are now chanting ‘Vouvray The Lads’.
Ian Charlton of London E5 says Clive Allen left Spurs because Bordeaux St Emilion (try it phonetically).
My thanks to all for a superior vintage.
Grobbelaar under renewed pressure from Hooper.
By Cynthia Bateman
THE Liverpool manager Kenny Dalglish has included two goalkeepers in his 15-man squad for today's game at Queen's Park Rangers.
Mike Hooper, who replaced Bruce Grobbelaar for 25 games last season, is in ‘on merit’, the manager said yesterday.
Hooper's inclusion is seen as a move by Dalglish to introduce the fear factor after three defeats in four games, in which Grobbelaar let in six goals, including four at Southampton.
That was Liverpool's heaviest defeat since Hooper conceded four at West Ham in the Littlewoods Cup last season.
The last time the 25-year-old Hooper was given a chance was when Grobbelaar contracted meningitis early last season.
The reserve goalkeeper held on to the place for four months, and was selected for several weeks after Grobbelaar returned to action with the reserves.
Steve Nicol should be back in the defence today, but Dalglish must also be concerned about his strikers.
Liverpool have scored only twice in the past four games, and Rush, with six this season, has not hit the net since the middle of September.
Manchester City last night signed the Blackburn Rovers centre-back Colin Hendry for £700,000, of which £200,000 goes to his former club Dundee.
Gary Penrice, the Bristol Rovers striker, has moved to Watford for £500,000.
The fee is just £50,000 short of Watford's record of £550,000, for Luther Blissett from AC Milan.
The Rovers directors meet this weekend in an attempt to end the dilemma over whether to sell the club's England Under-21 goalkeeper Nigel Martyn to Crystal Palace.
There have been snags over the asking price of £1million, a record for a goalkeeper.
Mick Mills, replaced at Stoke by Alan Ball, has moved in the opposite direction, succeeding the caretaker manager by becoming Colchester coach.
He is expected to become Colchester's manager when Jock Wallace retires next year.
Table Tennis: Mason breaks Soviet spirit.
By Richard Jago
NICKY MASON, ranked No.5, showed during England's outstanding 5-1 victory over the Soviet Union at Worthing on Thursday night that he is pushing for regular inclusion in the England team.
He repeated the best win of his career — over the Soviet No.1, Andrei Mazunov, in Moscow last season — by saving a game point at 21-22 and going on to win 24-22, 21-12.
It put England 2-0 up and seemed to break the spirit of the world bronze medallists.
Alan Cooke and Carl Prean scored two wins each, with Prean again suggesting he is pushing Cooke for the England No.1 position.
Remarkably the Mazunovs, Andrei and Dmitri, sustained three defeats between them, with Cooke also beating Andrei.
Dmitri had beaten Prean in the semi-finals of the Austrian Open on Sunday before going on to take the title.
This time Prean coped with noise from the extractor fans, his opponent's booming backhand and an early 6-11 deficit before winning 21-16, 21-17.
Gomer and Javer discarded.
TWO of the top three women in Britain's national rankings, Sara Gomer and Monique Javer, have been left out of the British team for the European championships which take place in Nantes from November 23 to 26.
Clare Wood, who beat Gomer in the national singles final at Telford last weekend, replaces her in a team completed by Jo Durie and Anne Hobbs.
Britain's opponents in the First Division are the USSR, France, Italy, Sweden and the Netherlands.
Hendry makes his move but Martyn waits.
MANCHESTER CITY have completed the £700,000 signing of the Blackburn Rovers defender Colin Hendry.
The 23-year-old Scot has signed too late to play at Derby today but should make his debut in City colours against Coventry reserves next week.
Gary Penrice, the Bristol Rovers striker, has moved to Watford for £500,000.
The fee is just £50,000 short of Watford's record, £550,000 for Luther Blissett from AC Milan.
The Rovers directors will be meeting this weekend in an attempt to end the dilemma over whether the club's England Under-21 goalkeeper Nigel Martyn really is bound for Crystal Palace.
There have been last-minute snags over the asking price of £1million, a record for a goalkeeper, and not every director favours the sale so soon after the departure of Penrice.
Mick Mills, replaced at Stoke by Alan Ball, has moved in the opposite direction, succeeding the caretaker manager by becoming Colchester coach.
Mills is expected to become Colchester's manager when Jock Wallace retires at the end of the season.
Ron Futcher has completed a £60,000 move from Port Vale to Burnley — the 33-year-old striker's 12th club.
England could be sent to Sicily.
By Paddy Agnew in Rome
ENGLAND may not, as had been widely expected, play all their opening World Cup finals games in Sardinia next year.
With Spain pushing hard for one of the first six seeded places, England could find themselves unseeded and playing in Sicily too, as the side ranked No.2 in a Group F headed by Belgium.
In Rome, Italia ‘90's director-general, Luca Di Montezemolo, acknowledged that Spain were putting pressure on Fifa.
Were they, because of their political pull within soccer's international body, to be seeded, then that would be at the expense of England.
It had been believed that England would be seeded to head Group F and would thus be based in Calgiari, Sardinia.
Fifa, Italia '90 and the English FA are all agreed that the hooligan element among English fans could be better contained if England played their opening games on an island.
The key to the seeding argument is Article 24 of Fifa's World Cup rule book, which in effect allows it to use whatever criterion it thinks fit when allocating seeds.
Spain claim to be entitled to a seeding at England's expense because they finished seventh in the Mexico World Cup finals in 1986, one place ahead of England.
The Spanish candidacy is being supported by Turin, one of the six cities in which the six seeds will be based for the first round.
At the moment Italy (the hosts) will be based in Rome, Argentina (the holders) in Naples, Brazil in Milan, and West Germany in Verona — leaving Belgium, England or Spain for Turin and Calgiari.
As semi-finalists in 1986, Belgium seem guaranteed a seeded position.
Were England seeded, they would be sent to Calgiari, leaving Belgium to go to Turin.
This has not gone down too well with the Torinese, who want a more prestigious side to inaugurate their new stadium.
Luca Argentieri, an Italia '90 spokesman, said last night that for obvious security reasons it was still desirable to send England to an island.
Sicily is the only other island to stage World Cup matches.
He confirmed that in the event of Spain being preferred to England in the seedings, then Spain would play in Turin and Belgium in Calgiari.
England, therefore, would play two first-round games in Palermo and one in Calgiari.