

The great onion disaster
FOR THE LAST three weeks, officials of the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control (UNFDAC) have been trying to sell thousands of tons of onions.
They have been pestering other UN agencies, embassies and local traders, so far without success.
Last year, UN officials in the district of Dir, Pakistan's most prolific opium-growing region, advised thousands of local farmers to grow onions instead of the lucrative poppies.
Farmers were told they would make pots of money, more than the heroin processors in the neighbouring, largely tribal agency of Bajaur could hope to offer.
Moreover, they were told that if anything went wrong the United Nations would guarantee them a market for their onions.
Convinced by the foreigners — and the then high price of onions — the farmers took the plunge on a large scale.
Whole villages went over to onions, and narcotics officials beamed with pleasure and satisfaction.
Crop substitution was working.
The experience was enough to make an opium farmer weep.
UN officials were seemingly unaware of developments in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital.
The federal government decided that exports of vegetables were contributing to the soaring inflation rate, and banned them.
The result was a home market swamped with onions, and a halving of prices.
In Dir, unsold onions are rotting.
The local UN office has been inundated with angry farmers.
‘They've been arriving in scores, each delegation with one appointed English speaker’ said an official.
‘I don't blame them for their anger.’
One young farmer, Shermani Yussef, said that for the first time in his life he had been forced to lease some of his land to cover his losses.
If he had grown opium on his half acre, he would have been guaranteed at least 20,000 rupees.
There would have been no trouble about marketing, as the Bajaur heroin processors obligingly collect the opium from the farm.
The likely result of the Great Onion Disaster is that the Dir district will return to its traditional crop of opium with a vengeance.
During the enforcement season the bumper crop will be burnt by the army.
And UN officials are being advised to leave.
Samizdat.
ON JULY 14 this year, Dai Qing, one of China's most prominent journalists, was arrested and her flat in Beijing ransacked.
She was a columnist with the Guangming Ribao (The Enlightenment Daily), a ‘quality’ newspaper, and an editor of Donggang Jishi (Chronicle of the East), a new journal about politics and literature.
At the time of her arrest, Dai Qing was working on a series of studies entitled Modern Chinese Intellectuals: From Liang Qichao to Fang Lizhi, in order, as she put it, to fill in some of the ‘memory holes’ of the history of the Chinese Communist Party.
Dai Qing was arrested two weeks after the Mayor of Beijing, Chen Xitong, had delivered a 15,000-word report to the standing committee of the National People's Congress (Parliament) on ‘checking the turmoil and quelling the counter-rebellion’— the June clampdown on the pro-democracy movement.
Dai Qing's name was singled out as one of the ‘tiny handful of people’ who had ‘colluded with foreign forces, ganged up among themselves at home and made ideological, public opinion and organisational preparations for years to stir up turmoil in China, overthrow the leadership of the Communist Party and subvert the socialist people's republic.’
On September 13 the Guangming Ribao, pilloried her on the front page under the headline, Dai Qing — the Rebellion ‘Reporter’.
The opening paragraph described her as having ‘gone all out to play an extremely ignominious role by jumping around to establish ties, make outcries, agitate the people, fan the flames, and add fuel to them.
This was Dai Qing, a reporter of the Guangming Ribao’.
Dai Qing's whereabouts, like thousands of others arrested since June, are not known.
If brought to trial, she can expect a long prison sentence, followed by ‘re-education through labour’ in a camp in Qinghai —‘China's Siberia’— an Area like the Sahara desert, in the west of the country, where the climate is notorious for its boiling heat in summer and freezing temperatures in winter.
‘Counter-revolutionary’ crimes are serious offences punishable by a bullet in the neck in some cases.
Dai Qing, brought up in one of China's most privileged families, has an impeccable revolutionary pedigree.
Born in Chongqing in 1946, the daughter of a revolutionary martyr, she was adopted by the family of Ye Jianying, one of the famous 10 marshals of the People's Liberation Army.
Marshal Ye Jianying (now dead) was a member of the Standing Committee of the Party's Politburo.
Dai Qing is married, with a daughter.
After graduating from the Harbin Military Technology Institute, she worked at the People's Liberation Army General Staff headquarters.
Between 1979 and 1982, she worked at the Foreign Relations Office of the Chinese Writers' Association.
In 1982, she joined Guangming Ribao as a reporter, becoming known for her writings on women's issues and her interviews with leading intellectuals.
In the early 1980s, because of her past connection with the military establishment, intellectuals tended to shun her and rumours had it that she worked for the Chinese KGB, the Ministry of State Security.
She told one foreign reporter that she knew of the rumours and laughed them off, saying, ‘If my relationship with the General Staff makes me a secret agent, maybe I am!’
Other sources say that she was an intelligence reject, mainly because of her rebellious and unpredictable personality.
She told another foreign reporter that she had spent most of her time at the General Staff learning English.
In August 1988, Dai Qing was invited to speak at a banquet in Hong Kong held in honour of Liu Binyan, the most famous ‘investigative reporter’ of the People's Daily, the official organ of the Chinese Communist Party.
Liu Binyan had been expelled from the party and dismissed from his post in 1987, and is living in exile in the US.
Now one of the most wanted men in China, Liu Binyan — whose faith in the Communist Party still endures — spoke of his writings as a ‘second kind of loyalty’ to the party.
Dai Qing shocked the audience by declaring: ‘I don't care what Binyang says about his second kind of loyalty; even the third, fourth or fifth kind of loyalty won't save China’.
In February this year, Dai Qing was at the forefront of the campaign to stop the Yangtze River Three Gorges Dam Project.
She wrote: ‘The reason China is in the state it is today after four decades of ‘peacetime construction’ is that every time a situation arises when people should shout ‘No’to avert a serious policy error, there is nothing but silence.’
She became known as the Chinese ‘Green’ leader.
On March 14, Dai Qing and two friends wrote an open letter to the National People's Congress, which was signed by 40 intellectuals and supported earlier appeals for the release of Wei Jingsheng and other political prisoners.
For Guangming Ribao (September 13), this was proof of Dai Qing's determination to have a confrontation with the authorities and showed ‘Dai Qing's basic objective to influence society and intervene in politics with independent personal characters and independent thinking.’
ON APRIL 26, Qin Benli, the editor of the Shanghai-based Shijie Jingjie Dao Bao (World Economic Herald) was sacked for publishing notes of a forum calling for the rehabilitation of Hu Yaobang, the former disgraced Communist Party's general secretary who died in April this year, and expressing support for the student demonstrations in Tiananmen Square.
It was Dai Qing who rallied other journalists to send messages of support for Qin Benli, urging his reinstatement.
This, and her close association with the World Economic Herald, were proof of her ‘bourgeois liberalism,’ according to the Guangming Ribao.
On May 3, Dai Qing and a number of Chinese intellectuals, marking the 70th anniversary of the May 4 Movement, called on the Party to continue with the liberal reforms and supported the demands of the students.
Dai Qing was often seen in Tiananmen Square talking to student demonstrators, and being interviewed by foreign journalists.
She became a mediator between the authorities and student leaders, and on a number of occasions tried to persuade students to end their hunger strike, leave Tiananmen Square and return to campus.
Some writers and journalists ridiculed her appeals, which were often received with hostility by militant students.
There were allegations that she was a ‘government agent.’
In mid-May, she told one foreign reporter that bloody repression would be inevitable if the students did not withdraw.
This prediction, according to the same source, was based on her privileged knowledge.
However, for Guangming Ribao, all her appeals to students to end the demonstrations had an ulterior motive.
The paper quoted her speech to the students in Tiananmen Square on May 14 when she said ‘Attack when attack is called for’ and ‘withdraw is a must.’
It said this really meant ‘withdrawing for the purpose of attacking again.’
MARTIAL law was declared in Beijing on May 20, and the massacres in Tiananmen Square took place on June 4.
Outraged by the bloody repression, Dai Qing publicly resigned from the Communist Party and said that she would distance herself from politics to concentrate on her writings.
She was reported to be deeply depressed and feeling dejected.
What was remarkable about the long article on her in her own newspaper were the details of her whereabouts and all her speeches during her pro-democracy movement in the spring, which were selectively presented to incriminate her.
It was worthy of the Security Bureau.
Apart from the personal attacks, its indictment of her political and ideological ideas went back as far as 1978 when she published her novel Await.
Guangming Ribao concluded: ‘Dai Qing's various activities in the turmoil and counter-revolutionary riot in Beijing are not accidental.
They have their deep-rooted, ideological source.
They are the inevitable result of her stand in advocating bourgeois liberalisation over a period of time.’
The article ended with the following paragraph: ‘Actually, how could Dai Qing be an elite of China's intelligentsia?
She is nothing but a pawn of reactionary forces at home and abroad who are trying to turn China into a bourgeois republic.
Dai Qing was a member of the rebellious group during the Cultural Revolution.
Her name was Fu Ming.
After the Cultural Revolution, she changed her name to Dai Qing.
However, although she changed her name her thought remained unchanged.
She only changed from an ultra-leftist to an ultra-rightist.
Whenever there is a chance, she and her partners will emerge and stir up trouble.
But they will never be able to achieve their goal.
The fact that the Chinese people have promptly quelled the counter-revolutionary riot in Beijing has completely shattered their fond dream.’
Lek Hor Tan is Asia researcher of Index on Censorship, 39c Highbury Pl, N5.
Tel 359 0161
Sir Julian Bullard, former British Ambassador in Bonn, looks into a future full of fear and expectation in Central Europe and charts Britain's role The time to shed our illusions.
DURING my time in Germany (1984-88) the British Ambassadors in Bonn and East Berlin would twice a year set off on an official tour, once in his territory and once in mine, to gather impressions about the relationship between the two parts of the divided German nation and how it might develop.
Year after year we came home convinced that ‘all-German’ emotions, though officially discouraged on one side and dormant on the other, were far from dead, and that the post-war arrangements in central Europe were therefore a lot less permanent than they might seem.
So the East German events of this week were an earthquake waiting to happen.
Historians will argue over what was the causa causans and which the causa sine qua non.
My own choice for the single most influential factor would be the decision of the Hungarian Government to subordinate its very clear obligations under an agreement with the GDR to its general duty under the Helsinki Final Act of 1975 — a decision which blew a hole in the sealed frontiers of the GDR, and relegated to the past the comfortable slogans of the last three decades.
Since then it is events rather than governments that have been in command.
Gorbachev's warning to Honecker not to postpone the necessary reforms was a smoke alarm soon drowned by the blaze.
Krenz's programme of measures may have to make way for a more revolutionary alternative — and Krenz too.
So this is a time for shedding illusions and for staking up such relative certainties as exist.
I will list some of the latter: 1.
Whatever happens in Central Europe must pass the test of self-determination.
It saddens me to hear some people in Britain speak as if there were some way of keeping Germany divided whether or not this is what the Germans want.
That may be a tenable position for the Soviet Union, but not for Britain, which has committed itself repeatedly to accepting both self-determination for the German people and a re-united Germany if this is what self- determination leads to.
2.
But this does not mean accepting whatever kind of Greater Germany may come into being.
The four principal victors of 1945 retain responsibility for ‘Berlin and Germany as a whole’.
They cannot exercise it without regard for the wishes of the German people, but neither can the German people act as if the ‘German question’ concerned nobody but themselves.
This is a matter of international law, and of politics too.
It was a Christian Democrat Chancellor of the Federal Republic (Kurt Georg Kiesinger) who said that a reunified Germany would be ‘a critical mass’.
In other words, it would need to be held in place by a strong political framework.
It would be helpful if matching promises could now be made by Washington, London and Paris, that they will exercise their residual responsibilities only in the direction requested by the German people, and by Bonn, that the German right of self-determination will be exercised only in consultation with the three Western Allies.
3.
Reunification need not, and probably will not, come overnight.
But it could start overnight, and indeed it has already started.
The GDR's borders are now open, and the Government in Bonn poised to jump in with massive economic support for the process of political reform as it develops.
The West has money and know-how, the East has greenfield sites in plenty: the GDR is 60 per cent less densely populated than the FRG.
In a few years time the two German states could be virtually a single economic area.
4.
The European Community should recognise its limitations.
Current attempts to link its internal to its external development have something synthetic about them.
The coming battle for the soul of Central Europe will not be decided on the playing fields of EMU, nor by throwing in the sheepmeat regime at the decisive moment.
The GDR is already a country member of the EC, with free access to the markets of the FRG.
The EC could absorb the 16.5 million East Germans, if it came to that, more easily than it could the two countries whose applications already lie on the table in Brussels — Austria with her backward deck-cargo of neutrality, and Turkey, with her GDP well below that of Portugal.
But full membership must always be a complex package of rights and responsibilities, requiring, first, years of negotiations and then years of transition.
If the EC is looking for ways to help the reform process in Central Europe, it should dust off Article 238 of the Treaty of Rome, whose benign language allows ‘Association’ of almost any kind.
5.
Berlin, in the present context, is more symbolic than significant.
With all of the GDR's western frontier open, the Wall is the most convenient crossing point only for those who want to go no further than the Kurfurstendamm.
Cocooned in its Quadripartite Status, Berlin does nobody any harm at present.
If and when re-unification came about, the Four Powers would lift their hand from the city as they lifted it from ‘Germany as a whole’.
Whether then Berlin became the national capital would be a matter for the German people to decide.
6.
The question of Germany's frontiers, still unsettled today as a matter of strict international law, will likewise fall into place as part of any new arrangement in Central Europe.
This means the definitive and final recognition of the present frontiers of Poland.
The territories beyond the Oder-Neisse line are already lost to Germany.
So the sacrifice will be more formal than real, and it will be in the general interest, and it must be made.
To approach the military aspect is to move from relative certainties to what the old joke calls ‘a higher level of ignorance’.
The phrase ‘the two military alliances’ implies a resemblance which never existed, but today the fates of Nato and the Warsaw Pact do seem strangely linked, like Jacob and his cryptic antagonist in Genesis 32.
Alongside their traditional functions (which grow ever harder to explain to a public caught up in the excitement of recent developments), they offer a general reassurance against unpleasant surprises; a brake on events which could otherwise outstrip our power to control them.
But how exactly should the future of Nato and the Warsaw Pact be fitted together with the future of Central Europe?
An answer can only be given in the kind of perspective which the processes of East-West reconciliation and arms control may, in any case, create: a perspective in which the strategic factors progressively diminish in importance, until the 19 Soviet divisions now stationed in the GDR have no more significance than a knight or bishop stranded on a square of a chessboard which no longer figures in the game.
Uncertain, too, is the broad political picture that may emerge in Europe under the influence of the radical changes now in progress.
The West German Foreign Minister has spoken of a ‘new European Peace Order,’ Lord Callaghan of a new Concert of Europe.
Both ideas imply an arrangement transcending the present division between Nato and Warsaw Pact and neutrals, EC and EFTA and Comecon.
Here is a vision for the think-tanks to ponder and put some flesh on.
Meanwhile, there is a perilous stretch of water to be navigated.
President Gorbachev's record as fairy godmother to the cause of democratic revolution, first in Beijing and now in East Berlin, may have caught our fancy in the West, but to some in Moscow he must seem more of a wicked stepmother, turning the achievements of Socialism to dust wherever he goes.
When Khrushchev fell in 1964 his colleagues in the Politburu leaked an indictment of 29 charges against him.
It would be surprising if a similar tally were not being kept in Moscow now, against the day when Gorbachev may over-reach himself.
In the GDR, as in the Soviet Union, the reformist trend could certainly be checked, even if not reversed.
And in the West, the situation will require exceptional skills on the part of our present leaders — especially in West Germany, where a string of elections over the next 12 months will make it hard for those in power to preserve the calm and objectivity with which all these questions need to be discussed.
So the political maturity of the Federal Republic and its institutions will be tested as never before.
Anger at Caspar Weinberger award.
ON MONDAY November 13, the University of Leeds plans to award Caspar Weinberger an honorary degree in Law.
Are we to assume that he is to be honoured for his illustrious career as US Secretary of State for Defence?
The University appears, then, to have great admiration for the fact that, among other things, Caspar Weinberger: a) supported the Contra rebels in a war which led to the deaths of some 30,000 Nicaraguans and which was declared illegal by the International Court of Justice.
Ironically, it is with an honorary degree in Law that the University now wishes to recognise him; b) actively encouraged military spending in such areas as ‘Star Wars’, chemical weapons and first-strike nuclear weapons systems; c) attempted to scupper all arms control agreements and moves towards detente with the Eastern bloc.
Given this, he is clearly not the servant to ‘Peace and Humanity’ that Leeds University has billed him, and there must surely be many people who deserve the honour more obviously.
The award also has deeper implications.
Leeds, like most universities, is watching its government grant shrink each year.
It would seem that Caspar Weinberger — apparently a strange choice on grounds of achievement — would be a useful contact in the lucratively immoral world of weapons research.
This is both a plausible theory and one with disturbing implications.
We object to the awarding by the University of Leeds of an honorary degree to such a man and urge the university authorities to reconsider.
We also most strongly oppose the increasing trend of greater military funding of higher education and the erosion of the independence of its institutions.
Eddie Goncalves (Co-Ordinator, Leeds University Union CND & peace group), John Baruch (Yorkshire Convenor, Scientists Against Nuclear Arms), Gillian Anderson (General Secretary, Leeds University Union), Simon Hughes MP (Liberal Democrats Education Spokesperson), Meg Beresford (General Secretary, Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament), Julian Jacobs (General Secretary, Nicaragua Solidarity Campaign), Rob Evans (Campaign Against Military Research on Campus).
Walter Tkach:.
WALTER Tkach served three American Presidents as White House doctor — Eisenhower, Kennedy and Nixon.
He also ran the medical dispensary at General MacArthur headquarters in Tokio during the US occupation of Japan.
A doctor who liked a life of action, as an Air Force major general he spent the Korean War years as a surgeon and during the Vietnam War flew into combat zones to help the wounded.
It was typical of him that after serving as an assistant White House physician during the eight years of the Eisenhower Administration, he became restless after eight months with the more liberal Kennedy Administration and left the White House for service as a deputy surgeon with the Pacific Air Forces, becoming command surgeon of the 7th Air Force in South Vietnam.
He was a friend of Richard Nixon, however, and when Nixon was elected president in 1968, he returned to the White House as the president's physician.
After Nixon's resignation, he reverted to his other persona, and became command surgeon for the Air Force Systems Command at Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington DC, retiring in 1979. — W.J.W.
Breaking down the barriers to true freedom in East Germany.
EXAMPLES are not hard to find which prove that capitalism and democracy, though they may sometimes exist together, are certainly not synonymous.
In the midst of the dramatic events now taking place in East Germany, the demands for free elections in the GDR are usually linked with assumptions that these will result in a market economy on capitalist lines.
To presuppose this is both contradictory and dangerous; contradictory because the West cannot insist on a certain outcome from free elections and still uphold democracy; dangerous because, if the confusion of the two in the public mind persists, there will be many more instances of superpowers subverting elected governments because they have not opted for a market economy.
Nicaragua is a case in point.
There is, of course, a moral argument in favour of encouraging democracy in the countries of eastern Europe but the choice between a planned economy and an unfettered market must be left to them.
Above all, we must ourselves acknowledge that democracy is not incompatible with either.
Harvey Quilliam.
6 Poulevara House, West Oakhill Park, Liverpool.
AFTER the recent wonderful developments in eastern Europe, particularly the fall of the Berlin Wall, can we now have a bit more freedom — other than the freedom to spend money.
For example, a civil Bill of Rights and the introduction of a fair electoral system, namely proportional representation?
Sue Atkinson.
Castle Street, Stroud, Glos.
Obituary: Margarete Buber-Neumann.
MARGARETE Buber-Neumann lived and suffered much in the eye of the storm of history that tore Europe apart, and died just as the world was watching incredulously what seems to be the great schism's healing.
As a young socialist in Weimar Germany she shared her life and ideals first with Rafael Buber, son of the Jewish theologian and philosopher Martin Buber, then with Heinz Neumann, who was to become leader of the German Communist party until Stalin had him removed in 1932.
In 1935 they were summoned to Moscow by the Comintern and in April 1937 Neumann was arrested by the NKVD and disappeared for ever.
A year later, Margarete followed him into the darkness of Stalin's police underworld, but after a time in a Siberian camp had the honour of forming part of a present from Stalin to Hitler, being one of several hundred German political prisoners ‘of interest’ handed over to the Gestapo near Brest-Litovsk in 1940 after the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact.
This might seem more than enough for one life, but in the Ravensbruck concentration camp to which she was now sent she met the woman with whom she formed the other crucial relationship of her life, with Milena Jesenska, whose own life experience drew Margarete intensely, if vicariously, into another of the crucial Central European milieux of that period — the Prager Kreis of Willy Haas, Max Brod and Kafka, whose lover, and early translator, Milena was.
Margarete's memorialising book about Milena, published when the author was already in her late seventies, gives grimly graphic pictures of camp life, and underlines, as if it were needed, how the two womens' all too comprehensive experience of two totalitarian systems led Milena to declare that Stalinism and Hitlerism were indistinguishable (as a result of which the communists' leader in the camp declared that ‘after the liberation Milena Jesenska and Margarete Buber-Neumann would be stood up against the wall by the Red Army.’
In the event, Milena died practically in Margerete's arms in 1944, and it was the Americans who liberated Ravensbruck.
Thereafter, much of Margarete's unquenchable energies were devoted to telling in books and lectures what she knew of the story which Solzhenitsyn would describe definitively in his Gulag trilogy, and to trying to inoculate the young against the totalitarian virus wherever she thought she saw the threat of it.
For all her tempering in the fires of history, she remained an impassioned idealist to the end of her long life, though with enough self-knowledge and self-irony to be able to record what Milena Jesenska said about the difference between them —‘What an incurable girl guide you are.
I'm an inveterate city slicker’.
W.L.Webb Margarete Buber-Neumann (nee Thuring), born Potsdam, October 21, 1901; died Frankfurt, November 6, 1989.
Clapham tragedy highlights transport policy dangers.
SIR ANTHONY Hidden QC has omitted one place to lay the blame for the Clapham disaster — the law lords who decided in the ‘Fares Fair’ case that an ‘economic’transport system was one that made a profit or broke even on fares charged, rather than one that could expect support from ratepayers or taxpayers.
The result has been that ‘investment at the highest levels ever’ has come from fares, not from any public purse, and that an ‘economic’system has become unsafe as BR and LRT weigh up commercial investment needs against the cost of safety measures and the cost of paying wages sufficient to maintain a safe level of staffing.
What the GLC were hoping to do with London's transport system now looks quite farsighted, and the learned judge's remark that Ken Livingstone ‘had made a naked grasp for power that must not be allowed’ just silly.
But the political spite it betrayed must at least rank as a contributory factor in the sequence of events that led to Clapham and King's Cross.
(Rev) S.Parish.
1A Fitzherbert Street, Warrington.
BRITISH RAIL already spend large sums of money on advertising.
Their TV adverts, which show contented passengers relaxing on clean, modern, uncrowded and efficient trains, whilst enjoying the attentions of friendly and caring staff, are far from the reality we all experience.
Behind the scenes they have been steadily resisting, for many years, the introduction of even the most basic and cheap safety measures such as cab radios.
I would have added a further recommendation to the Clapham conclusions: that British Rail should forthwith desist from any further advertising expenditure and re-route the money to the improvement of safety and engineering standards.
To spend corporate money telling us that ‘it isn't so’ when we all know that it is, insults our intelligence as well as endangering our lives.
V.P.Hill.
London NW3.
THE GOVERNMENT'S involvement in undermining attempts to freeze carbon dioxide emissions by the year 2000 (Guardian, November 8) should perhaps be viewed together with the Department of Transport's recently announced road-building programme, and projections that UK road traffic will increase by about 43 per cent over the next 20-30 years.
In the same issue, it is reported that Sir Anthony Hidden's investigation into the Clapham Junction rail crash criticises British Rail for not preventing ‘commercial considerations of a business-led railway from compromising safety,’ and asserts that excessive overtime should be ended, and that there should be curbs on overcrowding in trains.
‘Can you give up your car?’ asked the Guardian not very long ago.
The answer has to be an emphatic ‘no’; not until the Government is switches funding from road-building to investing in the railway infrastructure, which remains the most sensible alternative.
Geoff Palmer.
Stamford Bridge, York.
Emergency calls for action.
IN TRYING to split off nine-tenths of ambulance drivers' journeys as ‘non-emergency,’ Mr Kenneth Clarke attempts to separate the inseparable.
At any time, a ‘routine’ journey may become an emergency.
GPs probably spend a similar proportion of time on patients who are not in immediate danger.
They are paid, as ambulance drivers should be, for ‘being there’(as the drivers still are) with their skill and know-how.
(Rev) Ernest Moore.
Harrogate, N. Yorks.
SO Mr Clarke says the ambulance dispute was caused by the ambulance crews' failure to accept their leaders' recommendation.
Had the recommendation been for industrial action and the crews voted against, I have no doubt Mr Clarke would have applauded the triumph of democracy.
He really cannot have it both ways.
This government has repeatedly talked about ‘giving the unions back to their members.’
Very well: the union has behaved democratically.
Mr Clarke's reaction reveals the same double standard as did his reaction to the doctors' equally democratic verdict which he proceeded to dismiss.
Is it intelligence or integrity he lacks?
(Rev) M.L.Forster.
Buckminster Road Baptist Church, Leicester.
YOUR leader on the ambulance service dispute (November 8) is, unfortunately, highly misleading.
You compare the lowest figure for an out-of-London ambulance worker (on £10,000) with the possible earnings of a Metropolitan police constable (£25,000).
In fact, London qualified ambulance workers are being offered £12,100, while to get anywhere near £25,000 a Metropolitan police constable would have to be putting in a huge amount of overtime — the annual pay of a PC with three years' experience is £12,756.
More to the point, you fail to mention the fact that the Government has offered talks on a pay structure which would ensure that those ambulance workers with a high skill level, who tend to be those who deal with the worst accidents, are paid more to reflect their training.
The obvious corollary of this is that less qualified ambulance workers, who are largely engaged in driving non-urgent cases, would not see their earnings rise by so much.
That is why NUPE and the other unions have been so unwilling to negotiate sensibly on this aspect of the dispute.
Yet it would seem to make perfect sense for higher qualified paramedics to be more highly paid, provided there was an acceptance that ambulance workers with lower skill levels would receive less.
John Marshall,(MP).
(Con, Hendon S), House of Commons.
WITH regard to the ambulance dispute, the Minister frequently says that they should accept the 6 ½ per cent, which has been accepted by other health service unions.
The ancilliary workers have accepted 9 per cent, the doctors 8 per cent and certainly my own union is at the moment balloting to decide on industrial action over the 6 ½ per cent offered to Medical Laboratory Scientific Officers.
Economical with the truth?
Ralph Baer.
27 The Drive, Amersham, Bucks.
IWISH to express my support for the ambulance men and women.
In 25 years of general practice I have had nothing but admiration and gratitude for their assistance.
Their level of expertise and commitment is at least on a par with that of the police and fire service.
Their unfailing good humour and propensity to reassure those in their care are a welcome support to the tired GP seeking to admit a patient at 3 am!
(Dr) S.Wyn Jones.
Wrexham, Clwyd.
YOU REPORT (November 7) that the president of the Police Federation is worried lest the use of the police in the ambulance dispute would jeopardise the idea of the impartiality of the police in the eyes of the public.
Let me put his mind at rest: any notion that the police were impartial disappeared with their behaviour in the miners' strike.
Esmond Smith.
Broad Street, Orford, Suffolk.
Sound Bites
I am sick of always being treated as part of the President's baggage.
Danielle Mitterrand on being the wife of the French leader.
I usually get rid of my men after 2 ½ years.
Tina Turner.
The players were acting like a bunch of women.
Police officer after the Arsenal v.
Norwich battle.
Women, with certain exceptions, have little to offer the House of Commons.
John Carlisle, Tory MP for Luton.
I think we should be told.
Mr Justice Michael Davies after Private Eye and Sonia Sutcliffe agreed that the amount of libel damages should remain undisclosed
Diary.
By Ann Clwyd
‘CONGRATULATIONS,’ said one of my Welsh male colleagues ‘on getting on to the assisted places scheme.’
He added quickly: ‘I didn't really mean it.’
Since he is a man without malice, he was nevertheless probably accurately reflecting what some, if not many, male Labour MPs feel about reserving three places for women in Labour's Shadow Cabinet.
While we stood for election alongside the men, a decision taken in July by Labour MPs to bring more women into prominent positions in the party ensured that at least three women would be elected.
In the event, we got four and almost five.
People like Willy Brandt in West Germany pioneered similar systems years ago to get more women into Parliament.
According to the pundits, I was a ‘surprise’ result: a ‘rebel’who had bucked the system.
As a former reporter I devour newsprint with the appetite of a motorised refuse truck, but some of the garbage that has been written about myself and other women MPs deserves instant binning.
The fact that the hordes of reporters who live in the burrows of the Palace of Westminster got it wrong — and have since tried to justify getting it wrong — has given me, and many of my friends who knew the score pretty accurately before the result, much quiet pleasure over the last few days.
It all happened too fast.
One moment we were sitting in a packed meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party, hearts aflutter, waiting for the results.
The next, Jo Richardson, Joan Lestor, Margaret Beckett and myself were out on the terrace of the Commons among the cameras, the microphones, and the reporters, like rare butterflies pinned on a specimen board.
Interviews followed (for me in Welsh as well as English).
‘When do you next expect to get sacked?’ was a favourite.
‘How do you get on with Mr Kinnock?’ was another.
Then came the first Shadow Cabinet meeting.
Cameras, lights, and a red rose for all of us: all the women were asked to sqeeze round Neil.
Much laughter, jollity, and anticipation of a successful 12 months ahead with a government on the run.
As I walk through Mountain Ash on my way to my Saturday surgery, people call out on the street.
‘Congratulations’, ‘Well done’.
An old man sitting on a seat in the town centre shouts: ‘Ann Clwyd, Ann Clwyd, congratulations.
Prime Minister next.’
I laugh and think, ‘No thank you.’
The warmth and obvious pleasure of everyone I meet and see in the Cynon Valley that day is humbling and exhilirating.
These are the people who made me Wales's only woman MP.
I have to repay them.
The letters have poured in this week.
From friends of long ago, from the European Parliament, and from names I could not decipher.
There have been the odd sour ones, from men who object to what they call sexism in the Labour Party, ie, ‘assisted places’ on the Shadow Cabinet.
With only 41 women out of 650 in Parliament, what a nerve!
CAMBODIA has been the main subject of my mailbag this week.
Other MPs the same.
All say they have had more letters on this foreign-policy subject than any other.
A Tory MP asks me whether the story is true about the UK training troops in secret bases in Thailand to fight alongside Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge.
I tell him to ask the Prime Minister.
After all, she has been asked the question several times over the past few days and will not say yes or no.
We all know the answer is yes.
I was last in Cambodia in September, my second visit in two years.
I watched the much-maligned Vietnamese troops leave.
People forget that it was they who freed the country from Pol Pot, otherwise many more would have died than the one million who were starved, tortured, and executed between 1975-78.
John Pilger's TV film last week has roused the conscience of the British people in a way that politicians like us have failed to do.
There is a real fear that Pol Pot will return to Cambodia.
Surely the world cannot stand idly by and watch this country of eight million people go through the agony of war yet again?
Because of the political impasse over the past ten years Cambodia, one of the poorest countries in the world, has received no UN development aid, nor any bilateral or multilateral development aid from the UK.
It is only the dedication of charities like Oxfam, which has a team of permanent aid workers in Cambodia, that enables the UK to hold up its head.
The British Government has blindly followed the American ‘bleed Vietnam white’ policy to justify its policy of ignoring Cambodia.
Now the Vietnamese are no longer there, it has no excuse.
It will of course still make one: a mirror-image again of the American claim that Vietnam has left one million settlers behind, and that the Cambodian government is communist.
Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia has said many times: ‘Come and see for yourselves.
Send an international team which includes former Khmer people, so they can distinguish between the two peoples.’
Repeatedly he has said he favours internationally supervised elections, and that his country wishes to be non-aligned.
On my two visits I met many ordinary people who have great respect and affection for their prime minister.
He is not the despot portrayed in the West.
AROUND my neck I wear a gold and ruby necklace from Pailin, a near-derelict town on Cambodia's mountainous border with Thailand.
The rubies come from there and the area has recently been fought over.
Government troops have been defeated and the Khmer Rouge now occupy Pailin.
I finger the necklace often these days as I think of my many friends in that country.
The Khmer Rouge was one of the bloodiest regimes in Asian history.
Yet recognition of the anti-Vietnamese resistance coalition, of which it is the dominant partner, will be maintained at the United Nations next week.
The British Government has acquiesed in an insane situation.
A lot of other people are deeply worried.
A retired diplomat who now spends all his time lobbying on Cambodia, has sent a 30-page fax from Los Angeles to my constituency office in Aberdare.
I send my secretary there an SOS and she spends a day clearing up and dumping my old files, generally tidying me up as well.
IWONDER what frail Madame Phiroun, Secretary-General of the Cambodian Parliament, is thinking now.
Pol Pot killed her entire family.
She was a former civil servant and escaped death only by telling her interrogators that she was a peasant.
As she has a deeply freckled skin, they believed her and she was sent to do hard labour in the paddy fields.
No hard-line communist is she.
One of her main interests is our Royal family.
She herself was educated in Paris with Prince Sihanouk, and she once entertained Princess Margaret and Lord Snowdon in Cambodia.
And her endless supplies of Paris Match keep her in touch with the Royals.
Then there is our gentle guide, Kan Phardidh.
He was training to be a teacher when the Khmer Rouge took over.
He was sent to work in the fields.
Now most of his family are dead.
What were his hopes now, I asked.
‘All our hopes have changed,’ he said sadly.
Our Shadow Cabinet meeting on Thursday decided to use Labour's time on Monday to debate Cambodia.
I am delighted: it is an issue on which I have campaigned vigorously for more than two years.
Gerald Kaufman will open the debate and I will sum up.
It is my first appearance at the dispatch box in my new role, and it could not be a better issue.
Ann Clwyd, MP for the Cynon Valley, is Labour's new Shadow Secretary for Development and Co-operation.