

Video.
By Tim Pulleine
SELL-THROUGH, as the retail sector of the video market is obscurely known, is at the moment very much a bull market, and there has lately been a growing shift to releasing more recent movies in this way.
This has been capped by the well publicised current appearance of no less than Rain Man (Warner) for sale (£14.99) as well as for rent, when hitherto the two spheres have tacitly been regarded as mutually exclusive.
But for all the changes, the prime emphasis in the retail market, so far as movies are concerned, still seems to be on the past, and predominantly on the mainstream Hollywood past.
Current refinements, no doubt with Christmas present buying in mind, include boxed sets of three or more related cassettes from Warners — for example, all three of James Dean's movies for £29.95, or for the same price, Marilyn Monroe in The Prince and the Showgirl, The Misfits and (a bit of a scoop, since it has not been on video before) Some Like It Hot.
This kind of collection, though usually available individually, is increasingly and intelligently proving to be a marketing ploy.
For random instance, CBS/Fox has recently released (£9.99 each) not only Cronenberg's 1986 The Fly and its far from negligible 1958 forerunner, but also the 1959 quick-buck sequel to the latter, Return Of The Fly, a collector's item, though not necessarily in qualitative terms.
And to move from B to Z movies, connoisseurs of the bizarre can now lay in their own copy of Edward Woods’ Plan 9 From Outer Space (Palace, £14.99), once voted the most incompetent film of all time.
The rental sector meanwhile provides — along with all the box-office successes which nowadays transfer to tape within a few months and probably need no further introduction — the chance to catch up on a variety of (often more deserving) movies which have been less widely seen in cinemas here.
A prime example is Crossing Delancey (Warner), Joan Micklin Silver's deft and sympathetic comedy of Jewish New York life.
Or, still in New York, there is Peter Yates' The House On Carroll Street (Virgin), a gripping suspense story set against the background of the McCarthy inquisition.
For Queen And Country (Sony) is a tough and effective British ‘urban western’ confronting racism and inner-city deprivation in uncomplacently stylised terms.
Representing a more traditional form of British cinema, John Schlesinger's Madame Sousatzka (Virgin) has a stand-out performance by Shirley MacLaine and a keen eye for varied London locations, while A Time Of Destiny (Vestron) is a baroque romantic melodrama from Gregory Nava (El Norte), which despite the miscasting of William Hurt as a Basque immigrant's son seemed to me to have been unfairly downgraded.
Another flawed but striking recent movie is DOA (Buena Vista), an update from the creators of Max Headroom of the classic 1949 thriller of the same name, which may detrimentally alter the plot of the original but boasts nonetheless some arresting high-tech intimations of neo-expressionist atmosphere.
Needing no alibis, however, though it comes close to an exploitation concept, is the hard-driving Australian movie Shame (Vestron), with a dynamic central performance by Deborra-Lee Furness as the city woman caught up in Outback violence.
Speaking of exploitation, students of the genre might care to consider Trapper County War (Guild), an archetypal example of the backwoods nightmare, set in one of those supposed hillbilly communities where the locals, when not spitting out tobacco or imprecations, are banding together to hunt down interlopers and blast them to bits.
And for historically minded exploitation devotees, there is Terror Train (MGM/UA), made in 1980 and one of umpteen contemporaneous movies patterned after Halloween, but with the novelty of being almost wholly set aboard a train.
The star is Jamie Lee Curtis, who in those days, well before A Fish Called Wanda, was the acknowledged holder of the ‘scream queen’ title which had once rested on the shapely shoulders of Evelyn Ankers.
Another war of words?
Critic's view Cinema.
By Derek Malcolm
THE LONDON Film Festival — the largest ever mounted — grinds to a halt on Sunday with a performance of Ettore Scola's What Time Is It?
But before then there is another Guardian debate (Saturday, NFT1, 2.15) which, if it is half as argumentative as last weekend's about the South African cinema, ought to be well worth attending.
The subject is contentious enough in all conscience — the independent film.
Which means the kind of film that is not financed by the major American companies and is sometimes thought of as art rather than commerce.
In particular the debate focusses on the American variety of independent film, of which there have been a large number at this year's festival, ranging from Jim Jarmusch's annoyingly fashionable Mystery Train to Julia Cameron's God's Will, which cost only 31,000 dollars to make.
Incidentally, I am not sure that Cameron should admit this fact since it will make anyone who wants to buy her movie positively glow with pleasure at the thought of paying her practically nothing for it.
But that's another matter.
Anyway, the debate ought to be fun since what is certain is that American audiences, or at least distributors, have at least as much contempt as those here for independent features without bankable stars, car chases and expensive special effects.
It will be chaired by Steve Pinhay, the producer of ITV's Saturday Night At The Movies, a programme which keeps on sending me press releases saying how wonderful it is but, when I actually watch it, seems to ignore the independent cinema entirely, particularly the variety that actually dares to speak in a foreign tongue.
Someone ought to ask him about that.
Meanwhile I much enjoyed chairing the South African debate, since tempers flared throughout, including mine, which is always interesting.
I particularly enjoyed the contributions of Wally Serote, the black poet and writer who is now the ANC's cultural representative in London, and who never lost his cool once.
What he said was very significant — that the ANC wanted to encourage any film-maker, black or white, who tried to put on the screen images of black people that were recognisably human, and who also tried to give employment and encouragement to black technicians.
He spoke very movingly about this, and his lack of political inflexibility was cheering.
But I do wonder whether it is really necessary for the London festival, or any other, come to that, to clear any South African film they might want to show not only with the ANC but also with the South African Film and Allied Workers Organisation.
If you can't tell what is a racist film and what is not, you shouldn't be in charge of a festival in the first place.
This smacks of something akin to censorship, as one impeccably non-racist European festival director sadly pointed out to me.
And wherever that comes from, it is surely a bad thing.
Recommended films in London: Kieslowski's A Short Film About Killing, Greenaway's The Cook The Thief His Wife And Her Lover, Soderbergh's sex, lies and videotape, Russell's The Rainbow, Phil Noyce's Dead Calm, Spike Lee's Do the Right Thing, Kenneth Branagh's Henry V and Bertrand Tavernier's Life And Nothing But.
Independent director Jim Jarmusch: see Critic's view Youki Kudoh and Masatoshi Nagase in a scene from Jim Jarmusch's Mystery Train: see Critic's view Ian McElhinney and Carol Scanlan in Reefer And The Model (left) and Thomas F. Wilson and Lea Thompson in Back To The Future II: see Reviews, page 23 Julia Cameron's God's Will is one of the US independents screened at the London Film Festival: see Critic's view
From Dylan to Dexy, Prince to Propaganda-Sweeting's 20 for the 80s (in no particular order).
Dexy's Midnight Runners-Searching For The Young Soul Rebels (EMI, 1980).
THIS formidable collision of punk anger and soul fervour was Kevin Rowland's finest, most fanatical hour.
Just check the way he sneers ‘for God's sake, burn it down.’
Bob Dylan-Biograph boxed set (CBS, 1985).
DYLAN'S albums in the Eighties have been disappointing, including the recent and much-overrated Oh Mercy.
But Biograph was a timely reminder of why he used to loom so large, featuring rare tracks, live recordings of familiar songs, and the best Dylan interview in 20 years in the booklet inside.
ABC-The Lexicon Of Love (Neutron, 1982).
STILL Martin Fry's most memorable achievement, and a record which stands up astonishingly well, thanks to Trevor Horn's ground-breaking production and Fry's songs.
The Look Of Love and All Of My Heart remain peerless.
Madonna-Like A Prayer (WEA, 1989).
MADONNA was already legendary when she made this record, but it was by far her most heartfelt, exuberant and accomplished set of songs.
Enough, even, to make you forget those dodgy movies.
Elvis Costello-King Of America (F-Beat, 1986).
I THINK Costello makes too many records for his own good, but here, he found a vein of country and swing which was peculiarly well suited to his wordplay and visual imagery.
In American Without Tears, he even sounded compassionate, for once.
John Hiatt-Bring The Family (Demon, 1987).
AFTER a familiar Eighties-style de-tox saga, Hiatt returned after years spent as the nearly-man with this scary, hilarious and durable collection.
As impressive as the emotional force of the songs was the way their author had learned to marry complex lyrics to tunes which never sounded forced or over-extended.
Bruce Springsteen-The River (CBS, 1980).
NOT a perfect album by any means (Point Blank is mere melodrama and I Wanna Marry You is a nauseous homily), but a breakthrough for Springsteen in terms of establishing the range of his vision.
Wreck On The Highway and Fade Away were bleak and enduring vignettes, while Independence Day and the title song were nothing less than monumental.
Sandie Shaw- ‘Hello Angel’(Rough Trade, 1988).
IN WHICH the barefoot songstrel rewrote her life story for the late Eighties, and came back to claim what should have been hers years before.
Great performances, astonishingly strong songs, and a sense of humour too.
Prince-Sign O The Times (Paisley Park, 1987).
ALL Prince's albums have plenty to recommend them, even the somewhat two-dimensional Batman.
Sign O The Times offered the bleak social realism of the title song, an unusually piercing glimpse into the artist's soul on The Cross, plus fragments of incandescent musicianship.
The album's apparent randomness made more sense when you saw the movie.
Propaganda-Propaganda's Secret Wish (ZTT, 1985).
ONE and only outing from the unique German foursome, blending the Gothic, the Romantic and the operatic into a glittering technological whole.
Abba meets Kraftwerk.
Echo & The Bunnymen-Heaven Up Here (Korova, 1981).
THE Bunnymen hit an early peak with this second album, achieving a distance, weight and mystery they would never quite match again.
The likes of A Promise brought a Northern Hemisphere chill to the band's stately romanticism.
Rosanne Cash-Rhythm & Romance (CBS, 1985).
ROSANNE wasn't over-enamoured with this little lot when she'd finished it, considering it too sugary and poppy, but it stands up as her finest album to date.
She's in splendid voice on chart-friendly pieces like Never Be You, while Halfway House is a harrowing look at a marriage in transition.
Too good to be pigeonholed under ‘New Country.’
Neneh Cherry-Raw Like Sushi (Circa, 1989).
THE shape of pop to come?
The outrageously self-possessed Cherry blends pop, soul, rap and the art of the remix into a fiendishly accomplished whole.
Makes Bobby Brown look like a novice.
Terence Trent D'Arby-Neither Fish Nor Flesh (CBS 1989) IT WON'T do to write D'Arby off as a pathetic Prince impersonator, because his roots are rather different-more Sixties London than Detroit funk.
Beneath the quirks of arrangement on this second album, D'Arby delivers resounding pop songs, some great vocal performances, and an idiosyncratic vision which will help him go far.
Guns'N'Roses-Appetite For Destruction (Geffen, 1987).
AXL ROSE and Co have worked hard at being the bad boys of metal, but their screams of anguish and unleashed hedonism from LA's underbelly strike a blow for freedom from the hegemony of the American mainstream.
Sordid and diseased, perhaps, but there's already a compelling and coherent vision at work.
John Cale-Music For A New Society (Ze, 1982).
THIS fractured and desolate album is often unbearably intense, and you sincerely wouldn't want to be in its author's shoes.
But Close Watch and Taking Your Life In Your Hands alone ought to be enough to guarantee it a place in the Immortal section.
UB40-Labour Of Love (Dep International, 1983).
SUBLIME set of reggae covers from the cunning Brummies.
They'll never better Please Don't Make Me Cry, and they know more about Neil Diamond's Red Red Wine than he does.
Wall Of Voodoo-Call Of The West (Illegal, 1982).
AS GOOD as it got for the deranged Los Angeles combo.
Stan Ridgway's distinctive Hollywood-flavoured world view was roaring at full blast on the big set pieces, Lost Weekend and the title track, while the Voodoos' one and only hit single, Mexican Radio, remains thrillingly bonkers.
New Order-Brotherhood (Factory, 1986).
IT WAS about here that the Mancunians really began to get to grips with the sheer scale of their music.
They deployed vast quasi-orchestral sweeps and some of their most memorable melodies (something they're sometimes short of) on their most consistent album.
Aerosmith-Permanent Vacation (Geffen, 1987).
RECENT live appearances have found the ‘Smiths in peak condition.
Permanent Vacation marked the start of their comeback, and it's stuffed with unforgettable songs, some of the finest riffs this side of Keith Richards, and above all, contagious good humour.
Metal with soul.
Win ENO Gala tickets:.
ENGLISH National Opera's acclaimed production of Puccini's Madam Butterfly receives a Royal Gala at the London Coliseum in aid of the RSNC's British Wildlife Appeal on December 8.
A raffle will also be held during the evening, which is organised around a Japanese theme, with the first prize a return trip for two to Nagasaki.
We have a pair of tickets to give away (normal price £50 each) for the gala, plus special entry into the raffle, the winner of which will be announced on the night.
The Duchess of Kent will attend the performance at which Janice Cairns sings Butterfly and Edmund Barham sings Pinkerton.
To win the pair of tickets answer the questions below and send your answer, on a postcard, to Opera Offer, Listings Limited, 17 Berners Street, London W1P 3DD.
En- Janice Cairns as Butterfly tries must be received by first post on Wednesday, November 29.
Tickets for the gala can also be booked through 01-403 1960.
Which opera was Puccini working on at the time of his death?
In what year was Madam Butterfly composed?
Bruce Springsteen: Songs about relationships, growing older and social issues sat alongside primitive rock'n'roll revelry * U2'S BONO: From adolescent to messiah; MICHAEL JACKSON: Curtain call (of sorts) during a visit to London; BOB GELDOF: Live Aid mastermind; MADONNA: Durable as Bette Davis?.
It began with the murder of John Lennon and ended with the Rolling Stones back on the road.
Above all it was the era of Live Aid.
Adam Sweeting remembers an exhausting decade and selects 20 key albums Rockin' the Eighties
DECADES make convenient units of time for historians, sociologists and pundits of every stripe, but the people who live and work through them don't share the same enthusiasm for tying everything into bundles or stopping precisely at midnight on December 31.
You can process the musical history of the Eighties into any format you like-you could call it the decade of Dance, or of Conscience Rock, or of World Music.
It was the decade of Geldof and thrash metal.
It was the decade of Thatcher and Greenpeace.
It was the Sixties all over again.
It was unbundling and future technology.
It was bloody exhausting, frankly.
Some will argue that it was the decade when ‘real’ music was murdered by Stock, Aitken & Waterman or rap, but on the other hand the ‘real’musician of mature years had never had it so good-Chris De Burgh, Fleetwood Mac and Eric Clapton never sold so many tickets, or so many records.
It has been a decade divided irredeemably between dance clubs and rock arenas, between acid house and pomp rock, and between teeming fringe activity and an increasingly vast and immovable mainstream.
The Eighties began with the murder of John Lennon and Goodbye.
The Smiths Echo & The Bunnymen Talking Heads Bros Husker Du.
ended with Lisa Stansfield.
The Eighties began with The Magic Of Boney M and ended with the never-ending saga of the Rolling Stones.
At the start of the decade the 2-Tone bands were keeping everybody up to scratch about racism, and by the end of it a member of Duran Duran had bought himself a house in South Africa.
Queen played at Sun City and were reviled, then played at Live Aid and were forgiven.
In 1980 U2 were four callow youths from Dublin, and in 1989 people come looking for miracle cures in Bono's front garden.
The Japanese now own CBS and a lump of Virgin Records.
Yet the way the decade would develop was, with hindsight, reasonably clear from the outset.
In 1981 the Human League released Dare, which promptly became a global electropop sensation.
Today, its technology sounds comically shrill and weedy, but songs like Seconds and Don't You Want Me still exert considerable force, and the album's focus on pop melody coupled to straightforward dance beats marked a conscious turning away from Punk, politics or the cerebral dogmatism of bands like Gang of Four.
Not that Dare was brainless-Seconds considered John Kennedy's assassination, and Don't You Want Me was as perceptive a snapshot of Eighties mores as pop would produce.
Yes, you could think and dance at the same time.
But while Human League had emerged from an ethic of post-punk avant-gardism, pop's new wave was narrower in outlook.
Before you knew it, we were knee-deep in New Romantics.
Spandau Ballet went everywhere in kilts and were, apparently ‘the applause for their audience.’
Meanwhile, Steve Strange was forever drinking cocktails in nightclubs, while Ultravox perfected one of the least lovable recorded sounds of all time.
Most of pop's pretensions to offering social commentary for all were waning along with The Clash and the 2-Tone contingent, and a new ethic of dance-and-forget prevailed.
It was the shape of things to come.
It was only a short step from here to the so-called ‘New Pop’ of Duran Duran, Wham! and Culture Club, with ABC standing by as a rather aloof and better-dressed alternative.
Everybody stopped reading the music papers and switched to Smash Hits.
Rock began to look outmoded, and pop was sexy and young.
Yet, while the New Popsters produced a stream of memorable hit singles (Culture Club's Do You Really Want To Hurt Me, or Duran's Hungry Like The Wolf), within three years they'd all be defunct, or frantically searching for a new ‘adult’ audience.
George Michael would find it easiest to grow older gracefully, eventually launching his 1987 album Faith on to a perfectly-targeted audience of millions.
As pop's glitterati edged towards maturity, the Prince's Trust and Amnesty International, the thing called Rock pursued its own path.
Bruce Springsteen began the Eighties with The River, an uneven double album but one which staked out the broad territory over which he would roam in the ensuing years.
Songs about relationships, growing older and social issues sat alongside primitive rock'n'roll revelry and country idioms, telling you something about Springsteen's range as well as about the breadth of concerns which rock could now legitimately address.
Meanwhile, U2 kicked off their career with Boy, which introduced their scintillating guitar-based sound and the vaguely spiritual approach which would harden progressively into a kind of rock crusade as the Eighties wore on.
U2's progress has been a useful indicator of Eighties mainstream tastes (white).
On this evidence, audiences want expressions of compassion and concern and not too much materialism.
They want music which recalls rock's most exciting classic moments without quite turning into heavy metal (too crass).
They want emotional commitment, but no specific political affiliation.
They want to feel righteous, but they don't want to define exactly where they stand.
U2 are the world's most successful social democrats, the perfect spokesmen for the Live Aid era.
Sorry, Sting.
Above all, the Eighties has seen music becoming increasingly industrialised, and increasingly impersonal.
Like all large corporations, the big record companies and the major artists allocate a percentage of profits to charity and good causes.
As one is encouraged to endorse broad humanitarian concerns, one is also expected to respond not so much to specific songs or artists so much as to generic types of music.
For instance, Bon Jovi, Cher and Alice Cooper might easily swap places.
Alexander O'Neal, Freddie Jackson and Luther Vandross could substitute for one another if one of them got sick, while a new ‘Women’ category has been opened to accommodate Tanita Tikaram, Suzanne Vega, Tracy Chapman etc.
This is how the record companies want it, because if one act inexplicably runs out of steam it's no problem to find another.
Once, it was a pop cliche that the records which mattered most to you were the ones which marked your earliest sexual encounters or which signposted key events in your adolescence.
Now, music is so undifferentiated and ubiquitous that young lives are measured instead by TV commercials or computer games with Bomb The Bass backing tracks on them.
Music isn't for keeping and treasuring, it's for cutting up and feeding into a computer.
Hence, the great divide between music perceived to be ‘authentic’ and music held to be ‘manufactured’.
Neither category contains meaning any longer, since we don't hear anything unfiltered by the business or the media.
But if you find yourself looking for authenticity, it means you're at least 32.
Thus, the irritatingly righteous World Music has become Hello.
Stone Roses ‘New’ Country 808 State R.E.M.
Soul II Soul.
a handy refuge for many punters fed up with processed pop, but the indigenous musics of Zimbabwe, Soweto or Venezuela will never serve the same purpose as Gimme Shelter or Relax for a British, French or American listener.
Meanwhile, big, butch rappers like LL Cool J and Public Enemy are held up as authentic voices of the Male Ghetto Experience (usually by middle-class white semioticians), but if anything rap is even more the product of flatulent ego and opportunist marketing than anything by Bros or Kylie Minogue.
Also, it isn't physically possible to sit and listen to a rap album all the way through.
Run-DMC sensibly provided a side order of heavy metal with their rantings and secured crossover success, while it's noticeable that LL Cool J has resorted to introducing unabashed Radio 2-style ballads into his repertoire.
For the Nineties, it's safe to predict that the nostalgia boom has a few years left to run, that Neneh Cherry, Roland Gift and Terence Trent D'Arby will become as big as they want to be, and that Bobby Brown's crafty commercialisation of rap, soul and a vast ego will give Wacko a run for his money quite soon.
Bruce Springsteen will return to smaller venues, having realised that the Born In The USA tour was a big mistake, and Madonna will prove to be as durable as Bette Davis.
Michael Jackson will be the first man on Mars, if he isn't already.
THE new issue of the Film Yearbook (Virgin, £6.99) includes comments from several film-makers on the quality of the past 12 months' cinema.
The most trenchant is by the Dutch director Harry Kumel…‘a terrible year — I have never seen one like it.’
This seems to be pitching things a good deal too high, but the current London Film Festival, which continues until Sunday, tends to confirm the impression that 1989 has been a less than vintage year for the movies.
For one thing, there has been nothing in the festival from the really great names, save for Satyajit Ray, whose transposition of An Enemy Of The People seems to me, though hardly on the top level of his work, to be both eloquent and deeply felt.
And perhaps now Kieslowski must be counted among this elite: his A Short Film About Love can, like the Ray, be seen on Sunday.
But elsewhere, despite quite a bit of stodge, there has been evidence of lively and (that old critical standby) interesting, if not necessarily very innovative, work from a wide range of quarters.
And quite a lot of it, from sources ranging from Brazil to Finland, will be finding its way to a wider British audience fairly soon — evidence of the continuing courageousness of our specialised distributors in the face of considerable odds.
By contrast with this largesse, however, one area that nowadays seems rather under-represented on our screens is the mainstream cinema of western Europe.
But LFF evidence tends to corroborate suggestions that this may be because such film-making is just not very good at the moment.
Dark Woods, for instance, by the veteran French director Jacques Deray, offers a pretty discouraging experience.
Opulent decors and images only point up the jadedness, and the tale of a deracinated interloper (Beatrice Dalle) caught up in family plotting at the chateau turns into a risible cross between Edgar Allan Poe and Homes And Gardens.
Where Deray has been making films for 30 years, Pierre Jolivet's Force Majeure(complete with an eccentric appearance by a French-speaking Alan Bates) represents only his third feature.
Yet it seems hardly less lacking in vitality, and manages to make its commendably brief duration of 86 minutes feel like a great many more as it toils though a youthful crisis of conscience.
French-speaking cinema managed, though, to make considerable amends with Jean-Jacques Andrien's Australia, actually a Franco-Belgian-Swiss co-production, and set partly under the bright skies of South Australia but mainly among the mists of the Belgian city of Verviers, where the director was born.
The film, which stars Jeremy Irons and Fanny Ardant, is distinguished by an elliptically refined narrative structure and by the expressive cinematography of Yorgos Arvanitis, but above all by a real capacity to dramatise intimate emotions.
And it evinces a rather daring readiness to weave its fiction around the world of work, where private lives are inextricably bound up with talk of profit margins and raw materials.
The novelistic density of Andrien's film makes the well-meant Canadian picture Bye Bye Blues (director, Anne Wheeler), which touches on somewhat related themes though it is set during the war, seem merely novelettish.
But the disparity lies less in tone than in technique: like rather a lot of modern movies, Bye Bye Blues lacks the capacity to formulate its material rather than just present it to the audience and leave them to do the rest.
And speaking of Australia, one of the strangest films in the LFF has come from there: Malpractice, made by Bill Bennett, and echoing the semi-documentary style and probing of official attitudes of his earlier A Street To Die, except that here the recounting of a medical accident is fictitious.
The long opening sequence, detailing a mismanaged operation of a baby's delivery, is an extraordinary feat of simulation, yet it also tends to defeat realism because we know what we are seeing is not really happening.
But it should be added that at the press preview, I seemed to be only one of several spectators who chose to devote themselves during these scenes to a meticulous scrutiny of their shoes.
Books.
A special 12-page guide to Christmas books will appear in Saturday's edition
Too-easy rider Television.
By Hugh Hebert
AMERICANS will tell you anything, says Michael Palin, and half of me believes him.
The other half wants to hang dependent clauses; like ‘Americans will tell anything to an Englishman with a camera poking over his right shoulder when they are trapped on a long distance train.’
Or, ‘Americans will tell anything to Michael Palin.’
This may be partly because Palin is so patently and so very likeable, and, whatever his private doubts, always looks as though he believes every word.
Do you have problems with obesity, he asked the steward on the Desert Wind, the train so called not because of dietary angst but because it crosses the Mojave on the way from LA to Chicago.
‘We treat obesity as a handicap,’ said the steward before launching into the story of the Fat Lady who lifted the toilet seat by mistake and was caught by the waste disposal system.
The system on this train-be warned-does not blow, it sucks.
Around the World in 80 Days (BBC-1) started by pulling eight million viewers and at the last count two weeks ago had more than 11 million.
That week it nestled at No 14 in this channel's Top Twenty.
You can see why, apart from Palin-for one thing, it is cunningly scheduled between the Nine O'Clock News, with its much increased audience, and Sportsnight.
It has also been running for the past three weeks against The Free Frenchman, which may turn out to be a turbo-tortoise but which started as the turn off of the week.
The world with Palin is armchair travel on the scale of the grand tour, in the company of an agreeable guide.
The worse things got for this cheerful pilgrim, the better to enjoy our home comforts.
It's all been a bit too easy on the ear and eye.
The Palin charm and good humour wash off without leaving any residue for all the 30,000 miles on the clock, and all the pounds on the budget, and Passepartout's diligent camera, and Roger Mills's direction.
Of the programmes I've watched-not all of them, let me confess-only the third, on the dhow in the Gulf seemed to enter into a wholly unknown, and dangerous environment, a way of life I could never have imagined.
And he seemed to get closer to these seamen because of that.
Maybe you can't engineer that sort of thing in advance, but I just wished it had happened more often.
Still, it was not, after all, a straight documentary, but a bet.
And Palin won, arriving back on the eve of his eightieth day, and finding the Reform Club, his starting point, closed to him — or at least to his cameras-and London in the grip of last Christmas's shopping rush.
On the train from Chicago to New York before joining his last ship, he met two women off on a trip to the Big Apple for the shops and the shows, and a night out at Chippindales.
This turned out to be a male stripper club (‘Not naked!’ said one matron, with Mid-Western propriety).
And when you go home again, said Palin, is that an anti-climax?
They loved it.
But home to London, where a newsvendor would not serve him till he turned the camera away, was pretty anticlimactic too.
Brits won't tell you nothing.
THE planned Signals (C4) on the American wave of hate comedy has run into IBA trouble so instead we had Sue Judd's programme about the five finalists for the Vivian Ellis award for young writers of musicals.
There was one about 1930s radio shows: All I had to do was hear your voice, All at once I knew I had no choice…
There was one about lesbian leanings in a girls' school: Put on your navy knicks, Pick up your hockey sticks…
There was one based on Proust and one based on Zola, and the winner was about the ghosts of a haunted house being disturbed by an estate agent and a gang of would-be mortgage slaves.
Comment was dominated by the critic Mark Steyn who kicked opera in the teeth and said he'd take Frank Loesser in preference to Puccini any time.
And Lionel Bart was on hand with his native pith: ‘Stephen Sondheim's not afraid to show his emotions.
Such as they are.’
Is musical theatre a bitchy profession or something?
It looked like a rock ‘n ‘roll shambles, then the Killer smelt blood.
Robin Denselow sees Jerry Lee Lewis in fighting form at Hammersmith Odeon Rock solid.
THERE are three main attributes in becoming a living legend.
It is useful (though not always vital) to have played a significant part in the development of popular music.
It is important to have been about for a very long time.
And it is desirable to act in a way that shall ensure long, unbelievable biographies.
On the last count alone, Jerry Lee Lewis has justified his status a hundred times over in the past few days.
The wildest white pianist of the rock ‘n’ roll era is now 54, and his early history is celebrated in a new film in which Dennis Quaid tries to play the younger Jerry Lee.
Perhaps it is an honour he has found hard to bear, for he has been acting very strangely even by his own standards.
Most artists would revel in such adulation, especially when the film is followed by a special concert that is to be televised and includes a whole gang of celebrities paying their musical respects.
The event was supposed to be staged a couple of weeks back, but was postponed because Lewis was said to be unwell and still in America.
He reached Britain this week, but then refused to turn up for several arranged interviews and acted aggressively enough to justify his old nickname, Killer.
The omens were bad, and when the Hammersmith show eventually got going it seemed we were in for an all-time rock ‘n’ roll disaster.
A distinguished backing band, including Dave Edmunds and Presley's one-time guitarist, James Burton, knocked out a few appropriate standards while a video crew wandered about on the stage shining lights at an audience that had not paid to be treated as studio extras.
Then, with no explanation, they wandered off.
It was a shambles.
Those predicting a no-show were proved wrong.
Lewis suddenly wandered on to the stage and started playing, hotly pursued by the band, who had not been tipped off.
He looked as mean as ever, a pallid, unsmiling figure in black-suede jacket and very shiny black shoes.
He seemed as tense as a newly released convict, and that tension was reflected in the percussive piano style with which he treated the opening up-beat R&B and country selections, including Mean Woman Blues and You Win Again.
When he addressed the audience it was to remind them of ‘one of my lovely wives’— a sly reference to the Fifties tour when he was hounded by the British press because he had married a 13-year-old.
Most would-be tough pop-stars are pussycats, but Lewis is still trouble.
Musically, he was heading for a standard, slightly throw-away show, when the first special guest appeared.
Van Morrison, arguably the second most difficult white performer in rock history, wandered on in a suit to start improvising round a punchy version of the old Weavers hit, Good Night Irene.
The staccato vocals, and Morrison's sudden interjections, utterly transformed the song, and the duo moved on to swap vocals to and fro in Lewis's hit, What'd I Say.
Suddenly, this had become a special event and Lewis knew it, for his playing took on a new intensity as he began to alternate between rock ‘n’ roll classics from his early career back in the Fifties Sun era to later country material.
By now he was joined by a motley army of British guitarists, including a delighted Dave Davies from the Kinks, a diffident Stuart Adamson from Big Country, the Moody Blues bassist, John Lodge, and Queen's Brian May, who was determined to startle the Killer with wailing heavy-metal solos.
They bashed efficiently through Jailhouse Rock, Tutti Frutti, and the rest, along (of course) with the Jerry Lee classics, Whole Lotta Shakin' Going On and Great Balls Of Fire, as well as a strange, up-beat Me And Bobby McGhee.
Jerry Lee still found time to criticise the bassist from his own backing band but was now in classic form.
He played standing up, with his feet and backside, and managed to sound dangerous.
There was fighting in the gangways and a young girl beat the bouncers to throw herself at his feet.
He may act at times like a nasty prat, but he is still a legend.
Jerry Lee Lewis…as tense as a newly released convictPHOTOGRAPH: DOUGLAS JEFFERY
Short films about success Krzysztof Kieslowski's reputation precedes him.
At Cannes last year, A Short Film About Killing took a major prize.
Now after ecstatic reviews it is playing to packed audiences in London.
Next year, his ten-film Decalogue of parables will be shown on TV.
Steve Goldman talks to the man widely regarded as Europe's best film-maker.
KRZYSZTOF Kieslowski has become the European film-makers' film-maker.
The 20-year overnight transformation from an obscure documentarist working with Krzysztof Zanussi's Tor unit to Poland's leading director came on November 26 when Kieslowski's A Short Film About Killing (Krotki Film O Zabijaniu) took the first European Oscar.
Contrasting the brutal murder of a taxi driver with the subsequent execution of the accused, A Short Film About Killing forms the first part of Kieslowski's Decalogue cycle — ten separate parables which draw thematically from the Ten Commandments and are linked by a common setting, an anonymous Warsaw housing estate.
Says Kieslowski: ‘The stories are set in Warsaw, the pictures made in Poland, but the situations described are universal.
The Commandments relate not only to religion, but to the intercourse between people, which is most interesting to me.
If something is well written, one should film it.’
Seeking to tap Poland's two primary sources of finance, Film Polski, the state's governing film board, and Pol Tel, the national broadcast network, Kieslowki divided his productions into two groups.
Decalogue V and VI, A Short Film About Killing and A Short Film About Love were made for the cinema.
The remaining eight were made for Polish television.
The difference, apart from the lengths (the theatrical versions running at approximately 90 minutes, the television versions at 60), is negligible.
As Kieslowski, who cut his molars on more than 30 documentaries in the Seventies, told one French critic: ‘There's no difference between the two except that television pays you less and you have to work faster.’
Remarkably, Kieslowski shot and edited the ten films back-to-back over a 21-month period using different cinematographers on each production.
‘Making ten films is truly boring,’ he says ‘If I had worked continuously with the same cameraman, I wouldn't have been able to get up in the morning.
‘The decision was to give them a lot of freedom, letting them take the pictures they liked so long as their interpretations were true to the general concept.
The result was a kind of competition with each trying to outdo the other.’
A Short Film About Killing (Decalogue V) marked its premiere at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival where it was awarded the Jury and International Film Critic's prize.
September saw the premiere of the second film of the cycle, A Short Film About Love with top honours at San Sebastian.
By February 1989, following his success at the European Film Awards, Kieslowski had established a formidable reputation.
Disqualified from the official competition after ‘losing its virginity at San Sebastian’, the German premiere of A Short Film About Love at the Berlin Film Festival played to packed audiences.
By May, Kieslowski was back in Cannes, this time as a member of Wim Wenders' Jury.
Again the films, Decalogues I, IX, and X (the first television versions to be screened), played out of competition to capacity attendance at the small Andre Bazin cinema.
The completed cycle was screened in its entirety for the first time at the Venice Festival this autumn.
Much has transpired in Poland since my two conversations with Krzysztof Kieslowki in Berlin and Cannes — a July election giving a popular mandate to Solidarity (of which Kieslowki is a member), President Bush's tour of the Eastern Bloc, the insubstantial pledge of debt reduction, and the growing economic crisis which now threatens the fragile new government.
Still, it is interesting that Kieslowki's pessimistic perceptions of the Polish state, and to a lesser extent its film industry, have remained unchanged.
‘Of course, one can say a lot now,’ said Kieslowki last February in Berlin when asked about the impact of Glasnost.
But talking changes nothing, and for now it is only talk.
The autorities in Poland understand that talking will not harm them and this gives the Polish intellegentsia a feeling of freedom.
So they allowed it.
But it is only talk, only words.
‘In Poland, the problem is that one can't buy toilet paper.
You have to collect old papers and find the special places where they swap them in return for new toilet paper.
For three rolls of old paper you get one new roll.’
Similar chords of pathos are struck in Kieslowski's A Short Film About Love, where an adolescent voyeur becomes infatuated with an older woman living across the square.
Spying on the woman and her lover from afar with his telescope, he disrupts their encounter by reporting a gas leak in the apartment.
But when the gas board make their inspection, they check for the leak with a candle.
Similarly, when a rendezvous is finally arranged, a date at an icecream parlour, the couple arrive only to find the shop has run out of icecream.
‘It's funny for you,’ says Kieslowski, ‘but for us it's not so funny any more.
I think people in Poland are losing their sense of humour and this is very dangerous.’
Kieslowski's acerbic critiques of life under communism won little respect from the Party.
Few of his films were screened abroad and many suppressed within Poland.
Their fate now rests with Solidarity's new communications minister, Andree Drawice, who replaced the hardliner Jerzy Urban.
In Poland, the Decalogue has met with impressive results.
Kieslowski cites attendances of 200,000 for the initial run of A Short Film About Killing, and 400,000 within five months for A Short Film About Love.
Initially the Polish press labelled the films ‘boring’, ‘insipid’, ‘ill-made’ and ‘ill-played’.
‘They are now trying to draw back from earlier opinions, but this does not change my opinion of them.’
Kieslowski…
‘
One can say a lot now, but talking changes nothing, and for now, it is only talk’
Testing time for Brecht Critics' view Theatre..
By Michael Billington in London
DEBORAH Warner, who stunned us with her Titus Andronicus and Electra, makes her debut at the National directing Brecht's The Good Person of Sichuan in the Olivier.
Fiona Shaw stars in the double-role of Shen Te and Shui Ta and Bill Paterson and Pete Postlethwaite feature in a strong cast.
It will be intriguing to see how Brecht's play stands up at a time when Communism is loosening its ideological hold.
Stephen Poliakoff's Playing With Trains at The Pit examines our own troubled society and the move from the optimistic Sixties to the competitive Eighties.
Michael Pennington returns from the ESC to the RSC, Simon Russell Beale and Lesley Sharp also feature in Ron Daniels's production.
In the West End there are two major transfers.
Timberlake Wertenbaker's award-winning Our Country's Good moves from the Royal Court to the Garrick: if you haven't seen it already, not to be missed.
Andrew Davies's Prin, a hit at the Lyric Hammersmith, moves to the Lyric, Shaftesbury Avenue, with Sheila Hancock still in command as a Sparkish college principal.
At the Phoenix Trevor Nunn directs The Baker's Wife: an American musical by Stephen Schwartz and Joseph Stein based on the famous Marcel Pagnol comedy.
Alun Armstrong plays the baker, Sharon Lee Hill his wife.
Cheek by Jowl come to the Almeida with Lady Betty: the story of Ireland's first hangwoman written and directed by Declan Donnellan with music by Paddy Cuneen and Sally Dexter in the lead.
Nigel Planer appears in the jokey I, An Actor at Hampstead Theatre.
The Young Vic Studio presents Dario Fo's Can't Pay?
Won't Pay! in from a recent tour and directed by Romy Baskerville.
Recommended:
We, The Undersigned (Orange Tree, Richmond): Alexander Gelman's sharp, biting satire on Soviet graft, corruption and entrenched power: excellent production by Sam Walters, ingenious train set by Tom Piper.
Poor Beast In The Rain (Bush): Well-crafted Billy Roche play about the limited joys of life in Wexford: some of the best acting in London with Des McAleer outstanding as an ebullient, small-town fantasist.
Singer (The Swan, Stratford-on-Avon; today matinee and Saturday evening): Peter Flannery's tonic, audacious play about Rachmanism and the dangers of erasing the past: Antony Sher unmissable as the eponymous, chameleon hero.
Man, Beast and Virtue (Cottesloe: today until Wednesday).
Pirandello at his gayest: a blithe farce about marital masks zippily directed by William Gaskill.
By Robin Thornber in Manchester
ALAN AYCKBOURN is writing for children again, after the success of his Mr A's Amazing Maze Plays at Scarborough last Christmas (his earlier offerings to young audiences are now suppressed, at his insistence).
Or rather, he says, for family audiences (seven and upwards).
Invisible Friends — about a teenager whose make-believe friend materialises, complete with family — opens at the Stephen Joseph Theatre in the Round tonight, directed by the author.
The Wrestling School premieres Howard Barker's new play with a Last Supper theme, Golgo, at the Leicester Haymarket Studio tonight and the Haymarket Studio also offers its own production, directed by Nick Philippou, of Edward Bond's new play about class war in an unnamed rioting city, Jackets, from Wednesday.
Also on Wednesday, Jamaican women's theatre group Sistren bring their show, Buss Out, to Warwick Arts Centre in Coventry to round off the Midlands-based Kajoyo festival of black theatre before touring to Nottingham, Brixton and Cardiff.
Nabil Shaban in Nativity; Tricycle: see Theatre Seamus Newham, The Vanek Plays; Soho Poly: see Theatre Suzanne Packer and Clive Russell in Our Country's Good; Garrick: see Critics' choice Reg Stewart and Howard Crossley in Can't Pay?
Won't Pay!;
Young Vic: see Critics' choice
Birmingham..
By Gerald Larner CBSO/Rattle.
A SURPRISING aspect of the first British performance of Sofia Gubaidulina's Violin Concerto, subtitled Offertorium, is that it provoked the odd walk-out in Birmingham Town Hall.
Certainly, it is an eccentric work and it is true that its spiritual elevation-signalled, Berg-like, by the entry of an instrumental chorale towards the end-cannot be anticipated in the early stages of its apparently disorganised single-movement construction.
It is, on the other hand, a highly eventful work, entertaining where not piercingly expressive and, though disconcertingly many-sided in character, it derives coherence from its peculiar devotion to the melody which inspired Bach's Musical Offering.
If there is another problem, in that the soloist seems less interested in that theme than the orchestra and prefers to go his own way, it is resolved before the end of the work.
Written eight years ago for Gidon Kremer and much revised since then, it has developed its shape from the pressure of the emotions within it and, in spite of the obvious parallel with Berg's Violin Concerto, is fundamentally like no other.
The performance, to which Simon Rattle and the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra made a contribution as passionate as the soloist's own, was preceded by an unscheduled opportunity (the first in this country) to hear a recent unaccompanied violin elegy, For Manfred, by Hans Werne Henze.
Beautifully played by Gidon Kremer, it would have been all the more welcome if, being the sort of work which doesn't invite applause, it hadn't been so closely associated with Offertorium as to seem to merge into it.
The other work in this boldly planned programme was Stravinsky's Rite of Spring, in an interpretation which is surely the product of much thought on Rattle's part.
It is as though he had analysed the failings in most other accounts of the work and had deliberately devised the means to obviate them.
The very evident tendency of the end of the first part to overshadow the final Sacrificial Dance is one problem he convincingly solved, partly by restraining the former but mainly by injecting an extraordinary degree of ferocity into the fragmented rhythms of the latter.
Sadler's Wells.
By Mary Clarke LCDT.
IT IS too soon to judge what impact upon London Contemporary Dance Theatre will be made by its new artistic director, Dan Wagoner, but the first programme of the Sadler's Wells season finds the dancers, all of them young, in excellent form even if the choreography is less rewarding.
Dan Wagoner's own new work, first staged in Plymouth in October, has a jokey title, Turtles All The Way Down, and has something to do with a Bertrand Russell lecture when it was suggested that the Earth is not round but carried on the back of a giant tortoise which stands on turtles all the way down.
The dancers engage in playful sport, dressed in simple turtle-coloured costumes, while Wagoner stands at the back as some kind of pondering philosopher figure.
It was superbly performed and I found it enjoyable, although it did seem to hark back to an earlier period of American modern dance.
Perhaps deliberately; the music is Aaron Copland's Piano Quartet.
It was preceded by a 25 minute work by Darshan Singh Bhuller called Ace of Spades which is about the Vietnam war, no less.
Lighting and setting are by Robert Cohan (who has known war experience) and there's no doubt of the work's deep sincerity and compassion for the American soldiers of its cast.
That does not, however, necessarily justify such a wallow from a young choreographer.
The first part of the programme consists of three short pieces: Cohan's clever solo for Bhuller in which he discards his garments, in front of Crickmay blow-up photographs, to Britten's Six Metamorphoses after Ovid; Bhuller's own Interlock, which is quite simply about an interlocked couple to the accompaniment of a sitar; and a dance by Jonathan Lunn, to Philip Glass music, called Doppelganger which is, as you might guess, about a chap confronted by a woman in identical costume whose stuttery movements gradually blend into his own.
Next week brings three more London premieres and may tell us more.
Sadler's Wells until Dec 2.
Battersea Arts Centre.
By Betty Caplan Macbeth.
WHAT would a visiting foreigner make of this production of Macbeth by The Raving Beauties?
She might come away understanding the first part of the company's title, but not the second.
She would be well and truly mystified by the sight of an elderly king who needs to be helped into his chair one minute, but can swing his cane around like a golf stick the next, and even more flummoxed by the depiction of a world in which the porter has closed circuit television, but the method of killing hasn't changed a jot.
As for Greg Hicks' delivery of his role, she might well consider it beautifully spoken, but would be hard put to find a glimmer of meaning in it.
She might imagine that to be quite an achievement.
She might even feel that he has at least lent a new understanding to such lines as ‘There's nothing serious in mortality.’
Frances Viner, who both directs and designs, has set out to look at the ‘feminine’ qualities of the play and its spiritual nature.
Judging by the result, her search was in vain.
The witches are apparently a representation of the triple goddess: one looks old like the crone, another is the mother and the third is supposedly the Virgin because she carries her rag doll around with her.
This becomes a transitional object quite literally; when Lady Macbeth dies, Macbeth is suddenly seen clutching the very same doll.
Is it his anima?
His fetish?
Who knows?
Who cares?
And the clothes!
The porter has a kilt poking out from under his jacket, and Macduff is stuck with wearing a raincoat on top of his dinner suit for the whole show.
No wonder he can't bring himself to show much emotion at the news of his family's demise.
The weary visitor would sigh with relief that the production had at least been cut to two hours, and head for the nearest library where she might enjoy reading about the buried feminine aspects of the play.
At Battersea Arts Centre (01.223 2223) until December 3, and then on tour.
Festival Hall.
By Edward Greenfield LPO/Tennstedt.
YOU would never have known that Klaus Tennstedt had been ill in his life.
After so many forced cancellations over the years, it was a rare joy to welcome this vigorous, athletic figure back to conduct the LPO in what with most conductors would have been a run-of-the-mill Festival Hall programme, but which with Tennstedt in charge became an exhilarating drive.
Nothing confirms the stature of artists more clearly than the way they tackle the potboilers of the repertory, and here as soloist in the Grieg Piano Concerto we had another artist who can be unpredictable, sometimes nervily so, Radu Lupu.
I have rarely heard him sound more relaxed.
With nothing self-conscious in his manner, he and Tennstedt restored the mountain freshness to one great Norwegian melody after another.
The piece was played for all its worth, and more, but vulgarity disappeared, the sense of playing to the gallery that dogs the piece.
But it was Beethoven's Seventh Symphony after the interval that brought the greatest revelations.
In the slow introduction Tennstedt made it clear that this was to be a reading of high, dramatic contrasts, and that led to an account of the Vivace which with its sprung rhythms kept relaxing into pastoral moments without loss of pace or power.
In the remaining three movements Tennstedt's speeds were all on the fast side.
I have never known the Scherzo sound so like a dashing tarantella, and the headlong pace for the finale inspired exuberant playing from the LPO players, with the horns braying magnificently.
THEATRE: Michael Billington on an Expressionist Shaw at the Riverside Studios Death-wish down in Sussex.
WE endlessly re-interpret Shakespeare.
So why not Shaw?
One answer is that he was so explicit in his stage-directions that he leaves designers and directors little freedom of manoeuvre.
Boldly ignoring the Shavian prescription, Nancy Meckler's highly original Shared Experience production of Heartbreak House at the Riverside Studios has the quality of a fragmented dream, only occasionally marred by a sock-it-to-em over-emphasis.
Written between 1913 and 1919, Shaw's masterpiece famously ‘began with an atmosphere’: that of cultured, leisured country-house England embracing the cataclysm of the first world war in a fevered death-wish.
Down in Captain Shotover's nautical Sussex retreat, civilisation is seen as a ship on the rocks.
The Utterwords and the Hushabyes represent, respectively, the last vestiges of Colonialism and Bohemianism.
Boss Mangan, the symbol of industrial and political might, is a love-stricken wreck easily manipulated by the go-getting Ellie Dunn.
Only Shotover, a Shavian figure seeking a ‘mind ray’ that will destroy his enemies, tries to unite wisdom and power; and even he is revealed at the last as a rum-soaked old poseur.
It is a great play precisely because it puts so much of England on the stage and because Shaw combines tragic pessimism with comic ebullience.
And what Ms Meckler and her designer, Dermot Hayes, have inventively done is to remind us that these characters are like people picknicking on the edge of Vesuvius.
Shotover's house is represented by a set of rusting iron arches filled with canvas sails.
Chahine Yavroyan's sound-design is a mosaic of distant gunfire, creaking hulks and elegiac music.
A British Tommy periodically intrudes into the action as a silent rebuke to the self-absorbed amorous cavortings of the Shotover household.
All this is far superior to the dressy emptiness of the last star-studded Haymarket revival.
Ms Meckler also decisively scotches the absurd myth that Shaw is a cold, passionless writer.
There is a moment here when Fred Pearson's Shotover (looking like a raffish, siren-suited version of Shaw himself) says of his daughter, Lady Utterword, that she is afraid that she has no heart to break: at which point Jennie Stoller's stately, voluptuous Ariadne throws himself at his feet with a wrenching poignancy.
Shaw, I suspect, deliberately created the mask of the witty, cerebral sage to conceal the strength of his own emotions.
Ms Meckler gives us all of Shaw's poetic tragedy: what she misses is his comic subtlety.
Like all first-rate comic writers, Shaw was fascinated by the gulf between appearance and reality.
Thus the joke about Boss Mangan, the industrial magnate and political adviser, is that he is frock-coated, careworn and commonplace.
But in Stephen Jameson's performance he looks like Beckett's Pozzo or a Daily Worker cartoon of a bloated capitalist: bounced around the stage at one point like a rubber doll, he becomes a figure from a comedy of humours rather than a semi-Chekhovian fantasia.
Likewise David Fielder's Mazzini Dunn has less ‘the language and appearance of a City missionary’ than a whey-faced, mime-show pathos.
In highlighting what she sees as the essence of the characters, Ms Meckler often misses their comic contradictions and ambiguities.
In acting terms, the production is in fact a strange mixture of precision and coarseness.
Mr Pearson's Shotover has exactly the right air of a rapt scientific experimenter trying to attain power through means of mind.
Annabelle Apsion's Ellie Dunn is no romantic dreamer but a tough pragmatist in white muslin weaving dance-patterns in front of Boss Mangan like a Sussex Salome.
Ian Gelder's Hector, wax-moustached and posturingly heroic, and Marty Cruickshank's Hesione, a bourgeois gypsy in full flight, also hit the right note.
I just found the Boss Mangan and the Randall Utterword so effortfully frantic I wanted to avert my gaze.
But at least Ms Meckler has rescued Shaw from museum-piece revivalism.
She has made him more of an Expressionist than he really was but she has realised an essential truth: that Heartbreak House is a deeply poetic play about the death of liberal hopes and the cracking-apart of a civilisation.
At the Riverside Studios (01-748 3354) until December 2.
Annabelle Epsion as Ellie
Plymouth..
By Andrew Hoellering Richard Deacon.
RICHARD Deacon won the Turner prize in 1987 since when he has become one of the most respected of the new wave of British sculptors of the Eighties.
Recent exhibitions have been at the Whitechapel Art Gallery and abroad in Toronto, Paris, Pittsburg, Maastricht, Antwerp, Madrid and Los Angeles.
His new show is at Plymouth, where he studied as a schoolboy before going on to Somerset College of Art.
Deacon's work clearly stands on its own.
The challenge he sets himself grows from the nature of his materials and their relationship to an evolving form, and the outcome often involves a series of variations on known or familiar objects.
In Distance no Object, one of the five pieces in the show, the analogic form is the eye, in the form of a large protruding oval lip joined to three aluminium bands, the middle one of which is raised.
From the side the construction resembles a first world war tank.
The eye is of dark glass fibre contrasted in terms of colour and texture to the aluminium.
It reflects the viewer and is the negative version of the outside positve shape.
The fascination of the piece comes when one starts to compare positive and negative, or outside to inside.
The title refers ironically to the fact that the space is not an object but a vaccum which we endow with its physical attributes.
Another piece, Kiss and Tell, creates contrasts of surface, texture and colour as well as form.
Deacon's structure involves two complementary shapes joined at right angles; shapes that one has never seen before but one recognises as familiar.
The first shape is a stack of diminishing wooden ovals, and one looks into it as through the wrong end of an extended telescope.
The second shape comes out of the first like the extension of an igloo.
If the first shape is a series of rough-hewed approximations, the second is a shiny patchwork of beautifully stitched leather cut-outs.
Both parts can be seen as different versions of one another, but there is an absence of inner connection between them.
Hence their title.
Deacon both uses and transcends technology.
He merges the dividing line between natural and man-made materials, between organic and inorganic shapes; the separate traditions of Hepworth and Moore on the one hand and Anthony Caro on the other.
With him art does not so much represent nature as human nature creates through art.
The results are both impressive and disquieting, for unlike natural forms his do not seem to invite our participation, nor do they depend on us for their formidable originality and sense of completion.
Richard Deacon — New Sculpture, Plymouth Arts Centre until December 23.
Six more schools play out their scenes for The Wizard at Snape Maltings tonight at 6 pm.
Birmingham.
By Gerald Larner CBSO/Rattle.
A SURPRISING aspect of the first British performance of Sofia Gubaidulina's Violin Concerto, subtitled Offertorium, is that it provoked the odd walk-out from one or two places in Birmingham Town Hall.
Certainly, it is an eccentric work and it is true that its spiritual elevation-signalled, Berg-like, by the entry of an instrumental chorale towards the end-cannot be anticipated in the early stages of its apparently disorganised single-movement construction.
It is, on the other hand, a highly eventful work, entertaining where not piercingly expressive and, though disconcertingly many-sided in character, it derives coherence from its peculiar devotion to the melody which inspired Bach's Musical Offering.
If there is another problem, in that the soloist seems less interested in that theme than the orchestra and prefers to go his own way, it is resolved before the end of the work.
Written eight years ago for Gidon Kremer and much revised since then, it has developed its shape from the pressure of the emotions within it and, in spite of the obvious parallel with Berg's Violin Concerto, is fundamentally like no other.
The performance, to which Simon Rattle and the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra made a contribution as passionate as the soloist's own, was preceded by an unscheduled opportunity (the first in this country) to hear a recent unaccompanied violin elegy, For Manfred, by Hans Werne Henze.
Beautifully played by Gidon Kremer, it would have been all the more welcome if, being the sort of work which doesn't invite applause, it hadn't been so closely associated with Offertorium as to seem to merge into it.
The other work in this boldly planned programme was Stravinsky's Rite of Spring, in an interpretation which is surely the product of much thought on Rattle's part.
It is as though he had analysed the failings in most other accounts of the work and had deliberately devised the means to obviate them.
The very evident tendency of the end of the first part to overshadow the final Sacrificial Dance is one problem he very firmly and convincingly solved, partly by restraining the former but mainly by injecting an extraordinary degree of ferocity into the fragmented rhythms of the latter.
It was not a motor-driven electronically tuned performance (like a recent one by Salonen and the Philharmonia) but one which attempted to penetrate the mysteries of the slower sections, above all those at the beginning of the second part, and one which was thoughtful enough to seem to come to its violent conclusion in spite of itself.
Bury St Edmunds.
By David Nice The Wizard.
BRITTEN'S Miss Wordsworth, primmest of Suffolk schoolma'ms, would no doubt have balked at setting before the public eye any but her most promising music pupils.
The remarkable thing about Daryl Runswick's operatic project, following a tradition set by Britten himself and acknowledged as such by the generous support of the Aldeburgh Foundation, is that it involves whole classes from primary and middle schools around Suffolk, not just the few so prematurely labelled ‘musical’.
Runswick claims a modest role in his ‘Write-Your-Own Opera for children to do themselves’, providing the musical frame and a scenario which magics six classes through the ages and to the ends of the earth in search of ingredients for Mr Gandolfi's birthday cake.
The rest is up to the children, music included; as Runswick and music director Terry Edwards discovered on their rounds of the schools at an earlier stage in the project, the teachers had only to supervise, rarely to prompt or invent-solid preparation indeed for the GCSE's new emphasis on composition.
Eighteen schools are participating in the three performances, and invention from the six gathered in St Edmundsbury Cathedral on Tuesday ranged from dialogue with the odd splash of singing and recorder-music to fully composed masques using all available resources.
Howard Primary School, landing at Cambridge University Observatory, found time for a ballet of the night-sky to a background of synthesizer and a resourceful battery of percussion; and although improvisation and rhythm (rap a firm favourite) pushed melody to one side for the most part, Ixworth middle school beguiled the time outside Colman's Mustard Shop in Norwich with a garland of song.
Undoubtedly, though, the most spectacular results came from collaboration with Runswick (aka Mr Gandolfi) and Edwards on Prologue and Epilogue.
Learning by rote lines which, with their unexpected changes of stress and metre, might baffle a teenager confronting the printed page, combined forces found strength in numbers and support from the resourceful accompaniment.
The round still proves the soundest of methods: even given limited rehearsal time, there was much security in the warm-up sequence, a point surprisingly made with This Little Babe from Britten's A Ceremony Of Carols, and by the time we reached Runswick's final party ensemble not a single face on stage I could see registered anything less than complete involvement.
John Fordham on the Miles Davis session it's taken four years to release and the week's other albums Twisting, teasing trumpet Jazz.
MILES DAVIS: Aura.
(CBS 463351-1).
MARCUS ROBERTS: The Truth Is Spoken Here.
(RCA/Novus PL83051).
CHARLES ROUSE: Epistrophy.
(Landmark LLP1521).
STAN TRACEY: Genesis And More…
(Steam SJ/CD114).
MICHEL CAMILO: Why Not?
(King Records K32Y6031-CD).
MICHEL CAMILO:(CBS PRT463330-1).
PETER KING: Crusade.
(WEA/Blanco y Negro 2292 46 117-1).
VLADIMIR CHEKASIN: Anti-Show.
(Leo Records LR165).
MILES DAVIS, the late Gil Evans said, was blessed with a sensitivity to his ‘complete surroundings’ -not simply an awareness of what notes worked with what chord, what accents with what rhythm, but of an atmosphere and resonance about the sounds around him that go beyond their formal construction.
Aura, a CBS recording made in Scandinavia four years ago (Davis went to WEA for his last two albums, after 30 years with Columbia), is as good a demonstration of that as anything the trumpeter has recorded since his most famous collaborations with Gil Evans.
It is an orchestral session featuring Danish musicians plus Davis, John McLaughlin on guitar, and Vince Wilburn on drums playing the Scandinavian trumpeter's Palle Mikkelborg's concerto for his hero, recorded in Copenhagen to accompany Miles's receipt of the Sonning Music Prize, a tribute whose earlier recipients have been Stravinsky, Leonard Bernstein, and Isaac Stern.
The delay in issuing the album may well have been because of CBS's anxiety about how it would go with Davis's fusion fans.
Much of it is slow, contemplative, out of regular tempo, deploying distinctly unstreetwise exotic instrumentation.
Harps echo McLaughlin's scalding guitar figures, synthesisers unleash cascading peals of sound like church bells, sustained low trombone sounds throb beneath the horn and guitar like sensations from a distant engine-room.
Over it all, in nine parts named after colours Mikkelborg associates with Davis, the trumpet curls, wriggles, and lashes out.
On the last side's Violet, a reworked blues with references to Messiaen in it, some of Miles Davis's most exquisite slow playing is to be heard over slurred, sliding chords and the kind of empty space you hardly ever hear him loose in these days.
Mikkelborg's composition probably would not stand up without Davis, but then it was not designed to.
As Miles Davis, now 63, goes on developing, his most assiduous young admirer, Wynton Marsalis, goes on backtracking in search of his roots, taking other potentially excellent young players with him.
Marsalis appears on his pianist Marcus Robert's album of standards, originals that sound like standards, and tributes to Monk, The Truth Is Spoken here.
Roberts has long seemed one of the most interesting ingredients in Marsalis's bands, a young guardian of the traditions exhibiting both the smooth swing of a Wynton Kelly and the crabbiness of Thelonius Monk.
But, like many of the present batch of respectful ‘classical jazz’ sessions, the sense of inevitability about what is going to happen next overcomes the work of the most virtuosic players, even a supporting cast that includes Elvin Jones on drums and the tenorist Charles Rouse.
Rouse can be heard to better effect on a live recording from a San Francisco Monk tribute in October 1988, seven weeks before his death.
The broken, Monkish phrases, lean, understated tone with a faint quaver to it, and unerring sense of placement are to be heard on five Monk tunes, and the trumpeter, Don Cherry — a musician of whom it is distinctly difficult to say you know what is coming next — is available on some of them.
When Rouse came to England his favourite playing partner was Stan Tracey.
Genesis, Tracey's distinctly secular celebration of the Creation, has been reissued as a CD, with two of the composer's big-band classics (Afro-Charlie and Murdering The Time) added for good measure.
Genesis is exhilarating and exuberant orthodox big-band music of a kind rarely played with such punch any more and the sharpness of the CD enhances the brash, headlong momentum of it — Tracey's orchestras always sound as if they are going to work with the elan of Saturday night at the Savoy ballroom.
Another kind of piano-led exuberance comes from the Santo Domingo pianist, Michel Camilo, who made such an impact with his dancing, colourful Caribbean-dominated virtuosity at Ronnie Scott's earlier in the year.
Why Not? is a CD of a four-year-old recording, the CBS album being a session from last year.
The CD is the more tonally varied, featuring the excellent Lew Soloff playing a good deal of street-festival trumpet on some irresistible buoyant themes.
On the 1988 session Camilo's luxuriant piano plays with a different trio on each side, both displaying an absorption in the past without a hint of scholasticism.
The emphasis is on reflection.
In the new jazz climate, the anonymity of Peter King, one of the unsung great British saxophonists, has lifted a little— partly because one of his admirers is Ben Watt of Everything But The Girl, who is also the producer of Crusade.
Given that background, the album is unsurprisingly pop-influenced, with a velvety studio atmosphere, tunes by Smokey Robinson, Donny Hathaway and Joni Mitchell, even a funk version of Blue Monk.
It all represents King a little too effectively marketed to tingle the skin, but underneath it all there is the same fluidity, the same lightning double-time runs, the same sense of shape, declaring that repackaging cannot really cramp his style.
The opposite extreme is represented by the Russian saxophonist, Vladimir Chekasin, sometime member of the Ganelin Trio, caught here live on the Munster Jazz Festival.
It is a delicious jumble of free-improvising sound-effects (percussion shuffles like dogs sniffing, demented woodpecker noises, thumps like paperweights dropped on upstairs floors, sudden yelps and barks), manic pastiche of military marches, bolero music, and awards-ceremony pomposity, with Chekasin's raw, scorching horn slashing through it.
Miles Davis: exquisite slow playing PHOTOGRAPH: ALLAN TITMUSS OVERNIGHT FILE
Pleasures of Purcell Classical.
By Edward Greenfield GREENFIELD ST CECILIA GRAM PURCELL: Come Ye Sons Of Art, Welcome To All The Pleasures-Pinnock/English Concert and Choir (with Yorkshire Feast Song).
DG Archiv 427 663-2.
Parrott/Taverner Consort, Choir and Players (with Funeral Music for Queen Mary, Funeral Sentences).
EMI CDC7 49635-2.
PURCELL: Welcome To All The Pleasures, Arise My Muse, Now Does The Glorious Day Appear -King/King's Consort.
Hyperion CDA 66314.
HANDEL: Four Coronation Anthems, Royal Fireworks Music-King/New College Choir/King's Consort.
Hyperion CDA 66350.
Four Coronation Anthems, Chandos Anthem No. 9- Willcocks/King's College Choir/ ECO.
Decca 421 150-2.
PURCELL: Te Deum and Jubilate in D, Four Anthems-Preston/Christ Church Choir/English Concert.
DG Archiv Galleria 427 124-2.
ST CECILIA'S DAY this year has prompted not just one but two brand new recordings of Purcell's delightful Ode for celebrating that day in 1683, Welcome To All The Pleasures, while earlier this year there was yet a third.
Thanks to records above all we are no longer in danger of forgetting such joyous Purcell inspirations as this, pieces that have always been in danger of dropping out of the repertory simply for being ‘occasional music.’
After all ceremonial and courtly pomp inspired many of the most important works not just of Purcell but of whole centuries of composers, and record companies, egged on by the period performance boom, are more and more investigating them.
The three versions of the 1783 St Cecilia Ode are all authentic performances on period instruments, but are nicely contrasted.
Both of the latest versions couple the 1683 Ode with the best-known of Purcell's Odes for Queen Mary's Birthday, the one for 1694, the year before both she and he died.
Andrew Parrott with the Taverner Choir and Players are more intimate-sounding than their rivals, Trevor Pinnock and the English Concert and Choir, but the voices are slightly distant.
In sheer sound Pinnock gains consistently from greater fullness, brightness and immediacy, and the weight of his forces goes with extra rhythmic resilience, lifting the music more.
Parrott is lively too, but the performances are gentler, and his often slower speeds-as in the first chorus of the Birthday Ode with its call to ‘Celebrate this triumphant day'-bring out the dancing rhythms less infectiously.
I prefer Pinnock's soloists too.
The countertenor duetting of Michael Chance and Timothy Wilson in the delectable ‘Sound the trumpet’ from that same Ode is unmatchable.
Interestingly in that duet Parrott has only one countertenor-Timothy Wilson again-with the second part taken by a high tenor, John Mark Ainsley.
Pinnock's coupling is the rarer and more generous too, the Yorkshire Feast Song, composed in 1690 for an ‘otherwise obscure annual gathering of York nobility.’
The wonder is that Purcell, seemingly unable to turn out a pot-boiler even for minor events, produced ten substantial movements which in their vigour and imagination match the royal odes.
But don't expect much more than pompous doggerel in the words.
Parrott's coupling is less generous but both apt and well-contrasted, Purcell's two collections of Funeral Music.
In pursuit of authenticity he has eliminated the apparently spurious timpani part from the first movement of Queen Mary's Funeral Music, the well-known solemn slow march for slide trumpets-performed here on sackbuts.
That makes it dramatically far less effective than on some previous recordings, but the central anthem is beautifully done, and it is good too to have the three superb Funeral Sentence anthems of a few years earlier.
The third version of the St Cecilia Ode of 1683 comes on Hyperion from the King's Consort under Robert King using instead of a choir an octet of distinguished soloists (including James Bowman, Michael Chance and John Mark Ainsley).
With cunning recording balance ensuring that there is no lack of warmth or weight in the choral sound, this is a more relaxed account of the St Cecilia Day Ode, and is well coupled with two of the other Queen Mary Birthday Odes, the first two, dating from 1690 and 1691.
Also from the King's Consort is a highly enjoyable new recording of Handel's Four Coronation Anthems, again amiable and relaxed rather than incisively dramatic.
Simon Preston's DG Archiv version with the English Concert remains preferable, but Robert King evens the balance by providing as an extra the first period performance of Handel's Royal Fireworks Music to use the full complement of instruments that Handel demanded.
I am not sure that on record it makes all that much difference to have 24 baroque oboes, as here, instead of 12 or so, but the sound of so many along with 12 bassoons, nine trumpets, nine trumpets and four sets of timpani is mightily impressive, and the more attractive for a rhythmic bounce.
On the Hyperion label the disc comes at ‘upper mid-price’-just under £10-but it is worth remembering that Sir David Willcocks's vintage performances of the Coronation Anthems with King's College Choir at their brightest now come on mid-price CD in Decca's Ovation series, generously coupled with the magnificent, extended Chandos Anthem No. 9, O Praise The Lord With One Consent.
On the mid-price Archiv Galleria label-an invaluable source of excellent baroque material-DG has issued a selection from Simon Preston's splendid collection with the Christ Church Cathedral Choir and Trevor Pinnock's English Concert of Purcell's Anglican church music.
The great Te Deum and Jubilate in D are generously supplemented with four major verse anthems-My Heart Is Inditing, O Sing Unto The Lord, They That Go Down To The Sea In Ships and Praise The Lord, O Jerusalem.
The performances and recording are near-ideal.
OVERNIGHT FILE
The team spirit Is Field Of Dreams really about baseball?
Derek Malcolm reviews Kevin Costner's latest film, and the other new releases.
IS Field Of Dreams (Cannon, Shaftesbury Avenue, PG) poetry or corn?
What you will think of it, I suspect, depends on your zodiac sign or whether you blubbed through the last few minutes of Peter Weir's Dead Poets Society.
It hangs on that sort of knife-edge.
In Phil Alden Robinson's adaptation of W.P.Kinsella's book, Kevin Costner, Hollywood's latest superstar, plays a New York boy with a hang-up about his father who has taken his wife (Amy Madigan) and daughter off to an Iowan farm to find themselves as a family.
Once there he hears a mysterious voice in his cornfields: ‘If you build it, he will come.’
The ‘he’ is Shoeless Joe Jackson (Ray Liotta), a disgraced member of the Chicago team who threw the World Series back in his father's time.
Another message —‘Ease his pain’— sends the farmer off to Boston to find a reclusive novelist (James Earl Jones) and a third imprecation from the skies —‘Go the distance’ has him looking for another old baseballer (Burt Lancaster) who played just once for the New York Giants before becoming a much-loved doctor.
Finally, they all progress back to the ranch for one last game where the farmer's father materialises to play catch with him.
The game the young man has been playing, however, is not baseball but exorcism.
And what he wants to exorcise are his bad feelings about the man who brung him up.
All this is exceedingly American and seems even more so at a time, in the cinema at least, where men love men best and occasionally try for sex with women.
But it is totally universal as well in that it is also a simple parable, like Dead Poets Society, about the necessity to follow your instincts and not get trapped by the drive to conform.
The Sixties versus the Eighties, in fact.
The question is — does it work?
Little niggles surface.
Baseball fans point out that Jackson bats right-handed and throws left instead of the other way round and was anyway more villain than hero, a theory the film never discusses.
More seriously, the film's remorseless romanticism has a smug and manipulative edge to it that some may find virtually intolerable.
All the same, it is something of an achievement, both in the solid craft of its making and the strength of its performances.
Costner can act very well, but it is his presence that really counts, a little like it did for James Stewart.
And there is no doubt that both James Earl Jones, as the sceptical writer, and Lancaster as the saintly doctor, are the sort of character players you never stop watching.
Field of Corn it may be, but at least the corn is not over-ripe.
Everyone involved seems to be scrupulously in tune with with the piece's pent-up emotions so that the small details consistently add to the whole rather than deflect from it self-consciously.
Besides, in the week of Back To The Future II (Empire PG), with its trailer for the third episode shamelessly tacked on to the end, and dozens of trade names shamelessly glaring through its mise-en-scene, Field Of Dreams seems positively purist in its appeal.
There is very little to say about the new Robert Zemeckis film that hasn't been said about the old one.
Except that it was made back-to-back with a third episode, and there is an extraordinary air of expediency about it.
The only difference I can find lies in the darker, more spiteful vision of the new film, and the fact that the cast seems almost manically inclined to get through it all as fast as possible and at as high a pitch as the Dolby Stereo can cope with.
Unless the sound setting at the press show was a mistake, I have seldom heard a noisier film nor one which seems to require its stars (Michael J. Fox and Christopher Lloyd again) to bellow their lines so startlingly over the din.
Whipping off in the Doc's DeLorean time machine to find 2015 in Hill Valley, California, a purgatorial version of its former self, with the old labouring under hormonal treatment that has fuddled their brains while rejuvenating their bodies and the young equipped with weapons of world-destruction, Marty McFly returns to discover the mid-Eighties in even worse disarray.
Blacks (perish the thought) now inhabit his old house and pitched battles between gangs and police make the streets untenable.
But the trouble with the picture is that it does absolutely nothing with its various prognostications except play the fool with them.
Joe Comerford's Reefer And The Model (Metro, 15) won the feature film prize at the Celtic Festival, the Europa Prize at Barcelona, and was nominated in three catagories in last year's European Film Awards.
Yet its original presentation at the Berlin Festival was by no means an unalloyed success.
There, the audience was very much divided as to its merits and there isn't much doubt that Comerford, certainly one of Ireland's most distinctive and challenging film-makers, will probably always get that reaction.
He is not into the business of making orthodox movies.
Reefer (Ian McElhinney), a disillusioned ex-IRA man, commands an old trawler running cargo that is just inside the law, and the Model (Carol Scanlan) is the homeless and pregnant woman whom he befriends and falls for.
Also on board are another ex-gunman and an army deserter and, when the trawler breaks down, a plan is forged to rob a bank.
At first it is difficult to know exactly where the film is going, either as a thriller or a romance.
Comedy obtrudes too to obfuscate matters still further.
Gradually, however, Comerford's designs upon his audience seem clearer.
He is after nothing less than a full-blown and not always approving commentary on Irish attitudes.
This is what so fascinated the European Film Award Jury (which included myself)— that conventional thinking about the Provos, the Ascendancy, religion, prostitution and homosexuality were so confidently challenged within the film's quite conventional framework.
Added to that, the imagination of the film-making was generally admired.
For instance, the whole episode of the homosexual's gingerly desperate ‘coming out’ in a hostile society is achieved in a genuinely moving manner, so that one can easily forgive the hesitancies and lack of narrative drive that is sometimes apparent elsewhere.
Reefer And The Model has its flaws, but it is trying for something extra.
And I would always prefer that to the smooth and empty professionalism one so often encounters these days.
This is also true of the Canadian A Winter Tan (ICA Cinema, 18), a cooperative effort by five film-makers that is even more challenging to received assumptions and inhabits an even more dangerous area — that of female sexuality.
Taken from the letters of Maryse Holder, posthumously published as Give Sorrow Words, the film graphically and with total honesty describes the writer's descent into a hell of her own making on a ‘Mexican vacation from feminism’ in search of happiness.
The film, set on the beaches, in the bars and discos and in the shabby tourist rooms of downtown Acapulco, is distinguished by a central performance from Jackie Burroughs (also one of the directors) that is an astonishing tour de force of which it is impossible to speak too highly.
That it is sustained almost to the point of embarrassment is exactly what is so good about it, since discomfort is the name of this film's particular game.
She and the film show us in corruscating detail the real difficulties of the character's position, and asks us not for approval but for understanding and perhaps the grace of mercy.
The fact that I've seen no film for some time that is more sexually honest is actually beside the point.
What isn't is A Winter Tan's capacity to move us in another way, in particular with a riveting and lacerating piece of acting that underlines and illustrates its argument.
You will not see a better performance than this all year.
A Private Life (Cannon, Tottenham Court Road, 15) is a British film made in South Africa and welcomed, just in case you wondered, by the ANC.
It is very simply made and no great shakes as a piece of cinema.
But it tells you more about the personal horrors of living under apartheid than many a flashier epic.
This is a true story of one of the many tragedies of apartheid — a white South African policeman falls in love with a woman of mixed race, resigns from his job and goes to live with her in Cape Town.
The woman, who has three children by him, is desperate to have her official designation changed from ‘coloured’ to white, so they can marry and become ‘respectable’, and her struggle to live normally becomes impossible when the examining board refuses her request.
Her oldest son then gets a white girl pregnant, and the baby has to be aborted, as Government rules allow under these circumstances.
The acting in Francis Gerard's film is totally convincing (Bill Flynn and Jana Cilliers are the parents who, incidentally, were finally able to marry, but only after the suicide of their son) and, though it scarcely ever raises its voice, A Private Life shouts to the rooftops about the injustices it portrays.
For sheer daftness there's no beating the British Tank Malling (Cannons, Panton Street and Oxford Street, 18) which postulates a ludicrously megalomaniac semi-Fascist politico (Peter Wyngarde), backed by criminals, the police, bishops and the judiciary in his attempt to bring moral regeneration to the country, while at the same time feeding the dirty sexual desires of the great and the good who back him.
All that stands in his way is Mr Malling (Ray Winstone), an investigative journalist just out of jail and into booze.
But good bloodily triumphs at the end of a film made by James Marcus rather like a Warner Brothers gangster picture set incongruously in Soho and gone rather badly off-key.
Through it all strolls the one and only John Conteh, as a strong-arm man rendered practically speechless by the goings-on around him.
Which was lucky for him really, considering the script.
Jana Cilliers as Stella in A Private Life OVERNIGHT FILE
Obituary: Edward Bawden: A sardonic eye for detail from Essex to the desert.
EDWARD Bawden, one of the most prolific and perfectionist graphic artists of the century, has died aged 86.
He was very much an artist of East Anglia.
He was born and died in Essex and scarcely ever left the region, apart from his notably productive years of eastern travel as a war artist.
He was in a special sense a village painter, endlessly inspired by the quiet landscape and tenor of life in what he once described as ‘the very backbone of Puritan England.’
His own chapel-going background gave him a feel for that.
He was one of the shyest people in the world.
Too shy to board a bus: as a solitary student in London, he walked miles around the streets, sharpening his observation.
Bawden's view of the passing scene is an outsider's: not exactly cruel but certainly sardonic.
Those highly populated, finely detailed human landscapes — Bawden's pullulating market places, pubs and railway stations — become more disquieting the closer one gets to them.
On the beach at Clacton the sunbathers wear blankets.
Early on, Bawden had been an admirer of Beardsley and something of Beardsley's precocity stayed with him: the finesse of the line drawing, the love of the macabre.
‘Wonderful boy, Beardsley,’ he once said in an interview.
‘No one has produced such pornography.
And pornography, to be good, has to be elegant.’
Another influence was The Girls' Own Paper, which he liked much better than the Boys' Own version.
He loved the oddly ordinary: stories, buildings, decoration.
He saw the intense charm of bourgeois Victorian decor many years before the onset of Betjemania, and was an early collector of such objects of mild fantasy as waxen fruits in tall glass domes and crenellated jelly moulds.
He was at the Royal College of Art in the mid-1920s — a bumper year which included Moore and Hepworth.
He made immediate friends with Eric Ravilious, whose interests curiously paralleled Bawden's.
Since then their names have been inextricably linked (somewhat to Bawden's detriment).
Trained initially as a designer-letterer, he quickly found calligraphy too monkish.
He saw himself more in the Arts and Crafts tradition of the designer who can turn his hand to anything.
He wanted to be ‘an important chap like Morris,’ always his great hero.
Should one see him as the last of the Pre-Raphaelites?
He even looked Victorian, with his high domed forehead and his quizzical regard.
Certainly, Bawden's work ethic was Victorian.
His laconic manner concealed an immense energy in the mastery of techniques.
His first important commission, the mural for Morley College, meant starting from scratch, travelling to Italy to learn about the fresco.
So he went on, from one technique to another: watercolour drawings, line engravings, lithography, line cuts, designs for pottery.
For my twentieth century British Design retrospective exhibition, he lent me, with a good deal of fussing and commotion, his last remaining ‘Heartsease’ cup and saucer, a Wedgwood design of the early 1950s.
It stood out like a beacon in that rather murky period.
Whatever he concentrated on he did convincingly.
I find in my files Bawden's own account, written out in his finicky copperplate hand, of his own quasi-William Morris enterprise as a designer-manufacturer of wallpapers in the late 1930s: ‘The desire to do wallpaper designs arose from seeing a furnished room hung with William Morris's ‘Daisy’ at the Wembley International Exhibition.
‘John Aldridge and I, who live in the same village, decided that we would try to print our own designs by the roll from our own blocks.
A few lengths were produced and these amateurish efforts were seen by a director of Coles who was passing through Braintree and happened to look in at an art exhibition in the Institute.
From then onwards we cut full-size wallpaper blocks faced with lino and passed on the blocks to Coles who printed and sold the designs.’
Bawden loved his own work and found it soothing to live surrounded by it.
Those wallpapers, the ‘Bardfield Papers’, were central to the mise-en-scene at Brick House in Great Bardfield, the gentle red-brick building Bawden and Ravilious discovered on their travels by bicycle round Essex.
Bawden lived in that house for 30 years, and no one who went there could forget its atmosphere, partly created by its English artists' eccentricity of decor.
The overflow of objects, at first sight rather ramshackle, came to look more poetical in its organisation.
In style Brick House almost resembled Charleston, but more cottagey, with Staffordshire ornaments on the chimney piece.
Brick House oddities and beauties were emphasised by the extraordinary contrast between tall, gaunt, silent Edward, in his menacing deep blue denim boiler suit, and his comfortable, comforting wife Charlotte.
I see her in my mind's eye always in a Fair Isle jersey.
Charlotte Epton, ‘laughing Charlotte’ in the memoirs of that circle, was a painter and a potter who had worked with Bernard Leach.
As a couple, they had the Jack Sprat symmetry of the man who eats no fat and the wife who eats no lean.
For a man so rooted in his domesticity the nomadic life of the Official War Artist was a gamble.
But some of his finest work was done in wartime, in the Western Desert and later in Saudi Arabia.
Even the small selection in The Penguin Modern Painters shows how much the role suited him, with his objectivity of vision and his sheer efficiency of technique.
He enjoyed the play-acting, too.
Jim Richards describes spotting him on the terrace of Shepheard's Hotel, Cairo.
He was wearing his captain's uniform with meticulous correctness but with a consciously satirical air, ‘as though he thought of it as fancy dress.’
In the end, what does one remember Bawden best for?
Those enchanting illustrations for Ambrose Heath's Good Food books?
The Queen's Beasts?
The linocuts of Brighton, the town which appealed most to his strong sense of the fantastical?
The great heraldic mural for the Brussels Exhibition (now at the Royal College of Art in London)?
His pictures for Henneoo's grown-up children's story, the beauteous and curious Lady Filmy-Fern?
Impossible to choose.
He was terrified of boredom, and like other artists of great versatility (like Eric Gill for instance) he is difficult to pin down.
Like Gill he had his philosophic doubts about Art-nonsense.
But no one ever doubted that Bawden was an artist of a particular, peculiar directness.
As Eric Newton, later the Guardian's art critic, wrote about his paintings in 1938: ‘They are dry and worried and patchy.
But they are immensely serious.
‘They break the rules because Bawden cares less for rules than for the things he has to say about the feel of a summer morning, the watery sunshine of an April afternoon, or the flurry of a February snowstorm.’
Fiona MacCarthy Edward Bawden, born March 10, 1903; died November 21, 1989.
The recent Bawden exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum is over now, but another, drawn from the artist's permanent collection at the Cecil Higgins Museum in Bedford, is at the Holburne Museum, Bath (till December 10).
A large exhibition of paintings by Jackson Pollock (1912-1956) and Lee Krasner (1908-1984) has opened in Bern.
John Berger believes it raises more questions than meet the eye Photograph of Pollock in his studio by Hans Namuth The suicide of art Pollock and Lee Krasner: when they first met she was 34 and better known as an artist than he was.
‘I had a comet by the tail,’ she said PHOTOGRAPH AT NORTH TRURO, MASSACHUSETTS BY BERNARD AND NINA SCHARDT suicide of art.
THE SUICIDE of an art is a strange idea.
Yet I am bound to start with it, if I'm to talk about the story of Jackson Pollock and his wife, the painter Lee Krasner.
Krasner outlived her husband by nearly 30 years and went on working as a considerable painter in her own right until 1984.
Now, however, I want to concentrate on the 15 years during which the two of them lived and worked together, and Pollock made a bid to change the course of what was then thought of as modern art.
Pollock died 34 years ago in a car accident near his house in Springs on Long Island in New York.
This wasn't the suicide.
He was 44 years old and he had already been acclaimed the First Great American painter.
The tragedy of his death, even if foreseeable, obscured for most the suicide of the art.
Born in 1912, Pollock was the youngest of five children of a poorish Irish/Scots Presbyterian family, living mostly in Arizona.
He revealed a clumsy but passionate talent early on.
Talent doesn't necessarily mean facility.
It's a kind of motor-activity within a temperament — a form of energy.
Pollock's talent was immediately recognised by his teacher, Thomas Hart Benton, the Country Folk painter.
Pollock was slim, handsome, aggressive, brooding: deeply ambitious to prove he was not a failure and perhaps to earn, at last, his stern mother's approval.
In everything he did there was a touch of charisma, and, following everything he did, a nagging doubt.
He was more or less an alcoholic before he was 20.
As a teenager he dropped his first name, Paul, and used only his second name, Jackson.
The change says a lot about the persona he was already being driven into.
Jackson Pollock was a name for fighting in the ring.
A champ's name.
His later fame as a painter produced the legend that at heart Pollock was a cowboy.
Compared to his first collector, Peggy Guggenheim, or to his first apologist, Clement Greenberg, or to the art critic, Harold Rosenberg who invented the term Action Painter for him, he was indeed a goy and a redneck.
He hated verbal theories, he didn't read much, he'd never travelled outside the states, he punched people up, and when he was drunk at parties he pissed into the fireplace.
But whatever miracles cowboys may achieve with lassoes, no cowboy could dream of controlling paint as Pollock did.
This needs repeating several times because with his notorious drip paintings he came to be thought of by some as a dripster, a drooler, a mere pourer.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The suicide was committed with mastery, and the desperation was very precise.
Pollock found himself as a painter during the 1940s.
At that time most avante-garde painters in the US were interested in Picasso, surrealism, the Jungian unconscious, the inner self, abstraction.
Direct painted references to the objective visible world were usually dismissed as ‘illustrative’.
The trip was inwards, an uneasy quest for the soul.
In 1943 the well-known painter, Hans Hofmann, asked the young Pollock how important nature was for his art.
‘I am nature,’ replied Pollock.
The older painter was shocked by the arrogance of the reply and Pollock, sensing this, rubbed salt into the wound by adding: ‘Your theories don't interest me!
Put up or shut up!
Let's see your work!’
The reply may or may not have been arrogant, but, more significantly, it carried within itself the fatality to come.
Six years later Harold Rosenberg, thinking of Pollock and praising him, wrote: ‘The modern painter begins with nothingness.
That is the only thing he copies.
The rest he invents.’
AT THIS moment what was happening in the outside world, for a cultural climate is never separate from events?
The US had emerged from the war as the most powerful nation in the world.
The first atom bomb had been dropped.
The apocalypse of the Cold War had been placed on the agenda.
McCarthy was inventing his traitors.
The mood in the country that had suffered least from the war, was defiant, violent, haunted.
The play most apt to the period would have been Macbeth, and the ghosts were from Hiroshima.
The word Freedom was being bandied about a lot at the time and meant many different things.
It's worth considering three different kinds of freedom, for, put together, they may conjure up something of the stridency of the period.
Time was short in the US.
There was very little patience.
The stakes were down.
There was an inarticulate sense of loss, often expressed with anger or violence.
Vietnam was one of the historical tragedies which would eventually follow from this insecurity.
Freedom of the market.
The New York artists were working, more crudely than ever before, for an expanding free market.
They painted exactly what they wanted, the size they wanted, with the materials they wanted.
Their finished works, scarcely dry, were then put up for sale, promoted, sometimes bought.
Bought by collectors — and for the first time whilst, as it were, still wet — by museums.
The competition, however, was ruthless and aggressive.
The latest was always at a premium.
Gallery fashions changed quickly.
Recognition (being featured in Life magazine) was dramatic but short-lived.
The risks were high and the casualties many.
Gorky and Rothko killed themselves.
Kline, Reinhardt, Newman died young.
Nearly all the painters drank heavily to protect their nerves, for finally, their works, transformed into extraordinary property investments, benefited from far more security measures than their working lives.
They lived on success and despair.
Next, the freedom the artists were seeking within themselves.
As a mixed show catalogue statement put it: ‘The past decade in America has been a period of great creative activity in painting.
Only now has there been a concerted effort to abandon the tyranny of the object and the sickness of naturalism to enter within consciousness.’
Entering into consciousness — an obscure phrase — meant trying to be oneself on the canvas, without the props of a single familiar reference, and thus to be free of rhetoric, history, convention, other people, safety, the past.
Perhaps in a foul world these men were seeking purity.
Then there was the freedom of the Voice of America, the freedom of the Free World.
By 1948 the US needed an international cultural prestige to offset its military and political power: it needed a sophisticated reply to the slogans of Yankee Go Home!
This is why the CIA during the 50s and 60s covertly supported a multitude of initiatives whose aim was to present the new American Art across the world as a promise for the future.
Since the works (de Kooning apart) were abstract they lent themselves to diverse interpretations.
In this way a mostly desperate body of art, which had at first shocked the American public, was transformed by speeches, articles and the context in which it was displayed, into an ideological weapon for the defence of Individualism and the right to express oneself.
Pollock, I'm sure, was unaware of this programme — he died too soon; nevertheless the propaganda apparatus helped to create the confusion surrounding his art after his death.
A cry of despair was turned into a Declaration for Democracy.
IN 1950 Hans Namuth made a film of Pollock painting.
Pollock puts on his paint-spattered boots — that appear as a kind of homage to Van Gogh — and then he starts to walk around the umprimed canvas laid out on the earth.
With a stick he flicks paint on to it from a can.
Threads of paint.
Different colours.
Making a net.
Making knots.
His gestures are slow but follow one another swiftly.
Next he uses the same technique but this time on to a sheet of transparent glass placed on trestles, which allows the photographer to film the act through the glass, so that we see the paint falling around the pebbles and wires already placed on the glass.
We look towards the painter from the painting's point of view.
We look out from behind to the front where everything is happening.
The way he moves his arms and shoulders suggests something between a marksman and a beekeeper putting a swarm into a hive.
It is a star performance.
It was probably this film which prompted the phrase Action Painting.
The canvas, according to this definition, becomes an arena for the artist's free actions, which the spectator relives through the traces they leave.
Art is no longer mediation but act.
No longer pursuit but arrival.
What we are slowly making our way towards are the pictorial consequences of Rosenberg's nothingness and the fatality.
PHOTOS of Lee Krasner and Jackson Pollock taken together somehow indicate how much theirs was a marriage of two painters.
It's on their clothes.
You can smell the paint.
Lee Krasner's first love was a Russian painter called Igor Pantuhoff.
She lived with him for 11 years.
When she first met Pollock she was 34 and better known as an artist than he was.
‘I had a comet by the tail,’ she said afterwards.
What called out to her was surely what she felt to be Pollock's destiny as an artist.
He was inspired, probably more inspired than anybody she had ever met.
And for Jackson Pollock the champion, always fearful of losing, Lee was at last the judge he could trust.
If she told him that something he had painted worked, he believed it — at least at the beginning of their marriage.
Between them the ultimate in praise was: ‘It works.’
A phrase between professionals.
From 1943 till 1952 — the period when Pollock produced all his most surprising work — the two of them were, in part, painting for each other : to see each other 's surprise.
It was a way of communicating, of touching or being touched.
(Maybe there were not many ways of communicating with Pollock.)
During these years, Lee Krasner painted less than she did before or afterwards.
Pollock took the studio on the property they bought in Springs, and she worked in a bedroom.
Yet the argument that she sacrificed her art for his is as stupid as the argument about who influenced whom.
(In 1953 Pollock produced a canvas called Easter And The Totem which anybody might mistake for a Krasner.)
The truth is that as painters and as a man and a woman, they were engaged, during these years, in the same adventure which turned out to be more fatal than either of them realised at the time.
And today their canvases talk of it.
Lee Krasner's paintings were, by nature, sensuous and ordered.
Their colours and gestures frequently suggested flesh, the body: their order a garden.
Abstract as they are, one enters them to find, behind the colours or collage, a kind of welcome.
By contrast, Pollock's paintings were metaphysical in aim and violent.
The body, the flesh, had been rejected and they were the consequence of this rejection.
One can feel the painter, at first with gestures that are almost childish, and later like a strong, fully grown man, emptying his body of energy and liquids so as to leave traces to prove that he had physically existed.
On one occasion he put his handprints on the painting as if beseeching the canvas to acknowledge the exiled body.
There is an order in these works, but it is like that at the centre of an explosion, and all over their surfaces there is a terrible indifference to everything that is sentient.
When their paintings are hung together the dialogue between them is very clear.
He paints an explosion: she, using almost identical pictorial elements, constructs a kind of consolation.
(Perhaps their paintings said things to one another during these years that they could never say in person.)
Yet it would be wrong to give the impression that Krasner's paintings were primarily consolatory.
Between the two of them there was a fundamental issue at stake.
Time and again her paintings demonstrated an alternative to the brink which they sensed his were heading for.
Time and again her paintings protested against the art's threat of suicide.
And I think they did this as paintings whilst Lee Krasner as a person was being dazzled by the brilliance of his recklessness.
An obvious example would be a painting called Bald Eagle, made in 1955, one year before the car accident.
Here Lee Krasner took a canvas Jackson Pollock had abandoned — a bare hessian canvas with flicked black lines across it — and incorporated pieces of this canvas into a large colourful collage, a little suggestive of autumn and a bird soaring.
Thus her picture saved the lost gestures of his.
The example, however, is not typical, for it occurred after the suicide.
Before, he would splatter, and she would take the same pigment, the same colours, and assemble.
He would thrash; and she would make the same wound and stitch it.
He would paint flames; and she would paint fire in a brazier.
He would throw paint imitating a comet; and she would paint a part of the milky way.
Every time the pictorial elements — as distinct from the purpose — were similar, if not almost identical.
He would lend himself to a deluge; she would imagine water gushing into a basin.
But the messages of her paintings to his paintings were not about domestication.
They were about continuity, they were about the desire of Painting to go on living.
Unfortunately it was already too late.
POLLOCK had stood the art of painting on its head, reversed it, negated it.
The negation had nothing to do with technique or abstraction.
It was inherent in his purpose — in the will which his canvases expressed.
On these canvases the visible is no longer an opening but something which has been abandoned and left behind.
The drama depicted is something that once happened in front of the canvas — where the painter claimed to be nature!
Within or beyond them there is nothing.
Only the visual equivalent of total silence.
Painting throughout its history has served many different purposes, has been flat and has used perspective, has been framed and has been left borderless, has been explicit and has been mysterious.
But one act of faith has remained a constant from palaeolithic times to cubism, from Tintoretto (who also loved comets) to Rothko.
The act of faith consisted of believing that the visible contained hidden secrets, that to study the visible was to learn something more than could be seen in a glance.
Thus paintings were there to reveal a presence behind an appearance — be it that of a madonna, a tree or, simply, the light that soaks through a red.
Jackson Pollock was driven by a despair which was partly his and partly that of the culture which nourished him, to refuse this act of faith: to insist, with all his brilliance as a painter, that there was nothing behind, that there was only that which was done to the canvas on the side facing us.
This simple terrible reversal was the suicide.
The Jackson Pollock/Lee Krasner exhibition continues at the Kunstmuseum, Bern, until February 4, 1990.