

Packer pressed to buy Bond Media.
By Ross Dunn in Canberra
FINANCIERS are pushing for Alan Bond's highly geared media group to be taken over by Australia's richest man, Mr Kerry Packer, and some leading institutions.
The behind-the-scenes manoeuvring came as the Bond corporate empire met renewed difficulties with the Australian Stock Exchange, which suspended trading in Bond Corp.
Holdings, the Bell Group and JN Taylor Holdings.
The suspensions resulted from the failure of the companies to lodge printed copies of their annual reports by the opening of trading yesterday.
The suspensions of Bond and Taylor, which the companies regarded as harsh because photocopies of the audited results were lodged with the Australian Stock Exchange last week, may be lifted today after the companies begin mailing reports to shareholders.
Mr Packer was being actively lobbied to take joint venture control of the Bond Media Channel 9 Network, which he sold to Mr Bond for more than A$1billion several years ago.
Mr Packer, who split the international cricket scene apart in the 1970s by forming his World Series Cricket competition, is still owed A$200million from the sale.
Bond Media has proposed to repay Mr Packer a reduced amount from a renegotiated bank facility or from asset sales with a rollover of the outstanding sum.
The Bond group of companies last month reported a loss of almost A$1billion last financial year, the worst result in Australian corporate history.
BP sells stake in SA coal.
British Petroleum is pulling out of South Africa with the sale of its $225million stake in coal mining businesses to the Anglo American corporation.
The deal, part of BP's plan to sell all of its worldwide coal assets, includes a 88.5 per cent holding in the South African Middelburg Mine Joint Venture.
Bill to Bush.
The US Congress yesterday sent the long-delayed $14.7 billion deficit reduction bill to the White House for President Bush's signature.
The administration has expressed satisfaction with the package which includes real cuts of $4.6billion and $6billion in taxes.
Unit trusts cashed.
Investors cashed in £877.5million worth of unit trust holdings last month, the highest figure since the crash of October 1987.
Medirace bid.
Medical research company Medirace, which is trying to develop a drug to treat cancer and Aids, is more than tripling its size through an £87million takeover.
It is buying Evans Healthcare, whose management bought the company from Glaxo three years ago.
Housebuilding slows.
A sharp slowdown in private housebuilding was behind a 9 per cent fall in new construction orders in the third quarter of 1989, figures from the Department of the Environment indicated yesterday.
Jobless fall.
The number of people out of work and claiming benefit for more than a year fell by 61,000 to a seven-year-low of 613,000 in the third quarter of the year, the Department of Employment said yesterday.
Merrill Lynch cuts.
Merrill Lynch, the largest US broking firm, is planning a restructuring which could mean hundreds of redundancies affecting its overseas offices as well as its domestic base.
The move quickens the pace of cutbacks on Wall Street.
Wall Street up.
The stock market, shaken earlier this week by sell-offs in defence issues and takeover candidates, regained its composure and moved higher.
At the close the Dow Jones Industrial Average had climbed 17.49 to 2,656.78.
Monopolies probe stalls Bupa deal.
By Ben Laurance
A£92MILLION deal which would tighten Bupa's grip on the British private health market has been stalled by the government.
The Department of Trade yesterday ordered the Monopolies and Mergers Commission to investigate Bupa's proposed purchase of 10 British hospitals and seven nursing homes from the American-based HCA.
The commission has been told to report its findings by the end of February.
Bupa already has 16 hospitals.
Adding the HCA operations would give it over 1,500 beds — still less than 20 per cent of the private hospital beds in the UK.
Private Patients Plan, Britain's second largest health insurer, has been calling for government intervention to stop the HCA takeover since it was announced in June.
The Office of Fair Trading recommended a full monopolies inquiry because of the potential impact of the purchase on Bupa's buying-power when seeking bed-space in private hospitals.
The OFT found no evidence that Bupa has abused its buying power up to now, but felt that allowing the takeover could increase the risk of abuse.
Bupa has about 60 per cent of the private health insurance market.
And four-fifths of all treatment in private hospitals is paid for by insurance.
Private hospitals not owned by Bupa are reckoned to rely on patients who are insured by Bupa for half their business.
Before the HCA deal was announced, Bupa had bought several smaller private hospitals.
The other big hospital operator in Britain is AMI Healthcare, an offshoot of American Medical International.
Two-thirds of AMI Healthcare was put up for auction this week after the company's Los Angeles parent changed hands.
Mercury starts to reap profits.
By Tony May *
THE Prime Minister is one of the latest customers to be linked into Mercury, the Cable&Wireless company which is BT's only mainstream rival.
The optical fibre cable recently laid to Number 10 Downing Street joined a network which the group cannot spread fast enough to meet demand.
The investment is huge with nearly £1billion to be spent over the next three years.
The rewards are just beginning to come through with Mercury's contribution to C&W trading profit leaping from £4million to £14million in the six months to September 30.
This will take time to catch soaring turnover — up from £72million to £142million — as the group pays fees to BT and other international carriers for calls using their lines.
Gordon Owen, the managing director in charge of Mercury, says the group is anxious not to more than double the network in a year as it is a case of ‘how fast you can go without falling over’.
Mercury provides a tiny part of C&W profits, which climbed 22 per cent to £241million before tax.
C&W claims to account for 7 per cent of UK invisible earnings.
Earnings a share rose 9 per cent to 14.4p and the dividend 10 per cent to 3.10p.
Three-quarters of profits still come from Asia and the Pacific, notably Hong Kong.
The group's finances are strong, with gearing at 40 per cent and group borrowings are being refinanced over 10 years.
The Government has an ‘indefinite’ golden share in C&W but Jaguar's experience does not worry Lord Sharp, the chairman.
He said yesterday that its high cost and strong earnings would deter predators.
Government criticised on cable grid.
By Peter Large Technology Editor
COMPANY heads yesterday condemned the government for refusing to sponsor the recabling of Britain to provide the information infrastructure of the next century in step with global competition.
But at a Whitehall seminar there was no agreement on how that national grid of optical cables, bringing hundreds of new services to home and business, should be built.
Although speakers mentioned the ‘enormous potential’ to boost the economy, only British Telecom set an operational target: investment of up to £20billion over 10 years.
Alan Rudge, BT's technology director, encapsulated the scope of optical communications with the statistic that two strands of glass, tiny enough to pass through the eye of a needle, already can carry thousands of phone calls and hundreds of video channels.
But BT's target depends on politics, regulation, standards, competition and public demand.
Mercury profits, page 12
Hanson confounds City with £420m US sell-off.
By Ben Laurance
LORD Hanson, the crafty deal-maker who three months ago clinched Britain's biggest takeover bid by paying £3.3billion for Consolidated Gold Fields, yesterday confounded the City with the £420million sale of a US offshoot.
When the ConsGold takeover was announced, it was predicted that Hanson would dismember ConsGold and sell off everything — with the exception of the mining group's ARC operations which quarry gravel and other building materials in the US and the UK.
But yesterday, Hanson revealed it is selling ARC's four main American operations to Australian mining group CSR for $670million.
Hanson pocketed a further £240million by selling an 8 per cent holding in Gold Fields of South Africa plus a string of stakes in more minor South African mining companies.
The sale severs ConsGold's century-old link with the South African gold industry.
Shortly after Hanson completed the ConsGold takeover, £368million was raised by selling most of the British company's GFSA stake.
So now, Hanson has recouped well over £1billion of the £3.3billion it paid for ConsGold.
Even if Hanson holds on to the British end of the ARC operation, it still has a long list of ConsGold assets to offload including:
Half of American mining group Newmont
All of Gold Fields Mining Corporation, also based in the US; and
Half of Renison Goldfields Consolidated of Australia which produces not only gold but also tin, copper and the raw material for making titanium oxide.
In looking for buyers for the gold-producing assets, Hanson has been helped by the recent upturn in the gold price.
The price per ounce dipped below $360 in the summer, but has recently climbed above $400 and last night was nudging $410.
Most analysts are surprised at the price which CSR paid for the American ARC operations.
In the year to the end of June, they showed pre-tax profits of $47million on sales of $385million: these figures suggest CSR has paid well over 20 times annual net earnings to buy the business.
The American ARC operation embraces 48 quarries in six states producing limestone, sand and gravel.
There are also 40 plants making concrete pipes and other building products.
The Australian company plans to carry out a Hanson-style break-up of ARC America.
CSR managing director Ian Burgess said yesterday: ‘There are significant assets which are surplus to the current operations and these will be divested.’
Yesterday's sales mean that Hanson now has virtually no net debt.
Further asset sales from breaking up ConsGold will put it in an even stronger position from which to launch further takeovers.
Shareholders have recently agreed to extend its borrowing powers, so, in theory, it could raise sufficient funds to bid for virtually any quoted company: only one of two of Britain's very largest companies — like BP and British Telecom — are beyond Hanson's grasp.
Hanson's share price rose 5p to 221 ½p.
It's full steam ahead as investors get appetite for perks on a plate.
By Phillip Money
THE lure of 20 per cent off the cost of a portion of fish ‘n’ chips at Harry Ramsden's Yorkshire restaurant has proved irresistable to thousands of small investors.
The offer of shares in the group, which was listed on the USM this week, has been two and a half times oversubscribed.
This and other shareholder perks — or concessionary discounts as they are called in the stockbroking trade — are the icing on the cake for the growing army of small shareholders.
With a carefully selected equity portfolio you can get 10 per cent off a room at selected Hilton Hotels (Ladbroke Group), a cut price ‘exclusive’ two-week African safari, 15 per cent off two transatlantic voyages on the QE2 (Trafalgar House), and a free centre court ticket at Wimbledon (All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet) for every day tennis is played.
And when you get back down to earth, concessionary discounts can ease your domestic burdens.
Boots offers 10 £1 vouchers for shareholders, BET offers discounts on Anglian Windows double glazing and Sketchley offers 25 per cent discount on dry cleaning and ancillary services.
For investors who also want a return on their perks, several housing companies offer discounts.
Barratt Developments takes £500 off every £25,000 you spend on a new home.
And Bellway gives £600 per £25,000 subject to a maximum discount of £3,000.
However, with both companies you need to be on the share register for 12 months.
While the gloss of shareholder perks can be dazzling, remember, you get nothing for nothing.
Most companies demand a minimum shareholding before offering discounts and in most cases it is not worth buying the shares just to receive the perks.
For a pair of next year's Centre Court tickets at Wimbledon you must buy two £500 debentures costing approximately £4,500 each.
Also available from 1991 are tickets lasting five years, which involve an outlay of £40,000 per seat.
BET's safari to Africa, while limited to shareholders, costs between £1,355 and £1,675.
Sketchley requires you to hold 300 ordinary shares, costing about £3.71 each, to qualify for its discount.
According to Peter Hume, finance director of stockbrokers Seymour Pierce Butterfield, investors considering buying shares in a company offering concessionary discounts should only do so on the merits of the shares.
‘To do so they should look at the yield of the shares and the strength of the company's management,’ he said.
Each year Seymour Pierce Butterfield publishes a guide to shareholder perks* which includes a list of 120 companies offering perks.
The next edition is being prepared now and will be published in early January.
Although he concedes that shareholder perks are primarily a marketing exercise, Mr Hume says they benefit both the company and shareholders.
He says the two main benefits for shareholders are that the perks are a ‘bit of fun’ that it ‘enables them to relate more to the company.’
He adds: ‘These days there's always a vast gulf between management and the people who own the company.’
This year, Mr Hume said, one perk which stands out is that offered by Lonrho.
For shareholders holding 100 25p ordinary shares, costing about 264p, the company's car franchises offer an extra one to two per cent discount on top of the normal 12 per cent trade discount, off the cost of a new Audi or Golf.
While most perks are a benefit for existing shareholders, P&O has used them to boost its share register.
The 50 per cent discount that it offers shareholders on its ferry crossings boosted the number of shareholders by 60 per cent to 160,000 between 1981 and 1984.
One of the most prominent players in the share market, the Government, has used shareholder perks as a major plank of its privatisation programme.
It has offered bonuses in British Telecom, British Gas, British Airways and lately water privatisation Concessionary Discounts, available from January 1990 for £2.50 from Seymour Pierce Butterfield, 10 Old Jewry, London, EC2R 8EA.
Pensions plug Courtaulds gap.
Courtaulds has called up £11million from its pension fund surplus to fill a large part of the interim profit hole from the South African pulp sale.
The half year before the demerger of the textile division was otherwise remarkably stable.
Benefits from lower raw material prices and the falling pound are expected to provide a boost on top of the move into higher-margin chemical materials in the United States.
Pre-tax profit fell to £85.6million from £98.1million, though after lower tax and minority interests, reflecting the African withdrawal, earnings showed only a fractional decline.
Apart from the pension gain, more than half of which was taken in the form of lower interest charges, spinning rationalisation costs of almost £10million were treated as an extraordinary levy.
The pension contribution will continue for many years.
Turnover was £90million up at £1.36billion, including two months of the US chemicals acquisition.
Textiles accounted for just over a third, after a slight increase that got through to profit.
Well over half of profit still came from overseas, and marine paint and powder coatings were narrowly the largest contributors.
In chemicals, cigarette filter acetate kept up its growth and in packaging-film, Cellophane's problems are being countered by a new polypropylene production line.
The interim dividend goes up a fraction to 3.1p, from 2.9p.
Although interest rates are set to jump after reinvestment in the US and on new plant, earnings of 17.3p, against 17.7p, a share provide a fair base for the two successor companies.
Textiles will have about a fifth of earnings.
Food giant gets fatter.
Ranks Hovis McDougall, the food giant rich in brand names, boosted profit on the back of fatter bread and flour margins and property gains in a year when the Goodman Fielder Wattie hands-off counterbid in Australia cost £58million as an extraordinary post-tax charge.
Further brand upvaluations more than balanced it out.
Although bakery closures by the Mothers Pride, Mr Kipling and Bisto purveyor were reflected in slightly lower sales in this area, turnover was 7 per cent ahead at £1.79billion.
Pre-tax profit rose nearly twice as fast, gaining £20.5million to £176.5million.
Milling and baking continued to account for over a third of these totals and grocery products, particularly the enlarged fruit juice business, made strong gains in both sales and profit, along with the United States branch after rationalisation and the tomato products acquisition.
Shops and restaurants slipped, along with Sharwood's mushroom business, in an over-supplied market and the hot weather adversely affected confectionery earnings.
Property profit more than doubled, to almost £15million.
The dividend is lifted by a fifth to 12.74p, with a final 8.92p covered by normal earnings of 34.4p, up almost 4p a share.
BAT on course for £2 billion.
Tobacco-to-insurance conglomerate BAT, awaiting a threatened bid from Sir James Goldsmith's Hoylake, yesterday unveiled nine-month profits up 17 per cent at £1,228million, putting the group firmly on course for its promised £2billion total by the year-end.
Farmers Group, the American insurer it bought last year, showed a surplus of £205million in the nine months to September — and should now make more than enough money in the full year to cover the cost of its acquisition.
For the first time, BAT's financial services operation, which embraces Eagle Star and Allied Dunbar in Britain as well as Farmers in America, made more money than the tobacco business.
Since Hoylake launched its first £13billion bid in the summer, BAT has promised shareholders that it will carry out its own partial break-up of the group.
The American retailers, Saks and Marshall Fields, will be sold.
And both the UK catalogue shop chain, Argos, and BAT's paper businesses, Wiggins Teape and Appleton, will be floated as separate companies.
Thomson gets travel sickness.
Thomson Travel's profit contribution to the Canadian parent was down £10.7million to £53.1million in the nine months to September 30 as a result of the squeeze on holiday prices and poor late sales.
Turnover rose £155million to £1.06billion following the Horizon acquisition.
Holiday numbers are now being reduced and the Britannia Airways subsidiary is leasing out surplus seats overseas and selling two older Boeing aircraft.
Cost-cutting will continue over the winter and in anticipation of weak summer sales next year.
The Thomson Corporation parent in Canada reported a strong advance in special publishing profit and higher North American newspaper circulations.
Lower advertising revenue in some US markets was offset by new publications and there have been more than 40 acquisitions so far this year.
Total earnings were well ahead and were further boosted by exceptional gains on the oil and gas disposal.
In short…
RADIO CLYDE'S profit rose 28 per cent to £1.9million on turnover up 23 per cent at £7.76million in the year to September 30.
The results include North of Scotland Radio, bought last December, which made a profit of £218,000 against £180,000.
METRO RADIO is in preliminary talks with a number of companies including Radio Forth.
The markets.
A false report of a bid for Williams Holdings by the Barclay brothers sent its shares leaping 55p to 280p before denials saw them crashing back to 239p.
British and Commonwealth was hit early in the day by ‘malicious rumours’ of a Fraud Squad investigation, falling 19p to 89p.
It ended the day 16p down to 92p, helped by a management reorganisation and strenuous management denials.
The Stock Exchange is investigating both cases.
Apart from rumours, equities did little all day as investors waited to see how bad today's trade figures would be and many were preoccupied with the underwriting of the water issue.
BTR, firmed 9p to 422p as KKR bid speculation revived.
Upton Southern shed 5p to 40p in reaction to the chairman's resignation over a policy disagreement.
Attwoods extended its rally to 29p at 448p, while Wyndham took its profits-inspired gain to 16p at 256p.
SEAQ volume at 5 o'clock was 324.2million shares, with the FTSE index closing 7.2 points up at 2,192.3 In properties, there was renewed interest in Rosehaugh, 20p higher at 553p, on hopes that Olympia and York will make an offer.
The group's results are due today.
A heavy stream of important trading statements made little lasting impression on the shares involved.
Cable and Wireless dipped 9p to 482p, the 22 per cent rise in interim profits.
The renewed strength of gold and the sale of ARC of America and South African assets helped Hanson rise 5p to 221p.
Stores were cautious in front of the Boots figures today.
Defence stocks remained depressed by recent downgradings following the ‘outbreak of peace’ and the current industrial unrest over a shorter working week.
SW Wood weakened another 8p to 49p as news of management resignations followed the losses announced on Tuesday.
Tokyo: Stocks closed at a new high for the second consecutive day.
Nikkei index: 36,286.92 (36,059.87).
Hong Kong: Share prices were mixed to softer in lacklustre trading.
Hang Seng index: 2,812.02 (2,817.19).
Paris: Stocks finished higher.
CAC index: 514.1 (515.4).
Courtaulds has called up £11million from its pension fund surplus to fill a large part of the interim profit hole from the South African pulp sale.
The half year before the demerger of the textile division was otherwise remarkably stable.
Benefits from lower raw material prices and the falling pound are expected to provide a boost on top of the move into higher-margin chemical materials in the United States.
Pre-tax profit fell to £85.6million from £98.1million, though after lower tax and minority interests, reflecting the African withdrawal, earnings showed only a fractional decline.
Apart from the pension gain, more than half of which was taken in the form of lower interest charges, spinning rationalisation costs of almost £10million were treated as an extraordinary levy.
The pension contribution will continue for many years.
Turnover was £90million up at £1.36billion, including two months of the US chemicals acquisition.
Textiles accounted for just over a third, after a slight increase that got through to profit.
Well over half of profit still came from overseas, and marine paint and powder coatings were narrowly the largest contributors.
In chemicals, cigarette filter acetate kept up its growth and in packaging-film, Cellophane's problems are being countered by a new polypropylene production line.
The interim dividend goes up a fraction to 3.1p, from 2.9p.
Although interest rates are set to jump after reinvestment in the US and on new plant, earnings of 17.3p, against 17.7p, a share provide a fair base for the two successor companies.
Textiles will have about a fifth of earnings.
Food giant gets fatter.
Ranks Hovis McDougall, the food giant rich in brand names, boosted profit on the back of fatter bread and flour margins and property gains in a year when the Goodman Fielder Wattie hands-off counterbid in Australia cost £58million as an extraordinary post-tax charge.
Further brand upvaluations more than balanced it out.
Although bakery closures by the Mothers Pride, Mr Kipling and Bisto purveyor were reflected in slightly lower sales in this area, turnover was 7 per cent ahead at £1.79billion.
Pre-tax profit rose nearly twice as fast, gaining £20.5million to £176.5million.
Milling and baking continued to account for over a third of these totals and grocery products, particularly the enlarged fruit juice business, made strong gains in both sales and profit, along with the United States branch after rationalisation and the tomato products acquisition.
Shops and restaurants slipped, along with Sharwood's mushroom business, in an over-supplied market and the hot weather adversely affected confectionery earnings.
Property profit more than doubled, to almost £15million.
The dividend is lifted by a fifth to 12.74p, with a final 8.92p covered by normal earnings of 34.4p, up almost 4p a share.
BAT on course for £2 billion.
Tobacco-to-insurance conglomerate BAT, awaiting a threatened bid from Sir James Goldsmith's Hoylake, yesterday unveiled nine-month profits up 17 per cent at £1,228million, putting the group firmly on course for its promised £2billion total by the year-end.
Farmers Group, the American insurer it bought last year, showed a surplus of £205million in the nine months to September — and should now make more than enough money in the full year to cover the cost of its acquisition.
For the first time, BAT's financial services operation, which embraces Eagle Star and Allied Dunbar in Britain as well as Farmers in America, made more money than the tobacco business.
Since Hoylake launched its first £13billion bid in the summer, BAT has promised shareholders that it will carry out its own partial break-up of the group.
The American retailers, Saks and Marshall Fields, will be sold.
And both the UK catalogue shop chain, Argos, and BAT's paper businesses, Wiggins Teape and Appleton, will be floated as separate companies.
Thomson gets travel sickness.
Thomson Travel's profit contribution to the Canadian parent was down £10.7million to £53.1million in the nine months to September 30 as a result of the squeeze on holiday prices and poor late sales.
Turnover rose £155million to £1.06billion following the Horizon acquisition.
Holiday numbers are now being reduced and the Britannia Airways subsidiary is leasing out surplus seats overseas and selling two older Boeing aircraft.
Cost-cutting will continue over the winter and in anticipation of weak summer sales next year.
The Thomson Corporation parent in Canada reported a strong advance in special publishing profit and higher North American newspaper circulations.
Lower advertising revenue in some US markets was offset by new publications and there have been more than 40 acquisitions so far this year.
Total earnings were well ahead and were further boosted by exceptional gains on the oil and gas disposal.
In short…
RADIO CLYDE'S profit rose 28 per cent to £1.9million on turnover up 23 per cent at £7.76million in the year to September 30.
The results include North of Scotland Radio, bought last December, which made a profit of £218,000 against £180,000.
METRO RADIO is in preliminary talks with a number of companies including Radio Forth.
The markets.
A false report of a bid for Williams Holdings by the Barclay brothers sent its shares leaping 55p to 280p before denials saw them crashing back to 239p.
British and Commonwealth was hit early in the day by ‘malicious rumours’ of a Fraud Squad investigation, falling 19p to 89p.
It ended the day 16p down to 92p, helped by a management reorganisation and strenuous management denials.
The Stock Exchange is investigating both cases.
Apart from rumours, equities did little all day as investors waited to see how bad today's trade figures would be and many were preoccupied with the underwriting of the water issue.
BTR, firmed 9p to 422p as KKR bid speculation revived.
Upton Southern shed 5p to 40p in reaction to the chairman's resignation over a policy disagreement.
Attwoods extended its rally to 29p at 448p, while Wyndham took its profits-inspired gain to 16p at 256p.
SEAQ volume at 5 o'clock was 324.2million shares, with the FTSE index closing 7.2 points up at 2,192.3 In properties, there was renewed interest in Rosehaugh, 20p higher at 553p, on hopes that Olympia and York will make an offer.
The group's results are due today.
A heavy stream of important trading statements made little lasting impression on the shares involved.
Cable and Wireless dipped 9p to 482p, the 22 per cent rise in interim profits.
The renewed strength of gold and the sale of ARC of America and South African assets helped Hanson rise 5p to 221p.
Stores were cautious in front of the Boots figures today.
Defence stocks remained depressed by recent downgradings following the ‘outbreak of peace’ and the current industrial unrest over a shorter working week.
SW Wood weakened another 8p to 49p as news of management resignations followed the losses announced on Tuesday.
Tokyo: Stocks closed at a new high for the second consecutive day.
Nikkei index: 36,286.92 (36,059.87).
Hong Kong: Share prices were mixed to softer in lacklustre trading.
Hang Seng index: 2,812.02 (2,817.19).
Paris: Stocks finished higher.
CAC index: 514.1 (515.4).
Pound sags as fears grow on October trade figures.
By Larry Elliott Economics Correspondent
THE prospect of a Tory backbench challenge to the Prime Minister and extreme twitchiness over the release today of the October trade figures left the pound sagging on foreign exchanges once again yesterday.
Sterling lost ground against a buoyant German mark as dealers took fright at the prospect of a fall in exports leading to a widening of the current account deficit last month.
However, the fact that the Bank of England refused to intervene when the pound came under pressure left some analysts speculating that predictions of an October shortfall of upwards of £1.8billion were too pessimistic.
The Government's decision to price water shares at the expected 240p rather than 235p added weight to the theory that the authorities might have better-than-expected news in store to trap dealers who have aggressively sold sterling.
Mr Mark Brett, economist with Barclays de Zoete Wedd, said: ‘The risk has to be that the figures will be better than everybody is assuming.
The relaxed attitude of the authorities would certainly point in that direction.’
He said depressed high street spending could reduce imports, while the recovery in North Sea oil output since the pipeline shutdowns earlier in the year should help boost exports.
Against the mark, sterling fell from 2.8505 to 2.8389, after hitting a low of 2.8280 at one stage.
The effective exchange rate ended 0.1 lower at 87.1 per cent of its 1985 value.
GM ponders massive jobs cuts.
By Mary Brasier in New York
IN A FURTHER sign of recession in the US car industry, General Motors is considering cutbacks in its management and salaried staff which could mean thousands of redundancies over the next five years.
GM, which like Ford and Chrysler is suffering falling sales amid growing Japanese competition, will not confirm the extent of the cutbacks.
Any cuts would be on top of production line redundancies and would come only a year after GM finished cutbacks which slashed its white-collar staff by 40,000 to 140,000 worldwide.
Old Joe gets rich on a false Stock Exchange rumour Notebook.
By Edited by Alex Brummer
ON A DAY when many people are wondering how to make a few bob out of water, somebody else showed how to make millions, in the worst possible City fashion.
The popular name for this particular activity is share ramping.
It has always happened, of course, but in the old days, when the stock market was a smaller and more human place, the intimacy of dealing lent some protection.
It wasn't that people did not spread false rumours.
But with personal contact through the old jobbing system on the floor of the Stock Exchange, experienced people could see Old Joe coming and knew what to expect — even if they might sometimes join in to make a little extra money.
Now that the trading floor has disappeared and everything is electronic that protection has been removed.
The market makers who replaced the jobbers rarely meet face to face, so one rumour is as good as another.
Because the source is less easy to trace it is more difficult to judge the legitimacy of the rumour.
Rumours range from the truth through analysts' exaggerations to blatant lies whose purpose is to make a profit or extract a dealer from an awkward position.
So in the past few years since Big Bang we have seen dealers chasing every hare, especially since dealing volumes declined and firms have been more desperate to do business.
It is all illegal, of course.
And always has been.
Creating a false market in shares carries a penalty of seven years imprisonment under Section 47 of the Financial Services Act.
One benefit of computerisation is that deals following such a ramp operation are easier to trace.
Stock Exchange surveillance computers pick up any unusual movement in share prices and the regulators follow up with visits to stockbrokers involved to discover who has been dealing.
But linking transactions to rumour-mongers is virtually impossible.
So there will always be ramping.
It will be worse when traders are desperate for business, as they are now.
Challenge for EC.
THE natural tendency to consider the West Germans as better Europeans than ourselves will be severely tested when the EC seeks to complete work on a common monopolies and competition policy in Brussels today.
German officials consider the Federal Republic's Cartel Office to be the most rigorous among the 12 EC countries, with a status (at least in their own minds) roughly akin to the Bundesbank.
Thus, in much the same way as the Bundesbank chairman, Dr Karl Otto Poehl, has been at pains to preserve the monetary integrity of the new Europe, so the Cartel Office is disturbed about abrogating to Brussels responsibility for all mergers involving a turnover of less than $5billion.
The Germans also want the right to scrutinise mergers of national interest to the Federal Republic.
While West Germany's objections are the most serious, it is not the only member cutting up rough in the final stages of the monopoly and competition edict.
The French, who have driven the merger and competition policy hard during their presidency, are seeking to maintain a measure of reciprocity.
That is, they want to be sure that the scrutiny of takeovers in third countries moving into the EC is as thorough and as fair as in the Community.
While superficially this sounds sensible enough, other countries including the UK are concerned that it will reinforce the suspicion across the Atlantic and in Asia that the EC's main preoccupation is to build a fortress Europe from which all others are excluded.
As the debate moves into the final stretch, Britain is not without its bargaining cards either.
The objection of Mrs Thatcher's government is to a prospective review process which eventually would lower the barrier on EC scrutinised mergers to a turnover of $2billions.
The UK argues that it would be wrong to make the rules for the review (which comes after four years) before it happens.
However, one suspects that British caution reflects traditional Thatcherite fears that the new Europeans will be reaching deep inside the British economy in studying mergers, thus diminishing the sovereignty of HMG.
These last-ditch problems aside, the odds point to a coherent EC policy on monoplies and competition by the end of this year, with some flexibility of mergers affecting the media and national security.
What is perhaps most interesting about the process is the nature of the German objections: the assumption which Bonn/Frankfurt seems to make that somehow its institutions must be better than those of the EC or its rivals.
It is an economic and commercial arrogance which sounds a quiet siren for the EC, particularly one in which the two Germanys, economically if not politically united, would be the dominant power.
Capitol gains.
IT is not just the EC which is currently embroiled in merger and acquisition policy.
Buried deep within the entrails of the US budget compromise is the first apparently successful attempt on Capitol Hill to come down heavily on junk bonds and leveraged buyouts (LBO).
As part of a $6billion tax package, Congress has decreed that companies involved in LBOs can no longer claim tax relief on losses caused by interest payments on debt issued to finance the deal.
Company's such as Campeau, which plunged too deeply into debt when it bought Bloomingdale's, will no longer be able to count on the US taxpayer to bail them out.
Last time the Democratic-controlled Congress sought to fiddle with the tax laws affecting mergers it was embarrassed when the White House sought to blame lawmakers for the October 1987 crash.
But in the wake of the United Airlines debacle it is recognised that the problem is with the financiers, not with Congress.
Murdoch and Reed in buying spree.
By Daniel John
RUPERT Murdoch and Reed International yesterday resumed their battle to carve up a large slice of America's publishing industry between them, by spending more than three-quarters of a billion dollars on two major companies.
Following the cosy deal in which Reed bought Travel Information Group from Mr Murdoch to help him alleviate his debt problems, the two have gone their separate ways to strengthen their competing US businesses.
Reed struck first by purchasing the US equivalent of Britain's Solicitors and Barristers' Directory, to add to its growing stable of professional publications.
The acquisition of Martindale-Hubbell has cost the British publisher $303million (£194million) and takes its spending on magazines and directories this year to £847million.
The price is equivalent to 10 times the asset value and 20 times Martindale-Hubbell's last year earnings of nearly $15million.
The City welcomed the purchase by marking Reed's shares up 9p to 410p, but was more surprised by News Corporation's acquisition of the textbook publishing arm of Time-Warner.
Mr Murdoch's empire recently admitted that mounting debts were taking a toll of its finances — an admission which analysts interpreted as a sign that the group, which owns five British national newspapers, would not be making any purchases for the time being.
Yesterday's agreement to buy Scott Foresman for $455million (£291million) shows that Mr Murdoch remains relatively unworried about the group's ability to fund its expansion.
However, News Corporation is also taking on $48million of debt as a result of the transaction.
Reed has no such problems and has been gradually using the £800million proceeds from its withdrawal from manufacturing to expand its publishing interests.
The latest buy follows that of the travel guides from Mr Murdoch for £480million and TV Times from the ITV companies for £125million.
New York-based Martindale-Hubbell publishes an eight-volume guide to the legal profession which contains entries for 700,000 lawyers and 44,000 law firms.
Reed says the guide is the definitive directory for the US legal profession.
Peter Davis, Reed's chief executive, said: ‘This offers us a unique opportunity to expand our subscription-based information publishing for the legal market, which we know well and where we are under-represented in the US.’
Easing of MMC proposals allows Whitbread to keep breweries.
By Ben Laurance
THE Government's watering down of Monopolies and Mergers Commission proposals to weaken big brewers' grip on their pubs has persuaded Whitbread to drop ideas of selling its breweries.
When the commission unveiled its tough plans for shaking up the beer industry in March, many industry watchers predicted that Whitbread, forced into a choice between keeping its six breweries or freeing two-thirds of its 6,250 pubs from the obligation to sell its beers, would decide to keep full control of its pubs and pull out of production.
Company chairman Mr Sam Whitbread admitted yesterday that selling the breweries was one of the options it considered.
But now, with the Government having heavily modified the MMC's recommendations so brewers have to drop the tie from only half of the outlets they own over a 2,000-pub limit, Whitbread has decided to stick with brewing.
The company claims that in the year to September, its volume of beer production rose by 3.5 per cent although the beer market as a whole fell slightly.
Within the last two weeks, Whitbread has finalised the purchase of two breweries from Manchester-based Boddingtons.
That should nudge Whitbread's share of the British beer market up by about one per cent to about 14 per cent.
The company brews a range of bitters including Fremlins and Flowers and has a deal to sell Pedigree bitter from Burton brewer Marston's through Whitbread pubs.
Whitbread's pre-tax profits for the half year to August rose to £128.5million against £110.6million a year earlier.
The company's retailing arm, which includes managed pubs, Thresher off-licences and restaurants like Pizza Hut and Beefeater, showed a 17 per cent profits rise.
But managing director Mr Peter Jarvis admitted: ‘Because of the squeeze on spending, retailing, particularly in the South-east, is not doing so well as we had hoped.’
Marston's pre-tax profits rose 17.5 per cent to £9million in the six months to September.
Second judge throws out allegations of insider trading.
By Daniel John
THE Government's crackdown on insider dealing was dealt another blow yesterday when a former company director was acquitted of the allegations against him.
It is the second trial within two weeks that has failed after the judges in both hearings ruled that there was no evidence to prove the cases concerned.
In the latest case, Judge Wroath halted the trial at Southampton Crown Court at the end of the prosecution's submissions.
Piers Fitzwilliams, 29, of Pilley, Lymington, Hampshire, had been accused of four offences of dealing in shares in Centreway Industries while he was a director of corporate finance group City and Westminster Financial.
The allegations involved making use of unpublished, price-sensitive information when he bought shares in Centreway at the time he was negotiating on City and Westminster's behalf to buy a stake in Centreway.
But Judge Wroath told the jury yesterday: ‘I am satisfied the prosecution have not in this case produced evidence and as a matter of law have not proved the case to the requirements of the Act.’
The jury formally returned verdicts of not guilty.
Mr Fitzwilliam's acquittal came two weeks after Mr John Briggs, deputy chairman of engineering group Wheway, was cleared of allegations of illegal share trading.
Mr Briggs had also denied the charge against him.
He said after the case that the Department of Trade and Industry had been ‘rather petty’ in prosecuting him in the first place.
The DTI has so far prosecuted 15 insider dealing cases involving 21 people since 1981 in which eight have resulted in not guilty verdicts.
At least 18 other investigations are underway while four further trials are due to take place within the next few months.
Hard times make underwriters take reduced margins Low commission on water sell-off.
By Patrick Donovan Industrial Correspondent
IN A move which highlights the hard times facing the City, more than 200 institutions yesterday agreed to take on the risk of underwriting the £5.3billion water sell-off at commission rates worth a total of just £33million.
Although the returns would have been regarded as uneconomic two years ago, government advisers will pay out the second-lowest bill for underwriting in the history of public sell-offs.
Such was the demand for business that institutions accepted rates for sub-underwriting at 0.17 per cent.
That is dramatically cheaper than earlier flotations such as British Telecom, which paid commission rates at 0.375 per cent.
The huge demand emerged despite City warnings that leading institutions would shy away unless better commissions were offered.
‘This just shows how hungry institutions are for commissions,’ one banker said.
‘The underwriting really went exceedingly well, given the size of the issue.’
Institutions poured into the issue amid speculation that the flotation would start trading at a substantial premium.
Shares gained up to 24p in grey market trading.
An analyst yesterday said the issue ‘is set to get off to a good start’.
But there were warnings that nobody should make any firm investment decision until just before the actual float as any fall in the market could wipe out chances of an opening premium.
There was disappointment, however, as it became clear that none of the 10 water companies are likely to get into the FTSE index of the hundred biggest companies.
The market had expected Thames, Severn Trent and North West to be listed, putting them at an immediate investment advantage to the rest of the sector.
This is because index-linked funds would automatically favour them over their smaller rivals.
Meanwhile an intense marketing campaign will continue to interest overseas investors in the 18.5 per cent of the issue earmarked for sale abroad.
The exact proportion sold to foreign buyers depends on demand for the UK retail market, financial advisers said yesterday.
Schroders, the merchant bankers, have set aside 52.6 per cent for Tokyo; 26.2 per cent for continental Europe; 11.9 per cent for Canada and 9.3 per cent for Wall Street investors.
If demand hits a pre-set level, one quarter of these shares will be clawed back to increase allocations from the small investors.
Just under 50 per cent will be available for the individual investor if demand warrants.
Clawbacks will be triggered if the public applies for more than 1.75 times the near-24 per cent of the issue provisionally reserved for small buyers.
If the ‘Sid’ allocation is oversubscribed 2.25 times, further shares will be scooped back from domestic institutions.
As in previous privatisation, activation of the clawback would give a massive fillip to the share price when dealings open next month.
It would put added pressure on institutions to make up their holdings by buying in the market.
Opening the offer, Schroders director Mr David Challen said: ‘The yields are attractive.
They range from 8.10 per cent to 9.68 per cent and the weighted average gross yield is over 8.5 per cent.
This is substantially higher than the average yield of shares quoted on the Stock Exchange.
‘The offer price of 240p is spread over the longest instalment period ever on any privatisation.
We are delighted to be helping to create a major new investment sector by bringing these 10 companies to the market.
‘The Government has placed these companies on a sound financial basis to develop their core businesses over the years to come.’
Inquiry launched into share ramps.
By Financial Staff
THE Stock Exchange is investigating two blatant share ramps which for a while yesterday added £178million to the value of conglomerate Williams Holdings, and knocked £94million from financial services group British & Commonwealth.
A newspaper report that the multi-millionaire Barclay brothers had built up a 3 per cent stake in Williams and were thinking of a full bid at 300p a share sent the price soaring 58p to 283p.
In contrast, shares in British & Commonwealth at one stage dropped 25 per cent to 82p after unfounded rumours that Department of Trade and Industry inspectors had raided the offices.
Chairman John Gunn described the rumours as ‘malicious, gratuitous and unnecessary, reflecting badly on the market’.
In the Williams incident, a caller giving a false name and claiming to be from brokers Hoare Govett rang the Guardian and other newspapers with a story earlier this week claiming that a stake of over 3 per cent had been built secretly by the Barclay brothers.
The bid was expected this week or next, with finance arranged through Manufacturers Hanover and Charterhouse, which acted for the brothers in the past.
The Guardian established that nobody of the caller's name worked at Hoare Govett.
After a denial from the Barclay brothers and from Charterhouse, the story was dismissed.
However, a detailed version appeared in another newspaper yesterday, which cited banking sources in the City.
Hectic trading in which 3.1 million shares — worth £8million — changed hands was followed by a retreat to 238p when the Barclays vehemently denied that they held any shares in Williams.
Mr Nigel Rudd, chairman of Williams, said the company had received categorical assurances from the Barclay brothers that they had no intention of making an offer.
The Stock Exchange confirmed it was investigating the rumours and the share price movement.
The exchange has been asked by Mr Gunn, through his brokers BZW, to investigate the rumours which knocked his company's shares.
He has also written to the Bank of England to complain ‘in the strongest possible terms’ about the creation of a false market.
He said the City's ethical standards seemed to have disappeared.
B&C shares recovered only part of their losses, closing 16p down at 92p, because the rumours coincided with downgradings of the company by three analysts.
The rumours also came on a day when B&C reshuffled top management, with chief executive Peter Goldie moved sideways to concentrate on the disposal programme.