

Violence erupts on Basque funeral day.
By John Hooper and Reuter in Madrid
PROTESTERS set fire to banks and offices of the ruling Socialist Party yesterday as Basques mourned the assassination of one of their leaders.
At least nine police were hurt and about 10 people detained in clashes between security forces, demonstrators and strike pickets in the Basque region and the neighbouring Navarre province, local government officials said.
Tens of thousands of mourners accompanied the coffin of Mr Josu Muguruza in a funeral procession through the centre of Bilbao, chanting ‘independence’ and ‘long live ETA’.
Mr Muguruza was shot dead by masked gunmen as he dined with colleagues from Herri Batasuna (People's Unity) at a hotel in Madrid on Monday night.
He had been elected last month to the Spanish Parliament and was murdered the night before he was to take his seat.
Mr Inaki Esnaola, another of Herri Batasuna's four deputies-elect, was seriously wounded in the attack.
Doctors said yesterday his condition had improved significantly, but that it was still serious.
Radicals hurled petrol bombs at several banks, set alight two offices of the Socialist Workers Party (PSOE) in Eibar and Lezo and ransacked the headquarters of a moderate Basque nationalist party.
More than 100 cars for export at the port of Pasajes were stoned.
Barricades and bomb threats paralysed public transport in the Basque region.
Most shops heeded Herri Batasuna's call for a 24-hour strike.
Herri Batasuna has called the killing a state crime and blamed the Socialist government.
Interior ministry sources said they suspected ultra-rightwing groups were responsible for the murder.
Ceausescu in call for Hitler treaties to be annulled.
By Ian Traynor in Vienna
AS the ideological gulf between Moscow and Bucharest yawns ever wider, the Romanian leader, President Nicolae Ceausescu, has raised the potentially explosive issue of former Romanian territories annexed by the Kremlin during the second world war.
In a speech to the Romanian Communist Party Congress earlier this week, he attacked the Stalin-Hitler pact of 1939 that carved up Poland and the Baltic states between them, but also ceded Bessarabia — then part of Romania and now the Soviet Republic of Moldavia — to Moscow.
Mr Ceausescu demanded that ‘all treaties with Hitler's Germany be annulled’ and ‘practical steps taken to reverse the consequences of those treaties.’
His remarks came amid simmering nationalist tension in Moldavia, where the Communist leader was recently sacked.
The Kremlin dispatched security forces to the region 10 days ago, after demonstrators in the capital, Kishinev, attacked police headquarters.
President Ceausescu has generally kept quiet on the Moldavian issue, while routinely stressing Romanian national sovereignty and independence.
But Romania's official press has reported extensively on the ethnic unrest across the border, while, for example, failing to report on the radical reform and street demonstrations taking place in other Warsaw Pact countries.
Romania's near total isolation was further underlined at the congress in a series of attacks on perestroika.
Speakers denounced ‘anti-Communist theories that questioned the legitimacy of socialism.’
Inquiry indicts SA squad.
By Patrick Laurence in Johannesburg
AN independent inquiry yesterday backed up allegations that a South African police ‘death squad’ had killed anti-apartheid activists.
The four-man team presented its report to the Attorney General for the Free State, Mr T.P. McNally, who has been mandated to investigate charges by a former policeman that as a member of a ‘police murder unit’ he took part in at least eight murders.
Set up on the initiative of the secretary-general of the South African Council of Churches, the Reverend Frank Chikane, the Independent Board of Inquiry into Informal Repression has investigated five episodes in which the ‘death squad’ was involved.
It found ‘significant corroboration’ of the charges made by the ex-policeman, Almond Nofomela.
He is on death row awaiting execution for a non-political murder.
On the murder of the human rights lawyer, Griffiths Mxenge, in 1981, the report noted that Nofomela's statements were substantially corroborated by those of two co-members of the same unit, Captain Dirk Coetzee and Mr David Tshikalanga.
Another attack in which Nofomela claimed to have taken part was in Swaziland in 1983, when the ‘death squad’ crossed the border to ‘hit’a house occupied by African National Congress cadres with grenades and small arms.
At least two ANC men were killed in the attack.
The board of inquiry called yesterday for a full and open judicial inquiry into the alleged activities of the death squad, noting that the present McNally investigation was an inter-departmental inquiry behind closed doors.
It pledged to continue its own inquiry.
Meanwhile, violence continued in Natal, where a power struggle between Inkatha and pro-ANC organisations rages despite repeated appeals for peace.
Police reported yesterday that four black men were stabbed and hacked to death in a battle in Magoda township.
South Koreans question group of fleeing Chinese.
By Reuter in Seoul
TWELVE Chinese claiming to be fleeing persecution following the Tiananmen Square massacre have arrived by boat on a South Korean island, reportedly seeking to defect to Taiwan.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman in Seoul said the 12 Chinese arrived on Tuesday on Cheju Island, which lies about 60 miles off Korea's south-west coast.
The spokesman said they were being questioned.
He gave no further details.
Taiwan State Radio said the group, which includes one woman, was seeking asylum in Nationalist-ruled Taiwan.
The owner of a Chinese restaurant visited by the group supported this version of events.
But a South Korean Foreign Ministry spokesman was unable to confirm the asylum request.
The Yonhap news agency reported that the members of the group were aged between 17 and 40.
The report said they chartered a boat on the Chinese mainland and arrived early on Tuesday.
The agency reported that the group hid in a pine forest for several hours before heading for a town and finding the Chinese restaurant.
They asked their countrymen to inform the authorities of their arrival and pass on their request for asylum, the report added.
They claimed to be victims of political persecution following the military crackdown on student protesters.
Opposition groups fear Communist attempt to regain the initiative Krenz offers ‘round table’ talks on free elections.
By Anna Tomforde in Bonn
EAST GERMANY'S ruling politburo yesterday gave in to demands from independent opposition groups and said it was prepared to convene ‘round table talks’ about free elections and constitutional and electoral reform.
The offer, reported by the official ADN news agency, contained no date for such negotiations, nor did it specify which groups should take part.
It followed growing pressure from within the ruling Communist Party for a dialogue with the opposition, and came after newly elected Communist Party leaders in the provinces had already made contact with the biggest opposition group, New Forum.
This has happened in at least two cities, Halle and Karl-Marx-Stadt, where young party leaders have replaced their ‘old guard’ predecessors.
The politburo proposal resembles similar offers made by ruling Communist parties in Poland and Hungary last year.
But it also coincided yesterday with a pledge by Mr Egon Krenz, the party leader, that there ‘cannot and will not be an East Germany without a Communist Party.’
Opinion polls have given the Communists up to 15 per cent in the event of genuinely free elections.
Calls for a round table have come from Social Democrat-inclined opposition groups, such as Democratic Awakening and Democracy Now, as well as from the newly founded Social Democratic Party, the SDP.
They were publicly endorsed yesterday by the Liberal Democratic Party, the LDPD, which is in alliance with the Communists.
But New Forum, the leading force in the independent opposition movement, remained sceptical yesterday, saying that the offer could be part of the Communists' attempt to regain the initiative.
The greatest fear of the opposition groups now is that the ruling parties will try to appease them and rush ahead with calling free elections before the opposition groups are properly organised.
Meanwhile, East Germany banned the export of antiques and second-hand goods, in an attempt to counter rising currency speculation.
Mr Krenz speaking to workers yesterday at the Bergmann-Borsig machine factory outside East Berlin — a hotbed of critical opposition and the birthplace of East Germany's first independent trade union — reiterated that he was prepared to have his position as party leader voted on by a new central committee.
The LDPD suggested yesterday that East Germany should reintroduce the post of State Presidency — for which the Liberals would propose a candidate — which would curtail Mr Krenz's treble power as party leader, head of state, and chairman of the National Defence Council.
East Germany was yesterday preparing further measures to counter a drastic fall in the value of its currency.
Mr Hans Modrow, the new prime minister, has told East Germans to be prepared for ‘unpopular measures’ which will be agreed by the government today.
Apart from the ban on the export of antiques and other goods, these are likely to include increased customs controls and measures to stop other ‘illegal transactions.’
Buyers of certain subsidised goods could be required to show their identity cards in shops.
Kohl rules out one Germany before Europe itself unites.
By John Palmer in Strasbourg
APOSSIBLE framework for a pan-European organisation linking countries in Western and Eastern Europe was unveiled here yesterday as the West German Chancellor, Dr Helmut Kohl, formally ruled out any prospect of Bonn seeking German reunification outside the creation of a united Europe.
The new body — to be set up by the 12 countries of the European Community and the six countries of the European Free Trade Association — would be open to east European states who opt for democracy.
The attempt to put flesh and blood on the skeleton structure of a possible united Europe emerged during an unprecedented day in the history of the European Parliament.
Reflecting both the sense of momentous events in Eastern Europe and the desire to strengthen the political role of the European Parliament, MEPs were unexpectedly addressed yesterday both by Chancellor Kohl and President Mitterrand, President of the European Council.
The Commission's thinking about a wider European organisation was set out yesterday by its vice-president, Mr Frans Andriessen, in a report about the proposed European economic space with Efta in which capital, people, trade, and services would move freely.
In the short run this new body is seen by the Commission as a useful means of delaying or diverting the application of countries such as Austria which want to belong to the inner core of the 12 European Community states.
But Mr Andriessen conceded that the 18-country EES would be presided over by a council of ministers ‘shaping decisions by consensus’.
Advocates of faster progress to European monetary union were encouraged yesterday by the unambiguous declaration made to the European Parliament by Chancellor Helmut Kohl yesterday that change in eastern Europe could not justify going slow on EC integration.
Others speculated that the foundations were being laid for a pan-European unity which might stretch from the Urals to the Atlantic.
The Chancellor also took the opportunity to nuance his support for German reunification in ways which will reassure those fearful that precipitate moves to unification might unsettle the Soviet Union and threaten the improvement in East-West relations.
Unlike his Foreign Minister, Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, Dr Kohl had first reacted to the changes in East Germany by highlighting German reunification.
While underlining the right of the East Germans to opt for unity with their fellow Germans in the Federal Republic, Dr Kohl said this was a matter for their own free choice.
‘The people of the GDR do not need lectures on this subject from outsiders,’ commented Dr Kohl, adding that Mr Gorbachev's survival was vital for the wider movement to democracy and reform in eastern Europe.
He concluded that a ‘free and united Germany’ was conceivable only in ‘a free and united Europe.’
The Chancellor stated that the priority now was for East Germany to move to free and secret elections, a press freed from bureaucratic political control, free trade unions, and the right to form independent parties, he said.
‘The recent declarations of the GDR Prime Minister, Mr Hans Modrow, contain references which undeniably lead in this direction.
All now depends on how these announcements are implemented.’
While making no secret of the Federal Republic's readiness to provide massive aid for a democratic East Germany, the Chancellor emphasised that virtually all of eastern Europe, from Poland to Yugoslavia, would have a claim of the support and solidarity of Western Europe.
For his part President Mitterrand reported on the steps taken in Paris last weekend by EC heads of government to bolster the crisis ridden economies of Hungary and Poland.
‘Yugoslavia must also not be forgotton since Yugoslavia was one of the first East European countries to show courage in making change, although its economy has not necessarily benefited from this,’ said President Mitterrand.
News in brief: Row over Tory leadership.
The ‘near-certain’ commitment by backbencher Sir Anthony Meyer to stand against Mrs Thatcher for the Tory leadership brought the instant criticism of party leaders upon his head.
Back page.
Difference on defence.
Mrs Thatcher is set for a clash with President Bush tomorrow over proposed big cuts in the US defence budget.
She is to seek assurances that these will not erode the US military commitment to Western Europe.
Page 5. £450m rent arrears.
Council tenants' rent arrears have risen to over £450 million, and in some inner London boroughs two out of three tenants are in arrears, the Audit Commission reveals.
Page 6.
Siege ends quietly.
The Salvador hotel siege ended peacefully when 12 US Green Berets were freed after a seeming deal between guerrillas and the army.
Page 5.
E German concession.
The East German politburo told opposition groups it was prepared to hold talks on free elections and constitutional reform.
Page 4.
Dispute tension grows.
Tension in the ambulance dispute was heightened as management in London published a list of 999 calls which it claimed had not been answered.
Page 7.
Disclosure order.
A trade magazine journalist was ordered in the High Court to disclose the source of commercially sensitive information.
Page 7 PAGE
Communists ‘out of step’.
By John Richmond
THE ‘new thinking’ in the Soviet Union has outstripped that of Mr Joe Slovo, Secretary-General of the South African Communist Party, whose view that President De Klerk's recent reforms were ‘new wrapping on an old package’was published in the Guardian on Saturday.
Mr Boris Asoyan, a distinguished Africanist and a key figure in formulating Soviet policy on South Africa, believes the reforms are not simply cosmetic.
Writing in Pravda at the end of August, he added: ‘Over the last 11 years, reforms have substantively changed the situation of the country's political life.’
Those comments prompted Mr Slovo to reply six weeks later that Mr Asoyan had characterised the African National Congress in terms in which Pretoria might sketch one of its propaganda pieces.
For example, an equal degree of responsibility was levelled at ‘extreme radicalism in the black community’ as at ‘white extremism.’
In an exclusive interview, however, Mr Asoyan dismissed suggestions that the debate with Mr Slovo was evidence of a difference of views.
‘Generally we agree on how the situation in South Africa looks today.’
The difference was more apparent than real, a question of ‘words’ in which ‘all the details are important’in a new ‘information environment’— meaning his words ought to be read in the light of the special status of the Communist Party organ, Pravda, and of glasnost.
Mr Asoyan underlined the USSR's suport for the ANC's policy on attacks against so-called soft targets, adding his personal revulsion, and reaffirmed belief in the legitimacy of armed struggle and attacks on military and economic targets.
Asked whether a Bolshevik-style revolution in Africa by violent means that would miss the capitalist stage of development was possible, he said: ‘I don't think that revolution in this sense is possible.’
It is on this point that the views of the SACP and some Soviet policymakers divide.
Mr Slovo, again in Pravda, accused Mr Asoyan of ‘underestimating the value of armed struggle.
Mr Asoyan places greater emphasis than Mr Slovo on the forces of social and economic transformation and notes the dissipation of consensus of white opinion.
Turning to the African population, he said in Pravda: ‘Botha's reforms opened the way to gradual transformation of purely racial into social barriers.
‘In the black community, stratification is proceeding very fast, a rather substantial middle class is emerging that is interested in stability and peaceful means to resolve the present conflict.
Skin colour is losing its meaning as a factor in economic life.’
Mr Slovo dismisses this as ‘made without reference to any statistics whatever.’
Leningrad party boss goes too.
By John Rettie in Moscow
WHILE the Communist Party's Moscow chief was being sacked on Tuesday, the same fate befell his counterpart in the Soviet Union's second city, Leningrad,— apparently for similar reasons.
In a report from Leningrad, Pravda revealed that the city's first secretary, Mr Anatoly Gerasimov, had been relieved of his post, which was taken over by the Leningrad regional boss, Mr Boris Gidaspov, combining the two jobs.
This was ‘to give greater flexibility to party work, and to remove unnecessary parallelism in the activity of the regional and city committees’.
The decision was taken at a joint meeting of the two committees which adopted ‘a programme of party action to strengthen perestroika’.
This is to be the party's platform for the elections to republican and local soviets early next year.
What Pravda did not say was that Mr Gerasimov failed to get elected by popular vote in the all-union congressional elections last March — just like Mr Lev Zaikov, the ousted Moscow party leader.
Mr Gidaspov, however, who is not a party apparatchik, was one of the few top Communists to retain popularity with the Leningrad electorate.
He took over as regional party leader in July in place of the hardliner Mr Lev Solovyov, a junior member of the politburo who also failed to get elected.
A professor of chemistry, Mr Gidaspov is expected to try to galvanise the party campaign, in the same way as Mr Yuri Prokofyev, the new party leader in Moscow.
A document circulated within the Leningrad regional party by its ideological commission, however, throws a new light the electoral campaign, indicating serious concern about the growing influence of the Popular Front and other radical groups, particularly among the rapidly expanding voters' clubs and associations.
PAGE
Leningrad party boss goes too.
By John Rettie in Moscow
WHILE the Communist Party's Moscow chief was being sacked on Tuesday, the same fate befell his counterpart in the Soviet Union's second city, Leningrad,— apparently for similar reasons.
In a report from Leningrad, Pravda revealed that the city's first secretary, Mr Anatoly Gerasimov, had been relieved of his post, which was taken over by the Leningrad regional boss, Mr Boris Gidaspov, combining the two jobs.
This was ‘to give greater flexibility to party work, and to remove unnecessary parallelism in the activity of the regional and city committees’.
The decision was taken at a joint meeting of the two committees which adopted ‘a programme of party action to strengthen perestroika’.
This is to be the party's platform for the elections to republican and local soviets early next year.
What Pravda did not say was that Mr Gerasimov failed to get elected by popular vote in the all-union congressional elections last March — just like Mr Lev Zaikov, the ousted Moscow party leader.
Mr Gidaspov, however, who is not a party apparatchik, was one of the few top Communists to retain popularity with the Leningrad electorate.
He took over as regional party leader in July in place of the hardliner Mr Lev Solovyov, a junior member of the politburo who also failed to get elected.
A professor of chemistry, Mr Gidaspov is expected to try to galvanise the party campaign, in the same way as Mr Yuri Prokofyev, the new party leader in Moscow.
A document circulated within the Leningrad regional party by its ideological commission, however, throws a new light the electoral campaign, indicating serious concern about the growing influence of the Popular Front and other radical groups, particularly among the rapidly expanding voters' clubs and associations.
Tough realities face Eastern Europe's oldest industrialised country.
By Martin Myant
ONCE Czechoslovakia settles down from the current euphoria of people's power, its new leadership will have to take some hard decisions on how to overcome its economic difficulties.
Compared with some in Eastern Europe their position looks reasonably comfortable.
The Czechoslovak economy is not on the brink of collapse.
It is not plagued by shortages of basic consumer goods.
There are shortages, especially of electrical goods and cars.
There are also frequent problems with the range and quality of garments and footwear.
Behind this lies the problem of an economy that has been largely stagnant since the mid-1970s.
Official figures suggest reasonable growth rates — 5 per cent a year up to 1975, declining to between 2 and 3 per cent now — but they are almost certainly exaggerated by up to 3 per cent.
It seems that the system of central planning, adopted after the Communist Party took power in 1948, did bring some economic progress in the 1950s and even into the 1960s.
After that it had largely exhausted its potential.
One powerful argument attributes this stagnation to the economic structure set in the early 1950s.
Before the second world war Czechoslovakia was a producer and exporter of light consumer goods.
Once incorporated into Stalin's Soviet bloc, the economy was reorientated to rely on its own resources as much as possible, while exporting heavy machinery to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe in exchange for raw materials.
The technology for these new industries was always backward by world standards, and it has never been possible to find secure markets outside the Soviet bloc.
This has left an economy largely isolated from the most advanced countries, with one of the world's highest levels of consumption per capita of energy and steel.
Domestic energy resources will only last another 30 to 40 years, while burning coal with an ever higher sulphur content is already destroying the forests on the mountainous Polish border.
The limitations to this structure were already clear by the 1960s, and an attempt was made to shift back towards lighter industries and consumer goods.
This new strategy was ridiculed by the Soviet leadership and opposed by the heavy engineering sector inside Czechoslovakia.
Among its firmest advocates was the young economist Mr Valtr Komarek, who fell from favour after 1968.
His star could only rise again with the economic stagnation of the early 1980s and, even more clearly, following the appearance of Mr Gorbachev.
Although nothing much changed in cultural policy, in the political system or in the media, steps were taken towards economic reform.
Mr Komarek became the director of a new research body, the Institute of Forecasting, given the task of advising on long-term development strategy.
He clearly had friends in high places, as he was able to take on prominent people who had been purged after 1968 and even some who had suffered after the takeover of 1948.
He has remorselessly plugged the necessity for structural change — referring at one time to the need to halve steel production from its current level of 14 million tonnes.
He has also taken up the case for a market-orientated reform, which has been started, but with far less vigour.
His basic case is that, with a shift towards producing more modern products, Czechoslovakia could quickly regain its place among the most advanced countries of Europe.
Mr Komarek may have some influential friends, but he also faces powerful enemies.
The traditional steel and heavy engineering sectors naturally have no sympathy.
Neither does the State Planning Commission, the vast organisation responsible for the day-to-day management of the economy.
Despite government and party documents since the early 1980s accepting much of Komarek's argument, nothing has changed in the structure of the economy.
The planners have, however, finally been shaken out of their complacency by a fall in orders from the Soviet Union.
The initial stimulus was a drop in the price of Soviet oil, which has meant that Soviet industry can no longer afford to buy so much Czechoslovak machinery.
The prospect for the future is that a modernising Soviet economy might even prefer to buy better quality equipment from elsewhere.
At the same time, Czechoslovakia has been hit hard by the Warsaw Pact arms reductions.
Figures on the extent of military production and exports have never been published, but much of the best of the Czechoslovak engineering industry is producing armaments.
There seems little alternative to a change in the economy's structure towards a new range of products.
The question is whether this can be achieved without some form of outside aid.
Government policy in the 1980s has been to oppose any increase in the country's dollar debt, which remains at the manageable level of $5.5 million.
Komarek hopes that substantial further borrowing may not be necessary.
His institute's estimates of the country's current economic level relative to Western Europe are high and he concludes from this that economic reform can be based largely on domestic resources.
A growing number of economists are sceptical of this.
If, as seems likely, the Czechoslovak economy has been largely stagnant for 15 years then it is hard to see how domestic resources could be enough.
Martin Myant is a writer and author of The Czechoslovak Economy — 1948-1988: The Battle for Economic Reform (Cambridge University Press) Leader comment page 18
Latest shuttle mission ‘aims to deploy new spy satellite’.
By Martin Walker in Washington
THE first black to command a US space mission, Air Force Colonel Fred Gregory, led a team of specialists aboard the space shuttle, Discovery, last night, for a secret mission believed to be the deployment of a spy satellite.
It will be the 32nd US space shuttle mission, and the seventh since the Challenger shuttle exploded in flight in 1986.
The satellite is to be deployed 22,300 miles above the equator, and has been variously described in the technical press as designed to monitor Soviet compliance with arms treaties and as an advanced eavesdropping satellite, able to monitor, record and re-transmit hundreds of Soviet communications channels, including voice, data and telemetry.
Nasa also took delivery yesterday of a report it had commissioned to put a timetable on President Bush's vague plan for a manned mission to Mars, which could now put four people on the planet by 2011.
The report spells out a series of options, and leans towards a plan which would put men on the Moon in 2001 to build a base there as a springboard for the Martian expedition 10 years later.
Although no cost analyses have been made in the Nasa report, a separate study by the White House Office of Management and Budget has put a tentative $400 billion price tag on the Mars venture.
By John Rettie in Moscow
BREAKING two decades of silence in the Soviet media, one of Russia's most distinguished writers has denounced the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 as ‘collective murder’.
In the latest issue of Moscow News, Daniil Granin said Czechoslovakia's efforts to create ‘socialism with a human face’ was ‘the first perestroika in socialist countries, and we crushed it and slandered it.
That was collective murder’.
Mr Granin, who is also a much-respected parliamentary deputy and a war veteran, made his remarks in an open letter to his ‘Czechoslovak friends and readers’.
Soviet leaders have made no direct comment about events in Eastern Europe — except to welcome reformist changes when they happen.
Mr Granin also commiserated with Czechoslovaks for their sufferings under the post-Dubcek regime.
Clash likely at Camp David meeting with Bush Thatcher to attack US defence cuts.
By Martin Walker in Washington and Hella Pick
THE Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, is preparing for a head-on clash with President Bush at Camp David tomorrow over American proposals for radical cuts in the US defence budget.
Deeply concerned at what she sees as a naive response to changes in the Warsaw Pact countries which could yet be reversed, Mrs Thatcher will seek a clear assurance from Mr Bush that any defence cuts will not erode the US military commmitment to Western Europe.
There must be no unravelling of the alliance's military posture.
Mrs Thatcher has reacted angrily to the surprise decision by the US Secretary of Defence, Mr Dick Cheney, to slash billions of dollars and seek a 3 per cent cut in the 1991 defence budget.
She had received no advance warning, and was all the more disturbed when Mr Cheney justified his move by declaring that the threat from the Warsaw Pact was diminishing.
Ideally, the Prime Minister would like President Bush to repudiate the Pentagon chief.
But she recognises that the Administration is under considerable domestic pressure to reduce the US budget deficit through substantial savings in expenditure.
Mrs Thatcher will have to be satisfied with the assurances she will receive from Mr Bush, who will tell her that, since defence cuts are politically inevitable, it is far better for modest and planned reductions to be proposed by his cabinet and the Pentagon than for swingeing cuts to be imposed by the US Congress, which is already chafing at the thought of the US budget deficit being deepened to pay for the defence of the wealthy Europeans.
Mrs Thatcher will also be assured that there will be no unilateral US cuts of its forces committed to Western Europe, that all will be done in consultations with Nato, and that there will be no grandiose new proposal for further US and Soviet troop cuts until the current Conventional Forces in Europe talks in Vienna are complete.
Mrs Thatcher has been alarmed over reports from Washington that President Bush is already contemplating follow-on talks from the present East-West negotiations on conventional forces.
She is also concerned by West German manouvres to revive the debate over the future of short-range nuclear weapons and to enlist US support to kill plans to modernise the Lance missiles deployed in the Federal Republic.
Mrs Thatcher remains totally opposed to the idea of a ‘third zero,’ the elimination of short- range nuclear weapons, and believes the Soviet Union has now rallied to her view.
She will insist that no immediate decision is called for on the modernisation of Lance.
But in a first hint that she may be prepared to modify her views, the Prime Minister will tell the President that, if the deployment of new short-range missiles in Germany becomes unrealistic, Britain is certainly prepared to consider the alternative of stand-off missiles carried on Tornados.
Mrs Thatcher is still seen in the United States as the staunchest of its allies.
Yet this cannot disguise the shifting assessment of US interests which has already seen Bonn replace London as the crucial European relationship.
Mrs Thatcher's staff will today be scanning Mr Bush's televised Thanksgiving address to the nation last night, in which the President emphasised the continued US commitment to the Nato alliance and the defence of Western Europe, stressing that Nato's fortitude has been a prime cause of the transformations in Eastern Europe.
But these phrases, like the assurances of Mrs Thatcher, were couched in general terms, without the copper-bottomed guarantees of American troops, airbases, and nuclear weapons modernisation programmes, which the Prime Minister would like.
Mrs Thatcher is being given the honour of an invitation to the President's private retreat at Camp David, in the Maryland hills north of Washington.
Talks with Mr Bush and his National Security Advisor, General Brent Scowcroft, are to be followed by a what is planned to be as informal a lunch as Mrs Thatcher's presence will permit.
His first formal policy speech on Eastern Europe since the crumbling of the Berlin Wall, the televised address also dwellt on Mr Bush's hopes for the forthcoming summit with Mr Gorbachev.
A speech in which the epochal scale of change in the East was acknowledged and yet also modified by President Bush's innate caution, it was meant to include nothing that would alarm Mrs Thatcher.
President Bush has already promised that no commitments will be made at the Malta summit, and last week agreed to fly on to Brussels immediately afterwards to brief Nato leaders.
A speechwriter's attempt to compensate for the public relations lapse in not going to the Berlin Wall, Mr Bush's prime time statement went out on all television channels on Thanksgiving Eve.
Syrians blame Gen Aoun for murder of Muawad.
By Reuter in Damascus
SYRIA yesterday denounced the assassination of the Lebanese President, Rene Muawad, 17 days after he took office, and pointed the finger of suspicion at General Michel Aoun.
Gen Aouncontrols Lebanon's Christian enclave and opposes the presence of Syrian troops in the country.
He rejected the authority of President Muawad, who was elected with Syrian backing.
‘The hand of betrayal and treason has reached the martyr President Rene Muawad,’ the official Syrian news agency, Sana, said.
‘This ugly crime against Lebanon and its legitimacy followed a series of threats by the rebellious officer (Aoun).’
It said that Gen Aoun had threatened to destroy Beirut and kill deputies and leaders who approved an Arab-backed peace plan.
The US deplored the assassination as a ‘despicable act of terrorism against a man of peace.’
President Bush, saying the murder was a ‘disgraceful happening,’ offered US assistance in finding President Muawad's killers.
Appealing for calm in Lebanon, the State Department spokesmen said that they had no indication who was responsible.
Mr Bush admitted the assassination was ‘a direct setback to the effort to bring peace to Lebanon.’
Speaking on Capitol Hill, the Assistant Secretary of State for the Near East, Mr John Kelly, said that he hoped attempts to bring peace to divided Lebanon would continue.
France expressed horror at the assassination and appealed for unity to assure peace in the country it once ruled.
‘I wish to express the shock of the French Government in the face of this horrible assassination and convey its condolences to all Lebanese people,’ the junior Foreign Minister, Ms Edwige Avice, said in a statement to Parliament.
The assassination has thrown Arab leaders and diplomats into despair and shattered the most hopeful and broadly supported joint Arab effort to resolve the conflict at the core of 14 years of civil war in Lebanon.
‘It is a tragedy.
Whenever we take one step forward, we take five steps back,’ said an ambassador to the Arab League.
‘It's shocking.
We're back to square one,’ said a senior official at Jordan's Foreign Ministry.
The bomb that killed President Muawad appeared to have defeated or at least set back for many months the Arab initiative spearheaded by Morocco, Algeria and Saudi Arabia.
‘Where do we turn now?’ asked an official at the Tunis headquarters of the Arab League.
‘This is terribly tragic, but all the more reason for Arab mediation to continue,’ an Egyptian diplomat said.
In Strasbourg, the 23-nation Council of Europe issued a statement expressing its indignation at the killing.
‘By murdering President Rene Muawad, his assassins chose to strike down a man of dialogue and reconciliation,’ the secretary-general, Ms Catherine Lalumiere, said.
PAGE
Last stand for Communism and nostalgia at Renault birthplace.
By Paul Webster in Paris
ONE of Europe's symbolic Communist strongholds is preparing for its final battle after the decision yesterday of the state-owned Renault car company to close its 60-year-old Paris factory at Boulogne Billancourt in 1992.
The island site on the River Seine was a traditional centre of Communist led revolt, notably during the 1936 Popular Front, the 1947 national strikes and the 1968 unrest.
The Communist CGT trade union and party leaders warned that they would fight the decision, which threatens 4000 jobs.
The party newspaper, L'Humanite, said the firm was giving in to property sharks who want to develop 200 acres around the site where the Renault brothers built their first cars in the family garage more than 90 years ago.
The company says the plant, modernised at a cost of £100 million ten years ago, cannot meet today's standards.
No factory has played a more central role in France's industrial and social development, particularly after Renault was nationalised in 1945 as a punishment for collaboration.
If trade unions can stir up support they will receive sympathy from non-Communists who cherish the five storey factory as part of the national heritage.
Many of France's most popular cars, including the postwar 4CV, 4L and 5, were designed and built at Billancourt.
Prague's ‘underground’ gets used to the glare.
By Michael Simmons in Prague
SOLIDARITY achieved Poland's revolution in church crypts and decaying technical colleges.
New Forum in East Germany uses churches and community hostels.
Civic Forum in Czechoslovakia chose an early 16th century house on a cobbled street in Prague converted into an avant garde art gallery.
Beneath a vaulted whitewashed ceiling and surrounded by strange blocks and squares which artists said were ‘pictures,’ the playwright, Vaclav Havel, met the world's press.
Crowds are difficult to count in Prague these days, but the crush was equal only to Wenceslas Square last Monday.
Hindsight may show this to have been a pivotal meeting.
In the suffocating heat of a dozen television arc lamps, messages of support for Civic Forum and the students' cause were read from a canning factory in the provinces and from other industrial plants.
An establishment economist was present standing in sports jacket and flannels in the crush.
‘My presence is very important,’ he said.
‘The Forum is not just actors and intellectuals.’
Czechoslovaks must be the best fed and the best shod of Eastern Europe's new wave revolutionaries.
But the economist added: ‘Our analysis are much more negative even than the samizdat literature.
We need now to prepare the country's economy for ‘the day after’ and to be ready for the transition.’
‘You see,’ the next speaker said, ‘we are no longer dissidents now.’
It fell to the diminutive and very tired Mr Havel to declare that a message had gone from the Forum to Presidents George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev, urging them to look closely at 1968 and the invasion when they meet next month.
‘If Mr Gorbachev rejects the invasion,’ the playwright said, ‘the existing leadership in Czechoslovakia will lose its legitimacy.’
The case of Martin Smid — the student whom thousands believe was beaten to death by the riot police just down the road last Friday — was raised.
Petr Uhl, a dissident in prison facing charges of spreading false information, was said yesterday to be a victim of disinformation.
Perspiration poured from a hundred brows — though it was snowing steadily outside — as an official declared: ‘We ask you to tell the world about Petr Uhl.
‘He is a hostage.
He would be here if he was not in prison.’
But this is still Mr Milos Jakes's Czechoslovakia.
The government, said one speaker, did ‘nothing but spit at our past offers for dialogue’.
The Stalinists, added another, were still considering armed intervention.
Referring to the petition for change, A Few Sentences, Mr Havel said the crisis would be resolved very quickly in one way at least.
‘I appeal to Mr Jakes to sign this petition.’
Everyone in the room forgot their discomfort and burst out laughing.
Mr Havel, who has a genius for pinpointing the absurd, smiled gently and sipped at some mineral water.
Dusty answers for villagers on road to the polls.
By Suzanne Goldenberg in Amethi, northern India
POLLING stations 83 and 84 for the village of Hath Qila lie down a dusty track that must be one of the few roads that has not been metalled in the five years that Mr Rajiv Gandhi has been cosseting his home constituency of Amethi.
More than 100 sullen villagers were muttering outside yesterday, afraid to approach the polling station where the assistant district magistrate and scores of police are trying to create the impression that polling is normal.
Just 20 minutes before, about 60 heavyweight Congress I supporters in three or four jeeps roared up to the unprotected station in a whirlwind of dust.
Firing shots in the air they descended on the station and carted away the metal ballot boxes, substituting three of their own.
The magistrate, Mr S.K. Upadhyaya, resplendent among the dusty villagers in a navy blazer and a silver-tipped walking stick, denied that there had been any attempt to intimidate voters.
He said that the polling had been interrupted because the polling officers shut down for lunch.
He produced one of the officials as proof.
Trembling visibly with fear under the watchful eye of Mr Upadhyaya and the police, the official also said that the hold-up was due to a lunch break.
His terrified colleagues chimed in and held up their plates.
But just around a bend in the road an opposition supporter who was frightened away from the station, Mr Ram Raj Upadhyaya, said: ‘We are all terrified and afraid to go anywhere near the polling station.
If he (the magistrate) is saying that everything is all right, than this is all lies.’
Outside the polling station were bundles of legal ballot papers which had been discarded by the Congress I thugs.
According to dozens of villagers, journalists, and workers for the opposition candidate, the journalist grandson of Mahatma Gandhi, Mr Rajmohan Gandhi, who is no relation to the incumbent Prime Minister, there have been scores of such incidents in Amethi in systematic attacks that suggest that they have had sanction from higher authority.
Mr Jain, the opposition candidate campaign manager and a leading Indian economist, said that gangs of Congress I supporters, sometimes accompanied by non criminals and wearing masks, had attacked polling stations in 70 of the 150 in Amethi and carried away ballot boxes or stuff them with bogus votes.
All day long at the Janata Dal officers in Amethi yesterday, Mr Jain and his supporters scrambled to update the list of party workers and activists who were beaten up by Congress I supporters — many of them in the presence of a senior police officer.
At least three people were admitted to hospital.
By nightfall Mr Rajmohan Gandhi was calling for repolling throughout the entire constituency.
‘This is a critical stage for Indian democracy,’ he said in an interview.
‘I hope that what is happening here is not happening all over the country.
It's disgraceful that Mr Rajiv Gandhi has chosen this path for his exit from power.’
Tigre faces starvation.
Up to four million Ethiopians in the north may face starvation next year as a result of drought, Peter Biles writes from Nairobi.
According to the UN's World Food Programme, twice as many people as originally estimated will need emergency food aid in 1990.
‘We're particularly concerned about the situation in Tigre,’ the WFP's Director of Operations in Ethiopia, Mr David Morton, said.
‘It's become clear that the crop failure there has been far worse than we realised.’.
Rebels told to move.
Islamabad has told Afghan rebel groups to move arms dumps out of populated areas of north-west Pakistan where a huge explosion killed upto 40 people last week.
The order came as rebels announced plans to free two Soviet soldiers captured during the Soviet occupation.
-Agencies..
Mandela meeting.
Nine South African activists will visit Nelson Mandela next week in the latest talks between the black leader and anti-apartheid campaigners.
-Reuter..
Death threats.
A French headmaster, Mr Ernest Chenieres, who sparked a controversy by banning Islamic headscarves in the classroom, said yesterday he had received six death threats from Islamic extremists.
-Reuter.
Right gains in poll.
Denmark's far-right anti-tax Progress Party made gains in Tuesday's municipal elections at the expense of the ruling Conservatives.
-Reuter.
Poachers shot dead.
Kenyan wildlife rangers have shot dead six poachers in Meru national park, including the murderers of two French tourists, the Director of Wildlife, Mr Richard Leakey, said yesterday in Nairobi.
-Reuter.
Corruption triples.
China has uncovered 100,000 cases of bribery and corruption this year, triple last year's rate, said the country's top prosecutor, Mr Liu Fuzhi.
-AP.
Clean-up in Bulgaria.
The Bulgarian Communist Party politburo yesterday set up a top-level investigation into corruption under the deposed leader, Mr Todor Zhivkov, and fired his son as head of a party department.
-AP.
Green Berets walk free from Salvador siege.
By Simon Tisdall in Washington
THE siege of the Sheraton hotel in San Salvador ended without further bloodshed yesterday after 24 traumatic hours which underscored the difficulties and dangers bedevilling US policy in El Salvador.
The Salvadorean Government said the attack on the hotel was a bid to kidnap Mr Joao Baena Soares, secretary-general of the Organisation of American States, who was in the country on a peace mission, but the OAS chief said he did not believe this.
Mr Soares left the country on Tuesday evening.
Following an apparent deal between guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front and the Salvadorean army, 12 US Green Beret commandos emerged unscathed from behind barricades in the hotel's VIP annexe.
President George Bush said yesterday that a special US anti-terrorist team had been sent to El Salvador on Tuesday but had not been involved in ending the siege.
The commandos, who belong to a 55-strong group of US military advisers in El Salvador, had held out on the sixth floor of the annexe during the siege..
The soldiers, carrying pistols and M-16 rifles, got into a pickup truck outside the hotel and were taken to a Salvadorean military installation.
Reporters who approached the hotel just after dawn yesterday said there was no sign of the rebels who took over part of the hotel in the exclusive Escalon district of the capital.
In Washington, US Administration officials said the soldiers — members of the elite Green Berets — feared the rebels had left booby traps behind and waited for Salvadorean troops to work their way to the sixth floor, on which the soldiers were trapped.
The guerrillas, who stormed the hotel early on Tuesday morning, trapping 87 guests including the OAU secretary-general had already slipped away before dawn.
After the FMLN offensive which began 12 days ago and cost an estimated 1,300 lives, the capital was reported calm yesterday.
But many questions remained unanswered.
It was unclear why the Green Berets were in the hotel when the guerrillas attacked, whether the luxury hotel was their normal billet, and what their precise mission was supposed to be.
Also unclear was whether the commandos had, at one point, opened fire on the invaders, as claimed by the FMLN.
Under established rules of engagement, US military personnel in El Salvador may not fire unless fired upon.
Mystery also surrounded the status of a British ‘military adviser’ whom the guerrillas at one point claimed to hold captive.
Officially, Britain does not provide advisers to the Salvadoreans.
Tuesday's anguish in Washington about what was described as hostage-taking also seems to have been misplaced.
As the State Department and the White House both set crisis management operations in train, and President Bush urgently conferred with top officials, FMLN statements — that the guests, except for the armed Americans, were not hostages and were free to go as soon as a ceasefire was arranged — were almost ignored.
The guests were subsequently safely evacuated, in two groups.
The White House seemed unaware that not only were there no hostages, but that the trapped Americans were heavily-armed, elite troops trained to protect themselves in just such circumstances.
It fell to Pentagon officials to publicise this crucial information.
By that time, however, the President had already ordered the anti-terrorist Delta Force based at Fort Bragg on full alert, amid clear hints of full-scale US military intervention.
The US provides more than $1 million a day to the Salvadorean Government.
But by its actions and words on Tuesday, the Administration came close to admitting that its confidence in President Alfredo Cristiani's ability to defeat the FMLN was ill-placed.
The guerrillas' unexpected incursion into the exclusive diplomatic quarter of Escalon on Monday night had already shaken US confidence in the Salvadorean army, as had last week's murder of six Jesuit priests by uniformed intruders.