

Bush pledges US troops will stay in Europe despite changes.
By Martin Walker in Washington
PRESIDENT Bush last night pledged that US military forces ‘will remain in Europe as long as our friends want and need us’, no matter how great the changes in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
In his Thanksgiving address, Mr Bush said the US military commitment would stay ‘even if forces are significantly reduced on both sides’.
He did not give figures for troops and hardware.
Mr Bush defended his cautious response to the crumbling of the Berlin Wall.
‘A time of historic change is no time for recklessness.
The peace, and the confidence and the security of our friends in Europe — it is just too important,’ he said.
In a speech almost calculated to reassure Mrs Thatcher as she flies to Washington today, Mr Bush appealed to President Gorbachev: ‘America welcomes reform not as an adversary seeking advantage, but as a people offering support.’
He added: ‘Let us move beyond containment, and once and for all end the Cold War.’
But he saw Central America as a new stumbling block.
He said he would urge Mr Gorbachev to end the arms supply to Nicaragua and, in an escalation of the war of words, Cuba.
Mr Bush sounded almost smug when he said the changes in Eastern Europe had come ‘because America is strong and 40 years of perseverance and patience are finally paying off’.
Thatcher's worries, page 10
News in brief: Row over Tory leadership.
The ‘almost certain’ commitment by Sir Anthony Meyer to contest the Tory leadership brought the criticism of party leaders.
Page 20. £450m rent arrears.
Council tenants' rent arrears have risen to over £450 million, the Audit Commission reveals.
Page 2.
Siege ends quietly.
The Salvador hotel siege ended peacefully when 12 US Green Berets were freed.
Page 10.
Dispute tension grows.
Tension in the ambulance dispute was heightened as management in London published a list of 999 calls it claimed had not been answered.
Page 3.
Disclosure order.
A trade magazine journalist was ordered in the High Court to disclose the source of commercially sensitive information.
Page 3.
Arts, ReviewsWS24-26.
Computer GuardianWS27, 29.
Financial NewsWS11, 12, 14.
Guardian WomenWS38.
Home NewsWS2, 3, 20.
International NewsWS8, 10.
Law ReportWS39.
ListingsWS36, 37.
Movie GuardianWS22, 23.
ObituaryWS39.
PoliticsWS4, 6.
Review GuardianWS21.
Sports NewsWS15-17.
TV, Radio and WeatherWS40
Water sale terms ‘a giveaway’.
By Patrick Donovan Industrial Correspondent
WATER shares last night soared to a premium of more than 20 per cent on the unofficial ‘grey market’ as it became clear that the privatisation is set to become the biggest investor give-away since the 1987 Stock Exchange crash.
Amid outcry from opposition politicians, ministers yesterday priced water shares in the 10 companies at 240p apiece, valuing the industry at £5.24 billion.
Announcing the terms for the December 12 Stock Exchange launch, the water minister, Mr Michael Howard, refused to accept that the Government will face a paper loss of more than £1.3 billion.
Mr Howard said this was a ‘misleading’ way to interpret the figures.
The Department of the Environment, however, has previously announced that the cost of preparing the industry for market sell-off by wiping off debt and meeting environmental standards will be around £6.6 billion.
With more than 4.3 million people registered for shares, ministers expect that at least one quarter of the entire flotation will be bought by small British investors.
If demand is greater than expected more shares can be clawed back from allocations earmarked for institutional and overseas investors.
This could give the British public just under half the 2,183 million shares on offer.
With the issue priced right at the bottom of market expectations, analysts last night forecast that shares will start trading at a hefty profit.
Together with the lower than expected flotation price, the 10 companies have been given an attractive yield averaging as much as 8.55 per cent.
But experts warned that any market fall could still jeopardise the first day's trading.
The level of shareholders' return varies according to the investment attraction of the various companies — from 8.10 per cent for highly rated Thames to 9.68 per cent for South West, hit by a series of pollution incidents.
IG Index, a firm of ‘financial bookmakers’, was last night quoting a grey market price in water shares, showing gains of up to 21 per cent.
Best performers were Thames, Southern, Wessex, and Severn Trent.
The shadow Environment Secretary, Mr Bryan Gould, maintained water was being sold at a loss.
‘Every taxpayer is subsidising an unnecessary sell-off and then paying again when they get their water bill.’
The terms were described as ‘a barrow-boy price’ by the GMB union.
In a statement, the union said: ‘This will encourage the worst type of speculation.
This is a terrible way to treat a vital public service.’
Investors will have to apply for a minimum of £240 worth of the shares, with an initial instalment of £100.
Applications must be in by December 11.
Outlook, and further details, page 11; Leader comment, page 18
Tories move to halt Meyer challenge.
By Michael White, Chief Political Correspondent
THE Conservative Party juggernaut was last night rolling backwards and forwards across the person of Sir Anthony Meyer after he had virtually committed himself to standing against Mrs Thatcher when the annual leadership contest is formally declared open today.
Within hours of saying on BBC radio that his candidacy was ‘almost certain,’ Sir Anthony, MP for Clwyd North-west, was summoned by Mr Cranley Onslow, chairman of the backbenchers' 1922 Committee, who told him not to damage the party at a difficult mid-term juncture.
Sir Geoffrey Howe, Deputy Prime Minister and a potential successor, also signalled strong disapproval of what Sir Anthony last night called a challenge to ‘a leader who claims infallibility’— and what some supporters likened to the mass Tory abstention which dislodged Neville Chamberlain in favour of Winston Churchill in 1940.
In today's Financial Times, the Conservative chairman, Mr Kenneth Baker, warns that a leadership challenge would be an ‘unnecessary and irrelevant distraction’.
He comes close to ruling out a general election in 1991, saying: ‘I think we have to think in terms of 1992.’
Sir Anthony said on the BBC's World at One: ‘I almost certainly will challenge her in the first round if no one else comes forward.
It's my expectation and my hope that someone much better qualified than I will come forward.’
Who that will be he declined to say other than that he would be preferably an ex-minister, ‘somebody who has had a reasonably high profile’.
The panic which followed Mr Nigel Lawson's departure from the Treasury has subsided, but tremors have been produced this week by tabloid press reports that Mr Nicholas Ridley, the Trade Secretary, regards Mrs Thatcher as a liability, leaving only four solid loyalists in Cabinet — Mr John Major, Mr David Waddington, Mr Cecil Parkinson and Mr Norman Lamont.
Although dissident Conservatives seem disorganised and fragmented, a nervous Conservative Central Office mobilised party chairmen across the country to organise support for the Prime Minister.
One rebel said: ‘The hounds of the whips’ office are unleashed.’
No less an eminence than Lord Whitelaw echoed the loyalists' warnings when he invoked an old Willie-ism in appealing for ‘a stirring up of apathy as far as gossip, rumour and internal intrigue are concerned.’
He told a Westminster press lunch: ‘I want to see a Conservative government returned at the next general election under Margaret Thatcher's leadership.’
Ministerial jumpiness was further underlined last night when the junior energy minister, Mr Peter Morrison, demanded a public loyalty oath from all minsters.
He said in a letter to his Chester constituents that he would vote for Mrs Thatcher and called on constituency chairmen to ask their MPs how they intended to vote.
Something between 60 and 100 MPs are eager to clip Mrs Thatcher's wings by staging a show of disaffection or by forcing her into a second round when the first round votes are cast, on December 5 under the most likely timetable.
Then, the theory runs, the Meyer stalking horse would bring serious challengers like Mr Michael Heseltine into the race.
‘It doesn't matter if the contestant gets one vote.
If there are 99 abstentions that is the point,’ said one dissident.
Last night some Conservatives argued that government whips should demand that Mr Heseltine urge retreat on Sir Anthony, who has said he would like to see the former Defence Secretary and ardent pro-European lead the party.
At today's meeting of the 1922 Committee Mr Onslow will declare a leadership election open.
That would lead to a quick secret ballot on December 5, just before the Strasbourg summit.
The leadership election has been uncontested since 1975.
Mrs Thatcher is rated a 1-3 chance by the bookmakers William Hill to lead the Conservatives into the next general election.
They offer 2-1 that she will be replaced by then.
Politics, pages 4 and 6; Commentary, page 19
Kohl insists European union must keep up pace.
By John Palmer in Strasbourg
THE West German Chancellor, Dr Helmut Kohl, yesterday killed any lingering hopes in Downing Street that the Federal Republic would join Britain in trying to slow the momentum of European union.
In an address to the European Parliament here Dr Kohl left no doubt that, at next month's European Community summit, he would support moves to prepare for economic and monetary union.
British ministers had assumed that Bonn's preoccupation with the situation in East Germany might lead it to oppose any move to begin drawing up a new treaty for European monetary union.
This now seems unlikely.
‘Let it be made quite clear that there is no doubt about the position of my government; Germany stands fully behind the Single European Act and its objectives,’ Dr Kohl declared.
‘We stand behind the destination of European union.
For us economic and monetary union is only a station on the way to full European political union.’
Dr Kohl said the recent successes of European integration had ‘encouraged the process of reform in the states in Central and Eastern Europe’.
He added that it would be ‘a grave error at this time of all times to remove the momentum for this process’.
Yesterday the EC Commissioner for External Affairs, Mr Frans Andriessen, unveiled plans for an 18-nation body comprising the community and the European Free Trade Association to run the new ‘European economic space’, which East European countries could join as they reformed.
His remarks were seen as a sign that the community accepts that there could be a 20- or even 22-member organisation by the end of the 1990s.
Asked whether Britain might opt for membership of this looser body if it rejected progress towards full European union, Mr Andriessen said: ‘It is always open to countries to go back to Efta if they wish.’
This is bound to be seen as further evidence that Britain risks cutting itself off from the mainstream of European integration because of hostility both to economic and monetary union and to eventual political union.
In a separate speech to European Parliamentarians, President Mitterrand said that ‘an opening to the East is not in contradiction with but reinforces European unity.
We must strengthen the bonds of our union.
‘We can do nothing for Eastern Europe if we fail among ourselves in a few days’ time to agree on economic and monetary union, social and environmental policies so that we can complete the European single market on time.’
Senior West German officials here last night said that the Bonn cabinet had agreed to vote with President Mitterrand and other EC leaders to fix a date before the end of next year for the special conference of EC governments to begin drawing up a new treaty.
With the remaining doubters now likely to join the majority, Mrs Thatcher seems certain to end up in a minority of one in opposing the conference.
The significance of the conference has been increased by moves this week in the European Parliament to consider changes in the Rome treaty beyond economic and monetary union.
There is growing support for giving the European Parliament greater powers as part of an overhaul of all the community's decision-making institutions.
Meanwhile, European monetary experts fear that sterling's latest slide will strengthen Mrs Thatcher's determination to delay joining the exchange rate mechanism of the EMS.
The most she is expected to do is use slightly more positive words about Britain's aims.
Unification link, page 8; Pound sags, page 11; A bloc to do business with, page 19
Health changes to cost £217m.
By David Brindle, Social Services Correspondent
THE Government's shake-up of the National Health Service will add at least £217 million to its annual costs and require 4,000 extra administrators.
The official figures were revealed yesterday in the bill setting out the NHS proposals and the legislative changes for the community care white paper proposals, published last week.
Health ministers have denied that the market principles to be introduced into the NHS will mean an avalanche of bureaucracy and thousands more accountants.
But the health bill admits to a permanent increase, estimated to be 3,000, in the number of specialist staff in hospitals, including finance, personnel and information technology staff.
In addition an extra 835 staff will be needed by health and prescription authorities, as well as‘a small increase’ in central government staff.
The annual costs estimate includes £155 million for a ‘strengthening of management at all levels,’ £10.5 million to pay members of health authorities, £15.6 million for administering general practitioner budgets, and £3.3 million for computers to monitor drugs spending.
The bill says the costs will be outweighed by the benefits of a more efficient NHS.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, Health Secretary, promised more government funding, less waste and a better service for patients.
He said that far from privatising the health service, he was aiming to ‘pose a very real problem for the private sector and serious competition for them’.
The British Medical Association said the bill failed to offer people the assurances they wanted.
Dr John Marks, BMA president, said: ‘The public knows something nasty is going to happen to their health service, and here it is.’
The 60-clause health bill contrasted starkly with a second bill of only one clause tabled yesterday on plans for student loans.
Its lack of detail provoked considerable protest.
Details, page 6
Dubcek urges Communist hardliners to stand down.
By Michael Simmons in Prague
CZECHOSLOVAKIA'S former reformist leader, Mr Alexander Dubcek, yesterday promised to meet anti-government protesters in Prague during the coming days and urged beleaguered Communist leaders to resign.
For the third day running, 200,000 or more blocked the centre of Prague, cheering Mr Dubcek's call on the hardline leadership to quit.
The demonstrators came despite pelting snow and rumours that tanks and armoured vehicles were lurking on the city outskirts.
There were warnings from the capital's Communist Party leader, Mr Miroslav Stepan, that ‘armed units’ of the People's Militia, the party's paramilitary force, were standing by.
Mr Vaclav Havel, the playwright, greeted the rally from the balcony of a newspaper office.
He announced to cheers that he had written to Presidents Gorbachev and Bush seeking support for what has been called Prague's polite revolution.
He also said he had exchanged messages of support with New Forum in East Germany, Solidarity in Poland, the Democratic Forum in Hungary, Ecoglasnost in Bulgaria, Free Romania and at least two groups in the Soviet Union.
The party leadership of Mr Milos Jakes was still clinging to the hope that it could separate ‘the workers’ from ‘the intellectuals’, he said.
The People's Militia has been busy ripping down posters put up by the Civic Forum in factories and elsewhere.
They may yet have a marginal impact on the projected two-hour general strike, planned for next Monday, but by then it may already be too late to matter.
The strike is to last a maximum of two hours.
Ambulance workers will be exempt.
The stoppage is being organised by factory committees.
Mr Jakes will face his toughest test yet when he confronts an emergency meeting of the central committee this week.
It is not impossible, in this highly charged atmosphere, that the party leader will be replaced by the weekend.
Each demonstration this week has shown an increase in confidence which it will be very difficult to stop.
Mr Stepan's references to ‘criminalised elements taking advantage of a destabilised situation’, like Mr Jakes's references to ‘ruthless manipulators’ sound oddly out of date.
Yesterday, Mr Dubcek's name was chanted at least as loudly as it was in the same square over 21 years ago.
Most of those who shouted ‘Long live Dubcek’ were not even born in 1968.
The old party leader with the enigmatic smile is 67 and has become a person of greater symbolic significance than of real political potential.
He appeared in his home town of Bratislava yesterday to attend the staged trial of Mr Jan Czarnogursky for anti-state activities and was greeted by thousands outside the courthouse.
No policeman seemed brave enough to bar his way.
Thousands of demonstrators turned out in the streets of Bratislava last night in what was said to be the biggest demonstration there in decades.
Participants said the city's main square was filled to capacity.
Factory workers threatened strikes and voiced solidarity with the striking students, while leading actors and actresses read out lists of demands for greater democracy.
Hundreds of television employees said they would strike if prevented from reporting the demonstration.
Mr Czarnogursky faces a Turn to page 20, col 3
Dubcek urges Communist hardliners to stand down continued from page one possible five-year jail term on charges of sedition in what is being seen as a test case of the regime's genuine commitment to a dialogue with the opposition.
Thousands ringed the court building to demand the release of Mr Czarnogursky.
There have been several protest meetings in the city every day this week, though not on the scale of the Prague protest.
Leading opposition figures in Bratislava say that they would like to see Mr Dubcek return to active, official politics.
They suggest that he could become the country's national president in any strongly reformist administration that might emerge.
A message from Mr Dubcek to the crowd in Prague, read by the economist who advised him in 1968, called for the resignation of all those in the present leadership who were resposible for the invasion and its aftermath.
Mr Jakes, it is not forgotten, purged 600,000 from the 1.5million party and many more from other sensitive positions.
Their children are still paying for their parents' ‘sins’.
Long after the demonstration ended, groups of demonstrators, each of several hundred and some of a few thousand, were dotted about the square, cheering and chanting.
The demonstration itself was filmed live by Czechoslovak television — itself a highly significant breakthrough.
Tough realities, page 8; Leader comment, page 18
Driver averts tanker disaster.
The driver of a 5,000-gallon tanker, Darren Rushton, of Stoke-on-Trent, raced to warn three people in a cafe as burning fuel poured towards them when his vehicle exploded after a collision outside Oldbury oil terminal, West Midlands.
They reached safety seconds before the cafe was engulfed in flames.
Broadcast warning.
Powers claimed by the Home Secretary to intervene over the content of programmes would radically alter the constitution of broadcasting, Mr Anthony Lester, QC, told the Court of Appeal yesterday in winding up an appeal against the High Court refusal to outlaw restrictions on interviews with named groups, including Sinn Fein.
Judgment was reserved.
Welsh oil spill.
Anti-pollution vessels were last night tackling a mile-long oil slick after the 80,000-ton Texaco Westminster and a tug collided at Milford Haven.
Council uproar.
A Kensington and Chelsea council meeting was suspended and police called last night during uproar over plans to redevelop Portobello Road market when a motion to shelve plans pending consultation was voted down after stall-holders presented an opposition petition.
Mothers' campaign.
The Pre-School Playgroups Association yesterday launched a nationwide campaign to provide facilities so mothers can return to work.
Murder hunt.
A murder hunt was launched yesterday after a body, believed to be that of Monica Cantwell, aged 24, from Lingfield, Surrey, was found in New Zealand.
Listeria cases increase.
The number of listeria cases rose by a quarter in the first six months of this year, Dr Diane Roberts, of the Central Public Health Laboratory, told a London conference yesterday.
Help line for pensioners.
A group of charities yesterday launched the Winter Warmth Line telephone advice service for pensioners.
Doctor to be struck off.
London sex therapist Dr Brian Richards, convicted in the US of trying to have his partner killed, was yesterday found guilty of serious professional misconduct by the professional conduct committee of the General Medical Council, who ordered his name struck off.
Brown claims that Government has not faced the failures of the present Labour's ‘quack’ cures will damage patient — Ridley Queen's speech debate.
Paul Nettleton.
MR NICHOLAS Ridley defended the absence of any industry bills in the Queen's speech yesterday, saying the strength, success and increased productivity of manufacturers made legislation unnecessary.
But his Shadow, Mr Gordon Brown, said the Trade and Industry Secretary had taken his new cabinet post not to complete ‘unfinished business’, but to finish the department.
Mr Ridley said that manufacturing output was now at a record level — 12 per cent higher than in 1979, and 6 per cent higher than the previous all-time peak in 1974, and accused Labour politicians of being like ‘quack doctors’— claiming the country was ill and prescribing a cure that in reality would only make the country worse off.
Labour's proposed interventionist role for the DTI sounded depressingly familiar.
He recalled the Department of Economic Affairs and the National Enterprise Board.
‘Where did they leave British industry?
Demoralised, shabby and afraid, stifled and battered by government strategies and priorities, and more and more subsidies.’
Turning to Europe, Mr Ridley said that the Government was pressing other EC countries to reduce their industrial subsidies, for this was at the heart of a genuine single market after 1992.
He said Labour would be denied the opportunity to re-erect the interventionist policies promised in the policy review.
‘To do so would run into deep trouble.
The European Commission are working for radical cuts leading to abolition of subsidies throughout the Community and we strongly support their efforts.
We shall join them in trying to root out open and covert subsidies on the Continent which work against the principle of the single market and which put British firms at a disadvantage.’
Mr Brown claimed that the Government had failed to face the failures of the present, let alone the challenges of the future.
Mr Ridley should have said he would learn from the failure of a consumer and credit-based boom, end the exclusive reliance on interest rates that so damaged the industries he was supposed to represent.
He should ask the Prime Minister to open negotiations to enter the Exchange Rate Mechanism, and ensure a proper balance between consumption and investment to guarantee the long-term future of British industry.
Mr Brown added to this list investment in training, research, technology, innovation, and in the regions.
He mocked the Trade and Industry Department as ‘the department of abandoned responsibilities — not the business that likes to say yes, but the department that loves to say no.’
Deploring Britain's trade deficit, now approaching £20 billion, he said we were now in deficit with 76 countries, including Chile, Peru, East Germany, and Poland.
We were in surplus with a few, including Bulgaria, Vatican City and Andorra.
‘We are in deficit, unfortunately, with all the major trading nations of the world with the exception of Canada.
New products are invented in Britain…but developed in Germany and Japan, and mass produced in Korea, Singapore and Taiwan.’
The Government's response, he said, was to threaten to privatise the Export Credit Guarantee Department, cut support to small firms and cut the availability of export services to many businesses.
Mr Brown said Britain had become ‘the take-over capital of Europe,’ with a government which refused to help companies in trouble from asset strippers and junk-bond take overs.
Liberal Democrat spokesman Mr Malcolm Bruce said his party had now been completely vindicated in its opposition to nuclear power.
‘Billions of pounds have been squandered that could have been invested in energy conservation and the development of alternatives.’
If the Government wanted to have an effective environmental policy, it would have to put up the money.
‘It would be nice to know where the greenbacks are that will fulfil the Government's promises,’ he said.
Labour's new environment spokesman, Mr Bryan Gould, attacked the price of shares in the water privatisation, saying it showed that the Government was prepared to accept on behalf of the taxpayer a loss of at least £1.3 billion in order to sell off the water industry.
The Environment Secretary, Mr Chris Patten, said the new green bill would set in place the most sophisticated and comprehensive pollution control regulations anywhere.
‘Industry shouldn't be seen as the problem but as a major part of the solution to environmental improvement,’ he said.
‘There's a world market of over £100 million a year in clean technology and I want to see British industry winning a much larger share of it.’
The debate continues today with home affairs as the main topic.
Whitelaw warns on hasty bills.
By Alan Travis and Patrick Wintour
LORD Whitelaw, the former deputy prime minster, warned yesterday of the danger of producing low-quality acts of parliament by overloading the 15-bill Queen's Speech programme with additional ‘instant legislation’.
Last year's programme began with 16 bills in the Queen's Speech, but ended with 33 Government measures being enacted.
Lord Whitelaw observed that there was greater pressure for bills in recent years, but said ministers had to remember that the quality of the legislation was of the utmost importance.
He told a Westminster press gallery lunch that the problem was not the properly prepared Queen's Speech programme of bills, but the demand for instant legislation following a serious event, with ministers being deemed failures if they did not promise a new bill.
‘Nobody stops to consider the problems of drafting, or whether the new act of parliament is the best way of dealing with the problem at hand,’ he said.
The result is a hastily produced bill, heavily amended to correct its mistakes.
An example of an ‘instant’ bill in the last session was the one abolishing the dock labour scheme, which sparked a national dock strike.
The other danger arose from Government departments squeezing a small bill into the Queen's Speech: ‘They say it is just two or three little clauses and…it immediately turns out that the process is not nearly as simple as was promised.
It leads to ill-informed and ill-prepared new clauses and amendments which…then have to be amended again.’
as if to illustrate Lord Whitelaw's point, an hour later Mr Nicholas Ridley, the Trade and Industry Secretary, announced a bill not contained in the Queen's Speech.
It will prevent brewers from evicting publicans in tied houses if they sell one ‘guest beer’.
Delay over news code of practice.
By Georgina Henry Media Correspondent
THE simultaneous publication by national newspapers of a common code of practice and declaration of principles was postponed last night after the chairman and editors of Express Newspapers decided that they needed more time to examine the proposals.
National newspapers had been expected to publish the declaration, code, and announcement of a system of readers' representatives to take up complaints from the public in today's newspapers.
This followed a meeting on Tuesday between editors and representatives of national newspapers, which reached broad agreement on the measures they should take to meet public and parliamentary criticism of the standards of the press.
It appeared that other newspapers had been ready to publish the proposals which had been finalised by Mr Andreas Whittam Smith, editor of the Independent, after Tuesday's meeting, which he chaired.
Confusion over whether Mr Robert Maxwell, publisher of Mirror Group Newpapers, also had reservations were dismissed by him last night.
‘I would sign it immediately.
I am waiting for the editor of the Independent to authorise its release,’ he said yesterday.
‘There are some suggestions I made for changes but this would not prevent me signing it.
There is no dissent.’
Mr Maxwell said that his alterations — which he would make for publication in his newspapers — were to substitute the term ombudsman for readers' representatives and to widen the clause in the code of practice which refers to non-payment of criminals to include those benefiting from a criminal act.
He also believed that the proprietor should be the arbitrator of how the proposals operated, but that this would not undermine the role of the Press Council as final arbitrator.
‘Anyone who says I won't allow the Press Council to play its proper role is crackers,’ he added.
Last night Mr Nick Lloyd, editor of the Daily Express, who had not been present at Tuesday's meeting, said that the editors of Express Newspapers — the Daily and Sunday Express and the Star — and the publisher, Lord Stevens, had not had time to look closely at the proposals.
They would be meeting today to consider them.
‘What's the rush?
We don't want to leap into this without being totally sure that every point is acceptable,’ he said.
‘There is no reason why these proposals should be published this week or even next week, although obviously it would be sensible to publish them soon.’
This did not mean that he and his colleagues were opposed to the plan.
‘But we just want to think it through.
The first I knew about the plan to publish it in the newspapers tomorrow was a fax at midday today.’
Cash offer to HIV haemophiliacs.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
THE Government is expected today to announce extra money for the 1,200 haemophiliacs infected with the HIV virus as a result of contaminated blood transfusions.
A delegation of five Conservative MPs yesterday met the Prime Minister and left Downing Street convinced they had made ‘enormous progress’ in persuading Mrs Thatcher to make a one-off ex-gratia payment to the victims.
Although the parliamentary campaign, backed by 350 MPs of all parties, originally asked for £100 million to help the victims, the demands have been scaled down.
The MPs who saw Mrs Thatcher for half an hour were yesterday talking in terms of £20 million to £30 million being made available.
‘If we get a figure of that magnitude it will be a substantial victory,’ said Mr John Hannam, chairman of the all-party disablement group, and MP for Exeter.
‘I am just so relieved we are on the verge of getting a much more sensible system of payment to them after all this time.’
Miss Emma Nicholson, MP for Devon West, a member of the delegation, said that would work out at about £20,000 for each victim.
The Government up to now has ruled out direct compensation for the 1,200 haemophiliacs, 200 of whom are children.
So far 102 people have died.
The Government did give a £10 million grant to the McFarlane charitable trust to meet the health and domestic needs of the victims.
So far £1 million has been paid out on the basis of need.
The money announced today would be a one-off payment made automatically to the victims which would not imply any acceptance of liability on the part of the Government.
‘This does not affect any claims for compensation.
Each person must be free to pursue their own case,’ said Miss Nicholson.
Action ‘soon’ on boat people Lords debate.
Martin Linton.
THE Government will soon have to tackle the thorny question of the ‘involuntary repatriation’ of Vietnamese boat people, Lord Brabazon of Tara, the Foreign Office Minister of State, told the House of Lords yesterday.
The 57,000 boat people in Hong Kong are taxing the colony's resources and nearly 90 per cent of new arrivals are unlikely to qualify as refugees, he said in the second day's debate on the Queen's speech.
‘Unless action is taken more will continue to arrive — to be wretched and disappointed in their turn.
The only humane solution is for those who are not genuine refugees to return to Vietnam,’ he added.
In a wide-ranging foreign affairs debate he reaffirmed the Government's ‘total rejection of the Khmer Rouge’ and announced humanitarian aid for Cambodia and a visit by British officials to Phnom Penh.
He welcomed the rapid changes taking place in Eastern Europe but said Britain still needed a strong and united Nato.
‘We must also avoid offering any challenge to legitimate Soviet security interests,’ he said.
Lord Cledwyn, the Opposition leader in the Lords, warned that destabilisation of Warsaw Pact countries might see history repeating itself in the balkanisation of Eastern Europe and in ethnic and territorial disputes.
Britain should pursue disarmament negotiations with greater urgency and greater hope of success.
There was a case now for adding short-range nuclear weapons to the agenda, he said.
For the Liberal Democrats, Lord Bonham Carter agreed that Britain's response to events must not appear to threaten the security of the Soviet Union or attempt to dissolve the Warsaw Pact.
Lord Home, the former Conservative prime minister, said if Mr Gorbachev's reforms were to show results, an enormous programme of reconstruction on the scale of the Marshall Plan after the second world war would be required.
That would be much more likely if Mr Gorbachev could reduce his conventional forces and weaponry in the Warsaw Pact.
Lord Callaghan, the former Labour prime minister, called for an all-European conference through a revival of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Helsinki in 1973-1977 which could mark the beginning of what he called ‘a new Concert of Europe’ setting a new political framework.
Violence and poll-rigging mar Indian election Indian election.
Derek Brown and Ajoy Bose in Faridabad, Haryana.
NEARLY half a billion Indian voters yesterday started to choose their next government, in a general election clouded by violence and charges of poll-rigging.
At least 37 deaths were reported on the first of three days of polling.
Many of the killings were in Haryana, where rival groups fought with guns and stones.
There were also several incidents in the same state of booth-capturing: gangs of thugs taking over polling stations and stuffing the ballot box with votes for their favoured candidates.
In Amethi, the constituency of the Prime Minister, Mr Rajiv Gandhi, in the next state of Uttar Pradesh, his main opponent demanded a second poll in one area.
Mr Rajmohan Gandhi (no relation to the Prime Minister), a grandson of Mahatma Gandhi and candidate for the opposition Janata Dal party, accused the police of helping the ruling Congress party to intimidate voters.
Mr Rajmohan Gandhi made his demand after another leading Janata Dal politician, Mr Sanjay Singh, was shot and wounded in Amethi.
Last night, national officials of Janata Dal backed the call for the Amethi election to be declared void.
They also demanded a second poll in the East Delhi constituency, where they alleged ‘massive poll-rigging and booth-capturing’ by Congress.
The charges and the violence were far from one-sided.
In Congress-ruled Gujarat, on the west coast, the state Health Minister, Mr Vallabhbhai was attacked at a meeting on Tuesday and died yesterday in hospital.
In Haryana, the worst affected constituency, Bhiwani, saw pitched battles between Congress and opposition supporters which left three dead and scores injured.
The opposition candidate, Mr Dharam Vir, was charged yesterday with the murder of a Congress worker.
Elsewhere in the state, two women were killed by gunfire.
In the southern district of Faridabad there were visible pockets of tension, in spite of a strong presence of police and paramilitary forces.
After one outbreak of fighting, the main road running through the village of Rewasan was littered with bricks and stones.
Mr Abdul Rehman, the local polling agent for Janata Dal, told how his supporters had been attacked by a marauding band of Congress workers, some of them with guns.
‘We were outnumbered, but we threw stones back at them and drove them away,’ he said.
The lone, unarmed, constable on guard could only close the polling station.
Five hours later, when police reinforcements finally arrived, the booth was still firmly closed.
Only 120 of the 820 electors had been able to vote.
Incidents of ballot-stuffing were reported from all over India.
It is now up to the Election Commission to decide whether the frauds will, in effect, cancel each other out, or whether new polls should be ordered.
In spite of the sporadic violence and cries of foul, polling was largely orderly.
A moderate to heavy turnout was reported from the 15 states and six union territories which voted yesterday.
The rest of India will vote tomorrow or Sunday.
Dusty answers, page 10
NEC approves strategy plan.
By Patrick Wintour
THE Labour Party National Executive yesterday endorsed a campaigning strategy for the next year in which the party will seek to popularise its policy review while focusing its opposition to the Government on health, the economy, the poll tax, teacher shortages, and transport.
The NEC heard details of research showing the party had won the trust of the public on the economy, but still needed a clearer positive identity.
A paper by Mr Peter Mandelson, the party's Director of Communications, said that the economy, industry and developments in Europe were likely to form the election battle ground.
The NEC refused to endorse Mr Brian Green as candidate for St Helens South in place of Mr Gerry Bermingham the sitting MP.
By Patrick Wintour
THE Labour Party National Executive yesterday endorsed a campaigning strategy for the next year in which the party will seek to popularise its policy review while focusing its opposition to the Government on health, the economy, the poll tax, teacher shortages, and transport.
The NEC heard details of research showing the party had won the trust of the public on the economy, but still needed a clearer positive identity.
A paper by Mr Peter Mandelson, the party's Director of Communications, said that the economy, industry and developments in Europe were likely to form the election battle ground.
The NEC refused to endorse Mr Brian Green as candidate for St Helens South in place of Mr Gerry Bermingham the sitting MP.
President dies in car bomb blast after only 17 days in office Arab League close to despair Lebanon leader killed.
By David Hirst in Jerusalem
LEBANON'S new president, Mr Rene Muawad, died yesterday in a huge car-bomb explosion after 17 days in office.
It is a devastating blow to the latest Arab League peace plan, which — with parliament's adoption of political and constitutional reforms and the election of the new president — had come to embody perhaps the most serious attempt of its kind to end the 14 ½-year war.
‘Where do we turn now?’ an official at the Tunis headquarters of the Arab League asked.
‘It's a tragedy.
Whenever we take one step forward, we take five steps back,’ said another.
However, Lebanese observers say this blow is unlikely to lead to an immediate resumption of the war between the Christian leader, General Michel Aoun, and the Syrians and their Lebanese Muslim allies.
More likely, for the time being, is a return to political and constitutional deadlock — though with full and final partition of the fragmented country looming larger than ever.
A car rigged with an estimated 330lbs of explosive ripped through Muawad's motorcade as it passed through the Sanaya district of the predominantly Muslim West Beirut.
Unable to take up residence in the Baabda palace occupied by Gen Aoun, this was where he had been conducting his consultations for the formation of a government of national unity.
Twenty-three people were killed, including several Syrian and Lebanese soldiers.
Mangled remains were hurled 500 yards down the road.
Amidst scenes of carnage it was more than two hours before Muawad's death was officially announced.
A police officer said his corpse was so charred and mutilated that it took more than an hour to identify it.
Announcing the assassination, the Prime Minister, Mr Salim al-Hoss, levelled no specific accusation.
‘Let the criminal know,’ he said, ‘that hands can assassinate a great soul like that of the martyr, Muawad, but they cannot assassinate the enormous national faith which Muawad brought to the presidency.’
Inevitably Gen Aoun is the culprit as far as Syria is concerned.
‘This ugly crime against the Lebanon and its legitimacy followed a series of threats by the rebellious officer,’ the official Syrian news agency said.
But it is always unwise to jump to conclusions about Lebanese atrocities.
This one does seem to be a great boost to Gen Aoun, who stood in lonely defiance of the Arab and international communities, his Muslim compatriots, and many in his own Maronite enclave.
His interim military cabinet said it held an emergency meeting ‘to examine initial information about the ugly crime’.
‘The cabinet expresses its deep regret for the assassination of one of north Lebanon's most distinguished leaders.’
Some Lebanese argue that Gen Aoun's Syrian adversaries could benefit from the assassination.
Hardly had Muawad been elected than they detected signs that the Syrians were less than eager to give him the support he needed to impose his authority on the whole country.
There is a theory that the Syrians favour the perpetuation of the Aoun regime to give them a pretext for keeping an undiminished presence in the country.
The assassination may only have accelerated the inexorable drift towards partition.
For even before it, the new president's attempts to form a government of national unity had been faltering, thanks mainly to Gen Aoun's opposition.
But now all those Arab and Western powers that had invested such hopes in the plan will find it hard to sustain even a pretence that it remains a realistic proposal.
Only three days ago the American ambassador to Lebanon — who had evacuated his embassy, situated in Gen Aoun's enclave, last September — paid a one-day visit from Washington to the Syrian-controlled north Lebanon to present his credentials to the new president.
The ambassador called his election ‘the most important’ achievement of the Lebanon's long ordeal.
‘It seems to us that like great ships you are in fact approaching the end of the storm.’
He expressed surprise that the Lebanese Forces militia, Gen Aoun's ally, had not thrown its weight behind the new regime.
East Beirut officials and press called that a flagrant interference in the Lebanon's affairs, which could only strengthen Gen Aoun.
Among the Arabs, Saudi Arabia, which had invested great prestige in the plan, has suffered the biggest setback.
Arab peacemakers will presumably seek to find a successor to Muawad.
The Algerian foreign minister has said that the swift election of a successor would ‘show those who oppose national harmony that their enterprise is bound to fail’.
But with the process of assembling Lebanon's surviving deputies so difficult last time, a repeat performance seems impossible.
Christian leaders who had been thinking of it have been backing off.
Fear of meeting Muawad's fate will surely diminish any would-be successor's ambition.
Syrians blame Aoun, page 10; Obituary, page 39
COMMENT THE GUARDIAN Thursday November 23 1989 A great bet in a big bucket.
YESTERDAY's water privatisation is the taxpayer's bequest to the share punter.
And generous to a fault.
The Government is offering shares to investors at 240p each, which values the industry at £5.24 billion.
But since it has already written off £5 billion worth of debts and thrown in an extra £1.6 billion ‘green dowry’, that means that the entire industry — with thousands of miles of pipework, reservoirs, leisure land, sewage works and so forth— is being given away for minus £1.4 billion.
The shares are extremely good value for investors, short of a stock market apocalypse.
They offer (for a safe monopoly) a very attractive average yield of 8.5 per cent, with scope for capital appreciation and perks (one free share for 10) for those investing in their local company.
Since only a part of the purchase price has to be put down now, this represents a likely return on capital of over 20 per cent in the first year.
This is not the proverbial free lunch.
It is a massive redistribution of wealth from one owner (the Government, on behalf of everyone in the country) to a much narrower segment of the population (the 4 to 5 million likely to take up the offer) who will be able to buy the assets at a discount.
The losers are those who, for reasons of poverty or principle, decline to partake.
In financial terms the sale will be justified if private sector ownership improves efficiency by more than the huge point-of-sale loss to the Government plus the £175 million or so privatisation costs.
That will be an uphill battle, and difficult to prove anyway, because the industry under private ownership needs to earn a higher return on capital — by several percentage points — than in public ownership to attract shareholders.
So it has to improve its efficiency by a considerable amount just to stand still.
And in any case the main gains to efficiency will come not from privatisation, but from the legal necessity imposed by the EC (which would have happened anyway) to invest £25 billion over 10 years to bring water up to drinkable standards.
Anyone who can separate the gains from the ‘dynamics’ of privatisation from those arising from capital investment or the companies' success in manipulating the pricing formula will deserve free water for life.
However, whether necessary or not, privatisation must be made to work.
Water is a precious commodity too long taken for granted in the West.
All the fresh water in the world's lakes and streams represents barely 0.01 per cent of the earth's total store of water, which is mainly saline.
It is a shrinking resource badly distributed around the earth's crust, as yesterday's warning of a continuing severe shortage in the south of England reminds us.
As well as generators of rising dividends, the new water companies are custodians of one of the most vital resources on earth.
They must never be allowed to forget that..
Prague promises.
THERE WILL be no massacre; there will be no martial law.
Yesterday the Czech demonstrators were anxiously weighing Tuesday's assurance from Prime Minister Vladislav Adamec against the indications of an unresolved struggle within the leadership.
The Beijing massacre, after all, was preceded by just such a struggle.
For entirely practical reasons, Mr Adamec's view ought to prevail.
Most of the Czech Politburo consists of people who were ‘voted in by tanks’ in 1968.
A few days ago they were handed the Moscow black spot in the form of an invitation to reconsider history.
An island of Czech reaction cannot survive among its metamorphosed neighbours for more than a geopolitical instant.
The struggle has been between the Czech people and the security apparatus behind the Communist party.
If the army could not do the job unaided twenty years ago, it is even less likely to get involved now.
The Brezhnev Doctrine is dead: long live the Gorbachev Doctrine of the Soviet Union as just another European power, only bigger, which lets its neighbours go their own way.
It is all happening too fast for us to take anything quite for granted, neither becoming blase about the sight of ossified regimes crumbling at the knees, nor entirely ruling out the thought of some treacherous counter-current.
But we are very close now to the critical turning-point after which the political scene in Prague could be as rapidly transformed as among its neighbours.
If the leading dissident Mr Vaclev Havel is right, the current power struggle is not whether to resist change but who should succeed Mr Milos Jakes.
And with the force of example elsewhere, can the party will maintain its primacy for long?
The lingering conventional truths — that the Czech economy would be strong enough to cushion dissent, that the opposition does not have a sufficiently coherent voice — already look thin.
Mr Havel's Civic Forum may be some way behind East Germany's New Forum, but it can draw upon a reservoir of informally networked dissent which dates back more than a decade.
And if the miners of northern Bavaria do respond to the strike call for next Monday, the regime's social contract with them will be shattered.
As the tide sweeps on, the sight of President Ceausescu being applauded 67 times at his party congress — while Mrs Ceausescu sat in grim solitude — only highlights the increasingly anachronistic character of this European North Korea.
In Bucharest as in Pyongyang, it may well be that severe repression can in the first instance only be challenged by a well-aimed bullet.
But once the West no longer needed Mr Ceausescu's anti-Soviet services, his policy of deliberate isolation narrowed his options and led earlier this year to the first signs of internal party dissent.
Retracing the route from Berlin to Beijing — for let us not forget where people's power first flourished this year -we find a even more isolated regime with yet fewer options.
How long can it remain immune as the voices echo back from Eastern Europe?.
One loan clause.
MR CEAUCESCU, meanwhile, may have changed address.
He seems to be living in the Department of Education.
Yesterday the Department issued its student loans bill.
And how long was this measure, designed to embrace the principles of 48 pages of white paper and some 68 pages of analysis in two specially-commissioned Price Waterhouse reports?
Just four clauses.
Even that is a fourfold exaggeration of length.
There is only a solitary enabling clause.
As Jack Straw, the Labour Education spokesman, noted yesterday, this would be a constitutional outrage even in Romania.
How on earth does Parliament scrutinise an Act with only one clause?
No way.
What is the Government up to?
Alas, it is flying by the seat of its pants.
This student loans scheme has degenerated into open shambles.
That it would be unpopular with students or colleges was obvious.
But HMG totally underestimated the coolness of the banks.
From the beginning, they have been collectively unconvinced of the commercial value of the plan.
Three have already refused to take part.
With students threatening to run a Barclays-style boycott against any that participate, stand by for more to pull out.
Students are regarded by the banks as the ripest harvest of all: the people who will be earning the highest balances in the future and who are likely to stay loyal for life once signed up.
Why start on the wrong foot as collaborators in unpopular and spatchcock loans?
The best thing that could happen now would be for the scheme to be killed by another backbench Tory revolt, like the rebellion which quashed Sir Keith Joseph's 1985 effort to make student fees income-related.
There is the same motivation.
The new scheme will certainly hurt middle-income parents, with the present level of grant frozen until loans (or a combination of loans and parental contributions) make up 50 per cent of student finance.
But it will cause even more damage to low income parents, the very homes from which ministers had hoped to attract more students to achieve their target of doubling the proportion of children going to college by 2014.
This is simply perverse.
Only eight per cent of children from low income families (in the Registrar General's social classes four and five) go to university, even though they are guaranteed a free education through a full grant plus social security.
Now they are to lose their income support and housing benefit and allowed to borrow £420 a year at inflation-rate interest.
Some incentive.
It can only reduce student numbers and make our education system more unequal.
It should shrivel in ineptitude..
Prime target.
ONE Stalkinghorse cantered to the starting gate yesterday; though, in the most congenial of mixed metaphors, Sir Anthony Meyer prefers to call himself a ‘burnt offering.’
He'll stand against Mrs Thatcher for the Tory leadership next month unless somebody else (Stalkinghorse 2; a medium rare slice of rump) slips out of the deep freeze paddock.
And that should now happen.
Sir Anthony is a disenchanted maverick of a wet and is not best placed to present a fair test of backbench opinion.
No chance of a Stalkinghorse winning, but a nag from the heart of the party, who manifests — in votes and abstentions — the coronary palpitations of the 1922 Committee, is called for.
The unease is not secret.
The issues are mostly in the open.
The fears of a dominant personality, away from the core of traditional values, driving the enterprise on to the electoral rocks, are manifest in speeches and in countless polls of public opinion.
And there is an obvious point of principle.
The Conservative Party has a fixed framework for the election of leaders.
The Party, and its current Leader, firmly believe in such elections.
(If they didn't, Mr Edward Heath would be a much happier man.)
Further, the Leader herself has spent many toiling hours of late calling on the peoples of Eastern Europe to hold elections and thereby demonstrate their attachment to the fundamentals of democracy.
What is sauce for Egon Krenz is just as much sauce for Mrs Margaret Thatcher.
Of course, a vote is all very tedious, and will be ritually accompanied by the most ferocious pressures upon this beleaguered electoral college.
Conservative MPs who know what a party election is like do not relish the sheer nastiness that accompanies it.
But the fury and the knife-work should be constrained.
Sir Anthony, boldly, with little to lose, is willing to provide a focal point for discussion and decision on absolutely legitimate matters of political concern.
He modestly and realistically hopes a better candidate can be found.
But he thinks, in present circumstances, that a straightforward test provides the best way of clearing the air.
That is the democratic way; and an embarrassed Conservative hierarchy should never forget it.
Letters to the Editor
Education teaches students how to manage their overdraft.
By David Ward, Northern Education Correspondent With pix by Denis Thorpe ‘M.
OST students don't wake up till they are half way through the second year,’ said Paul Davies with the weary air of a man staring post-graduation penury in the face.
Paul, a third-year English student at Manchester Polytechnic, clearly despairs of his younger colleagues who leave home intent on making whoopee on a grant; he knows that it is almost inevitable that they will run smack into debt midway through their courses.
One floor down in the poly union's Mandela building, it was all studied unconcern.
‘I've got through my grant plus £500 of my savings this term,’ bragged Chris Singh, a first-year communications and media student with no regrets.
Who needs a loan when you can top up your income by despatch-riding in London at Christmas?
Look at it this way, said Chris's friend, Richard Lees.
Students should expect the Government to meet living costs, but not to cough up for the extra beer and nightclubbing which Richard regards as an important part of student life.
‘If you're not seen to go out a lot, you're a failure,’ he said.
Mike Carter is another solvent fresher: ‘It's so cheap here,’ he said.
‘The price of taxis and night clubs is astronomical in London.’
Loans seem irrelevant to him.
Okay, so his grant will be pegged at its 1990 level; but he can't see himself borrowing from the loan scheme introduced by the Government through the major banks.
He'll make do with his interest-free £250 overdraft from the listening bank.
But would he, out of solidarity with students opposed to loans, switch his account?
‘If I get the same deal as I'm getting now, I'll stick with the Midland,’ he said.
Chris Singh thought he might be tempted to borrow.
‘If I can take out a £420 loan and have ten years to pay it back, I'll just pick up the cheque and go out and get ratted,’ he said.
Back upstairs, Paul Davies and his third-year colleagues, Patrick Quigley (history) and Geoff Smith (English) were in despair over their finances.
Paul's bank now allows him £35 a week, and Geoff can withdraw no more than £40.
Patrick is allowed enough to cover his weekly rent and no more — so he works in Safeway for 16 hours a week.
‘I can't sleep at night because I'm worried: both about getting behind with my work, and about bouncing cheques,’ he said.
All three say the banks already have too much influence over students' lives, and that loans will strengthen the hold.
‘I saw my bank manager at the end of last year and she asked me why I was spending so much on food.
I told her I was a big chap,’ said Geoff (height — 6ft 2inch).
‘She told me I should find a rich girlfriend.
What kind of advice is that?’
Geoff spent the summer on a building site and will be back there as soon as finals are over.
It's the only certain way to pay off an overdraft which he expects by then to have topped £1,000.
He and his colleagues are convinced that loans will effect students' choice of courses.
‘The three of us are doing non-vocational courses,’ said Patrick.
‘If students are going to be landed with a debt at the end of three years, they are going to choose vocational courses so that they can be certain of getting a job when they graduate and so pay off the loan.’
‘The emphasis in working-class families will be on sons and daughters getting a career,’ added Paul Davies, ‘and that means courses like English will be left to students from middle-class families.’
Loans find no favour with Paul Scriven, president of the student union at Manchester Polytechnic, Britain's biggest.
‘We are spearheading a campaign here,’ he said.
‘I have written to the chairmen of all the big banks to tell them that we will run a campaign to urge all students to boycott all banks which take part in the loans scheme.
We also have to argue what loans will mean for higher education.
Robbins said that access should be based on intellectual ability, not on students’ ability to pay.
‘We are arguing not just for ourselves, but also for our younger brothers and sisters — and perhaps our own children.’
THE Tory MP Mr David Tredinnick (Bosworth) provoked fury from the Liberal Democrats during the Queen's speech debate when he accused them of ‘doughnutting’— sitting in a tight circle around their spokesman in order to give the impression on television that the Commons was full.
Thirteen of the 19 Liberal Democrat MPs were in the chamber — outnumbering both Tory and Labour MPs — and half of them had come in just to get on the cameras, he said.
MPs who had been waiting since the start of the debate didn't take kindly to ‘camera fodder’ coming in.
But the Liberal Democrats protested that their front bench spokesman had had to wait nearly five hours to be called by the Speaker instead of being called at the start of the debate like the Government and Opposition.
The former Liberal leader Mr David Steel said it was normal for MPs to support their party spokesman by coming into the chamber during his speech.
‘It is nothing whatever to do with the cameras which are in any case not allowed to pan along the benches.’
Water industry sale terms ‘an investor giveaway’.
By Patrick Donovan Industrial Correspondent
WATER shares last night soared to a premium of more than 20 per cent on the unofficial ‘grey market’ as it became clear that the privatisation is set to become the biggest investor give-away since the 1987 Stock Exchange crash.
Amid outcry from opposition politicians, ministers yesterday priced water shares in the 10 companies at 240p apiece, valuing the industry at £5.24 billion.
Announcing the terms for the December 12 Stock Exchange launch, the water minister, Mr Michael Howard, refused to accept that the Government will face a paper loss of more than £1.3 billion on the sell-off.
Mr Howard said this was a ‘misleading’ way to interpret the figures.
The Department of the Environment, however, has previously announced that the cost of preparing the industry for market sell-off by wiping off debt and meeting environmental standards will be around £6.6 billion.
With more than 4.3 million people registered for shares, ministers expect that at least one quarter of the entire flotation will be bought by small British investors.
If demand is greater than expected more shares can be clawed back from allocations earmarked for institutional and overseas investors.
This could give the British public just under half the 2,183 million shares on offer.
With the issue priced right at the bottom of market expectations, analysts last night forecast that shares will start trading at a hefty profit.
Together with the lower than expected flotation price, the 10 companies have been given an attractive yield averaging as much as 8.55 per cent.
But experts warned that any market fall could still jeopardise the first day's trading.
The level of shareholders' return varies according to the investment attraction of the various companies — from 8.10 per cent for highly rated Thames to 9.68 per cent for South West, hit by a series of pollution incidents.
I G Index, a firm of ‘financial bookmakers,’ was last night quoting a grey market price in water shares, showing gains of up to 21 per cent.
Best performers were Thames, Southern, Wessex, and Severn Trent.
The shadow Environment Secretary, Mr Bryan Gould, maintained water was being sold at a loss.
‘Every taxpayer is subsidising an unnecessary sell-off and then paying again when they get their water bill.’
Flotation terms were described as ‘a barrow-boy price’ by the GMB union yesterday.
In a statement, the union said: ‘This will encourage the worst type of speculation.
This is a terrible way to treat a vital public service.
The most likely outcome is that small investors will sell their shares very quickly, and the City institutions will mop up’.
Labour's water spokeswoman, Mrs Ann Taylor, also condemned the sell-off terms.
‘The Government is obviously extremely worried that they will not be able to sell these shares.’
The industry could also be hit by changes in European Commission pollution legislation, she said.
Flotation advisers revealed that investors will be able to apply for a minimum of £240 worth of the shares, with an initial instalment of £100.
Application forms must be in by Monday December 11.
Outlook, and further details, page 11; Leader comment, page 18
Pig drug faces US cancer ban.
By James Erlichman, Consumer Affairs Correspondent
ADRUG widely fed to British pigs, and often found in pork in shops, faces a ban by American health authorities because it is suspected of causing cancer.
The drug, sulphadimidine, a prescription antibiotic used to control epidemics of respiratory disease in closely packed pig units, has been heavily and widely misused by UK farmers.
But Mr Keith Meldrum, the Government's chief veterinary officer, said yesterday that there were no plans to ban farm use of sulphadimidine in the UK.
Efforts to reduce residues in pork products had been partially successful, and government scientists had studied and discounted US cancer concerns.
The US Food and Drug Administration announced earlier this month that it was likely to initiate a ban against farm use of the antibiotic — known as sulfamethazine in the US — because two laboratory studies linked it to thyroid cancer in rats and mice.
Residues of the antibiotic have been an apparent problem in UK farming for years.
Pig producers receive no EC subsidies, and depressed pork and bacon prices have meant some farmers have fallen into drug misuse to keep animals alive long enough to reach slaughter weight.
The Ministry of Agriculture's latest published studies show that more than a quarter of pig kidneys sampled in 1985 had residues of sulphadimidine at average levels 11 times higher than the Government's safety limits.
Mr Meldrum said that an education campaign among farmers had reduced the problem.
One sample in seven contained residues in 1986 and the level had fallen to one sample in 20 in the first eight months of this year.
The biggest problem has been the failure of farmers to stick to the requirement to withdraw the drug at least 10 days before pigs are slaughtered.
Residues in meat may also cause allergic reactions in sensitive people.
The alleged cancer risk found in the American studies was re-examined and rejected by the Committee on Toxicity, a panel of scientists who work jointly for the Ministry of Agriculture and the Department of Health.
Professor Richard Lacey, the Leeds University microbiologist who has been an outspoken critic of the Government on many food hygiene issues, also believes that sulphadimidine residues present little if any risk to consumers.
‘It is a drug used in medicine since 1935 and its serious side-effects are rare even when it is prescribed at high concentrations for long periods.
Either there is no cancer risk, or it is very small.’
But Dr Alan Long, an organic chemist who is research officer of the Vegetarian Society, said: ‘Sulphadimidine fed to pigs is made to a cheaper and less pure commerical grade, which is not identical to the human drug.’
Fighting to be god of the machine Commentary.
By Hugo Young
THE FINAL stage of television's take-over of British politics opens in the shadow of a paradox.
Television will infiltrate into the national consciousness even more copiously than is already the case the personalities of the two main party leaders.
Presidentialism will obtrude ever further into this supposedly parliamentary system, mitigated only by rare and welcome sightings of MPs never before displayed on the box.
And yet this is happening at a moment when the leaders in question stand exceptionally low in public esteem.
Each is in the same, painful fix.
Both Mrs Thatcher and Mr Kinnock are widely perceived to be liabilities to their parties.
More and more Conservatives, in and out of the House, are coming to believe that their chances at the election would be stronger under a different leader.
Fewer and fewer Labour people can any longer distract themselves from the common assertion that Mr Kinnock is surrounded by men who are more able and winning than he is.
Yet these are the two characters upon whom television will now confer a new and exalted benediction.
The television experiment will, among other things, be another interesting test of the medium's power to change existing reality.
It already seems obvious that Mr Kinnock will be the earliest beneficiary, and this for a simple reason.
It has little to do with the quality of his jokes or the televisual cut of his suiting, although adequate performance here is important.
What matters is that the Labour leader is suddenly there, reminding one how infrequently he has been there hitherto.
Compared with the Prime Minister, Mr Kinnock is hardly ever on the screen.
No law of equal time exists to ensure that he appears at as many international summits as she does.
I guess that over the last six years television has given him only a quarter of her exposure.
But in the House of Commons, equality suddenly descends.
Here is this man, never previously seen doing his public duty, always seen merely roaring at the Labour Party or being interviewed like any tuppeny-ha'penny minister, now occupying the despatch-box which is the only site that gives credibility to his claim to be a prime-minister-in-waiting.
At last Mr Kinnock achieves some formal stature, to match the fact that he will indisputably remain where he is.
Mrs Thatcher, on the other hand, gains little.
Arguably, she is already on the screen so much that further appearances only supplement the passionate irritation which she provokes even among those who have voted for her.
Also she is more vulnerable than she was.
Unlike Mr Kinnock, her confederate in unpopularity, she may face a challenge.
In only one circumstance, it seems to me, can such a challenge do the Conservative Party any good.
It needs to succeed, directly or indirectly, in ousting her.
For that to begin to come about, a challenger would need to attract at least 70 MPs to vote for him or abstain.
Sir Anthony Meyer does not look like the challenger, although this is a furtive world, where the unexpected might occur.
Unless someone more plausible comes forward, therefore, the challenge is likely to have two results.
First, a derisory vote, after a contest creating a lot of thoroughly unhelpful aggravation.
But second, enough of an overwhelming victory for the incumbent leader to rule out what has always been the more credible avenue through which change might occur: her own apprehension, reaching her by whatever means, that perhaps the time has come to quit — before the election rather than after it.
The case for her doing this, in the interests of the party, looks stronger after the Queen's Speech.
There has been a lot of theological argument about whether this programme constitutes Thatcherism or post-Thatcherism.
A shrewd retreat, as one sort of minister affirms.
Or proof of energies undimmed, as says the official line.
This seems an academic disputation compared with the salient fact that the programme, whichever way you look at it, would appear to have hardly a single vote in it.
Conceivably, the controls on litter and the promised crackdown on pollution will happen quickly enough to produce a political pay-off.
Maybe the Food Safety Bill will be useful damage-limitation: pre-empting public terror that almost nothing in the supermarket is safe to eat.
But look at the three vanguard social reforms through the eyes of a Conservative MP defending a small majority, and you will see naught for his comfort.
The reform of legal services, which may run into fiercer argument from the House of Lords than any measure for a decade, entirely passes the public by.
Unless they are unlucky, it will not touch even the fringe of their lives.
The contents of the Broadcasting Bill will, in the next two years, impinge only on two tiny elites: media people themselves, and the moguls who want to keep or buy a television station.
As for the reform of the National Health Service, it is already well established that every hour devoted to this subject plays into Labour's hands.
This is the measure of the legislative programme.
A lot of worthy efforts, from a Tory viewpoint, but creating more controversy than popular support: in a political context which may no longer fail to penalise such cavalier indifference to the priorities of the masses.
Beneath this programme, moreover, there beats the double anxiety about which the Queen had nothing important to say.
The irrelevance of new laws is accompanied by the alarming relevance of two old problems.
The laws are fairly insignificant when set beside the economic problem, and the near certainty that, even if all its present plans work out, the Government will be compelled to report a worse economic record in its third Parliament than its second.
If the interest rate treatment fails to work, and the failures of investment are added in, the record will look so spectacularly bad that the quality of Labour's promises will fade from the agenda.
It will be the prelude to the first election entirely focused on the record of the Government — and its all-mighty leader.
The second lurker is Europe: the issue which directly raises the problem of the leadership, and which will not go away.
This, as argued here before, is the one question capable of splitting the Tory Party, at least to the extent of creating factions with a passionate attachment to their prejudices, and no great reluctance to insist on them even at the cost of deep party division.
Mrs Thatcher's style almost obliges this division to get worse.
Unless she can find a concession to make, while terming the outcome victory, most Tories must be beginning to fear the worst.
We now watch these matters unfold, from a new seat at the ringside.
It is a long time since politics were more vibrant, at least for anyone who is not a professional Conservative.
For those who find themselves in that category, something extra is now needed, some adventitious stroke of fortune, something to upset the terms of the argument and create a world no longer dominated by a leader of proven unpopularity.
But will this goddess leave the machine?
Dubcek urges hardliners to stand down.
By Michael Simmons in Prague
CZECHOSLOVAKIA'S former reformist leader, Mr Alexander Dubcek, yesterday promised to meet anti-government protesters in Prague during the coming days and urged beleaguered Communist leaders to resign.
For the third day running, 200,000 or more blocked the centre of Prague, cheering Mr Dubcek's call on the hardline leadership to quit.
The demonstrators came despite pelting snow and rumours that tanks and armoured vehicles were lurking on the city outskirts.
There were warnings from the capital's Communist Party leader, Mr Miroslav Stepan, that ‘armed units’ of the People's Militia, the party's own paramilitary force, were standing by.
Mr Vaclav Havel, the playwright, greeted the rally from the balcony of an office.
He announced to cheers that he had written to Presidents Gorbachev and Bush seeking support for what has been called Prague's polite revolution.
He also said he had exchanged messages of support with New Forum in East Germany, Solidarity in Poland, the Democratic Forum in Hungary, Ecoglasnost in Bulgaria, Free Romania and at least two ‘independent’ groups in the Soviet Union.
The party leadership of Mr Milos Jakes was still clinging to the hope that it could separate ‘the workers’ from ‘the intellectuals’, he said.
The People's Militia has indeed been busy ripping down posters put up by the Civic Forum in factories and elsewhere.
They may yet have a marginal impact on the projected two-hour general strike, planned for next Monday, but by then it may already be too late to matter.
Monday's strike is to last a maximum of two hours.
Ambulance workers will be exempt.
The stoppage is being organised by factory committees.
Mr Jakes will face his toughest test yet when he confronts an emergency meeting of the central committee this week.
It is not impossible, in this highly charged atmosphere, that the party leader will be replaced by the weekend.
Each demonstration this week has shown an increase in confidence which it will now be very difficult to stop.
Mr Stepan's references to ‘criminalised elements taking advantage of a destabilised situation,’ like Mr Jakes's references to ‘ruthless manipulators’sound oddly out of date.
Yesterday, Mr Dubcek's name was chanted at least as loudly as it was in the same square over 21 years ago.
Most of those who shouted ‘Long live Dubcek’ were not even born in 1968.
The old party leader with the enigmatic smile is 67 and has become a person of greater symbolic significance than of real political potential.
He appeared in his home town of Bratislava yesterday to attend the staged trial of Mr Jan Czarnogursky for anti-state activities and was greeted by thousands who stood outside the courthouse.
No policeman seemed courageous enough to bar his way.
Thousands of demonstrators turned out in the streets of Bratislava last night in what was said to be the biggest demonstration there in decades.
Participants said the city's main square was filled to capacity.
Factory workers threatened industrial strikes and voiced solidarity with the striking students, while leading actors and actresses read out lists of demands for greater democracy.
Hundreds of television employees said they would strike if prevented from reporting the demonstration.
Mr Czarnogursky, meanwhile, faces a possible five-year jail term on charges of sedition in what is being seen as a test case of the regime's genuine commitment to a dialogue with the opposition.
Thousands ringed the court building to demand the release Turn to page 20, col 3
Dubcek urges Communist hardliners to stand down continued from page one of Mr Czarnogursky.
There have been several protest meetings in the city every day this week, though not on the scale of the Prague protest.
Leading opposition figures in Bratislava say that they would like to see Mr Dubcek return to active, official politics.
They suggest that he could become the country's national president in any strongly reformist administration that might emerge from the current upheaval.
A message from Mr Dubcek to the crowd in Prague, read by the economist who advised him in 1968, called for the resignation of all those in the present leadership who were resposible for the invasion and its aftermath.
Mr Jakes, it is not forgotten, purged 600,000 from the 1.5million party and many more from other sensitive positions.
Their children are still paying for their parents' ‘sins’.
Long after the afternoon demonstration ended, groups of demonstrators, each of several hundred and some of a few thousand, were dotted about the square, cheering and chanting.
The demonstration itself was filmed live by Czechoslovak television — itself a highly significant breakthrough.
After the demonstration, television film crew members, who only yesterday morning were reported to be ‘under surveillance,’ were lecturing to their own crowds of supporters.
Tough realities, page 8; Leader comment, page 18
Trippier tries to pacify conservation body over split.
By Paul Brown
SIR William Wilkinson, chairman of the Nature Conservancy Council, castigated the Government yesterday for its decision to dismember the council without consultation.
His complaint, at the annual meeting of the NCC, led to an intervention by Mr David Trippier, the Environment Minister.
Mr Trippier said the Government had the best interests of nature conservation at heart and invited the NCC council to meet him before the Government makes the reoganisation details public.
Sir William, who was expressing a personal view because of internal differences over the reorganisation, said that to split the NCC into three would remove a strategic overview in formulating national policies.
‘Separate country agencies for England, Scotland, and Wales, with their limited responsibilities and sectional place, could not carry ‘sufficient clout.’
And the grant of £40 million would need doubling to provide the same level of service.
The Government is to amend the Environment Protection Bill and is expecting a rough passage through the Lords where a select committee is already examining the NCC's scientific base.
Mr Trippier pledged that the NCC would not be worse off financially because of the reorganisation.
Car bomb blows up president after only 17 days in office Arab League close to despair Lebanon leader killed.
By David Hirst in Jerusalem
LEBANON'S new president, Mr Rene Muawad, died yesterday in a huge car-bomb explosion after 17 days in office.
It is a devastating blow to the latest Arab League peace plan, which — with parliament's adoption of political and constitutional reforms and the election of the new president — had come to embody perhaps the most serious attempt of its kind to end the 14 ½-year war.
‘Where do we turn now?’ an official at the Tunis headquarters of the Arab League asked.
‘It's a tragedy.
Whenever we take one step forward, we take five steps back,’ said another.
However, Lebanese observers say this blow is unlikely to lead to an immediate resumption of the war between the Christian leader, General Michel Aoun, and the Syrians and their Lebanese Muslim allies.
More likely, for the time being, is a return to political and constitutional deadlock — though with full and final partition of the fragmented country looming larger than ever.
A car rigged with an estimated 330lbs of explosive ripped through Muawad's motorcade as it passed through the Sanaya district of the predominantly Muslim West Beirut.
Unable to take up residence in the Baabda palace occupied by Gen Aoun, this was where he had been conducting his consultations for the formation of a government of national unity.
Twenty-three people were killed, including several Syrian and Lebanese soldiers.
Mangled remains were hurled 500 yards down the road.
Amidst scenes of carnage it was more than two hours before Muawad's death was officially announced.
A police officer said his corpse was so charred and mutilated that it took more than an hour to identify it.
Announcing the assassination, the Prime Minister, Mr Salim al-Hoss, levelled no specific accusation.
‘Let the criminal know,’ he said, ‘that hands can assassinate a great soul like that of the martyr, Muawad, but they cannot assassinate the enormous national faith which Muawad brought to the presidency.’
Inevitably Gen Aoun is the culprit as far as Syria is concerned.
‘This ugly crime against the Lebanon and its legitimacy followed a series of threats by the rebellious officer,’ the official Syrian news agency said.
But it is always unwise to jump to conclusions about Lebanese atrocities.
This one does seem to be a great boost to Gen Aoun, who stood in lonely defiance of the Arab and international communities, his Muslim compatriots, and many in his own Maronite enclave.
His interim military cabinet said it held an emergency meeting ‘to examine initial information about the ugly crime’.
‘The cabinet expresses its deep regret for the assassination of one of north Lebanon's most distinguished leaders.’
Some Lebanese argue that Gen Aoun's Syrian adversaries could benefit from the assassination.
Hardly had Muawad been elected than they detected signs that the Syrians were less than eager to give him the support he needed to impose his authority on the whole country.
There is a theory that the Syrians favour the perpetuation of the Aoun regime to give them a pretext for keeping an undiminished presence in the country.
The assassination may only have accelerated the inexorable drift towards partition.
For even before it, the new president's attempts to form a government of national unity had been faltering, thanks mainly to Gen Aoun's opposition.
But now all those Arab and Western powers that had invested such hopes in the plan will find it hard to sustain even a pretence that it remains a realistic proposal.
Only three days ago the American ambassador to Lebanon — who had evacuated his embassy, situated in Gen Aoun's enclave, last September — paid a one-day visit from Washington to the Syrian-controlled north Lebanon to present his credentials to the new president.
The ambassador called his election ‘the most important’ achievement of the Lebanon's long ordeal.
‘It seems to us that like great ships you are in fact approaching the end of the storm.’
He expressed surprise that the Lebanese Forces militia, Gen Aoun's ally, had not thrown its weight behind the new regime.
East Beirut officials and press called that a flagrant interference in the Lebanon's affairs, which could only strengthen Gen Aoun.
Among the Arabs, Saudi Arabia, which had invested great prestige in the plan, has suffered the biggest setback.
Arab peacemakers will presumably seek to find a successor to Muawad.
The Algerian foreign minister has said that the swift election of a successor would ‘show those who oppose national harmony that their enterprise is bound to fail’.
But with the process of assembling Lebanon's surviving deputies having been so difficult last time, a repeat performance seems to be impossible.
Christian leaders who had been contemplating such a move have been backing off.
Fear of meeting Muawad's fate will surely diminish any would-be successor's ambition.
Syrians blame Aoun, page 10
Rumbold snubs exam critics.
By David Gow
THE Government yesterday brushed aside growing pressure from business and higher education for radical reform of Alevels and called instead for greater use of contrasting A and ASlevels to provide breadth in sixth-form studies.
Mrs Angela Rumbold, Education Minister, said in a BBC Radio interview that there was no question of reviving the proposals put forward by the Higginson Committee for a ‘leaner and fitter’ five-subject Alevel.
‘No, the Government is very clear about the importance of Alevels.
We do have to address the needs and requirements of very able youngsters,’ she said.
Professor Gordon Higginson, Southampton University vice-chancellor, who chaired the committee, said its proposals were quite modest and were bound to be implemented by the mid-1990s.
‘I'm not opposed to specialisation, but certainly not at the tender age of 16.’
Mrs Rumbold said at a London conference that it was imperative to secure broad and balanced curriculums for students of different abilities.
She indicated that this meant greater use of mixed arts/science Alevel programmes and of contrasting/complementary ASlevels, worth half an Alevel.
The independent schools inspectorate, HMI, in a report published yesterday on the ‘rather tentative start’ of AS levels, said a quarter of schools were using these for the wrong reasons, often as a safeguard for weaker Alevel candidates.
Pupils had found that the amount of work involved was more than half an Alevel and felt the exams had not proved credible with employers and higher education institutions.
Beaten girl ‘died in shock’.
FIVE-YEAR-OLD Sukina Hammond died from the ‘pain, shock and exhaustion’ of a sustained beating, a Home Office pathologist told Bristol crown court yesterday.
Dr Richard Kellett said he had never seen a child as badly injured.
She suffered a minimum of 50 blows.
Her father, David Hammond, aged 25, allegedly beat Sukina to death in the family home in St Paul's, Bristol, last December 6 after he became annoyed when she would not spell her name.
Hammond denies murder.
The prosecution alleges Hammond attacked the girl with his hands, fists, a ruler and the flex from an electric kettle.
Dr Kellett, who gave evidence of his post-mortem examination, said most of the injuries were consistent with blows from the flex, either looped or in a straight line.
Some marks on her body appeared to match the plug ends of the flex.
He told Mr Justice Phillips he could not be certain of the specific cause of death.
‘It was a combination of shock, pain and exhaustion and the overall effect of what had been done to her.’
The injuries indicated she had been the victim of a sustained attack.
A contributory factor was there were so many bruises that they caused circulation problems.
The jury heard a tape-recording of an interview between police officers and Hammond, in which he sobbed repeatedly when the officers told him his daughter was dead.
The case continues today.
A teenage couple whose baby was taken to hospital with bruises and bleeding eyes seemed unconcerned when told he might die, the Old Bailey heard yesterday.
A consultant paediatrician, Dr Heather McKinnon, said Danny and Celia Palmer showed ‘little reaction’, asked few questions, and did not cry.
The couple, from north London, deny murdering seven-month-old Christopher Palmer last December.
The case continues today.
Mandelson moves closer to Labour nomination.
By Peter Hetherington
LABOUR'S communications director, Mr Peter Mandelson, is near to becoming candidate for the Hartlepool constituency in Cleveland, with almost half the 67 nominations.
Last night six names went forward for next month's selection contest caused by the decision of Mr Ted Leadbitter to retire after 25 years.
Mr Mandelson's closest challenger, Mr Steve Jones, 31, the son of shadow Welsh secretary, Mr Barry Jones, has about 19 nominations.
A short list will be drawn up next week.
Mr Jones has criticised Mr Mandelson for announcing his candidature in a newspaper article and said that the spirit of the party's selection code, which says the media should not be used to promote a candidate, may have been broken.
Mr Mandelson was quoted in the article as saying: ‘This is not simply a career move.
I joined the Labour Party because I believed in its values.’
Managers accuse crews in clash over emergencies Ambulance 999 calls ‘go unheeded’.
By Keith Harper Labour Editor
THE intensification of the ambulance dispute yesterday was marked by increasing friction between management and crews, who were accused of putting lives at risk.
Ambulance services were hit in many areas, but the dispute remained centred on London, where management published a list of 999 calls which it said were not being answered.
Mr Tom Crosby, London chief ambulance officer, said that a ‘safe and reliable service’ could not be run in the capital under restrictions operated by crews.
The National Union of Public Employees, the main ambulance union, dismissed the claim as a ‘government inspired disinformation campaign’.
It said that the ambulance control centre at Waterloo was in ‘chaos and confusion,’ and maintained that ambulance crews were continuing to answer 999 calls, even though they were suspended.
A ballot among 200 controllers at Waterloo resulted in a decision not to pass 999 calls through to the police or the military.
While some observed the decision, others were using fax machines to send details through to Scotland Yard.
Nupe said this was being done mainly by non-union personnel.
Considerable sums of money have been collected from the public, whose support, according to the unions, shows no sign of abating.
With no overtime being worked, even ambulance staff not suspended are beginning to feel the pinch as the dispute enters its 11th week.
A campaign, supported by well known people outside the trade union movement, is planned for next week, separate from one already launched by the unions and another started yesterday by the TUC.
Mr Norman Willis, the TUC general secretary, said its general council had agreed to make ‘a very big drive’ to raise money quickly.
Labour's national executive called for the dispute to be resolved by arbitration.
Waltham Forest health authority, which includes Mr Norman Tebbit's Chingford constituency, in Essex, has become the second health authority to call for an end to the dispute by either negotiation or arbitration.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, yesterday said that the latest pay offer made last Friday was worth 9 per cent and 11.55 per cent in London.
Nupe said the offer was the same made at the Advisory, Conciliation, and Arbitration Service, several weeks ago.
The Government had offered a 9 per cent deal over 18 months.
An extra £5 million would be brought forward from next year to offset the extra cost, but it would not be made up next year.
Mr Clarke accused the crews of putting patients' lives at risk and going back on their promise to take all 999 calls.
But the unions' chief negotiator, Mr Roger Poole, dismissed the allegations as deceitful.
The five unions representing 22,500 staff have blacked all non-urgent work, with the exception of cases affecting children, expectant mothers, the terminally ill and cancer and kidney patients.
Leaders of the five unions meet today to review the situation.
The Transport and General Workers' Union complained last night after a driver employed at RAF Stafford died from a heart attack.
A military ambulance had been removed from the base to answer 999 calls elsewhere, and there was a 15-minute wait for a civilian ambulance to take the man to hospital.
Mr Tony Brighton, the TGWU's representative at RAF Stafford, said: ‘We cannot say whether the presence of the RAF ambulance would have made any difference to saving a life, but there was delay.’
Councils' finance watchdog finds hard-pressed tenants owe £450m Rent rises and benefit cut swell record arrears.
By Stephen Cook
RENT arrears among council tenants are reaching record levels, mainly because of rent increases and housing benefit reductions imposed by the Government in April last year, according to the Audit Commission for Local Authorities.
Arrears in 1988/9 increased by a third over the previous year to more than £450 million.
In some inner London boroughs, two tenants out of three are in arrears and the amount owed to housing departments is nearly 15 per cent of the total sum due in rent.
The commission, which released its figures yesterday after a survey of 270 housing authorities, says housing managers should be following its guidelines to reduce arrears.
Poll tax officers and water authorities will have direct powers of debt recovery after April, increasing pressure on tenants to pay their rent bill last of all.
The poll tax is likely to be higher in areas which already have the worst arrears, the commission says.
After April, rents not collected at the end of the year will have to be paid for with a general rent increase because of the Government ‘ring-fencing’ of housing revenue accounts.
On current performance, the rise would be between two and three per cent.
The Association of Metropolitan Authorities welcomed the commission's conclusions, which it said confirmed its own survey last December showing soaring arrears in England's big cities.
But Mr Maurice Barnes, chairman of the AMA housing committee, said it was disappointing that the commission has not asked the Government to reverse the housing benefit changes.
‘I will be calling upon the minister at the Housing Consultative Council to think again about the Government's policy of reducing housing benefits and increasing council house rents,’ he said.
The commission survey found that the housing benefit changes had short and long-term effects.
The immediate difficulties were caused by administrative and computer changes as local authorities took over the administration of the benefit.
In the long term, tenants who have had their benefit reduced or removed at a time of rising rents are having more difficulty in paying.
The commission's guidelines include setting a clear overall policy, making sure managers have up-to-date information on arrears, and telling tenants how much they owe and how debts will be recovered.
Specialist recovery staff and debt counsellors should be employed, and a firm and consistent approach to warning letters, evictions and legal action to seize and sell tenants' goods.
Mr Howard Davies, controller of the commission, said yesterday that local authorities should by now have overcome the administrative difficulties of housing benefit changes.
‘It is up to them to put a high priority on bringing arrears quickly under control.
‘The experience of those authorities who have contained the increase to manageable levels shows what can be done.’
Larry Elliott adds: The average outstanding mortgage stands at £21,300, according to the Building Societies Association's quarterly economics journal, Housing Finance.
In Greater London, where property is most expensive, the average debt was only £30,800.
Wales, the region where people move least frequently, had the lowest average at £13,200.
The latest figures from the building societies suggest that the size of the average new mortgage granted in 1988/9 was £35,000.
The average mortgage outstanding to banks was £29,400.
Survey of Local Authority Housing Rent Arrears, by the Audit Commission for Local Authorities in England and Wales; HMSO £3.50.
Turning over a few leaves.
By David Hencke Westminster Correspondent
TENS OF thousands of phantom azalea bushes and geraniums are believed to be alive and growing in the gardens of Northern Ireland after the discovery of alleged false accounting.
A government-financed horticulture nursery in Belfast falsified the value of its plants for 13 years to the extent that more than £500,000 of public money has had to be written off.
The scale of the problem is thought to have allowed huge thefts but no one can be prosecuted because no records of the plants exist.
The saga of the Northern Ireland Housing Executive's 130 acre nursery in Dundonald, Castlereagh, to supply council estates with shrubs and bedding plants was revealed in a Commons Public Accounts Committee report published yesterday.
Most nurseries write off one in 10 plants, for failing to germinate, thrive or being destroyed by pests.
But figures produced for 13 years by the Dundonald nursery show that the nursey created one in 10 new plants every year instead.
In the best years four extra plants appear on the book for every 10 grown.
The figures could have been used to cover a fraud operation or could have have been the result of no-one ever checking the facts.
The final audit of the accounts found only £45,220 of stock on the premises instead of the £570,680 declared.
The disclosure has led to the closure of the nursery -but the stock could only be sold for £26,246 because most growers had made their seasonal purchases.
One civil servant has retired on ill health grounds and two downgraded.
Thirty sixth report of the Committee of Public Accounts.
Further Matters relating to Northern Ireland.
HMSO £6.20
Straw attacks law by diktat Student loans bill.
David Gow.
OPPOSITION spokesmen and student leaders last night denounced the Government's bill to introduce top-up loans from next autumn as a constitutional outrage and abuse of parliamentary democracy.
The Education (Student Loans) Bill, published yesterday, comprises only one enabling clause setting out ministers' broad intention to usher in loans and two schedules making plain that the Government will use regulations to dictate the size of the annual loan, level of interest rates, repayment periods, deferments and premiums to the banks administering the scheme.
The bill, expected to become law before Easter, contains virtually no details of the proposed scheme, which is still being worked out in negotiations with financial institutions.
It will prove difficult for MPs and peers to amend and rules out favoured alternatives.
Mr Jack Straw, shadow Education Secretary, said the procedure was ‘worthy of President Ceausescu of Romania’.
The Government ‘had taken powers to establish a loans scheme by diktat.’
The bill's first clause simply states: ‘The Secretary of State may make arrangements for enabling eligible students to receive loans towards their maintenance out of money made available by him for that purpose.’
Mr Straw claimed that the lack of detail was a sign of the Government's desperation.
‘They have got the banks peeling off and they don't know how it's going to operate…
I think many Tory MPs will be very worried about it.’
The Government's scheme would offer all eligible students, defined as those on higher education courses lasting at least one academic year, an annual loan of £420 tapering to £310 in the final year.
The cumulative loan would be repaid through a private agency, the Student Loans Company, over a period of, say, 10 years.
Interest would accrue on a daily basis but would normally be pegged to the RPI so the real rate would be zero.
Grants and parental contributions would be frozen at 1990 levels and loans would eventually form half of a student's maintenance award.
Students would lose the right to social security benefits, but the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals last night pledged to fight this element — only referred to in the bill's preface — throughout its parliamentary passage and the courts if necessary.
Ms Maeve Sherlock, National Union of Students president, said: ‘The bill would actually give the Government power to introduce a full loan scheme and destroy the grant system.’
Leader comment, page 18
News in brief: Row over Tory leadership.
The ‘near-certain’ commitment by backbencher Sir Anthony Meyer to stand against Mrs Thatcher for the Tory leadership brought the instant criticism of party leaders upon his head.
Page 20.
Difference on defence.
Mrs Thatcher is set for a clash with President Bush tomorrow over proposed big cuts in the US defence budget.
She is to seek assurances that these will not erode the US military commitment to Western Europe.
Page 10. £450m rent arrears.
Council tenants' rent arrears have risen to over £450 million, and in some inner London boroughs two out of three tenants are in arrears, the Audit Commission reveals.
Page 2.
Siege ends quietly.
The Salvador hotel siege ended peacefully when 12 US Green Berets were freed after a seeming deal between guerrillas and the army.
Page 10.
E German concession.
The East German politburo told opposition groups it was prepared to hold talks on free elections and constitutional reform.
Page 8.
Dispute tension grows.
Tension in the ambulance dispute was heightened as management in London published a list of 999 calls which it claimed had not been answered.
Page 3.
Disclosure order.
A trade magazine journalist was ordered in the High Court to disclose the source of commercially sensitive information.
Page 3
FINAL details of the £700 million relief scheme aimed at helping former ratepayers in the transition to poll tax were sent to local authorities yesterday, Mr Chris Patten, Environment Secretary, announced in a written answer.
One change to simplify the scheme, announced in October, will mean relief is divided equally in properties occupied by three or more chargepayers, rather than to two nominated inviduals.
THE Security Service Act will come into force on December 18, Mr David Waddington, Home Secretary, announced in a written answer.
The act, intended to prevent a repeat of the Spycatcher affair, puts the Security Service on a statutory basis and provides an avenue for investigation of complaints.
He named Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as the commissioner to oversee the service and Mr Justice Simon Brown as president of the complaints tribunal, with Sheriff John McInnes its vice-president and Sir Richard Gaskell the third member.
MR Nigel Lawson's resignation address as Chancellor of the Exchequer was yesterday rated the parliamentary speech of the year.
But when he received the Spectator-Highland Park award at a lunch in London, Mr Lawson declined to discuss his departure from the Government.
The award for the parliamentarian of the year went to shadow Chancellor Mr John Smith, who won it in 1986.
Other award winners: The MP to watch was Mr Charles Kennedy (Lib Dem.
Ross, Cromarty and Skye; Back-bencher of the year, Mr Eric Heffer (Lab.
Walton); Wit of the year, Mr Neil Hamilton (C. Tatton); and Debater of the year, Mr John Prescott, shadow Transport Secretary.
TOTAL construction orders in the third quarter of 1989 were 9 per cent lower than in second quarter and 3 per cent lower than in the same period of 1988, according to provisional figures from the Department of Environment.
Private housing orders were 18 per cent down on the quarter, 36 per cent on the year.
THE last staff handling employees income tax returns are to leave London by 1992 for Bootle, East Kilbride, Cardiff, Middlesbrough, Salford and Sunderland, the Inland Revenue announced yesterday.
The moving of 1,200 posts completes a plan launched when Harold Macmillan was prime minister in 1959.
FINAL details of the £700 million relief scheme aimed at helping former ratepayers in the transition to poll tax were sent to local authorities yesterday, Mr Chris Patten, Environment Secretary, announced in a written answer.
One change to simplify the scheme, announced in October, will mean relief is divided equally in properties occupied by three or more chargepayers, rather than to two nominated inviduals.
THE Security Service Act will come into force on December 18, Mr David Waddington, Home Secretary, announced in a written answer.
The act, intended to prevent a repeat of the Spycatcher affair, puts the Security Service on a statutory basis and provides an avenue for investigation of complaints.
He named Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as the commissioner to oversee the service and Mr Justice Simon Brown as president of the complaints tribunal, with Sheriff John McInnes its vice-president and Sir Richard Gaskell the third member.
MR Nigel Lawson's resignation address as Chancellor of the Exchequer was yesterday rated the parliamentary speech of the year.
But when he received the Spectator-Highland Park award at a lunch in London, Mr Lawson declined to discuss his departure from the Government.
The award for the parliamentarian of the year went to shadow Chancellor Mr John Smith, who won it in 1986.
Other award winners: The MP to watch was Mr Charles Kennedy (Lib Dem.
Ross, Cromarty and Skye; Back-bencher of the year, Mr Eric Heffer (Lab.
Walton); Wit of the year, Mr Neil Hamilton (C. Tatton); and Debater of the year, Mr John Prescott, shadow Transport Secretary.
TOTAL construction orders in the third quarter of 1989 were 9 per cent lower than in second quarter and 3 per cent lower than in the same period of 1988, according to provisional figures from the Department of Environment.
Private housing orders were 18 per cent down on the quarter, 36 per cent on the year.
THE last staff handling employees income tax returns are to leave London by 1992 for Bootle, East Kilbride, Cardiff, Middlesbrough, Salford and Sunderland, the Inland Revenue announced yesterday.
The moving of 1,200 posts completes a plan launched when Harold Macmillan was prime minister in 1959.
Firm wins order forcing reporter to name source.
By Sarah Boseley
AJOURNALIST was yesterday ordered by the High Court to identify a source who gave him commercially sensitive information.
Giving judgment in a case that has so far been heard in camera, Mr Justice Hoffmann ruled that Mr William Goodwin, a journalist working for The Engineer, must hand over his notes of a telephone conversation with his source.
The judgment adds a new dimension to interpretations of Section 10 of the Contempt of Court Act, 1981, which says journalists can only be required to reveal their sources if it is necessary ‘in the interests of justice’, or for ‘the prevention of crime’.
Yesterday's ruling suggests companies seeking to protect their commercial secrets may have a case under Section 10.
After the judgment, Mr Goodman's solicitor, Mr Geoffrey Bindman, said his client would appeal.
He said: ‘It is the company's security that this is all about.
If the company doesn't look after its documents, does it give it a justification for a journalist being asked to reveal his source?’
The company in question — which cannot be identified by order of the court — has this year been negotiating for a substantial loan.
On November 1, the accountants' copy of a business plan for this purpose — one of eight numbered copies each labelled ‘strictly confidential’— disappeared from the company's premises.
The next day, Mr Goodwin's source telephoned him with information including the amount the company was trying to borrow, and the projected results for the current accounting year.
Mr Goodwin did not see the file and does not know if his source had access to the file.
Mr Goodwin then phoned the company to check his facts, and it took out an injunction to prevent his publishers, Morgan Grampian, publishing the information — which it said could severely damage confidence among customers and suppliers.
The judge rejected the argument that publication of the information in an article would be in the public interest.
He said: ‘It seems to me that business could not function properly if such information could not be kept confidential.’
Ruling that Mr Goodwin must hand over his notes by 3pm today, Mr Justice Hoffmann said that there was strong prima facie evidence that the company would suffer serious commercial damage from publication.
In order for the company to know who took the document, to sue for recovery and damages, ‘disclosure is necessary in the interests of justice’.
Later, in the Court of Appeal, Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, refused a stay in the order pending an appeal, but agreed to allow the notes to be given to the court in a sealed envelope, to be returned unopened if the appeal succeeded.
Last night Mr Goodwin was considering whether to comply.
Horror classics star bites off heads as the children watch Sketch.
By Andrew Rawnsley
ON day two of MP-TV Nicholas Ridley was scheduled to make a live appearance before the cameras — or, as it turned out from his speech, a dead appearance.
The star of a series of previous horror classics — the poll tax, water privatisation — came on to the despatch box at just before three in the afternoon.
This was highly insensitive scheduling to programme Mr Ridley's speech on industrial policy at a time when many young children, old folk, businessmen with heart conditions and Tory MPs with marginal seats might be watching.
It was a predictably shocking performance.
There was one particularly unpleasant scene, involving John Wilkinson, one of his own backbenchers.
Intervening to make a reasoned point about investment in space technology, Mr Wilkinson had his head bitten off in full view of the viewers.
The rest of the details are too grisly to describe.
Chris Patten, the sensitive young Environment Secretary, who would have to wind-up this section of the Queen's Speech debate, sat on the Government frontbench looking pale and terrified.
Mr Ridley was set against Labour's Gordon Brown, making an authoritative debut as Labour's industry spokesman.
This is another sign that, so far at least, the Opposition is rather getting the better of the ratings' war.
Mr Brown demonstrated that he has already utterly mastered the use of the sound-bite to get a headline phrase into the news bulletins.
They rolled off his speech.
Bite One: ‘The Secretary of State told us about the silver lining — he told us nothing about the dark clouds on the horizon.’
Bite Two: ‘Not the department that likes to say Yes, but department that likes to say No.’
Bite Three: ‘A Prime Minister and a Cabinet so busy trying to recreate the present in the image of the past that they have entirely missed out on the opportunities for the future.’
It was another of Mr Brown's sparkling, faultless performances.
In fact, it is almost about time Mr Brown made a mistake.
People are beginning to wonder whether he is actually human.
Leaving the Chamber now and again to compare it with the live BBC-2 coverage, Mr Brown also looked very telegenic.
Mr Ridley looked the reverse — what you might call cinegelet.
Apart from an extra lick of oil on his hair, he had made no concessions to the cameras.
The fact that Mr Ridley looked awful on television is not entirely his fault.
After the novelty of the first day, the omissions and the limitations of the rules governing the coverage are beginning to look more glaring.
So are some of the absurdities.
Mr Ridley appeared against the surreal backdrop of a vast headless, legless belly floating over his shoulder from the bench behind.
Midway through his speech, the torso suddenly developed legs and walked off.
Later the belly bounced back into place.
Only after some time did the cameras finally establish that the belly had a head belonging to Nicholas Soames, the Industry Secretary's PPS.
The other frustration of watching on TV is hearing the low rumble of chatter, unexplained laughter, heckles and shouts, like the noises off in a Russian drama, but being unable to see the source.
MPs appear to be permanently enjoying a joke which the public is not allowed to share.
But hurrying back into the Chamber proved that the camera does not entirely lie.
Mr Ridley still looked awful.
Seaside salmonella earns beaches unclean tag.
By Paul Brown Environment Correspondent
BRITAIN cannot reach European standards for safe bathing beaches because of salmonella in the water, the Government's pollution watchdog, the National Rivers Authority, said yesterday.
Addressing the Commons environmental committee, Mr Rupert Grantham, the NRA tidal water officer for south-west England said the absence of salmonella, stipulated by the EC Blue Flag scheme, could not be guaranteed.
He said the NRA wanted to talk to the commission to ‘simplify’ the EC quality standards to make them more ‘meaningful and achievable’.
He claimed scientific evidence had shown low levels of salmonella in water were not a risk to health.
In 1988, 123 out of 364 bathing beaches failed to reach European standards, but the NRA said the present compliance figures almost certainly gave an unrealistic optimistic view of the degree of compliance of bathing waters.
The commission wants Britain to build sewage works at the seaside to treat bacteria before it is pumped into the sea.
The chairman of the committee, Mr Hugh Rossi, was concerned about the Government's alternative plans to pump the sewage into the sea through long pipelines without treating the bacteria.
A scheme to spend £1 billion to replace existing short sewage outlets with long ones is under way.
Government scientists believe the action of sea water will destroy the bacteria.
Mr Rossi said this might be shortsighted and could store up serious future problems.
He compared it with the scheme 30 years ago when Britain built tall chimneys to disperse pollution over a wide area.
Now we were having to tackle the problems of acid rain.
Similarly, we were relying on the vastness of the oceans to dilute and disperse whatever bacteria and viruses allowed into them; in 30 years we might be regretting it.
He urged the NRA to take a very aggressive stance and not to be put off.
European resolve to tax vehicle emissions.
By Michael Smith Transport Editor
EUROPEAN transport ministers meeting in Paris will today be asked to approve radical plans for tax and financial incentives to curb vehicle emissions.
The recommendations, forming part of a programme of environmental measures, will be put to the 19 ministers gathered under the auspices of the European Conference of Ministers of Transport.
The meeting, chaired by Mr Michael Portillo, is the first such ministerial discussion on the effects of transport developments on the continent's climate.
Confidental documents obtained by the Guardian show that financial incentives proposed by the ECMT secretariat form a fundamental element of the programme.
Other measures proposed include action to tackle traffic flows, and greater environmental considerations of spending on new transport infrastructure.
The ECMT recognises that past policies and actions on transport and the environment are running behind the debate, and that future transport policies should be forced to consider environmental matters.
ECMT papers report that existing and planned emission controls are bringing about significant reductions in air and noise pollution levels.
But the secretariat is concerned that the growth of car and lorry ownership may overtake progress so far.
It recommends that further reductions in air and noise emissions be sought.
‘Economic incentives are potentially powerful tools in bringing about changes in the purchase of cleaner vehicles,’ ECMT documents state.
They say that ‘changes in transport pricing and tax structures should be made which are more consistent with environmental objectives,’ and suggest: ‘A programme of action in this regard should be drawn up.’
The precise nature of the tax incentives remains to be decided, but it appears the ECMT is proposing that motor manufacturers should be given clear incentives to make more environmentally friendly vehicles.
Although a communique will be issued later today, there are doubts about the commitment of all the countries, including Britain, to adopt the full programme of recommendations.
Mr Michael Portillo, the transport minister, is reportedly sympathetic to the wide-ranging proposals, but doubts exist over whether they will be carried through.
The ECMT, which is not part of the EC, is widely regarded as an ineffectual organisation.
It has no executive power, and its recommendations are not binding — which means in effect that the individual countries are being left to implement any proposals agreed at the meeting.
However, the meeting is bound to increase pressure on European governments to adopt a more forceful approach in seeking to improve the environment.
The debate takes place as pressure mounts on the Environment Secretary, Mr Chris Patten, to introduce a ‘green tax’ to help finance a cleaner environment.
The 19 ECMT countries are: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, West Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom and Yugoslavia.
Labour launches winter campaign.
LABOUR published six main amendments to the bill which they said would form the basis of the party's ‘winter campaign to save the NHS’, writes David Brindle.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow Health Secretary, said: ‘We could not have chosen a better issue to put centre stage for the first televised session of Parliament.’
One amendment would make any hospital opt-out plan subject to a ballot of local people.
A second would give patients a guaranteed right of access to the hospital of their choice, and general practitioners a right to refer patients to the consultant of their choice.
A third would give GPs an explicit right to prescribe the drugs their patients need without any cash limit, while a fourth would specify that all contracts for care must protect quality, not just promote cost competition.
The remaining two amendments apply to the community care plans.
One would ‘ring-fence’ or protect the grants to be given to local authorities so they could not be used for other purposes; the other would give elderly and disabled people in local authority residential homes the same social security rights as those in private or voluntary sector homes.
This last amendment would have the effect of removing the deterrent which local authorities will face if they place people in their own homes and have to meet the full cost.
Clarke says no provision in NHS bill to keep to budgets Doubts linger over drugs cash limits National Health Service bill.
David Brindle, Social Services Correspondent.
DOUBTS remained last night over whether the Government had honoured its promise not to impose cash limits on drugs expenditure in the bill to bring in National Health Service changes published yesterday.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, said in response to questioning by reporters that there was no provision in the measure to require regional health authorities to keep within their proposed firm drugs budgets.
This appeared to go back on the health white paper, which had stated in a detailed working document: ‘Legislation will be needed in order to require FPCs (family practitioner committees) and RHAs to keep to their drug budgets.’
Mr Clarke said: ‘What we have got here is the legislation we require.
The legislation does not require other than what it's got.’
The minister therefore seemed to have carried through the understanding reached with the British Medical Association in September.
He said then that general practitioners would remain free to prescribe whatever drugs their patients needed and would not be constrained by cash limits either at FPC or RHA level.
However, the bill does place a ‘duty’ on every RHA to ensure that its own and its constituent FPCs' spending, which will include GPs' indicative drugs budgets, ‘does not exceed the aggregate’of its income.
The BMA was last night examining this provision to see what, if any, effect it could have on GPs' prescribing.
But it was heartened by a reference elsewhere in the legislation that GPs could exceed their drugs budgets if they had ‘good cause’— a term which the BMA will interpret as patients' needs.
In other respects, the BMA said, the legislation left the public in the dark on key issues such as guaranteed local hospital services, public consultation on opting-out hospitals and quality of care.
The measure, the National Health Service and Community Care Bill, contains the legislation needed for both the NHS shake-up and enactment of the community care white paper, published only a week ago.
One of the few unexpected measures in the legislation is a clause removing the need for the Health Secretary to authorise private patient facilities in NHS hospitals.
The minister would retain only a right of intervention if hospitals or health authorities ‘abused’ their freedom to develop pay-beds at will.
Inclusion of the measure is bound to fuel the fears of critics who see the bill as paving the way for privatisation of the health service, particularly through the proposed opted-out, self-governing ‘NHS trust’ hospitals and other units.
Mr Clarke dismissed such fears.
He said that he did not see the point of a central control over pay beds which was a relic of the Labour governments of the 1960s.
Moreover, he did not envisage any circumstances in which he would exercise a right to intervene.
As expected, the bill provides for the main planks of the NHS shake-up — NHS trusts, indicative drugs budgets, optional practice budgets for some GPs and creation of an ‘internal market’— though it does so in markedly less robust commercial terminology than was first applied.
It also leaves open the possibility of extending these measures.
Although practice budgets are being offered only to larger practices with 11,000 patients or more, the bill sets no such lower limit.
One issue clarified by the bill is that ‘NHS contracts’, the contracts between purchasing health authorities or GPs and service-providing hospitals, will not be legally binding and will confer no contractual rights or liabilities.
Mr Clarke said ministers now accepted that the internal market would initially rely heavily on large-scale, block contracts.
Expectations that hospitals would be able to work up detailed costings had been revised.
Claiming that health workers' fears were being overcome and that there was now a much better understanding of the plans, Mr Clarke said: ‘There are volunteers all over the service waiting for Parliament to approve these provisions so we can get on with it from next summer onwards.’
Jimmy's real-life drama will intensify over NHS reform.
By Martin Wainwright
JIMMY'S, the real-life hospital drama, is in for some exciting episodes next year.
St James's University Hospital in Leeds, where the TV series is filmed, is expected to take up the proposal for self-governing trusts in NHS hospitals which was given the go-ahead in the Queen's Speech.
But Leeds Eastern health authority and NHS unions will fight the plan.
The authority has already told the hospital's management to take no action.
Yetdoctors such as Professor Richard Lilford, who will be at next Monday's national launch of the Health Reform Group, have got the bit between their teeth.
Management at Jimmy's, the largest hospital in Europe, is cautious on the issue.
The authority's line that it should not even do any homework on self-governing is considered impractical.
But close identification with reform carries risks in a profession vulnerable to political change.
The self-governing dynamo at Jimmy's has so far been strongly medical.
The initial expression of interest, backed by a ballot of consultants, went to the Yorkshire regional health authority from Mr Bill Shea, an orthopaedic consultant retired from clinical practice and now head of the hospital's medical management advisory committee.
A second ballot, on proceeding with a detailed prospectus, is likely to follow.
Doctors balance enthusiasm for more local control of funding as a self-governing trust against fears about clinicians finding themselves too close to budgetary responsibility.
‘A clinician's first duty must be to the patient,’ said one.
‘That could become difficult if he or she was also too close to handling the budget.’
Supporters of a trust point to a trend towards self-governing apparent in measures such as the growth of cross-border charging for services.
Doctors are uncertain of what self-government would mean in detail.
But any suggestion that it could lead to leaving the NHS, whose headquarters move to Leeds next year, gets short shrift.
The health authority has agreed to hear a presentation on self-governing trusts at its next meeting on Monday.
Jimmy's camera crew will not be present — alas for viewers who like a bit of metaphorical blood on their sitting room floors.
Support for bill to outlaw hackers.
By Owen Bowcott
APRIVATE member's bill to criminalise computer hacking along the lines of the Law Commission's recommendations would attract active Government support, it was disclosed yesterday.
The announcement by the Department of Trade and Industry follows fierce criticism of the absence of legislative proposals on computer misuse in the Queen's Speech.
The minister, Mr Nicholas Ridley, had to leave out the expected bill because of the Government's heavy legislative programme.
‘There may be an opportunity for a private member to introduce the bill,’ a DTI spokeswoman said yesterday.
‘If that could be carried forward, the Government would be very glad to see it and would give as much help as possible.’
In the summer, an anti-hacking private member's bill was withdrawn by Ms Emma Nicholson, Tory MP for Devon West and Torridge, in the belief that government action would follow.
She has been considering reintroducing her bill this session.
Rusting Chunnel fear ‘dismissed’.
By Andrew Cornelius Industrial Editor
EUROTUNNEL, the Channel tunnel group, denied last night that the concrete linings of the Channel Tunnel could be contaminated by salt and fail prematurely.
Mr Colin Kirkland, its technical director, described as absolute nonsense a report in New Civil Engineer magazine that research into existing subsea tunnels shows that ‘Channel tunnel wall sections as used on the French side will not be able to resist corrosion for their 120-year design life.’
The premature rusting of reinforcing bars in the lining segments could be prevented ‘but would have massive cost implications for either Eurotunnel or the UK and French governments’ depending on whether linings outlast Eurotunnel's 50-year concession period.
The magazine says that research by Mr Chris Ecob and Ms Elizabeth King, of Mott MacDonald, the civil engineering consultancy, on Danish tunnels showed that high quality concrete would not prevent the bars rusting in tunnel linings and their consequent ‘premature deterioration’.
Mr Kirkland said: ‘If this were so the Safety Authority would not let us go ahead and build the tunnel.
We spoke to consultants in three countries.
We firmly believe we have the best available technology.’
Michael Smith writes: Radical plans to privatise parts of the European railway system and help switch freight to rail has been proposed by the European Commission.
Mr Karel Van Miert, the Transport Commissioner, is asking member governments to approve a plan which would leave passenger services largely in the hands of state-owned monopolies but open up freight services to competition by permitting private operators to pay for the use of publicly-owned tracks.
He called for a single European standard for everything from track size to signalling and from staff training to rolling stock.
This would involve the governments in heavy expenditure but the commissioner said past neglect had reduced railways to a ‘Cinderella existence.’
The restructuring proposals also involve co-ordinating the high speed rail network.
Ministers from six European countries, including Britain, have agreed to set up a high speed network by 1998 although there are doubts that Britaincan meet the timetable because of delays over the Channel tunnel.
critics fear increased congestion problems similar to those experienced by airlines because of air traffic control difficulties.
Healthier lifestyles lead shift towards alternative medicine.
By David Brindle, Social Services Correspondent
THE DESIRE for healthier lifestyles is leading to growing acceptance of alternative medicine in treating minor ailments, a report by Mintel market analysts claimed yesterday.
Eight in 10 women surveyed said that they would use ‘natural’ remedies and considered pharmacists as effective as doctors in treating minor ills.
One in five never visited a doctor for such complaints and preferred self-treatment.
Almost two in three of the 897 housewives surveyed in June believed homeopathy and acupuncture were effective.
Mr Peter Kraushar, chairman of Mintel International, said the findings were ‘stunning’.
They showed people were questioning conventional cures.
Mr Bill Patterson, a market analyst with Mintel, said: ‘Consumers are saying: ‘If we are eating more healthily, why can't we mend ourselves more healthily too?’'
Mintel, which is charging £1,200 for a copy of the report, estimates that £450 million will be spent on alternative medicine this year, mainly on consultation fees.
Another £750 million is likely to be spent on self-medication, rising by 5 per cent a year over the next three years.
PAGE
Fast lady shows new turn of speed.
By Paul Hoyland
LADY Arran, a 71-year-old countess with a penchant for speed, put Britain back in the record books yesterday with a storming run in a hydroplane that made light of choppy conditions at the National Water Sports Centre at Holme Pierrepont, Nottingham.
Lady Arran, who in 1980 became the first person to top 100 mph in an offshore power boat, set the world speed record for an electric boat at just over 50 mph.
The previous fastest time recorded was 45 mph.
The gleaming white hydroplane, named An Stradag, Gaelic for The Spark, is being promoted by sponsors as an environmentally friendly boat, silent, efficient and pollution free.
A biting wind gusting to 30 knots threatened to blow the fragile, 15-ft fibreglass hydroplane off course as Lady Arran made two runs over a measured kilometre.
The judges stipulated that the boat's 12 batteries — which deliver 140 volts to electric motors ‘powerful enough to start a Harrier jump jet’— had to be recharged within 20 minutes of the first run.
This left Lady Arran free to fortify herself with a large tot of rum.
‘The rum made all the difference’ she said.
‘I was so cold I could only just press the stop button.
It's a lovely little boat to drive.
You could almost drink a gin and tonic in that boat.’
Lady Arran has invested £25,000 in her hydroplane, designed by Mr Lorne Campbell, one of the world's leading power boat designers, and built in the stable block of her Hertfordshire home.
After more than 20 years of power-boating achievements, yesterday's record attempt was billed as her graceful finale.
But on coming ashore Lady Arran decided retirement would have to wait.
‘We can go faster still next year,’ she said.
‘I never feel my age.
I love speed.
It's a relaxation to me, although one's nerve is bound to go sooner or later.’
Pushing the boat out…
Lady Arran takes the controls for yesterday's record-breaking run that was to have marked her retirement.
‘We can go faster still next year'PHOTOGRAPH: DAVID SILLITOE
A nose for environmental threat.
Thursday People.
Dennis Barker.
SOME 30 years ago, whenever Professor Wilfrid Bach ventured to blow his nose he faced a hazard which has affected his thinking for life.
A student at Sheffield university then, he recalls: ‘When you blew into your handkerchief, you got about three tons of coaldust.
I got very aware of environmental problems when I was 20.’
Bach is now one of the world's leading climatologists, and director of the Centre for Applied Climatology and Environmental Studies at Munster University, West Germany.
He was in London yesterday to present a report to a conference of environmentalists, showing that most predictions of the greenhouse effect on the world's climate are too optimistic, and advocating a plan of ‘permissible’ emissions of carbon dioxide.
His plan would allow each country a ‘quota’ until the end of the next century — a quota Britain would use up in 42 years at its present rate of emissions.
Bach speaks of such things with the passion of a self-made man who has beaten personal adversity.
Born 53 years ago in Eisenach, now East Germany, the son of a haberdasher who fought in the war and died shortly after it, his family's lack of money meant he had to win scholarships to schools and university.
He chose Sheffield as within his means.
He wrote his PhD on the climate, moved to McGill university in Montreal, then to the universities of Cincinatti and Hawaii.
He did the first course anywhere in air pollution meteorology.
In Hawaii, he was chairman of the government review board which examined the impact of industry on the environment — a job in which he had one specific victory.
Hawaii has two huge roadways, and planners wanted to build a third.
The feeder roads for it now end in empty air.
‘That was really the only project we managed to stop.
Your victories in this area are very small, you practically achieve nothing.’
Did that upset him?
‘That is a very interesting question.
Everyone gets once in a while his downs, his depressive periods.
But my personal philosophy is that I am not incredibly optimistic, but I am a realistic utopian or a utopian realist.’
He clenched his fist and added: ‘If other people take no notice, if we achieve nothing, than we put in more engagement, we work more hard towards what we want!’
Next month he meets West Germany's environment minister.
He has not yet written off the possibility of putting his ideas on a ‘four-eyes basis’— a meeting of just two people — to Thatcher and Bush.
That climate would be lively.
Comfort offered to Crockford's critics.
By Walter Schwarz, Religious Affairs Correspondent
CRITICISM of the Archbishop of Canterbury in the 1987 Crockford's Preface was not taken personally by Dr Runcie, who comforted some critics during the row which followed, according to a book published today.
Dr William Oddie, fellow of St Cross College, Oxford, writes in The Crockford's File that Dr Garry Bennett, the author of the anonymously-published preface, who committed suicide during the row, received communion from Dr Runcie at Oxford on the Sunday before his death.
‘Dr Runcie, to his eternal credit, remained his friend, though he had read the preface some weeks before and was certain in his own mind of its authorship.
‘If the rest of the hierarchy had maintained the same level of charity and civilised control as Dr Runcie, Gareth Bennett might well be alive today.’
The Archbishop of York, John Habgood, described the preface as a sour and vindictive outburst from a disappointed cleric.
Dr Bennett, a fellow of New College, Oxford, had accused Dr Runcie of leading a coterie of liberals who were weakening the Church's main beliefs.
The book says that, on the night Dr Bennett's body was found, Dr Runcie was comforting Mr Derek Pattinson, general secretary of the synod, who had commissioned the preface for the church's official Who's Who.
Father Philip Ursell, the principal of Pusey House, Oxford, told Dr Runcie of Dr Bennett's suicide.
‘There was a long pause and Dr Runcie said: ‘Well, I always suspected it was he who had written it, but I never thought there was anything personal in it.
He had not written anything he had not already said to me at different times’.’
He spent 20 minutes comforting Fr Ursell.
Dr Oddie, an Anglican priest who shares Dr Bennett's views, accuses Dr Runcie of being ‘an ecclesiastical chameleon’.
He writes that the issue of women priests had been a main cause of the Crockford's row.
After a synod debate on the issue, Dr Bennett had felt ‘quite panic-stricken.
It seemed to him that it was all up with the Church of England’.
Explaining Dr Bennett's suicide, the book says that if his authorship of the preface was uncovered, he would become an outsider.
The Crockford's File; Hamish Hamilton, £14.95
Runcie damns the Deal bombers.
THE KILLING of 11 Royal Marines bandsmen in the Deal Barracks explosion had put back the cause of the IRA, Dr Robert Runcie, the Archbishop of Canterbury, said during the memorial service to the victims at Canterbury Cathedral yesterday.
He described September's bombing as unjust, merciless, brutal and cowardly.
The congregation of 1,500 was led by the Duke of Edinburgh, the Prime Minister, Mr Neil Kinnock, leader of the Labour Party, Tom King, Defence Secretary, and senior military personnel, including Lt-Gen Sir Steuart Pringle, retired Commandant General of the Royal Marines and a former victim of an IRA bomb.
Members of the Royal Marines orchestra, including some bandsmen who were caught up in the bombing, played during the hour-long service.
The Archbishop said: ‘It is right and proper that we should bring our indignation with us to God's house.
‘For indignation is not blind rage.
Nor is it foul temper which vents itself indiscriminately on anyone who happens to be within range.
Indignation is anger targeted precisely upon an action which deserves it and upon whoever has performed it.’
He added: ‘By murdering 11 men and injuring many others these people have polluted yet more the very cause which they claim to be serving.
And I have no doubt that they have set that cause back further than they ever know.’
Dr Runcie described his visit to survivors in hospital the following day.
‘I was struck by two things — the refusal of battered victims to give in to despair, those who could not speak gave me a thumbs up, and the insistence of sorrowing parents and girlfriends that ‘we'll never let them win’,’ he said.
Dr Runcie stressed the terrorists should not have the last word.
‘God permits no power on earth — neither terrorism, nor any form of evil, nor even death itself — to have the last word.’
That should go to the rescue workers who took great risks to bring out survivors, the skill of the medical teams and the love expressed by those who cared for the injured and bereaved.
Relatives of all the victims were in the cathedral with many of the survivors, some still bearing the scars of their injuries.
The names of the dead were read aloud by Regimental Sergeant Major Bandsmaster Graham Harvey and a wreath was laid in the nave by the director of the Royal School of Music at Deal, Lt Keith Syvier, to a fanfare of trumpets.
The first lesson was read by the Duke of Edinburgh, the Captain-General of the Royal Marines, and the second by Admiral Sir Julian Oswald, First Sea Lord.