

Philippine rebels lay down arms.
By Sheila Coronel and agencies in Manila
ABOUT 300 Philippine army rebels agreed early this morning to leave their fortified positions in the city's business district and voluntarily return to their barracks, the chief government negotiator said.
Brigadier-General Arturo Enrile was speaking after President Corazon Aquino declared a national state of emergency and banned broadcasts of rebel pronouncements in an attempt to contain the mutiny which has shaken her government.
The general said that the mutinous soldiers would abandon their positions, give up their ammunition and walk on foot to their camp at Fort Bonafacio about three miles away.
‘They have agreed to return voluntarily,’ he added.
‘They will be treated humanely.’
‘We are going back to barracks.
It's finished,’ Lieutenant-Colonel Rafael Galvez said.
His 300 elite commandos would turn in their weapons and return to their base, he added.
Their ammunition will be given to government forces before the exodus begins.
The colonel looked tired.
Asked if the agreement to leave Makati was a defeat, he replied: ‘Tactically, yes.’
Small pockets of rebel soldiers could be seen assembling in different parts of the area.
A Red Cross van drove across the rebel lines in front of the Intercontinental Hotel, followed by three army trucks and a government military contingent.
Under the state of emergency, the government can take over or direct the operation of public utilities and businesses.
In a separate directive, the government banned the broadcasting of rebel propaganda, comments, and interviews.
The state of emergency was declared five days after the mutinous troops seized three military bases and two television stations in an attempt to overthrow Mrs Aquino.
‘This is not a declaration of martial law,’ an official said.
‘It is a temporary measure while the emergency exists.’
Thousands of foreigners and Filipinos trapped in hotels and flats in Makati were earlier evacuated to safer parts of the city.
The rebels had held Makati since Saturday, firing mortars and machine guns at government troops ringing the district.
On Monday they agreed to allow the evacuation of about 5,000 people.
Most of those caught in the siege of Makati spoke highly of the rebels.
‘They're probably the best troops that the Philippine army has,’ said Mr Peter Choynowski, an executive of the Asian Development Bank from Canada, who lives in a high-rise flat shelled by mortars.
‘They were all very determined and willing to die.’
At an airforce base in Cebu, central Philippines, government troops delayed an assault on 200 rebels as negotiators led by Cardinal Ricardo Vibal tried to resolve the situation.
Mrs Aquino earlier appealed to Filipinos to attend a mass tomorrow to demonstrate their support for her government.
‘I ask you to continue to support me,’ she said in an emotional television broadcast.
‘You are my sole source of strength.’
The mass will be held at a religious shrine on a road where, three years ago, hundreds of thousands of Filipinos gathered in the uprising which toppled the former president, Ferdinand Marcos, and installed Mrs Aquino in power.
The gathering was intended to show that the government, besieged by a rebellion started by the most elite units of its own armed forces, could still rely on ‘people power’ for support.
The emergency declaration was affirmed by 22 of the 23 members of the Senate in an apparent attempt to consolidate the various branches of government for what President Aquino said would be ‘the final blow in the final confrontation’ against the rebels.
The emergency powers also allow the government to tighten its grip on companies owned by opposition politicians and businessmen, who are believed to have encouraged and financed the mutiny.
In a meeting, Mrs Aquino said the rebels had a started a disinformation campaign to weaken her government.
Leader comment, page 18
SMILES are hard to find in Spitak.
A year after the Armenian earthquake, the only place where any sense of comfort and relief seems to be found is in the Italian Village, writes Jonathan Steele.
Proud tenants show visitors the beautifully designed prefabricated homes, with central heating, air-conditioning, and fitted kitchen, which a team from Italy completed in July.
It is temporary accommodation which puts most permanent local housing to shame.
Ariak Chopanyan and his wife offer coffee while four small children rush about the brand-new, single-storey house.
Two are her brother's children — their parents died in the disaster.
‘We are supposed to move from here when our new flats are ready, but no one will want to go.
Besides, the new houses will be tall,’ he said.
The Italian Village is set in the open plain where the new town centre of Spitak is supposed to be.
But there is little evidence of it yet.
In sorry contrast to the Italian Village, several rows of two-storey brick houses are slowly rising from the ground.
Russian workers from Uzbekistan pour concrete and fit window frames but eight months after the earthquake, not one was ready to be handed over for use.
Sloth and bad organisation seem to be to blame, even though the builders are on high wages to work fast.
From September, the two-month Azerbaijani blockade of Armenia made rebuilding even more difficult.
Opposite the Italian Village, the Norwegians were building a hospital but had to leave because of lack of supplies.
A site where building was going on with real devotion when I visited the town in August was on the once bare hillside near the old cemetery.
The sound of hammering echoed round the valley.
Some 250 family plots had been carved out, with low walls and marble plinths.
Photographs of a mother and her three daughters, aged 10, seven and three, have been etched in the marble of one almost finished grave.
The faces stare blankly out.
Hrachya Asataryan paused awhile to explain they were his nieces.
His brother, the only member of the family to escape death, was off fetching materials but returned while we talked.
The two men wept.
Around us the sight was repeated scores of times.
Hard work, then sudden pauses as people were overwhelmed by what they were doing and why they had to do it.
The whole town was still in a state of shock.
Four thousand of its 22,000 people died in the tragedy.
Spitak was originally meant to have been entirely rebuilt within two years.
‘That's just a dream,’ Sergei Grigoryan, the second secretary of the local party, said.
His office is a Portakabin given by the Armenian Community Centre in London.
‘In May the politburo promised to send 4,000 prefabricated houses.
Three months later only 500 had arrived,’ he said.
The approach of winter has done nothing to create an official feeling of urgency.
Literaturnaya Gazeta yesterday brought the story up to date with an emotionally devastating report.
Throughout the earthquake zone, where half a million were made homeless, only 50,000 flats have been built.
In Leninakan, Armenia's second-largest city until the earthquake struck, half the new buildings are still only at the foundation stage.
The newspaper's reporter wrote: ‘The city's electricity service is in chaos.
I don't know how people are going to get through the winter.
If it is severe, we can expect serious dissatisfaction.
The situation is already tense, if not threatening.’
The reporter said the town's new section was being put in the wrong place, in an area where tremors are likely again, instead of in a safer place across the valley.
The two-month blockade by Azerbaijan could not be blamed for everything.
Incompetence and irresponsibility were everywhere.
Literaturnaya Gazeta applied to interview the head of the department in charge of Armenian rebuilding in the Soviet Ministry of Building in Moscow, but he refused.
The newspaper asked to see any responsible official — none was available.
‘They must have something to hide,’ the reporter ended.
Clarke bill faces Tory challenge.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
DISSIDENT Conservative MPs will stage a limited challenge to the Government's proposed National Health Service reforms during the two-day Commons second reading debate starting today.
But it is unlikely to develop into a full-scale revolt.
The Government's health record provoked one of the largest backbench rebellions during the last session of Parliament, with the Government's majority cut to eight over eye charges.
Despite the all-party Social Services Committee report which criticised the pace at which Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, intended to introduce the reforms, as much as the proposals themselves, Tory dissent is likely to be confined to those rebels with detailed knowledge.
Their pleas for pilot projects in the key areas of self-governing hospitals and GPs' budgets are likely to be replaced by demands at committee stage for safeguards to be written into the legislation.
But the decision to add the radical reform of community care to the bill is likely to sharply increase the number of Conservative critics.
Mr Nicholas Winterton, the Conservative MP for Macclesfield, a consistent Tory backbench critic of the reforms, said yesterday: ‘I think the number of us might swell once the bill gets underway.’
A preview of the Commons debate was held in the Lords yesterday where Lord Ennals, a former Labour Health Secretary, warned the Government it could not push the proposals through the NHS in the knowledge that they were opposed by the medical profession's leaders.
Their co-operation was essential to the implementation of such reforms.
But a Conservative peer, Lord McColl of Dulwich, vice-president of the College of Health, said the original NHS Act had been passed in the teeth of BMA opposition.
Drug-linked bomb blast kills 50 in Colombia.
By Alma Guillermoprieto in Bogota
APOWERFUL bomb killed at least 50 people and wounded 500 in Bogota yesterday when it wrecked the headquarters of the Department of Administrative Security, the government agency charged with bringing Colombia's drug dealers to heel.
The blast came four months after the start of a determined government offensive against the country's cocaine traffickers.
On Tuesday, Judge Bernardo Jaramillo, who was investigating Medellin drug cartel activity, was shot dead as he was walking home.
Hidden in a bus and estimated to contain about half a ton of dynamite, the bomb ripped a wall of the nine-storey DAS building and badly damaged nearby buildings.
Mutilated bodies, some of them limbless, littered the area and pools of blood dotted pavements in the area.
Scores of employees who had been inside the building and nearby structures staggered from shattered shops and buildings, some of them weeping.
General Miguel Maza Marquez, chief of the investigative police and one of the traffickers' most vocal critics, escaped unharmed as he did from a car bomb attack last May in which seven people were killed and 50 wounded.
At noon, The Extraditables, a group of drug-traffickers, issued a statement saying the war would continue until the Senate put the issue of extraditing traffickers to the US to national referendum next month.
The five-page statement, delivered to radio stations in Medellin, did not specifically claim responsiblity for the blast.
But it was clear the statement was written yesterday because it hailed a vote by the House of Representatives on Tuesday night to make the extradition of drug traffickers a topic for a referendum.
Yesterday's blast was seen less as a direct attempt on the police chief who has most vigorously pursued Colombia's leading cocaine exporters, but as part of a campaign to terrorise non-combatants in the drug war into supporting negotiations and amnesty.
Most of the wounded were street-sellers and shopkeepers in the busy commercial sector behind the police buildings, who had arrived early to work eager for Christmas sales.
Hospital emergency wards were struggling to cope with the injured as radio announcers read lists of victims and broadcast anguished appeals from those who had not heard from relatives in the area near the explosion.
The government offensive against the drug cartel began in earnest on August 18 after the murders of a presidential candidate, Luis Carlos Galan, and the police chief in Medellin, where the leading drug traffickers are based.
Picture, page 7
Judges back TV ban on Sinn Fein.
By David Sharrock
THE Government's ban on broadcasting radio and television interviews with Sinn Fein and 10 other organisations in Northern Ireland was upheld in the Court of Appeal yesterday.
The decision was ‘fully open’ to the former home secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, in the exercise of his judgment and was not open to review by the courts, said Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, sitting with Lords Justice Ralph Gibson and McCowan.
The High Court ruled in May that Mr Hurd had acted reasonably and lawfully in imposing the ban in October last year.
The journalists challenging the High Court ruling at yesterday's hearing said they would pursue the case through to the European Court.
The journalists, BBC producer Mr Don Brind, Media Show producer Mr Alexander Graham, LBC producer Ms Victoria Leonard, former National Union of Journalists joint president Ms Scarlett MccGwire, Fred Emery, and Mr John Pilger, with Mr Thomas Nash, assistant to the NUJ general secretary, claimed the ban was unlawful, perverse and in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights.
The judges awarded the Home Office costs, but granted leave to appeal to the House of Lords.
Lord Donaldson ruled that Mr Hurd, in deciding whether to issue a directive, and in deciding its terms, was free to take account of the terms of the European Convention, but was under no obligation to do so.
The terms of the convention were irrelevant to the appeal's dismissal.
The journalists had argued that Mr Hurd, by breaching article 10 of the convention guaranteeing freedom of expression, had acted beyond his powers.
But Lord Donaldson said he did not interpret the power in the 1981 Broadcasting Act to mean that Parliament intended the home secretary to have authority either covertly to censor programmes or to require the broadcasting authorities to present news programmes other than with due impartiality and accuracy.
Although the power was ‘quite clearly all-embracing,’ there were exceptions.
For instance, it would be unlawful for the home secretary to require broadcasters to refrain from including a notice drawing attention to the ban.
The broadcasters' contention that the directives conflicted with the duty of the BBC and the Independent Broadcasting Authority to preserve ‘due impartiality’ misappreciated the nature of that duty.
The duty operated in the real world in which there would always be obstacles to giving every shade of opinion equal air time.
The directive was simply another obstacle which had to be taken into account by the broadcasting authorities.
It was ‘not self-evident’ that any duty of impartiality was owed to those who supported or excused attempts to achieve political change by terrorism.
Dismissing the argument that the directives were unreasonable, perverse or out of proportion, the judge said that perhaps the most startling feature of them was how little they restricted the supply of the ‘oxygen of publicity’ to the specified organisations.
ITN had said that in the 12 months before the ban was imposed, 0.01 per cent of air time would have been affected and these items could have been recast into a form which complied with the directives.
Lord Justice McCowan said he found it quite impossible to hold that Mr Hurd's political judgment — that the appearance of terrorists on programmes increased their standing and lent them political legitimacy — was one that no reasonable home secretary could make.
Afterwards, Mr Brind, head of the BBC Television Centre's NUJ Chapel, said: ‘I don't think anybody will be surprised.
Despite the length of the ruling it doesn't make a lot of difference to our prospects at the European Court of Human Rights.’
The case would be pursued through the House of Lords, ‘but we recognise that our best hope is in the European Court of Human Rights.’
Ms MccGwire said: ‘I think it's a terrible shame the judges are not upholding freedom of speech and the public's right to know, because that's what the case is all about.’
hdhead18,80,2.
London road pricing scheme impractical, says Parkinson
Impratical to charge for cars in London, says Parkinson ufsquare, 2,22 ufby
Michael Smith
Transport Editor ufdrop
EASING London's increasing traffic congestion by means of road pricing has effectively been ruled out by the Transport Secretary, Mr Cecil Parkinson.
Road pricing schemes have been effectively ruled out by Transport Secretary, Cecil Parkinson as a means of tackling London's increasing traffic congestion.
He Mr Parkinson indicated in the Commons yesterday that Road pricing, a form of ‘smart card’ payment to drive through popular parts of London, would be impractical, and impinge on individual freedom.
Mr Parkinson told MPs on the Commons transport committee: ‘Road pricing has a lot of practical difficulties and ‘there is something fundamentally unattractive about pricing people off the road,’ he told MPs on the Commons transport committee..’
He said There was no practical foreseeable possibility of a London-wide road pricing scheme.
being introduced on any foreseeable timescale.
Although Mr Parkinson did not entirely dismiss rule out road pricing, he will disappoint a the growing lobby wanting of those pressing for the Government to introduce schemes result in estimated charging s of £3 to £4 around £3 — £4 for to drive through central London.
Traffic flows would be cut, and the revenue Supporters of road pricing believe that the extra revenue raised by paying for journeys could fund help meet the bill for new investment in public transport, it is claimed.
and would cut down on traffic flows.
But Mr Parkinson pointed out yesterday that, while such a scheme would fail if all those motorists currently using the capital were willing to pay, a charge.
any scheme would fall down if all existing motorists into the capital agreed to meet the £3 — £4 charge.
Mr Parkinson said There would be ‘huge difficulties’ in tracking down those who failed to pay: for their journeys, estiamting that if only one in ten 10 motorists 10 per cent refused to pay their bill, the Government would need to collect 63 million times a year.be seeking payment for 63 million journeys a year.
He told the Committee that Only Singapore had persevered with a road pricing scheme, and while Hong Kong had withdrawn its.
A scheme.
their system.
But A new one scheme road pricing system was being introduced in The Hague will be watched carefully, he Mr Parkinson promised.
the committee: ‘We will be watching the Dutch experiment closely.’
Patrick Wintour adds: Motorists in London wanting to take their car into capital should be required to buy a £ 4 a day licence which would also give them access to free public transport in the City, The Liberal Democrats yesterday recommended a £4 a day central London charge, to include free out-of-centre parking and a public transport pass.
yesterday.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the party's leader, said the proposal was unique amongst the recent flood of proposals to reduce traffic congestion since it combined offering disincentives to using a car alongside positive benefits for those choosing not to do so.
The Liberal Democrats say the purchase of a London City Licence by a motorist wishing to drive into central London would entitle the driver to a ‘Freedom of the City’ pass which would give free travel to public transport in the central area and free car parking at out of centre park and ride sites.
Mr Ashdown said most projections suggested that on current trends avaerage mileage would drop from 11 mph to 9 mph, yet over 80 per cent of the population favoured sterner measures to restrict vehicle growth.
Receipts from the sale of the licences would be ploughed back into the provision of improved public transport.
The paper argues that ‘on grounds of environmental cost, loss of hosing and expense of construction, road building in urban areas is not an acceptable solution to traffic congestion’.
ufend, 2
Swifter awards to crime victims.
By John Carvel Home Affairs Editor
PLANS to reduce chronic delays in paying compensation for criminal injuries are about to be announced by the Home Secretary, Mr David Waddington, after criticism that some victims are having to wait more than two years for an award.
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board said yesterday that a 30 per cent increase in throughput last year failed to reduce its backlog.
The board's chairman, Lord Carlisle, said: ‘We are still marking time.
Put more starkly, with the current caseload and an intake of 50,000 new applications this year, even if we managed to exceed last year's output we would still have at least two years work in hand.’
He asked for streamlined procedures to sift out frivolous applications and allow individual board members greater discretion to reduce the number of full hearings.
Mr Waddington is understood to have accepted the board's proposals and is about to announce a package to speed up its work for implementation early next year.
He has ruled that compensation for victims of violent crime must be ‘timely’.
The problem emerged yesterday in the board's report for 1988/9 when it paid record compensation of £69.4 million to 27,752 victims.
The highest award was £307,781 to a computer expert who injured his back helping a store detective stop a suspected shoplifter.
Most cases take between a year and 18 months to process, but if the victim disputes the award a case can take another year for a full hearing.
Mr Waddington also announced that he has accepted a Commons home affairs committee recommendation that police officers should not be able to escape disciplinary proceedings by retiring on medical grounds.
A scheme to block the ploy has yet to be agreed with police representatives.
Young defends Rover deal.
By David Hencke
LORD Young, the former Trade Secretary, who secretly authorised the £38 million ‘sweeteners’ paid to British Aerospace to buy Rover, last night launched a strong defence of the deal.
His defence came as the Commons Public Accounts Committee decided it would meet on Monday to hold an inquiry into the Guardian's disclosure of the ‘sweeteners’ which were revealed in a confidential memorandum sent to MPs by Mr John Bourn, the Comptroller and Auditor General.
Lord Young, speaking as deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, to shipping magnates at the London Hilton, told them: ‘I am proud of the situation in Rover today.
‘When I left the private sector in 1979 to become Keith Joseph's special adviser, the car industry in this country was in ruins.
Twenty years of industrial strife had ensured that an industry where we were once world leaders was an object of pity and derision.
All because of the policies of those who shouted the loudest last week.
‘To the 40,000 or so employees, the further 50,000 employed by their distributors, and some tens of thousands more employed by their suppliers I would say that I am delighted that Rover is part of British Aerospace.’
‘I am proud that during my stewardship of DTI I was able to finish the job that Keith Joesph started.
‘In the nineties we will have a car industry competitive with any in the world.’
Lord Young declined to comment on the revelations contained in the memorandum or the confirmation by Sir Peter Gregson, permanent secretary at the DTI, that Britain has kept the deal secret because ‘it would severely damage our relations with the European Commission’.
He told them: ‘Well, Peter Gregson revealed all the facts during his marathon appearance before the Public Accounts Committee on Monday.
What I think of all this will have to await the publication of my book.’
Lord Young has offered to give evidence to the Public Accounts Committee, which usually takes evidence from civil servants only.
Mr Robert Sheldon, chairman of the committee, has said the committee might consider him attending.
But a minister has not given evidence to the committee ‘in living memory’.
‘McCarthyite’ watch on pressure groups.
By Richard Norton-Taylor
ARANGE of pressure groups, including Christian Aid, Greenpeace, the Child Poverty Action Group, the Low Pay Unit and Oxfam, are considered ‘vehicles for subversion’ by the Economic League, a study of the employment vetting agency discloses today.
It was commissioned by the National Council for Civil Liberties and uses information from the league's records.
‘Subversion’ as defined by the league extends beyond left-wing groups, says the study, and the league is extending its role.
To coincide with the study's publication, the council renewed its call for the Data Protection Act to be amended to enable individuals to see any file on them kept by the league.
An estimated 40,000 are held by it and other agencies, but since they are on paper, they fall outside the act.
‘When the league is proposing to expand its secret files to include animal activists, football troublemakers, gays and lesbians, this new law would be a significant first step in curtailing the unacceptable activities of this unaccountable organisation,’ Mr Andrew Puddephatt, the council's general secretary, said yesterday.
In a political mood captured by Mrs Thatcher's determination to hunt down the ‘enemy within,’ said Mr Puddephatt, a stand should be taken against ‘a vicious form of McCarthyism.’
The study discloses how workers were blacklisted after being quoted in the Morning Star.
A family was blacklisted after signing nomination forms for a relative standing as a Communist in a local election.
Information on employees is sometimes supplied by personnel officers of companies subscribing to the agency.
Executives from Ford, which has acknowledged subscribing to the league, have been called to appear at an industrial tribunal next month.
Mr Mick Gosling, former chairman of a union branch at Dagenham, contests his dismissal, saying he was blacklisted.
Mr John Lamidey, an officer of the Data Protection Registrar, concluded after visiting the league's London office that the data on computer was not that used for vetting, which ‘appears to be held on paper’.
Mr Stan Hardy, the league's new director-general, said yesterday that anybody could ask for material that may be held on them.
Such information was ‘entirely accurate and provable’, but the files themselves could not be inspected.
His predecessor, Mr Michael Noar, yesterday said that the emphasis had moved from ‘shop-floor subversion’ to education, the Civil Service and the media —‘the commanding heights of philosophical power rather than industrial power’.
The Economic League, The Silent McCarthyism, by Mark Hollingsworth and Charles Tremayne, NCCL, 21 Tabard Street, London SE1 4LA. £3.95.
Bonn sets new deadline for full monetary union.
By John Palmer
NEW proposals to be put by West Germany to the European Community summit in Strasbourg this weekend will significantly increase pressures on Britain to agree to a full European Monetary Union.
The West German plan, which has been agreed in outline by President Franois Mitterrand, will fix June 1994 as the final date for the EC to move to full monetary union, including a supra-national central-banking system.
It will involve a deal to give greater powers to the European Parliament to control the EC council of ministers which, in turn, will supervise the proposed central bank on behalf of the 12 member governments.
That runs counter to Mrs Thatcher's opposition to any expansion of the parliament's democratic powers.
The only cause for rejoicing in Downing Street as a result of the new West German proposals — outlined in a letter sent to President Mitterrand this week -is that the Strasbourg summit will not now decide on a date when EC governments should begin negotiating a new treaty for monetary union.
That decision may be taken instead by the EC summit due to be held in Rome in 12 months' time — although the practical effect will be to delay the start of the intergovernmental conference by only a few months to early in 1991.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's decision not to support the French proposal to fix the conference date in Strasbourg highlights his concern that the question of European monetary union and the inevitable transfer of powers from West Germany's Bundesbank to the new European central bank would get caught up in the German general election next autumn.
But others may see his move as evidence of a desire to use the election campaign to concentrate on moves towards reunification with East Germany.
There were signs of celebration in Brussels and in Paris last night that the West Germans had committed themselves to a closing date in return for a delay in starting the move to monetary union.
The president of the European Commission, Mr Jacques Delors, was said to be delighted that Bonn would throw its weight behind a more rapid move to the controversial, supra-national stages of economic and monetary union.
Equally, members of the European Parliament will welcome Bonn's decision to extend its role, which may encourage demands for an even greater transfer of powers from national parliaments to Strasbourg.
While Mrs Thatcher will welcome the proposed postponement of fixing a date for the conference, she will bitterly oppose the West German move to fix a closing date.
A senior commission official said last night: ‘From a British point of view, Mrs Thatcher may have gained a few months before the crucial business of changing the Rome treaty gets under way but she now faces a cut-off date beyond which the other EC governments are unlikely to delay their acceptance of monetary union.’
It remains to be seen what precise form of words are agreed by the 12 heads of government to express their commitment to the next stage of monetary union.
But despite last night's developments, Mrs Thatcher is still likely to be in a minority of one — both on completion date for monetary union and on her continued opposition to the European Social Charter of workers' rights.
European identity, page 10
Latecomers sink or swim in the great flotation race.
By Patrick Donovan Industrial Correspondent
WITH moments to spare before the closure of the Government's Biggest Ever Share Give-Away, Sheila Ullman broke into a frantic sprint as she turned up Princes Street in the City of London.
Using a heavy Tesco bag to help batter her way through the TV crews and a gaggle of amused onlookers, she reached the National Westminster Bank just after water privatisation's witching hour of 10am.
More than 12,000 people, from company directors to filing clerks, had been streaming into the share sorting centre with last-minute applications since the doors opened at 7.45am.
Many clutched a commuters' breakfast of buttered bun and polystyrene cup of coffee, weighing up the dilemma of being late for work against the lure of easy money.
At one point the queue stretched four deep for more than a quarter of mile.
But all Mrs Ullman found was the intimidating bulk of three police constables.
And despite her best entreaties, this Woking housewife achieved instant fame as the first person to miss the deadline for the much-hyped water offer.
So what does it feel like to miss out on Mrs Thatcher's handout to anybody who can afford to pay for shares?
Mrs Ullman looked at her toes and said she really didn't know.
Still panting, she struggled to maintain a vestige of self-respect as the press demanded a full briefing of her domestic itinerary over the last 24 hours.
Yes, her husband had asked her to put in for £500 worth of shares.
And no, she did not think it would jeopardise the marriage although he would, no doubt, be miffed at missing out on the latest freebie to the investing classes.
She may have put a brave face on it.
But with water shares expected to soar to a 30 per cent premium on the first day of trading, Mrs Ullman's delay on the Tube could have cost her as much as £150.
Mr Michael Howard, the Water minister, wore a broad smile as he watched his mistress's vision of a share-owning democracy lining up.
Symbolically, a 12-ft statue of Ceres, the Greek goddess of plenty, presided over yesterday's extraordinary scenes from a pigeon-soiled vantage point in the bank's wall.
From his vantage point astride Fleet, a chestnut police horse, PC Schrosbree could afford to look happy as he presided over the slow-moving queue.
He was among the hundreds of thousands of people who had already posted their application forms.
Others, such as Eric Bremner, a 28-year-old physics teacher, had only decided to apply for water shares on the spur of the moment.
Scouring a crumpled bank statement, he worked out how much he could afford and wrote out the cheque on his girlfriend's back.
‘I may be against this on principle but I don't see why I shouldn't be able to make a little bit of capital,’ he added.
A wide-boy type wearing a loud tartan suit said bluntly: ‘I'm out to make money.
Why else should I be here?
You're asking a lot of daft questions.’
Discarded by the press, the hapless Mrs Ullman walked slowly back to the Tube station, still reeling from her brief moment of TV fame.
Report, page 11
Flu outbreak puts hospitals on alert.
By Nigel Williams Science Correspondent
BEDS are being cleared in several London hospitals because of the large increase in influenza patients in the capital over the past few days.
In Wales, more than 40 per cent of children in West Glamorgan and Dyfed have been struck by flu in the past three weeks.
Schools in Gwynedd and Gwent were reporting cases as the virus spread.
In Scotland, health chiefs said an epidemic was imminent.
Glasgow is one of the hardest-hit areas and in some Lanarkshire schools 25 per cent of pupils have been affected.
Parts of South-west England have been badly hit but reports of a national epidemic have been an exaggeration, according to the research unit of the Royal College of General Practioners.
A spokesman for the college said levels were about 30 per cent above the comparable period last year, but this was not exceptional.
Figures for the last week in November — the latest available — show about 30 cases per 100,000 population.
An epidemic is only declared when the number of cases reaches more than 100 per 100,000.
But the Beecham drug company, which produces a monitor of flu occurrence in Britain, says its scale of between 100 to 300 shows an epidemic rating of 200.
The Emergency Bed Service has issued a yellow warning to hospitals in the North-East and South-East Thames Regional Health Authorities in the hope of releasing sufficient beds to cope with the outbreak.
The shortage had been worsened by lack of staff at hospitals because of flu, Mr Graham Hayter, of the service, said.
Miss Christine Murphy, a spokeswoman for the Public Health Laboratory Service -a Government-funded but independent organisation which also monitors levels of illness — said: ‘This year's virus is a sub-type of a strain we have seen before and many of the cases are not severe.
Children and young people are at greatest risk as the older element of the population who have experienced this before will have a degree of resistance.’
Vaccinations were recommended only for people at special risk.
The Queen was forced to cancel engagements because she had flu.
EC trading laws ‘flouted by Whitehall’.
By David Hencke Westminster Correspondent
AWHITEHALL investigation has been launched into allegations that the Government is secretly flouting European Community law by awarding contracts worth millions of pounds to British companies on an exclusive basis in advance of a privatisation sale next summer.
A routine audit is understood to have uncovered 120 furniture contracts, including orders destined for 10 Downing Street, which have been renewed without holding an open competition as required by European Community rules.
A disciplinary inquiry has also been launched after allegations that a senior civil servant and leading member of a management buy-out for the furnishing business accepted an invitation to attend the British Open golf championship from one of the main companies which benefited from the deal.
The investigation follows disclosures from Mr John Bourn, the Comptroller and Auditor General, that Britain has hidden from the EC a £38 million package of sweeteners to British Aerospace to persuade it to buy the Rover Group.
Sir Leon Brittan, the competition commissioner, has started inquiries into the Rover deal.
The discovery of the discrepancies came during an audit of the Crown Suppliers, Whitehall's furniture, fuel, and transport providers.
A bill to privatise the agency received its second reading in the Commons yesterday.
The main allegations centre on contracts worth between £100,000 and £4 million awarded by ministries and Downing Street.
They are all above the £92,500 ceiling which requires that they be advertised throughout the European Community.
All are said to have been renewed without seeking a competition for tenders or a dispensation from the EC required under EC Supplies Directive 77/62.
Lawyers in the Environment Department are said to have drawn to the attention of senior staff that renewal of the contracts was in breach of community rules.
Mr Christopher Chope, the junior environment minister and a member of the agency's board, told MPs on May 8 that the Crown Suppliers continued ‘to comply with established public procurement procedures and relevant EC/Gatt regulations.’
The disclosures come at a time when there are three known bids by senior civil servants to buy out part of the Crown Suppliers when it is privatised next year.
Any contracts won on an exclusive basis could affect the price at which it is offered for sale.
Ministers are known to have been concerned about the level of orders for the Crown Suppliers, since ministries could order furniture elsewhere.
The National Audit Office confirmed last night it was auditing Crown Suppliers accounts, and was examining its prospects for privatisation.
A spokeswoman for the office said it had decided to hold a ‘value for money’ inquiry on the lines of recent inquiries into the Royal Ordnance and Rover sales.
Last night Mr Dale Campbell Savours, Labour MP for Workington, raised the allegations in a debate on the privatisation of the Crown Suppliers.
Mr Chris Patten, the Environment Secretary, said he was sure Mr Chope could reply comprehensively when he summed up the debate.
Day in Politics, page 6
GP loses challenge to advertising rule.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
A FORMER National Health Service doctor trying to build up a private holistic treatment practice yesterday lost his Appeal Court challenge to a General Medical Council rule against advertising.
Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, said he had some sympathy for Dr Richard Colman.
But the GMC's rule against advertising was not so irrational or unreasonable that the court would interfere.
This follows a Monopolies and Mergers Commission decision that to forbid advertising by GPs was against the public interest.
Lord Justice Ralph Gibson said arguments put forward had spelled out a powerful case for changing the rule.
But if the rule was reformed, this would not indicate that the former rule was unreasonable.
The court rejected arguments that it should take account of article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which guarantees free speech.
It would be in breach of the law to accept that argument, Lord Justice Ralph Gibson said.
It would impute to Parliament an intention to import the convention into domestic law ‘by the back door.’
Dr Colman, of Fadmoor, north Yorkshire, sought GMC permission to place a factual, non-promotional advertisement in a local paper because he could find no other way to tell prospective patients of his services.
He hoped the Medical Defence Union would support a petition for leave to appeal to the House of Lords and the European Court.
Consultants win NHS review over spending on shake-up.
By David Brindle, Clare Dyer and Alan Travis
HOSPITAL consultants yesterday won permission in the High Court for a judicial review of the Government's right to spend money on its health service shake-up in advance of legislation.
Mr Justice Simon Brown said the case clearly merited consideration.
He ordered an expedited hearing, likely to be shortly after Christmas.
More than 3,000 consultants are backing the legal challenge, each having contributed at least £10 and guaranteed a further £100 towards the cost.
The case was brought in the name of Professor Harry Keen, director of clincial services (medicine) at Guy's hospital, London.
His counsel, Lord Irvine, QC, accused Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, of ‘jumping the gun without the authority of Parliament’ in authorising expenditure on the creation of self-governing hospital trusts.
The consultants calculate that ministers have put forward £250 million for the shake-up.
Although not all the reforms require legislation, the trusts plan does.
Professor Keen is one of a group of Guy's consultants opposed to the hospital becoming a trust.
He also won leave to challenge decisions of the South East Thames regional health authority to allot money to district health authorities for work on proposed trusts, as well as the districts' decisions to spend such money.
Mr Rodney Graham, a fellow consultant at Guy's, said Professor Keen had started legal action after discovering that Guy's staff were being diverted to work on implementing the NHS proposals.
Mr Clarke yesterday showed no sign of giving ground on the reforms set out in the National Health Service and Community Care Bill, due for its second reading in the Commons today.
At the Sunday Times Hospital of the Year awards, he said quality of NHS care ‘depends very largely on the luck of the draw’.
The rigidity and over-centralisation had been shown in the nurses' pay regrading exercise, which had been worth ‘nought out of 10 — useless’.
No other organisation could have ‘made such a Horlicks’ of awarding an average 19 per cent pay rise.
In a Labour survey of 130 of the 191 district health authorities in England, 92 said they will have to make cuts in services and jobs totalling £100 million by the end of the financial year, Mr Robin Cook, shadow health secretary said yesterday.
In a Commons written reply yesterday, Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the Health Minister, announced a £33 million funds package to cut hospital waiting lists.
Day in Politics, page 6
Brooke raises Unionist hopes.
By David Hearst in Belfast
MR PETER Robinson, deputy leader of the Democratic Unionist Party, said last night that he was encouraged by a speech by Mr Peter Brooke, the Northern Ireland Secretary, about talks to break the political deadlock.
Mr Brooke said there appeared to be ‘some common ground’ between Unionists and nationalists for talks to get underway.
The agenda would not be dictated by Britain, Mr Brooke said.
‘But I do believe there is some common ground: the parties who would be talking all reject violence; they all support devolution in some form, on a basis which involves both sides of the commmunity; and they all acknowledge the importance of the relationship between Northern Ireland and the Republic.’
The Secretary of State also offered a local assembly which could scrutinise the legislation more effectively than Westminster — one of the key Unionist demands.
Last night, Mr Robinson said Mr Brooke's speech had gone some way to getting dialogue ‘back on the rails.’
He was encouraged that there was a willingness to recognise the Unionist objection to the Anglo-Irish Agreement, which remained the key obstacle to talks starting.
But he added: ‘Everybody recognises that the Government has to hold on to an existing policy until the replacement is ready to put in place, and clearly the Secretary of State has to hold to his policy until an alternative has been agreed.’
Sixteen loyalists, including a senior member of the Ulster Defence Association, were arrested early yesterday in Belfast and Londonderry by police investigating allegations of collusion between loyalist para-militaries and the security forces.
It was the second wave of arrests since an inquiry was launched in September.
GP loses challenge to advertising rule.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
AFORMER National Health Service doctor trying to build up a private holistic treatment practice yesterday lost his Appeal Court challenge to a General Medical Council rule against advertising.
Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, said he had some sympathy for Dr Richard Colman and there was no suggestion that he was a ‘quack’.
But the GMC's rule against advertising was not so irrational or unreasonable that the court would interfere.
This follows a Monopolies and Mergers Commission decision that to forbid advertising by GPs was against the public interest.
Lord Justice Ralph Gibson said arguments put forward had spelled out a powerful case for changing the rule.
But if the rule was reformed, this would not indicate that the former rule was unreasonable.
The court rejected arguments that it should take account of article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which guarantees free speech.
It would be in breach of the law to accept that argument, Lord Justice Ralph Gibson said.
It would impute to Parliament an intention to import the convention into domestic law ‘by the back door.’
Dr Colman, of Fadmoor, north Yorkshire, sought GMC permission to place a factual, non-promotional advertisement in a local paper because he could find no other way to tell prospective patients of his services.
He hoped the Medical Defence Union would support an appeal to the Lords.
Gala goes on as opera ban ends.
Dancers at the Royal Opera House yesterday called off their overtime ban in time for tonight's gala performance of the Prince of the Pagodas.
A spokeswoman for Equity said that management and the dancers will discuss pay and terms of contract later this week.
Two shows were cancelled because of the ban.
Car quota scrapped.
The European Community is to scrap quotas on Japanese car imports in return for greater openness in Japanese markets, the commission said yesterday..
Testimony changed.
An ex-director and an employee of D M de Bruijn, the suppliers of lead-contaminated cow feed, were released from custody in Holland yesterday after a witness withdrew testimony.
Hotel for jury.
The Old Bailey jury trying Celia Palmer, 18, and her boyfriend Danny Palmer, 17, for the murder of baby Christopher Palmer was sent to a hotel last night despite asking to be allowed to begin deliberations.
PM's global warning.
Global warming could soon be accelerated dramatically due to a thinning of the sea ice, Mrs Thatcher said yesterday in the 50th anniversary lecture of the parliamentary and scientific committee at the Lords.
Mail ‘action’.
Daily Mail journalists voted for industrial action over plans not to recognise the National Union of Journalists in a postal ballot.
In the dog house.
A flag worded ‘The dog that left this mess has an inconsiderate owner’ was launched yesterday by Fido, Fight Inconsiderate Dog Owners..
Rape ruling reserved.
The Court of Appeal reserved judgment yesterday in the appeal by a physiotherapist, Kenneth Cain, against a High Court ruling that he raped a patient and must pay her more than £25,000 compensation.
Cities get own minister ‘to cut red tape’.
CITIES targeted by the Government are each to have a minister from a team of nine headed by the Inner Cities Minister, Mr David Hunt, to advise them on regenerating the urban environment They will work with City Action Teams and Inner City Task Forces already set up, Mr Hunt yesterday told a London conference, Business in the Cities.
‘We shall be rolling up our sleeves and getting out into the communities.
We are determined to cut the red tape.’
Manchester, Salford and Rochdale will have Mr Robert Atkins (Roads); Leeds and Bradford, Mr Tim Eggar (Employment); Tyne and Wear, Teesside, Hartlepool and Middlesbrough, Mr Douglas Hogg (Industry); Doncaster, Lord Henley (Social Security); Nottingham, Derby and Leicester, Lady Hooper (Health); Birmingham and Coventry, Mr Alan Howarth (Education); Liverpool and Bristol, Mr David Hunt; south London, Mr Colin Moynihan (Sport); and east and west London, Mr John Patten (Home Office).
Famine appeal cash floods in.
Credit card donations to the Ethiopia famine appeal on TV and radio reached £377,882 within hours.
Donations can be mailed to Ethiopia Famine Appeal, PO Box 999, London EC2R 7ET, paid at banks/post offices, or by credit card on 01 200 0202.
Druids fight solstice ban.
Druids said they would pursue their case to the European Court against English Heritage's decision to close Stonehenge again next year at the summer solstice.
Ruling on oils reserved.
The Court of Appeal reserved judgment on the challenge by auctioneers Messenger May Baverstock of Guildford to a High Court ruling that they had been negligent in selling for £840 two oil paintings that soon fetched £88,000 at Sotheby's as works of George Stubbs.
Messenger May Baverstock were ordered to pay £112,000 to the former owner.
Shilton wins tax round.
The Court of Appeal dismissed an Inland Revenue challenge to a High Court ruling that £75,000 paid to England and Derby County goalkeeper Peter Shilton by Nottingham Forest when they sold him to Southampton in 1982 should be treated as a ‘golden handshake’.
The Revenue was granted leave to appeal to the House of Lords.
Scholar wins libel award.
American art scholar Professor Frederick Hartt won £7,500 libel damages at the High Court in London over two articles in the Independent on his attribution of a statuette to Michelangelo.
But in his judgment Mr Justice Morland said Professor Hartt had been ‘dishonourable and deceitful’ by posing as a disinterested scholar when he had a financial interest in the statue's sale.
U2 beam East.
The BBC and Ireland's RTE will beam the Irish rock band U2 live, via stereo radio satellite, to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union on New Year's Eve as a tribute to ‘the massive recent changes’ in the Eastern bloc.
Rivers authority will have teeth drawn, says scientist Green Bill ‘damages pollution control’.
By Paul Brown Environment Correspondent
THE Government's Green Bill would seriously damage the independent role of National Rivers Authority and its ability to clamp down on pollution, the organisation's chief scientist, Dr Jan Pentreath, said yesterday.
Dr Pentreath, speaking at the European Study Conference in London, said the teeth of the NRA were likely to be drawn by the bill before the organisation has a chance to use them.
The independent authority's direct responsibility would be given back to government.
‘This we consider to be a retrograde and unnecessary step,’ particularly since these powers had only just been vested in the NRA under the Water Act, he said.
Under the Green Bill, the Government was introducing integrated pollution control, which the NRA endorsed, but at the same time was removing the independent monitoring of the system.
Instead of all the new controls being policed by the National Rivers Authority some of the responsibility was being handed over to Her Majesty's Inpsector of Pollution, with decisions being taken by the Department of Environment.
This would mean split powers, split registers of consents and split responsibilites for organising the schemes.
This particularly concerned the most dangerous ‘red list’ substances and their discharge.
‘Policing the most indentified dangerous substances would no longer be independent of government control — they will be controlled by government,’ he said.
One of the most important provisions for raising public confidence promised in the bill was the registers of licences and pollution control for each area.
Dr Pentreath said there would now need to be two registers, each containing data derived from two organisations thus confusing the public and independent groups and undermining public confidence.
These comments, coming from the NRA's senior scientist a few days before the Government's Green Bill is due to be published, add more problems to the rough passage already faced by the legislation.
As well as the controversery over the dismembering of the Nature Conservancy Council the Government has been criticised for the low morale and undermanning in the pollution inspectorate.
The sudden death of the director Brian Ponsford this week, after the resignation of three top inspectors, has left the Government trying to rebuild public confidence in a service which is the cornerstone of its green proposals.
Lisa Buckingham writes: Chemical companies have finally secured insurance to help them pay the costs of cleaning up the long term damage they do to the environment.
The scheme, launched yesterday, is expected to provide each participating chemical firm with around £5 million to meet claims.
It is the first time the industry has been able to purchase cover for long-term environmental damage although it does buy insurance against sudden pollution incidents or claims from disasters such as explosions.
The Chemical Industries Asociation, which has organised the new insurance cover, said stringent pollution tests would be applied to companies wanting to buy the cover.
But insurers have agreed to pay out if it is discovered in future that procedures which would now be classified as benign are found to cause environmental damage.
The chemical industry's efforts to secure insurance have been stepped up following the publication of a number of European directives suggesting a move towards much wider compulsory compensation for environmental damage.
Kidney doctor backs ‘gifts’.
By Owen Bowcott
AWORLDWIDE shortage of kidneys for transplant might be resolved by a system of ‘rewarded gifts’, a leading transplant surgeon and opponent of cash for human organs said yesterday.
This was ‘not an expression of approval by myself or my colleagues,’ Mr Robert Sells, a former president of the British Transplantation Society, told a hearing of the General Medical Council's professional conduct committee.
Mr Sells said data emerging from hospitals in Madras was offering an alternative where it was impractical and too expensive to treat large numbers of patients on dialysis machines.
‘The Madras doctors called this rewarded gifts, which I would call sale by another name.
If applied on an institutional scale it could abolish the deficit of cadaveric transplants and could go a long way towards solving the moral problem that continues to exercise me and my colleagues.’
Most kidneys for transplant come from those who have left their bodies for the organs to be used after death, but there were not enough.
Under the scheme in India donors were paid £1,000, and 325 operations had already been carried out.
Mr Sells's statement came on the third day of the inquiry into allegations that three London specialists were involved in trafficking in kidneys.
The doctors accused are Mr Michael Bewick, a kidney transplant surgeon, Dr Raymond Crockett, a Harley Street kidney expert, and Mr Michael Joyce, a urologist at Guy's Hospital.
They deny serious professional misconduct.
Mr Bewick was criticised strongly yesterday by Mr Sells for carrying out too many operations rather than reflecting on the ethics involved.
Mr Rodger Bell QC, for Mr Bewick, suggested that his client had a ‘bee in his bonnet’ about surgeons being able to work anywhere at a drop of a hat.
Mr Sells said he had corresponded with Mr Bewick and asked why he had not joined the BTS and become involved in debates on transplants.
In May 1985 Mr Bewick had been duped into believing a kidney given by a living Indian donor was from a relative, Mr Sells said.
‘If he had participated in that debate and gone through the moral and ethical gymnastics we were going through, I think things would have turned out very differently.’
The hearing continues today.
Non-Communist becomes acting head of state Krenz quits as unrest fears grow.
By Anna Tomforde in East Berlin
THE East German army last night intervened in the crisis gripping the country for the first time, warning that ‘chaos and anarchy’ would not be tolerated and calling on troops to protect military installations against possible attacks by demonstrators.
The warning, which followed an appeal by the government for people to refrain from storming installations of the National People's Army, came as the disgraced former Communist leader, Mr Egon Krenz, stood down as head of state and chairman of the country's Defence Council.
His place as head of state was taken by Mr Manfred Gerlach, the veteran leader of the Liberal Democratic Party.
ADN, the official news agency, said the military leaders had called on the armed forces to fulfil their constitutional task of defending East Germany ‘calmly and reliably during these fateful hours’.
The military called on all citizens ‘to share our concern for securing peace and to support our efforts for this.
Only together can we maintain the sovereignty of the GDR and save our country from anarchy and chaos,’ it said.
The generals' statement was issued by ADN shortly after the government said there were increasing signs that citizens might attack army bases.
There have already been public attacks on the offices of the hated security police.
Meanwhile, the Communist Party, driven by the furious pace of events, brought forward to tomorrow a crucial party congress to debate its future.
Head of state and chairman of the National Defence Council were the last two posts that Mr Krenz, aged 52, held after resigning as Communist Party chief last Sunday.
He has been at the helm for six weeks.
The politburo and central committee also stepped down.
The five smaller parties represented in the new ‘coalition government’ yesterday withdrew their support for Mr Krenz, saying they did not believe his assurances that he was unaware of the large-scale corruption among the previous communist leadership.
Mr Krenz, who is certain to become the next target of popular calls for revenge following the corruption revelations, left office warning that ‘anti-democratic forces’ could now roll back the process of change he had tried to introduce.
He apologised for having failed to assess the extent of corruption and abuse of power.
Last Friday, Mr Krenz told parliament that he never enjoyed privileges under the old regime of his mentor, Mr Erich Honecker.
But a shop assistant in the elite government village where Mr Krenz also lived, told local television he had been a regular customer in the supermarket supplying top officials with luxury goods.
The special party congress, staged under the auspices of the 25-member ‘working committee’ that has taken over the functions of the Communist SED will last through the weekend.
It had initially been planned for next week.
The congress — taking place in an atmosphere of extreme vindictiveness among the SED rank and file following the corruption revelations — will determine the future of the Communist Party.
Representatives are due to elect a completely new central committee and politburo, but the party newspaper, Neues Deutschland, suggested yesterday that such ‘Stalinist institutions’ would perhaps no longer be required if the SED was transformed into a ‘truly democratic party’.
The emergency SED leadership pledged that the congress would break with the ‘Stalinist system’.
Among those tipped to become the new party chief is Mr Wolfgang Berghofer, Dresden's reformist mayor.
Mr Gerlach, the acting head of state, said later he was ‘not happy’ about taking over his new role and would not stand as a candidate in the necessary Volkskammer election.
Although his party has been the first of the smaller satellite parties to adopt a more independent role, Mr Gerlach, aged 61, clearly felt that he too may not survive the popular anger.
Citizens' Committees outraged by the scale of corruption that has emerged during the last week, have continued their crusade against state, party and security institutions.
Near the town of Gera, citizens forced their way into a secret bunker of the former Stasi secret police, where they discovered a ‘communications centre’.
They reported that lorry-loads of files and documents had been taken from the bunker during the last few days.
They also found glowing ash as evidence that papers had been destroyed.
On Monday night, a teargas grenade was fired at angry demonstrators trying to storm the local Stasi building in the town of Suhl.
They were later allowed entry.
To defuse this near state of lawlessness, the Interior Ministry has ordered the abolition of the workers' militia in factories.
Members have been asked to hand in their guns, grenade throwers, anti-aircraft guns and armoured vehicles.
Virtually the entire leadership of the Stasi, renamed as the National Office for Security, has resigned.
An amnesty for convicts, including about 2,000 political prisoners, has been announced for December 12.
Manfred Seidel, the deputy director of the Communist Party's foreign exchange agency, the Commercial Co-Ordination agency, had been detained on suspicion of diverting 200 million marks (£71.6 million) in hard currency earnings abroad, ADN reported yesterday.
An unidentified East German, arrested in a crackdown on corruption as he tried to flee with more than half a million marks (about £180,0000), has hanged himself in his cell.
Leader Comment, page 18; Reunification outlook, page 19; Kremlin holds the reins, page 7
Non-Communist becomes acting head of state Krenz falls as unrest fears grow.
By Anna Tomforde in East Berlin
THE East German army last night intervened in the crisis gripping the country for the first time, warning that ‘chaos and anarchy’ would not be tolerated and calling on troops to protect military bases against possible attacks by demonstrators.
The warning, which followed an appeal by the government for people to refrain from storming installations of the National People's Army, came as the disgraced former Communist leader, Mr Egon Krenz, stood down as head of state and chairman of the country's Defence Council.
His place as head of state was taken by Mr Manfred Gerlach, the veteran leader of the Liberal Democratic Party.
ADN, the official news agency, said the military leaders had called on the armed forces to fulfil their constitutional task of defending East Germany ‘calmly and reliably during these fateful hours’.
The military called on all citizens ‘to share our concern for securing peace and to support our efforts for this.
Only together can we maintain the sovereignty of the GDR and save our country from anarchy and chaos,’ it said.
The generals' statement was issued by ADN shortly after the government said there were increasing signs that citizens might attack army bases.
There have already been public attacks on the offices of the hated security police.
Meanwhile, the Communist Party, driven by the furious pace of events, brought forward to tomorrow a crucial party congress to debate its future.
Head of state and chairman of the National Defence Council were the last two posts that Mr Krenz, aged 52, held after resigning as Communist Party chief last Sunday.
He has been at the helm for six weeks.
The politburo and central committee also stepped down.
The five smaller parties represented in the new ‘coalition government’ yesterday withdrew their support for Mr Krenz, saying they did not believe his assurances that he was unaware of the large-scale corruption among the previous Communist leadership.
Mr Krenz, who is certain to become the next target of popular calls for revenge following the corruption revelations, left office warning that ‘anti-democratic forces’ could now roll back the process of change he had tried to introduce.
He apologised for having failed to assess the extent of corruption and abuse of power.
Last Friday, Mr Krenz told parliament that he never enjoyed privileges under the old regime of his mentor, Mr Erich Honecker.
But a shop assistant in the elite government village where Mr Krenz also lived, told local television he had been a regular customer in the supermarket supplying top officials with luxury goods.
The special party congress, staged under the auspices of the 25-member ‘working committee’ that has taken over the functions of the Communist SED will last through the weekend.
It had initially been planned for next week.
The congress — taking place in an atmosphere of extreme vindictiveness among the SED rank and file following the corruption revelations — will determine the future of the Communist Party.
Representatives are due to elect a completely new central committee and politburo, but the party newspaper, Neues Deutschland, suggested yesterday that such ‘Stalinist institutions’ would perhaps no longer be required if the SED was transformed into a ‘truly democratic party’.
The emergency SED leadership pledged that the congress would break with the ‘Stalinist system’.
Among those tipped to become the new party chief is Mr Wolfgang Berghofer, Dresden's reformist mayor.
Mr Gerlach, the acting head of state, said later he was ‘not happy’ about taking over his new role and would not stand as a candidate in the necessary Volkskammer election.
Although his party has been the first of the smaller satellite parties to adopt a more independent role, Mr Gerlach, aged 61, clearly felt that he too may not survive the popular anger.
Citizens' Committees outraged by the scale of corruption that has emerged during the last week, have continued their crusade against state, party and security institutions.
Near the town of Gera, citizens forced their way into a secret bunker of the former Stasi secret police, where they discovered a ‘communications centre’.
They reported that lorry-loads of files and documents had been taken from the bunker during the last few days, and found glowing ash —‘evidence’ of destroyed papers.
On Monday night, a teargas grenade was fired at angry demonstrators trying to storm the local Stasi building in the town of Suhl.
They were later allowed entry.
To defuse this near state of lawlessness, the Interior Ministry has ordered the abolition of the workers' militia in factories.
Members have been asked to hand in guns, grenade throwers, anti-aircraft guns and armoured vehicles.
An amnesty for convicts, including 2,000 political prisoners, has been set for Tuesday.
Manfred Seidel, the deputy director of the Communist Party's foreign exchange agency, the Commercial Coordination agency, had been detained on suspicion of diverting 200 million marks (£71.6 million) in hard currency earnings abroad, ADN reported yesterday.
His former boss, Alexander Schalck-Golodkowski, who fled abroad last week after he came under investigation for fraud, gave himself up yesterday in West Berlin, police said.
An unidentified East German, arrested in a crackdown on corruption as he tried to flee with more than half a million marks (about £180,000) has hanged himself in his cell.
Leader Comment, page 18; Reunification outlook, page 19; Kremlin holds the reins, page 7
Non-Communist becomes acting head of state Krenz quits as unrest fears grow.
By Anna Tomforde in East Berlin
The East German army last night intervened in the crisis gripping the country for the first time, warning that ‘chaos and anarchy’ would not be tolerated and calling on troops to protect military installations against possible attacks by demonstrators.
The warning, which followed an appeal by the government for people to refrain from storming installations of the National People's Army, came as the disgraced former Communist leader, Mr Egon Krenz, stood down as head of state and chairman of the country's Defence Council.
His place as head of state was taken by Mr Manfred Gerlach, the veteran leader of the Liberal Democratic Party.
ADN, the official news agency, said the military leaders had called on the armed forces to fulfil their constitutional task of defending East Germany ‘calmly and reliably during these fateful hours’.
The military called on all citizens ‘to share our concern for securing peace and to support our efforts for this.
Only together can we maintain the sovereignty of the GDR and save our country from anarchy and chaos,’ the statement said.
The generals' statement was issued by ADN shortly after the government said there were increasing signs that citizens might attack army bases.
There have already been public attacks on the offices of the hated security police.
Meanwhile, the Communist Party, driven by the furious pace of events, brought forward to tomorrow a crucial party congress to debate its future.
Head of state and chairman of the National Defence Council were the last two posts that Mr Krenz, aged 52, held after resigning as Communist Party chief last Sunday.
He has been only six weeks at the helm.
The politburo and central committee also stepped down.
The five smaller parties represented in the new ‘coalition government’ yesterday withdrew their support for Mr Krenz, saying they did not believe his assurances that he was unaware of the large-scale corruption among the previous communist leadership of which he was a vital part.
Mr Krenz, who is certain to become the next target of popular calls for revenge following the corruption revelations, left office warning that ‘anti-democratic forces’ could now roll back the process of change he had tried to introduce.
He apologised for having failed to assess the extent of corruption and abuse of power.
Last Friday, Mr Krenz told parliament that he never enjoyed privileges under the old regime of his mentor, Mr Erich Honecker.
But a shop assistant in the elite government village where Mr Krenz also lived, told local television he had been a regular customer in the supermarket supplying top officials with luxury goods.
The special party congress, staged under the auspices of the 25-member ‘working committee’ that has taken over the functions of the Communist SED will last through the weekend.
It had earlier been planned for next week.
The congress — taking place in an atmosphere of extreme vindictiveness among the SED rank and file following the corruption revelations — will determine the future of the Communist Party.
Representatives are due to elect a completely new central committee and politburo, but the party newspaper, Neues Deutschland, suggested yesterday that such ‘Stalinist institutions’ would perhaps no longer be required if the SED was transformed into a ‘truly democratic party’.
The emergency SED leadership pledged that the congress would break with the ‘Stalinist system’.
Among those tipped to become the new party chief is Mr Wolfgang Berghofer, Dresden's reformist mayor.
Mr Gerlach, the acting head of state, said later he was ‘not happy’ about taking over his new role and would not stand as a candidate in the necessary Volkskammer election.
Although his party has been the first of the smaller satellite parties to adopt a more independent role, Mr Gerlach, aged 61, clearly felt that he too may not be able to survive the revolutionary climate of popular anger.
Citizens' Committees outraged by the scale of corruption that has emerged during the last week, have continued their crusade against state, party and security institutions.
Near the town of Gera, in the south, citizens forced their way into a secret bunker of the former Stasi secret police, where they discovered a ‘communications centre’.
They reported that lorry-loads of files and documents had been taken from the bunker during the last few days, and said they had found glowing ash as evidence that papers had been destroyed.
On Monday night, a teargas grenade was fired at angry demonstrators trying to storm the local Stasi building in the town of Suhl.
They were later allowed entry.
To defuse what is almost a state of lawlessness, the Interior Ministry has ordered the abolition of the workers' militia in factories.
Members have been asked to hand in their guns, grenade throwers, anti-aircraft guns and armoured vehicles to the army and the police.
Virtually the entire leadership of the Stasi, renamed as the National Office for Security, has resigned.
An amnesty for convicts, including an estimate 2,000 political prisoners, was announced for December 12, after hunger strikes had spread throughout the country's jails.
The general public prosector has ordered the release of Mr Wolfgang Vogel, a prominent lawyer and former close aide of Mr Honecker who was detained on Tuesday on suspicion of ‘criminal blackmail’.
The prosecutor apologised, saying the allegations were unfounded.
Leader Comment, page 18; Reunification outlook, page 19
Airline terrorism warning.
By Gareth Parry
AGLOBAL aviation security network is needed urgently to prevent another Lockerbie disaster, which could happen at any time, an expert on international terrorism warned yesterday.
Professor Paul Wilkinson of the Research Institute for the Study of Conflict and Terrorism was in London launching a report into the mid-air terrorist bombing of a Pan Am 747 above the Scottish town last December, which killed 270 people.
Governments and airlines had failed to learn lessons from the incident.
‘We are way behind in taking the necessary measures that will help to prevent this kind of tragedy happening again.
Future Lockerbies can and will occur.
Next time it might come down over the centre of a large city.’
Airport security was largely superficial, and outdated equipment could not detect plastic explosives.
Sophisticated screening equipment capable of detecting explosives like Semtex was already available, and should be introduced without delay.
A new hi-tech identity card should be introduced — by airlines if not governments — to supplement passports, which were more easily forged.
In addition, a European court to try international terrorists and drug traffickers should be set up, he said.
Methodists chide PM over poverty gap.
By Andrew Culf
METHODIST leaders yesterday accused the Prime Minister of increasing the gap between Britain's rich and poor.
In an open letter to Mrs Thatcher, the Reverend Dr John Vincent, president of the Methodist Conference, and former president, the Reverend Dr Richard Jones, said Tory policies had created an ‘underclass’ of deprived people.
The letter provided further evidence of the widening schism between the church and Downing Street.
It called for the repeal of legislation ‘which leads to the victimisation of the poor’.
This included the poll tax and changes in health provision, unemployment and housing benefits and education.
Dr Vincent and Dr Jones delivered the message to Downing Street after Mrs Thatcher refused to see a delegation from the church, a decision which they described as an ‘affront’.
They wrote: ‘It is not often that a major British church seeks such an interview, and the conference and our 500,000 members and 1 million community cannot but be offended.
‘Your unwillingness indicates insensitivity to what must have been perceived as deeply held and deeply felt concerns and convictions of the Methodist people.’
Methodist leaders sought the meeting with Mrs Thatcher after a resolution passed at the Methodist Conference in June last year, which declared outrage at the divisive effects of government policy.
The letter said: ‘We do not believe a nation can be rich or successful while some are ground down into an ‘underclass’ or are deprived of the means of contributing to society.
‘We call for a priority to be given immediately to new legislation which will actively facilitate the re-entry into our society of those at present disadvantaged within it.’
It also suggests Mrs Thatcher should initiate a public forum where the Methodist Church and others concerned about social issues could meet her and ministers to seek ways of overcoming the divisions within society, engendering a ‘new spirit of common commitment and enterprise.’
Woody Allen season leads BBC's Christmas offering.
THE BBC's Christmas schedule features a season of films by Woody Allen, including Hannah and Her Sisters and The Purple Rose of Cairo, and films starring Meryl Streep, beginning with Out of Africa.
Others will include the TV premiers of Crocodile Dundee, starring Paul Hogan, Clockwise, with John Cleese, and Prizzi's Honor, with Jack Nicholson.
The schedule will include a Christmas special from Birds of a Feather stars Pauline Quirke and Linda Robson, and editions of comedies such as Only Fools and Horses, and Bread, which will be celebrating a ‘green’ Christmas.
There will also be special editions of Ever Decreasing Circles, with Richard Briers, Blackadder's Christmas Carol, Porridge, Dad's Army, and Some Mothers Do ‘Ave ‘Em.
Other Christmas shows include a Russ Abbot special and Warren Mitchell as Alf Garnett In Sickness and In Health.
Paul Daniels, Jimmy Savile, Les Dennis, and Les Dawson all have special shows, while Noel Edmonds will be reuniting families across the world in Noel's Christmas Presents.
Britain resists EC concession.
By Michael White and John Palmer
MRS THATCHER will fly to Strasbourg for the two-day European summit tonight with no intention of making a conciliatory gesture over the Social Charter or economic integration to lessen the likelihood of Britain being isolated from the development of the rest of the community.
Whitehall officials are putting their usual brave face on the prospect that, against British objections, a version of the Social Charter will be agreed and an inter-governmental conference arranged for late 1990 or early 1991 to consider amending the Treaty of Rome in the direction of a single central bank and currency.
They stressed London's constant theme of ever-more open markets which chalked up a success with this week's unexpected decision to break down restrictions on competition in the European airline industry.
Nonetheless, the dominant tone remains suspicious.
Dissident Tory MPs’ hopes that their 57-60 votes against the Prime Minister in Tuesday's leadership election would prompt her to trim her Euro-sails are unlikely to materialise quickly, if at all.
Pressure increased yesterday when a Lords report attacked ‘excessive’ government criticism of the draft Social Charter and Tory members of the European Parliament complained that the Government was falsely claiming their support.
In pre-summit manoeuvres, European trade union leaders also warned of the ‘danger of social strife’ if the 1992 market arrived without proper social protection for workers and criticised France for allowing the Charter to be watered down in a doomed effort to win Mrs Thatcher's support.
The MEPs will make their protests at a meeting with the Foreign Office minister, Mr Francis Maude, today.
Lord O'Hagan, the group's social affairs spokesman, said: ‘I object to being misrepresented and I want to make sure that this sort of thing does not happen again.’
The MEPs' anger focuses on remarks in the Commons by Mr Maude and the drive by the Employment Secretary, Mr Norman Fowler, against the charter as a threat to jobs.
Whitehall last night confirmed the minimum-wage provisions have been deleted from the draft but insists working hours, statutory holidays and worker participation clauses will increase costs.
Cabinet ministers, including the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, who want British entry into the Exchange Rate Mechanism some time next year, if possible, are holding fire.
In today's Financial Times Mr Hurd says Britain would attend any conference to discuss changes in the Treaty of Rome and added: ‘The empty chair is not a British concept.’
The Government's stance took a further knock yesterday when the Conservative Bow Group published a survey showing senior British industrialists were not as vehemently opposed to the Charter as ministers.
It showed 42 per cent believed it could prove a useful catalyst for improving social conditions with 45 per cent against.
However, the Employment minister, Mr Tim Eggar, last night insisted the most effective social dimension to Europe was the single market, not regulations on employment.
Meanwhile, the desire for community unity in Strasbourg in the face of events in Eastern Europe means a flexibly-interpreted communique will emerge from the summit on Saturday.
Inclusion of Britain's alternatives to the Delors version of economic and monetary union on the IGC agenda could be one face-saver.
Whitehall is anxious to deflect attention to two areas — the follow-up to last month's Paris summit to provide aid to Eastern Europe, and further efforts to liberalise the internal European market for 1992.
On the IGC, Whitehall insists more preparatory work is needed.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, won £105 in a Tory sweepstake predicting votes in the leadership contest.
Politics, page 6; Commentary, page 19; City Notebook, page 11
MPs return to decent obscurity.
By Michael White, Chief Political Correspondent ‘A.
H well, back to obscurity,’ a Tory MP muttered to his colleague yesterday as they passed a journalist who failed to leap forward and solicit their views on the party leadership.
With microwave ovens, Manila and the flu epidemic suddenly dominating the news it was as if the event had never occurred except in Sir Anthony Meyer's imagination.
That is how Mrs Thatcher and her entourage are playing it and while many of the 57, probably 59, dissenters may disagree they, too, reinforced the Downing Street mood by prudently going to earth.
It perfectly caught the air of feebleness which has characterised months of desultory chatter.
Not one of the 33 No-voters, let alone the 24 abstainers, was prepared to go on television on Tuesday night to stand by Sir Anthony.
‘You'd have thought one of them would have had the balls,’ said one wet who voted for Mrs Thatcher on the grounds that no serious candidate had come forward.
The Prime Minister may be almost as contemptuous of her wetter supporters as of outright opponents — the ‘hard core’ of enemies any leader, especially a ‘conviction politician’, must acquire in nearly 15 years of leadership.
‘Forty of them would have voted against her if the Lord God Almighty had come down and instructed them not to’ said one minister.
‘Sixty-five of those who voted against her in 1975 are still in the House.
So 57 against her equals a net gain,’ said another So who wins from this week's mini-drama?
The Labour Opposition wins, possibly the Liberal-Democrats too if disaffected Tories drift their way rather than to the Greens.
Certainly Mrs Thatcher has not won, though the damage could have been much worse.
‘I don't think she's been either strengthened or weakened,’ one Cabinet minister declared.
‘I don't think it's made any difference.’
Mr George Younger, the Prime Minister's campaign manager, says she will take criticisms to heart.
That remains to be seen: an 85 per cent mandate from her 374 voters is convincing by any standards.
The 1922 committee is almost certain to raise to 20 or more the number of MPs needed to sponsor a challenger in future.
After Tony Benn's defeat by Mr Kinnock, Labour raised the threshold from 15 per cent of MPs to 40 MPs —‘too high’ one Tory whip said yesterday.
Mr Benn got 38 of the 221 MPs' votes cast in 1988 and, he ruefully noted this week, a much worse press.
‘It's safer to be in the centre,’ he said.
What of the hopefuls?
Sir Geoffrey Howe, increasingly sidelined by events, must have lost his best moment when this week's challenge failed seriously to wound the Prime Minister.
Mr Michael Heseltine stayed ‘out of the process’ and must await his chance.
He is the bad news candidate, the party saviour if things go wrong.
But since he is Sir Anthony's choice he may have been harmed by the Meyer candidacy.
By the same token Mr Kenneth Baker, as loyally supportive of Mrs Thatcher as Mr Heseltine was not, may have helped himself.
For him, and even more so for potential runners in their 40s, Mr John Major, Mr Chris Patten and A.N.Other, the timing was all wrong.
Their hope is to succeed as the consolidator of post-Thatcherism after the fourth election win.
But in politics the unlikely can happen, a Meyer candidacy for example.
Epidemic alert as flu cases increase.
By Nigel Williams Science Correspondent
BEDS are being cleared in several London hospitals because of the large increase in flu patients in the capital over the past few days.
In Wales, more than 40 per cent of children in West Glamorgan and Dyfed have been struck by flu in the past three weeks.
Schools in Gwynedd and Gwent were reporting cases as the virus spread.
In Scotland, health chiefs said an epidemic was imminent.
Glasgow is one of the hardest-hit areas and in some Lanarkshire schools 25 per cent of pupils have been affected.
Parts of South-west England have been badly hit but reports of a national epidemic have been an exaggeration, according to the research unit of the Royal College of General Practioners which collects reports from more than 200 doctors at 62 practices throughout England and Wales.
A spokesman for the college said levels were about 30 per cent above the comparable period last year, but this was not exceptional.
Figures for the last week in November — the latest available — show about 30 cases per 100,000 population.
An epidemic is only declared when the number of cases reaches more than 100 per 100,000.
But the Beecham drug company, which produces its own monitor of flu occurrence in Britain, says its scale of between 100 to 300 shows an epidemic rating of 200.
The Emergency Bed Service has issued a yellow warning to hospitals in the North-East and South-East Thames Regional Health Authorities in the hope of releasing sufficient beds to cope with the outbreak.
The shortage had been worsened by lack of staff at hospitals because of flu, Mr Graham Hayter, of the Emergency Bed Service, said.
Miss Christine Murphy, a spokeswoman for the Public Health Laboratory Service -a Government-funded but independent organisation which also monitors levels of illness — said: ‘This year's virus is a sub-type of a strain we have seen before and many of the cases are not severe.
‘Children and young people are at greatest risk as the older element of the population who have experienced this before will have a degree of resistance.’
Vaccinations were recommended only for people at special risk.
The Queen was forced to cancel two engagements yesterday and another today because she has flu.
Gunman kills 13 at university.
A gunman wearing a hunting outfit killed 13 people at the University of Montreal yesterday before committing suicide.
The man, with a.22 rifle, rampaged through a classroom, hallways and the cafeteria ‘shooting at anything that moved’.
He was one of three men who ‘wanted to get feminists’.
The gunman had entered a classroom and ordered male students to leave.
Bonn deadline.
West Germany proposals to the EC summit will increase pressure on Britain to agree to full monetary union.
Page 20.
Water sale ‘underpriced’.
Mr Michael Howard, the Water minister, effectively admitted that water shares have been underpriced.
Page 11; Eyewitness, page 20.
France backs forum.
President Mitterrand has backed Soviet proposals for a 35-nation conference next year to decide Europe's future.
Page 7.
Media ban upheld.
The Government's ban on media interviews with Sinn Fein was upheld in the Court of Appeal.
Page 4.
Saatchi losses.
Saatchi and Saatchi, the advertising agency, has plunged into loss.
Page 11; Outlook, page 13
Minister tells why he refused ban on killer toy.
By Paul Nettleton
AGOVERNMENT minister described yesterday how he agonised over whether to ban Kinder Surprise chocolate eggs after the death of the three-year-old Birmingham girl, Jennifer Ashton.
Mr Eric Forth, consumer affairs minister, told MPs he had been ‘very affected’ by the death but ‘on balance’had decided a ban was not justified on a product which carried a warning on the packaging.
The girl died after choking on part of a toy inside one of the eggs.
Mr Nigel Griffiths, Labour consumer affairs spokesman, asked why Mr Forth had refused a ban on the eggs, which were still on sale.
Mr Forth said: ‘There are many other products and toys which also have small parts.
If we were to start banning every product which could be swallowed by a child, there would be very little left on the market in terms of toys.’
Peers urge PM to back the charter.
By Patrick Wintour Political Correspondent
AN all-party committee of peers yesterday condemned government concern over the proposed EC Social Charter as ‘excessive’ and recommended that the Prime Minister treat it as a basis for an agreement with her Community partners at this weekend's Strasbourg summit.
‘It is of great importance that the UK should not appear to turn its back on Europe, so that it can play its full part in negotiations,’ the peers say in a report rushed out yesterday ahead of the Strasbourg talks.
They also argue that the latest draft of the charter, drawn up by President Mitterrand, has already gone a long way to assuage Mrs Thatcher's legitimate fears about the loss of British sovereignty.
The committee, chaired by Lord Allen of Abbeydale, says: ‘The Government should accept the draft charter as a basis for negotiation.
The changes required are not so great that it should be rejected outright.
Indeed the latest text has gone a long way towards meeting the UK's objections.’
The peers argue that if Britain fails to treat it at least as a basis for negotiation ‘the other 11 member states may well go ahead and sign the charter without any UK participation’.
Such a move might release the UK from the moral obligation to support any legislation stemming from it, but the Commission would still be entitled to bring forward legal proposals.
The peers recommend the Government to seek only to ammend the charter in two respects.
First, unnecessary detail should be excised, leaving member countries to negotiate implementation of the charter's broad principles at a later stage.
Secondly, it should be clarified that the charter does not involve an extension of the Community's present powers or any presumption that nation states will have no freedom to implement the charter's principles in their own way.
The Employment Minister, Mr Tim Eggar, responded last night that the Government could not sign the charter in its present form.
He said the current charter still gives no clear division of responsibility between the Community and the member states.
He added: ‘We have never said we would never sign up to a charter, but we are convinced this proposal would mean Community interference in areas like industrial relations law which are much better dealt with in Community countries.
It would impose unnecessary red tape and above all it would destroy jobs.’
Field ‘out on second vote’.
By Patrick Wintour
OPPONENTS of Mr Frank Field, the Labour MP for Birkenhead, believe they succeeded in deselecting him at the secret ballot held last Tuesday.
The result will be formally announced tomorrow night to a meeting of the constituency party's general committee.
It will pose a serious dilemma for the Labour leader, Mr Neil Kinnock, if Mr Field has lost and carries out his threat to cause a byelection.
Supporters of Mr Paul Davies, his chief opponent, believe he won on the second ballot.
Mr Field this week clarified his threat.
If he did not win a majority in the individual members' section of the ballot, he said, he would resign altogether.
If he won in the members' section, but still lost the ballot overall, due to heavy voting against him in the union section, he would cause a byelection.
He also promised to speak to Mr Kinnock before taking any action.
Under the party's rules 40 per cent of the votes in Birkenhead have been allocated to the unions and 60 per cent to individual members.
In the union section, Mr Davies's supporters claim he won 18 per cent, Mr Field 10 per cent and Ms Kathy Wilson, a Militant supporter, 7 per cent .
In the constituency section figures are less certain, but Mr Davies's supporters calculate around 23 per cent for him, 27 per cent forMr Field and 10 per cent for Ms Wilson.
On this basis, Mr Davies, a local Transport and General Workers Union official, will have captured the nomination if he took just over half of Ms Wilson's vote when it was redistributed in the second ballot.
Some 213 members attended the ballot meeting.
A further 68 members had postal votes, the vast majority of which went to Mr Field, who supports one person, one vote in reselection and has described the involvement of unions as corrupt.
Thatcher backs the market to save the environment.
By Patrick Wintour Political Correspondent
GLOBAL warming could soon be accelerated dramatically due to a thinning of the sea ice, Mrs Thatcher said yesterday.
If the 30 million square kilometres of sea ice separating the ocean from the atmosphere continued to thin due to the solar radiation falling on it, global warming would continue.
Mrs Thatcher, giving the 50th anniversary lecture of the Parliamentary and Scientific Committee at the House of Lords, said it was imperative to intensify efforts to model and predict climate change.
Mrs Thatcher said: ‘We have proposed a global convention — a sort of good conduct guide on the environment for all the world's nations on problems like the greenhouse effect.’
But further research was needed on climate change: ‘Before we can translate this into practical policy and precise targets, there is a lot of work to be done as a matter of urgency.’
Man had used the environment as a dustbin for decades.
She reiterated her view that humans could best be made to behave in an environmentally friendly way through the market, rather than regulation.
It was not regulation, but the decisions of individual consumers, and industry's response, which had led to the development of ozone-friendly products, bio-degradable plastics, and phosphate-free detergents.’
Minister's opt-out decision rules out council-backed CTC.
By Celia Weston
APLAN by Berkshire county council to create a city technology college was ruled out yesterday by Mrs Angela Rumbold, the Education Minister, when she gave the go-ahead for one of the schools involved to opt out.
Berkshire planned to amalgamate the 300-pupil Southlands Girls' School in Reading with a neighbouring boys' school, selling the site for about £7 million, putting up £3 million of public money, and raising another £3 million from commercial sponsors.
Commander Michael Porter, Tory chairman of the council's education committee, said he had hoped for a decision that would ‘provide us with a way to achieve the best possible education for pupils in south Reading, allowing us to set up a super new school designed for the demands of the 21st century, and a sixth form college.’
Mr Stanley Goodchild, county director of education, said the decision would be considered carefully and a report made to the education committee on December 20.
The first ballot on opting out at Southlands failed to attract a vote from the required 50 per cent of parents.
In a second ballot, 61 per cent of those eligible voted, with 81 per cent of these in favour.
New BR chief nets £400,000 pay packet.
By Michael Smith Transport Editor
MR BOB Reid, head of Shell UK, yesterday agreed to take over the chairmanship of British Rail under a deal that will bring him £2 million over five years.
Up to 20 other leading figures in industry and business had refused the job.
Mr Reid, aged 55, has been appointed at £200,000 a year.
His earnings will be doubled by a pensions package from his former employers.
He replaces Sir Robert Reid who retires in March from his £95,000 a year post after over 40 years in the railway industry.
Mr Reid will not be available to take up the full-time post until next October, although he becomes chairman-designate on January 1.
Mr Derek Fowler, vice-chairman, will hold the position between April and October, placing BR in the unusual position of having three chairmen in the space of six months.
The Department of Transport confirmed last night that Mr Reid had made no input into BR's new corporate plan which sets the blueprint and financial structure of the railways for the next three years, which is expected to show further cuts in government support.
Mr Reid denied last night that he was accepting the job solely for the money.
‘I ‘m not doing it for the money.
I do not have to justify my salary.
I can earn £400,000 elsewhere.
‘The great thing about this job is the challenge.
I believe in the challenge.’
His immediate tasks will be to restore morale on the railways, implement safety measures proposed after the Clapham Junction crash and match BR's operations to the strict financial regime imposed by the Government.
But some crucial decisions, including the siting of the high speed link from the Channel Tunnel, will have to be taken before he takes over.
Labour's transport spokesman, Mr John Prescott said the salary was a ‘kick in the teeth’ for railway workers who had to resort to industrial action to get an 8.8 per cent rise during the summer.
‘Unless Mr Reid has demanded that the Government remove its financial straightjacket, BR will continue to suffer from poor morale, chronic overcrowding and growing passenger concerns about safety and reliability.’
Mr Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the National Union of Railwaymen, said what mattered was policies not personalities for the railways.
‘We need a bold, imaginative strategy for the railways.’
£1billion price tag put on ‘care in community’ for mentally ill.
By Angella Johnson
ONE BILLION pounds must be spent on care in the community for mentally ill patients leaving hospital, the National Schizophrenia Fellowship said yesterday.
Ms Judy Weleminsky, director of the fellowship, said the Government should allocate the sum over the next four years to prevent patients — many suffering from schizophrenia — being discharged without proper supervision.
Often they ended up wandering the streets.
She told the junior Health Minister, Mr Roger Freeman, who was attending the fellowship's conference in London, that since 1971 more than 50,000 mental hospital beds have been lost; fewer than one in ten have been replaced by residential places in the community.
An estimated 12,500 beds will be lost in the next five years.
The fellowship welcomed the Government's white paper, said Ms Weleminsky, and its commitment to ensuring patients are assessed before leaving hospital, and the responsibility given health authorities and local authorities to meet needs.
But she did not believe it could become a reality unless much more money was forthcoming.
Mr Freeman said the level of spending was for local determination.
‘But we hope to make things a little easier in respect of health authority capital and specific grants for social care.’
Health takes biggest share of Scottish spending rise.
RISES in spending on health, education, transport, and housing in Scotland were announced yesterday when the Scottish Secretary revealed his public expenditure spending plans for next year.
The total budget will be £9.5 billion — £525 million higher than this year — and will rise to £10.4 billion within three years, Mr Malcolm Rifkind told the Commons.
Health spending — a third of the budget — will rise by £220 million, and education by 12 per cent to £439 million.
It will be £500 million in three years.
Support for students will rise by £134 million in the next three years, allowing for an increase of 6,000 students next year and 8,000 in 1991-92.
There is another £30 million for transport, bringing the programme to more than £400 million in 1992-93.
Housing will receive an 11 per cent increase in funding (£36 million), and provisional net allocations for council housing will increase by £25 million, or 15 per cent.
Capital spending for water and sewage services would rise by more than £100 million in the next three years.
For Labour, Mr Donald Dewar said the figures did not amount to a real increase and took no account of cuts in local authority spending in recent years.
Opposition burn their fingers on microwave Sketch.
By Andrew Rawnsley
JOHN Gummer came to the despatch box to give the new guidelines for safe cooking using microwave ovens.
But, as usual, what Mr Gummer was most interested in was sharing his recipe for spit-roasting members of the Opposition.
Fanny Gummer's recipe is an old one.
Take one opposition spokesman, simmer for an hour in a heavy sauce of sarcasm, season with scornful adjectives, throw in liberal amounts of contempt, add several pinches of disdain, and spice with invective.
Serve while hot.
Will comfortably feed about 100 Conservative backbenchers.
Yesterday Mr Gummer was roasting his Opposition shadow, Dr David Clark.
Labour's spokesman on food had come to the House thinking — unwisely as it soon turned out — that he was going to roast Mr Gummer.
Dr Clark had tabled a motion with the Speaker, demanding an emergency statement on the Government's failure to publish a list of the potentially unsafe microwaves.
The idea was to embarrass the Government.
When the time came for the statement, Dr Clark could be seen on the Opposition front bench, clutching a sheaf of notes.
They were almost certainly full of furious denunciations of the Government in general and Mr Gummer in particular.
But something about Mr Gummer's face — like the look of insufferable smugness -should have warned Dr Clark that it was all about to go horribly wrong for him.
For it was a far-from-embarrassed Mr Gummer who rose to the despatch box.
‘The full list of every oven, together with updated instructions,’ he announced, ‘is being published by the manufacturers this afternoon.’
Dr Clark's jaw dropped a foot.
‘Anyone who has a microwave oven,’ went on Mr Gummer, ‘will be able to check against the list to see what steps, if any, they need to take to ensure their food is fully cooked.’
Dr Clark's jaw put on another yard.
The House, Mr Gummer thought, ‘will be pleased to know that’.
The House was pleased to know that, with the notable exception of Dr Clark.
Mr Gummer had — or at least appeared to have — already published the very list Dr Clark had come to demand.
Dr Clark was now seen hastily abandoning all those notes, containing all the furious denunciations that he had prepared earlier.
Rising to Tory jeers, he had no option but to thank Mr Gummer for the statement.
Gamely, but a bit limply, Dr Clark claimed they had only got it by getting Mr Gummer ‘dragged to the House’.
The Tories laughed again.
Dr Clark was now oven-ready for Mr Gummer.
Rising again, he began to slice up the Opposition spokesman.
‘Labour thought they were going to win a point today — they were rather disappointed when they found they had got it completely wrong.’
Then he threw in the spice and seasoning: ‘By stirring up people's fears unnecessarily, jobs have been endangered by the Labour Opposition.’
Conservative MPs found it delicious, though more refined palates will have gagged a bit at Mr Gummer's insistence on always over-salting the self-righteousness.
‘I did not seek to make headlines,’ he said triumphantly, ‘unlike the party opposite.’
The Agriculture Minister sat down, serene in victory.
Nobody could deny Mr Gummer this small triumph, but he might make more friends if he didn't always insist on making such a meal of it.
FT injury test case looms.
By Simon Beavis and Lisa Buckingham
ATEST case aiming to set new standards of compensation for journalists suffering from repetitive strain injury may be launched against the Financial Times.
Solicitors acting for the National Union of Journalists are considering whether to bring a ‘representative’ or class action case against the newspaper, whose staff has been among the worst hit by the industrial injury.
Unions representing workers in other industries have pursued RSI cases against employers.
A Midland Bank employee, stricken with RSI after using a word processor, was recently awarded £45,000 in compensation by the courts.
RSI is a loose description of musculo-skeletal disorders associated with repetitive movements; causing severe trauma in muscles and tendons and, at worst, severe disability.
The problem is long-standing in some industries but is making fresh inroads with the spread of new technology and keyboards.
The problem has hit a number of British newspapers, including the Guardian.
Mr David Walker, FT managing editor, said that over 100 journalists, or nearly a third of the staff, had been referred to the company's medical department with possible RSI symptoms.
Twenty were either off work or on restricted working, while a number of others were receiving therapy.
The company has decided to remove editorial responsibilities from the deputy editor, Mr Richard Lambert, so that he can tackle the RSI outbreak.
The FT, in consultation with the Robens Institute of Health and Safety at Surrey University, is recommending changes in working practices to try to halt the spread of RSI.
The editor, Mr Geoffrey Owen, said in a memorandum to staff: ‘I accept that this could mean some fall in editorial quality; this is a lower price to pay than a continued RSI problem.’
18COMMENT THE GUARDIANThursday December 7 1989 Egon, and forgotten in a rush of events.
THE KRENZ credentials were never all that brilliant: loyal hatchetman for Mr Erich Honecker, smooth operator of the security apparatus, apologist of the Beijing massacre, and owner of the phoniest smile in the entire East German politburo.
Yesterday he smiled for the last time and said he did not wish to obstruct the work of Prime Minister Hans Modrow — who now constitutes, with a small group of associates from Dresden, the only remaining acceptable face of reform within the East German Communist Party.
Mr Krenz's resignation as head of state — he stepped down from the party leadership three days ago — signifies what could be a terminal crisis for the party, as it desperately advances its special congress by a week to find new faces.
Perhaps the opening up of the secret police files, once Mr Krenz's little empire, was the final shove, combined with the resignation of all the security chiefs and the placing under house arrest of his former boss Mr Honecker.
(Who knows what personal skeletons may now be discovered in Mr Krenz's private cupboard?)
But the drama of this not very pleasant person is wholly overshadowed by the larger drama of an entire nation.
The Berlin Wall is not the only boundary to have been breached in the past seven weeks, and who can say where the process will end?
It certainly may not stop with Mr Manfred Gerlach, the moderately reform-minded leader of the formerly stooge-like Liberal Democratic Party, who now takes over as head of state.
Just a month ago Mr Gerlach found his tongue and announced that the concept of the perfection of socialist democracy in the past had been ‘absolutely wrong’.
On behalf of the Liberal Democrats he now intended to work, in partnership with the Communist Party, for Genuine Socialism.
This sort of language already sounds ludicrously dated, even though a fair number of East Germans may still seek to redefine their society in different terms from the capitalist West.
Mr Gerlach himself may seem dated before too long.
Yesterday, even as he took over from Mr Krenz, he was speculating that he might soon lose his job if the East German parliament decided to replace the Council of State with an executive president.
The Liberal Democrats have finally emerged from the puppet-masters' box, but the crowds in the streets may decide they have left it too left.
Yesterday's events merely dramatised the fact that there can now be no certainty about the permanence of individuals, institutions or ideologies in present-day East Germany — not to mention other chunks of Eastern Europe.
Who knows, for example, whether the ‘complete restructuring’ this weekend of the East German Communist Party will save it from humiliation in next year's elections?
Heraclitus rules, and the state of flux is likely to get more, rather than less, dramatic.
Nato strategists may join with Kremlin regional specialists in feeling rather nervous about this excessively open-ended prospect.
We know that Mrs Thatcher feels jittery.
In spite of our own commitment to people-based change and transformation, we, too, may wonder where it is all going to finish.
But our hopes and fears are irrelevant as the train rushes on.
The task now imposed on everyone, and especially those preparing to spend the weekend in Strasbourg, is to think big and flexibly about Europe's future.
The lesson of Mr Krenz is that those who cannot cope get crushed by the engine..
Single sympathy.
STAND by for a new moral crusade against single mothers.
This week's report from the General Household Survey shows that the decline in traditional family life is accelerating.
There has been a startling 25 per cent rise in the number of single mothers within the past year: from 12 per cent of all families with dependent children in 1987 to 15 per cent in 1988.
Maybe this is all that is needed to re-ignite calls for a review of the welfare benefits which single parents receive — a review actually under way earlier this year, but thankfully kicked into touch by Tony Newton when he took over from the hapless John Moore as Social Security Secretary last Summer.
Mr Moore had made it clear he wanted a sterner system.
No-one was ever able to locate the elusive and possibly mythical teenager who supposedly became pregnant in Mr Moore's constituency merely to jump the housing queue, but still he knew it was a serious issue.
So what is happening?
First, remember that unmarried mothers are only one of four categories of single mothers.
There are three other categories: widowed, separated and divorced.
Unmarried mothers — of all ages — account for only one third of the total number.
Two thirds derive from the break-up of marriage.
Then consider whether social security is really an incentive.
The current benefit for a single mother with one child is £56-a-week plus housing benefit, or £67.80 with two children under 11.
Think of it: a little over £20-a-week per member of the family.
In fact, for a child under 11, a mother receives precisely £l.68 a day to meet all needs: food, heating, light, clothes, shoes, entertainment, presents, fares.
It doesn't even buy a burger, shake and large fries in a fast food joint.
Look, too, at the hurdles which a single mother who wants to work must face.
Last year the Government abolished the allowance that mothers who moved from benefits to work could claim.
With child care costs added to reasonable travelling expenses, this alone would have been worth as much as £40 a week now.
Instead, the old flat rate £12 disregard was raised to £15.
Then, finally, examine maintenance.
Only six per cent of single mothers can rely on maintenance as their main source of income.
Some 68 per cent of single mothers receive some maintenance, but less than half of unmarried mothers receive any.
An inadequate system has been made worse by the Government's decision that it will no longer accept responsibility for collecting maintenance unless there have been irregular payments.
Moreover, there are built-in disincentives on both aides for non-payment.
All maintenance is deducted in full from the welfare which the custodial parent receives; this, in turn, is a clear disincentive for the non-custodial parent to pay when the only body benefiting is the state.
Where should the Government move?
A comprehensive review, as against a cost-cutting populist exercise, would be welcome.
The people who would have suffered most from Mr Moore's penal approach are the 1.6 million children in one parent families.
Their interests need protection.
But the present, incoherent system does need reform.
There is every reason for more unmarried mothers receiving maintenance from the fathers of their children; but this is only a small part of the problem.
You have to scan wider.
All items need looking at: benefits, child care allowances, maintenance and the court procedures which make it so difficult to vary an order.
Over to you, Mr Newton..
Chiller Manila.
WHO WILL guard the guardians in the Philippines, where it is rapidly becoming clear that President Aquino does not command her own army?
Despite her declaration of a state of emergency yesterday and the government's announcement early today that the rebels had agreed to return to their barracks, the events of the last six days can only be seen as a colossal confession of weakness on Mrs Aquino's part.
In military terms the problem should have been settled on the first day.
In the business district of Makati, not more than four hundred rebel troops were holed up yesterday in several unpromising locations with no possibility of reinforcement.
In the central Philippines, the airbase of Mactan was occupied by no more than two hundred rebels and surrounded by allegedly ‘loyal’ troops.
A swift exercise of constitutionally legitimate force should have been enough.
Yet no one, from Mrs Aquino downwards, could be sure that her orders would be obeyed.
The rebels in Makati calmly bargained for surrender terms which, they insisted, should include her own resignation — and the terms behind the government's report that they had gone back to barracks were not immediately clear this morning.
A planned military assault on Mactan yesterday was unaccountably delayed.
Meanwhile there was a growing silence from those on whom Mrs Aquino must rely — like her own Vice-President, and, it now seems, the United States.
Washington's policy of never negotiating with terrorists suffered a 180 degree change on the way to Manila.
US officials freely explained that ‘tremendous pressure’ was being brought upon Mrs Aquino.
They added that the foreigners were not hostages ‘in the normal sense of the word’ but merely ‘unable to move because of the rebel presence’.
Hence negotiations which ended with the US Ambassador appearing to congratulate the rebels on their restraint.
The US administration has reined back its support from Mrs Aquino after the initial commitment of air support — now widely regarded in Washington as a move which further weakened her authority.
The State Department is murmuring that it is ‘premature to speculate’ on the long-term implications of the coup.
Mrs Aquino's advertisement for the democratic way of life is important to Washington.
So is the continuation of its lease on Subic Bay and Clark Air Base.
Realists may argue that the US has lived before with undemocratic regimes and can do so again.
It could, for example, live with the sort of civil-military coalition towards which the thoroughly disloyal Vice President, Mr Salvador Laurel, appears to be pointing.
Mr Laurel shares the Nacionalista Party leadership with the even more disloyal former Defence Minister, Mr Juan Ponce Enrile.
Yesterday the party called for non-renewal of the US bases agreement, but perhaps that should be seen as an opening bid.
The most depressing aspect of this latest coup crisis — the sixth since Mrs Aquino took office — is the absence in the streets of the people's power to whom she owes her own position.
The reasons for her loss of popularity is not hard to find.
‘The economic recovery has restored old fortunes far more significantly,’ she admitted in this year's State of the Nation address, ‘than it has touched the lives of the vast majority of our people.’
The lowest 30 per cent of the population remained mired in unchanging misery, she added.
‘They think nothing has changed and I don't blame them.’
Letters to the Editor
Thursday People.
Dennis Barker:.
Professor with a fatal fascination.
‘I.
F passengers started voting with their feet, my goodness, that starts things happening on the security front!’ said Professor Paul Wilkinson yesterday.
My goodness?
It was typically quiet language from the man who, as director of the Research Institute for the Study of Conflict and Terrorism, is one of the world's leading self-made experts on the bloodstained subject.
He was launching his report, the Lessons of Lockerbie, marking the first anniversary of the Pan Am jumbo jet blast.
It emphasises that airlines should get together to find ways of combating terrorism.
The interest in terrorism of the man born 52 years ago at Harrow-on-the Hill, the son of a clerk to a Scottish distillery, seems unlikely.
It started when he was an officer in the RAF.
‘I wrote about groups involved in protest, revolution and revolt in places like the Middle East — the sub-state actors rather than states.
‘It started as a short project for an article but the whole subject took off and turned into a major research field.’
The research — and terrorism — progressed when he was lecturing in politics at University College, Cardiff, and then reader at the University of Wales.
It turned into Political Terrorism, his first book on the subject.
Then he researched the problems of liberal democratic states trying to beat terrorism.
Terrorism and the Liberal State was published in 1977, and revised for a second edition in 1986.
A growth area indeed.
By the time he moved to Aberdeen University in 1979, becoming head of the department of politics and international relations, he was spending a third of his time researching and writing on it.
Wilkinson says his area is a difficult one, but no more so than for scholars writing about military strategy and intelligence.
His name once appeared in a diary of Colonel Oliver North during the Irangate hearings, though Wilkinson thinks that was because he was giving a lecture in Washington.
He says he ‘functions like most academics, from open source material’, though informal contact with people on the inside could produce more insight.
Campaign to cut drink-driving.
By Andrew Culf
THE devastating impact drink-driving can have on family life was stressed yesterday at the launch of the Department of Transport's £700,000 Christmas advertising campaign.
The message behind the television and radio campaign was reinforced by a mother who told of her only daughter being killed three years ago by a drunken motorist.
The Transport Minister, Mr Robert Atkins, said: ‘Christmas is a family time of year, but for some families Christmas is going to be unbearable, because a loved one has been killed by a drink-driver.’
Government figures show that 10,000 people have died in drink-drive accidents in the past 10 years.
One road death in five is drink-related and every year about 900 people are killed and 17,000 injured in accidents where drivers are over the legal limit.
Speaking at the campaign launch at the Victoria Palace Theatre, London, Mrs Caroline Lock, now a member of the Campaign Against Drinking and Driving, recalled her daughter's death.
‘Christmas will just be another bad time.
‘I don't really have any good times any more.
This will be my fourth Christmas without my precious daughter Sandra, who was 11 years old.’
Mrs Lock, of Formby, Merseyside, said the driver, who was jailed for two years, served eight months.
‘But what is eight months?
Sandra is deprived of her life and I am deprived of her company, love, and laughter because some creature chose to drink six or seven whiskies and drove home.’
Easing London's increasing traffic congestion by road pricing has effectively been ruled out by the Transport Secretary, Mr Cecil Parkinson who told the Commons transport committee that it would be impractical.
There was no foreseeable possibility of a such a scheme.
Writers rush to the aid of ‘blasphemy’ video.
By David Sharrock
MEMBERS of the literary establishment yesterday rallied to the support of a banned 20-minute video portraying the erotic visions of the patron saint of Spain, St Theresa of Avila.
Writers Fay Weldon and Marina Warner and Colin MacCabe, the former head of production at the British Film Institute, were among witnesses appearing before the Video Appeals Committee, called to examine a decision by the British Board of Film Classification to refuse a release certificate to ‘Visions of Ecstasy’.
The video, produced by Axel Ltd, is the first film in 77 years to be rejected by the board on the grounds of blasphemy.
Yesterday's hearing, acted out below the chandeliers and stained glass windows of the Institute of Public Health and Hygiene in London, struggled with the concepts of blasphemy and the erotic language of 16th century Christian mysticism.
Ms Weldon, a member of the committee who was not asked to sit at the hearing, described the video as a serious attempt to deal with the bride of Christ notion.
‘It didn't distress or alarm me in any way, certainly not as much as many other things that I have seen that have earned certificates’.
Mr James Ferman, director of the British Board of Film Classifications, admitted he found the video, an exploration of the borderline between religious ecstasy and sexual passion, an interesting and legitimate subject.
But it was the unanimous view of the board that it manifested contempt towards the divinity of Christ by presenting him as a living man, not a symbol, and as the object of overt sexual passion.
Mr Ferman said he found offensive scenes where the figure of Christ was repeatedly inter cut with a lesbian scene between two nuns.
Describing the American feature film, The Last Temptation of Christ, to which he awarded a certificate, as a challenging religious film he said that acontroversial scene: ‘It indicated that Christ had sex, but it did not go on for 14 minutes.’
Mr Geoffrey Robertson, QC, appearing for the film's director and producer, Nigel Wingrove and John Stephenson, argued that the board's grounds for banning the video rested upon very insecure foundations.
A recent Government statement following the controversy surrounding Salman Rushdie's novel The Satantic Verses stated that blasphemy prosecutions would be ‘damaging, divisive and inappropriate.’
It was ‘almost inconceivable’ that the prosecuting authorities would bring a blasphemy case against Visions of Ecstasy.
Previous court rulings stated that blasphemy consisted of ‘the publication of words spoken or written.
No-one seems to have noticed that this is a silent film.’
Throughout the appeal the video remained unseen.
‘We're all very familiar with it,’ said VAC chairman, Mr Peter Barnes.
‘I've certainly seen it three or four times.’
Marina Warner, artistic director of the ICA and an expert on mysticism, told the hearing that mystical language derived from the overtly erotic Songs of Solomon.
St Theresa's writings were part of the tradition of Christian mysticism.
In her view the film had been ‘quite careful’ to show that it was an allegory and it reminded her of the British classic film Black Narcissus.
It was a poignant film, which she wished had been longer.
The hearing continues today.
Microwave oven danger list fails to satisfy critics.
By James Erlichman and Paul Nettleton
THE Government was accused yesterday of concocting a fudged list to gloss over the real dangers of microwave ovens found to be faulty in its own tests.
Dr David Clark, Labour's agriculture spokesman, who warned that potentially unsafe models remain on sale, said: ‘All we have is a sham.’
The accusation came after Mr John Gummer, the Agriculture Minister — under fierce Labour and consumer group pressure — produced a list drawn up by the manufacturers on the 70 microwave oven models tested by Government scientists.
But it fell far short of providing the detailed model-by-model defect analysis demanded by Mr Gummer's critics.
The manufacturers' list describes 46 out of 70 models as ‘satisfactory’.
But it does not concede that any of the remaining 24 models failed the Government's test, even though at least three have been withdrawn from the market.
Instead, it gives a few lines of new advice on better cooking methods.
The 24 failed to achieve the 70C uniform cooking temperature needed to ensure that all food poisoning bacteria, including listeria, were killed.
The Government insists that a promise of secrecy given to manufacturers prevents it telling 8 million microwave owners exactly what may be wrong with their machines.
Instead, Mr Gummer told the House of Commons the list drawn up by the manufacturers themselves contained new instructions which would make all the machines ‘perfectly safe in use.’
‘By seeking cooperation and not confrontation…the public has been more fully informed,’ Mr Gummer said.
The Consumers' Association, which first forced disclosure of the hazards last August, described the list as ‘a welcome first step, but inadequate’.
The director, Mr John Beishon, said pressure had forced some disclosure.
But improved cooking instructions would neither identify or make safe those minority of models which even Mr Gummer admitted to needing ‘more substantial changes of oven design.’
One high street retailer, Comet, announced that it would offer refunds to people who bought its own-brand and other manufacturers' models which failed the Government tests announced on Monday.
The full manufacturers' list of 24 models which were considered not satisfactory (and presumably failed the government test) is: Boots 500; Brother MF1200PW and MF3200DB; Electrolux NF4061, NF4065 and NF4076; Goldstar ER350ME and ER535ME; Hoover H6312; Matsui 260TC; Moulinex 059; Philips AVM625 and AVM734; Proline M3030; Russel Hobbs 8504; Samsung RE570D, RE576D and RE990CT; Sanyo EM2714BR; Sharp R-7A50M and R-8H50(B)T; Toshiba ER9610EW-1 and ER9630E; Tricity MH1081.
Clarke risks rebuff by non-TUC union.
By Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent
THE Government was warned last night to expect a rebuff as the Association of Professional Ambulance Personnel prepared to ballot members on a deal rejected by the five TUC-affiliated unions for ambulance staff.
The association's leaders, who in two days of talks failed to secure any significant improvement in the the 9 per cent, 18-month offer thrown out last month, said that the ballot form would ask if members supported sanctions, possibly including action which would disrupt services to patients.
Although the association recommends acceptance, its leaders are sceptical that the 5,000 members will agree, and disappointed that the offer was not increased to 10 per cent during 22 hours of talks.
Mr Brian Bruno, a member of the association's executive, said: ‘There is a fair chance it could be turned down.
A lot of people expected a little bit more.’
The outcome of an earlier association ballot was kept quiet while the talks lasted under an agreement with the Health Secretary, Mr Kenneth Clarke.
The ballot result is believed to have backed action over the original 6.5 per cent, one year offer.
Mr Clarke granted the eight-year-old association pay-bargaining rights only last Friday.
Rejection of the latest offer by the association would rob the Government of the legimitacy to be gained from imposing an agreed deal on the other five unions.
The 12-week dispute showed no signs of abating yesterday.
Crews in Greater Manchester are to be balloted on a 24-hour strike on December 20, despite union appeals to maintain accident and emergency cover.
Local officials said that the move could result in the police and army being used locally for the first time, but reflected members' anger and frustration.
Yesterday Mr Clarke again made it clear that the 9 per cent offer was final, and continued to attack the TUC unions — particularly the National Union of Public Employees and the unions' chief negotiator, Mr Roger Poole.
‘He wants to play at politics.
He has set himself up as a left-wing leader taking on the Government,’ Mr Clarke said.
Doubts remain on Hanoi view of repatriation.
By Martin Linton
THE Government was unable to explain in the Lords yesterday what it will do if Vietnam refuses to accept the boat people to be repatriated from Hong Kong.
The Foreign Office Minister Lord Brabazon of Tara confirmed that Vietnam had ‘agreed to take these people back, provided forcible repatriation is not used’, and that talks were still under way.
The Liberal Democrat peer Lord Bonham Carter asked whether the Government had any contingency plans if Vietnam refused to accept them, but Lord Brabazon could only say that ‘hopefully’ the standard procedures to be used would not involve force.
‘Obviously if the Vietnamese considered the measures used to return these people involved the use of force, which is not our intention, we will use procedures in line with those used worldwide,’ he said.
He was confident that the Vietnamese authorities would find them ‘unobjectionable’.
The Labour leader in the Lords, Lord Cledwyn, asked: If Vietnam's human rights record was bad enough for British aid to be cut off in 1979, why was it now good enough to merit forced repatriation?
If it was good enough, why didn't the Government restart aid?
TODAY'S BUSINESS House of Commons: Home Office questions; questions to the Prime Minister; National Health Service Bill, second reading.
House of Lords: Human Fertilisation and Embryology Bill, second reading.
Bids for Crown Suppliers to be asked for soon.
By Martin Linton
PRIVATISATION of the Crown Suppliers will go ahead quickly once Parliament has passed the enabling bill which received its second reading yesterday, the Environment Secretary, Mr Chris Patten, told the Commons yesterday.
The merchant bank appointed to handle the sale, Samuel Montagu, will shortly invite bids for a business which had sales of £168 million last year.
Mr Patten said privatisation of the Property Services Agency, which builds and furnishes Government offices, will not be practicable until the second half of 1992.
As an interim, the agency will be ‘untied’ from Whitehall from April 1990 — it will be able to take on private work, and ministries will no longer have to use it.
Parts of the privatisated agency will remain under Government control, including maintenance of Westminster and the ministerial car pool.
Mr Patten said he would welcome a management-employee buy-out bid for both.
Labour's spokesman, Mr Clive Soley, said the privatisations were neither necessary nor desirable.
Two Government reports had concluded they were not in the public interest.
Even Samuel Montagu had said the purpose of the Crown Suppliers was to provide for departments more efficiently than they could do it for themselves or from any other source.
‘If that is their purpose and they are achieving that purpose, why is the Government privatising them?’ he asked.
As the junior Environment Minister, Mr Christopher Chope, wound up for the Government, Mr Soley accused him of ignoring the fact that the agency advised departments and the armed forces on security and vetting of staff.
Mr Chope said that it was not appropriate to discuss Westminster security, but the agency already contracted out most building work, including work with a high security content for the Defence Ministry.
The bill was given a second reading by 237 votes to 181, a Government majority of 56.
Dixons faces Kingfisher bid.
By Ben Laurance
KINGFISHER, the retailing group which controls Woolworth and B&Q, yesterday launched a £460 million takeover bid for Dixons, Britain's biggest chain of electrical shops.
Dixons' chairman, Mr Stanley Kalms, whose empire embraces 600 Currys outlets as well as 350 under the Dixons name, is expected to issue a rejection of the takeover attempt today.
Three years ago, his company failed in an attempt to buy Kingfisher, then called Woolworth, for £1.8 billion.
Retailing analysts in the City believe Kingfisher will have to pay far more than the 120p a share now on offer for Dixons to have a realistic chance of winning its cash bid.
Kingfisher was forced to show its hand after rumours that a bid was in the offing began to circulate on Tuesday.
Stock Exchange insider dealing investigators have launched an inquiry into a suspicious surge in activity ahead of the bid on the traded options market: traded options allow dealers to bet on future share prices.
People who bought Dixons traded options on Tuesday and sold once news of the bid was released yesterday made a 100 per cent profit in 24 hours.
If Kingfisher succeeds, it would control stores which last year sold at least 22 per cent of all electrical goods retailed in Britain.
Some figures put the market share at more than 25 per cent which would normally trigger a monopolies inquiry.
Kingfisher runs 307 Comet outlets and has recently bought Laskys.
Dixons has seen its fortunes fall steadily since its abortive takeover assault on Woolworth in 1986.
Annual profits have slumped from over £100 million to an expected £45 million this year.
Retailing industry-watchers believe that Dixons' core businesses — the British electrical retailing operation — is currently showing a loss.
The group as a whole is in the black only because it has income from an American retailing chain Silo and from financial services and property deals in Britain.
Shops selling large electrical goods such as television sets, hi-fi and washing machines have been the first to suffer from the slowdown in spending, while large chains like Comet and Dixons have been losing market share to small independent shopkeepers.
Kingfisher's 700-plus Woolworth outlets and the Superdrug chain are better placed to weather the slowdown.
Three years ago, when Dixons was the bidder, the position was exactly the reverse: electrical retailers were cashing in on an unprecedented boom.
Dixons claims to supply one in every five TV sets sold in the UK — although Mr Kalms once described television ‘as one of the curses of our society’.
He built up Dixons, with sales last year of over £1.7 billion, after starting work at the age of 16 with his father's portrait photography business.
Reports, page 11
Drug-linked bomb blast kills 40 in Colombia.
By Alma Guillermoprieto in Bogota
APOWERFUL bomb killed at least 40 people and wounded 350 in Bogota yesterday when it wrecked the headquarters of the Department of Administrative Security, the government agency charged with bringing Colombia's drug dealers to heel.
The blast came three months after the start of a determined government offensive against the country's cocaine traffickers.
On Tuesday, Judge Bernardo Jaramillo, who was investigating Medellin drug cartel activity, was shot dead as he was walking home.
Hidden in a bus and estimated to contain about half a ton of dynamite, the bomb ripped a wall of the nine-storey DAS building and badly damaged nearby buildings.
General Miguel Maza Marquez, chief of the investigative police and one of the traffickers' most vocal critics, escaped unharmed as he did from a car bomb attack last May in which seven people were killed.
Yesterday's blast was seen less as a direct attempt on the man who has most vigorously pursued Colombia's chief cocaine exporters, but as part of a campaign to terrorise non-combatants in the drug war into supporting negotiations and amnesty.
Most of the wounded were street-sellers and shopkeepers in the busy commercial sector behind the police buildings, who had arrived early to work eager for Christmas sales.
Hospital emergency wards were struggling to cope with the injured as radio announcers read lists of victims and broadcast anguished appeals from those who had not heard from relatives in the area near the explosion.
Motor traffic was paralysed in much of the city.
There was no trace of the bombers, and no one has so far claimed responsibility.
The government offensive against the drug cartel began in earnest on August 18 after the murders of a presidential candidate, Luis Carlos Galan, and the police chief in Medellin, where the drug traffickers, Pablo Escobar and Jorge Luis Ochoa, are based.
The blast appears to have been timed to coincide with a political offensive.
Like the bomb which blew up a national airline flight last week, killing all 107 aboard, the bombing came in the shadow of a struggle between President Virgilio Barco and the lower house of congress to overturn emergency extradition procedures decreed by Mr Barco against traffickers wanted for trial in the US.
More than 10 have been extradited.
But opinion polls show strong nationalist sentiment against extradition and congress representatives voted last night to put the extradition decree to national referendum next month.
But the Senate may yet overturn this.
Picture, page 7
Gobbledegook ‘betrayed cheat’.
ASTUDENT accused of cheating in his degree exam wrote complete gobbledegook which matched the examiners' draft solution to maths problems in the paper, an inquiry was told yesterday.
The case of Mr Francis Foecke, aged 31, began in June 1986, when the board of examiners alleged dishonest conduct in his maths and computer studies finals.
Mr Ian Karsten, for the board, told a Bristol University appeal committee hearing that there were passages in his script which were ‘bizarre and remarkable and which require explanation’.
Mr Foecke has claimed he scored passes in 13 out of 13 final exam papers.
He denies the university's claim that he cheated in two papers through having advance knowledge of the questions.
He maintains he achieved his high pass rate by year-long cramming with similar papers.
But Mr Karsten told the committee chairman, Professor Michael Furmston: ‘In one striking case there is a passage which in mathematical terms is complete gobbledegook.
‘By an astonishing coincidence in the examiners’ model solution precisely the same piece of goobledegook appears at precisely the same point.’
Mr Peter Goldsmith, QC, for Mr Foecke, submitted that it was now too late for Mr Foecke to have a fair trial due to the passage of time.
The board had introduced new charges which it would be unfair for Mr Foecke to contest.
But Mr Karsten said almost two years had been lost due to Mr Foecke's unwillingness to continue with the university's internal appeal procedure.
He appealed unsuccessfully to the Privy Council, acting on behalf of the Queen, Bristol University's Visitor, and a High Court judge over the university's appeal procedures.
The university appointed a new appeal committee with a view to speeding up the hearing.
Professor Furmston said he would reserve judgment until next week.