

Was Time magazine's recent dissection of feminism in fact a postmortem?
Nikki Finke reads between the lines Bad timing.
IS FEMINISM dead?
Well, Time magazine seems to think so.
And not since Newsweek's 1986 cover story ‘The Marriage Crunch’, which professed that single women over 40 had a better chance of getting killed by a terrorist than getting married, has a general-interest magazine article caused such discussion among women.
Bannered ‘Women Face the '90s’, the Time cover features a woman with a briefcase in one hand and a baby in the other -a symbol of those women who feel betrayed by feminism because, as the magazine says, they tried to have it all and now they've just plain had it.
Time doesn't define what feminism is supposed to be, yet claims to find a schism between the older generations of women who started the fight for economic, political and social equality and today's generations who seem complacent or angry about what women's liberation has achieved.
The reason, Time explained, is that women under the age of 30 picture a feminist, to quote one college senior, as ‘someone who doesn't shave her legs and is doing everything she can to deny that she is feminine’.
Because of this, the magazine said, these women dismiss leaders like Gloria Steinem as ‘hopelessly outdated’.
And as for women in their 30s and 40s, Time claims they feel the feminist movement betrayed them by failing to warn them about the sacrifices women had to make in exchange for equality and by pursuing the wrong goals — pushing more strongly for the equal rights amendment than for child care or flexible working hours.
Even more provocative is a poll that found that the vast majority of American women today don't even identify themselves as feminists.
To those that do, them's fightin' words.
‘Feminism was the most significant social movement to have occurred in centuries,’ says Judy Auerbach, director of the University of Southern California's Institute for the Study of Women and Men.
‘And what makes me mad is this flippant desire to dismiss it as dead.’
In fact, Time magazine almost went with the coverline ‘Is Feminism Dead?’ according to the article's author, senior editor Claudia Wallis.
‘The only reason we didn't was a pragmatic one: we had just used ‘Is Government Dead?’ and couldn't use it again.’
Still, some feminists believe that the article, just by raising the question, could be as devastating to feminists as Time's infamous 1969 ‘Is God Dead?’ cover story was to the clergy.
Carole Hemingway, ardent feminist and a Los Angeles radio talk show host, is hoping for a backlash.
‘Look what happened to God after that Time cover — fundamentalism began sweeping the world.
Now Time is asking if feminism's dead, and I say, ‘Watch out!’'
In fact, the article seems to conclude that the women's movement is alive and well: it's just the concept of feminism that's expired.
A Time-CNN survey of 1,000 women across the country found that the vast majority think the women's movement has helped women become more independent and is still improving their lives.
Yet only 33 per cent would identify themselves as feminists and 76 per cent said they pay ‘not very much’ or ‘no’attention to the women's movement.
What many feminists find most surprising about the article is its appearance at a time when the abortion issue has regalvanised women.
‘A few years back, you could not get young women to be active,’ said Judy Miller, president of the Los Angeles-based Trusteeship, an organisation of influential women in business and the arts.
‘Today they're coming forward as they see their rights being taken away.’
Whatever the extent of the outcry against the story, no matter, because author Wallis is prepared to defend it.
Or is she?
‘We started out asking questions that were being asked all over,’ she says.
‘This piece wasn't meant to denigrate feminism, and if it comes across that way, I think I failed.’
PAGE wom
Law Report.
Broadcasting ban on terrorists upheld:.
Court of Appeal Regina v Home Secretary, ex parte Brind and others Before Lord Donaldson of Lymington, Master of the Rolls, Lord Justice Ralph Gibson and Lord Justice McCowan December 6 1989
THE Home Secretary's directives to the BBC and IBA banning the broadcasting of appearances or words spoken directly by members and supporters of proscribed terrorist organisations is not unlawful, and therefore the court is not entitled to interfere.
The facts.
On October 19 1988 the Home Secretary issued directives to the BBC and IBA ‘to refrain from broadcasting any matter which consists of or includes — any spoken words, whether in the course of an interview or discussion or otherwise by a person who appears or is heard…where (a) the person speaking…represents or purports to represent [any organisation proscribed under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1984 or the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1978 and Sinn Fein, Republican Sinn Fein and the Ulster Defence Association]or (b) the words support or solicit or invite support for such an organisation’.
The Home Secretary was acting under clause 13(4) of the Licence and Agreement between him and the BBC and section 29(3) of the Broadcasting Act 1981 both of which gave him power to give the broadcasting authorities notice in writing requiring them to refrain from broadcasting any specified matter or classes of matter.
The directives were approved by Parliament.
Mr Brind and other journalists sought judicial review to challenge the directives, but failed before the Divisional Court [Guardian Law Report: May 27, 1989].
They appealed.
The decision.
One ground of challenge was that the Home Secretary had exceeded his powers by acting in breach of article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights which relates to freedom of expression.
Lord Donaldson said the Home Secretary's powers under clause 13(4) and section 29(3) were unambiguous.
It followed that while the Home Secretary was free to take account of the terms of the Convention, he was not obliged to do so and that the terms of the Convention were irrelevant to the court's decision.
The Home Secretary's reserve powers were not intended to be used frequently and this was the first time they had been used.
His Lordship would hesitate long before holding that Parliament intended the Home Secretary to have authority either covertly to censor programmes or to require broadcasting authorities to present news programmes otherwise than with due accuracy and impartiality, but he did not so read the power.
That being so, there was no reason why the words of section 29(3) should not be given their natural meaning and so read, the power was clearly all-embracing, subject only to the qualification that the Home Secretary could not lawfully require broadcasters to broadcast matter involving them in a breach of their statutory duty.
The journalists submitted that the directives were unlawful because they conflicted with the duty of the BBC and IBA under section 4 of the 1981 Act to preserve ‘due impartiality’.
Lord Donaldson said that misappreciated the nature of the duty in at least two respects.
First, that it operates in the real world where there would always be obstacles to giving every shade of opinion equal air time.
It was impossible to treat all parliamentary candidates alike without being either wholly uninformative or inordinately lengthy.
Principal contenders are rightly given more time than fringe candidates.
The directive is simply another obstacle which has to be taken account of by broadcasting authorities when giving effect to their duty to preserve due impartiality.
Second, the duty is to preserve ‘due’ impartiality.
It is for broadcasting authorities to determine what constitutes the appropriate degree of impartiality, and they must not lose sight of their obligation not to include in their programmes matter which is likely to encourage or incite crime or be offensive to public feeling.
It was not self-evident that any impartiality was due to those who supported or excused attempts to achieve political change by terrorism.
The decision whether or not to give directives involves the Home Secretary in making a delicate and difficult political judgment.
But it is a judgment to be made by him and not by the courts, whose right and duty to intervene arises only if the decision is untenable in the sense that irrelevant matters were taken account of, relevant matters were not taken account of, or that the decision was manifestly wrong.
Lord Donaldson said a startling feature of the directives was how little they restricted the supply of the ‘oxygen of publicity’ to the organisations specified.
The directives had no application to parliamentary proceedings or elections and allowed reported speech.
On the journalists' evidence, if the directives had been in force during the previous twelve months the effect on air time would have been minimal.
If the directives were to be criticised, it would have to be on the basis that any use of the power would damage the reputation of the British broadcasting authorities for independence and that that price was not worth paying for so small an effect.
His Lordship could not say the Home Secretary's decision was not one which was fully open to him in the exercise of his judgment.
Lord Justice McCowan said it was impossible to hold that the Home Secretary's political judgment was one that no reasonable Home Secretary could hold.
That was also the political judgment of the terrorists, or they would not be so anxious to be interviewed by the media or so against the ban.
In regard to giving ‘due impartiality’ to news presentation, the journalists had failed to give proper weight to the qualification of impartiality by the word ‘due’.
The dictionary definition of ‘due’ was not merely ‘owing’but also ‘merited, appropriate, rightful’.
The directive was aimed at Sinn Fein and the UDA but it could not have been the legislators' intention that the broadcasting authority should be impartial between the terrorists and the terrorised.
The appeal was dismissed.
Appearances: Anthony Lester QC and David Pannick instructed by Stephens Innocent for the journalists; John Laws and Robert Jay instructed by the Treasury Solicitor for the Home Secretary.
Shiranikha Herbert barrister
Obituary: JPMMillar.
Plebs for the cognoscenti:.
ALWAYS known by his initials, JPM Millar ran the National Council of Labour Colleges for over 40 years; an organisation which through classes, lectures, weekend and summer schools, and the massive number of correspondent courses organised by his wife Christine, provided shots and shell for the emerging Labour Movement.
Catering for more than 100,000 students a year, the Millars had a major influence on the dissemination of socialist ideas.
When the rush of Labour MPs came into the Commons after the 1945 election, about two thirds were former students or tutors of the NCLC.
The NCLC was born out of a strike at Ruskin College in 1908 about the class bias of Oxford education.
Ten of the 54 strikers formed the nucleus of the Central Labour College, backed by the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants, the South Wales Miners' Federation, and the Amalgamated Society of Engineers.
Hostility from Oxford landlords caused the college to move to Earls Court.
The students shared the cooking and domestic chores.
Millar came to the NCLC in 1923, first as press officer, but he soon became general secretary.
He continued as secretary until 1965, when the NCLC was handed over to the TUC.
The decision to wind it up coincided with Millar's retirement, but owed more to the competition from the TUC's own education department and the Workers Educational Association.
Millar said: ‘The WEA was subsidised by the state and we were not.
The WEA provided orthodox education, orientated to the capitalist system.
We provided a socialist system of education.
Would you expect the devil to be subsidised by heaven?’
Millar was obstinately determined to change the content of education.
Though never a left-winger in current terms, he wanted the socialist viewpoint expressed in every facet of learning.
‘Knowledge is power — the right kind of knowledge,’ he liked to say.
A strain of independent socialist thinking runs through his courses, pamphlets, and articles for Plebs, the NCL journal he edited for many years.
His quarrel with the TUC was about the narrow vision that Millar thought they applied to education, confining themselves to practical day-to-day union matters and ignoring socialist principles.
In the last full year of the NCLC there were 11,032 enrolled students, 9,119 on day or weekend courses, and 43,984 on the 74 postal courses.
The students were drawn from 88 trade unions, and some outside bodies.
Millar told me: ‘Labour view of education has always been limited.
It wasn't so much as how to achieve a new social order, but how can I ensure that my son or daughter gets a better job than I did.
That was the object.
Before you can have a revolution you have to break down the existing system.
The Labour Party has done precious little about the political education of its members’.
The Millars retired and moved to Dartmouth.
His house on the hill had a magnificent view over the bay.
Millar who liked to play the canny Scot, always said ‘I've seen it whenever the view was mentioned’.
Within three months of the move, the railway station was closed and Millar blamed Dr Beeching as the architect of his isolation.
The house had a double garage which Millar turned into a study and office.
Jam-packed with a complete run of Plebs and sets of the TUC and Labour Party conference reports, it was here that he wrote his book The Labour College Movement.
Allen Saddler JPMMillar, born April 17, 1893; died December 2, 1989
Diary.
By Andrew Moncur
INTREPID Peter Bottomley, former scourge of the dozy British motorist, has not abandoned his life's work just because Her Indoors shunted him from Transport to Northern Ireland.
In goodwill tours of the Six Counties he has been heard to ask for alcohol-free lager and other exotic drinks.
Dusty samples have had to be unearthed for his refreshment.
But his zeal knows no bounds.
Stopped at a traffic light by the SuperMac shopping complex on South Belfast's ringroad, Botters, by all accounts, spots a woman driving the adjoining car without her seat-belt fastened.
Out he leaps from his ministerial hot-rod to remonstrate.
The lady in question frames an elegant response: ‘Ferkauf, yer Brit eejut.’
Or words to that effect.
The crestfallen minister turns to his security men.
‘Why didn't you support me?’
The tight-lipped reply: ‘We're supposed to protect you from the IRA, not the voters.’
Or words to ditto ditto.
SO HOW did they break the news to a joyful populace, eagerly waiting to hear the outcome of Margaret Hilda versus The Fossil (© the Sun)?
The scene: Committee Room 12 at the Commons.
Outside the south door, the world's Press.
From the north door emerges, with entourage, Cranley Onslow, chairman of the 1922 Committee, head down and making for the lift.
‘Errh.
What about the press conference, old boy?’ says one of the senior Tories in the flying column.
The party does a smart about-turn.
The magnificent news is duly announced.
Well done.
AGHASTLY green (a sort of goose-droppings shade) note appears in this travel firm's bumf for 1990.
‘Land Travel shares the concern for our environment,’ it says.
‘Although we send brochures and personalised leaflets out to literally thousands of people, consuming large quantities of paper, all our paper supplies are made from timber from renewable forests.’
PAY ATTENTION.
All this talk of peace and detente in the Med isn't being allowed to interfere with war games at Greenham Common.
Having packed off a double convoy of cruise launchers (still at large) the base is playing at being under nuclear attack.
An Operational Readiness Inspection, it seems.
Carry on.
SOME mistake here.
In goes a Commons motion, tabled by the Liberal Democrat Simon Hughes.
This ends with a robust attack on the Labour Party, saying that what's happening ‘in local government is a clear indication of the total unfitness of HM's Official Opposition to run the government’.
Good knockabout stuff, apparently signed by nine MPs, eight of them Lib Dems.
The ninth?
Jimmy Wray, Labour MP for Provan, Glasgow.
Errh.
Can that be right?
YOU MAY have noticed that MPs, stung into action by last week's visit by President Roh Tae Woo, slapped in a motion deploring the South Korean habit of eating dog and chips, poodle with noodle and so on.
This coincided with publication of an altogether different motion (about closure of the BAT works in Liverpool) signed by loads of Labour MPs, including the member for Warrington North.
By unhappy chance, his name appeared in print as Mr Dog Hoyle.
This has, of course, sent them completely barking.
Doug has been having his paw pulled.
SOME more winning entries for the Vicar's Competition: newspaper captions for the nineties.
‘The Sellafield crater (above).
No cause for concern, says BNFL.’ and ‘A HoseCo official negotiates with third storey inferno family before attempting an expensive rescue operation.’
(both Steve Handsaker); ‘British intellectuals and workers demonstrate in central London demanding an end to the ‘leading role of the Conservative Party’.’
(Tom Seldon).
SOME VERY American news.
George Bush's three-year-old grandchild, Marshal, has been enrolled in an etiquette class, Petite Protocol.
Hugh Hefner has devoted a little bit of Playboy to his new bride, Kimberley.
Just 97 pages.
And Nancy Reagan's tendency to borrow designer dresses is, at this late stage, under scrutiny by the revenue.
Just when you thought it was safe to come out of the closet.
DID MY ears deceive me or was yesterday's BBC TV news saying that even the Queen has ‘flu?
As though in wonder that any virus, let alone a foreign one, would dare to get up the royal hooter.
I ask you.
Geoffrey Beattie hears of businessmen roaming the streets with half a million pounds in carrier bags and learns the difference between a mobster and a muppet.
‘You don't go to the opera to hear the music but to be bundled together with similar people.
It's the same with nightclubs’.
BOB IS big time, very big time.
He's worth several million.
He sipped his gin and tonic, and my eyes flitted to his gold watch and his gold bracelet.
I've seen them all: Rolexes, snide Rolexes that look better than the real thing.
Cartiers and snide Cartiers with the paint peeling off.
But his watch didn't make any attempt at the right label.
It might have been a Seiko, but I couldn't be sure.
Functional rather than ostentatious, for telling the time rather than for telling others who he was.
My eyes stayed on his wrists, and moved up to his starched cuffs, somehow more noticeable than all that gold, or gold paint in the case of the watch.
This was a man who liked order.
But I didn't think that order was the most important thing in building up a huge nightclub and casino empire, in a world full of sharks all wanting a slice of the action.
And what self-respecting shark doesn't want a piece of that action?
What has order got to do with any of it?
I wanted to find out.
So here we were a million miles away from his world of steak and more steak and steak Tartare and steak Bernaise and Moet and Lanson and Dom Perignon.
Here we were in a restaurant where books on croquet lay scattered around the place.
I wanted to disorient him.
It seemed to be working.
‘Every time you take me for a meal, it's to a non-smoking restaurant,’ said Bob in a somewhat annoyed tone.
He looked around briefly at the women with the scraggy necks in the Laura Ashley dresses, and the men who all seemed to be wearing red ties, and probably Seiko watches — but for a different reason from Bob.
Then he tucked into the ‘pan fried calves liver with sauted apples served with a crisp stir fry of mange tout.’
It wasn't prawn cocktail.
My mind wandered away from the disembowelled calves.
I've heard them all.
Small time burglars with the social skills of a potted shrimp telling me how they're saving all their readies to invest in a club one day —‘Maybe Puerto Banus, maybe Chesterfield, I'm not sure yet.’
I've spent hours listening to big time bullies, who like to saunter around clubs showing their bit-on-the-side exactly who they are, by demonstrating who they know, shaking every hand worth shaking.
‘How are you, sir?’ they say as they compress your hand for good measure.
It's always ‘sir’; their memory bank never quite matches their aspirations.
They've spent years doing this sort of thing, now they've decided that they want to do it for a living.
‘I could run a club like this,’ they say in an expansive sort of way, leaning back as they enunciate every word ever so carefully.
They lean back until they look as if they are about to fall over, so that they can look around them, and perhaps check who's behind their back.
It's a trick they've learned, presumably to keep themselves safe in confined spaces.
‘There's nothing to it really,’ they say.
And for a moment you don't know whether they're talking about this strange bodily posture or running a club.
But their philosophy comes pouring out, and you realise that they certainly haven't spent much time thinking about any aspect of their behaviour, or the kind of images they project, let alone strange and isolated postures.
‘You just have to be able to identify the good punters,’ they say, ‘the really big hitters, and be able to talk to them, and that's it basically.’
And the bit-on-the-side nods feverishly.
‘I know all the big hitters around here.
Give me a line-up of blokes I've never met before, and I'll pick out the big hitter for you.’
The bit-on-the-side's nods go into overdrive.
‘Oh, he knows all the VIPs,’ she says, ‘and he's even introduced me to some of them.
I've met Jack who's got a gold VIP card, who's got that used car lot in Rotherham.’
‘And a lot more besides,’ adds the big bully.
‘And Ken who's got the double glazing firm in Doncaster.’
‘And a conservatory business tacked on,’ adds grizzle again, ‘don't forget the conservatory business — a bit special is that.’
‘He knows them all,’ she says adoringly, ‘and they all drink shampoo — nearly every night.’
‘It's true,’ he says, ‘I do know them all.
All the shampoo set.
Lead me into a room and I could pick them out for you.
I've spent a lifetime meeting the right sort of people.’
And a lifetime of line-ups by the sound of things, I say in a rather low voice.
But he ignores me.
‘I'll sort out the big hitter from the two bob millionaires.
I haven't been selling snide Rolexes for nothing, you know.’
MY MIND returned to the man with the starched cuffs.
‘I'm a bit of a disappointment to you,’ he said eventually.
‘You'd rather I was like Bob Hoskins in The Long Good Friday.
That's the kind of image the public have.
Either a right heavy, a real bully, or someone very crooked.
But it's just not like that.
The nightclub and gaming business is run on the same principles as any other business.
You're basically selling a product at a fair price.
In the case of nightclubs, what you're selling is an environment.
It's up to the punters what they use the environment for.
‘A successful club has to be busy all the time.
You have to get the punters to pack in.
What makes them go?
In my view, it's the herd instinct.
The opera's just the same.
You don't go to the opera primarily to hear the music, you go to be bundled together with people similar to yourself, or people that you think you're like.
It's the same with nightclubs.’
‘But what about the sharks?’
I asked.
‘How do you deal with them?’
‘The first thing to remember is that 99 per cent of the people you come into contact with are people whom you don't have to worry about at all.
There are a few people who are out to cause you any aggravation, whom you have to treat that seriously.
The rest are just muppets.’
Now I've seen club owners in the movies, and I've listened to their talk in person, but I've never heard anyone using a word like muppet before.
But Bob's is a world of black and white: muppet and non-muppet.
The small time burglars are muppets, the big time bully boys are muppets, I'm a muppet.
In fact, I'm definitely a muppet.
I couldn't find the entrance to the restaurant that night for a start, and I spent the first half hour of the evening circling the outside of the building looking for a way in — in full view of all the diners.
I am not the kind of person to be treated seriously, in Bob's jargon.
‘But how can you tell muppets from non-muppets?’
I asked.
Bob looked at me as if only a muppet would ask a question like that.
‘Put it this way, I was approached a few months ago by a couple of guys in one of my clubs who said that they wanted to see the gaffer.
They came straight out with it: they wanted to supply all the spirits for the club — at very reasonable prices.
I said that I couldn't fault their prices, but asked what would happen if I didn't pay.
They just said ‘Oh you'll pay, don't worry about that.’
I said, ‘How many times?’
‘Oh, just the once.’
These were guys you had to take seriously.’
‘Not muppets,’ I added helpfully.
‘Definitely not muppets,’ said Bob.
‘It was their manner that told me they had to be taken seriously.
Not all flash and threats.
Very quiet, a bit understated.’
‘A bit like yourself,’ I added.
Bob wasn't sure whether this was a compliment or not, but continued regardless.
‘The only way of dealing with that sort of thing is not to get involved at all.
Not even a little bit — no matter how tempting it seems.’
It was now time for the fillet of local fallow deer served pink, with spiced red cabbage and glazed walnuts.
Bob seemed relieved that there was no steak on the menu.
He seemed to be loosening up, only tensing slightly when he noticed the no smoking sign again.
‘Two weeks ago we had a couple of so-called businessmen in the club, with their minder and the Roller parked down below.
Now they were muppets.
It was very late — after closing time, about 3am, and they came right out with it: ‘How would you fancy having a quarter of a million quid?’
‘I told them I wasn't interested, so it went up to half a million.
This guy just said, ‘I can bring it here first thing in the morning in a carrier bag, and don't be clever by saying that you don't want it.’
So I said, ‘Look, I just don't want it,’ so he tells me not to be so clever.
He thought that I was trying to provoke him.
‘You're just trying to be clever, and that's not too clever in itself, you know.’
‘I told them that they were barred from the club from now on.
The secret is not to get involved.
There are too many club owners who think that they can play it both ways.
Some think that they can steal what the club makes, but it's still thieving, even if it's thieving from yourself.
You've still got bills to pay.
‘Of course, incidents like this do put your blood pressure up.
And it just so happens that I mentioned to one of my doormen that particular night that I could do with one of those machines to keep a careful check on my blood pressure.
So he turned up with one the following day.
Don't ask me where he got it from.
We had a bit of a play about with it.
The only problem was that we nearly had a few fatalities.
After a day's work, it was a bit of light relief to use it.
There was no shortage of volunteers or helpers.
But it can be a bit dangerous if you've had a few drinks, because you keep pumping the thing up and forgetting about it.’
At this stage in the evening I started to sweat.
It might have been the stories about businessmen roaming the streets with half a million pounds in carrier bags.
It might have been the stories about the blood pressure of inebriate volunteers being measured at 3am in the morning.
It might have been the blazing fire in the corner of this very upmarket restaurant.
Bob was not sweating at all.
‘You know you could stop that if you'd any self-control,’ said Bob, noticing my state.
‘Just pull yourself together.
Just tell yourself that you're cold.’
I did, but nothing happened.
Beads of sweat continued to form and drip on to the table.
I noticed that the women with the scraggy necks were all sweating; so were the men in the red ties with the tight collars on their shirts.
Bob alone was cool.
He seemed to be freezing, in fact.
The fact that I had so little self-control seemed to be irritating him ever so slightly.
‘I've met so-called intelligent people before,’ he said in a challenging way, ‘and I know a lot of questions that can baffle them.’
He was staring right at me.
‘OK, let's start with this one — what's the square root of minus 16?’
He leaned back.
Bob was used to testing people, his whole life revolved around it.
Now it was my turn.
Unfortunately, the question seemed to me something of a nonsense, as it involved the square root of a minus quantity.
But was that the test?
To see how I would handle a bit of academic incompetence?
Was he trying to determine if I would correct him?
Or, heaven forbid, ridicule him?
I played it straight — instinctively, intuitively, without thinking — like a muppet.
‘The square root of minus 16 doesn't exist,’ I replied, remembering my school mathematics.
‘Any number squared gives you a positive number.’
A look of glee swept across Bob's face.
He leaned back in his chair ever so slowly.
I had certainly failed the test at some level, whatever the test was.
It was the first time that night Bob had displayed any real emotion.
His eyes sparkled.
‘That's where you're wrong, you see.
That one always get you so-called intelligent people.
The square root of minus 16 is J4.
Don't ask me how it's done, but that's the correct answer.
And don't argue with me.
It's part of a circle or something.
What's important is getting the right answer in the end, even if you don't understand how it's done.’
I replied the same thing could be said about running a successful club, but Bob was off, back into the night.
© Geoffrey Beattie.
Geoffrey Beatie: ‘I'm a muppet.
I'm definitely a muppet’ OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE gr1