

Truck or treats?
Brandwagon.
By Richard Longworth
DIESEL engines are the most fuel efficient vehicle power source available.
Trucks, buses and most taxis use them, and 40 per cent of vehicle fuel sold in the UK last year was diesel.
But diesel engines also have very dirty exhaust emissions.
While not having the concentrations of poisonous gases found in petrol engine exhausts, they give out far more ‘particulates’(soot).
Diesel engine manufacturers have long maintained that these are harmless, but recently they have been found to contain polyaromatich hydrocarbons (PAH), which can cause cancer when breathed deeply.
Soot was first connected with cancer by a London doctor in 1774.
Diesel engines also produce nitrous ocxides (NOx), which return from the skies as acid rain.
It is small wonder that the truck and bus manufacturers based in areas hit worst by acid rain, Volvo and Scania in Sweden and MAN in Bavaria, are working hardest to cut pollutants.
While many politicians have only recently seen their green light many diesel engine manufacturers have looked further ahead, and have been developing cleaner engines, principally in response to stringent American legislation.
The result will be a common level of NOx and particular emissions from vehicles (measured in grammes per kilowat hour) from vehicles sold in Europe after 1991.
NOx be cut to 11.8g/Kw/hr, and particulates to 11.8 g/Kw/hr, That level will still be significantly higher than US levels, but much lower than vehicles currently being sold.
There is also a further cut in the pipeline, but this second phase of diesel pollution is running into technical problems.
While the first level of cuts can be reached using existing levels of technology, the second stage, likely in 1994, will require a new generation of engines.
These will be electronically controlled, a technical task far harder on a diesel engine than on its petrol counterpart.
The exhaust will also have to be fitted with filters to trap the particulates and their carcinogenic PAHs.
However these are cumbersome, complicated and expensive.
The problem is that they clog up.
Some manufacturers such as MAN and DAF have solved the problem by fitting filters which clean themselves with a small furnace as the vehicle is in operation.
Volvo on the other hand is testing buses fitted with filters like dustbins, which are cleaned at the end of a day.
For there to be a Europe-wide common standard of emissions, there must also be a common standard for fuel, as some types of fuel smoke worse than others.
Talks are currently in progress in all the EC states, to try to distill some common requirements from fuel suppliers and their customers.
Unlike lead, which the fuel companies eventually proved only too pleased to take out of petrol, sulphur does nothing for either the performance or longevity of diesel engines and it contributes to acid rain.
Currently, diesel fuel sold in the EC contains 0.3 per cent sulphur, except in West Germany where the level is 0.25 per cent.
Klaus Schubert, technicaldirector at MAN, says his company would like to see it reduced to 0.02 per cent, but recognises that 0.05 per cent is a more realistic level.
However John Bullock, retail fuels technical manager at Shell UK, says the price of the fuel would rise significantly, because extra crude would have to be refined to run the hydro-desulphurisation process.
There is, however, a chasm between what is becoming technically possible, and the reality of what is likely to happen to the air on our city streets, where, according to Friends of the Earth, pollution levels regularly exceed WHO standards.
London buses, for example, are exempt from traffic lawsaffecting other vehicles, which in the competitive deregulated world of modern bus operation, include expensive pollution control.
There are also buses at least 30 years old still being run, so it is likely to be decades before the fleet is replaced.
With over a quarter of the UK fleet of rigid (urban delivery) vehicles over eight years old, high street deliveries are also destined to smell for years.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE en2
Whose flu?.
THIS year's flu forecasters got it right.
The flu strain reported this week to be hitting offices, factories and schools throughout Britain has been identified as A/Shanghai; the flu vaccine now available from doctors protects against it.
The cocktail vaccine is ‘mixed’ by the world's flu forecasters at a meeting in Geneva in February each year to discuss the international traffic in flu strains.
This winter's vaccine also protects against A/Singapore and B/Yamagata.
Dr John Watkins, a GP in Rogerstone, Gwent, who has made a special study of flu, stressed yesterday that it was not too late for high-risk groups to be vaccinated.
These include the elderly, people with chronic respiratory disease, chronic heart disease, kidney disease and diabetes, and health service staff.
These are the groups most at risk from developing secondary complications.
Flu vaccine ‘take-up’ in Britain is low compared with other EC countries.
This is partly due to a belief that flu jabs do not offer much protection.
In fact, they are 70 to 80 per cent effective.
Another factor influencing take-up is public perception of flu.
It is not seen as a ‘deadly disease’ in the same way as it is in France.
A third factor is that there has not been a major epidemic in Britain for 20 years.
The public has a very short memory.
An epidemic this winter — and it is still questionable whether we will have one — would trigger heavy demand for vaccine next year.
If you succumb to the Shanghai flu, reconcile yourself to four or five days in bed with a high fever, followed by a further four or five days with a cough and a runny nose.
Take paracetamol to keep your temperature down.
Lots of fluids are also essential.
Don't try any heroics.
Returning to work before you are fit could infect others and delay your recovery.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Water sports on reservoirs are threatened as more evidence emerges of the blue-green algae, which feed on pollution and were first seen in Britain this summer.
Paul Brown reports on a problem which will cost the privatised water companies a fortune to clean up Blue-green and deadly.
BLUE-green algaes, which killed sheep and pet dogs at Rutland Water this summer, are a serious and growing threat to sailing, water sports and fishing in all lakes and ponds in Britain as man made pollution feeds their growth.
Large areas of still water used for recreation are likely to be routinely closed in the summer months, just at the point of maximum use, in order to protect the public from toxic poisoning.
Otherwise they risk the same fate as 20 officer cadets who were ill, two seriously, after canoeing on a lake in Leek, Staffordshire, this summer.
The case, not reported at the time, was the first documented of human victims of this phenonemum in Britain.
Research is now being intensified at Dundee University, which has the world's leading expertise on the subject, in an attempt to understand what makes the algae release the potentially fatal toxins.
They want to find if there is any way to predict it and possibly prevent it.
Monitoring and attempting to prevent the pollution will cost millions over the next few years and will be passed directly to the consumer as an unforseen expense.
While the hazards of the algae have been documented since the beginning of the century in places such as Australia and the United States, it has only become a serious problem in Europe recently.
Scandinavian countries were the first to have to close waterways because of poisoning problems and now Britain has a potential crisis.
The hot summer and low water levels made the problem worse but it is Britain's farming and sewage practices that are the key to the problem.
The algae feeds on nitrogen and phosphates which come into the water from agriculture and sewage.
Rutland Water, where water is used for human consumption, is a classic case.
Water is pumped in from the River Nene, which is rich in farm nutrients, and sewage from Oakham, rich in phosphates from washing powders, goes direct into the reservior.
This, plus sunlight, makes a perfect soup on which the blue-green algae thrives.
Anglian Water Authority claims that the water drawn off from the lake is still safe despite these problems because of the treatment it gives the water before it reaches people's taps.
Last night the people who live and work round Rutland Water held a protest meeting to decide how to tackle this threat to their health and their jobs.
Since the reserviour was built it has become an important tourist and recreational centre but now none of the businesses can be sure they have a future.
Mr Nick Cox, who runs a sailing centre, marina and yacht chandlers on the lake has issued a writ for damages against Anglain Water Authority.
He is one of 35 local people who is considering suing the authority for loss of business because of the algae.
He blames the authority for creating the conditions in which the algae can thrive.
It is a growing problem partly and one that is likely to be with us for a long time.
‘We are all extremely worried here.
It is not just the six weeks we were shut down this summer and the loss of trade since, we are worried about the future.
Do we have any, or is this going to happen again.’
Anglian Water refused to attend last night's meeting and Mr Cox accused them of a ‘stone wall of silence.’
He said a total of 24 dogs had died and despite many samples being taken away the local people had never been given any results.
‘We have been given reassurances that the water is safe to drink and it was just the long hot summer but we are not so sure.
You can still see the algae in the water, and I am still drinking bottled.
We just do not have the information to go on.’
The National Rivers Authority, the new post privatisation watchdog for the water industry, is proud of its role in publicising the problem of blue-green algae.
‘We do not believe the public would have been told at all but for us,’ said a spokesman.
‘The problem is that very little is really known about the problem.
We know that nutrients added to the water by humans make the algae grow, this combined with the sunlight causes blooms, but beyond that we do not understand much about the toxins.’
Anglian Water Authority refused to attend the meeting of residents in Oakham because of rules preventing them discussing matters that might depress the share price during privatisation, and because there was little information available.
Professor Geoffrey Codd of Dundee University said an in depth study of the algae and what made them produce toxins was needed.
The algaes were very unpredicable.
One week the algae could be clear of toxins and the next week very toxic but no one yet know why.
This meant testing had to be done frequently and the waters closed down as a precaution once the blooms appeared.
‘It is a serious and growing problem partly because of the man made nutrients which aid the growth of the blooms.
It is likely to be with us for a long time to come.’
Mrs Shelley Howard, senior biologist of the Severn-Trent Region said the officer cadets had been involved in strenuous exercises which involved repeatedly going under the water.
The authority had coincidentally tested the water for toxins on about the same day as the officer cadets had used it.
Subsequently the scientists had advised the local environmental health officer of the dangers and he closed the water.
By that time the officer cadets were in hospital.
Two, who were most seriously ill with vomiting and other symptoms, were released after a week.
Mrs Howard said: ‘Unless we are given a lot more resources we will not be able to carry out the weekly monitoring required.
So far we do not know what is going to happen about this.’
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE en2
Please believe ME, I'm ill ME sufferers are sick of doctors not taking them seriously and have made a cinema ad to win support for their case.
John Illman examines the problems they are facing.
WE ALL like to be taken seriously, especially when we are feeling ill.
It is easy enough if you have chicken pox or some other common illness with well-defined physical symptoms.
But it is not so easy if you have a condition which is not susceptible to diagnosis and has no clear-cut signs or symptoms.
You may be written off as a malingerer or a neurotic or, perhaps even worse, as someone who must be gently humoured back to health.
Alternatively, you may be shown the door with a few sharp words more in keeping with a tyrannical consultant than your friendly neighbourhood GP.
We have all heard stories about GPs alleged to have given patients short shrift with remarks like: ‘Throw away your crutches.
It's your head that needs them, not your legs.’
‘Women of your age imagine aches and pains — are you sure you're not attention seeking?’
‘We all have to die sometimes.’
‘I'm not prepared to do any tests.
They cost money.’
‘You are a menace to society — a pest.
I wish you'd take yourself away from me.’
‘You middle class women have nothing else to worry about.’
‘It's one of those things you silly young women get.’
‘Stop feeling sorry for yourself.
I have patients with real illnesses — patients who are dying from cancer.’
‘Go home and have more babies.’
Surgery encounters like these have become increasingly common over the past 30 years with the erosion of the traditional divisions between sickness and health, which have led to, among other things, the medicalisation of ‘anxiety.’.
Until the launch of the so-called ‘minor tranquillisers’ in the early Sixties, anxiety was seen as an inevitable everyday experience, and, moreover, as a valuable psychological spur compelling us to take stock of things if they went wrong.
It was not something you took to the doctor — until Valium and Librium arrived on the market.
Since then the fashion has changed again.
Doctors are now increasingly reluctant to prescribe tranquillisers for fear of being sued by patients who become addicted to them.
What this means is that good old fashioned self-reliance could become a new health vogue of the Nineties.
The anxious and the worried may seek solace outside the surgery.
According to one theory, held by some psychiatrists, patients may find doctors increasingly unsympathetic to their plight.
This theory has it that, as a breed, doctors like to be masters of every possible situation, and that this may even be a factor in their selection of medicine as a career.
But this, it is claimed, may make them more vulnerable than most to negative emotions when they are shown to be powerless.
This may result in swift and brutal treatment of patients with complaints which are difficult to diagnose.
Admittedly, some may have totally unrealistic expectations of the NHS's power to keep them fit.
They may be neurotics or malingerers or both.
But others may be worthy candidates for the very best of the NHS.
Patients claiming to have Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME) may come into the latter category.
Symptoms include fatigue, night sweats, weight loss and exhaustion.
While some doctors recognise the condition, others question its existence, attributing problems to causes such as depression.
The ME Action Campaign is waging a major campaign to validate ME as a disease.
The alleged remarks by doctors to patients quoted above were taken from an Action Campaign survey highlighting ‘bad’ treatment.
This week the ME Action Campaign released stills from a forthcoming cinema commercial.
Featuring a teenage girl whose life is totally disrupted by ME, it is designed to win public support for ME sufferers.
The Action Campaign is also seeking support from medical journalists, and I have been asked repeatedly if I was going to add to the ‘adverse’ ME publicity.
Having heard conflicting views, I am not taking sides.
But I am sure about one thing.
A little humility in the medical debate would not go amiss.
It might even help deserving patients to be taken seriously.
Before and after…new cinema commercial features a teenage sufferer whose life is totally disrupted by ME OVERNIGHT FILE
In search of the most valuable GEMs of all Malcolm Smith on the importance of genetically-engineered micro-organisms.
LOSING your favourite gems may be a personal disaster.
But losing GEMs could have much farther reaching implications.
GEMs are genetically engineered micro-organisms and finding them again could prove vital.
So far, none are known to have been released in the UK.
But several are in the pipeline and there have been trials.
The reluctance of UK Authorities to sanction their release — for such agricultural purposes as extending the range of plants which harbour nitrogen-fixing bacteria in their roots — is understandable.
Once out you can never round them up.
Detecting their presence is as much as is practical.
Even that is far from straightforward.
Alun Morgan and Dr Jon Saunders of the department of genetics and microbiology at the University of Liverpool, working with Dr Roger Pickup of the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, Windermere, form one of a number of groups of scientists developing techniques to spot a GEM.
There are so many bacteria everywhere that picking out a GEM is a bit like looking for a candle amongst Blackpool's illumination.
Soil, for example, can easily have millions of bacteria — of very many different species — in just a gram.
A second problem is that many bacteria living ‘in the wild’ are not always easy to culture in the laboratory.
Many have fickle requirements and others lie dormant until very precise conditions happen to come along.
As a result, it's been estimated that not many more than one per cent can be cultured at any one time.
The researchers have devised a suite of methods based on detecting a marker gene engineered into the GEM.
They've used one that codes for an enzyme called catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (C230 for short).
It converts catechol — a naturally occuring substance in ordinary metabolism — to a vivid yellow compound.
The gene is very uncommon in nature so any intense yellow colonies of bacteria isolated from the wild — and cultured — are almost certainly the lost GEMs.
It's not the only way of checking for C230.
The enzyme can be tested for chemically, even in dilute water samples or by using other more complex, state of the art, tricks like DNA amplification.
Using catechol is relatively simple and cheap.
But the snag is that first you have to be able to recover the GEMs to culture them to do the catechol yellowing test.
To develop a recovery method, Morgan, Saunders and Pickup used a Gem called Pseudomonas putida mt-2, a modified common soil bacterium which may have wide applications for destroying toxic substances.
Their method has been designed for recovering a GEM from water — not easy because any bacteria in it are much less abundant than, say in soil.
This GEM — like most bacteria — isn't the smooth cell shape that it looks.
Tiny protein structures protrude — like flagellae to help it move and pili to attach itself to surfaces.
Their composition differs from one species of bacterium to the next.
So mt-2's purified pili and flagellae were injected into animals so that they rapidly produced antibodies specific to them.
These were then collected from their blood and purified.
The next step was to chemically link these highly specific antibodies to small magnetised polystyrene spheres.
Suspended in water, only the GEM for which the antibodies were specific will attach to the beads.
The beads plus GEM are recovered with a magnet.
The accuracy of the recovery process hinges on just how specific the flagellae/pili antibodies are.
Once you have the GEMs on the polystyrene spheres they can be washed off and cultured for testing with catechol or other techniques.
According to the researchers, highly specific antibodies have ensured that the technique is a success.
No confusion was found when they tested them against 200 different isolates of the same, but genetically unmodified, bacterium taken from lake water.
This research, to enable identification of a released GEM — and its whereabouts — is essential because of the risks involved in letting GEMs out of the laboratory.
There are concerns that, once released, GEMs might exhibit some previously unknown pathogenicity, might take over from some naturally occurring bacteria or pass on some perhaps unwanted trait to indigenous bacteria.
There are also fears that a genetic mutation — over which there could be no control — could suddenly produce a GEM with some nasty trick up its sleeve.
There may be ways around this, at least in part, as Jon Saunders points out.
Engineering a time delayed ‘lethal gene’ into a GEM to give it a finite life — making it sensitive to low air temperatures so that frost kills it — is one way.
Doubling up on ‘lethal genes’— by making a GEM both frost susceptible and ultraviolet light sensitive — is a belt and braces approach.
But none of these tricks can insure against a mutation.
Official concern was voiced at the EC's Environment Council in September attended by Chris Patten, the UK's Environment Minister.
Reporting to the House of Commons, he said: ‘Agreement was reached on a directive concerning the deliberate release…of genetically modified organisms.
The directive requires member states to establish systems for the national regulation of releases.
It also establishesa system for the review and clearance of products containing genetically modified organisms so that conditions can be established for their marketing.’
Reliable detection is an essential part of the precautions.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE sci
Weedy but powerful The Environment Bill, published later this month, will tackle the perils of genetic engineering.
Here Stephen Young considers the problem of herbal terrorists.
EVER SINCE mankind first began to till the soil, weeds have been practising their unique brand of herbal terrorism.
Two thousand years ago, the biblical farmer was tormented by tares and Virgil was denouncing what he called the lazy thistle.
Today, weeds are responsible for a 12 per cent reduction in the world's harvests.
The consequences of any increase in their activities are all too clear.
With such thoughts uppermost in their minds, ecologists are preparing for the arrival of genetically-engineered crops.
What concerns them is the risk that engineered plants might acquire weedy traits and escape from cultivation.
The effects on agriculture and the environment could be profound.
In a recent report, the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution concluded that potatoes, for example, might become troublesome weeds if they were engineered to be tolerant of frosts, blight and herbicides.
According to ecologist Kathleen Keeler, of the University of Nebraska, the creation of new weeds is the most serious risk attaching to plant biotechnology.
The point is that crops and weeds are in a sense kindred spirits, with several traits in common.
The dividing line is tenuous in the extreme.
Many of the world's crops double as weeds.
This is as true of guavas and pomegranates as it is of maize and rice, as true of lettuce and asparagus as it is of cabbages and carrots.
At the same time, weeds often see service as crops.
Of the world's 17 worst weeds, 13 are exploited by mankind, often as animal fodder, medicines, or potherbs.
Five of those are cultivated.
Keeler has been musing on the nature of weediness and the likelihood of it evolving among engineered crops.
Weediness is widely held to reside in a set of 13 traits, bearing on such matters as general hardiness, competitiveness, reproductive habits and germination of seed.
Keeler wondered how many of these traits were needed to transform a well-behaved plant into a pest.
To find the answer, she turned to a published league table of the world's worst weeds.
She analysed each member of this roll of dishonour, looking for the 13 hallmarks of weediness.
The average score was 11, with one contender, the purple nutsedge, gaining full marks.
Keeler's conclusion is that a weed must bear 10 or 11 of the tell-tale traits to be seriously weedy.
The argument now takes an ingenious turn.
Suppose, says Keeler, that we apply the same analysis to other groups of plants — crops, say — and tot up their score on the scale of weediness.
Subtract that figure from the score notched up by the weeds and we shall then be in a position to predict the number of traits that an average crop plant would have to acquire in order to become weedy.
(The word ‘average’ is important: the results of the analysis do not apply to any specific case.)
To complete the picture, Keeler also took the measure of a group of 20 randomly chosen wild plants from the British flora.
The wild flowers managed an average score of 7 ½ out of a possible 13.
For a random selection of 20 crops, the score was 5.
Ordinary wild plants, it seems, are weedier than crops, but both have a long way to go to catch up with the real pests.
On average, it would take at least five or six genetic changes to turn a crop into a dangerous weed.
Such a major transformation is highly unlikely.
Many crops are grown from seed every year and so all the necessary genetic mutations would have to happen to a single plant within one growing season.
On average, the chances of weediness emerging by accident are vanishingly small.
Yet this generalisation will not bear too much weight.
Weedy strains already exist in at least six of Keeler's 20 randomly chosen crops — notably oats, sunflowers, rice and sweet potatoes.
This is despite the fact that they carry only a minority of the 13 stigmata of weediness.
Small genetic changes might conceivably aggravate their nuisance value.
The tomato and the strawberry are more problematic.
Although awarded seven marks apiece — making them weedier than that old stalwart, the creeping thistle — they are not widely viewed as potential threats.
As these examples suggest, there is more to weediness than meets the eye.
A plant can be an obedient herb in one habitat and a rumbustious weed somewhere else.
The botanical annals are full of examples of plants that were introduced into a novel area, only to become seriously weedy — witness the prickly pear's progress in Australia and South Africa, or the rhododendron in Britain.
Weediness, it would seem, cannot be fully described simply by totting up a score.
It is also necessary to understand the subtle interactions between the plant and its surroundings — interactions which, if upset, can transform a civilised Jekyll into a rampaging Hyde.
Some ecologists see a parallel between introduced plants and engineered ones.
The resemblance could be particularly close if breeders were installing some trait that allowed the crop to thrive in a new habitat, or one that shielded it from parasites or diseases.
To predict the fate of such a crop — and its prospects of proving weedy — research must focus on the plant's most intimate dealings with its environment.
At Imperial College's field station at Silwood Park, Mick Crawley is setting up a series of such experiments as part of Prosamo, a research programme funded by the Agricultural and Food Research Council, the Department of Trade and Industry and a consortium of companies.
Prosamo (which stands for planned release of selected and modified organisms) is sponsoring a wide range of studies on the behaviour of genetically engineered organisms in the environment.
Crawley will compare the ecology of engineered and conventional varieties of three crops: potatoes, oilseed rape and sugar beet.
In carefully designed field trials, he will explore whether the engineered plants behave normally or abnormally towards their pathogens, competitors, herbivores and the physical environment.
The eventual aim is find out whether engineered genes render a crop plant more aggressive than its traditional relatives — and more likely to decamp from cultivation.
It is an important experiment and one that could play a key role in securing public approval, or disapproval, for genetic engineering.
Character defect…even the vibrant sunflower contains weedy strains OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE sc
Introns.
Dice rolling with the times.
Electronics John Webb.
THE centuries-old five-dice game of liardice — or liar's dice as it is called in North America — has a modern problem.
It needs space to throw the dice and this is not practical in planes and trains where it can do most to relieve the boredom of a long journey.
This dilemma for a game with millions of followers worldwide has proved to be a ‘bunch of sixes’ opportunity for Welsh inventor Don Hughes, a self-confessed liardice buff, who claims to have beaten the Far East electronics industry literally at its own game by developing an electronic version that is hardly bigger than a credit card.
The tiny instrument is an interesting example of the latest gate-array-chip technology.
It generates the random numbers for the dice from reading the device's internal clocks at the instant the ‘roll’ button is pressed.
Mr Hughes believes it is the only such electronic game aimed at an adult market and the only one not designed and manufactured in the Far East.
It could prove to be a good roll of the dice, for Mr Hughes has also written a book on the mathematics of five-dice games and devised special packaging to exploit the game's addictiveness by allowing it to be played while it is hanging from the supermarket shelf.
Mapping the universe.
Astrophysics Piyush Ojha.
MARGARET Geller and John Huchra of the Harvard-Smithsonian Centre for Astrophysics have discovered a thin sheet of galaxies measuring at least 200 million by 500 million light years, which stretches across the sky like a giant canopy.
They call this structure ‘The Great Wall’.
Its existence casts doubt on the current astronomical theory of the distribution of galaxies and the large-scale structure of the universe.
The observation of the Great Wall has come from an ambitious project to map the positions of all visible galaxies which are brighter than a specified minimum.
The survey —‘mapping the universe’— which Geller and Huchra began a few years ago is not yet complete but they have seen enough to conclude that ‘the size of the largest structures we detect is limited only by the extent of the survey’.
Astronomers know that the early universe was uniform because a remnant of that period, the cosmic microwave background radiation which bathes the Earth from all directions, is remarkably uniform.
The problem in understanding the present structure of the universe is that, after evolving for 10 billion years following the big bang, it has become very clumpy and matter has aggregated into galaxies and clusters and superclusters of galaxies.
An acceptable theory must explain in detail how this clumping of matter has occurred in the time available for it.
The larger the largest structure in the universe the more difficult it becomes to reconcile it with the uniform distribution of matter in the early universe.
(Science, vol 246, page 897).
Secrets of the flying lizards.
Zoology Mike Taylor.
THE butterfly lizard leiolepis bellani lives near beaches and sandy areas in tropical South-east Asia.
Its main claim to fame is its elongated ribs with which the lizard can extend a short fringe of skin along either side of its body, at the same time flattening its body.
The beast, it has been alleged, flies away from trouble: if surprised away from its burrow, it starts running, then opens its fringes to take off and glide for up to 20 yards.
J.B.Losos, T.J.Papenfuss and J.R.Macey of the University of California took a critical look at this notion by putting a team of 40 butterfly lizards through full athletic trials.
Their captive specimens could not be persuaded to leap horizontally for over two yards.
When the lizards were dropped, they held their legs and tails out like good free-fall parachutists.
Their fringes slowed their rate of descent by 5 per cent compared to other lizards of the same size.
But those other species also adopt the ‘free-fall’ position, so there is nothing very special about the butterfly lizard's aeronautical abilities.
Losos and his colleagues now believe that the fringes have several other uses.
The lizards seem to use their fringes to absorb heat while basking in the sun.
Lizards frightened by a predator also spread them to make themselves seem bigger than they really are, and more difficult to eat.
Males have brightly striped fringes and flash them at each other when displaying during combat.
The scientists' work confirmed their initial suspicions: that the undoubted improvement in parachuting ability was a fortuitous result of the development of the fringes for these other purposes.
But if the lizards ever took to forest or crag life, the fringes would be a preadaptation to leaping and parachuting, and — perhaps — a nudge towards the evolution of gliding, independently of the modern flying lizard draco volans.
(Journal of Zoology, vol, 217, 559-568) OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE sci
Rapidly growing environmental fears have made climate research more important then ever — and Europe is forging ahead in the field with the planned launch of the ERS-1.
As Nicholas Booth reports, Britain is playing a prominent role in a complex satellite which could unveil the mysteries of the Earth's resources The Euro-eyes of the world.
IN THE YEAR that saw mankind's first wave of planetary exploration reach a glorious climax with Voyager 2's passage of Neptune, it is clear that new space efforts will concentrate on the third planet from the Sun.
Already trumpeted as ‘A Mission To Earth’ by Nasa, climate research has gained new prominence, chiming with the rise in environmental concerns the world over.
It's an area in which Europe has forged ahead and which, against all the odds, is actively supported by our very own government.
For once, the UK is in the good books of the European Space Agency (ESA) for our support of the European Remote Sensing (ERS) programme, which will use the most complex satellites it has ever attempted to build.
‘It's one of the most important projects we have for the 1990s,’ says Philip Goldsmith, head of Earth observation at the European Space Agency.
ERS-1 is currently under test in Toulouse, scheduled for launch next October, at least two years before any other satellites as part of an international monitoring programme for the 1990s.
Whilst other space agencies have equally ambitious plans, they remain as blueprints, or, as one European scientist puts it, ‘pie-in-the-sky-eyes-in-the-sky.’
ERS-1 has five instruments which will scan the Earth at microwave wavelengths to monitor ocean, ice and land resources.
Microwave techniques will enable ERS-1 to return data continuously: they can ‘see’ through cloud and operate at night.
Orbiting the Earth at 780 kilometres altitude, ERS-1 will fly over the poles on each orbit and its instruments will cover the whole of the globe during three days.
So for oceanographers, used to data returned from ships in commercial shipping lanes, ERS-1 will give a totally global picture of the seas.
Two of the ERS instruments have been provided by the UK.
The Active Microwave Instrument radar system, built by Marconi Space Systems, is significant because it can be used over land or ocean: it will return vital information about how the wind interacts with waves.
How the wind affects the ocean and modifies the heat exchanged with the atmosphere is not well understood, but is of paramount importance to weather forecasters who cannot wait for ERS-1 to begin operations.
Though ESA admits there have been electronic problems with one of the system's processors, it's hardly surprising.
‘It's the most complex instrument we've ever built,’ says Joe McCaughey, Marconi's project manager.
‘ERS as a whole is a quantum leap for Europe.’
The Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in Oxfordshire has provided the Along-Track Scanning Radiometer, an infrared instrument which will measure sea surface temperatures down to 0.3C.
‘There are Americans who'd give their eye teeth for this sort of data,’ says one ERS project scientist at the laboratory.
This greater accuracy will allow the heat transfer between the oceans and the atmosphere to be better computed.
Commercially, the ATSR data will allow fishing vessels to ‘home in’ on the edges of sea currents where fish congregate to feed on nutrients brought up from the ocean floor.
But the emphasis for ERS-1 is science, as the ERS programme is ESA's contribution to Woce, the World Ocean Circulation Experiment, an important part of global climate research in the 1990s.
The way in which the atmosphere interacts with the oceans remains a last great unknown in Earth science.
Similarly, the mechanisms for heat transport in ocean currents is also mysterious, as the amounts of both heat and water within them is not well defined.
Nearly 10 per cent of the Earth's surface is covered by ice, which remains as terra incognita to climatologists as it was to 17th-century explorers.
Ice coverage limits the exchange of heat between the atmosphere and ocean, effectively ‘insulating’ polar regions from sunlight during summertime.
‘You'd be amazed how little we know about the polar regions,’ says Dr Preben Goodmandsen of the Technical University of Denmark.
‘During the wintertime, there's no sunlight.
ERS, with its microwave sensors, will give us the best view we've ever had.’
There are no exact figures for the rates at which ice melts and refreezes, mechanisms which have affected sea level changes.
ERS-1 is expected to return the first quantitive data on these processes at the poles.
‘The key to the ERS programme is continuity,’ says Guy Duchossois of ESA headquarters.
The agency has plans to launch a second craft in April 1994, at about the time that the first satellite reaches the end of its operational life.
Climate modelling and assessing environmental change will need more than three years' data if it is to be enhanced.
After refusing to sanction the project, the UK is now providing funding.
Perhaps more importantly, governmental space sources relate that Margaret Thatcher is behind ERS-2.
‘She knows about ERS-2 and is enthusiastic about it,’ says one.
At present, only France has not given its go-ahead for ERS-2 funding.
Dr Issac Revah, of the French space agency CNES, says: ‘We too are behind the project.
It's just a matter of finding the money.’
Next week, in Paris, ESA's governing body of national representatives meets to discuss ERS-2 amongst other future plans.
While France prevaricates, other nations are expressing interest in the ERS programme.
India, Pakistan, Indonesia, Brazil and Kenya have asked to receive data from ERS-1, which will be made available to them within three hours of it being transmitted from the satellite.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE sc