

Birth of hope Television.
By Nancy Banks-Smith A child, more than any other thing, Brings hope with it and forward looking thoughts Wordsworth
AYEAR ago yesterday 25,000 people died in Armenia in 41 seconds.
I had forgotten.
Astrik was still shaking.
Both her children died in the earthquake, her parents, her husband's parents, her brother's wife, his children.
‘To us it feels like yesterday.
We can't talk about anything else.
Nothing interests us in life.’
Her face was the candlelit colour of tallow.
She was heavily pregnant.
A home movie taken at a party just before the earthquake showed her dancing, a pretty young woman, a little overweight, a little overdressed.
‘Before the earthquake I used to dress in bright colours.
I had all the cosmetics a woman could want.
I liked to dress up and go out a lot.
The earthquake changed everything.
Now I can't wear any colour but black.
Black is my colour now.’
To say she was beautiful now is frivolous.
She was biblical.
‘My pain is unbearable,’ she said, her voice thickened with salt like the Dead Sea.
‘They have gone and we can't get them back.
There is no God.
Let no-one blame me.
There is no God for us.’
Armenia is a profoundly Christian country, gnawed at by Muslim neighbours.
When the bells rang and the bishop blessed the people and her cousin, Gayane, went to church, holding a child by each hand, Astrik turned her waxen face away.
Gayane had lost no children.
But on the Day of the Dead she went to the cemetery and cried out over the sound of her own deep sobbing ‘Mama, you are lucky not to see us so unhappy.
Where are you, my Gohar?’
Gohar was her four-year-old daughter.
At times she seemed actually demented.
‘Tell Uncle Ashot you want to bring Gohar back,’ she said to Gayane's little daughter.
‘No,’ said the child, startled.
‘I will go to bring my Gohar back in five days,’ Astrik went on dreamily.
‘Can you count five on your fingers?
I'm going to the cemetery.
Will you come with me?’
Her baby was due in five days and it had tasted nothing but tears.
‘I am impatient but worried.
Suppose something is wrong with her mind.’
She and her husband never doubted it would be a girl.
They were going to call her Gohar.
She would change their lives.
The hospital in Leninakan is bare as a garage.
The red robe they gave her there was the first bright colour she had worn.
Husbands are not allowed in the hospital so her husband Ashot — a big man, mostly moustache — waited outside.
It was a strong baby, bedraggled and bloody, as if pulled from some ruin.
Swilled quickly in a tin bath, it hung over the nurse's hand like a wet sock.
She slapped it.
It cried.
‘A beautiful baby girl,’ she said and swaddled it tightly as is the custom.
The camera moved slowly up the side of the hospital.
First three nurses, wearing their strange tall hats.
Then Astrik, smiling dazzlingly, holding up Gohar to show her husband in the street below.
After the earthquake a neighbour told her ‘Don't cry.
Your daughter is in the hospital.’
It was not true.
At the time.
This 40 Minutes Special (BBC 2) was produced by Agnieszka Piotrowska, who never makes a bad programme and hasn't made a better one than this.
It was, not inappropriately, made in association with Try Again Ltd.
THE delicious Victorian Kitchen (BBC 2), successor to The Victorian Kitchen Garden, ended with a bit of a blow out.
The only reason affluent Victorians did not physically explode like Henry VIII (after he was dead, naturally) was their habit of heaping the dinner table with exotic greenery.
Sometimes you could not see the food for the trees.
A banquet could evidently develop into a nasty clash between the cook and the gardener.
‘We can't let them get away with that,’ said Mrs Mott eyeing Harry Dodson's looped festoons of smilax, positively growing before her eyes.
‘We've got to do as good as they have.’
Steam issuing out of her ears like a kettle, she went back to the kitchen and spun sugar with some gusto.
It hung glittering like early morning cobwebs on her rolling pin.
There will be a third series, The Victorian Flower Garden, in two years.
Well, I know but roses won't be rushed.
Stratford.
By Michael Billington The Duchess of Malfi.
SHAW dubbed Webster ‘the Tussaud laureate’.
But Bill Alexander's powerful new production of The Duchess of Malfi at The Swan treats him not as a lurid Jacobean sensationalist but as a sombre, death-haunted melancholic.
The production doesn't have the imagistic verve of Adrian Noble's great Royal Exchange version in l980 but it is beautifully acted and rivets our attention on the fierce particularity of Webster's language.
Instead of opting for generalized decadence and satanic luxury, Mr Alexander and his designer, Fotini Dimou, locate the action in a precise world: Naples in 1504 under Spanish rule and Catholic sway.
It is a milieu of distant anthems and religious iconography.
Even when the lubricious Cardinal is titillated by his chair-straddling mistress, it is in the shadow of an overhanging jewelled crucifix.
What Mr Alexander establishes is the vital contrast between external sanctity and order and the lust, violence, madness and panic that fuel the characters' actions.
He also clearly makes a point I had never considered before: that Bosola, the eternal outsider and masterless man, is not simply some rogue assassin but the author's moral spokesman.
Nigel Terry plays him most intelligently, not just as a mercenary hit-man but as a soft-spoken scholar obsessed by mortality.
His gravitas, offset with a flickering irony, gives the production a strong moral centre.
But it is the Duchess herself who most obviously embodies those qualities of courage and fidelity that act as an antidote to the surrounding evil.
Harriet Walter plays her excellently as a woman who combines a strong sexuality with a defiant nobility of character.
She woos Antonio with tremulous lip and speaking eye; she stands up to her incestuously possessive brother, Ferdinand, with blazing authority.
But, interestingly, she treats ‘I am Duchess of Malfi still’ not as a ringing, operatic cry but as a simple statement of fact.
Ms Walter offers us not a contralto tragedy-queen but a real woman passionately attached to her husband (to whom Mick Ford lends a shy goodness) and children.
But the whole thrust of this production is to undercut rhetoric and to give Webster's pithy, metaphysical images their due weight.
Bruce Alexander thus plays the lycanthropic Ferdinand not as some howling lunatic but as a haunted, guilt-ridden creature.
Conscience, in fact, is still alive in this world of Neapolitan terror so that even Russell Dixon's Cardinal, having murdered his mistress (the fetching Patricia Kerrigan) on a poisoned Bible, ritually crosses himself and gently caresses her hair.
Instead of melodrama, we get tragedy.
Instead of the medical materialism of Hammer horror, we get a surprisingly restrained treatment of the play's fuliginous cruelties: even when the Duchess is invaded by a chorus of madmen, they are ushered in one at a time by a beady-eyed supervisor wielding a corrective cane.
My one reservation is that Mr Alexander denies himself expressive use of light and sound to convey atmosphere and leaves us with few memorable images.
In striving for sobriety, his production is just a shade dry.
Coliseum.
By Edward Greenfield Love for Three Oranges.
EVERY year the English National Opera at the Coliseum makes a shrewd choice of pieces for the Christmas season, pantomimes mainly for adults.
This year as well as a revival of the updated Hansel and Gretel in two weeks time, we have the most fizzing pantomime in years, Prokofiev's Love for Three Oranges.
It is the co-production with Opera North first seen in Leeds just over a year ago.
Under David Atherton's direction the Coliseum presentation fizzes musically from first to last.
The amazing thing is how well it has been translated to the large expanses of the Coliseum, not an easy place to raise laughs in.
Michael Druiett as the Herald, formally introducing the piece and explaining how the smell-cards (courtesy of Givenchy) will work, gets a winning tone of voice from the very start.
Admittedly the fun relies too relentlessly on schoolboyish anal humour — amusing at first, quickly a bore.
But the sheer high spirits, the idea of an over-the-top romp, matches the spiritedness of the music.
This was the exiled Prokofiev's very Russian response to the fantastic Gozzi fairy-tale of the hypochondriac prince who goes in search of three oranges, each containing a princess.
The wit and elegance of the Glyndebourne production with its sets by Maurice Sendak may be missing, but there is ample compensation in the sheer exuberance of this entertainment with its riproaring belly-laughs.
The Herald began the evening with the extra duty of announcing that one of the principals, Bonaventura Bottone as the clown Truffaldino, was suffering from severe flu.
But as it emerged, his was the performance which caught fire quicker than any, helped by the deftly-timed efforts of a double doing spectacular somersaults.
Bottone, looking like a cross between Woody Allen, Harold Lloyd and Billy Bunter, was in brilliant form, whatever his temperature.
It helped to have two such formidable singers taking the two female dragon roles: Anne Collins as a fruity Princess Clarissa, tyrannical in a general's uniform of black leather, and Jane Eaglen as Fata Morgana, like Katisha in Mikado only more so.
Richard Angas, physically monstrous as the Mikado in the ENO production, and equally as Jupiter in Offenbach's Orpheus, is ideally cast here as the gigantic cook, protecting the three oranges.
Alan Woodrow sings with trumpet tones as the Prince.
And when the third and surviving princess emerges from her orange, Lesley Garrett immediately makes up for lost time, singing ravishingly.
Best of all is Donald Maxwell, marvellously sinister as the hunchback Prime Minister, Leander, sidling on in a way to chill the blood.
PAGE
Just colour me Jesse Arts diary.
By David Rowan
ANEW portrait of Jesse Jackson, showing him as a blond, blue-eyed white man, attracted more than aesthetic interest when it was displayed on a Washington street corner last Wednesday.
Ten black men took a sledge-hammer to the work, and knocked off a large part of his face.
Jackson, who described the action as an ‘artistic’ response to racism, said that the painting-How Ya Like Me Now? by David Hammons-should be put back on display together with the sledge-hammer.
THE people at the Museum of the Moving Image are becoming rather excited about a new exhibit being installed on Monday Dec 11: a full organza dress, lined with peach silk crepe de chine, and decorated with ivory re-embroidered lace, crystal beading, peach silk chiffon and some hand-dyed rosettes.
Not a Julian Clary costume-but Charlene's wedding dress from Neighbours, as worn by Kylie Minogue.
Indeed a moving image…
THE National Theatre is breaking its long repertory tradition next March to stage a straight 16-week run of the Sondheim musical Sunday In The Park With George.
It will be the show's British premiere, but critics have expressed fears that the long run may set a precedent, making the National like any other West End theatre.
The decision was an ‘effective way of helping our situation’ when the National was expecting a mere two per cent rise in its Arts Council grant, according to a spokesman.
Since then, however, funding has been increased.
‘There's nothing sinister about it,’ the spokesman said yesterday.
‘We're doing it because it's one of the great modern musicals….
It is more expensive to stage than a straight play.
Although we're not talking Miss Saigon….’
LAST week Guardian readers voted Terry and June the television sitcom they would least like to see revived.
This week Robin Nash, responsible for sitcoms including Terry and June, was appointed the new head of comedy at BBC television.
Let no politician claim that there is a bias within the corporation towards the Guardian.
BRIGHT young things used to kill to break into theatre.
Nowadays not even luncheon vouchers can attract them, according to the Royal Court Young People's Theatre.
It is trying to find 30 young unemployed people to join a 16-week project exploring attitudes towards HIV and Aids, and is even offering £10 a week above unemployment benefit, travel expenses, luncheon vouchers, and £50 a week for child care.
Hannah Vincent, a young playwright, will write a play based on the group's workshops, and it will be performed throughout Westminster, Brent and North Kensington.
‘It's an amazing opportunity to break in to theatre, but we've had virtually no response from Jobcentres,’ a spokeswoman says.
But then the starving thesp always had more street cred than the vouchered…
STEPHEN Hawking, Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge, is to star in a Stephen Spielberg television film based on his book A Brief History Of Time.
Spielberg, accustomed to close encounters in the extra-terrestrial sphere, has offered to be creative consultant on a drama-documentary loosely based upon the book, which has sold over 300,000 hardback copies in the UK and has been reprinted fourteen times.
‘There's been nothing like it since the Bible,’ said an obviously excited spokesperson for the book's publishers, Transworld.
Hawking meanwhile, has a simple explanation for its success: ‘Someone told me that each equation I included in the book would halve the sales.
I therefore resolved not to have any equations at all.’