

Gloomy prospects for retail trade.
By Ben Laurance
BRITAIN'S shopkeepers are gloomier than at any time since the early 1980s, according to a survey published yesterday.
Retailers, wholesalers and motor traders all expect their businesses to become worse over the next three months.
Higher mortgage rates have already had an impact on spending, according to the latest survey of distributive trades from the Confederation of British Industry.
Many borrowers whose mortgage repayments change only annually will feel the impact of higher interest rates only next month.
Those sectors closest to the housing market, including builders' merchants and retailers of furniture, carpets and household goods were the most pessimistic.
Among DIY and hardware retailers, only one in a hundred expects business to get better in the next three months.
Figures from Grand Metropolitan yesterday also show that higher interest rates have had a big impact on people's willingness to eat out.
The company said that the number of people eating in its Chef & Brewer and Berni restaurants had fallen by about 10 per cent.
The CBI survey revealed that the majority of distributors feel that their stock levels are at an uncomfortably high level.
As they try to cut stocks, this is likely to make a big dent in orders to manufacturing industry and importers.
Few retailers expect their orders with suppliers this month to be higher than in December 1988.
For the first time since the survey was started six years ago, retailers, wholesalers and companies in the motor trade expect to cut investment in the coming year.
Only confectioners, tobacconists and newsagents remain optimistic: every other retailing sector identified in the CBI survey expects business to get tougher over the next three months.
Representatives from developers Olympia&York and high street retailer Marks&.
Spencer yesterday inspecting progress in the construction of the main shopping block at the £4billion Canary Wharf development, which will include a new 13,000-square foot M&S food hall.
M&S is the first big retailer to move to Canary Wharf and its announcement yesterday to take space in the building is a boost of confidence for the 71-acre London Docklands project.
Once complete, it will provide 10 million square feet of office space and 250 shops within 500,000 square feet of retail area by 1997.
So far, a third of the office space in the first phase of eight buildings has been booked.
M&S will join Texaco as one of the big-name occupiers of Canary Wharf, and Olympia&York says it expects to announce several other tenants shortly.
However, the development has attracted criticism in the past months as a possible white elephant following the effect of the steep rise in interest rates on the economy.
Critics have also pointed to the lack of transport links to the development, but Olympia&York denies that there will be a problem given the proposed extension of the Jubilee Line, increased capacity of the Light Docklands Railway, and the building of new roads.
Photograph: Martin Argles
As the season of goodwill gets into full swing, Jill Papworth looks at some presents which will still be appreciated on Boxing Day.
Counting the cost of mailing money
THE problem with sending Christmas gifts to children living overseas is that postage can double the price of the presents.
If you opt instead to send relatives and friends money to spend as they wish on their children, it's worth shopping around as costs differ considerably for the various methods.
All the banks and the Post Office strongly advise against sending cash.
route.
Likewise, sending British or Eurocheques can cause problems, delay and heavy charges for the recipient when he or she tries to cash them at a foreign bank.
The cheapest way is to buy and send postal orders in various denominations which are acceptable in around 60 countries.
Bought over the Post Office counter, postal orders are both traceable and give you a counterfoil to prove they have been sent.
A £20 order, for example, will cost 62p.
International money orders, available in sterling or US dollars from Barclays, or dollars only from Lloyds and the Royal Bank of Scotland, are the next best bet.
The Royal Bank's new American Express-backed orders, valued up to $1,000, cost just £3 each and can be cashed by the recipient at any Amex travel office.
The drawback is that both the sender and the recipient, if living outside the US, are at the mercy of prevailing exchange rates and foreign banks may charge a commission.
Banker's drafts come a little more expensive but can be bought in any currency.
Girobank charges a flat fee of £5 per draft and Barclays £9.
NatWest, Lloyds and RBS all charge 0.25 per cent of the value but with varying minimum fees.
Midland, the only bank to restrict its sending cash abroad service to existing customers, charges £6 on drafts of up to £100 and 0.5 per cent of the sterling value with a minimum charge of £9 over that amount.
The above three methods, while allowing you to send a tangible piece of paper as a gift, do mean you incur postal costs and are reliant on UK and foreign postal systems.
Barclays, RBS and Midland all offer guaranteed methods of transferring money direct to a foreign recipient's bank through their own mailing systems, costing a minimum of £7.50, £6 and £9.
But you have already missed the last postal dates for some countries, including Australia and New Zealand.
Monday is your last chance to send things by post to the US, Italy and Spain and Wednesday for the rest of Europe.
Your only option when sending money at the last minute to arrive by Christmas is to use the banks' electronic money transfer services which take from 24 hours to around five days depending on the bank and whether you use an express transfer.
Charges and services offered vary among the main high street banks, though using the example of sending £50 abroad NatWest and RBS work out the cheapest at £6 for a standard transfer taking around 48 hours.
Girobank charges a flat fee of £5 whatever the transfer value, but only to specific foreign banks and taking up to 10 working days.
Johnson Matthey hit by second departure.
By Financial Staff
JOHNSON MATTHEY, the precious metals to chemicals group, was given a respite from takeover speculation yesterday after its biggest shareholder, Charter Consolidated, said it had no plans to change its 38 per cent stake.
The news came as Johnson Matthey announced a second top-level boardroom departure within 24 hours.
On Wednesday night, the group announced that its chief executive, Mr Eugene Anderson, had resigned and yesterday Johnson Matthey said its chairman, Mr Neil Clark, would be retiring from the board at the end of the year.
A Johnson Matthey spokesman dismissed any suggestion of a boardoom rift and said that the two departures were ‘not particularly connected’.
Mr Clark will be succeeded by Mr David Davies, who is currently deputy chairman of Charter Consolidated and a former chief executive of merchant bank Hill Samuel, now owned by TSB.
The role of chief executive has gone to executive director, Mr Joe Stevenson.
Mr Anderson, who joined the group in 1985, will remain a consultant.
Yesterday Johnson Matthey — which announced pre-tax profits of £33.5million — said it ‘has been authorised by Charter to say that Charter has no present intention of either buying or selling shares in the company.’
Profits climb at GUS.
Great Universal Stores, the biggest of the mail order firms, raised pre-tax profit by £8million to £171million in the six months to September, although catalogue sales and retail earnings slumped by £8million.
A £7million rise in trading profit came from the financial services division and from investment income, both lumped together in the accounts.
Financial services rose on the back of increased consumer spending on cars, according to the group, and was ‘almost buoyant’ in the half year although it has dropped back since September.
GUS has an unspecified cash pile and no borrowing, so is a beneficiary of high interest rates.
Mail order is suffering from the public's current reluctance to part with cash for non-essential goods.
‘People seem prepared to buy food and cars but not clothes’, says GUS's Trevor Spittle.
Property profits, £4.8million in the six months against £4.9 million last year, reflect the group's continued wish to weed out unwanted retail premises which are not on prime town centre sites..
GWR issues warning.
Independent radio group, GWR, which joined the USM in March and recently merged with Consolidated Radio Holdings, has warned the media sector not to talk down the buoyancy of the industry.
The company, whose profits for the year to September rose by 16 per cent to £1.66 million, said commercial opportunities, particularly for radio, were about to be expanded significantly.
The group's turnover rose from £8.1 million to £9.66 million and a final dividend of 9p a share was declared.
Setback for Archer.
The slump in insurance rates in the shipping and aviation market has hit the financial results of Lloyd's underwriting group, A J Archer, for the second year running.
Thanks to higher interest income, the group managed to nudge pre-tax profits £227,000 ahead to £6.3 million, but both turnover at £7.5 million and operating profits were lower.
Archer, whose earnings per share in the year to September climbed from 15.6p to 17.1p, raised its final dividend from 4.25p to 5p.
Lovell advance.
YJ Lovell, which is currently bidding £137million for fellow builder Higgs & Hill says it is too soon to comment on current trading but its profits for the year to September 30, rose from £24.4million to £33.3million.
Chairman Andrew Wassell, who has been asked by the Takeover Panel to clarify his comments to the Guardian on Wednesday about the level of acceptances, said: ‘It is much too soon to know but I am encouraged by the efforts we are making in winning support for our bid.’.
De La Rue retreats.
De La Rue's sale of the Crosfield Electronics printing equipment business did not relieve it of other losses in advanced security equipment and in spite of the new cash surplus, the interim results are grisly.
The main printing and payment systems activities are performing strongly and the new chief executive, Mr Jeremy Marshall, ex-BAA, needs time to show his worth.
Sales were no problem as the reduction in turnover to £161 million, from £247million in the corresponding half to September 30 translates wih the help of currency gains into a rise of 18 per cent in the businesses retained.
Pre-tax profit skidded to £16.6 million, from £23.4million.
There was more difficulty over the high tax charge and ACT relief and the interim dividend stays at 3.25p covered less than twice by almost halved earnings..
In short…
UK PAPER, which is recommending a £263million takeover bid from the Finnish Metsa-Serla group, has forecast that its profits for 1989 will be up from £13.9million to £15million and that its surplus land has been revalued at £16.9million, which is equal to 17.4p a share.
PHOENIX TIMBER'S profit fell from £995,000 to £479,000 in the half year to September 30 after some pressure on mrgins.
BUNZL is raising £55.6million from the sale of its US electrical products distributor EESCO.
The markets.
The market paused for breath yesterday with the FTSE index dipping seven points to 2346.7.
Trading statements and bid situations continued to provide plenty of work for analysts and recent buoyant sectors like properties, insurances, and stores ran into profit-taking.
Alphameric was the day's major casualty with its shares plunging 32 per cent to 23p as hopes for its profit recovery faded.
On results, Grand Metropolitan rose 19p to 581p but De la Rue lost 26p at 311p.
Hong Kong: Firmer.
Hang Seng index: 2,770.00 (2756.39).
Tokyo: Record highs.
Nikkei index: 37,858.11 (37,654.29).
Frankfurt: Slightly higher.
FAZ index: 714.00 (695.74).
Paris: Mostly higher.
CAC index: 547.8 (542.6).
Dixons set to seek bid probe.
By Ben Laurance
DIXONS, the electrical retailing giant, looks certain to launch a vigorous campaign for a Monopolies Commission investigation of the £461million bid for the company by Kingfisher.
In mounting his assault on Wednesday, Kingfisher chief executive Geoffrey Mulcahy claimed a successful takeover would give the group 22 per cent of the British retail electrical market.
Kingfisher already owns 307 Comet electrical stores.
But Kingfisher's claim contradicts figures from independent market researchers Verdict.
They show that in 1988, Dixons had almost 18 per cent of the electrical market, Comet 7.6 per cent and Lasky — whose 58 outlets are now owned by Kingfisher — 1.2 per cent.
That suggests a successful Dixons takeover would give Kingfisher more than 26 per cent of the market — above the 25 per cent threshold which normally triggers a monopolies inquiry.
It emerged yesterday that Kingfisher's 22 per cent was derived by counting the rental of new televisions, video recorders and other hired electrical equipment in the market total.
‘Buying, renting and various options in between are simply different ways of obtaining a piece of electrical equipment,’ said Mr Nigel Whittaker of Kingfisher.
‘They are all part of the same market.’
Mr Robert Schrager of Dixons said last night: ‘We would treat the Kingfisher figures with some scepticism.
It is up to the authorities to decide.’
Dixons chairman Mr Stanley Kalms formally rejected the Kingfisher bid saying ‘it is making an opportunist bid during a downturn in the economic cycle.’
Kingfisher yesterday tried to counter the view that its 120p-a-share bid for Dixons is only a sighting shot.
‘They are blaming their current woes on the state of the market, when in truth, we would do a better job than the Dixons management in restructuring and repositioning the business,’ said a Kingfisher executive.
EMS ‘could spell mass unemployment’.
By Mark Milner
BRITAIN could face a decade of high unemployment if it became a full member of the European Monetary System without a sharp fall in the pound, according to a pressure group, the Campaign for Work.
In a robust assessment of the relative merits of joining the exchange rate mechanism, it argues the ERM will not provide a ‘soft option’ compared with other methods of slowing down the economy.
Though the group believes Britain should join, it warns that it should only do so at an exchange rate of around DM2.40 to the pound — involving a 15 per cent devaluation from the current DM2.79.
‘A high exchange rate and the monetary policy which underpins it is just as tough an instrument as domestic credit controls, tax increases or cuts in public expenditure.’
The campaign argues that the use of high exchange rates to squeeze inflation — by hitting corporate profits and therefore companies abilities to award inflationary pay increases — is ‘not a subtle process’ but is simply the ‘brutal and old fashioned one of deflation.’
It claims there is no evidence that ERM membership offers a less painful way of suppressing the spiral of wages and prices chasing each other higher.
The campaign also argues that Britain's trade deficit is unsustainable.
But though high interest rates will achieve an economic slowdown, they will also ensure that the inevitable devaluation of the pound will be more severe.
Official figures are hard to credit as families fail to claim benefit.
By Mike George
ASTAGGERING number of the hard-up are failing to claim benefit under the Family Credit Scheme — despite a recent change in government calculations.
Families struggling on low incomes can get help from the scheme provided at least one adult is working at least 24 hours a week.
When it was introduced in place of the old family income supplement scheme last year, just 38 per cent of those entitled claimed family credit.
The government subsequently altered its estimate of those able to claim and came up with a 50 per cent take-up rate.
And now Tony Newton's social security department is hoping a recent £7 million advertising campaign will boost that to 60 per cent.
Family credit is a means tested benefit paid on top of wages, or earnings from self employment.
It is almost always paid to a woman.
To qualify you must be responsible for one or more children aged under 16, or under 19 if they are still in full-time non-advanced education.
Your savings must total less than £6,000 though £1 of ‘notional income’ is added in when working out your income level for every £250 (or part thereof) of savings over £3,000.
Any children's savings are ignored, unless one of them has over £3,000, in which case you can't get family credit for that child.
The scheme is based on a so-called ‘applicable amount’, currently £54.80 a week.
Anybody whose income is less than this will get full family credit.
The payments are based on set amounts: £33.60 for a lone parent or a couple: £23.30 for each child aged 18: £16.35 for each child aged 16 or 17: £12.90 for each child aged 11 to 15, and £7.30 for each one up to 10 years of age.
If your income is above £54.80 a week, 70 per cent of the additional amount is cut from the set payments.
Sheila is a lone parent with two children, aged 13 and 15.
She works part-time, averaging 28 hours a week.
After paying tax and national insurance she gets £75 a week take home pay.
This is £20.20 above the £54.80 applicable amount, and 70 per cent of this is £14.14.
Her set amounts are £33.60 as a lone parent, plus £25.80 for the children.
That totals £59.40, but £14.14 is deducted, leaving her total family credit at £45.26 a week.
Child benefit payments, one parent benefit, housing benefit, income support and mobility and attendance allowances are all ignored as incomes for the purposes of family credit.
So Sheila's actual income is £75 from earnings, plus £14.50 child benefit (£7.25 each), £5.20 one parent benefit and £45.26 from Family Credit.
Earnings are always taken net of tax and national insurance.
For those who are weekly paid, normal earnings are estimated by looking at the last five weeks pay, or the last two months for the monthly paid.
For the self-employed it is either the last 26 weeks or the last year's set of accounts which are used.
Self-employed child minders only have one third of their net earnings taken into account as income, the rest is ignored.
Family credit is also available on unemployment benefit, although this is counted as income.
Pam and Errol have two children, aged 13 and 16.
Errol is on unemployment benefit of £34.70 a week, while Pam is bringing home £75 a week.
This adds up to £109.70, some £54.90 above the applicable amount, and 70 per cent of that is £38.43.
Their set amount for family credit is £62.85, from which £38.43 is deducted, leaving a final payment of £24.42.
With child benefit included their income has been increased from £124.20 to £148.62 a week.
If one partner has been getting statutory sick or maternity pay for a continuous period of 13 weeks or more, this is counted as income.
Otherwise these payments are ignored.
Family credit lasts for 26 weeks at a time, then you will have to reapply.
However, it will end sooner if someone else claims income support or family credit in respect of a child who was included in your family credit award.
If you feel that your award is wrong in some way you can ask for the decision to be reviewed or make an appeal — details of how to do this are available from social security benefit offices.
If you're getting housing benefit this will be affected if you claim a family credit award, as your income will increase.
In some cases this may make the prospect of an award less attractive.
Some local authorities also assume you're getting family credit, even if you haven't claimed it, and so reduce your housing benefit.
Ferranti and Germans ‘reach deal’.
By Mark Milner
TROUBLED defence electronics group Ferranti International Signal is reported to have reached a compromise with West Germany's Telefunken Systems Teknik over their rival bids to supply the radar for the European Fighter Aircraft.
However there were indications yesterday that it may be limited to proposals as to how the two would cooperate if they were ordered to combine their efforts by the NATO European Fighter Management Agency, which is responsible for purchasing the system.
There were also suggestions that Telefunken is already going cool on the terms of the compromise because they would not allow the West German group a large enough share of work on what is regarded as one of the key military avionics technologies.
The two firms are said to have indicated to NEFMA they would be able to work on the basis of Ferranti using a Telefunken-made data processor in its ECR-90 radar, he said.
The EFA radar contract is thought to be worth around £1.5billion to the consortium which wins the contract.
Of the four partners in the EFA project, Britain, Italy and Spain are thought to favour the Ferranti consortium — which also includes West Germany's Siemens — but the West German government prefers the Telefunken option.
The deadlock has meant the award of the contract is now well behind the original schedule.
The outcome is crucial to the future of Ferranti in the wake of the discovery of bogus contracts at its ISC Technologies subsidiary which forced the group to write off more than £200million.
Not only would winning the order mean around some £60 million worth of work a year for the next decade for Ferranti, but it would give a successful bidder or partner for Ferranti access to crucial next-generation radar technology.
Analysts do not expect any move for Ferranti until the radar contract is awarded, though one possible bidder — British Aerospace — has already ruled itself out.
Industry sources however suggest that the contract is extremely important to Telefunken, which is now part of the giant Daimler-Benz industrial combine.
Daimler has increasingly concentrated its defence activities on aerospace and the loss of the EFA radar contract would be a severe blow.
Reports of the compromise emerged on the same day the contract for the EFA's main electrical generator was awarded to a consortium including Ferranti and Telefunken.
Defence firms must take different tack in the new Europe Notebook.
By Edited by Alex Brummer
AFTER the string of contract calamities, which has sent the Serious Fraud Office globetrotting, Sir Derek Alun-Jones and his beleaguered Ferranti team must now see a small chink of light.
Instead of prolonging the dogfight with West Germany's Telefunken over their rival bids for the radar contract for the European Fighter Aircraft, the two hi-tech defence manufacturers have decided to do the really European thing and co-operate; Ferranti would use the Telefunken data-processor in its ECR-90 radar.
If this outline deal is approved by the authorities, it may put into question British Aerospace's abrupt decision to pull out of its Ferranti offer — or at least seek to renegotiate the deal.
But while the ups and downs of Ferranti's future remain of keen interest, not least to its management, workers and shareholders, there are wider questions to be addressed as the Nato European Fighter Management Agency plunges into its final decisions on the European Fighter Project.
What appeared an important strand in forward-looking European defence planning only a few years ago — when the new Europe sought a measure of independence from the US defence umbrella — looks more questionable now.
Who exactly is the Euro-fighter meant to defend Britannia and our European allies against now that the Berlin Wall is down, the Soviet Union is rushing towards disarmament and the Warsaw Pact has suddenly become the best investment opportunity since the post-war Marshall Plan?
Before embarking on what will inevitably be a huge investment, would it not be better to wait and see just how the next round of arms negotiations comes out.
If the after-Malta optimism is anything to go by, Europe may end up selling its costly fighter to Middle Eastern potentates.
This would almost certainly be at a loss.
Far better, perhaps, to concentrate on civil aviation.
US carriers and Lufthansa, among others, are champing at the bit for new Berlin and East German air routes now that the air corridors, carved out in 1948, are becoming obsolete.
The East German airline Interflug and even Aeroflot have placed modest orders for the Airbus, which could quickly become vast were air corridors and airports to be opened and hard currency loans to become more freely available as Western economic assistance begins to flow.
Far better to build more advanced Airbuses for a new market than a Euro-fighter to take on a non-existent enemy which is increasingly an economic partner.
We must not let our defences down, Mrs Thatcher and other cautious voices would argue.
They are right.
There may well be new instabilities.
Even so, it would still be far cheaper to do what Europe had planned, before an upsurge of Euro-nationlism, and buy US
F-15s and F-16s off the shelf rather than waste vast development costs which could be better deployed in the commercial sector.
It may not be what Ferranti wants to hear.
But for others in civil aviation, from BAA (which has been looking at airport facilities in Budapest) to carriers such as KLM and Interflug, which are anxious for the markets, it would be just the thing.
Running risks.
THE Lloyd's of London insurance market has an unhappy knack of slipping on banana skins.
That probably accounts for some of the scepticism after the decision to ape stock market precedent and end business barriers between underwriters.
Few would question Lloyd's determination to win business which now walks past its door and intorivals such as Commercial Union.
No one would doubt the market's need to deploy its £11billion capacity more effectively — some marine syndicates work at less than half strength while syndicates in different businesses are pushing their limits.
Lloyd's needs to get a grip on more ‘safe’ business to offset its increasing tendency to be at the wrong end of big disasters such as Piper Alpha.
And the market needs to establish its credentials in Europe unless it wants to risk being a perpetual also-ran to the likes of Generali, Allianz or Swiss Re.
But occasional forays by underwriters into unknown territory have thrown up some of the market's most spectacular disasters — the 1,600 investors facing £305million of losses on Dick Outhwaite's syndicate bear eloquent testimony to that.
Professional qualifications in the market are few, although basic examinations are being introduced.
Lloyd's is insisting underwriters must join the market association for the class of business they undertake, but quality policing will fall on the shoulders of managing agents.
In practice, the hoped-for package business will probably be handled by composite syndicates formed from the merger of existing specialists, so the quality of underwriting judgment should not deteriorate.
But it is unlikely — despite disclosure of business rules — that the less aware will not find themselves on a spectacularly high-risk syndicate which had in the past played safe.
Abolition of the business class regulations is a potentially liberating move.
The market must hope, however, that its business units do not emulate the mistakes which occurred after the City's Big Bang and that the risky business of being a Lloyd's investor becomes no more precarious.
Taking heart.
INFLATION causes havoc, we all know that.
But there is havoc and havoc.
First, there is the kind that keeps the UK out of the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System.
Then there is the South American strain.
Glass maker Pilkington yesterday bit the bullet over the Latin variety yesterday, taking a £4.4million write down against its Argentinian assets.
The reason?
A burst of hyperinflation that Pilkington's mathematicians reckon hit 73 million per cent per annum.
However, they are taking heart that it is now back to a comfortable 250 per cent.
Erm…!
Graduates in engineering shun profession Frontiers of work.
Andrew Cornelius Industrial Editor.
THE recruitment and image crisis facing British industry was cruelly exposed yesterday by a report which revealed that two out of three university engineering students graduating this year decided against a career in engineering.
A huge proportion of students, many sponsored by companies, were actually ‘turned off’ an engineering career by their experience of working in engineering firms.
According to the survey, 44 per cent of the sponsored students among the 14,000 engineers graduating in 1989 claimed that their work experience, averaging 13 months, has discouraged them from a career in engineering.
Further questioning showed that 58 per cent said they ‘knew nothing’ about the average engineering company and only 8 per cent felt ‘well informed.’
According to students, company recruitment presentations were often ‘downright boring’, made either by people who do not understand engineering, or engineers who are ‘past it’.
Around 60 per cent accused companies of issuing ‘untruthful’ recruitment brochures.
The survey arose because two final year students at Imperial College gambled with £6,000 of savings to establish a research company to plug the information gap between engineering industry and the students they wish to recruit.
Introducing the report, which was eventually sponsored by 12 top companies, including BP, Hewlett Packard and ICI, Lord Caldecote said that the study was the first ‘to present a student's eye view of the ills and problems surrounding a career in engineering’.
He said it had to be seen in the context of the UK's £25billion a year deficit on trade in manufactured goods, a 22 per cent fall in enrolment for engineering courses since 1985 and the forecast decrease in the number of 16- to 24-year-olds by the mid-1990's.
Mr Bruce Hepburn, the 24-year-old former student who helped found the Imperial Ventures company which commissioned the survey, said if companies did not improve their image ‘they will go out of business’.
He said some of Britain's top engineering companies were among those criticised by students.
The best-received firms were in the information technology and electronics sectors; the worst in traditional engineering sectors and construction.
The IVL report was based on a sample of 1,854 students, or one in 14 of the 14,000 who graduated this year.
It showed that only 35 per cent of the survey sample intended to pursue careers as engineers in industry.
A similar percentage opted for management careers, with a further 12 per cent opting for careers in commerce, management consultancy, accountancy or the City.
Sexual discrimination is also seen to be an important factor in turning female graduates away from engineering.
The survey showed that there was ‘unofficial’ discrimination against them in industry and 59 per cent said the engineering career structure worked against women succeeding.
Tourist Board faces probe.
The Welsh Tourist Board's system of recommending self-catering holiday accommodation is to be investigated by the Office of Fair Trading for ‘possible anti-competitive practices’.
The board only markets accommodation which has passed an inspection for which it charges a fee.
Chairman, Prys Edwards, said the scheme aimed to protect holidaymakers.
Cable&Wireless boost.
The contract to operate a mobile telephone service in West Germany has been awarded to the Mannesmann-led consortium, which includes Britain's Cable & Wireless.
Macarthy bows out.
Pharmacy chain Macarthy has dropped attempts to have a sales promotion scheme by drugs retailer UniChem declared illegal.
Eagle Trust move.
Eagle Trust, the beleaguered mini-conglomerate being investigated by the Serious Fraud Office, obtained High Court approval to remove the vote from a further 80,000 shares to add to the 67,420,000 already disenfranchised.
PowerGen deal.
PowerGen, one of the two CEGB successor generating companies, has struck the first direct sale power contract before privatisation.
The £50 million deal involves supplies to Toyota's new factory in Derbyshire.
Casino talks off.
Stanley Leisure has broken off talks with Leisure Investments — now at the centre of a bid from Bear Brand — over the planned purchase of Aspinall's Casino in London.
Short and sweet.
Short Brothers has won two orders worth £40 million for its Javelin close-air defence weapon system from the Ministry of Defence and an unnamed country.
Going Down Under.
A sharp rise in the number of Australian companies appointing receivers and liquidators has been reported by the National Companies and Securities Commission.
Wall Street falls.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed down 15.99 points at 2,720.78.
Overseas comfort for Pilkington.
By Mark Milner
AS CLOUDS gather over the UK economy, glass maker Pilkington yesterday drew comfort from the international spread of its windows and windscreens to contact lenses operations.
Chairman Antony Pilkington acknowledged concern that high interest rates were beginning to hit some UK customers.
But he added that, with three-quarters of the company's business now overseas, foreign exchange rates were moving in the right direction.
At the interim stage, Pilkington turned in pre-tax profits up 6per cent to £147 million and a 10per cent increase in the dividend to 2.93p a share.
‘We regard it as a very satisfactory half year, bearing in mind that the world's economies are not quite as clear cut as they were a year ago.
We think this is a solid performance.’
The core flat and safety glass business ground out another steady improvement, with Pilkington seeking to add value with products such as its ‘K’ glass.
Though the outlook for the UK is not as bright as it might be and the US is likely to take a knock from an end of price discounting in the car market, Europe looks set to turn in another strong performance.
The visioncare business, which Pilkington has been nurturing for three years and where it now ranks in the world's top three, increased its operating profits by £4.4 million to £18.8 million.
Though Mr Pilkington cautions against over-optimistic expectations, he is confident that the visioncare business is firmly on track.
There have been hiccups — the UK government decision to introduce eye tests, for example, brought a bulge in demand which has been followed with a corresponding flat patch — but the group reckons the long term is promising as ageing populations and greater access to markets such as India and China boost demand.
However, the defence related optronics business hit a sticky patch and lost £4.8 million — though Pilkington said the bulk of that stemmed from redundancy costs.
The group is still looking for possible partners for its optronics operations, though it insists that so far there have only been talks, not negotiations.
The group's jointly-owned South African business produced another strong performance and Mr Pilkington is dismissive of suggestions that his group might consider disinvestment.
Better for the employees and pensioners, he said yesterday, for Pilkington to stay and run the business as it runs its UK operations.
Going crackers over Christmas?
Then give your gift ideas a financial flavour.
FINANCIAL gifts could be the answer for friends and relatives who've got everything this Christmas.
Telephone savings stamps at £1 each, TV licence stamps in 50p denominations, or water bill savings stamps, at £1 and £2 each are a good idea for elderly hard-pressed relatives.
The post office is also the place to buy Premium Bonds; minimum £10 for those aged under 16 or £100 for those aged 16 or over.
The Royal Mint sells modern coins from a keepsake set of all seven uncirculated 1989 coins at £5.75 to expensive commemorative sovereigns.
Old and antique coins can be bought from specialist dealers like Spink and Son in London (Tel: 01-930 7888).
A famous Bun penny in mint condition or a King Henry II penny sell for around £50.
A 2,000-year-old Roman coin or and Elizabeth I sixpence go for just under £100, while a William the Conqueror silver penny is a little more.
Spinks also sell old English banknotes, which are more likely to rise steadily in value.
A black and white £5 note, printed between 1920 and 1956, costs from £20.
Those in mint condition have doubled in value over the last two years to around £50.
More plentiful are Second World War £1 notes going for £4 to £5, while the rarer 10 shilling notes cost around £10.
Tim Robson of auctioneers Sotheby's says that Latin American railways bonds depicting trains and elaborately coloured Chinese bonds are some of the prettiest notes around.
Both are available for under £20 from dealers such as Westcombe Investments (P.O.Box 84, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 ODC).
You can find out more from the Bond and Share Society (secretary Peter Duppa-Miller on 0305-262697) or through the largest UK dealer Michael Veissid (06944-268).
Presents that will help with financial planning include two books from the Consumers' Association: Which?
Way to Save and Invest (£10.95) and Getting the Best Deal for Your Money (£6.95), both published by Hodder & Stoughton.
Money gifts for children include cash deposited in special children's building society and bank accounts which usually have free gifts when new accounts are open.
But do not be dazzled by the free pens, badges, money boxes and radios.
Gross-paying accounts are best for most children as long as their gross annual income does not exceed their personal tax-free allowance; £2,785 for the tax year 1989/90.
While tax deducted at source from certain investment income, such as UK share dividends, is reclaimable by non-taxpayers, the composite-rate tax deducted at source from interest paid by banks and building society accounts is not.
Therefore, for a child, compare the net interest rate paid out by the banks and building societies with the gross rate paid by others, notably National Savings products.
Parents, however, should remember that if they give their child an investment that produces over £5 annual income, it will usually be taxed as their own unless the child is over 18 or married.
Although no incentive frills are attached to a National Savings Investment Account, the variable interest rate paid gross (currently 11.75 per cent) tends to be around 3 per cent higher than the best net rates offered by the major competitors.
An account can be opened at any post office with a minimum of £5.
As with most child accounts, children cannot make withdrawals until they are seven.
This is the best deal, although it differs from the bank and building society accounts in requiring one month's notice for withdrawals.
Parents opening accounts will find that The Royal Bank of Scotland's Rainbow Savings account comes out top of the major high street banks, paying 8.25 per cent net, followed by the Bank of Scotland's Supersaver at 7.82 per cet.
Both require a minimum investment of £1, give instant access and include gifts.
Of the larger building societies, Chelsea is offering 10.25 per cent net and Britannia 8.5 per cent.
It is also worth looking at the smaller, regional building societies.
Some offer comparable, even higher, net rates than the Investment Account's gross rate, though there can be a small catch.
The Sheffield, for example, currently offers the best rate at 12.36 net, but only children whose parents or grandparents are existing savers may open an account and there is a maximum investment of £500.
The latest survey by Which? magazine rates accounts from Leek United & Midland, and Harpenden, paying net rates of 11.44 and 11.41 respectively, as the next best deals.
For longer-term investments, a good guaranteed rate for non-taxpaying children is offered by National Savings Capital Bonds.
Left untouched for five years, a minimum investment of £100 in the Series A bond is guaranteed to grow to £176.24; a compound rate of 12 per cent gross per year.
Leaflets on all National Savings products are available at post offices.
To compare the latest rates and conditions on children's accounts, look at Blay's Money Master monthly tables at your local reference library.
An alternative could be high coupon gilts as the tax can be reclaimed.
But with the present high interest rates they do not form a great investment.
Curiously, the unit trust industry — usually quick to hype its products — has been rather slow to attract children.
This may be because nobody under 18 can own unit trusts in their own names.
Parents could buy units for their children but there is only one group that has tried to target children — the MIM Rupert Trust.
Even so, all that can be done here is designate a unit holder under 18, the child is only a beneficial owner.
However to attract parents and others to invest on behalf of the child the initial investment is £50, with additional payments of £25 or a monthly savings plan of £10.
The charges of a 5 per cent initial fee, 1.25 per cent annual, are standard.
The plan can be attractive to anybody other than a parent making a gift to a child.
In that case the tax deducted on the dividends can be reclaimed provided it is meant for a non tax paying child.
But if parents buy it for the child the dividend is considered part of the parents income.
As for direct exposure to the stock market, the advice of Malcolm Roberts of Montague Fleming is: ‘It would not be advisable to buy shares in the name of a child under 16.
You get all sorts of practical problems like can they sign transfer forms and many Registrars would refuse to accept them.
What parents can do is buy in both their names with an account designation of up to three letters which would be the child's initial.
They should not mark it as trustee because Registrars would not accept it.’
Money Guardian is edited by Personal Finance Editor Margaret Hughes
Costs of sending £50 abroad by various methods
BarclaysLloydsMidland|ONatWestRBS International Money Order£5 £4-- £3 Banker's Draft£9 £8 £6 £7 £6 Electronic Transfer standard £12.50 £8£15 £6 £6 express £12.50£15£15 £7£10 Note (1): Services offered only to existing customers.
Mint turns the clock back to a time when sovereign was king of coins.
By Morag Campbell
FIVE hundred years ago King Henry VII instructed the officers of his Royal Mint, then in the Tower of London, to produce ‘a new money of gold.’
Partly a public relations exercise to enhance the king's status, the coin was intended to convey the majesty of the throne and the dignity of the monarch — hence the name sovereign.
The present Royal Mint, now in Wales, has issued a set of commemorative coins to celebrate that 500th anniversary.
The original sovereign continued to be struck until 1603, when James I ascended the throne, but was revived in 1817.
Although this sovereign was half the weight and half the diameter of the original one, such was the international respect it enjoyed that people could travel through Europe confident that the coins would be welcomed wherever they went.
‘Originally worth 20 shillings,’ the Royal Mint says, ‘the sovereign was the country's first pound coin.’
Today, the price of a sovereign is £149.95p, including VAT.
For that price, you get 7.98 grammes of 22 carat gold.
However, you would not get £149.95p each if you fell on hard times and wanted to sell your sovereigns.
Rarity, the quality of the design, historical associations and, particularly, melt value all determine the maket value of gold coins.
In popular mythology, gold is regarded as a good investment.
In our collective folk memory — or possibly as a result of seeing too many old Hollywood movies — we think of gold in the form of coins as eminently portable in times of national emergency.
National emergencies, however, may not necessarily coincide with times of personal emergency and gold is an erratic investment.
In February 1980, for instance, 24 carat peaked at $850 an ounce.
Currently it stands just above $400 an ounce having tumbled in May this year to its lowest level since August 1986.
The popularity of South Africa's kruggerrand was due largely to the fact that collectors were buying a precise quantity of gold at only a fraction over the actual cost of the precious metal.
The imposition of VAT on the kruggerrand and other gold coins meant that gold had to rise by at least 20 per cent on their initial investment before a private collector could show a profit.
In similar fashion the bottom fell out of the illustrious 1817 sovereign market in the mid-1970s when investors realised that they were paying 50 per cent over the melt price for a coin minted in millions.
The three-coin set of Quincentenary commemorative gold coins — double-sovereign, sovereign and half-sovereign struck in 22 carat gold — is limited to an issue of 10,000 and costs £499.95 including VAT.
Individual sovereign coins can also be bought separately.
While a collector may be happy to pay over the odds for such interesting issues, an investor would have to be confident of rising gold prices to show a profit on resale.
If you don't feel bold or rich enough to take a gamble on sovereigns, for only £7.25, you can buy a presentation folder containing one each of the £2 coins issued to commemorate the 300th anniversary of the Bill of Rights and the Scottish Claim of Rights.
And for £9.95 you can purchase a Baby Pack — colour co-ordinated in pink or blue to the sex of the recipient — which not only includes a set of brilliant uncirculated 1989 coins but space to record baby's important details.
All coins issued by the Royal Mint can be viewed at 7 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1.
Mail order is available through the Royal Mint Coin Club, Freepost, P.O.Box 500, Cardiff CF1 1YY.
Telephone 0443-223880.
TCS helps to bridge the gap between gown and town.
By Martyn Halsall Northern Industrial Correspondent
STUART RILEY, a marketing specialist at the University of Lancaster, recognised his role in industrial change when he was asked to wear a suit for factory visits.
Staff at the BICC wiring division headquarters on Merseyside crossed their divide when Riley recommended casual clothing for a discussion day he had arranged in the Lune Valley.
Such details are hardly at the heart of ‘introducing major operational change’, which the Government's Teaching Company Scheme (TCS) proposes, but they form intriguing by-products.
They also illustrate the widening agenda of a project set for radical expansion before 1993.
The scheme was established by Labour in 1975 to harness the creativity of graduates, aged between 22 and 28, to companies seeking technological development.
It aims to echo in industry the teaching hospital experience available to young doctors.
After slow growth initially and reassessment under the Conservatives, the number of schemes expanded to around 350, employing 750 post-graduates today.
The target is 500 schemes by 1993, with a switch of emphasis towards small- and medium-sized companies.
Stuart Riley, at ease in Lancaster's academic village in a baggy woolly and corduroys, is part of the new wave.
He is helping to supervise three post-graduate associates in a marketing exercise for BICC, which marks a broadening of the scheme's primary role in manufacturing.
Mr Riley speaks highly of the BICC management team and the relationship between the company in gritty Prescott and the university on a rural hillside.
Any company involved in such a scheme has to be brave, Mr Riley says.
‘Maybe they buy it for the wrong reason; they can get a lot of research they would otherwise not carry out.
But they have got to be able to say: ‘We will open ourselves up to a change agent’…and change is painful.’
His colleague Peter Spillard — his suit trousers sharply creased for a trip to the industrial heartland — adds: ‘They have to answer questions they have not needed to answer before.’
Messrs Riley and Spillard — like another lecturer at Lancaster, Stuart Burge — stress the practical usefulness of their contact with TCS and its value in their teaching.
Companies profit from access to a network of university expertise far beyond individual scheme programmes and graduate associates mature rapidly, Dr Burge.
‘I am frequently amazed at the change in them.’
Experience from a two-year TC scheme could equal 10 or 15 years on the conventional industrial ladder.
Mal Gibb joined a Lancaster scheme after a degree in systems modelling at Sheffield Polytechnic and is now helping to develop computerised production at Nairn Kingfisher, a wallpaper plant on the Lancaster quayside.
He has appreciated the freedom to develop his work, the experience of dealing with everything from factory floor practicalities to board-room presentations, and the additional training which is 10 per cent of any scheme programme.
‘The main benefit is that I've enjoyed it; that's my yardstick.’
His supervisor, engineering and operational research lecturer Jean Tunnicliffe-Wilson, says much of the satisfaction is not only in suggesting ideas but having them tested in practice.
‘I don't get the same satisfaction just publishing ideas — I like to see them happening.’
Yet publishing ideas could be a barrier to TCS expansion, says George Steele, head of technology with the Departmnt of Industry in the North-west.
‘Academics get on by publishing papers and TCS by it's very nature isn't research; it's technology transfer and doesn't give the same opportunity for publishing…
So some academics fear they might fall behind in the promotion race if they get involved with TCS.’
Not all universities or academics agree.
Dr Burge has valued schemes as a source of research and some universities are now promoting both industrial contact and research experience.
The economic climate in higher education is also a constraint, says George Steele.
Higher education is very interested, ‘but they are strapped for resources and one of the problems of TCS is that it will cover all their costs, but it's not a way that a university or poly is going to make money.’
For all its popularity, TCS is essentially a shoe-string operation with an annual government input of £12million and an equal contribution from industry.
The goal for 1993 is that 60 per cent of participants will be companies with fewer than 500 employees.
People from European Community countries can be recruited on to British TC schemes but as yet the EC offers no equivalent.
Frontiers is edited by Peter Large
Insurance market's ‘momentous’ decision will spark head-on confrontation with leading corporate rivals Lloyd's of London rewrites its rules to take on the European competition.
By Lisa Buckingham
THE £11BILLION a year Lloyd's of London insurance market is abandoning rules forcing underwriters to specialise in particular types of business so as to compete more effectively in Europe and against the big insurance companies.
The decision, described by investor representatives as ‘momentous’, will bring Lloyd's into head-on competition with leading insurers such as Commercial Union, Prudential and Allianz.
In what is being seen as Lloyd's ‘Big Bang’, the change should allow the giant insurance operation to move in on a growing slice of business which it has found elusive.
The move was interpreted by some as a concession to Lloyd's brokers who supply the market with its business.
It will mean that wide-ranging corporate risks will be able to be placed with just one underwriter.
For Lloyd's entire 300-year history its underwriters have been forced to specialise in one of the four traditional classes — marine, non-marine, aviation and motor.
But from now on underwriters will be able to take on risks in any sector and brokers will no longer be forced to traipse around the market to place different strands of business with individual underwriters.
Lloyd's has become acutely aware that it is losing business to large companies, notably in Britain and Europe.
Many of its syndicates are operating at less than 50 per cent of their capacity.
It admitted being hit by the growing trend of big companies to place all their insurance business on a single policy.
Senior market official, David Coleridge, said recently that Lloyd's had lost out to Commercial Union on a multi-million-pound contract from Trafalgar House because it was unable to offer a ‘package deal’.
Bob Keville, chairman of the Lloyd's Insurance Brokers Committee, predicted the change was ‘bound to lead to more business coming Lloyd's way in future.’
Sturge, the largest underwriting group at Lloyd's, said the ability to drop barriers — which will not be compulsory — would lead to mergers between syndicates and an improved use of capacity.
Boutique syndicates are likely to remain, however.
But independent analysts in the market predicted disaster.
They pointed to cases in the past when underwriters had incurred huge losses by moving into an unfamiliar area of business.
And they forecast that profits could be reduced even if the overall income level rose because of new business.
Anthony Haynes, chairman of the Association of Lloyd's Members — which represents market investors — said, however, he felt underwriting standards and the disclosure of syndicate business would improve.
‘The barriers had ceased to be an effective protection for Names as those losing their shirts on marine syndicates are only too painfully aware,’ he said.
Lloyd's is keen not only to increase its market share but to broaden its spread of risks.
It wants to be less reliant on the depressed shipping industry but it also wants to shake off the tag of being the world's market of last resort and is determined to win safer contracts.
Apart from the big insuance companies around the world, Lloyd's already faces strong competition from the Institute of London Underwriters — a grouping of the marine underwriting departments of international companies — and is about to face further pressure with the establishment of the London Underwriting Centre, a similar company amalgam specialising in Lloyd's mainstream reinsurance business.
An executive in the London companies market dismissed the likely threat from Lloyd's.
‘We already operate in a competitive market and Lloyd's is unlikely to make that much more difficult.’
But we have been in this type of business for longer and will score on our expertise and we will also benefit from the ability we have through branch offices to handle claims.’
The changes will not come into force until 1991 and Lloyd's stressed that it was attempting to introduce safeguards to ensure the market's underwriting standards did not deteroriate.
Agents, who are responsible for the underwriting syndicates, will be compelled to inform investors specifically about the type of business being handled and underwriters will be obliged to join the market association responsible for any class of insurance written.
The agency companies will also be responsible for ensuring that syndicates are capable of handling the business they take on.
John Gordon, chairman of the Lloyd's Underwriting Agents Association said his members welcomed the move.
‘It will give the market extra flexibility and make it more attractive.
It also puts the responsibility for ensuring competence where it belongs — with the managing agent,’ Mr Gordon said.
New rules mean a set-back for army of casual workers.
By Linda Lennard
Unemployment benefit.
NEW rules to be introduced from tomorrow will hit many part-time workers receiving unemployment benefit.
Those who earn £43 a week or more will lose benefit for the whole of that week — even if they work only part of it and are unemployed for the remaining days.
Only people who earn £12 or less in any week will escape having their entitlement affected at all.
Anybody who earns between £12 and £43 in a given week may still be able to qualify for unemployment benefit on the days they are not working.
However, they will have to satisfy unemployment benefit officers that part-time work is not their usual pattern, and they are just doing it while looking for full-time employment.
In general, it has been accepted that people can take on part-time work in this way if it has not been their usual employment pattern.
But adjudication officers may eventually claim that part-time employment is your normal pattern, and that you should not be entitled to benefit on the days you don't work because you would not normally expect to be working anyway.
This so-called ‘full extent normal rule’ has come under considerable criticism from the Court of Appeal downwards.
The new rules coming in tomorrow effectively mean the end of the full extent normal rule for people earning £12 or less in a week.
The government says the changes are interim measures and it intends to reconsider the whole question of the treatment of earnings received by people on unemployment benefit.
If you do any part-time work while on unemployment benefit and your earnings do not affect your benefit entitlement, you will still have to meet the rest of the conditions for this benefit on the remaining days.
These include a new stringent ‘actively seeking work’ test which was introduced this October, as well as showing that you are available for work the rest of the week.
As well as earnings from part-time work, other income can affect your entitlement to unemployment benefit.
If you are aged 55 or over and have a personal or occupational pension which is more than £35 per week, the rest will be deducted from your benefit.
Money from a redundancy payment should not affect your right to this benefit.
Also note that if your partner earns more than £21.40 the adult dependants increase will not be payable for her or him.
Water shares: public dive in.
By Patrick Donovan Industrial Correspondent
THE public has applied for more than half of the £5.3billion water privatisation issue, with more than 1.4 million people signing cheques for an average of £2,000.
Although counting of applications continues, the issue is 1.75 times oversubscribed so far, forcing financial advisers last night to ‘claw back’ shares promised to overseas institutions so as to meet small investor demand.
This will increase the shares on offer to the public from 23.5 per cent to nearly 30 per cent of the issue.
With 500 share sorters working round the clock, however, small investors could see their allocation rise to a ceiling of nearly 50 per cent if the issue is 2.25 times oversubscribed.
Prospects for the highest-rated shares to open at a premium of up to 30 per cent continued to look good as the stock market held steady yesterday.
Thames Water was trading on a ‘grey market’ price of up to 132p.
Other companies attracted prices between the 122p to 129p opening price on the 100p partly-paid shares.
Flotation advisers declined to predict the total number of applications.
But only those applying for small amounts of shares are likely to see their allocation met in full.
‘It seems inevitable that almost everybody will only get some of the shares they wanted,’ one analyst said.
Analysts forecast an extra fillip to early water dealing with a wave of institutional buying from foreign buyers starved of stock.
The clawback mechanism has reduced the 18.5 per cent water holding intended for Japan, US, Canada and European institutions to around 12 per cent.
Any further ‘clawback’ will reduce shares allotted to institutions and brokers in the City.
All water companies have been ‘oversubscribed’ but advisers conceded that there were ‘regional buying differences’between them.
Analysts were increasingly optimistic about the prospect of share price premiums in early trading as it became clear that professional buyers will be starved of stock.
The main casualty of yesterday's ‘clawback’ will be the Japanese institution Daiwa, which is to take most of the overseas allocation.
‘We could see Japanese interest,’ said Mr Stephen Doe, of brokers Smith New Court.
‘It does look exciting for the aftermarket.’
But he conceded that Tokyo had held back in the aftermarket of British Gas.
In the US, buyers will have to hold back for 90 days after the issue because of Securities Exchange Commission restrictions on overseas dealings.
But heavy buying could be expected from Wood Gundy, which is handling the issue in Canada, and Credit Suisse First Boston, issue co-ordinator for the European markets.
A spokesman for Schroders, the Government's merchant bankers, said: ‘We have found that the average number of shares has increased as we have gone through the applications.’
But he said that it was too early to make firm forecasts about demand.
All forms are being checked by Price Waterhouse computer systems to weed out illegal multiple applications.
Sophisticated ‘fuzzy matching’ technology is being used to spot attempts to disguise similar names and addresses.
Experts last night were unsure over whether any of the water companies would qualify for the FT-SE index, a crucial point in assessing their investment potential.
‘Latest indications are that they will miss out, but it isn't impossible,’ said a spokesman for Schroders.
Thames, North West and Severn Trent are the most likely candidates.