

Good sense and justice sought in immigration issue:.
Queen's Bench Division Regina v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, ex parte Rafique Before Mr Justice Simon Brown December 7 1989
WHEN a man applies to come to the United Kingdom to marry a woman settled here, it is not necessary for him to be able to state specifically whether he intends to settle in this country forever or whether he wishes to marry and return to his own country.
If an applicant is uncertain as to his plans after marriage, the entry clearance officer should treat it as an application for settlement, and consider whether all the requirements for settlement are satisfied.
The facts.
Abid Hussain, a Pakistani, is engaged to be married to Miss Rafique, a British citizen, and they want to be married in England.
Mr Hussain was refused entry clearance to come to England, mainly because he could not say what were his long term intentions.
When interviewed Mr Hussain said he had not decided whether, following marriage, he, or his fiancee, would wish to remain in England or return to Pakistan.
The entry clearance officer (ECO) said he was not satisfied that the primary purpose of Mr Hussain's intended marriage was not to obtain admittance to the UK.
Mr Hussain appealed.
The adjudicator concluded that Mr Hussain's application was for a short-term stay and dismissed the appeal after hearing evidence from Miss Rafique that she had no intention of living in Pakistan.
The immigration appeal tribunal said the onus was on an applicant to bring himself within the specific immigration rule, and if he was unable or unwilling to do so he could not expect to succeed.
Mr Hussain appealed.
The Rules.
Rule 41 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules (HC 169) provides: ‘A man seeking to enter the UK for marriage to a woman settled here and who intends to settle here thereafter’ will be refused entry clearance unless the ECO is satisfied that it is not the primary purpose of the marriage to obtain admission to the UK.
Under rule 17 a man may apply for entry clearance to the UK for marriage where he and his wife will leave the UK after the marriage.
The decision.
Mr Justice Simon Brown said that shortly before the tribunal came to its decision in this case a tribunal chaired by Professor Jackson took a different approach in a similar case, Syed Jabar Hussain Shah.
That tribunal said that to force an applicant to state whether he intends to live here forever, or for a period of not less than six months, invites deceit and was somewhat removed from reality.
That tribunal said that where there was uncertainty as to the duration of the stay it was proper to consider the application as if ordinary residence was contemplated.
Mr Justice Simon Brown said he greatly preferred the approach adopted by Professor Jackson's tribunal.
It accorded with good sense and justice, and also properly reflected the important impact of the House of Lords' decision in Shah v Barnet Borough Council [1983]2 AC 309 upon the statutory definition of settlement for Immigration Act purposes.
In Shah's case Lord Scarman said, ‘All that is necessary is that the purpose of living where one does [eg, for education, employment, health, family or merely love of the place]has a sufficient degree of continuity to be properly described as settled’.
Why should an applicant, who must in any event be prepared to satisfy the primary purpose test, be worse off because he contemplates the possibility of a relatively short stay in the UK than one who had the fixed intention of permanent UK residence?
It was logical to construe the phrase ‘intending to settle’ in rule 41 differently from the contrasting phrase ‘admitted for settlement’which appears elsewhere.
There was no possible good reason why rule 41 should not encompass those genuinely undecided as to their long term ambitions.
Accordingly the tribunal in Mr Hussain's case fell into error.
They categorised all applicants, genuine or otherwise, who were unable or unwilling to specify their long term intentions, as necessarily falling outside the ambit of the rules and thus doomed to inevitable failure when applying for entry clearance.
The essence of what Mr Hussain said was that following the marriage he would remain in England on a settled basis as a married man for just so long as his wife dictated.
And for good measure, it should be noted that the ECO long ago expressed his own conclusion that settlement in the UK was the intention in this case.
The tribunal's decision was quashed and the appeal restored for hearing as an appeal against a refusal of entry clearance under rule 41.
The crucial issue still to be determined was whether the primary purpose of the marriage was to obtain admission to the UK.
If the immigration authorities concluded that Mr Hussain's assertion that he was undecided as to his long term intentions was pretended rather than genuine, clearly that would weigh against him in the primary purpose issue.
That was a general possibility and there was no reason to suppose that that would be the conclusion.
Appearances: Ramby De Mello instructed by Bean McDonald, Birmingham for Mr Hussain and Miss Rafique; John Laws instructed by the Treasury Solicitor for the Home Secretary.
Shiranikha Herbert barrister
Warren Tute:.
A MAN of many parts, Warren Tute was thought by those who knew him only slightly to be a good raconteur and a popular member of the Garrick.
However, he was a writer with a number of plays to his credit, none of them great successes but all worthy of note.
After leaving the Navy he also wrote much fiction, and as a novelist in the early post-war years his first published work, The Felthams (1950), was thought highly of and his bestseller, The Rock (1957), served to establish him as a writer of more than a little promise.
With such biographical works as Admiral Cochrane, Earl of Dundonald (1965), and his absorbing record of those 1940 operations involving the French fleet, The Deadly Stroke (1973), he broke into non-fiction too.
Tute was educated at Wrekin College, joined the Navy as a paymaster-cadet and served his apprenticeship throughout the thirties, becoming secretary to the Captain of the Fleet, Mediterranean.
He took part inthe naval landings in North Africa, helped plan further landings in Sicily, and towards the war's end he became deputy secretary to the chief of combined operations.
After the war, Tute worked in a variety of jobs where his skills as both sailor and writer were much in demand — broadcasting, film-making, and as script editor for London Weekend Television.
He also had a finger in theatrical production and I first knew him when he was associated with Elspeth Cochrane's literary management during the 1960s.
One of his most enterprising productions was Little Mary Sunshine in 1962.
Happy and novel and thoroughly charming, it gave several talented artists their first big chance, going on to bigger, if hardly better things.
None was so sweet (without being cloying) as that burst of theatrical sunshine at the Comedy Theatre in the West End during a fatal summer heatwave which put paid to the show's box office takings as well as Warren's plucky managerial debut.
His tenacious belief in the venture by keeping it running cost him heavy personal financial loss and his ‘nursing’ of this satire on operetta that has rarely been equalledis largely forgotten (but not by me).
Peter Cotes Warren Tute born February 22, 1914; died November 26, 1989.
Edoardo Amaldi.
Ragazzi of distinction:.
IN December, 1943, the men working feverishly to create the first American atomic bomb sent a team of ‘spooks’ to Naples.
One of their main assignments was to contact Edoardo Amaldi, a physicist thought to be in hiding near Rome.
Six months later, the day before Rome's liberation by the Allies, Amaldi was found.
He was interviewed by Moe Berg, then one of the most famous baseball players in America.
Berg was also an agent of the Office of Strategic Services, which was later to give birth to the CIA.
His job was to convince Amaldi to pack his bags because there was a ship waiting at Naples to take him to the United States.
Amaldi's presence there had been sought by two other Italian colleagues, also physicists.
His mentor, Enrico Fermi, later to be called ‘the father of the bomb’, and Emilio Segre (who died in California earlier this year).
Amaldi dodged the American invitation, perhaps because (with Rome liberated) Fermi's mantle in physics had fallen on his young shoulders and there were younger minds to teach.
He wore that mantle well at Rome University until his retirement in 1978.
But Amaldi never really retired nor grew old.
He kept regular hours in the university's physics building, spoke at scientific meetings this year in Moscow and Washington.
As President of the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei he had delivered the welcoming address on Tuesday to a symposium of scientists.
He then ordered a car to call for him the next morning for a similar occasion and was felled by a stroke while waiting for the lift.
Amaldi grew up in a small town in Lombardy, and took his doctorate in physics from Rome at the remarkably early age of 21.
In 1929, he became one of the ragazzi di Via Panisperna — the street where Fermi's ‘kids’ carried out their own experiments under the master in their own under-financed lab.
Emilio Segre was one kid, and Bruno Pontecorvo, later to defect from Britain to the Soviet Union, another.
It is interesting to note that the ‘pope’— as the kids called Fermi —‘because he's always right’, was only seven years older than Amaldi.
Amaldi astounded his group in October 1934 with his discovery that by slowing down, rather than accelerating, neutrons, he could provoke intense nuclear reactions.
He held a chair in physics from 1937 until his retirement publishing more than 150 papers on atomic and nuclear physics.
He was awarded honorary degrees by Algiers, Glasgow and Oxford.
He became a founder, and active executive, of the European Centre for Nuclear Research in Geneva.
I had the pleasure of two long talks last year with Professor Amaldi about his knowledge of what the German physicists were doing with their atoms during the war years.
Apart for his incongruously white hair, Amaldi seemed to have the mental lucidity and expected energy of a man half his age.
His modesty, considering his world-wide fame in his field, was endearing.
I knew almost nothing about physics but we shared some jokes about the Rome telephone system.
In 1949, Amaldi wrote to the Italian prime minister asking for permission to produce and sell sealing wax for letters, ‘so that we may raise needed funds for our physics lab’.
The reply came from an under-secretary who said that the present funding was considered adequate and the commercial undertaking would be ill-advised.
It was signed by Giulio Andreotti, the present prime minister.
George Armstrong Edoardo Amaldi, born Carpaneto Piacentino September 5, 1908; died Rome, December 5, 1989.
In the US, workers can now lose their jobs through drug tests.
Will the same procedure be introduced here?
Richie Denenberg reports Putting jobs on the line.
BUILDING work on a new county jail in Florida was falling woefully behind schedule, despite the critical need for additional space to house the many arrested as suspected drug offenders.
Pressed to account for the delay, an embarrassed local official explained that the project was lagging because too few construction workers could pass the drug test required of all job seekers.
The Florida county's ironic predicament illustrates the extent to which drug testing is relied upon by some US employers to screen the workforce.
The growing propensity to sample bodily fluids for contraband chemicals has engendered a bitter legal struggle over an employee's right of privacy, a conflict which could spread to Europe along with fear of ‘crack.’
For many workers, the ability to survive a drug test, most commonly a urinalysis for illicit chemicals such as cannabis and cocaine, is becoming a prerequisite to getting and holding a job.
On orders from the White House, perhaps as many as a million federal government emloyees are now subject to testing.
Wielding its regulatory stick, Washington is compelling the aviation, rail and trucking industries to test thousands of pilots, train crews and lorry drivers.
A survey by the US Department of Labor revealed that about a fifth of private-sector workers, mainly employees of large corporations, are already subject to testing.
Job applicants are spurned if they register ‘positive’ on a test, often without learning the reason for their rejection.
Successful applicants may be subjected to surprise random testing once they are hired -names of those who must provide a urine specimen are picked in a computerised lottery.
Others are tested when an industrial accident occurs, on the theory that it creates a ‘reasonable suspicion’ of drug impairment, even though faulty equipment or poor weather conditions may more plausibly account for the mishap.
Still others are tested if they apply for promotion to positions which are deemed ‘sensitive.’
Refusing to be tested or coming up positive usually results in immediate sacking.
Many unfair dismissal hearings centre on the arcane testimony of forensic chemists, toxicologists and psychopharmacologists (specialists in mood-altering substances).
The testing boom has been resisted vigorously by civil liberties groups and trade unions, who view this aspect of the ‘war on drugs’ as a frontal assault on a worker's dignity and entitlement to due process.
The obligation to urinate on demand offends many employees, particularly when an offical monitor — given the Orwellian title of ‘Collection Site Person’ in government regulations — stands by to guard against deceptive practices.
Urine advertised as free of detectable drugs is on offer by mail-order to anxious test takers, who could try to substitute it for their own.
Last spring, the US Supreme Court dealt the unions a blow by ruling, in a suit brought by treasury employees and rail workers, that for critical occupations (such as a customs agent) testing does not curtail constitutional rights.
Applying a balancing test, the court held that the danger posed by drug abuse outweighed the individual's expectation of privacy.
Despite that setback, opponents strive to contain the spread of testing through further litigation.
An argument often made in their briefs, against random testing in particular, is that it reverses the normal presumption of innocence: an employee is deemed guilty unless he can prove himself innocent by producing ‘clean’ urine.
Unlike the familiar blood alcohol tests in motoring cases, urinalysis does not demonstrate that the employee is impaired by drugs.
It merely detects residues of drugs ingested as much as weeks in the past, when the worker may well have been off-duty or on holiday.
An official of the American Civil Liberties Union has protested: ‘Firing people who come to work sober because of their condition on Saturday night is of debatable value.’
The civil libertarians argue that testing permits the employer to delve deeply into an employee's personal life; a specimen can be analysed, without the subject's knowledge, to reveal confidential medical conditions, such as epilepsy or pregnancy.
Drug testing also may disproportionally victimise members of racial minority groups whose subcultures sanction casual marijuana smoking, reversing much of the progress that has been made in eliminating employment discrimination.
AKEY ISSUE in the litigation is the accuracy of the analytical technology.
Testing has created a gold rush for the ‘diagnostics industry’, the largely unregulated private laboratories in which boxes of specimen jars, resembling crates of milk bottles, are processed in assembly-line fashion.
Errors sometimes occur, in part because an innocuous substance may trigger a positive.
Poppy seeds sprinkled on bread as a flavouring have a disconcerting tendency to react chemically in the same way as the extract of the opium poppy, so that a worker could be mistaken for a heroin user because of what he ate for breakfast.
The government's own Center for Disease Control discovered serious reporting errors when quality verification samples were posted to a number of laboratories as an experiment.
Although the government has since promulgated guidelines to standardise analytical methods, doubts remain about whether laboratories can be relied upon not to make technical and clerical mistakes which could result in someone's discharge.
When mistakes are made, they can prompt complex law suits.
An electricity generating company in California sued a laboratory which failed to properly document its analysis; the company was trying to recover from the laboratory the costs of settling a suit for unfair dismissal brought by an employee who lost her job because of the test.
Appearing as witnesses in court, some physicians have suggested that it is foolhardy to jeopardise a person's livelihood because of a laboratory report when the worker appears to be performing his job normally.
No doctor would order surgery or other treatment on the basis of a single test result, they point out, without corroborating clinical evidence.
Job-related performance testing, such as use of flight simulators to check the condition of pilots, has been suggested as a preferable substitute for the drug hunt.
There is a theory that even if drug testing is flawed, it at least deters drug use.
Yet addiction specialists scoff at the notion that someone who already faces death through overdose or through contracting Aids from hypodermic needles is likely to change his behavour because of a drug test.
And, although the Supreme Court upheld testing of customs agents, a few members of the bench doubted that a drug-imbibing agent would be deterred by a test if he was not already fearful, as one put it, that he ‘may be shot dead in unequal combat with unimpaired smugglers.’
TESTING for a short list of illicit drugs has been labelled as myopic, since the working population as a whole tends to abuse a vast pharmacopoeia of legal but impairing substances, many of them heavily promoted by distilleries and pharmaceutical firms.
A consumer group recently forced the withdrawal of a medical advertisement which invited doctors to prescribe tranquilizers for air traffic controllers suffering from job stress as they pore over their radar scopes.
The addiction specialists urge that the emphasis be shifted to eliminating underlying conditions, such as job stress and tedium, against which workers often seek to medicate themselves.
Rather than focusing on a few substances which are painted in lurid colours, the specialists say, the goal should be a workplace free of compulsive chemical use of all kinds.
Since testing is typically used not to facilitate treatment of addicted workers but to sack them — a process sardonically referred to as ‘dismissal therapy’— the upshot could be a ‘recriminalisation’ of addiction.
That would undo decades of effort to have chemical dependency recognised as a treatable disorder rather than as a moral lapse deserving of punishment.
Even though drug testing has attracted the most controversy, it is merely part of a broad movement in America toward a Darwinian worker-selection policy, which has been dubbed ‘employment of the fittest.’
Employees are routinely subjected to psychological screening and polygraph tests to evaluate their honesty.
Character is probed by handwriting analysts.
Genetic screening, to determine if the worker's chromosomes render him vulnerable to occupational illness, looms on the horizon.
Multiple layers of screening, much of it of dubious scientific validity, may become a routine feature of working life unless restraints are imposed by law, as some states have begun to do.
While it approved some types of drug testing, the Supreme Court did leave the anti-testing forces a glimmer of hope for ultimate legal containment.
It held that in principle a drug test is a ‘search’ within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment in the Bill of Rights.
Since the amendment bans ‘unreasonable searches and seizures,’ the possibility remains that a test may be found unreasonable if the job is so non-critical that public needs fail to outweigh individual privacy interests.
Drug testing opponents may also take comfort from the surprising dissent by arch-conservative Justice Antonin Scalia.
He disparaged the customs service testing programme as mere display, a gesture of solidarity with the President's anti-drug campaign.
Sacrificing civil liberties, Justice Scalia sneered, ‘cannot be the means of making a point.’
R. V. Denenberg, a former editor at the New York Times, is the author of Understanding American Politics (Fontana Press).
Dismissal therapy…the use of drug tests has lead to a US legal battle over workers' privacy rights PHOTOGRAPH: N. SAGANSKY
FOR EUROPE ENVIRONMENT ONLY Power without the people.
By Koy Thompson
SPANNING four continents and 70 countries, it is hardly surprising that the causes, and hence solutions to tropical forest destruction shift from region to region.
Common threads nonetheless emerge.
Tropical forests are almost always in developing countries suffering from varying degrees of poverty and debt.
Economic pressures on forests are immense, placing them on the cutting-edge of the reconciliation between environment and development.
So, how do we save them?
Prevalent conservation orthodoxy advocates protection through production.
Show that forests have a tangible value kept as forests, for example for timber, and countries will manage them for a sustained cash yield.
This top-down approach is favoured by the two major institutions charged with saving the tropical forests, the International Tropical Timber Organisation, and the World Bank and UN backed Tropical Foresty Action Plan.
Their solution offers money and resources to the powerful.
Technically sweet and politically acceptable, it avoids accusation of moral hypocrisy by using economic arguments to appeal to self interest.
Unfortunately the timber industry is shot through with economic inefficiency.
Weak forestry services are subordinate to production figures and dominated by wealthy elites, often politicians, who stand to gain tremendously from short-term liquidation of forest assets.
The benefits to the poor are trifling, and for native peoples, invariably negative.
This dire situation exists despite a welter of management plans, royalties, taxes, and fees.
Putting your tropical forest conservation eggs in the hardwood basket is a high risk strategy.
Some argue for weaning countries from timber centrism by showing the higher economic value to be had from non-wood products harvested without harming forests.
But despite detailed studies in Amazonia, Malaysia and Indonesia, there is little evidence that this persuasive economic argument has turned countries away from logging or forest conversion.
The failure is not in the argument, which is powerful and important, but in the approach.
It would take an heroic leap of imagination to suppose that those same forestry services with a proven inability to manage just one product, timber, could presently perform the economic and administrative gymnastics necessary to fully value and manage forests for multiple benefits.
Sometime in the future, sophisticated economic valuation may be critical for striking a global bargain for forest conservation between north and south.
But right now what is needed is a bottom-up approach; entrusting the forests to those increasingly organised peoples whose survival has depended for generations on environmental knowledge.
These forest peoples movements, the Indians, the rubber trappers, and ural unions, are well known in Brazil, but exist widely, for example in Kenya, India, the Phillippines and Malaysia.
They are organised and prepared to resist the destruction of the forests.
Involving people directly in decision making about forest development, and in their active management, recognises the social, political, and economic roots of the forest crisis.
Econmomic arguments are useful but sustainable development is fundamentally a moral concept, based on the common good, justice, and equity.
Koy Thomson is International Rainforest Campaigner with Friends of the Earth.
Standing up to be counted Commentary.
By Melanie Phillips
AN extraordinary scene took place this week.
Mr Jack Hibbert, the head of the Government Statistical Service, appeared in front of some 300 statisticians at a public meeting to defend the reputation and integrity of his service and the official information it purveys.
It was an unprecedented public appearance by the ultimate grey man in front of a deeply critical and anxious audience of greyish men (and a few women).
So sensitive was the occasion, approval had to be given by none other than the Cabinet Secretary and the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury before Mr Hibbert could be exposed to the harsh winds of public controversy.
For official statistics have become tainted by more than disagreement: the charges being levelled against the service amount to the politicisation of knowledge, a form of intellectual corruption and a scandalous abuse of power.
Concern has been growing for some time now, voiced not only by the media but also by some high-powered academics, ex-civil servants and former senior government statisticians, that official information which should be wholly objective is being distorted, suppressed or otherwise interfered with to serve the political ends of the government.
This anxiety has been fuelled by, for example, changes to the basis of counting the numbers of unemployed people, changing the index for measuring poverty or using official figures to claim that the health service is enjoying unprecedented prosperity.
In addition, the Rayner review of the service introduced not only cuts but a new philosophy that official figures, which previously had been for the service of the nation as a whole, were now to be tied far more closely to the requirements of the government of the day.
The statisticians are rightly extremely troubled by the loss of public confidence in official figures.
Official information provides the basis on which voters can decide on the record of the government and accordingly make an informed electoral choice.
As custodians of objective facts, statisticians know that the priceless asset of the truth must never be squandered in the interests of political expediency, not least because the public will then refuse to believe information that is actually true.
The grave claim that politicians are muddying the clear statistical waters has been made on a mumber of occasions now by Sir Claus Moser, a former head of the government statistical service.
He repeated his worry this week about the changes to the unemployment and poverty registers and the apparent wish to change the basis of the retail price index.
Professor Sir David Cox of Nuffield College, Oxford, an expert on — among other things — Aids statistics, no doubt had uppermost in his mind the Prime Ministerial axing of the Lifestyle Aids survey when he referred to increasing political pressure and lamented the sinking reputation of official statistics.
And a former deputy head of the Office of Population, Censuses and Surveys, Mr Philip Redfern, trenchantly criticised his erstwhile colleagues for lacking the openness and courage to swim against the political tide.
Faced with all this, Mr Hibbert's speech was a masterpiece of sanitised complacency which looked pitifully inadequate as a response to such well-placed anxieties.
The statistical service, said Mr Hibbert, was completely open about its methods.
Yes, said his critics, but it was a different story if anyone tried to get access to the information behind those methods.
The recent report by Profesor Richard Benjamin, for example, had castigated the government for deliberately obstructing access to certain data such as the Family Expenditure Survey.
Then there was the troublesome question of the unemployment statistics.
Publishing the old figures compiled from Job Centres, said Mr Hibbert, alongside the new ones might have been a good idea just to show how misleading the old ones had been.
For good measure, up popped Mr Peter Stibbard, Director of Statistics at the Department of Employment.
Mr Stibbard appeared outraged by any suggestion of impropriety.
The change in the figures appeared to be due to things like administrative convenience.
Total professional integrity! he smoothed.
But then up popped Mr Geoffrey Penrice, one of Mr Stibbard's predecessors.
In 1979, he said, the incoming government had felt the unemployment figures were too high.
Ministers wanted to change their presentation and their content.
The expression on Mr Hibbert's face didn't change.
He continued to nod and smile.
But Mr Penrice had given the game away.
The figures had been changed for political reasons.
The crucial distinction drawn by Mr Hibbert and others is between the figures themselves, simon pure as they are, and the possibly misleading use made of them by politicians and others.
In other words, the statisticians are anxious to prove that their hands are clean, however stained politicians may be.
But it's not as simple as that.
To say, as Mr Hibbert did, that statisticians cannot publicly dispute any misleading use politicians may make of official information is a weaselly argument.
They have a duty to set the record straight, otherwise they are conniving at falsehood.
Philip Redfern suggested it should become standard practice for statisticians to put their professional advice on the record.
There is no valid argument against such an obvious improvement to the democractic process.
But to speak out publicly without fear of retribution statisticians must become wholly independent of government, as happens in many other European countries.
And this august body of quintessential back-room people must now press loudly and firmly for this to happen.
It's not enough to imply, as Jack Hibbert did, that protests are being made to ministers behind the scenes.
It's understood that he has now been twice to complain to the Prime Minister that ministers are trying to make his staff do things he finds improper.
Brownie points for guts, if true; but public confidence is not going to be restored in the integrity of official information unless it is seen to be properly independent of the government machine that is now exerting its improper pressures behind closed doors.
Deaths: Sammy Fain: in Los Angeles aged 87: one of the last tunesmiths who peddled their songs from the back of trucks and in the dingy hallways of Tin Pan Alley.
Like Irving Berlin, Fain became part of that group of early 20th-century American songwriters with a talent for producing simple melodies that remained popular decades after they were first heard.
His evergreens include I'll be Seeing You, Katie, Dear Hearts and Gentle People, and I Can Dream, Can't I. Among films he scored or wrote for are Hellzapoppin, Anchors Aweigh, Love is a Many Splendored Thing, and Myra Breckinridge.
Robert Vidalin, a voice of resistance during the second world war, in Paris aged 86.
A Comedie Franaise actor, he joined the Underground and found his way to London and the B.B.C. to become one of the best known announcers on Les Franais Parient aux Franais, banned by the Nazis but heard throughout France.
Vidalin was among many who transmitted coded messages to the Resistance.
Birthdays.
Peter Blake, 38, David Carradine, 53, James MacArthur, 52, Maximilian Schell, 59, actors; Sir Ralph Carr-Ellison, chairman, Automobile Association and Tyne Tees Television, Lord-Lieutenant of Tyne and Wear, 65; Julian Critchley MP, 59; Sammy Davis jun, entertainer, 64; Sir Roger Elliott, Wyckeham Professor of Physics, Oxford, 61; Lucien Freud, painter, 67; James Galway, flautist, 50; Jennie Linden, actress, 49; Lord Prys-Davies, solicitor, 66; Paul Rutherford, singer, 30.
Another day.
December 8, 1924: I am at the moment just recovering from a heavy bout of drinking.
I had a good drinking evening with Alec, Terence, and Richard Greene.
Exactly a week later I suddenly went to Oxford by the most impossible train which stopped at every station.
I arrived at 10.30 and drove to 31 St Aldate's where I found an enormous orgy in progress.
Billy and I unearthed a strap and whipped Tony.
Everyone was hideously drunk except strangely enough myself.
Next day I moved to 40 Beaumont Street and began a vastly expensive career of alcohol.
I had a dinner party.
I arrived quite blind after a great number of cocktails at the George with Claud.
Eventually the dinner broke up and Claud, Roger Hollis and I went off for a pub-crawl which after sundry indecorous adventures ended up at the Hypocrites where another blind was going on.
Poor Mr Macgregor turned up after having lain with a woman but almost immediately fell backwards downstairs.
I think he was killed.
Next day I drank all the morning from pub to pub.
I ate no lunch but drank solidly.
I then drank double brandies until I could not walk…
I fell out of a window and then relapsed into unconsciousness punctuated with severe but well-directed vomitings.
I dined four times at various places and went to a drunk party at Worcester in someone's rooms I did not know.
On Wednesday I was sober.
Next day I lunched with Hugh [Lygon]and drank with him all afternoon and sallied out with him fighting drunk at tea-time when we drank at the New Reform until dinner.
(Diaries of Evelyn Waugh: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1975).
Eco Soundings.
By John Vidal
It's all terribly well the BBC congratulating themselves on their magnificent wildlife films but the huge ‘movie theme park’ they are planning for Rainham Marshes in Essex should comprehensively destroy yet another Site of Special Scientific Interest.
What is now home to the rare hen harrier, the short-eared owl and 170 species of birds, will shortly become the habitat of mechanical gorrillas, robot sharks and cheap imitations of nature as more than 70 per cent of the the 1200 acres are developed with prime riverside housing, studios and hotels.
Sounds like one for the Natural History Unit.
Think we've got problems?
A beach clean-up along 300 miles of Texas shoreline has turned up 15,600 plastic six-pack rings in 3 hours.
Magna charter.
EXTREME embarrassment in the lower orders of the DoE and DHSS by the Government's snub of the World Health Organisation's first-ever European Conference on Environment and Health.
While most of the 32 member states have sent very senior ministers to Frankfurt, the British have despatched Roger Freeman.
Who's he?
Oh, yes, the nonentity of a junior health minister.
And no-one at all from the DoE.
All this may have something to do with the conference's unpublicised preliminary meeting which was held in London at the beginning of October.
There, many Europeans could hardly believe their ears with the excuses of why the British would not want to sign a European Charter on Environment and Health.
‘They kept talking about the Magna Carta.
Their ideas were at least 100 years old’, complained one senior German at the time.
Free time.
FUNNY how religion is creeping into the environment debate.
Here's Mrs Thatcher molesting the Bible this week in a speech about pollution to a committee of legislators, industrialists and scientists: ‘Like the Garden of Eden to Adam and Eve anything which is given free is rarely valued…’
Vox Pope.
AND, just for the record, here's the Pope's first pronouncement on the environment.
‘It is manifestly unjust that a privileged few should continue to accumulate excess goods, squandering available resources while masses of people are living in conditions of misery.
Responsibility for protecting the environment and for limiting damage already inflicted, lies with the entire human community.
The right to a safe environment is ever more insistently presented today as a right that must be included in an updated Charter of Human Rights.’
Since you ask, nothing at all about population.
GREAT statistics of our time.
Americans receive enough junk mail in one day to produce enough energy to heat 250,000 homes.
And 44 percent of it is never even opened or read.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE en2
Check-Up.
THE National Society for Epilepsy is offering a ‘respite care’ service for relatives providing round-the-clock care for a parent, son or daughter with epilepsy.
The service comprises one to two weeks at the Society's centre in Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire.
Charges are £375 per week.
Help with payment may be available from social services.
Details from Sunsan Milward, senior clinical nurse, Chalfont Centre for Epilepsy, Chesham Lane, Chalfont St Peter, Bucks (Tel: 02407 3991).
THE National Information Forum is drawing up a directory of hospital-based services for disabled people.
Details to the Disabled Living Foundation, 380-384 Harrow Road, London W9 2HH (Tel: 01-289 2791).
ALEAFLET on how to help a diabetic person with an insulin reaction is now available (20p plus SAE) from the British Diabetic Association, 10 Queen Anne Street, London WIM OBD.
Self Help.
(An alphabetical directory of self-help groups) British Kidney Patients Association, Bordon, Hampshire GU35 9JP (Tel: 04023 2021/2) Aims: To give information and support to patients and their families.
Also operates holiday dialysis centres.
British Library of Tape Recordings for Hospital Patients (now known as the National Listening Library), 12 Lant Street, London SE1 1QH (Tel: 01-407 9417).
Aims: To provide tapes to all hospitals, residential homes and homes for the handicapped.
For £15 a year members receive as many tapes as they want.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Low-pressure pubs for a high old time Daedalus.
By David Jones
ONE OF the few things you can do more efficiently in an aircraft than anywhere else is get drunk.
The cabin is usually stabilised at less than atmospheric pressure, so its air has less oxygen than usual.
Your body burns alcohol more slowly, so a little drink can get you seriously sloshed, and you stay that way longer.
No wonder the airlines vie with each other to advertise their copious offerings of wine.
To bring the same advantages to earthbound drinkers, Daedalus is inventing a low-pressure pub.
The building will need to be carefully leak-proofed against the outside air, and customers will have to enter by an air-lock.
The beer, its bubbles expanded by the reduced pressure, will be fizzier than ever and magically intoxicating.
Rowdy customers will be hard to throw out through the double pressure doors of the air-lock, but at closing time Daedalus will reverse the pumps and take the pressure up above atmospheric.
Not only will the beer suddenly go flat: the extra oxygen in the high-pressure air will rapidly burn the alcohol out of the client's bloodstreams.
Experienced topers will leave promptly, before their merry glow is chilled into doom-laden sobriety.
But Daedalus goes further.
He points out that an animal's life span is linked to its metabolic rate.
If you slow its metabolism by restricted diet, it will mature more slowly and live longer than normal: the clock of its life will slow down.
Since reduced pressure also slows the metabolic rate, it too should slow and lengthen a creature's biological career.
And if the principle works with man as well, then by spending your whole life in a cruising aircraft you might live to be a hundred.
Or perhaps it would only seem like that.
So Dreadco's physiologists are setting up a variable-pressure metabolic laboratory to study the matter.
Animals and human volunteers will be maintained at various atmospheric pressures and oxygen concentrations while their biochemistry is monitored.
Daedalus expects that his under-pressured volunteers will lose appetite and be quite happy on two meals a day, especially if he provides airline food.
But how to judge their rate of ageing?
Dreadco is appealing for middle-aged identical twins, one to live in the low-pressure laboratory and one outside, while microscopic examination compares the rate at which grey hairs appear on their scalps.
The effects of high pressures should also be interesting.
Metabolism may speed up sharply, so that obese volunteers would be swiftly ‘burnt down’ to normal weight.
Animals might mature faster: a pressurised poultry house, for example, could hurry chickens to earlier adulthood.
But apart from aircraft and submarines, few human environments could incorporate such refinements into their normal operations.
Daedalus is designing a novel house extension, a variable-pressure bedroom, which may purchase an extra few years of life for its proud owners by slowing the metabolic rate of that third of their lifetime which they spend asleep.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE sc