

FOREST PEOPLE: Environment Guardian profiles Antonio Batista de Macedo Chico by the score.
By Alexander Shankland in Sao Paulo
TO THE Indians, he is Txai, a blood brother — the highest honour that can be conferred on a white man.
To the rubber-tappers, he is simply ‘Nosso Macedo’— Our Macedo.
To both communities in Acre, the remote region of the Brazilian Amazon which achieved world wide notoriety when the union leader and ecologist Chico Mendes was murdered there almost a year ago, Antonio Batista de Macedo is the champion who carries the hope of salvation for their rainforest home.
More than anyone else, it was Macedo who made possible the realisation of his friend Chico Mendes's dream — the Forest People's Alliance.
The Alliance united the traditional communities of Amazonia (Indians, rubber-tappers, Brazil nut gatherers, fishermen) in a crusade to save the great forest with which they had lived in harmony for generations.
It was Macedo who brought together the Indians and Seringueiros (rubber-tappers), communities kept apart by a century of violence and mistrust.
A short, weatherbeaten 37 year old, Macedo speaks with the quiet deliberation which is the mark of the Amazonian.
He describes growing up in the village of the Kxinawa Indians by the Parauaca River, listening to tales of the massacres which marked the occupation of Acre a century ago at the height of the rubber boom.
And he describes the last 14 years of his life dedicated to overcoming the bitterness accumulated since the ‘rubber barons’ first reached the region, bringing with them thousands of labourers from Brazil's impoverished Northeast, who they set to work as Seringueiros in lands wrested from the Indians.
The message Macedo carried to the villages — most of them accessible only by boat or along tortuous jungle trails and scattered over an area larger than England — was that the forest's people should, in uniting, take control of their own destiny.
Indians and seringueiros alike had become the virtual slaves of the rubber barons and their descendants, who suppresed the indigenous people's culture and kept the imported labourers in debt bondage.
In 1975 Macedo, then in the employ of the government Indian service FUNAI (he left in 1980 after constant clashes with the agency's corrupt and deskbound chiefs), arrived in the remote Jurua valley, near the foothills of the Andes and Acre's western frontier with Peru.
He found a scene effectively unchanged since the rubber-seekers first arrived there at the turn of the century.
The Jurua was still distant from the devastation and conflicts brought by cattle ranchers from the South to eastern Acre, around Chico Mendes's home town of Xapuri.
It remained frozen in a feudal system which had decayed but not died with the end of the rubber boom.
Since Macedo's arrival, things have changed.
Under his tutelage, the Indians began to demand the rights over their lands which they had been guaranteed by Brazil's Constitution.
Over 60 descendants of the rubber barons, who continued exploiting the inhabitants, have been forced to leave.
Macedo's vision of preservation for the forest and its peoples is very different from the Utopian fantasies of many in the developed world who profess a passionate concern for Amazonia.
‘Amazonia is nature's great monument,’ he says, ‘and we have to save her.
But it's crazy to want to preserve her people as they are now — poor, exploited, without schools or health care.’
Macedo believes that uniting development and preservation is not only possible, but essential.
The symbol of this approach is the Extractive Reserve.
First championed by Chico Mendes, Extractive Reserves are areas where the forest is preserved for the use of its traditional inhabitants.
They harvest its riches without destroying the ecological balance.
Macedos's most ambitious project is the creation of such a reserve in the basin of the River Tejo, an area of rubber-rich forest in the Jurua which borders Indian lands and a newly-created national park.
The project is currently awaiting a green light from the government in Brasilia — which, aware of the need to counteract a reputation as the world's ecological villain has given it a favourable hearing.
If legal recognition is granted, the reserve and its neighbouring area will together represent a stretch of rainforest half the size of Wales, home to 10,000 families of seringueiros and Indians, set aside for preservation.
But Macedo's ideas go beyond that.
He insists that the Extractive reserves are viable economically as well as socially.
A market for these plants is opening up both in Brazil and abroad, and he urges investment in researching the forest's untapped potential.
Development will come, he says, but built on an understanding of the forest and not a brutal sacking of its riches.
Macedo's line is that of Chico Mendes, for whom saving the rainforest went hand in hand with saving the way of life of its people and improving their lot.
It is a line which has stirred up against Macedo the same emnities which led to Chico Mendes's murder.
He has already survived two attempts on his life.
Is he worried his end will be the same as Chico's?
‘Yes, but in the end what can you do?
When they killed Chico, they transformed us into thousands of Chicos.’
22COMMENT THE GUARDIANFriday December 8 1989 The last chance to join the team.
JACQUES Delors got the thrust of what needs to be done absolutely right yesterday.
We must, he said, speed up the construction of our ‘common home.’
There was a clear imperative for the Strasbourg summit.
‘We have to maintain the Community as a pole of attraction, as a stabilising factor.
It is our duty, and in our interest, to meet our historic responsibilities.’
But the fact that Mr Delors is right does not mean that events will prove him right.
To the contrary, there is a growing, glum chance that events will pass him and the European Community by, for the speed of change in Eastern Europe — an East German head of state deposed on Wednesday, a Czechoslovak Prime Minister gone yesterday — has a bewildering momentum that quite outdistances the ability of any Council of Ministers to react.
Yet we are all prey to this speed of change.
Consider the coalition politicians who rule the economic core of the Community, West Germany.
They have an election to fight, next year.
The emotions unleashed as the Wall is dismantled are incalculable.
Who can wonder if they wobble back and forth between ten-point plans for confederal re-unification and loyalty to an immobilised Nato structure; between pounding on with monetary union and waiting to see what happens?
West Germany, as a nation, is being asked the most profound questions about the shape of things to come on its borders.
It would not, frankly, be totally surprising if — somewhere between Strasbourg this weekend and an EMU vesting date in the middle nineties — the tide of history began to dissolve the fabric of a Community built up over decades.
Nationalism — from Prague to Paris, from Berlin to Budapest — is a potent, perilous brew.
But it is, in this common enterprise, an enemy.
And here Britain may be the spectre at the Strasbourg feastings.
Mrs Margaret Thatcher has struck three notes since the Communist world began to disintegrate.
That this is Her Victory (self-serving grandiosity).
That what she said at Bruges, before any of it happened, was a tablet of stone — so that the nation state is the foundation of her Europe.
And that, frozen for ten or fifteen years, the countries of the East must painstakingly provide full democratic credentials before she allows them to move forward.
This is dangerous and foolish delusion.
No one, this week, can foresee the mood of East Germany next week.
No one can tell whether a corrupt and collapsing Communist party can retain any share in power.
And no one can predict whether free elections next year would not — the apotheosis of the Thatcher doctrine — produce a huge nationalist vote for confederal re-unification in fifteen months, not fifteen years.
History, said Mr Delors six weeks ago, ‘cannot wait.’
It isn't waiting.
And none of us can slow it down.
Do not over-estimate the cards that Britain has to play at Strasbourg.
They are low value, from a peripheral hand.
The summit will not be all about Mrs Thatcher's ritual denunciation of the Social Charter, her contempt for the potential of the European Parliament, her denial that the time is right, her isolated war against any truck with monetary union.
The core for Europe is common cause between France and Germany as the ‘stabilising factor.’
The question for Britain is one for us.
Do we want a role?
The broad Bruges argument is over.
It is lost.
It has no relevance to unfolding events.
That does not mean, for Britain, that all is lost, that we have no voice in affairs and no part to play.
We do — quite practically and with useful influence — if we choose to cast ourselves as a vigorous, amending, debating part of the European team.
But our Prime Minister has cast herself, and us, as something different: as the ranting outsider, as the pox on all other houses.
That is no part at all any longer.
It muddles facile loathing of a parody bureaucracy with the great issues of statesmanship.
Strasbourg is Mrs Thatcher's last chance to signal that she has seen the point and joined the team.
This time, history really cannot wait..
Airing the bids.
MR DAVID MELLOR, the Home Office minister handling the Broadcasting Bill, is a civilised chap, the sort of Government minister you will find on a Friday night addressing the Putney Music Club on brilliant young musicians (Cantelli, Lipatti, Ginette Neveu) struck down in their prime.
As a television viewer his tastes run to Bruckner rather than Cilla Black.
So even if ministerial loyalties make it hard to admit it, he probably shares the apprehension which haunts many others as they contemplate this Bill: that though, at the end of the day, quantity will increase, quality will diminish; or to put it in a form of words which trips easily off Conservative lips on other occasions — that More is going to mean Worse.
The cause of this apprehension comes mainly from two linked provisions which, if the sceptics are right, will reinforce each other.
One is the requirement that contracts in the independent sector should go from now on(except in ‘exceptional circumstances’ and subject to minimum standard requirements) to the highest bidder: the other is the reduction in the programme obligations which at present safeguard the claim of minority programmes to television time.
The present system of allocations, in which some stately committee offers the franchise to the most persuasive (or plausible) claimant on the basis of pledges which may never be fulfilled, is, all agree, very near indefensible.
But a system in which those with the biggest moneybags automatically outpace others of greater experience, imagination, talent and future potential falls short of perfection too.
Some 60 per cent of Conservative MPs who took part in a recent Gallup survey thought standards would fall, not improve, if these changes took place.
Even the party leadership doesn't really believe that de-regulation is the best guarantee of the public good: if it did, it wouldn't have needed to call up Lord Rees-Mogg to police TV decency.
It would make better sense if the money which new contractors raised to sustain their bids were to go, as the Campaign for Quality Television (CQT) urges, into programme-making.
That might be some guarantee of bigger, better, more varied and more daring programming.
But so far the reverse is the case.
The substantial sums which back the successful bids will be pocketed by the Treasury.
The contractors, having racked themselves to the limit to fight off all other comers, may be forced to cut back on programme spending, to the detriment of exactly the kind of endeavours which may give delight to many but have no great appeal to the masses.
This is not just some fanciful theory.
Australian TV is at present in turmoil precisely as a result of desperate overbidding.
Mr Mellor may well be attracted by the CQT compromise, though the Treasury certainly won't be.
But if 60 per cent of Conservative members really believe that standards may suffer, the remedy's in their hands: they must use their corporate power to change the Bill for the better.
And if Mr Mellor insists, as he has done so far, that the auction solution is not open to revision, let them ask him, kindly but firmly, if such crude competition is really the format to put on his Saturday screen the modern successors of Cantelli, Neveu and Lipatti.
At the most, it's a desperate risk, and one that a civilised chap should think long and hard before taking..
Adding up the Bill.
THERE is one simple test by which the Court and Legal Services Bill published yesterday should be judged.
Who gets most out of the Bill: the lawyers or the consumer?
By that yardstick, the Bill is a success.
There are five ways in which the consumer will benefit: a new legal Ombudsman to strengthen the present inadequate systems for handling complaints against solicitors and barristers; cheaper conveyancing through banks and building societies being allowed to provide a one-stop house purchase service; a new right for consumers to negotiate ‘no-win no-fee’ agreements with their legal advisers; and more access to justice both by redistributing chunks of High Court work to county courts, plus extending solicitors' rights of audience to the higher courts.
Yet, as the Legal Action Group (LAG) noted yesterday, the Bill may be promising more than it can deliver.
LAG worried on three fronts: the side-step taken by the Bill on extending solicitors' rights of audience; the gamble on the redistribution of High Court business when the county courts are already over-stretched; and the unknown risks of the conveyancing changes until the new code is published.
The Lord Chancellor's concessions to the Bar over solicitors' rights of audience are understandable but mistaken.
The initial Government proposal for a single accreditation system for advocates was the correct approach.
There would have been different levels of accreditation according to competence, but each level (Crown, High Court, Appeal Court) would have been open to both solicitors and barristers.
The thunder with which this was greeted from the senior judiciary — every one a former barrister — forced the Lord Chancellor to produce his fudge: separate systems of accreditation with four senior judges given a veto over solicitors' rights.
If the Opposition were smart, they would put down amendments now restoring the original provision.
Sadly, neither Labour nor the Liberal Democrats will produce such an amendment because, fatally, both leave reform of legal services to their lawyers, the last people who should be in charge.
The redistribution of court business is long overdue.
The present system frequently results in simple cases being set before the High Court while much more complicated issues are being decided by the county courts.
The Bill will give the Lord Chancellor the power to ensure that appropriate categories of cases — according to complexity, value and legal importance — are placed before the appropriate court.
Lord Mackay was cautious yesterday about the speed of change.
And with good reason.
In many areas of the country, the county courts are already overcrowded.
The interval between the start of county court proceedings and the trial of a contested case can be well over two years.
The 270 courts issued two million summonses, 1.3 million warrants and 180,000 divorce petitions last year.
Finally, it is a pity that a Bill designed to end restrictive practices should extend one of the worst in the book: but barristers' immunity from negligence claims looks set to be extended to solicitors.
That, perhaps, sums up the entire package: a slightly addled Lord Chancellor's egg.
PAGE