

This is a copy of Countryd Top copy sent to OBITS Country Diary for Saturday December 9th Machynlleth: For me a frequent delight in many years of hill-walking in Wales has been to come upon that lively, eye-catching bird the wheatear which so loves to play hide and seek among the rocks.
But I have seldom got very close to these quick, nervous birds.
From a distance I have managed to see something of their spectacular courtship frolics that take place both on the ground and in the air and I have listened to their songs which, though not rich in melody, seem just right for a world of cliffs and screes.
But with such a wide-awake bird as the wheatear you will discover very little else about its private life unless you really get down to the job.
And 40 years ago that is just what Peter Conder, soon to be assisted by his wife, Pat, set out to do.
He has been gathering his facts on and off ever since and now they are available to us all in his book The Wheatear, a truly classic study of every aspect of the wheatear's lifestyle.
It seems fair to claim this attractive book as a product of Wales because although the author lives in Eastern England and has observed wheatears in many far-flung places, the foundation studies were made on the Pembrokeshire island of Skokholm and Peter Conder has often returned there to keep fresh the memory of his pioneering researches.
Thorough in all its countless details his book is well written and easy to read, its charm further enhanced by many true to life sketches made in the field by John Busby.
The publisher is Christopher Helm, the price £19.95.
PAGE
Acid house man jailed.
Leslie Thomas, a leader of a gang that organised acid house parties in London, was jailed at the Old Bailey yesterday for five years and three months after being convicted in his absence of plotting to permit premises to be used for the supply of drugs.
Thomas, aged 27, who fled to Tenerife before his trial ended, was rearrested on his return to England last month.
Andrew Culf Three ambulance crews from Fulham dealt with emergencies yesterday after the 999 calls were put through to them.
But after taking their patients to hospital, the six ambulancemen involved were all suspended without pay for refusing to work normally.
They joined the rest of their colleagues — most of whom had already been suspended — in the rest room of Europe's largest ambulance station, where they were watching a video of A Bridge Too Far.
The choice of film seemed appropriate on the day the simmering dispute boiled over with growing frustration and bitterness among the staff, many of whom attended the Clapham train disaster and are veterans of dealing with the aftermath of IRA bomb blasts.
Outside the station a banner fluttered in the wind carrying the plaintiff message: ‘We are not on strike’.
Inside, the crews expressed their willingness to answer emergency calls and, despite being suspended, said they had no intention of going home.
Graphic evidence of their commitment to the 999 service came as three separate emergency calls were received at Fulham and crews responded to two road accidents and a medical collapse.
Mr Alan Thomas, who has been in the service for 28 years, took a motor-cyclist with leg injuries to Charing Cross Hospital after an accident in Kensington.
‘The call came through in the normal way and we dealt with it as we normally would,’ he said.
‘Several minutes after we returned, my station officer called me in to his office and warned me that as I was not working by London Ambulance Service guidelines I would be stood down without pay.’
He said: ‘They seemed to be using us as a last resort.
It seems they could not find anyone else to answer the call, so they came to us.’
Mr Charles Sawyer, an ambulanceman for five years, was also suspended on his return from taking an elderly woman to hospital following a crash in Chelsea.
‘I told them I was prepared to answer emergencies for no pay and I'm staying on until the end of my shift.
We are willing to work,’ he said.
Mr Bob White, acting shop steward, said there was no animosity towards the police or St John Ambulance, who were handling calls.
‘We have even offered to go out with the police in their cars to help.’
There would be no antagonism towards troops, who would simply be acting under orders.
He said the offer of 6.5 per cent was insulting and denounced management's inclusion of London weighting to artifically boost the offer to 9.3 per cent in the capital.
The union simply wanted arbitration.
Mrs Elaine Wake said her 18-year-old brother takes home £205 a week working in a supermarket.
After five years service, she clears £515 a month.
‘Will Kenneth Clarke tell my five-year-old daughter why she will not get a bike or a doll's house for Christmas?
Let us hope that it is Mr Clarke who needs an ambulance that has been stood down.’
The scale of the opposition to the health secretary became clear as the staff crowded round the lunchtime television news.
As Mr Clarke was interviewed, his answers were greeted with cries of outrage.
One ambulanceman summed up the mood as he threw his hands up in disgust and muttered: ‘Absolute rubbish.
It is all just so frustrating.’
PAGE
.
The Government would find it hard to design a student loan system more socially unjust and more likely to deter potential students from less privileged backgrounds, Sir John Kingman, vice-chancellor of Bristol University, said yesterday.
It was, however, misguided to object to loans on principle and MPs should amend the bill to devise a more equitable system which applied to part-time students, too.
‘A student whose education enables him later in life to earn a higher income should return some of that income.’
Higher education could not rely on the taxpayer as its only source of funds, he told the annual meeting of the university's court of governors.
If students were not to share the cost of tuition fees as well, the system would continue to transfer resources from the average taxpayer to the predominantly middle-class student body.
‘For most of the last 1,000 years, the universities have been an engine of social mobility; they are now, thanks to the funding system, a means to ensuring that the graduate class is hereditary,’ Sir John said.
PAGE
LIBEL DAMAGES FOR MP'S WIDOW An elderly London widow agreed at the High Court today to accept substantial undislosed damages for a Sunday Times article alleging her twin children were the result of an affair with the father of Jacqueline Kennedy-Onassis.
The front page article published on May 21 this year claimed that Mrs Ann Plugge's children Gale and Greville were not fathered by her husband, Captain Leonard Plugge, who was Conservative MP for Chatham, but by Jack Bouvier.
Mr Andrew Stephenson, solicitor for Mrs Plugge, who lives in Dovehouse Street, Chelsea, told Mr Justice Brooke sitting in London, that the newspaper, and the writer of the story, Rosemary Collins, now accepted that was not true.
Mr Alastair Brett, for the journalist and Times Newspapers Limited, said: ‘The defendants, having made extensive inquiries into the allegation, are quite satisfied that Mr Bouvier was not the father of the plaintiff's twins and very much regret that the allegation was ever published.
‘Through me the defendants tender their sincere apologies to the plaintiff for the distress she was caused by the publication of the article.’
The article, headed ‘Tragic Secrets of Jackie's British Brother and Sister’, said that in 1972 Gale, 27, was stabbed and buried alive in Trinidad by henchman of the late Michael X a former black power leader and racketeer in London.
The man was hanged for her killing.
A few months later Greville was killed in a car crash in Morocco.
Captain Plugge died in 1981.
The defendants also agreed to pay costs incurred by Mrs Plugge who is in her late 70's. end ab PAGE
5m claimants to be worse off under poll tax, says Meacher.
MORE than five million adults receiving income support will lose out when the poll tax is introduced in England next April, Labour's social security spokesman, Mr Michael Meacher, claimed yesterday, writes Alan Travis.
He argued at a Westminster press conference that in only 35 out of 403 local authority areas would any claimants gain or break even, despite Mrs Thatcher's pledge in July 1987 that they would not be adversely affected.
Claimants on income support are now required to pay a 20 per cent contribution to rates or poll tax bills.
But the Government has provided compensation allowances in income support payments equal to the average poll tax bill in each council area.
Mr Meacher claimed yesterday that next April the value of those allowances would not be enough to cover even the most conservative forecasts of average poll tax payments.
On the Government's safety-netted forecast of £272 a head in England, the compensation amount is 75p a week short of the amount a couple are likely to pay in poll tax.
However, Mr Meacher's figures were challenged by the Department of Social Security, which claimed the compensation amount for couples this year had been 95p a week more than Labour's estimate.
Mr Meacher in turn claimed that this was only notional and had already been clawed back.
His claim came as local authorities lodged final returns for poll tax registration.
These are expected to show that four-fifths of councils in England have achieved more than 95 per cent registration, compared with the official population figures for their area.
But some councils have returned forms claiming 110 per cent registration, indicating how out of date are some Office of Population Censuses and Surveys estimates of population.
Labour's poll tax spokesman, Mr David Blunkett, last night said this provided yet another reason to doubt the Government's projection of poll tax bills.
New backbench revolts simmer for Thatcher.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
MRS THATCHER faces a series of Conservative backbench challenges to her legislative programme.
Although not all the Tory dissidents now discussing tactics over individual bills were among the 60 who withheld their votes from her last Tuesday, the arithmetic of the leadership election does raise the question of whether she can rely on her Commons majority in the coming battles.
The party's vice-chairman, Mr Peter Morrison, betrayed the Tories' nerves: ‘It would have been extremely surprising if, after 15 years as party leader and over 10 years as prime minister, there had not been some dissenting voices.
Tough policies and resolute leadership always create enemies.’
In a speech last night in Birmingham, he noted that, in the end, ‘dissenting voices were remarkably few and remarkably quiet…
Now we must turn away from conflict.
There are so many important tasks ahead — tasks to be tackled with unity and resolve.’
Such putative loyalty will be tested by this session's bills, particularly broadcasting, legal reform and the NHS shake-up.
Mr Nicholas Winterton, MP for Macclesfield, has served notice he intends not to support the NHS bill at its second reading on Monday night.
He will find support on the Conservative benches, as members of the Commons Social Services Select Committee seek to refer the bill to a standing committee.
This would allow the select committee, under its chairman, Mr Frank Field, to take evidence from all interested parties, including the British Medical Association, before line-by-line scrutiny of the bill begins.
On the broadcasting bill, 58 Tory MPs have signed two early day motions criticising the thrust of the Government's legislation.
The first, initiated by a former minister, Sir Geoffrey Pattie, calls for tendering to allow the size of the bid and the programming quality to be judged in tandem when awarding contracts.
The second is put down by a another sacked minister, Mr George Walden, who opposes the bill in principle.
He also voices concern about loss of quality once the bill is put into practice.
A third group of backbenchers is concerned at cross-media ownership in the new channels under the bill.
The combination should result in a rebellion at the second reading on Monday week.
The Government's legal reforms are likely to produce a crop of backbench critics, with the Bar Council pressing to amend solicitors' new rights to handle court cases.
The contingent of barristers on the Tory benches will lobby to keep ‘a strong and independent’ Bar.
Ministers still face difficulties over last year's programme.
Sir Rhodes Boyson, MP for Brent South, next Thursday leads a delegation to the party chairman, Mr Kenneth Baker, demanding further action on the poll tax.
He and others fear that ‘safety net’ losses to be suffered by some areas will cost them key metropolitan councils in next May's elections.
Mr David Wilshire, MP for Spelthorne, last year a staunch supporter on the Commons committee examining the tax, is now so alarmed at how it works that this week he asked ministers to scrap the ‘monstrously unfair’ community charge.
‘Unanswered questions’ remain over Rover deal.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
LABOUR'S Trade and Industry spokesman, Mr Gordon Brown, yesterday continued to press the Government over the alleged deception surrounding the Rover Group sale.
He said 18 parliamentary questions he had put down remained unanswered, after the Prime Minister claimed that all the financial details of the car company's sale to British Aerospace had been released.
The questions, to the Trade and Industry Secretary, Mr Nicholas Ridley, are designed to establish the full cost to the taxpayer of the Rover deal.
They centre on a request for details of ‘a private side-letter’ alongside the final funding agreement from Lord Young, the then Trade and Industry Secretary, to British Aerospace.
The letter allegedly offered additional guarantees to BAe beyond any final contract.
The demands for further information follow disclosures that Lord Young wrote to BAe asking it to choose how to hide the £38 million ‘sweeteners’ involved in the sale from Parliament and the European Commission.
Mr Brown's requests suggest there were further hidden subsidies which have yet to be disclosed officially.
‘I want to see the correspondence between the European Commission and the Government over subsidies and over guarantees about the future of Rover's activities and jobs,’ Mr Brown said.
‘I want to know what discussions took place during the Rover negotiations on other civil and military issues; on launch aid for the Airbus; and on the general tax affairs of British Aerospace.
‘I want to know what tax concessions the Government believed they had made to British Aerospace.
‘These answers are required so that the full cost of the Rover deal can be assessed,’ Mr Brown said yesterday.
Labour's Trade and Industry spokesman has put down questions about whether, as part of the final contract, BAe's advisor's fees were paid from public funds.
He also would like all correspondence about the future of the Government's ‘golden share’ in Rover to be published.
FATHER JAILED FOR BREAKING BABY'S BONES A father who broke his baby son's bones in six places was jailed for four years today.
Nottingham Crown Court was told that by the age of nine weeks, the child had fractures to both collar bones, both legs and an arm as well as a broken skull.
Mr Peter Joyce, prosecuting, said the offences came to light when the baby, who was not named in court, was taken to a health centre for treatment to an elbow injury inflicted by his father five days earlier.
Factory worker Robert Brooks, 33, of Pleasant Row, Hyson Green, Nottingham, admitted six charges of causing grievous bodily harm to his son and one charge of child cruelty.
The prosecution accepted a not guilty plea by the baby's mother, Sharon Peel, 28.
Mr Joyce said the child, now 17 months old, was in care and very fit and healthy.
Defending, Mr Noel Philo, said Brooks loved his son and did not mean to harm him, but he was an inadequate father who could not cope.
Judge Thomas Heald said he took into account the family's cramped living conditions and financial difficulties.
end tp PAGE
MAN LEAVES CAT AND £43,000 TO CHARITY Sooty the black cat has brought a £43,000 windfall to a charity.
Her owner, an anonymous Suffolk man, left the cash in his will to the National Society for Epilepsy on condition it gave Sooty a home.
Now the 16-year-old cat is settling in at the society's headquarters at Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire.
‘Poor Sooty was very unsociable when she was first brought here,’ said house manager Jean Coleman.
‘She went under a desk and didn't come out for four days.
But she is settling in much better now and looking forward to the best Christmas dinner money can buy.’
end nh PAGE
News in brief: Havel may get presidency.
Mr Vaclav Havel, the Czechoslovak opposition leader, and the still ruling Communist Party were immersed in crisis talks on the shape of a new coalition government as the prospect of Mr Havel becoming the next president appeared to strengthen.
Page 24.
Kidney ‘theft’.
Mr Ahmet Koc, aged 34, a Turkish peasant farmer, described to the General Medical Council's professional conduct committee how a Harley Street doctor had allegedly, under the pretext of giving him a blood test, stolen his kidney to be used in a transplant.
Page 2.
Cocaine seizures rise.
Cocaine seizures by Customs have risen by 50 per cent this year, the Home Office minister, Mr David Mellor, told the Commons during a debate on the misuse of drugs.
Page 6.
Aquino rallies support.
President Corazon Aquino of the Philippines lashed out at her enemies and mobilised popular support behind her beleaguered government during a rally attended by thousands of Filipinos.
Page 10.
Damages for maid.
A maid who was whipped and beaten by two Arab princesses for whom she worked was awarded £300,000 damages in the High Court.
Page 4.
Microwave health alert.
Microwave cooking creates potentially dangerous substances in baby milk which may damage the brain, liver and kidneys, doctors said.
Page 24.
Leonard retains title.
Sugar Ray Leonard won his world middle-weight title fight with Roberto Duran.
Page 19.
Grants victory.
An historic legal decision will give tens of thousands of European students who could not afford British college fees the right to apply for discretionary grants.
Page 4.
2.2m queue for shares.
Nearly £5 billion has been put up by 2.2 million private investors chasing water shares, it was confirmed, making the sale one of the most popular in the Government's privatisation programme.
Page 11.
Aids vaccine hope.
A step towards producing an Aids vaccine was announced by researchers.
Page 3
PAGE
Poor public response prompts BT to cut number of cheap-rate days.
THE number of cheap-rate days for telephone users is to be cut from eight to five next year because not enough people took advantage of it, British Telecom announced yesterday.
A company spokesman said: ‘We introduced cheap rates to stimulate telephone traffic.
But our experience has shown the public didn't take advantage of the facility except over the Christmas and New Year period.’
From next year, all dialled local and national calls, and most direct-dialled international calls will be charged only at cheap rates on Christmas Day, Boxing Day and New Year's Day.
Previously, in England and Wales, concessionary days also included Good Friday, Easter Monday, May Day Holiday, Spring Bank Holiday and Summer Bank Holiday.
In Scotland they included Christmas Eve, December 27, December 28, December 29 and January 2; and in Northern Ireland, Easter Monday, Easter Tuesday, May Day Holiday, July 12, and July 13.
When one of the three dates falls on a weekend when cheap-rate calls apply, the concession will be transferred to another day.
But next year, none of the concessionary days is on a weekend.
The move will not affect existing weekend rates or the weekday 1pm and 6pm cheaper rate periods.
Father jailed for injuring child.
A father who broke his nine-week-old son's bones in six places, was jailed for four years at Nottingham Crown Court yesterday.
Robert Brooks, a factory worker, fractured his son's collar bones, legs and an arm, and broke his skull.
The child, now 17 months old, is in care.
Athlete to be freed.
Stephen Pinsent, a former weightlifting champion who was jailed last month for supplying anabolic steroids, had his three-month sentence reduced to 28 days by the Court of Appeal yesterday.
Lost master sold.
A painting which hung in Blairgowie Scottish Episcopal Church for 40 years yesterday fetched £825,000 at Christie's in London.
The Liberation of St Peter, by Mattia Preti, went to an anonymous buyer.
Councillor case dropped.
A case against Mr Naren Dave, a Labour councillor in Barnet, north London, who allegedly used threatening behaviour during a visit in June by Mrs Thatcher to her constituency, was dropped yesterday.
Party plotter jailed.
Leslie Thomas, aged 27, who organised acid house parties in London, was jailed for five years at the Old Bailey yesterday.
Thomas, of east London, plotted to permit premises to be used for the supply of drugs.
N-dust judgment delay.
Judgment was reserved at the High Court in London yesterday on a claim by Mr Christopher Merlin, aged 48, and his wife, Christine, of Broughton-in-Furness, Cumbria, that their former home was contaminated with plutonimum dust from the Sellafield plant.
Maxwell boycott.
The National Union of Journalists yesterday launched a worldwide campaign to boycott products from Mr Robert Maxwell's Pergamon Press publishing company in Oxford.
The union is fighting to reinstate 23 sacked journalists.
Crusader who provoked left Saturday People.
Andrew Culf.
FRANK Field, whose political career stood at the crossroads last night, was first elected to the House of Commons in May 1979.
Mr Field, aged 49, has won cross-party admiration at Westminster for his crusading stance on poverty and social inequality.
As chairman of the influential social services select committee, he has regularly won headlines for the Labour Party on welfare issues.
He is the second casualty of Labour's current round of re-selections.
But in the case of the St Helens South MP, Mr Gerry Bermingham, the national executive committee has ordered the ballot to be re-run.
The fight in Birkenhead was not the first time that Mr Field had crossed swords with the Labour left.
His political career began in 1958, when he joined the Young Conservatives.
A year later he switched to Labour, and within six years he had won a seat on Hounslow borough council.
His first parliamentary contest was in 1966 when he unsuccessfully fought South Buckinghamshire.
In 1979 he won Birkenhead, succeeding Mr Edmund Dell, and at the last general election his majority was 15,372.
Before entering Parliament, he was director of the Child Poverty Action Group and the Low Pay Unit.
The same interests have dominated his 10 years at Westminster, and it is claimed that he has redistributed more than £60 million from the taxpayer to the poor by challenging the DHSS in test cases.
Frank Field: redistributed £60 million to the poor
Helping hand of laser man Saturday People.
Dennis Barker.
DISABLED children throughout the world had cause yesterday to be grateful to a man who has proved that Great British Characters are not extinct.
Paul Cook, professor of laser technology at Brunel and inventor of a laser system which detects causes of night blindness and other eye defects, recently formed and became president of the British Science and Technology Trust.
The trust organised the first Children of Science Awards, bringing together in London yesterday 150 incapacitated children from Europe, the Soviet Union, the Middle East, and Australia who have been helped by science.
Five children received awards at a ceremony at the Soviet Embassy.
At first Professor Cook, aged 55, failed to get the Russians interested.
But finally President Gorbachev sent two children, one of whom, Yalya Butko, aged eight, got an award.
She has had skin grafts since being badly burned in the Siberian train disaster.
‘My idea is protection of the environment through science and technology, and it is my aim to have every youngster in the country sign the pledge to become a PEST,’ said Cook yesterday.
‘We must demonstrate to youngsters that science and technology can in their many ways find the answers and should not always be viewed as the culprit.’
Cook left school at 14 to become an apprentice, got involved with radar and electronics during National Service, and graduated from Queen Mary College, London.
He is now chairman of his company, Scientifica-Cook, adviser to the Royal National Institute for the Blind, and laser consultant to British Aerospace.
Cook has in his garden in Acton, London, a lake full of Japanese fish.
Blind and disabled children who flow through his home are encouraged to feel the fish as a tactile experience.
His work for these children has opened doors internationally.
President Bush has sent presents.
‘I feel quite capable of using the miracle of science to forge links of friendship and do a great deal of good throughout the world,’ Cook said.
Minister warns against ‘open frontiers’ with EC states 50pc rise in cocaine seizures this year *.
By Martin Linton
COCAINE seizures by Customs have gone up by 50 per cent this year, Home Office minister Mr David Mellor told the Commons yesterday during a debate on the misuse of drugs.
Declaring himself ‘deeply troubled’ by the rise — from 264kgs last year to 392kgs so far this year — he said some people were underestimating the problem because there had not yet been an influx of misusers to drugs clinics.
But he warned against drawing false comfort from that.
He said the growth in Britain was through the derivative crack, which could easily be made from cocaine and a readily available ingredient, and then smoked.
Seizures had risen from 12 in 1987 to 27 last year to 124 this year.
He said America bitterly regretted its failure to take action earlier against cocaine, which now has 5-6 million regular users and caused more than 1,000 deaths last year.
But he said figures showed that international traffickers were targeting this country as never before, and ‘it's simply a question of time’ before that fed through to the streets.
He said that imports through European Community countries now account for half of cocaine seizures, and ‘the practical reality is we cannot afford to have open frontiers with countries like the Netherlands, because the consequence is that drugs in increasing numbers come into our countries.’
However, Mr Mellor said that only measures to reduce the demand would stop trafficking.
‘However professional the police and Customs are, there will always be a way through.’
Labour spokesman Mr Barry Sheerman said it was no good trying to stop the Peruvian peasants who grew the coca by defoliating their forests.
Britain should stop giving ‘piffling’ sums of aid to Latin American countries and help them find alternative crops.
He also criticised the Prime Minister for suggesting drug abuse was a ‘problem of prosperity’.
That was ‘a million miles from reality’, he said.
Ms Diane Abbott, Labour MP for Hackney North and Stoke Newington, said the inner cities needed a war on drugs ‘that enlists and involves the community, not a war that leaves the community feeling that it is under threat’.
Three doctors deny removing kidneys for cash, as ‘donor’ insists he wouldn't sell one ‘for the whole of Istanbul’Turk tells of transplant ‘theft’.
*.
By Gareth Parry
ATURKISH peasant farmer wept yesterday as he described how a Harley Street doctor had allegedly, under the pretext of giving him a blood test, ‘stolen’ his kidney to be used in a transplant.
Mr Ahmet Koc, aged 34, told the General Medical Council's professional conduct committee in London that after coming to England with the promise of employment last year, he had first been taken to the surgery of Dr Raymond Crockett for what he believed to be a medical examination for a job.
Then he said he had been checked into what he thought was an hotel for the blood test, and was given an injection.
‘The door opened and I saw Dr Crockett.
After that I didn't remember anything.
When I awoke, I was without pants and there were lots of tubes and bottles and I had pain’, he said, giving evidence through an interpreter.
The committee heard that the ‘hotel’ was in fact the Wellington Humana Hospital in London.
Mr Koc recalled asking Mr Ata Nur Kuntar, one of the Turks who had brought him to Britain, what had happened.
‘He said: ‘You are sick and you have had your appendix out.’
I did not believe it, I said I was healthy and then all of a sudden, this happened.
Then I became suspicious of the injection.’
Three days later, Mr Koc said he was taken from his room at the hospital to another room where a man was lying in bed watched by his wife and six-month-old baby.
The woman offered him chocolates.
Mr Kuntar, one of two alleged ‘kidney brokers’, came into the room and told him his kidney had been given to this man.
‘He said: ‘You are going to be given a lot of money and your life is safe.’
I started crying.
I cried a lot and said: ‘How could you do this?’ ' said Mr Koc.
Three doctors are before the committee charged with professional misconduct for their alleged involvement in removing kidneys from four Turks who were paid for the organs.
The doctors, who deny the charge, are Dr Crockett, a Harley Street physician specialising in kidney disease, Mr Michael Joyce, a urologist at Guy's hospital in London, and Mr Michael Bewick, a leading kidney transplant surgeon.
Mr Koc told Mr Roger HendersonQC, counsel for the GMC, that the ‘broker’ brothers Mr Ata Nur and Mr Riza Kuntar had promised him he would be getting a job when he was brought to England.
He was examined several times by Dr Crockett in his surgery, but was never told a kidney would be removed.
Mr Henderson asked him three times if he had any idea what a kidney was for.
Mr Koc replied: ‘No.
I didn't know what a kidney was, that it would be worth money.
They stole one of my kidneys.’
Mr Koc said on a visit to Dr Crockett's surgery he saw him hand a cheque to Mr Ata Nur Kuntar.
Mr Koc remained in hospital for six days, and was then taken back to the small hotel where he had been staying since his arrival in London.
By then his eyes and hands were swelling, he was feeling nauseous and could not lie down at night because of the pain in his back.
He said he was not given any medicine, and no doctor saw him.
Mr Koc said he was taken to the airport by Mr Ata Nur Kuntar and given a packet containing £2,500, plus an envelope with three £50 notes in it as pocket money.
When he got back to Istanbul and changed one of the notes he realised how much he had been given.
The money was equal to 8 million Turkish lire.
Mr Koc had been earning 50p a day doing winter work on a building site in the Turkish capital before he was taken to London.
Later, when he contacted a third brother, Mr Tunc Kuntar, and threatened to complain to the authorities, Tunc said: ‘If you do you must be aware of the consequences of that.’
Mr Koc contacted a lawyer in Istanbul and they wrote to the Public Prosecutor's office.
Tunc was prosecuted and jailed for two years, but he testified that Mr Koc knowingly sold his kidney.
Mr Koc said Tunc was given an 18-month suspended sentence for this allegation.
Mr Anthony ArlidgeQC, counsel for Dr Crockett, read out an advertisement from a Turkish newspaper in which it was stated that Mr Koc was selling his kidney.
The advert, placed in April last year, gave an address and telephone number of an Istanbul bakery where Mr Koc was living.
Mr Koc said he had known nothing about the advertisement.
Mr Arlidge asked: ‘Supposing a man came to the bakery and said, ‘Mr Kuc please sell me your kidney’.’
Mr Koc said: ‘If you gave me the whole of Istanbul I would not do anything like that.
I was only making my living by my own strength, now I can't work and I have become disabled.’
The hearing continues on Monday.
Peasant farmer weeps as he alleges that ‘blood test at hotel’ led to him becoming an unwilling kidney donor Turk tells of transplant ‘theft’.
*.
By Gareth Parry
ATURKISH peasant farmer wept yesterday as he described how a Harley Street doctor had allegedly, under the pretext of giving him a blood test, ‘stolen’ his kidney to be used in a transplant.
Mr Ahmet Koc, aged 34, told the General Medical Council's professional conduct committee in London that after coming to England with the promise of employment last year, he had first been taken to the surgery of Dr Raymond Crockett for what he believed to be a medical examination for a job.
Then he said he had been checked into what he thought was an hotel for the blood test, and was given an injection.
‘The door opened and I saw Dr Crockett.
After that I didn't remember anything.
When I awoke, I was without pants and there were lots of tubes and bottles and I had pain’, he said, giving evidence through an interpreter.
The committee heard that the ‘hotel’ was in fact the Wellington Humana Hospital in London.
Mr Koc recalled asking Mr Ata Nur Kuntar, one of the Turks who had brought him to Britain, what had happened.
‘He said: ‘You are sick and you have had your appendix out.’
I did not believe it, I said I was healthy and then all of a sudden, this happened.
Then I became suspicious of the injection.’
Three days later, Mr Koc said he was taken from his room at the hospital to another room where a man was lying in bed watched by his wife and six-month-old baby.
The woman offered him chocolates.
Mr Kuntar, one of two alleged ‘kidney brokers’, came into the room and told him his kidney had been given to this man.
‘He said: ‘You are going to be given a lot of money and your life is safe.’
I started crying.
I cried a lot and said: ‘How could you do this?’ ' said Mr Koc.
Three doctors are before the committee charged with professional misconduct for their alleged involvement in removing kidneys from four Turks who were paid for the organs.
The doctors, who deny the charge, are Dr Crockett, a Harley Street physician specialising in kidney disease, Mr Michael Joyce, a urologist at Guy's hospital in London, and Mr Michael Bewick, a leading kidney transplant surgeon.
Mr Koc told Mr Roger HendersonQC, counsel for the GMC, that the ‘broker’ brothers Mr Ata Nur and Mr Riza Kuntar had promised him he would be getting a job when he was brought to England.
He was examined several times by Dr Crockett in his surgery, but was never told a kidney would be removed.
Mr Henderson asked him three times if he had any idea what a kidney was for.
Mr Koc replied: ‘No.
I didn't know what a kidney was, that it would be worth money.
They stole one of my kidneys.’
Mr Koc said on a visit to Dr Crockett's surgery he saw him hand a cheque to Mr Ata Nur Kuntar.
Mr Koc remained in hospital for six days, and was then taken back to the small hotel where he had been staying since his arrival in London.
By then his eyes and hands were swelling, he was feeling nauseous and could not lie down at night because of the pain in his back.
He said he was not given any medicine, and no doctor saw him.
Mr Koc said he was taken to the airport by Mr Ata Nur Kuntar and given a packet containing £2,500, plus an envelope with three £50 notes in it as pocket money.
When he got back to Istanbul and changed one of the notes he realised how much he had been given.
The money was equal to 8 million Turkish lire.
Mr Koc had been earning 50p a day doing winter work on a building site in the Turkish capital before he was taken to London.
Later, when he contacted a third brother, Mr Tunc Kuntar, and threatened to complain to the authorities, Mr Kuntar said: ‘If you do you must be aware of the consequences of that.’
Mr Koc contacted a lawyer in Istanbul and they wrote to the Public Prosecutor's office.
Mr Tunc Kuntar was prosecuted and jailed for two years, but he testified that Mr Koc knowingly sold his kidney.
Mr Koc said Mr Kuntar was given an 18-month suspended sentence for this allegation.
Mr Anthony ArlidgeQC, counsel for Dr Crockett, read out an advertisement from a Turkish newspaper in which it was stated that Mr Koc was selling his kidney.
The advert, placed in April last year, gave an address and telephone number of an Istanbul bakery where Mr Koc was living.
Mr Koc said he had known nothing about the advertisement.
Mr Arlidge asked: ‘Supposing a man came to the bakery and said, ‘Mr Kuc please sell me your kidney’.’
Mr Koc said: ‘If you gave me the whole of Istanbul I would not do anything like that.
I was only making my living by my own strength, now I can't work and I have become disabled.’
The hearing continues on Monday.
Party congress proposes reformist as new leader Ex-leaders held in East German purge.
By Anna Tomforde in East Berlin
ASERIES of arrests of former leaders preceded yesterday's opening of an emergency congress in East Berlin — at which a reformist, Mr Gregor Gysi, was proposed as party chairman late last night.
Mr Erich Honecker, aged 77, the disgraced former party chief, is among six ex-politburo members now under investigation for abuse of office, corruption and personal enrichment.
Four were arrested on the orders of the chief public prosecutor, but Mr Honecker was let off because of ill health.
He was described as neither fit for questioning nor detention, but remains under house arrest.
Mr Hermann Axen, the former politburo member responsible for foreign policy, is in Moscow for an eye operation and so avoided arrest.
Mr Willi Stoph, the previous prime minister; General Erich Mielke, former head of the Stasi secret police; and two less prominent figures, Mr Gunther Kleiber and Mr Werner Krolikowski, completed the list of arrests.
The Communist SED which, in round-table talks with opposition groups, has agreed to hold the first free elections in East Germany since 1946 — planned for next May — is seriously threatened by a split or even dissolution.
Formal election of Mr Gysi, a 41-year-old lawyer, and a 100-member party board is expected today.
Mr Gysi has spoken out for sweeping political and economic reforms and has acted as lawyer for the opposition New Forum.
Delegates at the congress, in East Berlin's Dynamo sports hall, last night called for a ‘grassroots renewal’ and said they were bitter and disappointed over the ‘criminal acts’of their former leaders.
One of the 2,700 delegates said 80 per cent of his factory colleagues had left the SED.in recent weeks.
‘The number of members has, over the last few days and weeks, dropped more dramatically than a barometer before an impending typhoon.’
Amid predictions that the emergency meeting could be the SED's last party congress, the Communists have accepted ‘full responsibility for the deepest crisis in the history of the GDR’.
They want to give the party a new name and place the emphasis on ‘international socialist traditions,’ including pacifism and social democracy.
It is expected that the congress, organised by the party's interim leadership after the politburo and central committee resigned last Sunday, will immediately elect a new leader and central committee.
The politburo could well be abolished.
Mr Wolfgang Berghofer, the 46-year-old mayor of Dresden who had been tipped to become the new party chief, said yesterday that he and a renewed party stood for a break with Stalinism and instead wanted socialism with a human face.
By having to concede free elections at the round-table talks on Thursday night, the Communists have, in effect, accepted they will in future be only one partner in a pluralist political system.
If the party splits into a Communist and Social Democrat wing, it would risk extinction, with the already founded Social Democratic Party likely to swallow up social democrat-inclined members.
In the last free elections in what is now East Germany, in 1946, the SED, after its forced alliance with the SPD, won on average 45 per cent of the vote.
Today the share is likely to stand below 20 per cent.
The eleven-hour round-table talks, which ended early yesterday, were termed a remarkable success by churches, opposition groups and the official parties.
Apart from recommending free elections, the discussion group also demanded that the secret police should be dissolved.
The next round-table meeting has been set for December 18.
Army joins the people, page 7
Muslims may step up action on Rushdie Joanna Coles finds Islamic community still raging at The Satanic Verses.
BRITISH Muslims are being encouraged to renew their battle against the author Mr Salman Rushdie and to step up their efforts to achieve a ban on his novel, The Satanic Verses.
The appeal, to be made by the Umalah (Muslim clergy) next Friday in Britain's 1,000 mosques, comes after a period of relative quiet among campaigners and is being interpreted as a shift towards Mr Rushdie's more vigorous opponents, including Dr Kalim Siddiqui.
Dr Siddiqui caused a furore in Manchester two months ago when he asked a meeting of Muslim activists to raise their hands in agreement with the death sentence imposed on Mr Rushdie by the late Ayatollah Khomeini.
His speech, tapes of which the BBC was forced to surrender, is being considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions.
A decision is expected shortly on whether Dr Siddiqui will be prosecuted for incitement to murder.
But according to the Association of Sunni Muslims, Friday's Day of Solidarity will also herald a new, nationally co-ordinated anti-Rushdie campaign.
Mr Abdul Chishti, the association's secretary, said the campaign would continue for ‘five, 10 years…until the British Government bans the book.
The media thinks we have gone quiet but we have not’.
New tactics will include picketing London's Saudi and Kuwaiti embassies and targeting leading Muslim businessmen to put pressure on the secular business community.
A full-time pressure group is likely to be set up in the new year.
‘Muslims are organising themselves on a nationwide scale,’ Dr Mohammed Ghayas, editor of Muslimedia, a news service of the Islamic movement, said.
‘The mosques are now being politicised.
There have been many meetings and there are many programmes under discussion.
We are very disappointed by the Government's failure to respond to our position and we intend to keep the issue alive,’ said Dr Ghayas.
But Dr Hesham El-Essawy, a prominent moderate and chairman of the Islamic Society for the Promotion of Religious Tolerance, preaches caution.
He has consistently denied that most British Muslims support Iran's fatwa (religious edict)— a belief borne out by a BBC2 survey for the Public Eye programme which showed only 28 per cent of British Muslims in favour.
But even Dr El-Essawy talks of tempers boiling over.
‘The young ones born here are the most militant, they are pushing the elders to revive the campaign,’ he said.
One of the most significant recent developments is the emergence of Muslim youth groups, united by their desire to see Islam enjoy the same protection as Christianity.
Mr Mohammed Siddique, aged 33, is president of the newly-formed Muslim Youth Movement of Great Britain.
Based in Bradford, it has only 100 members but claims to be linking up with branches throughout the country.
Mr Siddique estimates there are now some 200 groups and last week he wrote to Mrs Thatcher warning her that ‘Bradford may turn into Beirut’.
Mr Siddique said his members understood that Mr Rushdie was protected under British law, but said: ‘I would welcome the opportunity to kill him myself if he was in an Islamic country.’
The publishers of The Satanic Verses, Viking Penguin, who still receive death threats, have already spent £2 million on extra security.
A spokesperson said there were no immediate plans to publish the book in paperback but, when that happened, the novel would appear without prior publicity.
One of Mr Rushdie's friends said the sooner the paperback appeared the better.
‘The cycle of the book will then be completed.’
Dr El-Essawy, of the more moderate Muslims, said Mr Rushdie only had to withdraw the book and Muslims would give up their campaign.
‘He is not doing much to help himself,’ he said.
‘But he is probably safer now than he will be in 10 years’ time.
A nut will get him.
It only takes one.’
Summit maps out strategy for German unity
continued from page one a bigger role for the European Parliament from the Rome Treaty review process.
In practice, the first session of the inter-governental conference will be attached to the Rome EC summit next December, although serious bargaining will only start some months later.
Chancellor Kohl wants this process finished by 1991, which could mean that Britain would have to choose between agreeing on a new treaty for a supranational monetary union or risk being left behind by the rest of the EC months before the next British general election.
When Chancellor Kohl said he would prefer the December inter-governmental conference to be held after the West German election, Mrs Thatcher intervened and said: ‘But Mr Chancellor, my elections are due the following year.’
What is less certain is whether the whole complex machinery for monetary union will be in place by the start of 1993, as most EC leaders want.
On the other hand, they were more optimistic yesterday than for many months that the long legislative process to make the single market a reality by December 31, 1992 would be finished on time.
Britons favour greater European integration and are increasingly critical of Mrs Thatcher's stance on the subject, according to a Gallup poll for the Daily Telegraph.
The poll also shows the Tories have cut Labour's lead from nine to six points over the past month.
Popular usage decimates literary elite.
By John Ezard
AN elite corps of transatlantic guardians of the English language has thrown in the towel.
Its rearguard battle to discourage solecisms such as the use of ‘aggravate’ to mean ‘irritate’and ‘decimate’to mean ‘slaughter most of’is to be abandoned.
The panel of 175 distinguished authors, scholars, broadcasters and public figures regards correct usage as no longer worth fighting for and trivial, according to a poll of its views to be published on January 8.
The turnabout is expected to be seen as disastrous news by purists — not only in the United States but here in Britain, because of the speed with which language fashions cross the Atlantic.
A review of the poll says the panel's decision to waive rules on which previously it insisted reflects a sense among experts of ‘a precipitate decline in the importance of humanist classicism and…cultural literacy’.
The experts, a veteran ‘usage panel’ regularly consulted by the Random House Dictionary, include journalists William F. Buckley and the Guardian's former Washington correspondent, Alastair Cooke; writers Jessica Mitford, Louis Auchincloss, Garrison Keillor, Paul Theroux, Fay Weldon, Eudora Welty, Isaac Asimov and Carl Sagan; academics Jacques Barzun, Daniel Boorstin, John Kenneth Galbraith and Susan Sontag; and politicians Jeanne Kirkpatrick and Eugene McCarthy.
In 1969 they took a hard line.
Only a quarter tolerated the common misapprehension whereby to decimate has ceased to mean, as in the Roman legions, to slaughter one in 10.
Now two-thirds accept its usage as meaning to kill most of.
Seventy-one per cent were prepared to allow ‘aggravating’ for ‘irritating’compared with 43 per cent in 1969.
Half approved ‘anxious’ as a synonym for ‘eager’(23 per cent in 1969).
Fifty-eight per cent passed the use of ‘transpire’ for ‘occur’.
Half felt the error was so common that they voted to give up its etymological origin —‘to become public’.
Asked about grammar, the panelists strongly resisted confusions of singular and plural, as in ‘anyone who isn't happy can take their grievance to the arbitrators’.
But half agreed to tolerate split infinitives — as in Startrek's ‘to boldly go’.
The American linguist, Geoffrey Nunberg, writes of the poll: ‘What is new is the sense that the study of grammar is irrelevant.
We now think of an insistence on grammatical correctness as a conservative position.
It is hard for us to understand how these same principles could have been part of the radical political programme of writers as diverse as Cobbett and Gramsci.’
The State of the Language, 1990, edited by Christopher Ricks and Leonard Michaels, published by Faber and Faber on January 8 (£17.50).
Havel may get presidency.
By Ian Traynor in Prague
MR Vaclav Havel, the Czechoslovak opposition leader, held talks with senior Communist Party figures last night on the shape of a new cabinet amid growing signals that he could become the country's next president.
The outcome of the talks remained unclear but leading figures in the opposition Civic Forum were optimistic that the Communists will be reduced to a minority in the new coalition government.
In a separate development, the Foreign Ministry told the Soviet embassy here that it wanted talks as soon as possible on the withdrawal of the 75,000 Red Army troops based in the country.
The Forum sought to link the creation of the new government to the stepping down of President Gustav Husak, a key demand of the opposition.
But a Communist Party spokesman said that the two issues should be dealt with separately.
The Forum leadership is believed to have discussed putting Mr Havel's name forward for president yesterday.
Father Vaclav Maly of the Forum said that he wanted Mr Havel to be president.
A source at the meeting would not deny that Mr Havel's candidacy was being actively considered.
Another leading Forum activist said that last night's talks, in which the Communists were lead by the politburo member, Mr Vasil Mohorita, and in which the small political parties also took part, could produce a quick agreement.
The new cabinet could be finalised over the weekend following the crisis produced by the resignation of the prime minister, Mr Ladislav Adamec, on Thursday, the source said.
It was notable that Mr Adamec's replacement as Prime Minister, Mr Marian Calfa, did not take part in the talks.
Opposition sources describe the new Prime Minister as ‘faceless’.
The sources also reacted favourably to a statement published yesterday by the erstwhile Communist satellite, the People's Party, calling for the Communists to be restricted in effect to around a third of a new cabinet.
Under this scheme, half the seats would be shared between the established political parties, and the other half would go to ‘non-party’ people.
Were this plan to go into efect, it would make the opposition the strongest group in the government.
Non-party seats would go to the Forum and their supporters.
The Forum could also count to a large extent on the backing of their Socialist and People's parties.
‘The People's Party statement is very important,’ a senior opposition figure said.
‘It is quite clear that the Communists have to be in a minority in the new government.
This happened with the Czech [regional]government.
The federal government cannot be different.’
While the seeming inexorable logic of events points to Mr Havel being named president, opposition figures stressed that the presidency issue was secondary to the priority of swiftly forming a new, stable and strong government.
Constitutionally, the prime minister may assume the functions of the head of state for two weeks.
Were President Husak to quit over the weekend and a new government be formed, the presidential issue could be deferred while efforts were made to defuse the threat of instability.
The Forum also insisted that the price of supporting Mr Calfa as Prime Minister was to have the leading Slovak human rights activist, Mr Jan Czarnogursky, as first Deputy Prime Minister.
Leader comment, page 22; Husak profile, page 7
Opposition floats Havel as next president.
By Ian Traynor in Prague
MR VACLAV Havel, the Czechoslovak opposition leader, and the still ruling Communist Party were immersed in crisis talks on the shape of a new coalition government late last night as the prospect of Mr Havel becoming the next president appeared to strengthen.
The opposition Civic Forum earlier described the talks as constructive, amid growing opposition optimism that the Communists would be reduced to a minority in the new government.
But the results of the talks with the party politburo member Mr Vasil Mohorita remained unclear.
At a meeting yesterday to draft tactics after the resignation of the Prime Minister, Mr Ladislav Adamec, the Forum's leaders were believed to have discussed putting Mr Havel's name forward for the post of head of state.
One of the opposition's chief demands is that President Gustav Husak should step down because of his association with the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968.
A source at the meeting did not deny that Mr Havel's candidacy was discussed, while Father Vaclav Maly, a leading Forum activist, said he wanted to see Mr Havel as head of state.
Mr Ladislav Lis, of the Forum, said the talks, in which the smaller political parties were also taking part, could produce quick agreement.
The new cabinet could be finalised over the weekend, he said.
The opposition sought to link the creation of the new government to Mr Husak stepping down.
A Communist Party spokesman said that the two issues should be dealt with separately.
But leading Forum figures emphasised that the issue of the presidency was secondary to the priority of quickly forming a new, strong and stable government.
Constitutionally, the prime minister may assume the functions of head of state for a fortnight.
Were President Husak to resign over the weekend and a new government be formed, the presidential issue could be deferred.
Opposition sources reacted favourably to a statement by the former Communist satellite, the People's Party, calling for the Communists to be restricted in effect to about a third of the cabinet seats.
Under such a scheme half the seats would be shared among the established political parties; the other half would go to ‘non-party’ people.
Were the plan to come into effect, it would make the opposition the strongest group in the government.
Non-party seats would go to the Forum and its supporters.
The Forum could also count to a large extent on the support of the Socialist and People's Parties.
‘The People's Party's statement is very important,’ a senior opposition figure said.
In a further signal of the changes sweeping the country, President Husak abolished the crime of subversion and a host of other political offences.
Other developments included the Foreign Ministry calling for prompt talks with Moscow about the withdrawal of the 75,000 Red Army troops stationed in the country and signs that the diplomatic corps was about to be purged.
Leader comment, page 22; Husak profile, page 7
£300,000 for princesses' beaten maid *.
By Andrew Culf
AMAID who was regularly whipped and beaten by two Arab princesses for whom she worked was yesterday awarded £300,000 damages in the High Court.
Mrs Laxmi Swami, who told the court her employers wrenched out two of her gold teeth and kept her without food for days, was awarded the damages, and costs estimated at £100,000, against Princesses Faria and Simiya Al Sabah, sisters of the Emir of Kuwait.
After three-and-a-half hours' deliberation, the jury awarded Mrs Swami, aged 49, of Kingsbury, north-west London, £240,000 for the assaults, and £60,000 for false imprisonment.
Last night, Mrs Swami said: ‘I am stunned at the award.’
Her solicitor, Mr Rohit Sanghvi, added: ‘The award reflects the outrage which this jury felt and which any decent person would feel at the treatment of my client.
To describe her treatment as barbaric would be to put it mildly.’
During the five-day hearing, the jury heard Mrs Swami suffered frequent mistreatment at the princesses' house in Bathurst Street, Bayswater, London, between 1980 and 1983.
She said she was beaten almost daily with a horse whip or flex until she bled, forced to sleep on the floor and kept without food, sometimes for two or three days.
She had to work night and day and survive on two hours' sleep.
She said fear prevented her escaping.
The daughter of an Indian labourer, Mrs Swami was deserted by her husband and had to support four children on her own.
After going to work in the Gulf states she was offered a job with the princesses.
The princesses, who were not in court, admitted assaulting Mrs Swami but contested the frequency of the beatings.
They admitted interfering with her gold teeth, but denied she was kept prisoner, made to sleep on the floor with only two sheets and kept without food.
In 1985, when they pleaded guilty at Knightsbridge crown court to assaulting Mrs Swami, they received suspended sentences, were fined and ordered to pay £2,000 compensation.
Mr Alistair McDuff, for the princesses, told the court Mrs Swami's treatment in the summer of 1983 was dreadful, but in previous years things were not as bad as painted by her.
Interest of £19,200 will be added to the award.
Mr Justice Popplewell said £85,000 paid into court in offer of settlement would be paid immediately, and refused an application for a stay on damages above £85,000, pending a possible appeal.
Land release boosts forestry...
By Paul Brown Environment Correspondent CHANGES in government policy are about to release large areas of land for commercial forestry and halt the feud between the timber trade and environmental groups over the conservation of upland areas.
The Scottish Office, after five years of lobbying by the timber trade, and prompted by European Community farm surpluses, has agreed that marginal farmland previously kept for agriculture can now be used for forestry.
It will also instruct all the regions in Scotland to produce a forestry strategy which earmarks land for tree planting.
This would exclude land of scientific or ecological value and identify large areas where commercial growers could plant forests.
The combination of the two policies, which are likely to be extended to the rest of Britain, means that land which can support far greater numbers and variety of trees will be available to foresters.
This will divert forests from disputed uplands where foresters are frequently held up or defeated in long battles with environment groups.
It is ironic that the changes are being adopted just after the dismemberment by the Government of the Nature Conservancy Council, mainly at the instigation of Scottish Office.
Forestry interests and landowners in Scotland had been lobbying the Scottish Office to draw the teeth of the NCC because it had been too successful in defending the uplands from conifers.
Mr Vincent Goodstadt, of the department of physical planning at Strathclyde regional council, has devised a map to identify areas with potential for forestry.
Mr Goodstadt says: ‘Until recently, further opportunities for planting were becoming increasingly restricted to the residue of highly sensitive uplands, where contentious applications conflicted with the interests of wildlife, landscape and water resources.’
The policy will attract forestry investment to the areas most suitable in climate, soils, accessibility, land price and availability which were unconstrained by conservation issues.
Mr Ronald Williams of the Forestry Industry Committee of Great Britain said the land being released would enable foresters to grow a greater variety of trees in a more attractive way.
Army ambulance cover for S Yorks.
SOUTH Yorkshire yesterday became the fifth health authority to call in the army and police to take over its emergency services.
Military vehicles were on standby in the county from 6am.
The chief ambulance officer, Mr Don Page, said last night that they had been very busy all day, and that their use would continue indefinitely —‘until ambulancemen and women in South Yorkshire resume normal working’.
He said no staff had been suspended, but they were not being paid.
The county joins London, Lincolnshire, Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire in having military ambulances answering calls.
The London branch of the Association of Professional Ambulance Personnel, the non-TUC union, meets on Monday to consider resigning.
‘They are rapidly becoming a leadership without a membership,’ said a spokesman for Nupe, the biggest of the five TUC ambulance unions.
Hundreds of members have already left the association after its leaders recommended acceptance of the 9 per cent, 18-month pay offer rejected a month ago by the unions.
The whole Hertfordshire branch resigned on Thursday night.
Glasgow ambulance staff yesterday voted to observe TUC guidelines after management had warned that those on patient transfer would have their pay docked by three quarters unless they worked normally, and accident and emergency staff would lose half their pay unless they worked within the guidelines.
Microwaves may cause dangerous molecular changes in milk, meat and fish.
By James Erlichman, Consumer Affairs Correspondent
MICROWAVE cooking creates potentially dangerous substances in baby milk which may damage the brain, liver and kidneys, doctors said yesterday.
Research published in the Lancet casts doubt on the safety of using microwave ovens to heat other foods such as cheese, meat or fish, which contain amino acids, the building blocks of proteins.
Doctors at the paediatrics department of the University of Vienna heated samples of infant milk formula for 10 minutes in a microwave used for warming baby food and compared it with milk heated in a water bath to 80C.
The conventionally heated milk showed no abnormal molecular changes, but all the microwaved samples contained two abnormal amino acids, D-proline and cis-hydroxyproline.
The Vienna doctors say that D-proline is neurotoxic, which means that it can kill brain and other nerve cells.
It is also toxic to liver and kidney cells.
Cis-hydroxyproline, when used by the body to build protein, may cause ‘structural, functional and immunological effects’, according to the Lancet letter.
Professor Merton Sandler, an expert in infant nutrition at Queen Charlotte's Maternity Hospital in London, said yesterday that the report appeared to be significant and should be more fully explored.
Earlier this week government research was published showing that 32 out of 102 ovens failed to heat food uniformly to at least 70C, the temperature necessary to kill listeria, salmonella and other food poisoning bacteria.
Microwaves create very short, high energy radio-waves which agitate and heat water molecules on or near the surface of foods.
Cooking works by conduction, as heat from the surface is drawn in.
The concern is that this high energy agitation can transform healthy amino acids into toxic ‘mirror images’ of themselves.
It was announced last night that urgent talks are to be held with public health officials after a survey by the Institution of Environmental Health Officers showed 2,858 out of 5,622 restaurants, pubs, and other outlets investigated were using microwave ovens designed for home kitchens.
The Agriculture Minister, Mr John Gummer, said: ‘This is obviously a cause for concern.
I shall be following up this survey.’
.
Cocaine hauls rise.
Cocaine seizures by Customs have gone up 50 per cent this year, the Home Office minister, Mr David Mellor, told the Commons during a debate on the misuse of drugs.
Page 6.
Grants victory.
An historic legal decision will give tens of thousands of European students who could not afford British college fees the right to apply for discretionary grants.
Page 4..
.
MR TREVOR Clay, retired general secretary of the Royal College of Nursing, was yesterday awarded £8,000 High Court libel damages over a Daily Mirror story, which he claimed accused him of working ‘with an eye on getting a plum job with the Government’.
But because he turned down an out of court settlement of £10,000 in August, his financial backers, the RCN, now face paying a large share of a costs bill of around £25,000.
The jury decided unanimously that Mr Clay, aged 53, of Swiss Cottage, north London, was libelled in the article, published in November 1988, during nursing pay negotiations.
Afterwards Mr Clay, who retired as General Secretary in September, said he felt ‘totally vindicated’.
‘I don't regret bringing this libel action.
I took the advice of my lawyers not to accept the £10,000 offered by the Mirror.
I wanted an apology and I was not given one.
The jury has found in my favour.
These things are expensive but the crucial thing is that both my name and the name of the RCN has been cleared.’
Later, Mr Clay, who retired as general secretary in September, said he did not know whether he would receive the £8,000 or whether it would be used to offset the costs bill.
mfl ab During the two-day hearing, Mr Clay said the 285,000-member RCN had been frequently attacked for its industrial relations policy.
As the only no-strike nurses union, it had often been accused of being a Government ‘lackey’.
But the Mirror article, read to him over the phone while he was in Korea, was a personal attack.
He complained through the College on the same day.
Mr Milmo said that it was ‘utterly and completely false’ to suggest that Mr Clay had been influenced by the prospect of some plum job when he retired.
He was not aware of any post being sought for him by the Government and, if offered one, would have turned it down.
Instead of apologising for the article, the Mirror, in an act of ‘pure undiluted hypocrisy’, published a second article ‘Maggie's Clay Test’ and a leader on the subject the following day.
Headlined ‘This Sick Idea’, the leader recorded the fact that Mr Clay was unaware of what Mrs Thatcher was trying to do and asked whether she had not realised that ‘by seeking to reward the only general secretary who treated her with kid gloves, she would end up by blackening his name’.
‘Didn't she understand that it might look like she had bought him off with bribery?’ the leader asked.
It ended by saying that Mrs Thatcher should apologise for trying to find Mr Clay a job and withdraw her request that he be given one.
Mr Clay said he saw the second article on the plane flying home.
‘I wondered with horror if the thing might be dragging on.
I was amazed at the content of the Daily Mirror page that day,’ he said.
‘I think it was incredible that they took the line that they did by seeking to say it was the Prime Minister who should apologise and not the Daily Mirror.’
Mr Clay added: ‘I have spent 35 years serving the nursing profession, most of that time as a member of the College.
‘There have never been any thoughts in my mind that I would get something from the Government.’
Guarantee bill set for success.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
ABILL improving guarantees on cars and household goods has a good chance of becoming law because it is being introduced by the MP who topped the ballot for private members' bills.
The Consumer Guarantee Bill, to be introduced by Mr Martyn Jones (Lab Clwyd SW), has been drafted by the National Consumer Council.
It will lay down minimum terms for a new manufacturer's guarantees.
Makers will not be obliged to offer the guarantee but those who decide not to will have to display a prominent notice saying ‘no consumer guarantee’.
Under ordinary sale of goods law, consumers have the right to reject faulty goods and demand a refund, but only if they act quickly.
There is no right to repairs or a replacement.
Existing guarantees offer extra rights but vary from maker to maker.
The new guarantee, good for the first year after purchase, would entitle consumers to free repairs, a replacement on loan or compensation if the product is not repaired within five days (three for motor vehicles), the choice of a refund or replacement if the fault cannot be put right in three attempts, or if the product is under repair for 30 days in any 12-month period.
A National Consumer Council opinion poll this year found 98 per cent thought it important that consumers should have a legal right to demand a replacement or refund if a product cannot be repaired reasonably quickly.
The bill, based on similar guarantees in the US, has widespread support from manufacturers, retailers, trading standards officers and consumer advisers.
Channel 4 veto dispute.
By Georgina Henry Media Correspondent
SIR Richard Attenborough, the chairman of Channel 4, yesterday warned he would resign if the Government insisted on a right to veto appointments to the new body which will run the channel.
Sir Richard described the proposal in the Broadcasting Bill as ‘state control of a commercial channel — surely the antithesis of everything this government is opposed to’.
He said his board was united in its opposition.
A government veto would impinge not only on the funding arrangements but on editorial autonomy.
‘I think if the clause received royal assent I would not wish to continue as chairman.’
Under the bill the Independent Television Commission — whose members are appointed by the Government — will make appointments ‘subject to the approval of the Government’ to the new Channel 4 Corporation.
This will take over the running of Channel 4 at the beginning of 1993.
The Government argues that its bill enshrines Channel 4 as part of the system of public service broadcasting and that therefore it should have a final say in the appointment of who runs it.
Mr David Mellor, the Home Office Minister with responsibility for broadcasting, said the Government could have directly appointed members as it does with the BBC and the ITC, but decided — after pressure from Channel 4 — not to do so.
‘What we are saying is that the ITC will put up the name.
All we have the right to do is look at these names and if anyone or two are unsuitable, we will say so,’ he told Channel 4 News on Thursday.
Mr Michael Grade, the channel's chief executive, yesterday called on the Government to explain why it could not trust ITC appointments.
‘If this is not direct political control of a broadcasting network I do not know what is,’ he said.
Girl, 16, died after taking single tablet of Ecstasy.
A16-year-old girl became Britain's first fatal victim of the drug Ecstasy after taking only one tablet of it in a night club, an inquest in Manchester heard yesterday.
Clare Leighton, of Cannock, Staffordshire, developed massive internal bleeding and died in hospital 36 hours after being admitted in a delirious condition.
She had taken a tablet of the drug — one of a group of amphetamine-based substances — on a visit to the Hacienda club in Manchester in July.
She had taken it only once before, on a visit to the same club two months earlier.
Coroner Mr Leonard Gorodkin recorded a verdict of death by misadventure after hearing that Clare developed what was called an ‘idiosyncratic reaction’ to the drug.
Dr James Freemont, pathologist, of Manchester Royal Infirmary, said Clare died after developing internal bleeding which made her major organs fail.
After her death, he carried out research showing that there were only two fatal cases in the world, both in the US, directly related to the drug.
Protest as Jews lose assembly.
By Education Staff
ALEADING independent day school for girls with a large number of Jewish pupils has provoked a row by replacing the weekly Jewish assembly with a non-denominational, multi-faith gathering of the entire school.
South Hampstead High School in north London has some 200 Jews among its 510 pupils, but a steady inflow of Muslim and Hindu girls has prompted the headteacher, Mrs Averil Burgess, to cancel the Friday Jewish assembly from January.
Some angry parents and a visiting rabbi have accused Mrs Burgess of failing to consult them, and want the Chief Rabbi, Lord Jakobovits, to intervene.
They fear the assembly will in effect be Christian, and derpive Jewish pupils of knowledge about Judaic faith, practices, history and ethics.
EC forges ahead on currency International bank plan for East bloc.
By John Palmer in Strasbourg
EUROPEAN Community leaders last night hammered out an historic strategy for achieving economic and monetary union by the mid-1990s and seeking a peaceful and more united Germany in close co-operation with the Soviet Union.
Late last night they were also reported to have agreed to establish a supranational bank to finance the reconstruction of Eastern Europe — a strategy Mrs Thatcher has doubts about.
She had already found herself in isolation over progress to monetary union and the endorsement of a social charter of workers' rights, and it became clear that the new European Community order would be built on an even closer alliance of France and West Germany.
Any lingering doubts about the closeness of that alliance were dissipated when Chancellor Helmut Kohl gave his ringing support for President Franois Mitterrand's call for a special inter-governmental conference next December, to begin revising the Rome Treaty and opening the way to full economic and monetary union.
The West German leader, far from seeking to slow down the process leading to monetary union, said the treaty revision should be agreed by the end of 1991 and put into force by the time the EC single market was completed at the end of 1992.
Leaders of the other 11 EC countries paid scant regard to Mrs Thatcher's ritualistic denunciation of the Social Charter as a threat to business competitiveness, and to the unity conference as premature.
But she did have the satisfaction that no sooner were the two decisions taken, than the entire Palais de Congress, housing the summit, the media and several thousand attendants and officials, was plunged into darkness by a five-minute power failure.
Last night, the 12 heads of state and government were discussing a text on the situation in Eastern Europe which gave unambiguous but qualified support to the right of the German people to self-determination — and by implication to some form of unity.
But the declaration makes it clear this can only be achieved within the process of European integration, in the context of a close East-West cooperation and dialogue.
Earlier, a big split was threatened over the language to be used about German reunification — with President Mitterrand and the Italian Prime Minister, Mr Giulio Andreotti, expressing opposition to a simple reference to German ‘self-determination’.
They spoke about the ‘concerns and worries’ President Gorbachev had expressed about the developments in East Germany in recent days.
Early this morning work was continuing on getting the wording right.
Although all sides denied that a deal was being done on Germany, there was no mistaking the willingness of the French and West Germans to accommodate each other 's political needs.
Chancellor Kohl will return to Bonn with the backing of his Community partners for some kind of confederal link between the two Germanys.
In return, he gave the clearest commitment yet that the government in Bonn would not permit any tampering with the Oder-Neisse line, the border between East Germany and Poland.
The agreement on a supranational Bank of Europe, for which a US and Japanese input would be invited, to help Eastern Europe was announced by the French Foreign Minister Mr Roland Dumas.
The British backed the plan but are less enthusiastic than the French.
Mrs Thatcher's aides were keen to put a brave face on the undoubted diplomatic setback she suffered here yesterday.
‘The battle of ideas only begins now, and we will produce our ideas and have them fully debated,’ the Prime Minister's press secretary, Mr Bernard Ingham, said.
‘We shall look forward to it.’
The British government will find it even harder to win support for its alternative road to monetary union based on a free-for-all competition between different currencies.
The Italian government, which takes over the EC presidency from Ireland next summer, will use the three-stage Delors strategy for monetary union as the basis for considering changes to the Treaty of Rome.
This calls for the establishment of a single European Community central bank, and eventually a single currency.
At the same time, the president of the European Parliament, Mr Enrique Baron, described to the summit the list of demands for increased powers for MEPs to turn to page 24, col 2
EC goes ahead on currency continued from page one control ministers and central bankers.
Mrs Thatcher, although she has criticised the Delors monetary union plan for being ‘undemocratic,’ is determined to try to exclude consideration of a bigger role for the European Parliament from the Rome Treaty review process.
In practice, the first session of the inter-governmental conference will be attached to the Rome EC summit next December, although serious bargaining will only start some months later.
Chancellor Kohl wants this process finished by 1991, which could mean that Britain would have to choose between agreeing on a new treaty for monetary union or risk being left behind months before the next British general election.
When Chancellor Kohl said he would prefer the inter-governmental conference to be held after the West German election, Mrs Thatcher said: ‘But Mr Chancellor, my elections are due the following year.’
What is less certain is whether the whole complex machinery for monetary union will be in place by the start of 1993, as most EC leaders want.
On the other hand, they were more optimistic yesterday than for many months that the long legislative process to make the single market a reality by December 31, 1992 would be finished on time.
Britons favour greater European integration and are increasingly critical of Mrs Thatcher's stance on the subject, according to a Gallup poll for the Daily Telegraph.
Firm's engineers win 37-hour week.
By Keith Harper Labour Editor
A 37-HOUR working week agreed yesterday for a group of engineering workers may become a benchmark in the national engineering dispute, now in its second month.
The agreement at Smiths Industries, Cheltenham, ending a three-week strike at the plant was accepted overwhelmingly at a mass meeting yesterday.
It gives the 3,200 staff a 7.6 per cent pay increase.
The two-hour reduction will be introduced in phases, with the second becoming effective in November 199l.
The engineering unions have been seeking either a 35-hour week or a two-hour reduction.
Attention will now focus on negotiations at Rolls-Royce and British Aerospace.
Mr Derek Jackson, Smiths' managing director, said that the agreement would not increase unit costs and would enable the company to ‘bid prices’ which won business.
Staff would have new opportunities to gain additional skills and benefit from greater flexibility.
At Vauxhall the unions are divided on a two-year offer of a 9.7 per cent rise plus a lump sum payment of £200 in the first year and inflation-plus-£5 in the second.
Members of the Amalgamated Engineering Union voted for but Transport and General Workers' staff have voted against and yesterday held another one-day strike.
Grant case opens door to students.
By Celia Weston, Chief Education Correspondent
NEW regulations forced on the Government will give tens of thousands of European students who could not afford to come to college in Britain the right to apply for discretionary grants to finance their studies.
The new rules came in after Treasury solicitors agreed to settle the case of a German law student who was granted a judicial review of the Government's refusal to reimburse EC students' tuition fees.
The review was of the Government's failure under the Treaty of Rome to ensure equal treatment for EC and British nationals who apply for grants to pay the cost of their fees to study in this country.
In addition, the Treasury has offered an ex gratia payment of £580 to Ms Anouschka Zagorski, studying law at King's College, London, to reimburse the cost of her fees for the last academic year.
All EC students will now be able to compete for polytechnic and university places, and for money from local education authorities, on the same basis as British nationals.
Poorer EC students will be able to apply for board and lodging grants as well as their fees, on the same basis as British students.
From next September, the Government is to raise the cost of tuition fees, paid by local education authorities on behalf of students, from £607 to £1,675.
However, it has made no provision in its spending plans for the influx of EC students which is likely to follow.
More than 10,000 EC students came to study in Britain in 1987, the last year for which figures are available.
Of these, 2,602 were Greek, 2,378 German, and 1,876 French.
Between 800 and 1,200 students came, in each case, from the Irish Republic, Italy, and Spain.
The change conceded by the Government and the Department of Education and Science will also allow thousands of British students to apply for grants to study in EC countries.
Byelection fear for Kinnock.
By Alan Dunn and Alan Travis
THE Labour leader, Mr Neil Kinnock, was last night facing the possibility of an embarrassing byelection after the maverick Labour MP Mr Frank Field learned he had lost his reselection fight in his Birkenhead constituency.
The long-time social crusader said he had been ousted by the trade union block vote and had won the majority support of the individual members of the Birkenhead constituency who took part in the secret ballot on Tuesday.
After the vote was announced, Mr Field said he would be seeing Mr Kinnock on Monday.
He has previously suggested that if he lost the reselection vote he would resign, thus provoking a byelection.
‘I said that if I was turfed out by the trade union vote I would see Neil Kinnock and we would then both issue a statement afterwards,’ he said.
‘The Labour Party will have to very quickly make up its mind: does it want a Labour Party clearly led by Neil Kinnock, as I do, or one run by Ron Todd?
It is intolerable that Labour MPs who are also accountable to all the voters in their town should be turfed out by the block vote.
There was a clear majority in the earlier ballot for me.
The Trotskyist Militant vote moved en bloc to defeat me by a handful.
‘This has been going on for ten years,’ he added.
‘Ten years of their trying to undermine the Member — not a bad result at all.’
When the result was officially declared at a general committee meeting of the Birkenhead party last night, Mr Field had already won the first round of the ballot in the individual members section with 159 votes against his two challengers, Mr Paul Davies, a local Transport and General Workers' union official, who secured 75 votes and Militant supporter, Ms Kathy Wilson, with 48 votes.
In the trade union section, which is allocated 40 per cent of the total vote, Mr Davies came first with 25 votes, Field second with 15 and Wilson last with 11 votes.
But in the second round, when Ms Wilson was eliminated, Mr Davies had 35 trade union votes against Mr Field's 16.
It was sufficient to outweigh Mr Field's 165 to 113 second-round victory in the individual members' section.
Mr Field, MP for Birkenhead for 10 years, will see Mr Kinnock next week before deciding his next move.
‘I said if I lost the membership vote I would have resigned quietly, but I had a clear and commanding lead.’
He forecast Mr Davies would never stand as candidate, ‘because if the Labour Party allows him to go forward this seat will actually be won by the Liberal Democrats.
We may have problems in the Labour Party but we ain't that barmy.’
But Mr Davies disputed the claim that Mr Field had the backing of a majority of the individual members of the party.
‘If you add up the people who voted for him and those who voted against him and those who didn't vote, you have to decide if that is a vote of confidence in him or not.’
A Labour Party spokesman said if a complaint was received, the selection process ‘would be scrutinised in every respect.
The process will only be complete when the national executive endorses the candidate.
‘Any claims of infiltration, if properly substantiated, will be fully investigated and dealt with by the NEC,’ the spokesman said.
The Labour MP Mr Chris Mullin was last night reselected as candidate for Sunderland South, winning 63 per cent of the vote against his opponent Mr Les Scott's 34 per cent.
People, page 2
.
The past is another country.
EVERYTHING has to go, at ridiculous prices.
In East Germany that includes the flag with its hammer and compass, the current national anthem, and quite possibly over this weekend the Communist Party as well.
In Prague, where one Prime Minister has already resigned, his successor has been awarded only conditional co-operation by the opposition.
Mr Ladislav Adamec went because he was handed a list of non-Communist names to fill his government's portfolios.
Mr Marian Calfa is pleading for more time on the grounds that he has been given an even longer list.
Meanwhile President Gustav Husak's ultimatum to go expires on Sunday.
There is a suggestion that the Soviet Union would not object if Mr Alexander Dubcek succeeded Mr Husak.
It looks increasingly as if Moscow has no time for such trivial questions.
The Soviet Central Committee has been summoned to meet today apparently to consider some tricky agenda items for the Congress of People's Deputies next week.
These may include calls to follow the Lithuanian lead and abolish from the Soviet Constitution as a whole the clause which guarantees the Communist Party a leading role in society.
As a communist leader who has, in his own way, resisted change said before ordering the tanks to go in, ‘If you give a first step, it is never the last.’
The current whirlpool of political trial and experimentation in Eastern Europe comes as a tonic contrast to the years of ideological stagnation for almost everyone except Mr Deng, President Ceausescu and, regrettably, President Fidel Castro.
(However we should still heed Mr Castro's warning that nothing now happening in Europe is going to help the desperate problems of the Third World.
) There is a heady feel to the discussion paper produced for the East German congress by the working group running the leaderless party.
Throw Stalinism overboard, it declared, and build on the ‘socialist, social democratic, communist, anti-fascist and pacifist traditions’ of the past.
The only problem is whether everything is going to get sucked down in the process.
We applaud the initiative of the East German citizens in liberating their secret police headquarters and share their regret that vital papers were destroyed in the shredder.
(Just in passing we might reflect on the likely reaction in Curzon Street or around the Euston underpass if our own citizens took it into their heads to peer behind MI5's muslin curtains.)
But, with simultaneous political vacuums this weekend in Prague and East Berlin, there must be some apprehension as to what may happen if either or both implodes.
It is also very hard for apparatchiks at the grassroots of the party to understand.
It is perhaps not so difficult to accept the overthrow of an individual — a Honecker or a Jakes: that been done before.
It is the catastrophic slippage in public respect which blows the minds of the apparatus.
The new party secretary in Czechoslovakia, Mr Karel Urbanek, has complained that he is quite unable to persuade district and regional party leaders to understand that the party's leading role has gone.
In the one Eastern Europe country where the communists had some claim to popular legitimacy in the past, opposition spokesmen freely proclaim: ‘Czechoslovakia has never been a communist country.
Czechoslovakia was a country in which the Communist Party implemented its totalitarian power.’
In East Germany the party has been forced to hold ‘round table’ talks with the opposition groups, and to concede free elections not just sometime but next May.
It was the round table approach which sunk the Polish Communist Party.
Bertolt Brecht's aphorism has been dramatically reversed while we pause for breath.
For years the government had attempted to dissolve the people and elect another.
Now the people are taking their revenge..
No trouble on the terraces.
THE CHOICE of Sardinia — now confirmed as the venue for the opening stages of England's 1990 World Cup campaign — satisfies the requirement laid down by Britain's Minister for Sport, Mr Colin Moynihan, that these matches ought to be played ‘on an island where the problem can be contained.’
The problem wasn't specified — but then it hardly needs to be.
It is, of course, the loud-mouthed, oathmongering, lager-swilling, foreigner-baiting, Union-Jack-encrusted British football yob.
Sardinia is a land whose past is riddled with bloody brigandry and often inexplicable feuding; a land which at various times in the past has bowed the knee to such untoward arrivals as the Vandals and the Goths (not to mention the supreme midfield general of his day, Napoleon Bonaparte).
So Sardinia knows what it faces and is fully prepared.
‘Our island will be as if in a state of war’ one senior official was quoted as saying yesterday.
‘We will use tear gas, helicopters — anything we believe is necessary to keep our island from being damaged.’
‘England's army of thugs were told last night: ‘cause any aggro and we'll jail you and throw away the key’’ it was reported yesterday in The One That Most Of Them Read.
‘Italian security chiefs.. have pledged to lock up the yobs in Sardinia's notorious Buoncamino Prison and leave them there until AFTER the World Cup ends.’
Buoncamino, the Sun went on to warn its potential customers, is ‘a sinister survivor of the mediaeval past with few modern facilities…the Sardinians treat their criminals ruthlessly — and there will be no relaxation of their hard regime for the English.’
While the Daily Star held out the glittering prospect of ‘dark, damp, rat-infested dungeons in a medieval castle where troublemakers will be left to rot.’
But Sardinia is only the start.
If Mr Moynihan is prudent, he will already be thinking ahead to the World Cup of 1994.
That will be staged in the United States, with stadiums designated in those areas where soccer is strongest, like California.
Mr Moynihan should even now be pressing the football authorities to cast around for an island where The Problem can be contained.
One obvious candidate suggests itself: the island of Alcatraz.
Its qualifications for taming England supporters look from this distance more compelling than even Sardinia's.
It is smaller than Sardinia (just 22 acres, or roughly 13 football pitches, against Sardinia's 16,000 square miles, or six million pitches) which for purposes of containment ought to be counted pure gain.
There are no public bars or outlets for purchasing lager, and the only route for escaping the forces of law and order is a taxing swim through a shark-infested bay.
Best of all, of course, the place has a built-in prison to put Buoncamino to shame, for though Alcatraz closed its doors to its regular customers 27 years ago it is still preserved as a tourist attraction.
It may not be rat-infested, but any good entrepreneur could swiftly see to that.
If Mr Moynihan is keen to hang on to his job he should get on to FIFA now and tell them to make the booking.
What was good enough to contain Al Capone, he could then assure the Prime Minister, should be right for the English yob.
PAGE
Lawyers' advert ‘misleads’.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
THE Law Society has been forced to reconsider the wording of a £70 million national advertising campaign.
The Legal Action Group, which campaigns for better legal services, has threatened to report the society to the Advertising Standards Authority for actively misleading the public.
The director of the National Consumer Council, Mr Maurice Healy, has also written to the society expressing concern that the advertisements might confuse.
The advertising is designed to promote solicitors subscribing to Solicitors Financial & Property Services, a company set up by the society last year to help small legal firms win mortgage, pension and insurance business.
Readers are told to complete a coupon ‘for a list of solicitors providing advice on mortgages, pensions and other financial products.’
However, financial advice is not provided by the solicitors who are not registered under the Financial Services Act but by a firm of insurance brokers, Sedgwick, which has a contract with the company.
Individual firms avoid having to register as financial advisers under the act by providing advice through a ‘permitted third party’ who fulfils the act's requirements.
Mr Roger Smith, the Action Group's director, said the advertisement ‘would have actively misled the public into thinking solicitors were providing advice when it was in fact coming from someone else.
It is vitally important that the integrity of solicitors is not jeopardised by their drive for new markets to compensate for the possible loss of conveyancing.’
Mr Andrew Lockley, head of the society's legal practice directorate, said: ‘The present text of the advertisements was settled after taking very careful advice.
But we are going to review it in the light of the criticism.’
Outcrop of worry in Dales.
By Martin Wainwright
ASOFTLY-SOFTLY approach is to be taken to the owners of one of Britain's strangest threatened landscapes, the Clint-and-Gryke limestone pavements of the Yorkshire Dales.
Seamed by deep fissures (the Grykes) into large, often fantastically shaped, blocks of stone (the Clints), the pavements shelter a unique flora and create eerie patterns on the fells.
But the national growth of interest in gardening, and hunt for novelty, has revived a threat last seriously seen in Edwardian times.
Clints have been quarried for rockeries at a markedly increasing rate in the last 20 years, according to a Dales National Park report.
A sample taken by the Institute for Terrestrial Ecology found only 3 per cent wholly intact.
A full survey of the 150 pavements in the park is under way, and a conference on the subject, involving the Nature Conservancy Council and the Countryside Commission, will be held next May.
But meanwhile the park has agreed to seek protection orders in consultation with landowners, rather than risking conflict and long legal proceedings.
Prey for collectors…
A limestone pavement above Malham, North Yorkshire, the future of which is worrying conservationists PHOTOGRAPH: DENIS THORPE
Minister ducks Commons battle over higher education loans.
By Celia Weston, Chief Education Correspondent
MR JOHN MacGregor, the Education Secretary, has distanced himself from the Government's loans scheme for students by appointing the two most junior ministers at the Department of Education and Science to sit on the parliamentary committee discussing the Education (Student Loans) Bill.
Mr MacGregor, who supports strongly the principle of loans for students, is believed to be embarrassed by the controversy created by Mr Robert Jackson, the junior minister for higher education, who devised a top-up scheme which has angered backbench Tories and the banks that are supposed to administer it from next September.
The committee, which meets for the first time next Tuesday, is expected to end its deliberations in January.
Mr Jack Straw, Labour's shadow education secretary, said last night that it was the first time in his 10 years in Parliament that responsibility for piloting such an important piece of legislation through committee had been left to such junior departmental politicians.
It was extraordinary, he said, given the bill's political sensitivity, ‘that Mr MacGregor has decided not to serve on the committee.
He is leaving Jackson to swing in the wind’.
Mr Alan Howarth, who joined the DES only in the July reshuffle and has little experience of and no responsibility for higher education, will be Mr Jackson's back-up.
Waddington cuts back on parole.
By John Carvel Home Affairs Editor
THE Home Secretary, Mr David Waddington, yesterday proposed a cut in prisoners' parole rights as a main ingredient of a shake-up of the criminal justice system to be set out in a government white paper next month.
Mr Waddington said prisoners should serve at least half their sentences rather than the present minimum of one-third.
All offenders should be supervised after their release and returned to prison to serve out their full sentences if they re-offended.
Penal reformers estimate the package will add about 4,000 to an average daily prison population of 48,500 unless it is balanced by compensating changes in sentencing policy by judges and magistrates.
Mr Waddington, who hopes to eliminate prison overcrowding within three years, now appears to be satisfied that other sections of his white paper will reduce the number of less-serious offenders sent to prison.
Sentencers are to be provided with a range of tougher non-custodial punishments.
Home Office ministers and officials are currently wooing judges and magistrates to the new approach.
The parole reforms will please the judges who believe time served should more closely reflect sentence given.
The package adopts almost all the recommendations of a review committee chaired by Lord Carlisle of Bucklow and jettisons changes introduced by Mr (now Sir) Leon Brittan when he was Home Secretary in 1983.
Sir Leon extended early parole to many more short-sentence prisoners and virtually abolished it for long-term offenders convicted on drugs, sex, arson, and violence charges.
The policy of releasing prisoners into the community without a transitional period of supervision was challenged earlier this year following the case of David Evans, who murdered the schoolgirl Anna Humphries shortly after his release.
Mr Waddington, who was addressing the Lancashire business school, said that prisoners serving short sentences — defined by Lord Carlisle as under four years — should be granted parole automatically after serving half their sentences.
At present most are eligible for a discretionary parole review after serving one-third of their time, or six months, whichever is longer.
‘But where the sentence is substantial the offence will be grave, the risk the offender represents to the public can be significant and the difference which decision to grant or not to grant parole makes, may be more than a few months.
It is my view that there should be no automatic parole for people serving substantial terms of imprisonment.’
Parole for these longer-term prisoners should remain discretionary.
The minister disagreed with Lord Carlisle's recommendation that the Home Secretary should give up his veto over decisions by the Parole Board in cases involving ‘the worst kind of offenders’.
The Carlisle report said that sentence lengths would have to be reduced by 5 per cent if its package was not to increase the prison population.
Mr Harry Fletcher, assistant general secretary of the National Union of Probation Officers, said later, parole and greater risk of offenders breaching longer periods of supervision could add at least 4,000 to the prison population.
There was no certainty sentencing practices would change.
Pace of flu attack hits 14-year high.
By Nigel Williams Science Correspondent
FLU is sweeping across Britain at the highest rate recorded for 14 years, according to figures published yesterday.
In the first official recognition of the extent of the outbreak, Dr Douglas Fleming, deputy director of the Birmingham research unit of the Royal College of General Practitioners, said there is now a ‘substantial epidemic’ which is likely to get worse.
The official definition of an epidemic is 100 cases per 100,000.
During the week ending last Tuesday 109 people in every 100,000 of the population had flu, and 154 had flu-like illnesses.
Compared with the previous week, there was a trebling in the rate of flu and a doubling of the rate of flu-like illness.
The rate of increase during the past three weeks is comparable with that seen in 1975, when infection levels rose to an average weekly rate of 350 per 100,000 population.
The research unit collates information on communicable diseases and respiratory tract infections from a network of 228 family doctors in 62 practices across England and Wales.
Figures indicate the spread is occurring nationwide, with children under 14 at highest risk.
In Wiltshire, a doctor has died from the flu virus.
A post-mortem examination on Dr Magdalene Weld, aged 52, found she died on Wednesday from bronchial pneumonia brought on by influenza.
At Southampton General Hospital, where 90 out of 360 nurses are off sick, management appealed for volunteer nurses.
The hospital is refusing to take non-emergency patients.
Two weeks ago 24.6 people per 100,000 were reporting flu, and 51.7 had flu-like illness.
The subsequent week's figures were 29.9 and 80.0.
The highest level of epidemic influenza ever recorded by the unit was 918.1 per 100,000 in the winter epidemic 20 years ago.
Monkey tests lift hopes for Aids vaccine *.
By Nigel Williams Science Correspondent
ACRUCIAL step towards the production of an Aids vaccine was announced yesterday by researchers who have successfully immunised eight of nine monkeys against infection with one strain of an HIV-like virus.
Dr David Tyrell, a scientist working on the Medical Research Coucil's Aids programme, described the results at Tulane University, Louisiana, as ‘very important and encouraging.’
Some researchers had become so daunted by the devious nature of the virus, which can hide within the cells of the body, that they felt a vaccine would be impossible.
This vaccine is a chemically inactivated preparation of the whole simian immunodeficiency virus, or SIV.
The monkey virus is the closest animal counterpart of HIV.
It also causes a fatal Aids-like illness in some species of monkey.
The findings, reported in the US journal Science, extend previous reports of limited success in immunising monkeys against much higher doses of SIV at the New England regional primate centre in Massachusetts and at the University of California.
Dr Tyrell stressed that the results do not mean that a similar vaccine can be made for HIV ‘but at least the road now does not look like a dead end’.
So far, the vaccine has been tested against the same viral strain that the monkeys were immunised against.
Developing a vaccine that protects against diverse strains is essential, because humans can be infected by many strains of HIV.
In addition, a chemically inactivated virus is unlikely to be safe enough for human use because of concerns that some live viral particles would survive the chemical treatment.
Preliminary vaccine tests in humans have largely involved so-called ‘sub-unit’ vaccines, made from parts of HIV, which are not infectious.
Such vaccines are less likely to be toxic than a whole virus vaccine but some researchers believe that they are also less likely to work.
A vaccine against HIV is still likely to be many years away but Dr Michael Murphey-Corb, who led the Tulane team, said he hoped ‘to see something in five years.’
The nine monkeys received a series of three vaccine injections as well as a booster injection one year later.
Two weeks after their booster, nine were given intravenous injections of SIV.
The amount injected was 10 times the minimum amount of SIV required to infect and cause the Aids-like illness.
News in brief.
Acid house plotter jailed.
Leslie Thomas, aged 27, who organised acid house parties in London, was jailed for five years and three months at the Old Bailey yesterday.
Thomas, of the Isle of Dogs, east London, was found guilty of plotting to permit premises to be used for the supply of drugs.
Life for killers.
Ryan Monks and Paul Mill, both 21, were jailed for life at Perth High Court yesterday for hacking gunshop manager Mr Gordon Johnston, aged 54, to death during a raid at his shop in Dundee.
Sunday trading appeal.
A conference of more than 150 representatives of local authorites in London yesterday backed an appeal to the Attorney General, Sir Patrick Mayhew, to act against retailers and DIY chains which flout Sunday trading laws.
Bakers raise pay offer.
The Federation of Bakers yesterday made an increased pay offer of 9.5 per cent to bakery workers to save threatened Christmas bread supplies.
The Bakers, Food and Allied Workers' Union had threatened a series of one-day strikes.
N-dust judgment delay.
Judgment was reserved at the High Court in London yesterday on a claim by Mr Christopher Merlin, aged 48, and his wife, Christine, of Broughton-in-Furness, Cumbria, who claim their former home was contaminated with plutonimum dust from the Sellafield plant.
Maxwell boycott.
The National Union of Journalists yesterday launched a worldwide campaign to boycott products from Mr Robert Maxwell's Pergamon Press publishing company in Oxford.
The union is fighting for the reinstatement of 23 sacked journalists.
Press Council reform plan..
By David Sharrock
ASLIMMER Press Council should speed up its handling of complaints against newspapers and act firmly against unacceptable intrusions of privacy, according to a review conducted by its chairman, Mr Louis Blom-Cooper QC.
His report, which it is understood will be considered by the council next Tuesday, recommends that the body be reduced in size from 36 to 24 members, plus an independent chairman, divided equally between members of the press and public.
Significant changes in the working of the complaints procedure would be made by shortening the process, giving each side one opportunity to state its case.
The existing complaints department would have a new role directly investigating complaints by telephone, correspondence and, if necessary, face-to-face interviews.
The absolute right of an editor or journalist to opt for a personal hearing before a complaints committee would be removed.
An individual suspecting that an unwarranted invasion of privacy may about to be published would be able to approach the council's director, who, when satisfied of this, ‘should instantly contact the editor and put him on notice of the complaint.
‘Publication should remain a matter for the editor's discretion, but if a complaint is subsequently upheld the council may feel justified in strengthening criticism.’
The council would publish a code reflecting commonly-accepted good journalistic practice, to come into effect by next March.
All proprietors and editors would be asked to publish the code and abide by it.
The code emphasises privacy.
Publishing information about the private lives of individuals without their consent ‘is not acceptable, unless there is a public interest overriding the right of privacy’.
The code also covers accuracy and sources.
‘Journalists have a professional obligation to protect confidential sources of information.’
The council should ‘in appropriate cases’ add to an adjudication a recommendation that an apology be made to the complainant.
To maintain public confidence in the ability of the press to regulate itself, the Press Council believes it necessary for proprietors or publishers ‘to give a positive commitment to uphold the principles stated in the council's declarations of principle and in the code of practice’.
Siege mentality fails to stop time marching on Summit sketch.
By Michael White
AS BEFITS one of the great revolutionary years of modern European history, the police were taking no chances with the Strasbourg summiteers yesterday.
Even by the standards of French provincial life, there were flattering numbers of flics, plain-clothed flics and bored CRS riot-flics hanging round the respectable northern suburbs.
It could only mean one thing: they suspected that the sleek Strasbourgeois citizenry might be planning to outdo Warsaw, Budapest, Berlin and Prague by marching up the Avenue de la Paix to overthrow 12 governments at once.
Fat chance.
This was an incongruously comfy setting for such momentous deliberations.
The Palais des Congres, an undistinguished lump of modernism, is situated amid solid villas which look like Alsatian mutations of Ealing or Didsbury.
Gothic mock Tudor is what Dorking would look like if the Kaiser had won.
Incongruous, too, because La Dame de Fer and her redoubtable overseas mouthpiece, British Sources, spoke much as they did six months ago in Madrid when the Berlin Wall stood firm and Alexander Dubcek was still an obscure forestry official.
These are heady times.
But did they talk headily around the conference table?
Of course they did.
Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, but to be a full member of the Exchange Rate Mechanism was very Heaven.
Unless you are British.
In which case bliss was it to be soft-peddling on EMU, EMS, German reunification (10 to 15 years) and the Karl Marx Memorial Social Charter.
‘In the real democracy which we inhabit in the United Kingdom’, we see things differently, as British Sources are wont to put it.
A crushing piece of condescension that, worthy of a Spanish grandee in about 1700, too proud to notice that the world has moved on.
In its way it is magnificent: shades of heroic defiance of reality, like Dunkirk in 1940.
Except that in 1989 the European skies are bright, not dark.
Franco-German battles are fought with press release, not tank division, and the general idea is to keep the Huns firmly inside French territory — not the other way round.
Mrs Thatcher wore red, Mr Hurd wore grey and sat between her and Mr Jacques Delors, the traditional French enemy.
British Sources wore a truculent glower and insisted that we were ‘true Europeans’.
The press wore magnificent shoulder bags stuffed full of Alsatian free gifts which some of you will be getting for Christmas.
Thus bribed, the media steadily worked their way through mountains of free food and the occasional libation.
From time to time, national spin doctors — or ‘medecins du spin’, as we say around here — would emerge to say something or nothing at inordinate and chauvinistic length.
The inter-governmental conference which British Sources had refused to countenance all day was duly nodded through.
After lunch, Madame Edith Cresson, Mr Mitterrand's French Source, was pounced upon by the Broadcasting Bill's finest and made to admit that La Dame de Fer had said something positive.
She hinted of an important secret still to be divulged.
In mid-afternoon the lights went out.
But the expected Strasbourg Uprising did not occur.
Outside, the city shivered under nine TV channels and an oppressive blanket of prosperity which includes Habitat, Marks and Sparks and Burtons.
If only these people would adopt real democracy and the unfettered free market, this place could be as prosperous as Southampton.
Inside the briefing room of the Royaume Uni we hovered on the edge of Dunkirk as usual.
Jovial inquiries about illegal subsidies to industry, Rover for instance, got short shrift.
The Duchess of Finchley's Light Infantry was trapped behind enemy lines, but it was digging in.
French press releases overran our positions, German amendments raked us with deadly fire.
But down in our trench we could take it.
We still had the Dutch on our side.
Sorry, cancel that last report.
The Dutch appear to be wavering.
British Sources insisted throughout that ‘we shall be our constructive selves’ or ‘play our full and constructive argumentative part’.
Suggestions that we were non-communautaire was the fault of the British press.
Alas, Liberation's headline yesterday was ‘L'eternelle solitude de la Dame de Fer’, while the local paper, which is called DNA (Dernieres Nouvelles d'Alsace, silly) inexplicably reported that she was ‘plus anti-communautaire que jamais’.
Where do they get it from?
Community closes ranks against UK, page 7