

Athletics Christie's winter sprint.
By Sandy Sutherland
ALTHOUGH three English Commonwealth Games representatives, Peter Elliott, Derek Redmond and Phil Brown, have withdrawn, Linford Christie's presence should do much to enliven the Scottish Indoor Championship in the Kelvin Hall, Glasgow, today and tomorrow.
Christie arrived back from warm-weather training on Thursday, but confirmed yesterday through his coach, Ron Roddan, that he would be flying north to attempt a sprint double, even though the 200 metres is scheduled for today and the 60 metres tomorrow.
The presence of the Seoul 100 metres silver medallist might have attracted a few more through the turnstiles had the Scottish AAA not agreed to keep his entry a secret at the request of the athlete himself, a fact which inevitably leaked out leaving the promoters somewhat embarrassed.
Christie will face a strong line-up, including Michael Rosswess, the Birchfield Harrier who won both his international 60 metres races in Glasgow last winter but could not clinch his Auckland trip.
Scotland's Jamie Henderson and Elliot Bunney, who are both Auckland-bound, will be there for the sprints, but with neither Brown nor Brian Whittle competing, the 400 metres has lost much of its appeal.
Chris McGeorge is in the 800, though, and Northern Ireland's Mark Kirk defends the 1500 against Tony Morrell, who has a point to prove about his fitness.
Alistair Currie will attempt the Scottish Commonwealth selection standard of 7min 48sec in the 3,000 metres despite the absence of Elliott, who has flu.
Benn learning fast at new school.
By John Rodda in Las Vegas
THE maturing of Nigel Benn is an appropriate tale for the season of the transformation scene.
Before he was knocked down and beaten — for the first time — by Michael Watson, he was a brash product of black anger, a ghetto-blaster of the ring whose pantomime craftsmanship was redeemed by the crunching power of both fists.
But Watson did both Benn and British boxing a service.
Reassessment followed that defeat and brought a new direction with new people and a contract of $2 million for four fights over the next two years.
Benn was eager to get the taste of American boxing before he met Watson and the urge to find new experience brought the break, sad but needed, from the trainer who had brought him through from his amateur days, Brian Lynch.
While Lynch had developed his punching power, Benn needed boxing lessons and the time-honoured way of getting them is in sparring.
Under Lynch that was not part of the regime, which is regarded as a curious omission in most gyms, and it did not work for Benn.
Since moving into a gymnasium in Florida and working with Vic Andreetti, a former British champion from the East End of London, Benn has taken on a new mantle.
Now he is just flattered by the label —‘the British Marvin Hagler’— which Bob Arum, the American promoter investing that $2 million, has tagged on him; previously he would have been angry that he himself had not invented it.
‘After a few days in the gym here I would wake up and hope that the sparring partners would not turn up.
It was hard and they hurt, but you soon learn to accept it and respect them as they do you.
All that tap, tap work in England was no good; there I was always the governor, now I'm learning all the time, nicking moves from everyone,’ he said.
Last weekend he despatched Jose Quinones, a shot fighter, in one round.
Next month he faces another man who has seen better days, Michael Olajade, a Nigerian born in Britain.
Olajade was going places until he was badly beaten by Michael Nunn, but he will provide Benn with fighting experience.
‘From now on my home is in England, but the business of boxing will be here,’ he said.
The Arum plan is for him to fight Iran Barkley in London in April, but that is dependent upon his dealing competently with Olajade and Barkley defeating Doug de Witt in Atlantic City the night Benn's contest takes place there.
Dutch plan for sitting room only.
THE Dutch plan to do away with standing room at national league grounds within the next 10 years.
As part of their attempt to rid themselves of a growing hooligan problem, the clubs agreed on Wednesday to begin converting their grounds into all-seat stadiums and to petition the government for grant aid.
‘We're going to do away with standing places, with a 10 per cent cut in the number each year over the next decade,’ a Dutch association official said yesterday.
There is only one all-seat stadium in the Netherlands — at Utrecht — and many grounds have extensive standing areas.
PSV Eindhoven's stadium, for example, has standing room for 12,000 supporters out of a capacity of 28,000.
Dutch football has been increasingly dogged by hooliganism over the past few years.
This season Ajax Amsterdam were banned from European competition for a year after fans hurled iron stakes on to the pitch and forced the abandonment of a Uefa Cup tie in September.
The following month 14 fans were injured when Feyenoord fans threw fragmentation bombs at Ajax supporters at a game in Amsterdam.
Japan wants to stage the World Cup in 2002.
The Japanese FA is to initiate a programme of stadium-building before the choice is made in seven years' time.
World Cup amnesty.
WORLD Cup organisers have granted an amnesty to players who received yellow cards for fouls and other offences during qualifying matches.
Hermann Neuberger, the chairman of the International Football Federation World Cup organising committee, said players who had been shown the yellow card once during qualifying games would not have to carry it over to the finals.
Players with two yellow cards would be able to sit out the subsequent one-match sus pension during an international friendly before the 24-nation tournament, Neuberger added.
But he said that the amnesty would not cover players who had been shown the red card and sent off for serious offences during qualifying games.
They will have to sit out remaining match suspensions when the finals begin on June 8.
Fifa officials could not immediately say how many players would benefit from the yellow-card amnesty, but confirmed that at least three players would be suspended for one World Cup match after receiving red cards.
They were named as Romario of Brazil, Stanislav Griga of Czechoslovakia and Gheorghe Hagi of Romania.
Two other players, Abdul Razaq Ibrahim Albalooshi, of the United Arab Emirates, and Mehmed Bazdarevic, of Yugoslavia — who has a year's ban — could also be suspended for red-card offences if appeals were unsuccessful, the Fifa officials added.
Beardsley, Pearce and Adams are the three England players who received yellow cards during qualifying matches.
Ireland had six offenders: Whelan, Townsend, Aldridge, Stapleton, McCarthy and Houghton (two).
The amnesty is particularly good news for Houghton, who picked up his second yellow card of the qualifying tournament in Malta last month and feared that he could miss the opening game in Italy.
Now it seems likely that he will instead miss Ireland's next match, against England in Dublin on March 28.
Rickett rises from depths.
KATIE RICKETT, the surprise selection in Britain's team to play the United States in the Maureen Connolly Trophy match at Cardiff, was beaten 1-6, 7-6, 5-7 by Elly Hakami yesterday.
At one time Hakami was ranked 32nd in the world, and her 21-year-old opponent from Birmingham often looked out of her depth, especially in a 27-minute first set.
Rickett, to the surprise of the gallery, turned the match round by winning a marathon second set after leading 3-1 and trailing 3-4 before Hakami served for the match at 5-4.
She failed, only for Rickett to miss five set points in the 12th game.
PAGE
Rugby League Crackdown on headhunters.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
THERE has been a considerable outcry from St Helens supporters over the eight-match ban imposed on the club's Kiwi loose forward Shane Cooper two weeks ago.
A previously blameless disciplinary record should have entitled Cooper to more lenient treatment, they argue.
But Cooper was unfortunate to appear before the disciplinary committee at a time when it was under increasing pressure to eradicate the high, late tackle that has been such a scar on the game this season.
Those irate fans, however, may be mollified if the committee continues to deal consistently with all such offenders.
Thursday brought further heavy punishments with eight players being banned for a total of 66 games.
One of them, Mark Fairbank of Keighley, was suspended for 10 matches while Hussein M'Barki, the first Fulham player to be dismissed since April 1987, was banned for eight games.
The campaign has been given additional clout this weekend, with referees under instruction to dismiss instantly anyone guilty of head-high tackles on or off the ball, and not to send them to the sin-bin where they have gone too often in the past.
The League cited ‘any tackle involving an attack to the head’.
Wigan and Widnes will be the first sides to come under scrutiny when they meet in today's televised second-round Regal Trophy game at Central Park.
Generally, however, discipline has not been a problem between them in recent years and there have been some pulsating contests.
One disappointing absentee is Jonathan Davies, who has been playing with such verve at full-back recently but has not recovered from his damaged hamstring, allowing Alan Tait to revert to full-back.
Shaun Wane and Adrian Shelford come into a Wigan side now without their Australians, Les Davidson and Phil Blake.
For Bradford's visit, Leeds — whose squad has been strengthened by the arrival from Barrow of the Australian forward Cavill Heugh — have dropped the Great Britain prop Lee Crooks.
In dispute with the club earlier in the season, Crooks is having weight and fitness problems.
Bradford's pack will miss Kelvin Skerrett, while John Hamer and Paul Medley are also doubtful.
Salford have signed the 24-year-old full-back Martin Birkett from the Cumbrian amateur club Frizington on a three-year contract.
A student at Leeds Polytechnic, Birkett could be one of the substitutes tomorrow at Halifax.
Warrington, redundant this weekend, are reported to be keen on signing the Bridgend rugby union half-backs Kevin Ellis and Aled Williams.
Ellis, a member of the Wales B squad, has scored eight tries this season, his fly-half colleague 13.
In addition to the bans on Fairbank and M'Barki, there were eight-match suspensions for Neil Geary (Warrington), Phil Southward (Runcorn), Frank Simpson (Huddersfield), Mick Hughes (Dewsbury), Richard Mead (Halifax) and Derek Bridgeman (Sheffield).
Alan McMullan (Workington) was suspended for four matches, and Graham King (Hunslet) for two, but Mike Fletcher (Hull KR) was ruled not guilty when the committee accepted his explanation that his alleged trip last weekend on the S Helens forward Paul Forber was accidental.
Martin Thorpe.
CALLS for an independent, unbiased ‘Ombudsfan’ to investigate supporters' complaints were amplified this week by the outcome of the case involving an Everton supporter, Dave Clarkson.
Clarkson says that on August 19, the opening day of this season, he, his wife and two mates arrived at Highfield Road at 2.15pm with £9.50 stand tickets for the Coventry v Everton game, kick-off 3pm.
He claims there were only four turnstiles to admit thousands of Everton supporters and as a result he and his party were still queuing, in crushed conditions, at 3.10.
After going to the ticket office and being refused a refund, he finally got into the ground at 3.35pm.
Coventry, however, claim the queues were caused by late-arriving supporters, and that there is no way Clarkson can have arrived at 2.15 and not have been in the ground by 3.10.
When Clarkson, a social worker, got home he sent Coventry a recorded-delivery letter, again asking for his money back.
Coventry replied by offering four tickets for the corresponding fixture next season.
That did not satisfy Clarkson.
‘If you go to the theatre and miss the start because of the queue to get in, you would get your money back,’ he argues.
His MP Eric Heffer even wrote to Coventry on Clarkson's behalf.
Nothing happened.
Clarkson decided to go to the small claims court.
Coventry decided that it would cost more to contest the claim than pay it; so Clarkson will get £74 for the party's four tickets and travelling expenses.
But nobody has ‘won’.
Clarkson got his refund ‘because I refused to give up’, not because Coventry believed his story.
The rights and wrongs of the case remain unresolved.
IT TAKES a GM Vauxhall Conference side to show how supporters should be treated.
When Welling, who today take on Reading in the FA Cup second round, beat Gillingham at Priestfield in the last round, there was some confusion over the price of entry for juniors.
Welling were originally told £2.70, but when young Welling fans arrived for the match they found it was £3.90.
When the Welling director Graham Hobbins and his brother Barry, the secretary, found out, they immediately went outside and paid every kid the difference.
MERTHYR, who visit Hereford in the Cup today, have something of a celebrity board.
The chairman John Reddy is the 1980 Wales and West Slimmer of the Year.
At his heaviest he was 18st 3lb, and he lost seven stone in 10 months.
He now runs 30 miles a week.
The club's vice-chairman is Lyn Mittel, a comedian with shows on Welsh TV and radio.
His alias is Owen Money.
Since becoming vice-chairman four months ago he has thought of changing it to Owen More Money.
THE Brazilian Soccer Confederation has filed a suit against the supporter who shot the signal flare in the Brazil v Chile World Cup game, seeking about £16,000 for costs incurred in defending Brazil's case before Fifa in Zurich.
The fan, Rosenery Mello, has become a celebrity since the incident and posed for the cover of the November edition of Brazilian Playboy.
ACCORDING to John Popham, Radio Nottingham's commentary for the recent Forest game at Manchester City revealed that one player had elbowed another in the face ‘quite unnecessarily’.
WE ASKED last week for predictions for the Nineties.
Phil Domingo predicts: Trevor Francis will become management consultant to the Royal Institute of Midwives.
Ronnie Whelan's left foot will qualify for unemployment benefit (what, he asks, goes to Wembley every year and is never used — Whelan's left foot); Emlyn Hughes will be lead singer of the Communards and the FA and Football League will be able to act with the benefit of hindsight.
Brian Keighley sees the game going in a different direction.
A match would involve three teams instead of two, playing on a triangular pitch with three sets of goals.
Teams would be free to form liaisons with each other depending on the state of the game, so bringing new skills to the game such as negotiation and selling techniques.
Specialist positions such as goalkeeper and striker would be joined by the mediator and even ambassador.
Then there is the second ball…
Argentina.
WC apps: 9 Winners: 1978, 1986 Runners-up: 1930 The holders will again take their cue from Maradona, who is becoming increasingly unpredictable.
Burruchaga, who scored their winner in the 1986 final, is still there and Caniggia, who like Troglio plays for Verona, is very quick.
But they need Maradona as a match-winner and a talisman — and he knows it.
Seeded
England.
WC apps: 9 Winners: 1966 Nobody has scored a World Cup goal against England since Maradona left the defence looking like a broken washing line in 1986.
Shilton's goalkeeping and extra pace in the back four should make them hard to beat next summer, but goals will be a problem if Lineker does not rediscover his finishing touch and the team as a whole lacks subtlety and imagination.
Seeded
Holland.
WC apps: 5 Runners-up: 1974, 1978 After their European Championship victory and Milan's orange-tinted European Cup triumph, Holland will be expected to do well in Italy.
But a lot depends on the state of Gullit's knee and the speed at which other injury problems are solved.
Still, Van Basten did return late from the treatment room to score crucial goals in West Germany last summer.
Second group
Italy.
WC apps: 12 Winners: 1934, 1938, 1982 Runners-up: 1970 The most strongly fancied host nation since Argentina in 1978, Italy still need to make up their minds about Baggio and the best striker to partner Vialli.
But the foundations look impressive.
Baresi is one of the world's best liberos, Italian technique is as good as ever and home advantage still counts for much.
Seeded
Republic of Ireland.
WC apps: 1st time Jack Charlton is still riding the wave of optimism that bore the Irish through the European Championship.
Omnipotent in Dublin, the Republic have the players — Whelan, Houghton, Aldridge, Cascarino, Sheedy, O'Leary — to see off a large part of the opposition in Italy.
They will not win the World Cup, but going further than England would be the next best thing.
Third group
Romania.
WC apps: 5 This is the Romanians' first appearance in the finals since 1970 and after Steaua Bucharest's supine performance against Milan in last season's European Cup final it might be unwise to expect too much.
Nevertheless Hagi, Camataru and Dumitrescu are quality players and if Romania, given the political situation in Eastern Europe, have the right appetite they could cause the odd upset.
Third group
Scotland.
WC apps: 7 The Scots are in their fifth successive World Cup and would presumably go along with the Olympian sentiment about taking part being more important than winning.
This is because they have only won three matches in a World Cup proper.
On paper the side compares poorly with its predecessors, but if McCoist and Johnston are inspired Scotland may yet exceed expectations.
Second group
South Korea.
WC apps: 3 South Korea seem the most likely side from the Third World to achieve a surprise or two this time.
In 1986 they lost narrowly to the Italians and held Bulgaria to a draw in torrential rain.
Park Kying-Hoon, Choi Soon-Ho and Kim Joo-Sung have survived from Mexico.
You must remember them.
Fourth group
Soviet Union.
WC apps: 7 Some observers thought the Soviet Union were a better all-round side than Holland in the 1988 European Championship.
Certainly they offered a number of impressive portents for 1990 and England are still trying to forget the way Aleinikov, Mikhailichenko and Zavarov reduced their defence to rubble in Frankfurt.
Protasov and Litovchenko will catch the eye in Italy.
Second group
Spain.
WC apps: 7 Spain were unimpressive in the last European Championship and the nucleus of the side remains unchanged.
With players of the quality of Butragueno, Michel, Martin Vazquez, Sanchis and Chendo available they should do better, but a big improvement is needed if they are going to make an impact in Italy.
Second group
Sweden.
WC apps: 8 Runners-up: 1958 After flirting with failure, the Swedes came through to the finals with a point to spare after a 2-0 victory in Poland in their last qualifying game.
Hysen, Thern, Ekstrom and Magnusson give the side a strong backbone, but they are suspect defensively on the flanks.
Third group
Austria.
WC apps: 6 Austria gladdened a few hearts in 1978 when they beat West Germany but lost a lot of friends in 1982 when they conspired with the West Germans in the cynical exercise which froze out Algeria.
A bit of an unknown quantity now, their most crucial result in the qualifiers was the goalless draw with the Soviet Union in Vienna.
This suggests they will be hard to break down in Italy.
Second group
United Emirates.
WC apps: 1st time The United Arab Emirates qualified against expectations; even their Brazilian coach, Mario Zagalo, was surprised.
They owe their place in Italy to Qatar, who beat China in Singapore in the final Asian play-offs.
While they will do well to emulate Morocco, no side organised by Zagalo should be taken lightly.
Fourth group
United States.
WC apps: 4 The Americans only just managed to take advantage of the enforced absence of Mexico — banned after fielding over-age players in a World Youth Cup — by winning their decisive qualifier in Trinidad by the odd goal.
They are an honest, hard-working but rather dull team redeemed by the goalkeeping qualities of Meola and creative midfield play, when he is fit, of Perez.
Fourth group
Uruguay.
WC apps: 9 Winners: 1930, 1950 If they really have got their act together and manage to cut out the cynical stuff, Uruguay could achieve much more this time.
Francescoli, Perdomo and Sosa are among the world's most exciting players and Uruguay's technically adroit, close-passing, possessive style will always make them awkward opponents.
Third group
West Germany.
WC apps: 12 Winners: 1954, 1974 Runners-up: 1966, 1982, 1986 The Germans ran Argentina close in the 1986 final with a team past its prime.
Now, with players like Hassler, Reuter and Moller emerging, Klinsmann confirming his European Championship promise and Augenthaler re-emerging from the shadows as libero, the side has a nice balance between youth and experience.
Seeded
Yugoslavia.
WC apps: 8 Once more Yugoslavia are being talked of as dark horses but they faded in 1974 and flopped in 1982.
However they still have good players — Zlatko Vujovic, Stojkovic and Susic for example— and England will have an opportunity to check them out at Wembley next week.
So many Yugoslavs are based across the Channel that French football will virtually be represented in Italy by proxy.
Second group
Belgium.
WC apps: 8 The Belgians tend to be ignored until they suddenly turn up in the latter stages of major tournaments — the final of the 1980 European Championship and the semi-finals of the last World Cup.
Ceulemans is still in their attack and Van der Elst continues to orchestrate the midfield.
A team to be watched, even if they are not crowd pullers.
Seeded
Brazil.
WC apps: 14 Winners: 1958, 1962, 1970 Runners-up: 1950 After last summer's disastrous European tour, Brazil won the South American championship and reached Italy with little fuss apart from the Chile fiasco.
Bebeto and Romario could be one of the best attacking combinations next summer and, with most of the team based in Europe, Brazil will have no problems acclimatising.
Seeded
Cameroun.
WC apps: 2 Cameroun's big moment came in Spain in 1982 when they held Peru, Poland and Italy to draws and went out of the tournament proud of their unbeaten record.
This time Cameroun only lost one qualifier in the African group and their decisive defeat of Tunisia in the final play-off augured well for Italy.
Fourth group
Colombia.
WC apps: 2 The Colombians delighted a small Wembley crowd 18 months ago with the spontaneity and ingenuity of their football.
Valderrama is still their main inspiration and, as they showed in the play-off against Israel, their team is well organised at the back with the ability to strike quickly on the break.
Third group
Costa Rica.
WC apps: 1st time Costa Rica qualified early from the Concacaf play-offs, leaving the rest to fight it out among themselves.
Their manager, Marvin Rodriguez, promises a ‘conservative game’ in Italy, but Cayasso and Coronado are a couple of forwards to watch provided the defence can get the ball away.
Fourth group
Czechoslovakia.
WC apps: 8 Runners-up: 1934, 1962 The Czechoslovaks have only been seen twice in the tournament proper since they reached the 1962 final and on neither occasion were they able to win a match.
Bilek, Moravcik and Skuhravy look like giving their attack a cutting edge, they qualified without much difficulty and if the team takes its cue from the state of the country anything might happen.
Third group
Egypt.
WC apps: 2 Mike Smith, the former manager of Wales and Egypt, takes a lot of credit for giving the Egyptians the impetus to reach the finals for the first time.
They made sure by defeating Algeria, which says a lot for their prowess.
Most of these fourth-rated teams have learned how to defend in depth.
Diddymen are now thin on the ground in world football.
Fourth group
Japan doubles Van Rensburg's troubles.
By Martin James
CHRISTO VAN RENSBURG, one of the world's leading doubles players, went on court at the Albert Hall yesterday believing he would be competing for the last time in the official season-ending doubles championship.
But not of his own volition.
Next year the Nabisco Masters doubles changes its name to the ATP doubles finals.
It also changes venues, and that is where Van Rensburg thinks his problems could lie.
The event has been staged at the Royal Albert Hall for four years.
Next year it will move to either Japan or Australia.
‘As a South African I am not allowed to play in Japan,’ said Van Rensburg, who partners Paul Annacone.
‘I understand it's hard for the organisers because they have to go where they can find the biggest sponsor.
But South Africa is not going to change because of me.’
Van Rensburg and other South Africans on the tour are barred from playing in more than 20 countries.
However, late last night the organisers were still considering the Australian bid.
The South African-American pair are virtually out of contention for this year's title.
Yesterday they lost for the second time when they fell 6-7, 7-6, 6-3, 6-4 to Todd Witsken of the United States and Jorge Lozano of Mexico.
They now have only one round-robin group match left to make amends.
It was not a good day for the more established pairings.
The defending champions Jim Pugh and Rick Leach also lost their second successive round-robin group encounter and were left to play off for the minor placings.
In the early hours of yesterday morning they were beaten in four sets by Patrick McEnroe and Jim Grabb, and then some 13 hours later they fell 6-3, 7-6, 7-6 to the Australians Darren Cahill and Mark Kratzman, who as a result qualified for the semi-finals.
The Australians' red group counterparts, McEnroe and Grabb, also reached the last four when they brushed aside their fellow Americans Jim Courier and Pete Sampras 6-2, 6-3, 6-3.
No let-up by McEnroe Minor.
AS A singles player Patrick McEnroe languishes below Aki Rahunen and Ville Jansson in the world rankings, writes Martin James.
As a doubles player he leaves even Boris Becker behind.
Yesterday he endorsed his doubles standing when he and his partner Jim Grabb, already through to the semi-finals of the Nabisco Masters doubles championship at the Royal Albert Hall, finished their round-robin group matches unbeaten when they defeated the Australians Mark Kratzmann and Darren Cahill 7-6, 6-1, 6-4.
McEnroe, ranked 19th in doubles to Becker's 39th (although the German has played only seven tournaments) but only 359th in singles, is proud to be part of a successful partnership but would be happier still to make an impression as a soloist.
‘My game is suited to doubles because I return well,’ he said yesterday, ‘but my priority is to do well as a singles player.’
Today's semi-finals will feature John Fitzgerald and Anders Jarryd against Cahill and Kratzmann and McEnroe and Grabb against Piet Aldrich and Danie Visser.
The Association of Tennis Professionals yesterday announced that its end-of-season doubles championship next year will take place at the Sanctuary Cove resort near Brisbane in Australia.
The event will be worth $1 million.
Snooker Mountjoy deepens Thorne's gloom.
By Clive Everton
THE Everest World Matchplay Championship, restricted to the 12 players who earned most ranking points last season, began at the Brentwood International Centre yesterday with Doug Mountjoy trouncing Willie Thorne 9-2.
Thorne, the world No.9, admitted after a lacklustre display last night: ‘This has been the worst year of my life.’
Terry Griffiths beat Clive Thorburn 9-5, the first time he had beaten the Canadian in nine attempts.
The televised phase of the competition begins tomorrow with Steve Davis opening the defence of his title against the winner of today's match between Dean Reynolds and Tony Meo.
A repeat of the Stormseal UK final between Davis and Stephen Hendry is on the cards.
Gavin Lightman QC, the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association's one-man disciplinary tribunal, announces his findings today on two charges of bringing the game into disrepute.
Alex Higgins brought a complaint against his former manager, Howard Kruger, and Higgins himself is the defendant in a charge arising from recent incidents at Stoke and Reading.
Rusch de Farges will take his chance on fast ground.
By Chris Hawkins
IF MARTIN Pipe has a Gold Cup horse in his yard this season it is probably Rusch de Farges and there will be plenty of interest in this exciting young horse when he reappears in tomorrow's A.F. Budge Gold Cup at Cheltenham.
Despite worries expressed by connections last weekend about the fast ground, a stable spokesperson confirmed yesterday that Rusch de Farges will run under top weight of 11st 10lb.
This means an all round rise of 4lb, with the original top weights, Barnbrook Again and Golden Freeze, coming out, both on account of the ground.
Rusch de Farges, an ex-French gelding, won two of his six races last season both in soft ground and put up his best effort when beaten three lengths by Barnbrook Again at levels in the Arlington Chase Final over two and a half miles at Cheltenham last January.
He has some improving to do if he is to develop into a genuine Gold Cup hope but being only a six-year-old and trained by the man who has turned the joke ‘the impossible we do at once, miracles take a little longer.’
into reality, he is quite likely to make the grade.
The dry weather continues to affect racing and Oliver Sherwood will not run Tonights The Night in the A.F. Budge Chase.
A decision on Cruising Altitude's participation in the Bula Hurdle will be made after the trainer has spoken to the jockeys at today's meeting.
Cruising Altitude was so impressive in beating Morley Street at Newbury that he has been backed down to 8-1 for the Champion.
A race betweeen him, Beech Road and Floyd in the Bula would have been particularly informative but of that trio only Floyd is a certain runner now.
At Cheltenham this afternoon the big race is the Final of the BMW Chase series.
Once again the ground has ruined what promised to be a good contest and only four of the 15 entries go to post.
Nicky Henderson's Wont Be Gone Long (2.20) has top weight but is not badly treated considering he beat Lockwood Prince by 15 lengths at Chepstow last May and meets him here on the same terms.
As he showed all his form on fast ground last season he will not be bothered by the going but he has to give 15lb to Bonnie Artist.
It is dangerous to oppose any of Arthur Stephenson's runners at the moment but Bonnie Artist, although he has won four in a row, has not beaten anything of real ability.
Stephenson also sends Durham Edition down for the Food Brokers Ferrero Rocher Handicap Chase but due to defections the weights go up 14lb and he is topweight with 11st 10lb.
Durham Edition ran a fair race to finish just under eight lengths fourth to Ghofar in the Hennessy and he must come into the reckoning, although the weight rise seems to give an advantage to Royal Cedar (2.55), who was originally 8lb out of the handicap.
Royal Cedar, trained by John McConnochie, who has taken him over from the now retired Mercy Rimell, is another who is perfectly at home on fast ground, winning here over three and a half miles and at Newbury this season.
On his reappearance run when ooking backward, he led until falling seven out in the race won by Seagram, who meets him on 2lb better terms now and is thus entitled to start favourite.
Doncaster has been similarly decimated and only seven go to the post in three races worth a total of £11,246.
Croghan Star (2.00) and On Tap (2.30) should prove too good for their solitary opponents, while Wigtown Boy (3.05) has only two to beat in the Red Alligator Handicap Chase.
Devon is always a happy hunting ground for Pipe, who has saddled twice as many winners as any other trainer in the last five years here.
He should score with Blake's Progress (12.45), Maintown (1.15) and North Lane (2.45) today.
After three winners yesterday, he is only seven short of his century, while Jonothan Lower maintained his strike rate on the Pipe horses with a Taunton double on The Leggett and Ambassador, giving him 21 winners from just 34 rides.
Worthless words from mumbling shamateurs The Keating Column.
By Frank Keating
SAVING the punchline till last, just about the best joke of a pretty unfunny decade comes in its dying days.
A suited smart alec, riding shotgun on rugby union's suddenly careering shamateur bandwagon, this week told a group of British international players that they should soon be able to charge £1,500 for a solitary interview.
The mind boggles.
I cannot remember us jabber of journos enjoying a joke more.
Press interviews with the rugger-buggers are almost a contradiction in terms — even the official, collective, post-match post-mortems after home internationals, down in the bowels of Twickenham or Cardiff, say.
These occasions are only for humorists who enjoy the captains' and coaches' mumbled no-comments, and pusillanimous platitudes from grown men.
OK, it might be a trifle unfair to cite such post-game bunfights.
But what about the one-on-one interview?
Any journalist will tell you that British rugby union players, with two or three beguiling exceptions, are hardest to get anything out of worth printing.
Few seem to have anything remotely interesting to offer on the philosophy, flavours, fads or fancies of their game.
Yet now they are told they can expect to pocket £1,500.
They'd better get their act together first.
Perhaps they are thinking of the soaraway end of the market?
Even more of a no-go area, I'm afraid.
Very few of those who write the terrible tabloids, let alone those who read them, are likely to have heard of these ‘internationally famous’ sportsmen, so I doubt if they'd make half of £1,500 even for such tales as Flanker Star Ate My Goolie During Scrum, by England's Ugliest Prop; or Sexy Secrets in the Showers, by Welsh Tea Lady.
What, anyway, makes British rugby players plan to price themselves at such a princely paypacket?
Just for one interview, dammit.
Like other fellow scribblers whose squiggles seriously abuse the very title ‘shorthand notebook’, I have nevertheless been generously given hours, sometimes even days, by sportsmen happy enough to rabbit on without so much as a penny piece being mentioned.
Start with the beginning of this decade if you like, when the one and only Muhammad Ali personally escorted me round every nook and cranny of his Deer Lake log-cabin home.
Not the slightest mention of money, either, for an interview in depth from, offhand, Gavaskar, Richards, Botham, Willis, Marshall, McEnroe, Connors or Borg — though the latter, I must admit, was expecting me to stay the day, yet by elevenses we agreed there was not much more to say to each other except ‘My game's in pretty good shape’.
Did Nicklaus ask for £1,500 for a chat?
No, he asks you to please stay for supper and we'll go on in the morning.
Did Lee Trevino say ‘How much?’
Of course not.
Nor anyone — not one — down the years, when I've approached such luminaries of the lore as, well, Ashe, Stewart, Prost, Platini, Charlton, Best (he even cooked me breakfast), Coe, Thompson, Cauthen, Francome…
This year alone — the sad one in which British rugby players are apparently rubbing their hands in greedy but pitiful expectation — I've relished long, doubtless tedious (for them) but totally gratis and generous interviews with the likes of Scudamore (on his most precious mid-season afternoon off), Offiah, Gower, Gooch, Border, Simpson, Jacklin, Robson, the teenage millionaire Chang; and even Mansell took a day off to drive me round and round Silverstone.
So why is this internationalsuperstar of the scrummage, who I agree is a household name and all that (although he is known even in the next village as either Whatsit? or Thingymabob), suddenly being advised he has the (to coin a phrase) clout and muscle to alter the long-established formulas and ethics of sports journalism?
In other words, just who do these jokers and the jerks pulling their purse-strings think they are?
Oh dear, even before they open it, poor Twickenham's can of beans is beginning to pong something rotten.
The hilarity induced, however, should run and run.
Washbrook: composure and constancy at a jaunty angle Frank Keating dares to wish a four-square and formidable hero a very happy birthday.
HAPPY BIRTHDAY, Mr Washbrook, sir.
‘You're late, boy.’
Sorry, sir, you said any time after six; it's only quarter past; thought you might like to listen to the news headlines first.
‘All right, all right , can we get on with it.
What do you want to know, I'm a busy man, you know.’
I know, sir, all I wanted was to wish an old hero a happy birthday.
Have you been flooded with greetings all day, sir?
‘Yes, as it so happens, various people have wished me congratulations; very kind; though didn't recognise most of them, I must say.’
Washbrook, the four-square and fearless warrior with the faded, jaunty-peaked, blue cap of both Lancashire and England, was 75 on Wednesday, the day I dared my many happy returns, and still as robust, hale and healthy as ever.
Oh dear, I thought, he reckons I'm wheedling my way in, not for birthday greetings, but for contentious sexist matters — to grill him about tonight's Lancashire cricket club annual meeting when the agenda is topped by a proposal that women should at long last be allowed full membership entitling them to mix with men in the pavilion.
Another right bitchy ding-dong is in prospect.
Mr Washbrook read my thoughts.
‘Don't even think of asking me about female membership,’ barked the old Sgt-Major.
‘I'm president of the club.
I've no comment whatsoever to make.
I'm not even discussing it with you.
The club will decide, right?’
I assured him I was only on a romantic, misty-eyed mission, though secretly I was wishing I'd sent the birthday card instead to Winston Place.
Fade to childhood and music and Hovis-type ad: ‘This is the BBC Light Programme and here is the county cricket scoreboard.
Another undefeated opening stand of exactly 150 by Washbrook and Place again put Lancashire in an unassailable position today…’
‘Oh yes, Winston.
Staunch man.
No, I never see him these days, never comes to Old Trafford.
Yes, we had a very happy partnership.
A great stalwart, though he never thought he was all that good, oddly enough; at the wicket, I mean.’
The endearingly diffident but prolific Place retired to a sweetshop-newsagents in 1955, then became an umpire.
He and Washbrook once put on 350 for the first wicket against Sussex.
Mind you, that wasn't Washbrook's best opening stand — and I passed on greetings on Wednesday from Surrey, where Sir Leonard Hutton lives.
Says Sir Len: ‘Cyril was my best and favourite opening partner: the ideal: technique, composure and a firm friend, too.’
This message from his old comrade who faced the whizzbangs in the frontline trench obviously moves the birthday boy, though you sense he tries to hide any emotion.
He sniffs for a split-second.
‘That's very kind of him.
Well, we were a real partnership, weren't we?
All based on a perfect understanding between the wickets — and him not telling me what to do and me not telling him.
We simply had innate confidence in each other.
‘I remember to this day coming out after tea at Jo'burg, 1948-49, going down on to the ground with Len; vast crowd, and this fellow comes out of it and says ‘only 30 more for the record, boys’.
Len looks at me andmutters, ‘What's he on about?’
‘Not a clue,’ I say.
‘Well,’ says Len, ‘we'd better get 30 more then and see what record it is, eh’.’
It remains England's highest opening partnership — 359, both men not out.
In 1951 Washbrook was dropped by England.
Five years later — the Ashes series — he was a Test selector.
England miserably one down after two.
The selectors met at London's Bath Club for Sunday lunch.
The chairman, Gubby Allen, asked Washbrook to leave the room, then argued fiercely with the new young captain, Peter May.
Gubby had a hunch.
Naturally he prevailed.
They called back Washbrook, now 41, and told him to get up to Headingley with his bat and pads.
He was staggered.
So was the press.
Vindictive, more like it.
The Daily Express even printed a sneering open letter on the front page at the gall of a selector picking himself.
On Thursday morning at Leeds the vultures smugly unscrewed their fountain pens at 11.34am when, with reeling England 17 for three, the commanding, middle-aged man, shirt as ever of more rich, creamy, Blackburn flannel than anyone else, cap-peak more defiantly wonky than ever, strode steadfast to the wicket to join young May.
‘Seventeen for three.
I'll remember those figures till my dying day.
The Yorkshire crowd gave me the most overwhelming reception, you know.
It was my greatest moment.
No, I wasn't nervous, not unduly worried.
Just got down to it.’
He and May put on 187 — a stand that turned the match and indeed the whole rubber.
For all his 76 centuries (seven doubles) and 35,000 runs, that 98 at Leeds was, he says, ‘my proudest 98 ever’.
And he still cannot resist, all these years later, a spiky dig —‘but most gratifying of all was that the journalists who condemned me were proved so utterly wrong’.
Which reminds him of me and he is fast out of his reverie.
‘Now look here, I'm a busy man.
One more question and that's it, right?’
The best he ever faced?
‘Lindwall.’
Has there been anyone, Lillee or Holding or Marshall to match him since?
‘Pphh!’ if that's how you record a dismissive grunt.
‘Is that it then?’
Same goes, I supposed, for today's batsmen; though didn't he play on better pitches?
‘Yes, we had better pitches, sure, but we were correspondingly better players.
I'll say one other thing before you go.
What cricketers need now is a dose of the amateur captain, you know, one who was the boss and everyone knew it, even in the committee room.
He was king; he stood on his own; he was an example.
Right, is that all?
I really must get on with other things.’
After some seasons as Lancashire's first professional captain, he had a spell as team manager.
He ruled the new generation with a rod, boys who had worshipped the hero as kids and tried to emulate him in their tennis-ball pick-up games —‘Bags I be Washy!’
When they first met for real the fierce, cold, autocratic, heroically self-made man's beady eye and cockily addressed him as ‘Washy’ to his face, well, petrification set in, sometimes terminal.
‘Well, that's it then, please.
No more.’
Sorry, sir, thank you, sir.
Very good of you, sir.
Why hadn't I gone to gentler old Winston's place instead.
No, not at all.
I take that back unreservedly.
It is richly good to greet the real heroes of your youth — and once I was out of earshot I found myself skipping about merrily, humming ‘Happy Birthday, Washy’ over and over again.
And, no doubt about it, very many happy returns, sir.
Mason cuts a battered but defiant figure.
GARY MASON, booed, bruised and bloodied from his encounter with a ‘hand-picked’ opponent, will allow Terry Lawless to choose his next bout.
But he says he would welcome another Mark Wills or a match with Derek Williams.
Mason needed an X-ray on his right hand and repairs around both eyes after being taken the full distance by Wills on Wednesday night, but his heart and ambition remain undamaged.
He still wants to fight Mike Tyson in about 18 months.
And he was encouraged by the way he came through the first 10-round contest of his 33-fight unbeaten career.
‘People didn't believe I could go beyond seven or eight rounds without blowing out,’ said Mason.
‘I wasn't 100 per cent sure myself.
But I have now, and it has enhanced my confidence.’
The X-ray showed nothing more than bruising.
And the video recording he watched yesterday morning revealed to him rather fewer weaknesses than his critics had discerned.
‘I'm disappointed with the criticism I got, stuff like I looked light years away from Tyson,’ he said.
‘It was a battle, but I wanted a battle and I want more of them.’
His hand, the same one he injured in April last year, needs at least two weeks' rest, but he should be back in the ring in February.
Jarvis Astaire, the Wembley director and promoter, is hoping for an opponent like Trevor Berbick or James ‘Bonecrusher’ Smith, both former world champions.
Williams, who beat Trevor Currie on Tuesday night to add the European championship to his Commonwealth title, may have to wait for his shot at the British champion, though Mason rises to his former sparring partner's rhetoric.
‘I would like to beat him because of what he has been saying about me,’ Mason said.
‘All I'll say is that only a foolish dog barks at a flying bird.’
Even at his fittest the 17 ½-stone Mason would have difficulty passing as a flying bird.
If he ever goes in with Tyson, he could be taken for a foolish dog.
Scottish preview Newcastle's Aitken bid ‘too low’.
By Patrick Glenn
NEWCASTLE United yesterday sent a written offer to Celtic for Roy Aitken reportedly so low that it is likely to be returned to St James' Park unopened.
The bid, understood to be only around £300,000, has no chance of acceptance by the Glasgow club.
While they have consistently refused to name their price, they value their captain much higher than that.
Jim Smith, the Newcastle manager, would not disclose the amount, saying: ‘We are sending an offer in writing to Celtic today.
After that it's up to them.’
Aitken, 31 and capped 50 times, is battling to be fit for the Premier Division match against Hibs at Easter Road.
He injured his groin during the friendly with Ajax on Wednesday, but was improved yesterday.
Aitken's fellow international midfielder Paul McStay misses the match because of suspension, while Hibs recall their international goalkeeper Andy Goram.
Aberdeen, the league leaders, are at home to Dundee United and Alex Smith, their manager, is contemplating ‘at least one change’ after last week's defeat by Celtic which took away the points advantage they held over Rangers.
Partick Thistle have signed Hearts' 31-year-old midfielder Ian Jardine as player-coach.
Treble for artistic Dunwoody.
By Chris Hawkins
ONE OF THE anomalies of National Hunt racing this season is the comparative paucity of winners for the artistic Richard Dunwoody, the jockey who most resembles that supreme stylist John Francome among the current crop of riders.
At Cheltenham yesterday, however, Dunwoody did something to put the record straight with a 26 ½-1 treble on Remittance Man, Wont Be Gone Long and Royal Cedar to take his score to 34, but only marginally improve a strike rate of 15 per cent.
Dunwoody was surprised when the judge called him the winner on Remittance Man in the opening Bristol Novice Hurdle, believing Peter Scudamore had got back in the final strides on the favourite Regal Ambition after being headed halfway up the run-in.
Remittance Man deserved this change of luck as he has never been out of the frame in his seven previous starts but had only managed one win.
By Prince Regent, out of a mare by Run The Gantlet, he has a flat race pedigree but never ran on the level.
He has the size to make a chaser but has yet to fill out.
This was the first leg of a double for trainer Nicky Henderson whose Wont Be Gone Long won another nip and tuck affair to take the BMW Chase Final.
Dunwoody made all the running on Wont Be Gone Long, keeping something up his sleeve to repel the challenge of Bonnie Artist, who ranged upsides rounding the home turn.
The pair were in the air together at the last, but Bonnie Artist stumbled on landing and could never quite peg back the leader who held on by threequarters of a length.
Wont Be Gone Long was making a belated seasonal reappearance due to a nasty cut on a hind leg, but now fully recovered, he loves this fast ground and obviously jumps for fun.
The Coral Welsh National may be his next race, although he is a long way out of a handicap.
The sponsors offer him at 33-1, which could be generous, while making Ghofar and Bonanza Boy joint favourites at 5-1.
Dunwoody completed his treble with a beautiful performance on Royal Cedar, the 6-4 favourite, in the Food Brokers Ferrero Rocher Handicap Chase.
After making the running for the first circuit, he let Royal Cedar take a breather going down the back for the last time, with Seagram and Durham Edition leading him down the hill.
You could see Dunwoody was conserving Royal Cedar's energy, however, and asking for an effort approaching the second last he rose fractionally in front and was well on top at the line, having 2 ½ lengths to spare over the gallant Durham Edition who was trying to give 18lb.
Royal Cedar was a fourth winner from only eight runners for first season trainer, John McConnochie, who clearly paid a great deal of attention when assistant to Mercy Rimell.
The Seagram Grand National looks to be an ideal race for Royal Cedar, who jumps economically without being spectacular and never put a foot wrong here.
‘He's a bit on the small side but very agile and loves fast ground, so we shall have to think seriously about the National,’ said McConnochie, who at this stage also intends to run Golden Friend, who runs at Haydock on Wednesday.
Martin Pipe weighed in with his usual daily double, Royal Wonder and Vagog, both ridden by Peter Scudamore, but fortune certainly smiled on them in the Coral Golden Hurdle Qualifier.
Vagog was struggling in fourth place at the last where Lady Westown, going the best, fell and brought down Parlezvousfrancais.
This left Ambegate in front but he weakened up the hill and never-say-die Scudamore forced Vagog up in the last few strides.
At Cheltenham this afternoon, CRUISING ALTITUDE (1.20) should be more at home on the ground than the champion hurdler Beech Road in the Bula Hurdle, while his Newbury victim, MORLEY STREET (2.30) looks good in the Mercury Communications hurdle.
David Elsworth has changed his mind about running BARNBROOK AGAIN (1.55) in the A.F. Budge Gold Cup and even with 12st, this high class chaser should be hard to beat.
Doncaster staged it's first meeting since the abandonment of the St Leger fixture but it was a disappointing turnout with a total of only 29 runners, which included a walk-over by Tebitto, who won £4,491 because of the defection of Tap On in the Sea Pigeon Handicap Hurdle.
Charlton v Millwall There is a relegation ring about this derby, with Charlton 19th and fast-falling Millwall only two points above them after no win in their last six games.
Lennie Lawrence could give a first League start to the striker Kenny Achampong and names the trainee Jason Lee in the home squad, while Millwall are without the injured striker Teddy Sheringham and the suspended midfielder Terry Hurlock.
Coventry v Arsenal Arsenal return to one of the few grounds where they were beaten last season, with their match winner against Manchester United, Groves, likely to partner Smith up front again.
George Graham's defending champions have lost four of their last five away games and Coventry, with Regis rediscovering scoring form and McGrath likely to return in midfield after five matches out, is no easy place to improve that record.
Liverpool v Aston Villa The greatest test yet of Villa's remarkable resurgence.
Cynics will say this will be brief, but Graham Taylor's team can start to prove them wrong if they win today and, most probably, go top.
The visitors, seeking their ninth win in ten League games, are likely to switch McGrath from centre-back to midfield to combat McMahon's aggressive runs.
Liverpool hope Barnes will recover from hamstring trouble but are again without a shoal of injured defenders.
Manchester U v C Palace This could be the day when Alex Ferguson finally loses patience with one of his expensive front axis.
Statistically, McClair rather than Hughes is the likely victim after only four goals this season — and the Scot has not scored since October.
‘I am thinking of making a change up front.
I am worried about the partnership,’ says United's manager.
Palace, still without an away win, attempt to shore up the division's worst defence by giving a debut to Thorn.
Nottingham Forest v Norwich Norwich's manager Dave Stringer was playing the last time his team won at Forest — in 1974.
Fleck should be back soon to sharpen that attack, but for today Stringer names an unchanged squad of 13 to meet a side which has Sutton back in goal after five games' absence at the expense of Crossley.
QPR v Chelsea This is likely to be Peter Reid's last appearance in a Rangers shirt, with Loftus Road seemingly resigned to the midfielder's becoming Howard Kendall's player-coach at Manchester City.
Reid's midfield partnership with another former England midfielder, Wilkins, may trouble Chelsea, who give the defender Johnsen, their £306,000 recruit from Bayern Munich, his debut.
Sheffield Wednesday v Luton Wednesday include their new £375,000 Swedish right-back, Nilsson, in their squad to face Luton and await fitness checks on Shakespeare and the captain Pearson.
Luton, without an away First Division win in 12 months, may give Cook a League debut with Kennedy and Black doubtful.
Southampton v Manchester C Howard Kendall watches from the stand as his new charges attempt to resist the First Division's most prolific attack.
City's caretaker Tony Book prepares for the assault by bringing back Hinchcliffe at full-back.
Oldfield is set to replace Brightwell..
Tottenham v Everton Two former Evertonians, Lineker and Van den Hauwe, prepare to meet their former team.
Everton have Ratcliffe back in defence but Beagrie and Atteveld must take tests.
Wimbledon v Derby County Wimbledon leave out Fashanu for the fourth successive game, keeping faith with the veteran Cork.
Indeed Bobby Gould is likely to stick to the team that won startlingly at Chelsea last Saturday.
Derby, with six successive wins, could have both Blades and Goddard back after injury.
Middlesbrough v Leeds With Sheffield United off duty until tomorrow Leeds can go top, at least for a day, but have Sterland (bruised ribs) and Haddock (calf) taking tests this morning.
Middlesbrough's teenage defender, Mohan, is suspended.
Ipswich v Sunderland Ipswich will put together their best run for five years if they avoid defeat against Sunderland.
John Duncan's side are likely to lose Stockwell from midfield, with Wark returning, against unchanged visitors.
Russell Thomas
Snooker Higgins is docked £3,000.
By Clive Everton
ALEX HIGGINS escaped suspension but was fined £3,000 yesterday for bringing the game into disrepute.
The Irishman said he had had ‘a very fair hearing’ from the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association's one-man disciplinary tribunal, Gavin Lightman QC, who ‘took great account of the mitigating circumstances’.
Higgins had failed to attend a post-match press conference at Stoke in September, and also admitted using foul and abusive language towards two WPBSA officials and three journalists in a late-night incident in a Reading hotel bar in October.
Lightman took into account the Irishman's current financial situation, which he described as ‘in pretty bad shape’.
The QC also considered ‘his attempts to put his life in order and adopt a more responsible and sincere approach to his affairs’.
Higgins has now been fined a total of £17,700 during his tumultuous 18-year professional career.
When he last appeared before Lightman he was fined £12,000 and suspended from five tournaments for head-butting Paul Hatherell, the WPBSA tournament director, during the 1986 UK championship.
The twice world champion's case was considered by Lightman immediately after one in which Higgins was the complainant in a disrepute charge against his former manager, Howard Kruger, who resigned from the association's board last weekend.
Lightman ordered that Kruger be publicly reprimanded on two counts.
First, that he allowed Framework Management Ltd to go into liquidation admitting it owed £21,000 to Higgins (who claimed he was owed £51,000); and, second, that he had caused to be issued in 1988 ‘a press release regarding a tournament to be held in Peking stating, and telling Mr Higgins in order to induce him to take part in the tournament, that the first prize was £35,000 when in fact it was not’.
A number of other allegations made by Higgins against Kruger were either not proceeded with or found not to constitute conduct bringing the game into disrepute.
Hockey Lahore XI 1, England XI 1.
Cotton fumes as England are suffocated by umpires
ENGLAND's visit to Pakistan may well be remembered mostly for the umpiring.
England felt they suffered again yesterday.
Bernard Cotton, the England manager, forcefully expressed the view that England failed to beat the Lahore XI because the Pakistani umpires did not award them the penalty corners and strokes they had earned.
‘We created enough opportunities to have won handsomely,’ he said.
England rested Potter and Clift and played Soma Singh at centre-half against largely unknown opponents.
The team played better but failed to profit from their many spells of domination.
Rob Hill, one of England's relative newcomers, gave them the lead, following up at a 10th-minute penalty corner, but the team allowed themselves to become rattled by the umpiring and Lahore equalised after 50 minutes.
Cherzeel scored with a close copy of England's goal.
The coach, Norman Hughes, said he was pleased with the play of Soma and much of England's build-up play and felt the second-half changes made a significant impact.
Garcia and Potter came on for Leman and Halls in the 45th minute and Welch replaced Williams seven minutes later.
England play Pakistan again today in the final match of the tour, writes Pat Rowley.
England players involved in the postponed fourth-round cup ties on Sunday will have about 30 hours to recover from their overnight journey home.
It will be interesting to see how that affects the players of the First Division clubs East Grinstead, Havant and Hounslow.
Nearly half the Havant team are in Pakistan.
Their home tie with Barford Tigers, a team who have had excellent results in the Midlands League in recent weeks, may require them to recover quickly from their overseas exertions.
Hounslow, the holders, who will welcome back Jon Potter and Martyn Grimley, face a first meeting with another Middlesex club, the new Second Division side, Lyons.
Lyons' cause cannot have been helped by the red card received by one of their skilful full-backs, Jasminder Matharu, in the league last Saturday.
Matharu is likely to incur a suspension of two or three months.
The other cup tie on Sunday pits Eastcote of the South League against East Grinstead at Feltham School.
The fitness of Clift and Leman, who has had influenza in Pakistan, is important for Grinstead.
Eastcote, who have just acquired an Australian coach, Mark McCrea, have a team who are almost entirely the product of their successful colts scheme.
The other outstanding cup tie, between Old Loughtonians and Broxbourne, has been arranged for Sunday week because Broxbourne are involved in the last of the East qualifiers for the Royal Bank English Indoor Championship.
Hull put Proctor on list at £15,000.
HULL yesterday placed their forward Wayne Proctor, who toured with Great Britain in 1984 and was substitute against Papua New Guinea, on the transfer list for £15,000, writes Paul Fitzpatrick.
Also on offer, at the same price, are Neil Puckering, who played four times for the Great Britain Under-24 side, and Alan Tomlinson.
Swinton have reduced the asking price on six players, including the winger Derek Bate, who has had his price cut from £45,000 to £35,000.
Castleford have placed their winger Chris Chapman on the transfer list at £45,000.
Squash Absent Cumings faces disciplinary action.
By Richard Jago in Newcastle
ALISON CUMINGS, a former British title-holder, faces disciplinary action from the Squash Rackets Association for withdrawing from this year's national championships at Newcastle yesterday ‘because of an unfavourable draw which might have meant me losing money on the week.’
Her action has again raised the issues of lack of sponsorship and reduced prize money which have preoccupied many leading players.
Geoff Williams, another former holder, and Phil Whitlock, an England international, have both declined to play because they are disappointed with the marketing of the championships and by the fact that the prize fund has descended from £16,780 to £9,000 despite the presence of television.
Another international, who preferred to remain anonymous, claimed that two thirds of the top 24 would have gone on strike had they been asked, and that a players' union will soon be formed to help deal with matters such as prize money, rankings, training and selection.
Four years ago seven leading men threatened to boycott the event because they considered the prize money too low.
If a union creates a better understanding, so much the better.
The SRA has put several thousands of pounds into this year's event and believes that the failure to acquire a sponsor is related to an adverse market.
‘Over the years the players have done incredibly well from the national championships and have had higher prize money than a lot of international events,’ said the SRA's squash manager, Andrew Shelley.
‘We are mystified at Alison's action because she had already entered.
I'm afraid I don't regard being unable to make money from the event as a reasonable excuse.’
One of the North of England's leading women players, Julie Woodcock, 23, the Cheshire champion, from Northwich, has been killed in a car accident near Buxton, Derbyshire.
Jones searches for chinks of light in a dark age for women's tennis David Foot on a former champion and her bright sparks aiming high in Cardiff.
WOMEN's tennis in this country is apt to be seen as a jokey disaster area, lost cause and eternal outlet for false and flimsy dreams.
Amid these cliches, sly slanders and unavoidable realities, Ann Jones sits at the net and ponders.
She has watched and sighed at the conveyor belt of busted rackets and aspirations — as successive decades of dewy-eyed schoolgirls have emerged from the manicured suburban court retreats in the romantic search for more than strawberries at Wimbledon.
The National Sports Centre for Wales, Sophia Gardens, Cardiff is temporarily deserted between matches in the Maureen Connolly Trophy.
Ann Jones is the Great Britain captain, soon we imagine to succeed Sue Mappin as national women's team manager.
She is both martinet and mother hen.
And she is engagingly old-fashioned in her concepts.
‘I'm afraid we've gone a bit too soft,’ she says with almost Blimpish fervour.
‘Girls come up against an obstacle or two, maybe on tour, and they tend to give way instead of trying to overcome them.’
She contemplates a surprisingly bellicose analogy: ‘sport in its own way is another war — somehow we must regenerate the old fighting spirit.’
She is privately perturbed, though not entirely unsympathetic one suspects, with recent words of disenchantment from Valda Lake, the 21-year-old Devonian who feels there may in future be more joy, if less money, in being an art student.
Lake's sentiments looked pretty damning in print.
But in the artificial, unrelenting competitive world of perpetual travel and token nods across the net, there isn't too much time — or inclination — left over for real friendship.
Who can see Martina sharing a dinner party with Steffi?
Jones, Wimbledon winner, respected referee and, just as significantly, mother of three, confines herself to: ‘It's very tough, not helped in our girls’ case by the computer.
Those in the States may have to travel long distances for tournaments but it's still in their own country.’
On the broader issue of Britain's minimal success — despite two successive triumphs against the rankings in the Maureen Connolly Trophy, at the Queen's Club, London, and at Dallas — the captain spreads her hands, searching one empty base-line and then the other for the elusive answer.
‘If only we knew why, we'd do something about it.
Whatever some think, we don't sit back.
People criticise the LTA but we've really tried.
It's been very gratifying to win these last two trophies — yet disappointing that there hasn't been improvement in the general standard of our girls’ tennis afterwards.’
The captain has the kind of severe, rather schoolmarmy face that readily softens.
‘Just like Sue, she doesn't mince words,’ someone says under her breath.
But she's refreshingly strong on psychology.
‘In a team event like this, the difficulty from my point of view is the varying personalities of the girls as they go into the consecutive matches.
Val, for instance, needs chatting up…
Sarah needs concentration…
Clare is well motivated, one of those who takes advice quite well.’
Off court, handling the obligatory press conference, these still young competitors are almost without exception pleasant and self-possessed.
The same goes for Americans like 16-year-old Kim Kessaris.
Sarah Loosemore is Britain's youngest at 18, just back from her three A levels and injury, eager to prove she has never really been away.
Her home is 10 minutes away, here in Cardiff.
Her parents, dad a solicitor and mum a former Welsh international, are watching with her brother as she beats Jennifer Santrock.
Lake, who is getting out, has taken a bit of a battering and feels that her spontaneous outpourings the other day were probably misconstrued.
‘The trouble is that there is such a high level of expectancy,’ she says.
This was compounded in her case when she jumped 20 places on the world computer in 1987 after reaching the third round at Edgbaston.
Today Great Britain's No.1 for the Trophy, Clare Wood, a vicar's daughter from Sussex, takes on Amy Frazier, who is 140 places above her in the rankings.
She's heartened by her win over the Americans' No.2 Audra Keller, who also outranks her, on Wednesday.
‘I desperately wanted to go on the circuit — I still find the life terrifically exciting.
It's difficult to keep in touch with friends and I know I can't go wild socially.
But as long as I go on improving and enjoying myself I'll play.
‘I've noticed the difference in the mental approach of the foreigners.
They seem much more secure, happier with themselves.
They don't worry like we seem to but don't ask me why.
I was a bit surprised at what Valda said.
Relationships are often shallow but that's inevitable, especially between the countries.
There has got to be rivalry and life can be very frustrating.’
Women's tennis has always had its administrative uncertainties.
This week the future structure of the Wightman Cup is being discussed.
But here at Sophia Gardens, a nap hand of British girls have in their different ways been doing their best to tell us something about the game they play…and offering a few hints of hope for the future.
Dave Whelan, 53, who played for Blackburn Rovers and broke a leg in the 1960 FA Cup final, has offred £100,000 to any youngster born within 10 miles of Wigan parish church who wins the junior Wimbledon title in the next 10 years.
Whelan, now a millionaire businessman, said: ‘A town that can produce world class rugby league and swimming stars should also be able to produce a tennis legend of the future.’
Squash Jansher jolted by fine and forfeit.
By Richard Jago
JANSHER KHAN narrowly avoided a ban but was fined for the second time in six weeks by the International Squash Players Association yesterday — and lost ranking points which may cost him his world No.1 spot.
The world champion may not be worried about the £500 fine handed out for throwing the last game of his bizarre straight-games loss to Jahangir Khan in the final of last month's Stuttgart Open, but he should be more concerned at the zero computer points assigned him for the Stuttgart tournament, which may enable Jahangir to overtake him in the New Year rankings, plus the fact that any further misdemeanour will probably mean draconian punishment.
The ISPA says it is determined to take ‘strong action’ against individuals who ‘fail to commit themselves to raising the image of professional squash players’.
Jansher, who was already on probation after being fined £200 for walking out of the Kuala Lumpur World Open dinner in October, has clearly reached a point of no return with his conduct.
Meanwhile, the British national championships at Newcastle saw their first upset when the England international Martin Bodimeade fell 9-5, 9-2, 9-3 in the second round to the Scottish No.2, Colin Keith.
Later Jason Nicolle, the 10th seed and one of England's world team bronze medallists, also went out, losing 10-8, 9-2, 6-9, 9-4 to the 18-year-old Peter Marshall.
After their match the victorious Welsh No.1, Adrian Davies, and the British under-21 champion, Stephen Meads, complained about their referee, Ed Johnson, and alleged that the financial cutbacks because of sponsorship problems had affected the standard of officiating.
‘The best referees ought to be here, but some of them are not because the SRA is cutting back on everything,’ said Davies.
Soccer David Lacey in the Eternal City on the hopes, fears and ephemera surrounding this afternoon's World Cup lucky dip.
INTO THE HAT — 24 NATIONS WITH THEIR EYES ON ROME
Nobody gets to be drawn until the fat guy sings
THERE is something rather symbolic about the presence of Sophia Loren at today's draw in Rome for the 1990 World Cup.
One or two of Miss Loren's films have been more notable for the depth of cleavage displayed than any profoundness of plot.
Similarly the draw will attract as much interest for those it keeps apart as those it brings together.
The seedings have already lessened the chance of the principal characters in next summer's month-long soap opera getting in each other 's way until the latter stages.
The placing of Uruguay and Colombia in the third pool has satisfied the South Americans, and what used to be called the Iron Curtain countries cannot complain.
All that remains now is for the draw, which will be made in the Rome Sports Palace late this afternoon, to avoid such minor irritations as Holland joining England in Sardinia, thereby doubling the security problem; Scotland renewing hostilities with Uruguay, whom they have refused to meet in friendlies since the 1986 World Cup; and Austria playing West Germany, which would revive memories of the cynical conspiracy in 1982 which froze Algeria out of the second phase.
Rest assured that whatever happens the proceedings will be above board.
‘Innocent fans,’ said Sepp Blatter, the general secretary of Fifa, would be making the draw from an assortment of pots.
Luciano Pavarotti will be there to strike the right note for an occasion of speeches, publicity films and general hype that is costing £1 million and will be seen by a worldwide television audience of 500 million.
The draw itself is expected to last no more than 10 minutes, although there is always the chance of the sort of hiccup that occurred before the 1982 tournament when Belgium and Scotland ended up in the wrong groups — and there was the embarrassed re-examination of screwed-up slips of paper such as might be seen when the vicar's wife wins both the turkey and the hamper in the Christmas raffle.
By the time the draw takes place the audience will have had an eyeful of Loren and an earful of Pavarotti, who was once a deep-lying centre-forward and is now roughly the same shape as the ball.
If England could organise the draw to their liking they would probably play Austria, Colombia and Costa Rica in the first round.
However, they are just as likely to get the Soviet Union, Uruguay and South Korea.
The Scots would be extremely unlucky to get a 1990 equivalent of Mexico's ‘Group of death’ when they found themselves facing Uruguay, West Germany and Denmark.
Andrea Arrica, head of the local World Cup organisation in the Sardinian capital Cagliari, has dismissed worries about English hooliganism, saying that England's prestige as a footballing nation meant more to Sardinia than a potentially troublesome minority.
Cagliari is calling the exercise Operation Friendship; the local gaol awaits dissidents.
Fifa gives Chile World Cup boot and life bans.
By David Lacey in Rome
CHILE were thrown out of the 1994 World Cup by Fifa yesterday after forcing their decisive 1990 qualifier against Brazil to be abandoned in Rio when their players walked off claiming that the Chilean goalkeeper, Roberto Rojas, had been injured by a flare.
Fifa banned Rojas from all football for life and announced a list of suspensions of Chilean officials, culminating in the ban from the next World Cup, which will be hosted by the United States.
Sergio Stoppel, president of the Chilean FA at the time, has been banned from involvement in football for life.
Orlando Aravena, the national team coach, has received a life ban from international soccer and a five-year ban at domestic level.
The team doctor, Daniel Rodriguez, gets a life ban for submitting a fraudulent medical certificate detailing Rojas's ‘injury’; and Fernando Astengo, Chile's vice-captain who led the players off the pitch in the Maracana, has been suspended for five years.
The team physiotherapist, Alejandro Koch, has been banned for a year because, in Fifa's words, he was ‘an accomplice of the doctor’, as has the kit man, N Maldonado, because ‘he got rid of the gloves and jersey of the goalkeeper’.
Fifa is awaiting action from the IOC and the Chilean government against the doctors of the Chilean Olympic Committee and the national forensic medical service, all accused of supplying phoney medical certificates.
The Chilean FA has also been fined £42,000.
Fifa had already fined the Brazilians a minor sum for crowd disorder.
Brazil, who had drawn a stormy match 1-1 in Santiago in mid-August, were leading 2-0 in Rio in September when a woman fan released the flare which landed near Rojas but plainly did not hit him.
Nevertheless the goalkeeper played dead, blood appeared from somewhere and the Chileans refused to continue.
Sepp Blatter, the secretary general of Fifa, has described Rojas as ‘a mediocre actor’.
The 1991 World Youth Cup, which was going to Nigeria until they were caught fielding someone over age, will now take place in Portugal.
Argentina will not enter the Rous Cup in May, leaving England to play only Uruguay at Wembley.
Both countries will be hoping to avoid one another in today's World Cup draw.
England will play two friendlies in Sardinia, when they will hope to drum up local support, before their final warm-up against Tunisia on June 2.
Soccer Sardinia ceded to England's record.
By David Lacey in Rome
ENGLAND made their expected landfall in the 1990 World Cup yesterday, leaving Scotland and the Republic of Ireland to drift towards whatever fate the draw has in store for them in Rome tomorrow.
Bobby Robson's team, having been seeded at the head of Group F, will play their three first-round matches in Cagliari on the island of Sardinia.
Andy Roxburgh's Scots have been placed in the second-draw section, along with Spain, the Soviet Union, Austria, Yugoslavia and Holland.
Jack Charlton's Irish, in the finals for the first time, join Colombia, Uruguay, Czechoslovakia, Romania and Sweden in the third pool.
In the end, and in spite of prolonged speculation to the contrary, there was never much doubt either that England would be seeded or that they would begin the World Cup in Cagliari.
Turning Sardinia into a Mediterranean Alcatraz to prevent hooliganism would have looked a little silly if Belgium had gone there instead.
Bert Millichip, the FA chairman, claimed that the decision to seed England in Cagliari had been made purely for footballing reasons.
‘It had nothing to do with security,’ he said.
‘There was never any doubt that England would be seeded…[it]was based on our record in the last two World Cups.
‘With all our problems, we have to be happy with the situation.
Sardinia is a lovely island.
Let's hope it's still a pleasant place when we leave it.’
Spanish attempts to get themselves seeded ahead of England came to nothing.
‘If Spain were upset,’ said Millichip, ‘they didn't say anything.
In fact on the basis worked out for the seedings, we came fifth out of six.’
In spite of what Millichip believes, the need to minimise the possibility of trouble from England's fans has everything to do with their playing in Sardinia.
The Italian interior minister had already stipulated that this was the only way he could guarantee the security of the World Cup.
However, if England do progress beyond the opening round — and with the first two from each group plus the four best third-placed teams going through, it is going to take some wretched performances to fail — they will then travel to Bologna, Genoa or Turin for the second phase, with the prospect of visits to Naples, Rome or Florence in the quarter-finals.
The semi-finals will be in Naples and Turin with the final in Rome on July 8, so the further England go the more complex the security problem will be.
No England team have ever gone beyond the last eight in a World Cup played abroad, and the significance of their seeding this time will only become clear after tomorrow's draw.
However, they do know that winning Group F might give them an easier game in the second round (against the runners-up in Belgium's group) than they would earn by finishing second, when they would face the second-placed side in Argentina's group.
If they finish third they might have to play Brazil.
‘There has been no manipulation of the seeding,’ Millichip insisted, sounding like a character from a Bateman cartoon (‘The Man Who Thought The Draw Was Straight’).
Maybe yesterday's groupings were not actually bent, just massaged to satisfy World Cup convention.
For example, Uruguay were put in the third pool to avoid a possible conflict of South American interests with Colombia.
Nobody will want Uruguay as third team in a group, least of all Scotland after their Mexican experience against them.
The Republic of Ireland could be in England's group, as they were in last year's European Championship.
Robson may prefer Colombians, Czechs or Romanians, and at least with the Swedes you can be reasonably sure of a goalless draw.
All the top seeds will want to avoid Holland, the European champions, and the Soviet Union, who finished runners-up.
But nobody will complain if they get Austria or Scotland, and Spain would be preferred to Yugoslavia.
Cameroun and South Korea are the teams to avoid from the fourth pool.
Certainly England will not complain if they are confronted with Costa Rica, and 1950 is a sufficiently dim memory now not to have bad vibes about the United States.
Yesterday's proceedings were not entirely cut and dried.
The organising committee took four hours to announce the seedings and draw order, much of the time being taken up trying to persuade West Germany, who had assumed they were going to Verona, to switch to Milan at the last moment.
The problem stemmed from Turin's — and therefore Fiat's — demand for an attractive seed to grace the city's new stadium.
Belgium did not fit the bill so it was decided to move Brazil (who were to have played in Milan) to Turin, bring West Germany to the rebuilt San Siro Stadium and send the Belgians to Verona.
The West Germans objected strongly but it was all smoothed over and so they will have a trio of Internazionale players — Matthaus, Klinsmann and Brehme — starting the World Cup on their home ground while Belgium, who at one stage were being threatened with Sicily, are at least promised the occasional cooling breeze in Verona.
Rowing Red Alligator over its hurdle as The Banshee falls at the first.
By Jon Leyne
CAMBRIDGE University's Boat Race trials were derailed yesterday when one of the three crews hit a floating sleeper on the Thames at Putney, tearing a long gash in the hull.
But with a third crew, in the shape of a freshmen's eight, participating for the first time, the race was restarted and the freshmen were beaten by the surviving senior eight by just over two lengths from Putney to Mortlake.
The three crews, all named after former Grand National winners, made their first attempt at the unsocial hour of eight in the morning.
On Surrey, The Banshee contained the president, Paddy Mant, while this year's other remaining Blue, Guy Pooley, was in Red Alligator in the centre.
The freshmen, on Middlesex, were named after Foinavon, the 100-1 outsider that came through to win the National after most of the runners had fallen.
It was a jibe that nearly became a prophecy, though Cambridge were left with more of a one-horse race.
The Banshee came to grief two minutes off the start while lying third, a length down on the leader, Red Alligator.
Its rudder and fin were both knocked out, and a four-foot-long gash in the shell meant even repairs on the bank were out of the question, reinforcing complaints about the lack of driftwood clearance on the river this year.
After the restart it took Red Alligator longer to break clear of the freshmen.
The Red crew gained a length by the mile post and 2 ½ by Hammersmith Bridge, but the freshmen hung on to lose by about the same margin, six seconds behind Red Alligator's winning time of 19min 46sec.
Mark Lees, the Cambridge coach, knows the Light Blues face a serious deficit of talent this year, compared with Oxford's three world bronze medallists and strong supporting cast.
He may be tempted to poach some of his promising-looking freshmen to strengthen Goldie, or even the Blue boat.
Meanwhile, Oxford and London Universities are to put their goods on view in trials next week.
Golf Hare coursing for a 66.
Rob Bonnet on the ordeal of qualifying school at La Manga
AT THE La Manga club in Spain this week there is not a hacking holidaymaker in sight.
Two hundred and eight golf professionals — some reigning champions, others young rookies — have been competing for 50 places on next season's full European Tour.
By Wednesday the 208 had been reduced by 100 after four rounds, the cut having come at four over par.
Later this morning, after two more rounds, a further 58 will be excluded.
Some of the 50 who win their cards are likely to have done so by surviving a sudden-death play-off: careers are launched, and sometimes sunk, on the accuracy of a three-foot putt on the 109th green.
Bad weather has prolonged the tension by half an extra day.
Among those already out of their misery is Richard Fish.
He is used to it, though; this is his 11th failure in 12 years of trying.
He missed the four-round cut by two strokes, but he left the course with a cheery ‘See you next year’.
Jackie Nicklaus carries the burden of his father's name and knows it does not hit golf balls for him.
He too will have to try again.
Failure has driven some in the past to tears, but for the moment the 22-year-old Andrew Hare, from Sleaford, Lincolnshire, is quietly showing the bright-eyed optimism of the first-timer.
He made the cut by three strokes, and in qualifying for the final two rounds he has already guaranteed himself a place on next season's growing satellite tour, Europe's golfing second division.
That is already progress.
He only turned professional 12 weeks ago after helping to beat the United States in the Walker Cup this summer.
His amateur career started at the age of 12 with a father's encouragement and a set of women's irons.
Two and a half years later he was a four-handicapper, but then he broke his leg in two places playing football and missed a whole season.
His handicap went up to six.
He has not turned out for the village team since.
Hare's sights are set high, but he thinks it best not to listen to those who predict a bright future for him.
‘I had a bonus at this year's Open, a practice round with my hero Bernhard Langer.
You expect fire to come out of the back of his ball when he hits it, but his ball's flight is no different to mine.
So it brings you on level terms.’
Hare did admit to Ian Wright, who caddied for Seve Ballesteros, that he would feel intimidated if Wright carried for him at La Manga.
Wright told him: ‘Don't be so silly; it's immaterial.’
His caddie instead is ‘Baldrick’, Richard Owens from Sleaford who got his nickname from Hare's request on the practice ground for more ammunition.
Owens may not know the course intimately, but he knows Hare's game, which relies on consistent direction off the tee and accuracy on the green.
Here the latter has been wanting: ‘I know it sounds daft.
I've putted well but haven't holed anything.’
Today's final cut for the last 50 seems likely to fall at one under par.
Hare will need a three-under in his final round to make it, but is aiming for a six-under 66.
As for the game itself, Hare has a philosophy which might make the rest of us win.
‘No disrespect to a 20-handicapper.
When you watch them you think it almost looks pointless.
But it isn't; it's the good rounds that bring you back.
My lowest ever is a 62; my aim now is a 61.
The better you get, the more you want to play.
I love the game.’
After yesterday's fifth round, four players shared first place.
Heinz Peter Thuel of West Germany, Steven Bowman of the United States and England's David Ray and Christopher Williams were 15 under par on 345.
Rob Bonnet is the BBC TV News sports correspondent.
South Africa's David Frost and the Americans Scott Hoch and Tim Simpson scored five-under-par 67s yesterday to share the lead after the first round of the Million Dollar Challenge at Sun City, Bophuthatswana.
Frost scored five birdies on the back nine to catch Hoch and Simpson.
They each had 32s on the front nine, including eagles at the par-five 9th, and 35s coming in.
No one else in the field broke par.
Vauxhall in the vanguard.
By Russell Thomas
VAUXHALL LEAGUE teams could well be in the vanguard of the non-League assault on England's top clubs when the FA Cup third-round draw is made on BBC1 tomorrow night.
With three clubs — Aylesbury, Basingstoke and Woking — in today's second round, the Vauxhall League boasts the same number of representatives at this stage as the GM Vauxhall Conference.
The BBC cameras will concentrate on the games at Basingstoke and Whitley Bay, but there is plenty of opportunity for non-League rejoicing elsewhere.
Northampton's County Ground could be the scene of one upset for the visit of several old boys — including the manager, Trevor Gould — in the ranks of ambitious Aylesbury, the Vauxhall Premier leaders.
Gould, brother of Wimbledon's Bobby, has just signed a new five-year contract.
He reckons his best chance of managing a Football League team lies in ‘taking Aylesbury there’.
Basingstoke's Camrose ground is preparing for a record 4,000-plus crowd for the visit of Torquay, whose chances of survival have been reduced by the flu bug in their camp.
Trevor Williams, Basingstoke's manager, can call on a full-strength squad apart from the defender Sandy Baird, injured in the last round.
Fred Callaghan, the Woking coach and London cabbie, directs his Vauxhall team to Cambridge United confident that his full-strength squad will not lose their way as they did last season in falling 4-1 to the Fourth Division side.
Whitley Bay attempt to take the HFS Loans League banner into tonight's draw at the expense of Preston.
Even without the suspended Chris Scott, whose goal gave them their win at Scarborough, the home side's manager Bobby Graham believes his men will claim another League victim.
Fulham have been ordered by the FA to go ahead with their tie at Bristol City, even though flu has claimed most of the first team.
Ray Lewington has named a squad of 14 although, he said, ‘in normal circumstances only three would be considered.
I'll be playing, so will [assistant manager]Gary Peters, and neither of us should be near the team sheet.’
Wembley cuts ticket prices.
WEMBLEY has cut some of its ticket prices by half in an attempt to ensure a respectable crowd for England's friendly against Yugoslavia next Wednesday.
Seats in the new Olympic Gallery, which cost £40 each for last month's game against Italy, have now been reduced to £20.
The maximum price for other seats is £15, with the cheapest at £5.
Richard Gough will make his comeback for Rangers tomorrow only six weeks after shattering his jaw in four places.
The defender, hurt in a collision with Hibernian's Pat McGinlay, will be in the Scottish champions' line-up against Motherwell at Ibrox.
Neath banned from touring.
By David Plummer
THE Welsh Rugby Union has banned Neath from touring abroad for three years because they walked off the pitch in a pre-season friendly in France last August.
Neath were playing against Brive in a quadrangular tournament involving Toulouse and Bath.
Three forwards were believed to have been sent off, two from Neath and one from Brive.
At the time Neath said they walked off in disgust after 35 minutes because their lock Gareth Llewellyn was told he could continue until the interval but would then be sent off.
Two players had allegedly already been banished for fighting.
But when the French official submitted his report to the WRU, only Llewellyn was cited for foul play.
On the basis of that report the union has disciplined Neath.
However, the WRU is seeking clarification from the French Rugby Federation before dealing with Llewellyn.
It wants a more detailed report, but Llewellyn, though free now to continue playing, will eventually be subject to the same disciplinary measures as a player sent off at home.
If the union found against him, that would indicate a minimum four-week ban, ruling him out of Wales's opening home championship match against France next month — unless, that is, his case were dealt with within the next fortnight.
The WRU has appointed a four-man committee of inquiry to look into the events surrounding the centenary tour of South Africa last August.
It will be chaired by a QC, Vernon Pugh, with the union's honorary solicitor John Evans as his assistant.
The other members will be two erstwhile presidents of the union, Desmond Barnett and Glyn Morgan.
The WRU has ruled that none of its players will be given permission to take part in the centenary tour of Natal planned for next summer.
Fit again Barnbrook can give the weight away.
By Richard Baerlein
TODAY'S excellent programme at Cheltenham has not been ruined by the hard ground to the extent which at one time appeared likely and there are two bonus runners, namely the champion hurdler, Beech Road in the Charles Heidsieck Champagne Bula Hurdle, and the Queen Mother Two Mile Champion Chase winner Barnbrook Again in the A.F.Budge Handicap Chase.
David Elsworth is lucky to have such a superb performer as Barnbrook Again in his string at the same time as Desert Orchid.
Barnbrook Again was unbeaten last season and there was something radically amiss when he fell on his reappearance at Kempton for which there has never been a satisfactory explanation.
However, he fully redeemed himself next time out at Newbury when he gave 2st to Springholm and beat him with a bit in hand.
Barnbrook Again is being trained for the King George on Boxing Day, when he will take on Desert Orchid.
Today's event is his tuning-up race and he has not got an easy task.
However, he will be fitter and more able to cope with the ground than the form book danger, Rusch de Farges, whom he beat three lengths last season, but the latter has an 8lb advantage.
Earlier in the week Pipe was not sure to give his Gold Cup candidate a race on the firm ground but the stable is in tremendous form and the inmates do not seem unduly affected by the state of the ground.
Clever Folly has made great improvement this season, winning three of his five races and he is only 1lb out of the handicap.
He has already proved he can win on the ground and he beat Repington five lengths at Huntingdon last week.
Joint Sovereignty won over the course and distance winner when getting up to beat the smart Golden Freeze a neck in the Mackeson Gold Cup.
He finished three lengths in front of Dudie, who is 4lb better off.
The top chasers have a habit of being able to give weight and a beating to their more humble rivals and although Barnbrook Again appears to have been given a stiff task in conceding 8lb to Rusch de Farges, his two runs already this season should give him the advantage.
The Bula Hurdle is likely to have a considerable influence on the ante-post market for the Champion Hurdle, for which Beech Road at present shares the 5-1 favourite spot with Kribensis.
The latter started favourite for last year's Champion but proved no match for Beech Road, though he is expected to become a stronger horse this season.
For one who is better with some give in the ground and who is having his seasonal debut, Beech Road will find a super-fit Cruising Altitude, receiving 6lb, a big task.
Cruising Altitude has put up two really smart performances this season both at Newbury.
First he beat Tom Troubadour, who has won since, and then he slammed Morley Street in the Gerry Fielden.
As a result he is down to 7-1 third favourite for the Champion and the way he is improving he could end up shorter still.
Barry Hills is expecting his Cesarewitch winner Nomadic Way to reach the top in due course but his one run this season hardly suggests he will beat Cruising Altitude receiving only 4lb.
He is only 1lb better off for about ten lengths.
Osric gets 12lb from Beech Road and 6lb from Cruising Altitude, which puts him in with a chance.
Past Glories suggested he is on the way back when third to Kribensis in the Fighting Fifth at Newcastle, while Floyd is not quite up to it in the highest class these days.
As Cruising Altitude is at his very best and is favoured by the weights they will find him very difficult to beat.
The Mercury Communications Challenge Hurdle has tempted Jonathan Sheppard, the leading N.H. trainer in America for the past 17 years, to bring over Jamaica Bay together with his 21 year old college girl rider, Blythe Miller.
The challenge began last year when the Americans could not win here and the English could not win in America.
Now Jamaica Bay can collect a $100,000 bonus for winning the Sport of Kings Challenge on both sides of the Atlantic.
He won the first leg at Nashville.
Blythe Miller, in her first full season, is proving a very able rider.
Although Jamaica Bay likes the fast ground, he faces a very formidable rival in Toby Balding's Morley Street.
This five-year-old was only beaten once in five outings last season.
On his seasonal debut he was beaten six lengths by the very fit Cruising Altitude.
Martin Pipe saddles Tel-Echo, who looked a promising prospect last season when only given two outings.
He was second on his debut at Leicester but went back to that track to win by 20 lengths.
He could be a danger.
Deep Sensation is a horse with a future, probably over fences, but I doubt if any of them will be able to beat Morley Street.
At Doncaster Mr Frisk, who came to the last fence in front in the Hennessy Gold Cup, should gain compensation in the Constant Security Handicap Chase, and Red Ruddel can gain his fourth consecutive victory of the season.
Richard Baerlein's selections: Nap: Cruising Altitude (1.20 Cheltenham).
Next best: Morley Street (2.30 Cheltenham).
PAGE
Leonard keeps more money than friends in a farce of fistic folly John Rodda in Las Vegas on how the battle between two greats ended as a sad stalemate.
ASTRATEGY for winning, but not winning friends, took Sugar Ray Leonard to the prize and to his first $100million from boxing.
But his world super-middleweight title fight with Roberto Duran, ushered in with an awesome display of fireworks to mark the opening of the largest resort in Las Vegas, turned out to be a stalemate in styles, a fistic folly in which the two outstanding exponents of the Eighties brought the decade to a close amid booing and jeering.
Nine years ago when the pair met in Montreal, Leonard taunted his opponent to the limits of frustration and Duran walked out after eight rounds calling: ‘No mas.’
There were derisory calls of a similar kind from the crowd long before the eighth round on Thursday as the fighters went to their corners after another three minutes of little more than dancing.
Strip the argument for boxing down to its bare elements and you find Leonard producing exactly the fight required.
But somewhere along the line the input of those on the other side of the ropes, many there for the price of $800 (£500), has to come into the account and the argument is faulted.
Boxing at this level is up on stage with show business and this kind of performance does not count as entertainment.
A pair of young fighters who come into the ring and fight a contest of this kind would have had the referee boxing their ears and offering such terse words as ‘get in there and fight’.
Indeed Bob Arum, the promoter, who put it all down to a conflict of styles, recently dismissed his ranked middleweight Michael Nunn for such a negative performance.
But this was a world-title fight by two of the greatest world champions and the only contribution from the referee, Richard Steele, was to pull them apart.
This brought the bitter words from Duran, ‘How can I win in America [a hint that the political climate between Panama and the United States is also manifested in boxing]when Leonard's Siamese twin is the referee?’
Although that is overkill in defence of his part, Duran had some cause to grumble that the referee instantly pulled the pair apart when Duran forced a clinch.
It was from those situations that he was likely to salvage something and draw Leonard into a fight.
Each round was a photocopy of the previous one, Duran edging forward, Leonard moving backwards and the space between them constant.
The speed of hands stamped the most vivid contrast on the encounter, for in each session Leonard took time out in his backtracking to whip in the jab and later the left hook to win the judges' favour.
Nine years ago and several times since, Duran had shown the difficulty he has in fighting someone who is on the retreat.
This time his 38-year-old legs were not quick enough to cut off the corners and trap his quarry for even the slightest roughing-up.
Yet if Leonard's fleet feet were still part of his youthfulness, there were signs of bodily frailty; he bore the only real wounds of the contest, a cut to the lip sustained early on and a more serious one over the left eye in the 11th round.
But it was a fight in which no one— apart from the punters — suffered any real pain.
By the third round Leonard was producing a replay of their last contest, taunting Duran by thrusting his head forward, safely out of range, and then winding up his right hand with the threat of a bolo punch.
He stared wide-eyed, then turned aside and looked disdainful while the grizzled, worn features of Duran were screwed up to hide his frustration.
By the fourth round the crowd was jeering.
It turned to booing and some chanted expletives by the eighth, when Leonard, clearly mastering the fight, won points with some superb counter-shots but then pulled back from driving in the wedge.
He caught Duran with a solid left hook and when Duran grabbed for cover Leonard wanted to get out and back to his sniping post.
That is when the crowd felt cheated; Duran had come to fight, Leonard only to win, and since the tactic was working why change it?
‘By the third round I knew the fight was going my way,’ Leonard said.
The judge, Jerry Roth, gave every round but the final one to Leonard.
Bob Logist had the first and the last round drawn and the remainder for Leonard, while Joe Cortez gave the fourth, fifth, ninth and 10th rounds to Duran to produce the narrowest margin, 116-111.
The statistics showed the disparity in more stunning form: Duran connected with only 84 punches in the 12 rounds but threw 588, a percentage of 14.3.
Leonard's workrate overall produced 438 punches, of which just over half hit the target.
According to The Mirage Resort, the gate receipt from the crowd of 16,000 was a world record of $9.1million (£6m), which seems slightly suspect since that works out an average of $500 before one takes account of the undisclosed figure of complimentary tickets.
The most resilient part of the boxing business is the promotional side, and no doubt it will recover from the barrage of criticism that will pour on this contest.
But modern boxing has a more sensitive audience, one that never goes to the arena but watches at home on the television.
If they switch off and the closed-circuit figures drop, the present heady economics of it all begin to crumble.
No one this time was talking about the next fight.
‘I want to go home to my family and Christmas,’ Leonard said.
Positive thinking will have to wait a while, but it augurs well for one of the young ringsiders who turned up in his smartest suit and said: ‘What a disgusting fight; I wish I'd worn my tracksuit.’
This was fighting pride from Nigel Benn of Britain, who produces the sort of middleweight action the punters want to see: knockout punching.
Whether the men of the Eighties want to risk their ageing bodies against such threats, only the Nineties will reveal.
Boxing White Hopes like Cooney do not have a prayer of toppling Tyson.
John Rodda meets Max Schmeling, 85, and ponders: Where are his peers today?
THE oldest fight story of them all, the Great White Heavyweight Hope, has turned up here again.
Max Schmeling, who became the darling of the Nazi Party by being the first man to defeat Joe Louis, was feted in one of those boxing nostalgias which try, on the side, to thumb the nose at the American Medical Association and other such clinical societies concerned about brain damage.
Schmeling, a sprightly, dignified 85-year-old, is certainly an argument that some fighters come to no harm, even those who suffer the sort of beating Louis meted out when the pair met again.
Among those at the party was Muhammad Ali, who unlike Louis has, so far, not sunk to being doorman at Caesars Palace; he just stands in the Mirage Hotel at the head of a never diminishing human snake, signing his autograph.
Parkinson's Disease seems to be marking time at the moment.
With Ali at the honouring of Schmeling was Mike Tyson, a reminder that these days there is not much hope for any White Hope.
But a mile off The Strip, on a trading estate, the Top Rank gym bubbles with fighting action and gossip and, with a bit of a strain, the White Hope theory is being nurtured.
At 33, Gerry Cooney is cranking up to beat another golden oldie, George Foreman, who is 41, in Atlantic City next month under the promotion banner The Preacher and The Puncher.
Foreman, winner of three world heavyweight title fights in the early Seventies, is best remembered for his part in the one he lost: ‘The rumble in the jungle’ in Kinshasa, Zaire, when Ali knocked him out.
Now he is a minister of a church in Houston, where among the prayers he offers is one to be allowed to fight Tyson for the world title.
There are thousands, not of his flock, who are praying that he will not.
Cooney can fulfil their wish by cutting him down in their Atlantic City conflict, without inflicting the harm of which Tyson is capable.
Cooney always seemed a reluctant fighter, a man more pushed into the business by parental desire and promoters who saw the advantage of his size — 6ft 7in — rather than his personal predicament.
It is 2 ½ years since he lost in a world title match to Michael Spinks and just as he did after a similar fight, with Larry Holmes, he brooded for a long time, finally overcame problems with drugs, and went into business, part of which was as a fight promoter.
He put on one of the Foreman return contests — though even he would admit now that the word contest is stretching credibility.
For this latest return to the ring he has linked with Foreman's former trainer, Gil Clancy, who admits it is going to be hard getting Cooney back into shape.
He is using middleweight and light-heavyweight sparring partners in an attempt to make Cooney work faster, but in the session I watched he was not quick enough.
‘It was one of those rough days,’ Cooney admitted with a bruise under his left eye and a shining, tight patch of skin on his very large nose.
His monotone drawl made one feel he is not yet convinced that he has the mental application to match his great physical ability.
Cooney cuts out talk about Tyson with: ‘I'll take one fight at a time.’
But toppling Foreman will start a bandwagon at a time when, with one exception, the heavyweight division is bereft of talent and ability.
Hockey Pakistan 4, England 1.
English defence again porous
ENGLAND suffered the same fate in the second Test with Pakistan in Lahore as they did in the first, losing heavily.
A 4-1 defeat was marginally better than the 5-1 setback on Tuesday against the side who will be England's key rivals for a semi-final place in their World Cup group in February.
Martyn Grimley (Hounslow) scored England's goal with a well-struck penalty corner shot in the 54th minute, immediately after England had conceded a third goal.
Both teams included their second goalkeepers and made two other changes from the first Test.
England were able to start with their captain Richard Leman and gave an outing to Don Williams.
Pakistan brought in Qasim Khan and Zahid to their attack.
English observers felt England had improved and that they dominated periods of the game but were let down by defensive errors.
The forwards exerted pressure from time to time, with Thompson and the substitute Garcia both going close to scoring.
Once again the umpiring, by two Pakistanis, left something to be desired, but Pakistan are a fit and talented young side with players of flair.
Bhopali, breaking through the middle, gave them the lead after 16 minutes, and England again conceded a goal immediately after the interval.
An unforced error by Faulkner gave away a penalty corner which was converted by Saeed Anjum.
In the 52nd minute England had two chances to clear before the second-half substitute Qamar Ibrahim scored.
He added his second goal four minutes from time.
PAKISTAN: Shahid Ali Khan; Qasi Mohib (capt), Khalid Bashir; Saeed Anjum, Farhat Khan, K M Junaid; Qasim Khan (Qamar Ibrahim, 47min), Tahir Zaman, Arif Bhopali, Zahid Sharif (Shahbaz, 31), Wasim Feroze.
ENGLAND: S Rowlands (Havant); P Bolland (Hounslow), D Faulkner; R Hill (both Havant), J Potter, M Grimley (both Hounslow); D Williams (Havant; R Garcia, Havant, 47), R Leman (East Grinstead, capt; Soma Singh, Southgate, 55), C Mayer (Cannock), R Clift (East Grinstead), N Thompson (Old Loughtonians).
Umpires: Rashid Ali Khan and K N Bajwa (both Pakistan).
Today three of the feeder competitions for the National League — the East, North and West Leagues — complete their pre-winter break fixtures, writes Pat Rowley.
Firebrands have a six-point lead in the West before meeting Swindon.
Chelmsford must beat Pelicans to be sure of heading the East League at the break.
For Preston, the North leaders, merely beating Bradford will be no guarantee of retaining top place in the AW Yarns competition since Ben Rhydding and Alderley Edge have the same number of points.
Territorial encroached on all fronts.
THE end may be in sight for the annual Territorial Championship, whose post-Christmas slot is the least acceptable in the women's fixture list.
The once eagerly awaited tournament, a highlight because of its purpose as England trials, is suffering the effects of progress, writes Janet Ruff.
No longer used for England selection purposes, the event has been trimmed, condensed and diminished, and apart from upholding a vestige of regional pride is now becoming lost in the mists of tradition.
The England training squad, with the World Cup on their minds, have been barred, and other players are pursuing alternative attractions during a well earned Christmas break.
The venue, Silksworth, near Sunderland, is as usual for this championship neither central nor convenient for the majority.
This year there is one further change, the backing of a sponsor, and the NatWest Cup to play for.
The tournament, which starts on December 28, is run concurrently with the Under-21 Territorial Championships, an event that has rather more significance as an England trials showcase.
The East, who have won the title for the past two years, are the defending champions and they select their squad this weekend, as do the South.
With their squads already chosen, the North, Midlands and West get down to concentrated coaching.
Rugby League Bettinson dismissal leaves doubt over Reilly.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
THE management team which has built the most successful Great Britain side since the Seventies was broken up yesterday with the dismissal of the 54-year-old Les Bettinson, team manager since 1985.
Malcolm Reilly, reported to be ‘shocked’ by Bettinson's dismissal, has been offered an up-graded title of coach/ manager while Maurice Lindsay, the Wigan chairman, replaces Bettinson and assumes the title of tour director and business manager.
Bettinson, a director of education in Stockport, had booked an appointment with his superior yesterday to ask for the unpaid leave he would have needed to complete the tour of Papua New Guinea and New Zealand next summer.
He was under the impression that the renewal of his contract was a formality.
Bettinson is a man of considerable dignity, diplomatic and not given to emotional language.
But he was a hurt and disillusioned man yesterday.
‘Now I know how Julius Caesar felt on the steps of the Senate before he was stabbed in the back,’ Bettinson said.
There will be no shortage of sympathy for him.
Bob Ashby, the chairman, said that Bettinson's contract had expired ‘and we wanted the best man for the job…and that is Maurice.
His position on the board of directors is immaterial.
Maurice has a proven track record with Wigan’.
Lindsay, who said that he had no idea he would be offered the job, pledged his support to Reilly, saying that he was ‘firmly behind the decision to ask Malcolm to continue as he is obviously the best man for the job’.
Lindsay said that Reilly could rely on his ‘unswerving support as he is a man I have the highest respect for’.
But will Reilly now accept the post?
What seemed a formality on Wednesday looked less certain 24 hours later, and he himself hinted at a possible obstacle when he said he would have to get the permission of his employers, the brewers John Smith.
If that permission were not forthcoming, he said, he would have to reject the job.
Then there is Phil Larder, the third member of the management team which led Great Britain to victory over Australia in Sydney last year and to a 2-1 series win over New Zealand recently.
It is not now certain that he will be invited to join the tour next summer, nor is it certain that he would accept if he were.
Rugby Union Harriman coughs, Smith wings in.
THE England and Wasps wing Simon Smith has been called up by London for their divisional match against the South-West at Imber Court tomorrow.
He replaces Andrew Harriman, of Harlequins, who became another flu victim.
Smith should have been on the bench for London's game against the Midlands last Saturday but had to drop out with the same complaint.
Midlands have also made a late change.
Tim Buttimore replaces Gary Hartley in the centre against the North at Moseley.
Hartley has infected vocal cords.
Buttimore has only recently returned to top rugby in England after two summers in Australia.
While there he was called up by the England squad when the touring team ran into injury trouble last summer.
Nigel Heslop of Orrell replaces Tony Underwood, who broke his jaw against the South-West last weekend.
The Neath lock Mike Whitson has been given an eight-week ban after being sent off in a Schweppes Cup tie against South Glamorgan Institute.
He was dismissed by the Brecon referee David Cherry for punching.
Whitson, who was also sent off while playing for Newbridge three years ago, will miss the next tie against Ystrad Rhondda and seven Merit Table club games.
Rugby Union Romanians relish their underdog role.
By Robert Armstrong
SCOTLAND meet Romania at Murrayfield today in a match which should be a useful warm-up for the forthcoming Five Nations Championship.
Given the substantial gap in standards between Scottish club rugby and the international arena, the Scots, who do not play their next game until February 3, clearly need all the match practice they can get at the highest competitive level.
While the form and ability of the players in action today is probably too well known to give this fixture the aura of a trial, Scotland will relish the chance to test their mettle against Romania's key areas of strength.
Traditionally the East European side offers a solid challenge in the set-pieces and keeps theoretically superior opponents under pressure with prodigious line-kicking from their experienced fly-half, Ignat.
It will be intriguing to see whether Romania's rather conservative tactics will be altered under their new manager, Mircea Paraschiv, and new coach, Florin Popovici, who both took over last month.
Defeat by the Soviet Union in the autumn was a traumatic experience for the Romanians, who responded by dismissing their coach, Theodor Radulescu, who is also the father of Alexander, the captain of the beaten side.
Paraschiv, a former international scrum-half who was involved in a 28-22 victory over the Scots in Bucharest five years ago, believes that Romania have more potential than this year's mediocre results indicate.
Wins against Western Samoa and Zimbabwe at the start of this season helped to restore a little confidence after the 58-3 humiliation by England in Bucharest last May.
It remains to be seen whether the role of unfancied underdogs suits Romania at Murrayfield as their manager appears to think.
This year Scotland have won all their home games, against Wales, Ireland and Fiji, scoring nearly 100 points in a style brimful of colour and movement.
Today's target will be a minimum of 30 points.
Of course, since the early Eighties, Romania have demonstrated periodically that they are capable of upsetting complacent opponents with a committed, well organised pack, allied to the ability to kick long-range goals.
Their 15-9 victory over Wales at Cardiff Arms Park last December was beyond dispute the most significant result they have ever achieved on foreign soil.
The Scots, though, are more likely to recall their 12-6 victory over Romania on their last visit to Murrayfield in 1981.
That score was close enough to justify Scotland's decision to accord the game full international status but it will be a considerable surprise if they fail to win by at least 20 points today.
Meanwhile the Toshiba Divisional Championship moves into its second phase with the holders, London, playing host to the South-West at Imber Court while the Midlands entertain the North at The Reddings.
If London and the North both win, as expected, then the stage will be nicely set for a north-south shoot-out in their final game at Otley next Saturday.
South-West were dealt a blow yesterday when their England flanker Andy Robinson pulled out after falling victim to the ‘flu epidemic.
He is replaced by Ian Smith who completes an all-Gloucester back row.
It will be crucial how Redman and Etheridge perform in the line-out against London's Ackford and Edwards.
The pressure on the Richmond fly-half, Martin Livesey, who makes his first appearance for the South-West, will also be significant.
The North have both the motivation and the coordination behind the scrum to brush aside a rebuilt Midlands team.
Dewi Morris and David Pears form a half-back partnership of genuine enterprise and aggression — exactly the qualities needed to feed the northern taste for fast-moving attack on a broad front.
The Midlands hooker Brian Moore returns after injury and the 6ft 10in lock Martin Bayfield should also have something to say when Dooley and Kimmins stake their obtrusive claim in the line-out.
SCOTLAND: G Hastings (London Scottish); A Stanger (Hawick), S Hastings (Watsonians), S Lineen (Boroughmuir), L Renwick (London Scottish); D Wyllie (Stewart's-Melville), G Armstrong (Jedforest); D Sole (Edinburgh Academicals, capt), K Milne (Heriot's FP), P Burnell (London Scottish), C Gray (Nottingham), D Cronin (Bath), J Jeffrey (Kelso), D White (London Scottish), F Calder (Stewart's-Melville).
ROMANIA: M Toader; B Serban, A Lungu, G Sava, S Chirila; G Ignat, D Neaga; G Leonte, V Ion, G Dumitrescu, S Ciorascu, C Raducanu, O Sugar, I Doja, H Dumitras (capt).
Referee: S Hilditch (Ireland).
Cricket Sky and BSB are at home.
By Mike Selvey
THE tentacles of satellite television are spreading even wider, even unto the English domestic scene.
Yesterday at Lord's the Test and County Cricket Board announced separate deals involving both Sky TV and British Satellite Broadcasting for the transmission of a large segment of the domestic game for the next three years.
In what can only be considered a plan of Baldrickian cunning, not only will the Board's coffers be groaning with the weight of money but — and here is the really clever part — fewer people than ever will now be able to observe what a mess the game is really in.
The deals are in fact important in the way the game is to be projected in the future in this country.
Already Sky TV is exclusively showing the winter series live from West Indies (with Geoff Boycott the newest recruit to the broadcasting team).
Now both Sky and BSB have extended their interests to include the 1990 and 1991 domestic seasons as well.
Perhaps the more significant of the deals is that involving BSB, which launches five new channels in the spring.
In a two-year deal, believed to be worth more than £1 million, they will enjoy, if that is the right word, exclusive live coverage of the Benson and Hedges Cup as well as a highlights package including all England's home Tests, one-day internationals and the NatWest competition.
The latter package is designed to be broadcast during the peak viewing hours of 8pm and 10pm when the BBC has traditionally been unable to do it.
Andrew Croker, head of BSB's sports channel, sees this as a bonus for cricket fans.
‘With the highlights package, now at last they will be able to see the best cricket at the time they will want to watch it.’
Peter Lush, who handled the TV negotiations on behalf of the TCCB, added his support.
‘The deal will benefit both the cricketing public and the Benson and Hedges competition, with more matches covered live and viewers enjoying a wider choice during peak hours.’
The BBC still has its live coverage of the international matches and the NatWest Trophy, and it will also be screening highlights of the other matches but of necessity these will appear at the usual anti-social hours.
It is debatable whether Sky for its part has bought a pig in a poke.
It will be reviving memories of summers past by transmitting ball-by-ball coverage of the Refuge Assurance Sunday League.
In previous years this was how the BBC treated the competition, but gradually, with its revamped Sunday Grandstand, cricket took a back seat to free-fall dominoes and the like.
This appeared to please neither public nor sponsor.
Now Sky, with promised aggressive coverage, can put it back on an equal footing with the other competitions, although a more compelling argument for reviving the Sunday afternoon walk in the country it is hard to imagine.
Testing baptism for Chamberlain.
IF Frank Chamberlain, chairman elect of the Test and County Cricket Board, had any qualms about taking on the job next October, they will have been magnified by his introduction to the massed press at Lord's yesterday, writes Mike Selvey.
The first question he was asked was how he intended to overturn the ‘deceit and deception’ rife in the TCCB.
This turned out to be a reference to the secrecy surrounding the use of Ossie Wheatley's power of veto as chairman of the cricket committee to block the reappointment of Mike Gatting rather than David Gower as England captain last summer.
Chamberlain coughed politely and said he was sure it would be cleared up by the time he took over.
He said he would be trying to bridge the gap between the board and the counties, who he thought ‘perhaps felt they weren't having enough say.’
Not least, it had been surmised, with the veto.
However the board's chief executive, Alan Smith, was able to say that unlike yesterday's press conference the issue at the board meeting did not occupy a major part of the time.
‘They fully endorsed the right of Wheatley to use the veto at his discretion.’
Smith added that the board did not subscribe to the view that the authority of Ted Dexter, chairman of the England Committee, and Micky Stewart, the team manager, had been undermined by the veto.
The nub of the meeting had been a lengthy discussion on the merits or otherwise of four-day cricket, while matters decided on were the 25-point penalty for producing inferior pitches, retained with wider definition to include over-grassed pitches; overseas players (counties may register up to two for next season only); a return to 15-yard run-ups in the Sunday League; and the making up of lost time in Tests to a maximum one hour.
Sport in brief Cricket.
Geoff Boycott is one of an 11-strong coaching team assembled by the England manager, Micky Stewart, to help prepare this winter's touring sides to West Indies and Zimbabwe.
The team, which also includes the former England players Alan Knott, Don Wilson, Geoff Arnold, David Lloyd, Bob Cottam and Norman Gifford, will conduct a five-week programme at six indoor centres.
Golf.
Hopes of golf making an Olympic comeback in 1992 failed yesterday when the IOC ruled against its inclusion as an exhibition sport in Barcelona.
Athletics.
Linford Christie, back from warm-weather training, runs in the 60 and 200 metres at the Scottish indoor championships in Glasgow this weekend.
Billiards.
Peter Gilchrist, a 21-year old Teessider, retained the British Open championship by beating the former world champion Norman Dagley 1,166-1,008 in the four-hour final in Leeds.
After breaks of 222, 213 and 116 in the afternoon his best was 73 in the evening but he held off Dagley, who had one of 252.
Sport in brief Athletics.
Steve Jones will run for the first time in the Morpeth-Newcastle, Britain's oldest road race, on New Year's Day..
Skiing.
Vreni Schneider, Switzerland's defending World Cup overall champion, could be out for two weeks after suffering a knee injury during downhill training in Colorado..
Golf.
Britain's Chris Moody is joint second after yesterday's first round of the Australian Classic in Melbourne, where Peter Senior extended his remarkable run with eight birdies to lead with a seven-under-par 65.
Senior has won the Australian Open and Australian PGA title in the past month.
PAGE
Reynolds earns Davis return.
By Clive Everton
DEAN REYNOLDS, whitewashed by Steve Davis in the Rothmans Grand Prix final, made a break of 112 to clinch his 9-7 win over Tony Meo last night which gives him a return meeting with Davis in today's quarter-final of the Everest World Matchplay Championship at the Brentwood Centre.
Dennis Taylor recovered from 1-4 to beat Mike Hallett 9-5 and will play John Parrott.
Birdman Reed will not duck the issue David Hopps on the Aylesbury ‘Rambo’ who is set to ruffle Northampton's feathers.
THE only Aylesbury Ducks likely to be found at The County Ground tomorrow will be an increasingly celebrated strain decked in green and white hoops.
Aylesbury's footballers have progressed to the second round of the FA Cup — and an away tie at Northampton Town — without a flutter of recognition from the whiter-than-white duck which provides their nickname.
‘Duckie’ Weston, a renowned local breeder, was an Aylesbury follower in his time, and one confused bird did waddle aimlessly around the ground a few seasons ago, but according to the club's chief executive, Tony Graham, ‘they are a devil of a mascot to parade about.’
Could there be, though, a more sinister reason for tomorrow's absence of the Aylesbury duck?
Prepare for a far-fetched tale of a prospective bird-breeder called ‘Rambo’, a burly former Yorkshire miner who admits he prefers his ducks buried under a mountain of cranberry sauce.
It was the fate of countless unfortunates a few seasons ago to become the terraces' substitute for Sylvester Stallone.
One jolting tackle and the link was made with the big screen's violent he-man.
Northampton Town's followers bestowed the well-meant, if dubious, honour on Graham Reed, a vigorous and gritty right-back.
Reed disarmingly describes himself as ‘nearly six feet tall and 13 stones when I'm at my best’, but the banners appeared in force all the same.
Northampton romped away with the Fourth Division championship in 1986-87 and whenever Reed had an off-day his manager, Graham Carr, loved to scoff: ‘Rambo?
More like Bimbo.’
Reed proved not indestructible.
His League career ended prematurely last season when he lost three pieces of bone in an operation on his right ankle.
Daily training became too demanding but non-League football offered an alternative outlet for a player approaching his 28th birthday and, in June he moved to Aylesbury.
With too much spare time suddenly on his hands, he reverted to a hobby enjoyed in his early non-League days with Frickley Athletic.
In Brixworth village, just outside Northampton, he has built an aviary at the bottom of the garden.
He keeps canaries, diamond doves and a pair of quails.
Aylesbury were taking stock of a cheerless season when Reed was signed by Trevor Gould, the elder brother of Wimbledon's manager, Bobby.
The club's first experience of the Vauxhall Conference had brought immediate relegation.
Traditionally members of the Southern (now Beazer Homes) League, they were allotted a place in the Vauxhall League, which they head by two points, and Gould takes a healthy smattering of former Northampton players back tomorrow.
The manager played more than 100 matches for the Cobblers in the early Seventies and, living three miles from the ground, he remains conveniently placed to keep tabs on potential signings.
Two months ago he paid Northampton a club record fee of £15,000 for Glenville Donegal, and the striker's winning goal against Southend United in the FA Cup first round ensured an immediate homecoming.
Donegal was hardly overcome by romantic notions.
‘My friends all say what a great draw it is, but I'm not sure,’ he said.
‘I quite fancied going somewhere different.’
Under Gould's guidance, Aylesbury's FA Cup record could hardly be more consistent.
They have reached the first round for the fifth successive year, although once admitted they initially quailed like nervous party-goers.
Watford drew a crowd of 7,500 to Turnfurlong Lane in 1951 and, by the time Gould broke a 34-year abstinence, plans were being formulated to turn the evocatively named ground into a housing estate.
Aylesbury lost a home replay to Slough in 85-86, fell at Bath the following year, then made a respectable 1-0 exit at Ashton Gate against Third Division Bristol City.
Last year they went one better, overcoming Waterlooville before losing 1-0 at home to Sutton in the second round.
Gould, a self-employed builder, put his craft to good use when Aylesbury transferred four years ago to waste ground off Buckingham Road, on the outskirts of the town.
The manager built both dugouts.
He must be a fair-minded fellow.
Rival managers have been relieved to confirm that the away dugout does actually face the pitch.
Crowds hover a touch above 1,000 this season but up to twice that number will make the trip to Northampton.
At least one banner will proclaim: ‘Rambo rules.’
It will be carried by one of Reed's neighbours, a Northampton supporter.
He is still a child, but old enough to understand about old times' sake.
Sole at the heart of Scotland for many years to come Robert Armstrong on the consummate skills of the new national captain.
WHEN Ian McGeechan made his oft-quoted remark in Australia last summer that David Sole was ‘a player 10 years ahead of his time’, the Lions' coach neatly summed up the collective view of the touring party.
Sole is one of those rare front-row forwards whose remarkable range of skills not only makes him a complete footballer but also brings fresh possibilities to the way the game can be played at the highest level.
In short Sole is a front-row radical for the Nineties.
Talk to Finlay Calder, the man Sole has succeeded as captain of Scotland, and you are left in no doubt about the respect Sole enjoys among his peers.
‘We are all very proud of David,’ says Calder.
‘You name it, he's got it: courage, skill, pace, commitment, the lot.
He is probably the most complete player I have ever seen and certainly the best front-row forward in the world.
‘Some players may be stronger than David but nobody can live with him in terms of all-round ability.
His pace is astonishing.
When I first came across him in 1982 he was playing for Exeter University in a sevens game at Twickenham.
I thought, ‘Who is this awkward little bastard?’
If Scotland had eight David Soles in their side today I for one would not be there.’
Clearly Sole, at 27, is young enough to double or even treble his total of 20 caps.
Given the small nucleus of genuine international players at Scotland's disposal, his influence as leader and player will be crucial in the Five Nations Championship.
In Scotland's club atmosphere the captain invariably creates the prevailing mood.
He emerged as a shrewd captain in Australia, leading the Lions to victories over New South Wales B and an Anzac XV.
When his friend Calder took an autumn break, Sole skippered Scotland for the first time, in a 38-17 win against Fiji at Murrayfield.
Last month he combined the roles of coach and captain on behalf of the Barbarians who lost 22-10 to the All Blacks at Twickenham.
Characteristically he reflects: ‘It was no bad thing that the Baa-Baas had to prepare without an official coach: it forced the players to think a great deal more for themselves.
We could have used more than a couple of training sessions, though, to prepare to meet a team of the All Blacks’ calibre.’
Sole will renew auld acquaintance with the Kiwis when Scotland tour New Zealand next May.
When you put it to Sole that his approach to captaincy is more intellectual than gung-ho he laughs: ‘Well, I am not a Finlay Calder by any means.
But the job of captain remains the same: you have to work in with the coaches, motivate the players and gain their respect.
It's nice to have the same players available from last season, but I think it will be a lot harder this time because the other home countries have got to know us better.’
Sole, of course, came to the attention of leading English players some time before he won his first cap against France (an 18-17 win) at Murrayfield in January 1986.
In his final year at Exeter, where he took a degree in economics and agriculture economics, he joined Bath just as the Avon club started to take off on its four-year domination of the John Player Cup.
‘It's a good place to learn your rugby,’ recalls Sole.
‘Everyone wanted to beat Bath, and the games were always hard.
‘I played in the 1987 cup final win against Wasps, but I don't remember much about that game because I got concussed in the opening 10 minutes.
When I came back to Scotland I found that generally the standard of club rugby was lower.’
Even so Edinburgh Academicals have provided Sole with a solid platform from which he has gone from strength to strength, culminating in three Tests and a series triumph for the Lions.
In his first season as an international Scotland shared the championship with France, and in the 1987 World Cup Sole gave a prodigious performance in a 20-20 draw with the eventual finalists France.
McGeechan believes that Sole has set standards of performance with his pace and mobility in the loose which only a handful of British players, such as Brian Moore of England, are currently emulating.
‘David has very high skill levels, and his driving is as good as anything else in his game,’ he explains.
‘In the past 12 months his play has come more and more to dominate phases of the game, especially against Wales and Ireland.
Quite often David has stepped up the tempo and provided tries for someone else.
I think he will do well as captain.’
Off the field Sole also recently switched roles, resigning from his job with an Edinburgh wine merchant to work as a grain buyer for United Distillers.
Ultimately he hopes to return with his wife and infant son Jamie to Aberdeenshire where his father — who used to captain Cambridge at hockey — runs a small farm.
Meanwhile the Sole family plan to spend a fortnight's holiday in Florida before David girds up for Scotland's challenge in the Five Nations.
‘It's always a fantastic experience to pull on a Scotland jersey and run out at Murrayfield: I get a tremendous buzz from that,’ he says.
‘But I am very competitive, and I love winning too, though it's very important how you win.’
As far as winning in style is concerned, Scotland can be sure their future is secure in the hands of David Sole.
A cosmetic change to alter the face of the offside rule Talking point.
By David Lacey
FROM time to time Fifa, the governing body of world football, comes up with ideas for improving the game, some better than others.
So far nobody has taken up the suggestion that since goalkeepers have become bigger, scoring would be made easier if the goals themselves were enlarged.
This week Fifa revealed the possibility of a less spectacular but rather more sensible change of law.
From next season an attacking player who is in line with the last defender when the ball is played up to him may no longer be offside.
Perhaps the alteration appears slight, no more than cosmetic, but it would make a considerable difference to defensive attitudes, especially in Britain, without undermining the spirit of the offside law.
At the moment the defender organising the line in a flat defence finds it easy to catch an opponent offside.
He knows that as long as everybody stays level with the leading attacker they can just step up when the ball is played and the linesman's flag will be raised.
Supposing, however, the defence has to cope with attackers pushing up just far enough to catch them on the turn and stay onside.
Playing the offside game would become a riskier business, especially against forwards with the pace of Lineker or Rush, who would be given the benefit of the doubt which at present goes to defenders.
The increased speed of the modern game and the athleticism of the participants has led to more crowded play so that linesmen are apt to flag when a forward suddenly breaks clear to receive a pass.
This happened when England played Italy at Wembley last month.
Donadoni split the England defence with a beautifully timed lob and Carnevale darted through to beat Shilton, only to find the flag against him.
Television showed he was onside and under the revised law it would have stood a better chance of being allowed.
Occasionally fans write in to demand that offside be abolished altogether.
This might be an understandable reaction in someone who has endured an afternoon of flag and whistle, but it misses the point of why the law was framed.
If there was no offside, games would be confined to packed goalmouths and creative football disappear.
The last major alteration to the offside law was made in 1925 when it was decided that, instead of needing three opponents between himself and the goalline to stay onside, an attacker would need only two.
The initiative for the change was British: full-backs, working in tandem, were catching forwards offside so often that games were becoming boring and gates were going down.
The proposal to change the law in 1925 came from the Scottish FA which, by coincidence, is drafting the measure which is likely to be put before the International Board, the game's law-making body, during the World Cup next summer.
The four British associations each has a vote on the board, with Fifa having four of its own, which gives it the power of veto but guards against the laws being riddled with crackpot theories — such as making the goals bigger.
Another area of the offside law under examination concerns interfering with play.
There is a feeling that if the wording were changed to ‘seeking to interfere with play’ it would spare the player who is in an offside position but making a genuine attempt to stay onside by, for example, running back towards the halfway line.
However, this would demand a fine sense of judgment by referees.
Remember the riot that broke out at Leeds towards the end of the 1970-71 season when Ray Tinkler allowed a West Bromwich goal to stand, ruling that Colin Suggett, standing offside when the attack crossed the halfway line, had not been interfering with play.
Even if the word ‘seeking’ had been added, the bottles would still have been thrown.
Tennis Frazier finishes off Britain.
By Our Correspondent
GREAT BRITAIN last night handed the Maureen Connolly Trophy back to the United States after Anne Simpkin and Clare Wood, with contrasting performances, lost in the singles at Cardiff.
Britian went down 7-4 overall.
The match in which Simpkin lost 7-6, 6-2 to Audra Keller was a wretched affair, something to be endured rather than enjoyed.
The players' serving was appalling, with Simpkin reduced to an underarm on one occasion.
In the ninth game, with the score 4-4, the American hit four double faults.
Even so she almost got away with it, and four times had game point.
But Simpkin finally broke her to lead 5-4, then had two set points.
However, an excellent Keller volley and Simpkin's missed passing shot lost those.
Wood's match was of far higher quality, and although the Briton lost 3-6, 7-6, 6-3 to Amy Frazier she came within three points of defeating an opponent ranked 33 in the world.
Like Simpkin, Wood was let down by an erratic serve.
But she moved extremely well and rallied consistently with precision and confidence.
Her game shows enormous improvement from a year ago, and the indications are that her breakthrough into the top 100 will come soon.
Ann Jones, the team captain, is confident that Sarah Loosemore, who won both her singles, will join her there.
‘The game is about guts and determination and the drive not to lose, and Sarah has the instincts to go for those shots,’ said Jones.
‘She looks and moves like a winner.’
The future of the Scottish grass-court championships, one of the warm-up events for Wimbledon, is in doubt after the Bank of Scotland yesterday withdrew its sponsorship because of‘soaring costs’.
Wolves go up for sale at £4m.
By Russell Thomas
WOLVERHAMPTON Wanderers are up for sale at £4million, just three years after the club were saved from extinction.
Wolves' owners, the Birmingham builders Gallaghers, earlier this week had a firm offer for the club, including a plan to develop Molineux.
Gallaghers bought the club for £1.25million in 1986 after the receiver had been called in.
Now, with planning permission secured for a supermarket next to the ground, the site's value has soared.
The ground itself, owned by Wolverhampton council, is unlikely to be sold.
But the council would welcome offers to update the two sections closed for safety work.
Charlton's campaign to return to The Valley has hit a further problem with Greenwich borough council urging the club to revise their redevelopment proposal and come up with measures to protect the environmental needs of residents near the ground.
Roger Alwen, the club's joint owner, said: ‘We have given Greenwich the opportunity to lead British football into the 21st century.
After all their talk of wanting Charlton back, I'm amazed the decision-making process is so slow.’
Charlton's directors hope to meet the leader of the council on Thursday to clarify the position.
Celtic are to reject a written offer from Newcastle, believed to be worth £300,000, for Roy Aitken.
The Scottish club want considerably more.