

Midwife at the birth of a state.
THE INTIFADA is a people's unarmed revolution against occupation.
Its two main slogans, repeated countless times in the directives issued by the underground leadership, are freedom and independence.
It has employed a dual strategy to achieve these two objectives.
First, a comprehensive civil disobedience campaign was begun by which people severed, or minimised, all the contact points by which they were bound to the Israeli occupation authority.
This campaign included resignations of Palestinian officials from public posts, the boycott of Israeli goods and products, and the refusal to pay taxes and fines.
Partial and full strikes, demonstrations, sit-ins, conventions…all these have in fact only constituted the outer layer of an inner mechanism of civilian rebellion.
The second, and complementary, part of the Intifada strategy concentrated on the construction of an indigenous national authority.
As Israel's authority was being lifted, the population began creating an alternative authority of their own.
Popular committees were established in villages, refugee camps, suburbs, streets, in fact in every community.
Some headway was made in expanding self-sufficiency, whether through utilising more land for agriculture, developing home economies, or encouraging local manufacturers and products.
Villages and refugee camps were thus being developed into ‘liberated’ or ‘independent’areas, if not militarily, then at least psychologically, politically and infrastructurally.
Bloody clashes would occur whenever armoured units raided these villages, storming through makeshift defensive road blocks and responding to rocks being thrown with live bullets and tear gas; but no sooner would these army units be gone than authority would revert to the village residents.
Palestinian flags would be raised on minarets and church spires, road blocks would again be erected, and life in all its aspects would once again be run by the local leadership.
The structure of the developing national authority has been both diffuse enough to prevent it from being destroyed by any one single sweep of arrests (there have been more than 50,000 arrests since the Intifada's outbreak), and coherent enough to allow for the existence of a unified resistance strategy.
While the entire network of popular committees, local institutions and the general public constitute the field commanders in the battle of civilian disobedience and of constructing a political infrastructure, a rotating Unified National Command acts in the role of field-general, issuing a bi-monthly directive outlining policy and determining specific resistance programmes.
A high level of mobility in the structure allows for continuous interchange of roles and ideas, and retains for the Unified National Command the closeness to grass roots that is required to make it truly reflect people's wishes and sentiments.
THIS expanded network of popular committees and institutions making up the Unified leadership is infused by tens of thousands of activists who belong to, or identify with, the different factions of the PLO.
In effect, therefore, the PLO exists at all levels of organisation within the occupied territories.
Thus the Palestinian national movement both inside and outside the occupied territories is an organic whole.
The pattern of the Intifada has been cyclical.
Thrusts of resistance (mass demonstrations, resignations, tax rebellions, etc) would come in crests.
The pattern is determined by a wide variety of factors, including what the Israeli army does.
But the relation is complex, not uni-directional.
Harsh measures — putting an entire community under an absolute curfew for a continuous lengthy period of time, demolishing homes, uprooting olive or citrus trees, physical intimidation and terror tactics employed by raiding army units, shooting, killing, cutting off water or electricity supplies and telephone links to villages or towns, mass arrests, intimidatory interrogation techniques — can either create a temporary lull or activate an eruption.
The army never knows which it will be.
It is as if it is walking through a minefield.
The wave-like pattern of the Intifada, its pains and sufferings, are all reminiscent of the process of birth.
The metaphor is apt, as Palestinians regard themselves as engaging in a process of giving birth to their independent Palestinian state.
Through their revolution, the masses are both mother and midwife to the birth of this state.
The Intifada is the midwife of freedom.
Through it, Palestinians are struggling on a daily basis to shake off Israel's authority and to construct their own.
The struggle reflects a revolution in mass consciousness, by which people have come to realise that ideas and aspirations must be embodied in manifest acts if reality is to be changed.
Thus, wherever one looks, one finds people engaged in the construction of the blocks that will make up the Palestinian state.
It is a conscious effort.
The masses are being engaged in the craft of state-masonry.
In this process of state building, many stages have been covered.
The Declaration of Independence issued by the Palestine National Council (PNC) on November 15 last year constitutes a major landmark along this road.
Its significance lies in its double message: that the aim of the Palestinian struggle is the establishment of Palestinian independence, and that this independence is regarded as being not at Israel's expense.
This has been a constant theme of Intifada policy: that we wish to build (Palestine), not to destroy (Israel); that we wish to achieve freedom (for our people), not to deprive others (Israelis) of it; that we wish to protect and save lives (ours), not to endanger the lives of others (Israelis).
In one of several Intifada leaflets written in Hebrew and addressed to the Israeli soldiers on duty in the occupied territories, the message was repeated: Soldier, go home.
Return to your family and children.
Be with them in peace so that we may remain with our family and children in peace.
We do not wish to harm you, or your state.
We wish to be unharmed, in our own state.
How can the process of state building be developed?
If the PNC Declaration of Independence constituted a major landmark in this process, the time has come to embark on another major step, that of declaring the setting up of a state or government structure.
AN ESCALATION of the Intifada in this direction would serve two purposes at once.
First, it would consolidate the structures of the developing national authority which is competing to replace the occupation authority.
Second, it would consolidate the image and essence of the Intifada as a constructive, not a destructive, force.
Naturally, to embark on such a step is not necessarily to succeed immediately in realising it.
Rather, it is a challenge.
It will be a further challenge to Israel's occupation, conceived in the image of earlier challenges of the Intifada.
But it will also be a challenge to us, Palestinians, summoning us to work more energetically towards the idea's fulfilment.
It would be a natural extension of the Intifada's dual strategy towards disengagement from Israel, and the corresponding process of state building.
It would further naturalise and legitimise the evolving skeletal form of Palestinian independence.
It would provide the multitudinous popular committees and activities with a more advanced form of organisation and structure.
It would enable better planning and performance.
It would maximise civilian tactics of resistance and defuse the natural potential for violence, containing and eventually eliminating the marginal but intrusive phenomenon of collaborator activation by Israeli security authorities and collaborator execution by local Palestinians.
It would create a further fact that would put Israel on the spot.
Israel's reaction, however hostile, could only further our cause.
Arresting or deporting the tens of thousands of Palestinian professionals who would be employed in perfectly apolitical, harmless and humanitarian jobs can only further isolate the Israeli Government.
Half-way measures can only imply half-way success.
A modus vivendi would also imply success.
In general, our policy should be to proceed with building our state block by block, without waiting to be given a gift of it through negotiations.
We should regard negotiations rather as the means by which we could establish formal agreements between our state and Israel.
Such agreements can range from the issue of borders to the issue of free wave-lengths for our future television and radio networks.
In the meantime, we have the capacity to bring coherence and organisation to a whole range of activities, further consolidating the institutional linkage between the people in the occupied state and the PLO leadership.
Entire departments can be set up, in health, foreign affairs, agriculture, trade, finance, education, justice, religion, information and social welfare.
A pyramid administrative structure, establishing links from popular committees in villages right up to the Executive Committee of the PLO (in its capacity as a Cabinet), can be established.
During the Intifada the people have been engaged in building the side walls.
A government would provide the roof which would bring these walls together.
It would add another necessary touch in the process of creating a Palestinian home.
Sari Nusseibeh, a leading Palestinian intellectual, is professor of philosophy at Bir Zeit, the West Bank university closed by the Israelis early last year.
His ideas are widely influential among Palestinians.
Nusseibeh…
‘The Palestinian national movement inside and outside the occupied territories is an organic whole’ PHOTOGRAPH: DAVID SILLITOE
The Intifada, now two years old, has brought the first chance for a civilised end to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Could it be the last?.
Stones that shook the world ‘Patience, patience, patience’ said Yasser Arafat this week — the question is how long can patience endure?
David Hirst traces the development of the Palestinian uprising, and below Sari Nusseibeh, a leading West Bank intellectual, points to one way forward.
LIKE MANY great upheavals, it all began inconspicuously enough.
Two years ago today, an Israeli lorry driver ran over and killed four Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.
Youths took to the streets in protest.
They hurled stones, and thereafter stones — in place of the Kalashnikov — became the prime weapon and symbol of the ‘blessed’ Intifada which has transformed the whole nature of the Arab-
Israeli struggle.
If the outside world did not at first grasp its significance, the Israeli leadership positively refused to do so.
Defence Minister Yitzhak Rabin forecast that it would be all over ‘in one or two weeks.’
A leading Israeli journalist was soon to ascribe that misjudgment to the ‘historic blindness’ that has always bedevilled Israeli governments and public, ensuring that developments which, to outsiders, might seem all but pre-ordained come as a very disagreeable shock to them.
It was particularly unfortunate this time.
The Intifada was perhaps the most convincing refutation ever of the time- honoured, complacent dogma that ‘the status quo can last as long as we want it to.’
True, it was not so spectacular as earlier assaults on it, such as the Arab-Israeli war of 1973, so it is hardly surprising that Israeli leaders should have so contemptuously dismissed it, so patently failed to understand its revolutionary import: that, for the first time, the enemy was offering the prospect of the civilised, peaceful, negotiated settlement for which Israel had clamoured since its foundation.
In a very timely book, Israel's Fateful Decisions, published shortly before the Intifada broke out, the Israeli scholar, General Yehoshavat Harkabi, wrote that for a settlement to be possible, both sides must first renounce their respective dreams or ‘grand designs’— for the Zionists, the ‘redemption’ of all the Land of Israel, for the Palestinians, the ‘liberation’of all the territory that once was theirs — and thereby end what he calls the absolute, ‘existential’nature of the struggle.
The ‘moderates’ on both sides, moved by their ‘common fear of the hell’that otherwise awaits them, had to gain the upper hand.
That is precisely what, with the Intifada, the Palestinians have done.
Two years on, the Intifada shows little sign of abating.
It is a cliche to say that it has become a way of life, and that the stone-throwing is only the public, propaganda face of a whole political, social, economic and psychological transformation — the Palestinians' own perestroika — which both sustains the Intifada and lays the groundwork for the eventual transition to statehood.
It is deemed unthinkable that it should stop.
Too much hope, to much sacrifice, has been invested in it.
Two years on, the Intifada's aim — the two-state solution -remains ‘moderate’, and, by and large, so do its non-armed methods.
Yasser Arafat sticks doggedly to the infinitely tortuous ‘peace process’, never saying ‘no’ to the Americans, even though it is obvious to him that what the Israelis want is surely unique in the history of peace negotiations: to both set their agenda and to appoint the other side's representatives.
The basic trouble is that the Palestinians' historic espousal of ‘moderation’ has not won its indispensable and commensurate Israeli response.
Polarisation in Israel there certainly is, but if one applies the same broad definition of ‘moderate’ and ‘extremist’to the Israelis as one does to the Palestinians, one cannot but conclude that precisely the reverse situation prevails among them, that it is their Jibrils and Abu Musas — or religious fundamentalists in the Hamas mould — who hold sway.
The ‘moderates’ are a small minority, while into the category of ‘extremists’falls that whole band of opinion ranging from the tougher section of the Labour Party, through the Likud, to the outright fanatics, nationalist and religious, of the far right.
It is the outcome of a process which, for Harkabi, has its origins in the Israelis' overwhelming, intoxicating victory in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
It was then, just as the first signs of Arab flexibility appeared, that in Israel the notion took root that the renunciation of ‘grand designs’ was erroneous in its minimalism.
And judging by the public discourse, the government's negotiating strategy, and the army and settlers' day-to-day behaviour in the territories, the Intifada has made many ‘extremists’ more extreme than ever.
There is the growing allure of apocalyptic solutions.
Harkabi described the idea of a ‘transfer’— the mass expulsion of Palestinians — as just the kind of project that is calculated to lend the struggle its absolute, ‘existential’ character.
One year after the Intifada began, some 49 per cent of the population favoured it; according to the latest poll, the number has now risen to 52 per cent.
AS FOR the government's negotiating strategy, Harkabi forecast that nothing would scare the ‘extremists’ like a readiness to talk from the other side.
Shamir and company persist, mulishly, in their contention that Arafat will always be Arafat; thus, according to the Deputy Foreign Minister, Benyamin Netanyahu, ‘the PLO says…flat out’ that it seeks ‘Israel's annihilation.
They don't say it on American television and maybe not in French, but they say it plainly in Arabic every day.’
There is no evidence for this, which is probably why the quality of their argument can fall so low, with Shamir saying of perhaps the most influential and long-standing of PLO ‘moderates’, Khalid Hassan, that ‘when you see his face you know he cannot be trusted.’
If, as some Israeli ‘moderates’ argue, terrorism always was a marginal question, it is certainly infinitely less serious for Israel's future than the mass popular unrest of the Intifada, but by continuing to lump everything they can — such as children throwing stones — under its general rubric, the ‘extremists’seek to ‘de-legitimise’the Intifada, and evade any necessity for looking at its real causes.
The ordinary, everyday behaviour of army and settlers flows quite naturally from a government and a public which hold such views.
It is the ingrained contempt, the impulse, apparently deliberately inculcated, to humiliate which, in the eyes of enlightened Israelis, is perhaps more revealing, more frightening in its ultimate implications, than all the well-documented brutalities.
It is completely and increasingly ‘normal’ for soldiers to break into houses and mix food with cement; to leave excrement lying around; to turn the male population out in the middle of the night to clean the streets and sprinkle them with rose water.
Settler children shout at bus drivers: ‘Run them over, they are Arabs.’
Graffiti says: ‘We shall eat the Arabs out of tins.’
Those Israelis whom this behaviour most appals have long been likening it to the earlier stages of Nazism, an analogy that found startling vindication with the recent disclosure that some units in the occupied territories draw on Nazi precedents for their own self-image, one calling itself the ‘Mengele detachment’ and another ‘the Auschwitz company’.
Palestinians who have tried to reason with the Israelis about the meaning of the Intifada find all this dispiriting.
But is hardly less distressing to Israeli ‘moderates’, not merely because they find oppression of another people morally wrong, but because of its dangerously divisive effect on Israeli society itself.
One really wonders whether the wilder fringe of Israeli ‘extremists’ loathe their own ‘moderates’any less than they do the Palestinians.
According to a recent poll, 58 per cent of Israelis believe there will eventually be civil war.
It is hardly surprising, in such a climate, that Israeli ‘moderates’, like their Palestinian counterparts, should now look so earnestly to the third party, the US, as the only possible way of saving Israel from itself.
But will it?
So far, it seems to the Palestinians that the US listens less to the ‘moderates’ of both sides than it does to Israel's still very powerful, if increasingly defensive, champions, the Jewish lobby, its knee-jerk supporters in the Congress and the media, who are still ready to parrot the Israeli ‘extremist’line that Arafat is, indeed, still Arafat.
It is not as if the Administration really believes that any more.
Weary of Israel's ceaseless importuning, it recently produced a long and scholarly ‘confidential report’ which concludes that, since Arafat told the UN General Assembly last December that he recognised Israel's right to exist and ‘renounced’terrorism, the PLO has not been speaking with ‘forked tongues’and its declarations have ‘for the most part been consistent, regardless of the media in which they appear.’
Yet despite that authoritative vindication, the moment the PLO makes what might at first sight appear a slight regression to its old-style militancy, the US promptly joins the Israeli ‘extremists’ in pronouncing it a serious setback for the peace process.
Under pressure from Congress, ‘renouncing’ terrorism is no longer enough; the sincerity of the conversion has to be proved too.
The Palestinians do, however, acknowledge signs of change for the better in US Jewry, Congress and the Administration, and that it is up to themselves to push them forward in much more effective ways than they have managed hitherto.
IF AT long last, thanks to US pressure on Israel, there is real, discernible progress in the ‘peace process,’ the Intifada will probably continue much as it is.
If not, it is unlikely to change its aims, but it may very well change its non-armed methods.
So far the senior, underground leadership is against that.
But among the younger ones impatience is growing.
It is partly sheer anger at the daily brutalities and humiliations; it was just such spontaneous personal vengeance that inspired a young Palestinian to force an Israeli bus over a precipice last summer, killing 14 people.
It is partly the cold calculation that the Israelis must be made to realise that there can, in the end, be no such thing as ‘the low-cost’ occupation they like to imagine there is.
There will be no terrorism, Palestinians forecast, and no systematic ‘armed struggle’ against Israeli soldiers, but there will probably be a growth in occasional, selective operations — like the recent killing of two soldiers in Gaza — intended to add a judicious edge of real pain to the innocuous rebellion of the stones.
But that kind of carefully calibrated escalation could easily get out of hand.
A key feature of the Intifada is that, after long years of trans-frontier or inter-state conflict between largely faceless enemies, it brought the conflict back to where it essentially belongs, to Palestine itself.
That is why it is very effective, but also why, in the absence of a settlement, it is very dangerous.
For it is an ethnic conflict, between peoples who see each other at close range.
It is ‘natural’, Harkabi warned, that such conflict should always get worse.
Entering the third year of the Intifada, it is more than ever clear that time is of the essence: how to keep it going long enough at a level which does not yield to the temptations of ruinous, reciprocal escalation, but still disturbs the outside world enough to get them to bring the Israeli extremists to heel.
‘Patience, patience, patience,’ exhorted Arafat this week.
‘We shall not tire, we can go on another two years, and another two years after that.’
But patience is becoming hard to sustain.
If the Israeli ‘extremists’ are allowed to persist in their grand design, their Palestinian counterparts will eventually succeed in re-imposing their own, with the ‘moderates’, including Arafat himself, reverting to the belief that Zionism remains the all-or-nothing, demoniac creed they used to say it was.
It will become, on both sides, an ‘existential’ struggle once again.
The Intifada may be the first chance for a civilised settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict; it is also, many Palestinians believe, the last.
And there is surely a limit to the time which this historic opportunity can endure.