

In exile and under attack…the princess Draupadi in The Mahabharata The realm of grand illusion TELEVISION: Hugh Hebert and Michael Billington consider Peter Brook's achievement in bringing his production of The Mahabharata, the longest poem in the world, to the screen.
ILLUSION runs right through the text and texture of The Mahabharata (C4).
There's the primary illusion created by the poet/narrator of this epic of war between rival branches of a royal family.
He sets the scene, intervenes, sums up.
The royal seat of power is ‘a palace of illusions’.
The great warrior Arjuna has battlefield doubts whether he may make war on his own kin, and his mentor Krishna tells him victory and defeat are the same, and he must fight without desire.
Arjuna asks: ‘How can one reach the truth if one is born in illusion?’
All-wise Krishna may be, but you wouldn't buy a used chariot from him.
When at the end the victor is stranded in limbo, the poet tells him there is no paradise and no hell, no enemies and no family.
‘Here words end like thought.
This was your last illusion.’
Maybe a word is just the name of a mirage.
Peter Brook's central achievement in the television version is to seize on the screen's ability to make a seamless connection between two senses of ‘illusion’, the philosopher's and the magician's.
The most magical moments encompass both.
After the game of dice where Yudhishthira gambles away his kingdom, and finally his shared wife Draupadi, the winner from the rival family, seizes and tries to strip her.
But as he pulls at the silk of her sari, it just unwinds endlessly in a cloud of colour until he falls bundled in fabric.
Draupadi still kneels untouched, covered, her dignity intact.
For her attacker, possession itself is illusory.
Brook sees the great Hindu myth as full of Shakespearean themes, though it's short on Mr W S's gutsy comedy.
It shares the conventions of ancient drama: unbreakable vows, divided kingdoms, miraculous births, meddlesome and slippery gods.
After the first half hour I was hooked by its beautifully lucid narrative, but thrown by the guffaw factor in some scenes.
In one, during the Pandava brothers' exile, Arjuna, cursed and unmanned by a woman he has rejected, dances and camps it up like a drag-queen in warpaint.
Sometimes too Brook is misled by his distinction between the theatrical art of suggestion, and the screen's need for ‘complete images’.
He mistrusts television's ability to handle the empty spaces that he loves so much on stage, and that's mistrusting the viewer's imagination-an error he also made in his Carmen triptych for Channel 4.
To which, incidentally, many garlands for its courage in presenting the Mahabharata.
The flaws are only minor cracks in the huge achievement of Brook and his collaborator Jean-Claude Carriere in bringing the longest poem in the world to television, to explore and exploit its illusions in gripping narrative and dazzling images.H.H.
PETER Brook's television film of The Mahabharata is the best transposition of a stage work to the screen I have ever seen.
Brook has not simply plonked the cameras in front of his original production: he has re-conceived it in filmic terms, making obvious concessions to cinematic literalism while retaining the sense of wonder.
I recall that two years ago at the NFT he announced that his great ambition as a young man had been to become a movie director: now (aided by director of photography William Lubtchansky and production designer Chloe Obolensky) he has made a landmark television film.
Inevitably, you win some, you lose some in transposing a work to another medium.
In theatrical conditions (whether in an Avignon stone-quarry or a Zurich boathouse) the production's basic ingredients of earth, fire and water acquired both a real and symbolic property: a standing-pool started as the source of creation and ended, by the time of the cosmic conflict, as a mud-caked river through which warriors heedlessly splashed.
But the point is that it was permanently visible.
In the theatre, a single chariot-wheel propelled across the stage stood for a whole army: in the film version, you have horses, chariots, contending extras.
But, oddly, the thing I miss most of all is the extraordinary sense of release that accompanied the stage version.
At the end, the characters informally assembled to share food and drink, a sitar gently played, after nightmarish destruction the world seemed to renew itself.
It was intensely moving: all the more so in Zurich as the back wall of the theatre was lowered to reveal the morning sun glittering on the lake.
A television film cannot be a communal experience.
But what Brook has retained is the clarity and magic that characterised the original.
Time and again the images have a distilled beauty: the simple two-shot before the battle in which Krishna explains to the warrior Arjuna that ‘Victory and defeat, pleasure and pain are all the same’, the sight of the nagaswaram (the shawm-like musical instruments) echoing their peals to the skies, Karna's golden lance speeding through the air on its momentous flight to pierce the green-bellied Ghatotkatcha.
Some of the performances also come into sharper definition before the camera.
Bruce Myers's Krishna is extraordinary: serene, benevolent, all-seeing.
Vittorio Mezzogiorno's Arjuna looks to have been sculpted out of rock until his moment of Hamlet-like irreso-lution before the great battle.
And Andrzej Seweryn's Yudhishthira has an Olympian calm betrayed by a vicious mole of nature in the form of compulsive gambling.
Does it work better on stage or screen?
In a sense the question is irrelevant.
The point is that Brook and his co-adaptors (Jean-Claude Carriere and Marie-Helene Estienne) have made the story available to a mass-audience.
But they also prove to me that television is capable of handling myth and that, in confining the medium largely to information and ephemeral diversion, we underestimate its aesthetic potential.M.B.