

Rugby Union Scotland 32, Romania 0 Tea and sympathy for the poor.
By Robert Armstrong
IT WAS a melancholy experience to contemplate the poverty of the Romanians on and off the field at Murrayfield on Saturday.
Their antiquated reliance on set-pieces was predictable enough; less obvious to the scattered crowd of around 10,000 were the penny-pinching circumstances that surrounded this international sponsored by the Royal Bank of Scotland.
As every sports writer visiting Bucharest knows, the Romanian Rugby Federation is virtually bankrupt.
Indeed, their first trip to Scotland since 1981 would not have been possible without the assistance of four British-based companies trading in Eastern Europe who at the eleventh hour put up a total of £10,000.
That sum may seem like a lot of lei (the Romanian currency that purchases next to nothing abroad) but it still left the Romanians treading a financial tightrope.
They had to journey from Heathrow to Edinburgh by overnight coach and check out of their Edinburgh hotel two hours before the kick-off because they could not afford to remain there after the match.
Even then, there was the embarrassing prospect that the Romanian players might have to walk the dark streets between having a bath at 3.30pm and the official dinner at 7.30pm.
Fortunately, the Scottish Rugby Union bridged the gap by serving the party with tea, and the hospitable Heriot's club followed that up with something a little stronger.
To their great credit, Romania looked far from demoralised on the field, driving the Scots on to the back foot for much of the first half and restricting the scoreline to 3-0 until the 39th minute.
If the East Europeans could have offered a bit more in the loose and a great deal more behind the scrum, they would have reaped some reward for their excellent work in the line-out.
As it was, Scotland took the game by the throat with four tries in a devastating 17-minute period either side of the interval.
Romania's inability to provide quick ball and their fumbling loss of possession often allowed the Scots to counter-attack from deep positions with the same instinctive fluency that has earned them 130 points in four games at Murrayfield this year.
No one impressed more than the 21-year-old Hawick wing Tony Stanger whose hat-trick of tries boosted his tally to five in two internationals.
Stanger has an appetite for apparently lost causes that rarely allows opponents to commit errors without getting punished.
The foundation of Scotland's success was laid in the loose by the captain, David Sole, and the No.8, Derek White, whose pace often confounded the Romanian back row, as well as bringing each man a second-half try.
But the disparity between the sides really emerged with a vengeance in the back division where Armstrong, Lineen and the Hastings brothers showed superior speed of thought, hand and foot.
Gavin Hastings kicked 12 points, including two touchline conversions.
Scotland's coach, Ian McGeechan, made the pertinent point that fixtures against Fiji and Romania had provided a valuable contrast of styles, expansive and then forward dominated, that were useful preparation for the Five Nations Championship.
‘We had five or six extra training sessions together with a match at the end of them,’ said McGeechan.
On the evidence of the autumn action — and last summer's Lions tour to which Scots made a huge contribution — Scotland can win the championship, especially as they play their ‘difficult’ games against France and England at Murrayfield.
Their own opening game, against Ireland in Dublin, is on February 3 — which gives the fly-half, Craig Chalmers, plenty of time to recover from a troublesome knee injury.
SCORERS: Scotland: Tries: Stanger (3), White, Sole.
Conversions: G Hastings (3).
Penalties: G Hastings (2).
SCOTLAND: G Hastings (London Scottish); A Stanger (Hawick), S Hastings (Watsonians), S Lineen (Boroughmuir), L Renwick (London Scottish); D Wyllie (Stewart's-Melville), G Armstrong (Jed-Forest); D Sole (Edinburgh Academicals, capt), K Milne (Heriot's FP), P Burnell (London Scottish), C Gray (Nottingham), D F Cronin (Bath), J Jeffrey (Kelso), D White (London Scottish), F Calder (Stewart's-Melville).
ROMANIA: M Toader; B Serban, A Lungu, G Sava, S Chirila; G Ignat, D Neaga; G Leonte, V Ion, G Dumitrescu, S Ciorascu, C Raducanu, O Sugar, I Doja, H Dumitras (capt).
Referee: S Hilditch (Ireland).
Basingstoke 2, Torquay United 3 No more fairytales.
IN Ruddigore, Mad Margaret could be snapped out of her raving by the password ‘Basingstoke’.
For a moment on Saturday it looked on the cards that the same word might forever snap the players of Torquay United the other way.
But it was only for a moment.
Immediately after Blankley's rocketing near-post header put Basingstoke ahead in the 40th minute, Elliott equalised.
Three minutes into the second-half the non-Leaguers' obligatory fireman, Mottashed, instead of shooting himself in the foot, set fire to himself with a jittery own goal and Loram shortly made it 3-1, deader than dead.
Clarkson's consolation was too late to make Torquay sweat.
As pantomime punters know, giants are no fun and no-one's friends unless they are killed.
Torquay, though, can now look forward to their home tie against West Ham when the seven-league boot will be on the other foot.
Basingstoke will inevitably look back.
Kipling wrote the famous ‘If’ but the FA Cup is always updating its own version.
They should remember that it would all have ended seven matches earlier if it had not been for an 88th-minute equaliser against Bashley on September 16.
Basingstoke can look back with pride, not only in a record crowd of 4,091 but in extending the reputation of non-League clubs for friendliness.
Even new towns may have a heart and Basingstoke's is beating warmly.
On the field Webb stood out for composure, O'Donnell's experience was invaluable, and their overseas player, Simpkins — he travels from the Isle of Wight — was brave and solid in goal.
Watership Down may be up the road, but Basingstoke proved no rabbits.
Scorers: Basingstoke: Blankley (40 min), Clarkson (90).
Torquay: Elliott (42), Mottashed (og, 48), Loram (54).
Basingstoke: Simpkins; Blankley, Davies, Wiltshire, Ingman, Webb, Greenwood, Whale, Clarkson, Mottashed, O'Donnell (Cameron, 77).
Torquay United: Veysey; Holmes, Lloyd, Elliott, Taylor, Joyce, Loram, Edwards, Smith, Uzzell, Weston (Davies, 74).
Referee: J Ashworth (Leicester).
Colchester United — beaten 2-0 by Birmingham City at Layer Road — donated 20p of the price of every programme to the fund for Sergeant Andy Mudd, the soldier who lost both his legs in the IRA bomb attack near the ground a fortnight ago.
Cornwall 12, Soviet Union 12 Mironov lands place in the history books.
By Ian Malin
AT 2.18 on Saturday, Igor Mironov, an air force pilot from the Gagarin Academy, put the ball into orbit.
It went clean through the Redruth posts and the Soviet Union's first tour of England had been well and truly launched.
Two hours later players rubbed bruises, swapped jokes and drank pints in the clubhouse in much the same way as anywhere else.
Tonight the Soviets attend a reception at the House of Commons and another tiny barrier will be broken down on Wednesday when the Combined Services provide the opposition at Aldershot.
On the evidence of Saturday, the captain Mironov is a prodigious kicker and beautifully balanced fly-half.
But the game was something of an anti-climax.
The Soviet Union had beaten Romania this autumn but were often on the back foot against players mainly culled from junior clubs.
Sergeev and Mishakov won heaps of line-out possession but they were often poorly supported at the set-pieces by the rest of the pack, while Tikhonov was a forceful No.8.
Graham Dawe, the Bath hooker, was impressed.
‘They scrummed well and it was as hard a match as I've played in this season.
The only thing they really lacked was that extra bit of meanness that you need to impose yourself on a game.’
Barry Trevaskis, who had six stitches put in a horrible wound under his left eye after being stamped on in a ruck, might not agree that the Soviets lacked meanness, but had their half-backs Chapman and Rule not missed six penalties between them, Cornwall could have brought off an unexpected win.
After Mironov and Chapman had twice exchanged penalties in the first half, Chapman's smart 30-yard dropped goal five minutes after the break put Cornwall ahead for the first time while Mishakov was off the field with a shoulder injury.
But the Soviet Union managed to fashion the only try of the game at Hellfire Corner.
The huge Tikhonov brushed aside two tackles and powered 15 yards from the back of a scrum to fingertip the ball over the line.
Cornwall rallied with some sweeping drives, the Soviets losing their discipline and Rule slotting over the equalising penalty 13 minutes from time.
The roar might have been heard on the other side of the Tamar Bridge.
SCORERS: Cornwall: Penalties: Chapman (2), Rule.
Dropped goal: Chapman.
Soviet Union: Try: Tikhonov.
Conversion: Mironov.
Penalties: Mironov.
CORNWALL: K Thomas (Redruth); B Trevaskis (Bath), C Alcock (capt), S Rogers, D Weeks; D Chapman, D Rule (all Camborne); J May (Redruth), G Dawe (Bath), A Ellery (Richmond), A Reed (Plymouth Albion), P Thomason (Redruth), A Bick (Bath), J Polglase (Camborne), G Williams (Redruth).
SOVIET UNION: E Zuev; I Kuperman, M Paarshin, I Necheaev, V Varapaev (Losabezidze, 70min); I Moronov (capt), I Frantzuzov; S Molchanov, R Malikov, I Hohlov, A Mishakov, S Sergeev, A Sokolov, R Khairulin, A Tikhonov.
Referee: A Speadbury (Somerset).
Coventry City 0, Arsenal 1 Merson repays club's belief.
By Russell Thomas
PAUL MERSON'S self-destructiveness banished him to football's margins for several weeks.
One moment of astonishing creativity in the dying seconds on Saturday transported him to the centre of Arsenal's universe.
Reputations are not changed overnight, but one of the most audacious goals of this or any other season can hardly hinder the rehabilitation of the young Arsenal striker, who has had plenty of time to repent at leisure past off-field indiscretions.
Suspended for a week by the club, fined £2,000 and dropped following misbehaviour at a supporters' dinner, Merson spoke of the 89th-minute winner that restored Arsenal to the top as a personal thankyou to Arsenal's players and staff for assisting him on the road to recovery.
‘I took a lot of stick from the press,’ said the England Under-21 player, ‘but the lads backed me and so did the manager.
I've paid them back.
The only way to do that is by scoring goals.’
Then Merson departed, chivvied along by a watchful captain Tony Adams, for the team bus.
That left an embarrassed home goalkeeper Ogrizovic to explain how all 6ft 4in of him was beaten by a chip by Arsenal's substitue from 20 yards and from a daunting angle.
Ogrizovic came out, checked back, but in retreat still did not think the chip would float in.
‘I couldn't believe it when the ball went in.’
Anger followed astonishment as the ball entered via the far upright.
‘I wanted to kick the post down.’
George Graham was amazed, too, after seeing another high-octane Arsenal performance lack only the finishing touch against a weakened Coventry side who manfully tried to keep pace with the champions.
But his bold substitution — putting on Merson after 70 minutes to give his side a third orthodox striker — provided the missing ingredient.
Merson has not started in the last six games and his dramatic goal will not change Graham's thinking overnight.
‘It doesn't guarantee Paul a place, and he knows it,’ said the manager.
But at least Merson is being judged solely on form.
‘He's only 21 and he knows that he did wrong,’ said Graham.
‘As far as we are concerned the incident is now forgotten.’
SCORER: Arsenal: Merson (89min).
Coventry City: Ogrizovic; Borrows, Downs, MacDonald, Billing, Dobson, McGrath, Emerson, Regis, Drinkell, D Smith.
Arsenal: Lukic; Dixon, Winterburn, Thomas, O'Leary, Adams, Rocastle, Richardson, A Smith, Groves, Marwood (Merson, 70).
Referee: J Worrall (Warrington)..
Manchester United have joined Nottingham Forest in the competition for Grimsby's highly promising centre-back Andy Tilson.
Forest have had a £175,000 offer rejected by the Fourth Division club who are unwilling to sell the former Kettering player while still in the FA Cup.
FA Cup third-round draw Petrifying Forest.
By Stephen Bierley
THE Cup draw was made rather late on Saturday and, no doubt, minds were a little muddled.
Hence one Sunday paper, commenting on the pairing of Nottingham Forest and Manchester United, described them as ‘two of the game's most successful clubs in recent years’.
Half right, perhaps, depending on how you define ‘recent’.
After a lousy annual meeting and a lousy result against Crystal Palace, Alex Ferguson might reasonably have hoped for a change of fortune.
Nobody loves you when you're down and out and if United go down to Forest, as they did in last year's sixth round, Ferguson may well be out.
The glory of the third round, of course, is the glory of the non-League clubs.
Whitley Bay are the current darlings, but found no love in the velvet bag, being despatched to Spotland.
‘I'm obviously very disappointed for the players,’ said the manager, Bobby Graham.
‘Rochdale are just Mickey Mouse compared with Liverpool.’
Hard cheese.
Darlington fared no better, but Welling, Gloucester, Bishop Auckland and Aylesbury will replay with brimming hopes and bursting hearts this week.
Liverpool, the holders, get the chance to play European opposition, namely Swansea, who flirted briefly with the Cup Winners' Cup this season, losing to Panathinaikos almost before they could pronounce it.
As Liverpool have been all Greek to most First Division clubs for a decade, Swansea's chances do not seem that brilliant, but…and that ‘but’ is the delight of the FA Cup.
FA CUP: Third round: Stoke v Arsenal; Reading or Welling v Sunderland; Watford v Wigan; Brighton v Luton; Bristol City v Swindon; Maidstone or Exeter v Norwich; Sheffield Utd v Bournemouth; Port Vale v Derby; Cambridge Utd v Darlington; Leeds v Ipswich; Torquay v West Ham; Hull v Newcastle; Plymouth v Oxford Utd; West Bromwich v Wimbledon; Blackburn v Aston Villa; Manchester City v Millwall; Cardiff or Gloucester City v QPR; Wolverhampton v Sheffield Wednesday; Nottingham Forest v Manchester Utd; Birmingham v Oldham; Huddersfield v Grimsby; Chelsea v Crewe Alexandra or Bishop Auckland; Northampton or Aylesbury v Coventry; Leicester v Barnsley; Hereford v Walsall; Middlesbrough v Everton; Swansea v Liverpool; Tottenham v Southampton; Rochdale v Whitley Bay; Charlton v Bradford City; Crystal Palace v Portsmouth; Blackpool v Scunthorpe or Burnley.
To be played Jan 6.
Squash Davies show hits buffers.
By Richard Jago
ROBERT OWEN, a largely unconsidered left-hander from Avon, became a surprise semi-finalist in the British National Championships for the second successive year at Newcastle yesterday.
He did so by skilfully, beating Adrian Davies, the Welsh No.1, 9-6, 9-3, 4-9, 8-9, 9-4.
Davies had become the most controversial player of this tournament.
He has been an outspoken critic of the Squash Rackets Association's economic stringency at this unsponsored event and made an official complaint about Friday's referee, Ed Johnson.
And while upsetting the seventh-seeded England international, Jamie Hickox, on Saturday, Davies told the referee that Hickox did not deserve a let because the ball had been ‘tight, very tight, as tight as the SRA’.
Yesterday, told his sponsor's logo was too large, he wore his shirt inside out.
Davies, an entertaining character, was lucky to escape unpenalised for joking and arguing disruptively yesterday.
Owen was warned for throwing his racket.
Owen today plays Del Harris, the favourite, who again played well while beating an England squad member, Mark Cairns, 9-5, 9-4, 9-2.
The other top seed, Martine Le Moignan, also won comfortably, 9-1, 9-3, 9-2 against another Welsh player, Tracey Thomas.
Later the reigning champion, Paul Carter, beat the second-seeded former champion, Phil Kenyon, 10-8, 9-7, 9-1 to earn himself a semi-final today with another former champion, Bryan Beeson, whose magnificent recovery overcome the England international Chris Walker 8-10, 8-10, 9-5, 9-0, 9-7.
GROUP A Italy Austria United States Czechoslovakia June 9 Italy v Austria, Rome 20.00 local time.
10 USA v Czech, Florence 16.00. 14 Italy v USA, Rome 20.00. 15 Austria v Czech, Florence 16.00. 19 Italy v Czech, Rome 20.00; Austria v USA, Florence 20.00.
GROUP D West Germany Yugoslavia United Arab Emirates Colombia.
June 9 UAE v Col, Bologna 20.00. 10 WG v Yugo, Milan 20.00. 14 Yugo v Col, Bologna 16.00. 15 WG v UAE, Milan 20.00. 19 WG v Col, Milan 16.00; Yugo v UAE, Bologna 16.00.
GROUP B Argentina Cameroun USSR Romania Fixtures: June 8 Argentina v Cameroun, Milan 17.00. 9 USSR v Romania, Bari 16.00. 13 Argentina v USSR, Naples 20.00. 14 Cameroun v Romania, Bari 20.00. 18 Argentina v Romania, Naples 20.00. 18 Cameroun v USSR, Bari 20.00.
GROUP E Belgium South Korea Uruguay Spain.
June 12 Bel v S Kor, Verona 16.00. 13 Urug v Sp, Udine 16.00. 17 Bel v Urug, Verona 20.00. 17 S Kor v Sp, Udine 20.00. day 21 Bel v Sp, Verona 16.00; S Kor v Urug, Udine.
GROUP C Brazil Sweden Costa Rica SCOTLAND June 10 Braz v Swe, Turin 20.00. 11 C Rica v Scot, Genoa 16.00. 16 Braz v C Rica, Turin 16.00; Swe v Scot, Genoa 20.00. 20 Braz v Scot, Turin 20.00; Swe v C Rica, Genoa 20.00.
GROUP F ENGLAND REPUBLIC OF IRELAND Holland Egypt.
June 11 Eng v R of Ire, Cagliari 20.00. 12 Holland v Egypt, Palermo 20.00. 16 Eng v Holland, Cagliari 20.00. 17 R of Ire v Egypt, Palermo 16.00; Eng v Egypt, Cagliari 20.00. 21 R of Ire v Holland, Palermo 20.00.
Snooker: Reynolds scales Davis peak.
By Clive Everton
DEAN REYNOLDS, whitewashed 10-0 by Steve Davis in the final of the Rothmans Grand Prix in October, beat him 9-7 to reach the semi-finals of the Everest World Matchplay Championship at the Brentwood Centre late on Saturday.
The Grimsby left-hander's semi-final opponent on Wednesday will be Jimmy White, who won the last seven frames in a row to turn a 5-2 deficit into a 9-5 win over Doug Mountjoy.
Reynolds, 15th in the world rankings at the start of the season, has improved provisionally to eighth.
He had a gilt-edged opportunity to beat Stephen Hendry, so far the man of the season with four first prizes, in the Stormseal UK Open at Preston, but missed a simple pink when leading 22-0 in the deciding frame and did not have another shot.
Davis came to Brentwood a 16-12 loser to Hendry in the UK final and is going through a patch where he is making more unforced errors than usual.
‘There are certain times that are better than others,’ said Davis.
‘I'm a very good player.
I can't be perfect.’
Davis swept to 3-0 but missed the easiest of blues on the brink of 4-0.
Reynolds won that frame, the next on the pink, two more on the black, and the last of the afternoon to lead 5-3 at the interval.
He made it 6-3 with a 90 break, and after 52 minutes of tactical battling potted the pink for 7-3 and ran away with the next to go five up with six to play.
After this extraordinary eight-frame losing streak, Davis won four in a row to close to only 7-8, but two elementary mistakes in the following frame, failing to reach the yellow when rolling up behind it for a snooker, and failing to pot a red at close range along the top cushion, prefaced a run of 48 with which Reynolds secured his most notable scalp.
PAGE
McNeill insulted by Newcastle offer for Aitken.
By Patrick Glenn
THERE would appear to be no future in Newcastle United's courtship of Roy Aitken, the Celtic captain, following yesterday's disapproval of the affair by Billy McNeill, manager of the Glasgow club.
McNeill referred to Jim Smith, his counterpart at St James' Park, as ‘insulting’ and accused him of conducting private business in public.
It had been reported that Smith was to send a written offer to Celtic for Aitken, and although Smith would not specify the amount it became common knowledge that it was for around £300,000.
McNeill said: ‘I have been waiting for two days for this supposed written offer.
Jim Smith seems intent on doing private business in public.
If that is the case, I'll talk to him the same way.
If he is insulting enough to make an offer for Aitken of the amount I have seen quoted, he needn't bother waiting for an answer.
‘Smith seems determined to tell me what I want for Roy Aitken, when in fact he has never asked me.
He is simply jumping on a publicity bandwagon.’
This is not the stuff of which marriages are made, and it is quite clear that if United do not improve what Celtic consider to be a derisory offer for the Scotland captain, who has made 50 international appearances, there will be no union.
Celtic are in no hurry to sell, and if they continue the form they showed in the 3-0 victory over Hibernian at Easter Road they will be quite happy not to have any calls from potential buyers at least until the end of the season.
The breathtaking goals which the Polish pair, Dziekanowski and Wdowczyk, scored before the interval were supplemented by Walker's score 20 minutes from the end.
Wdowczyk, after only four competitive matches, looks one of the best players to have come to the Premier Division in years.
The points, however, made no impact on the joint leaders, Aberdeen and Rangers, who also enjoyed good victories.
Aberdeen, who retain the edge on goal difference, took the points from Dundee United at Pittodrie with goals by Nicholas and Mason, while Ally McCoist established a Premier Division scoring record in Rangers's 3-0 home win over Motherwell.
He scored the second, taking him past Frank McGarvey's 127.
PAGE
Hockey Clift paves way for East Grinstead.
By Pat Rowley
ENGLAND's players endured a nine-hour delay on their overnight trip back from Pakistan on Saturday, but it proved no handicap to the 10 who played in the Nationwide Anglia English Cup, yesterday.
Hounslow, the holders, Havant and East Grinstead all gained clear-cut victories to qualify for away ties against other First Division sides in the eighth finals, and an England player scored for each of them.
Robert Clift, playing in his England position of inside-left, scored his first two goals of the season for East Grinstead, who beat Eastcote 3-0 at Feltham.
The first came after 10 minutes with a fine flick shot.
With the England captain, Richard Leman, in excellent form, Grinstead were too powerful in midfield for an Eastcote side without their skipper, Gary Tucker.
Chris John completed the scoring.
Hounslow had to wait until the second-half before England's Martyn Grimley scored their first goal in a 3-0 win over Lyons, the Poundstretcher Second Division side.
Nick Gordon and Rob Thompson added the others.
Havant, with five England men on duty, beat Barford Tigers, 5-2 but, after leading 3-0, allowed the Midland League club to cut the deficit to 3-2 early in the second half with corner goals by Mohamed.
Dave Roberts (two), Garcia, Seabrook and Gary Roberts scored for Havant.
Only two of the leaders in the regional leagues, Firebrands and Chelmsford, were victorious.
Firebrands beat Swindon 3-0 to extend a seven-point lead at the West League's winter break.
Chelmsford are four points clear in the East League after a penalty by Adrian Heelis proved decisive against Pelicans.
In the London League, Hampstead and Spencer overtook Surbiton, who snatched a draw at Purley; Ben Rhydding, beaten 3-2 by Sheffield, were overhauled by Preston and Alderley Edge in the North; while Trojans, held 2-2 by Anchorians, were joined by Chichester at the top of the South.
.
ONLY a month before the publication of Lord Justice's Taylor's full report on football safety there were disturbing suggestions yesterday that some clubs have failed to implement interim recommendations made in the wake of the Hillsborough disaster, writes David Hopps.
A crowd crush at Ayresome Park on Saturday forced Middlesbrough's match with Leeds United to be suspended for 15 minutes, and so alarmed the Leeds manager, Howard Wilkinson, that he clambered on to the perimeter fencing to appeal for calm.
Yesterday, Bob Schofield, treasurer of the Leeds supporters club, alleged: ‘People were very disturbed.
There was no exit in the perimeter fence and the gates in the side fence were locked.
Anyone trying to climb the fence could have been impaled on spikes the size of joiner's nails.
Clubs are not acting upon the Taylor report.’
Cleveland police will hold an inquiry.
Chief Supt Terry Tasker stressed there was no crowd fighting, adding: ‘Some Leeds supporters bought tickets for other parts of the ground and they were flushed out and taken to the enclosure set aside for them.’
The capacity of the south-east corner is only 2,108 and such was the demand for tickets in Leeds that 8,000 fans watched the match on close-circuit TV at Elland Road.
The crush was eased by moving some fans to an empty, condemned section of the ground.
All five spectators taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital were released yesterday, one with a broken leg.
Ten had treatment on the side of the pitch.
PAGE
Judo: Stevens justifies selection.
By Edward Ferrie
THE British National Championships at Crystal Palace at the weekend once again saw Wolverhampton dominate the proceedings, with their fighters Elvis Gordon, at heavyweight, Densign White, at middleweight, Fitzroy Davies, at light-middleweight, and Owen Pinnock the bantamweight all taking gold medals.
There was, however, no Wolverhampton presence in the category which generated the greatest interest this weekend — the light-heavyweight.
Following the Olympic bronze medalist Denis Stewart's decision to retire from competition after a poor performance in the world championships in Belgrade, two months ago, the No.1 spot was up for grabs.
Stewart's bitter rival, the veteran Nicholas Kokataylo, the 33-year-old from Denton, in Manchester, was favourite for the gold medal, but a strong challenge was expected from newcomer to the weight, Ray Stevens, 26, of the London Budokwai.
The reigning Commonwealth middleweight champion Stevens was forced to move up to the heavier weight following a knee injury and a prolonged viral infection.
Stevens's superior speed and technique combined with superb fighting spirit carried him through to the final.
Kokataylo and Stevens was an all-action affair with the Manchester fighter scoring with a leg throw in the opening seconds which almost finished the bout.
A half point was awarded but Stevens fought his way back into the contest scoring with a spectacular sacrifice throw and almost arm locking the much taller and heavier Kokataylo.
Stevens, despite losing the bout, clearly did enough to justify his pre-event selection for the Commonwealth Games.
PAGE
Adams awaits Robson's call.
By David Lacey
TONY ADAMS could make an unexpected return to the England team against Yugoslavia at Wembley on Wednesday.
Terry Butcher and Mark Wright have picked up injuries and are doubtful starters.
At the moment, Adams, who won his last full cap in Saudi Arabia 13 months ago, is set to lead the England B side against Yugoslavia B at Millwall tomorrow night.
But if Butcher, who damaged a knee playing for Rangers on Saturday, and Wright, who aggravated a neck injury playing for Derby County, have to drop out, the Arsenal captain will be promoted back to the senior squad.
‘Wright is the more doubtful of the two,’ Bobby Robson, the England manager, said last night.
‘He hurt his neck last Thursday and the club have admitted taking a risk playing him on Saturday.
That couldn't have done him any good.’
Wright has not played for England since the European Championship game against Holland 18 months ago but Robson has been sufficiently impressed by his League form to recall him to the squad.
Butcher has missed only one of England's last 13 matches.
John Barnes, who incurred a hamstring injury at Anfield on Saturday, is out of the Yugoslavia game.
Robson, who is expected to bring Steve Bull and David Platt into the attack for Beardsley and Lineker, can play Hodge on the left in Barnes's place and keep Waddle on the right, where he performed so well in the goalless draw with Italy last month.
Robson confirmed last night that England's friendly with the Republic of Ireland, due to be played in Dublin on March 28, was now in doubt with the teams drawn together in the same World Cup group.
‘It will be a joint decision by Jack Charlton and myself,’ he said.
‘We don't intend to pull out until we are certain it is the right thing to do.
We both need a match on that date and getting replacements will not be easy.’
The Irish have already sounded out Sweden as possible alternatives.
The B fixture against England in Cork on March 27 will go ahead.
David Lacey on the World Cup draw A case of deja vu for England and Ireland.
THE draw for the 1990 World Cup has been kind to the host nation, Italy, but hard on the holders, Argentina, easy on the West Germans and Brazilians and fair to the Scots but mean to Belgium, Uruguay and Spain.
It has also left England, Holland and the Republic of Ireland staring at one another in blank disbelief.
These teams were drawn together in the European Championship in West Germany last year, when England lost to the other two.
Now they will play each other in Group F of the World Cup, with England, the top seeds, in Sardinia and the Dutch and the Irish based in Sicily.
The one consolation is that the fourth team are Egypt rather than the Soviet Union.
The bad news is that the side finishing second in this group could well meet the Soviets in the opening phase of the knockout stage, which is when the World Cup begins in earnest.
England seem to have come an awfully long way simply to discover that it's a small world, and the Irish did not need reminding about Murphy's Law.
Yet if football was the only factor the prospect would be a fascinating one — the 1988 show transferred from the summer thunderstorms of West Germany to the clinging heat of Palermo and Cagliari, in which the Egyptians will be the only players who feel at home.
Unhappily, the pairing of England and Holland will be the centre of attention for all the wrong reasons, not least a repetition of the media hyperbole which accompanied their European Championship match in Dusseldorf 18 months ago.
That game was billed as football's Armageddon and the fact that there was no trouble between rival fans in the Rheinstadion did not get in the way of a good hooligan story.
Bert Millichip, the FA chairman, withdrew England's application for the clubs to be allowed back into Europe largely because of the way incidents involving English fans, the Dusseldorf police and young Germans looking for trouble had been reported by the press and TV back home.
There is now the danger that the same media circus will be dispatched to Sardinia next summer looking for the same headlines which will produce a similar outcome.
However, it should be remembered that the Holland football supporter abroad is a different character altogether to the wreckers of Ajax and Feyenoord, Utrecht and Den Haag.
There was no trouble, for example, when thousands of Dutchmen descended on Wrexham in October for the World Cup qualifier against Wales.
Moreover, the Dutch visit to Cagliari on June 16 will be fleeting; a lot of their fans will travel in and out on the day.
Nevertheless, it would be naive to suggest that the draw has not presented Sardinia with an even bigger security problem than it had bargained for.
Glen Kirton, the FA's assistant secretary, said that Les Walker, in charge of England security, and his Dutch opposite, Robert de Bakker, would be going to Sardinia soon to examine the situation.
In case it has been forgotten, the real purpose of England's visit to Italy is to attempt to raise the watershed of previous English achievements in World Cups played abroad beyond the quarter-finals.
To stand the best chance of doing this they need to win the group, which would bring them a match in Bologna against the runners-up from Group E.
This group is to be contested by Belgium, Uruguay and Spain with South Korea threatening to surprise any one of those three.
While nobody would suggest that Uruguay, for example, might represent easy opposition for Robson's players the likely alternatives in the second phase are alarming.
Should England come second they would then go to Genoa to play the runners-up from Group B, who are more likely to be Argentina or the Soviet Union than Romania or Cameroun, although this does look the toughest, tightest group of all.
Finshing third, provided they were one of the four successful stragglers, would leave England to play the winners of Group D, West Germany's group, in Milan or Group C, probably Brazil, in Turin.
Before all that, however, England have to readdress themselves to the problem of defeating the Irish and the Dutch, who beat them in Stuttgart and Dusseldorf last year.
England have more in their favour this time: as many as three go through, rather than one, and they will play all their opening matches in Cagliari whereas their rivals all have to shuttle back and forth from Palermo.
Jack Charlton, the Republic of Ireland manager, did not attend Saturday's draw in Rome but seemed more upset on TV back home than did Bobby Robson, who made all the right diplomatic noises in the Palazzo dello Sport without giving much away.
Thijs Lijbregts, who took over from Rinus Michels after Holland won the European Championship, has the additional pressure of managing one of the fancied teams while his best player, Ruud Gullit, is struggling to recover from a knee injury that has so far necessitated four operations and is threatening his career.
‘We have other good,’ Lijbregts pointed out on Saturday.
The Irish, making their first appearance in the World Cup finals, could have hoped if not for something better then at least something different.
Their manager's distress on hearing the draw could have something to do with the fact that Messiahs are not usually expected to rework old miracles.
England are due to play a friendly in Dublin on March 28 and even before the draw Lansdowne Road was assured of a sell-out.
But neither Robson nor Charlton may be too keen now to expose their teams to the little nuances and shifts of psychological advantage that could have a bearing on the game in Cagliari on June 11.
Egypt's best recent result is their 1-0 win over Bulgaria in Cairo in March last year.
England have played them once, in a warm-up before the 1986 World Cup when they won 4-0 in Cairo.
It is considered preferable to play the easiest opposition last.
Scotland, on the other hand, open the World Cup against Costa Rica in Genoa — shades of Dortmund in 1974 when they sauntered to a 2-0 win over Zaire and did not realise that this was the game to build up a healthy balance of goals.
Nevertheless the draw has dealt more sympathetically with the Scots than it did before the 1986 World Cup, when they found themselves grouped with West Germany, Uruguay and Denmark.
Unless there is a cock-up against Costa Rica, who they meet in their first match, Andy Roxburgh's team should reach the second phase.
This will be Scotland's third World Cup encounter with Brazil; they drew 0-0 in 1974 and Brazil won 4-1 in 1982.
Austria, Czechoslovakia or Italy seem to be Scotland's most likely opponents if they make the second phase.
England could play Italy in Rome in the quarter-finals, in which case the security problem would be even more acute.
They could also play Argentina or the Soviet Union at this stage.
Wherever you look England appear likely to encounter the sort of quality of opposition that has usually ended their World Cup ambitions in the past.
But first they have to solve the Irish problem, see off the Dutch, and remember how Egypt looked to an Englishman before Suez.
The draw ceremony was conducted seductively by Sophia Loren, operatically by Pavarotti, efficiently by Joseph Blatter, the Fifa general-secretary, and set against a background of studied chaos which would have done credit to a film by Fellini.
The only people who really matter, the players, were conspicuous by their absence.
Women win at last.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
THE third serious attempt in recent years to have women admitted to full membership of Lancashire County Cricket Club was successful at the AGM on Saturday, with a 68 per cent vote in favour.
This gives women equal access to a pavilion that has been a male preserve for 125 years and leaves Lord's as English cricket's last bastion of discrimination.
The early acquiescent mood suggested that the predictions of a ‘stormy’ meeting would be inaccurate.
Accounts were adopted without question, rule changes without demur.
But by the end of a long morning, this show's reputation for unrivalled unpredictability and entertainment was still intact.
And a unique flavour was provided by the appearance of Stephanie Anne Lloyd (formerly Kenneth Hull), ‘by a technicality your first full female member’.
Sex-change operations are more than some Lancashire members can cope with, and a bewildered silence descended on the Tyldesley Suite as Ms Lloyd, who runs a string of shops for transvestites, appealed for a ‘more enlightened approach in future’.
Some of the hardliners made their last-ditch appeals to sway the meeting.
There was some particularly strong stuff from two members from Southport, and there were references to ‘Emily Pankhurst and her floosies’ and, inevitably, to Mrs Thatcher —‘We've all seen what can happen when women get control’.
But even visions of breastfeeding could not stem the tide this time.
For the Lancashire committee the vote (2,046 in favour, 961 against) will have come as a relief, and for John Brewer in particular as something of a triumph.
He was campaigning on behalf of women 13 years ago.
Rugby League Regal Trophy, second round: Leeds 27, Bradford Northern 8 Leeds start and end with a flourish.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
LEEDS opened and finished this Regal Trophy second-round game at Headingley with tries of such quality as to mollify their followers for all the dross in between.
Bradford showed little of the enterprising approach that has been helping them shed a dour image this season, but it was not until the 64th minute that they began to slide out of the contest.
All that separated the sides at that point was a low bullet of a drop goal from Schofield that had put Leeds ahead 9-8.
They had been marginally the more dangerous side, but there was nothing then to suggest that Bradford might not complete their third win of the season over Leeds.
Soon afterwards Bradford were on their way out when exemplary support play — not a notable Leeds feature this day — by Izzard, Lord and Gibson sent Maskill, the man of the match, sprawling over the line.
Maskill improved his own try and Leeds were 15-8 in front.
Even better followed when the intelligent Coleman, always capable of rising above the mundane, made a marvellous break that was followed by a superb inside pass to Divorty.
So inviting was the gap created that the loose forward was able to score at the back of the posts, leaving Maskill with another simple kick.
Wilson, in the last minute, then broke from full-back, came full speed on to Coleman's pass, and the Bradford defence was cut open again.
Maskill improved the try and Leeds were home with a comfort which flattered them.
Leeds's opening try in the 12th minute had also been a fine effort, spread over 70 yards and involving Schofield, Maskill and Izzard before Coleman went for the corner.
Such excellence threw the next hour into even sharper relief with two sides growing increasingly scrappy.
Three penalties by Hobbs kept Bradford firmly in contention and another soon after the interval levelled the scores at 8-8.
Hobbs could have put Bradford 9-8 ahead with his easiest kick of the afternoon, but he struck a post and six minutes later Maskill scored the try which started that late rush of Leeds points.
Leeds: Wilson; Fawcett, Schofield, Gibson, Ford; Heron, Coleman; Izzard, Maskill, Dixon, Powell (Gunn, 61min), Laurie (Lord, 29), Divorty.
Bradford Northern: Wilkinson (Johnson, 68); Cordle, McGowan, Mackay, Francis; Henjak, Harkin (Richards, 59); Hobbs, Barraclough, Fairbank, Roebuck, Pendlebury, Stewart.
Referee: R Whitfield (Widnes).
Liverpool 1, Aston Villa 1 Villa besieged after the fall of Barnes.
By Stephen Bierley
NOBODY heard a sound.
One second John Barnes was all taunt and tease; the next he stopped dead, like a shot pheasant, and twirled slowly to the Anfield earth.
Not a snap or a twang, but the hamstring had gone for the second time in successive matches.
England will feel the immediate loss.
And Liverpool, already up to the physio's ceiling with assorted aches, strains and pains, notably those of Nicol, Gillespie and Hansen, may find December and the New Year decidedly awkward.
Dalglish wore the demeanour of a man who had just discovered the cat had been sick in his slippers.
‘We have,’ he said through a zipped mouth, ‘a few favours to come.’
The rest of the First Division, to twist WC Fields slightly, will be anxious not to give an injury-hit Liverpool an even break.
Aston Villa, with eight wins from their previous nine League matches, managed to nudge Liverpool's writing arm in the first half every time a cogent word or telling flourish was about to be penned.
Liverpool fretted and Villa scored, Ormondroyd touching on a Spink clearance via Daley to Olney, whose fierce shot burst through Grobbelaar's attempted save.
Neither Olney nor Ormondroyd are pretty players, being more giraffe than gazelle.
But once on the move they are devilishly difficult to stop, as is Villa's right winger, Daley.
‘We posed them quite a few threats in the first half,’ said Graham Taylor, while conceding the second belonged to Liverpool.
Villa were quite unable to get out of their own half after the interval, with Whelan's precise, perceptive passing aways likely to unhinge them.
‘We would have liked to support Olney more,’ said Taylor, but as Liverpool plundered the middle ground Daley became increasingly peripheral, while Ormondroyd and Platt were needed to contain rather than construct.
Mountfield, veteran of many a Merseyside derby, Nielsen and McGrath were magnificently combative, the more so after Beardsley had equalised.
This was probably not the most significant draw on Saturday, but at least it was not reliant on a Lancaster Gate sell-out to televison or Sophia Loren's fingers.
‘I shall not be taking my holidays in Sardinia,’ Taylor quipped.
Nobody mentioned anything Italian to Barnes, least of all Parma ham.
SCORERS: Liverpool: Beardsley (64); Aston Villa: Olney (21) Liverpool: Grobbelaar; Hysen, Staunton, Ablett, Whelan, Molby, Beardsley, Houghton, Rush, Barnes (Tanner, 38), McMahon.
Aston Villa: Spink; Price, Gray, McGrath, Mountfield, Nielsen, Daley, Platt, Olney, Cowans, Ormondroyd.
Referee: K Redfern (Whitley Bay).
Toshiba Divisional Championship: London 28, South-West 12 Incisive midfield sets up fine finale.
By David Frost
BY defeating the South-West at Imber Court, London ensured that the Toshiba Divisional Championship will have a proper climax at Otley on Saturday when the two unbeaten sides meet — London and the North.
London's chief strengths are the driving mauls of their forwards and the incisiveness of their midfield trio of Andrew, Carling and Clough.
In addition, Paul Ackford and Neil Edwards won important possession from the line-outs, and Andrew was successful with six out of nine kicks at goal.
The South-West forwards tried to play a similar mauling game, but with Teague far short of his true form they seldom made much headway and only occasionally produced clean possession for Hill.
Even so, Hill had another highly impressive game, passing crisply, nosing out openings, supporting assiduously and doing much useful work in defence.
Much of the game was taken up with mauls which an alert French referee often had to turn into scrums.
But London won enough of the ball for Carling to display his acceleration and his priceless ability to time a pass.
The strong running of Clough was an ideal complement to the subtlety of Carling; and Pilgrim, until handicapped by a blow on the thigh, showed how much improved he is.
London created two tries through running and passing and got another from a pushover.
The South-West's late try came when Clough was sent a hospital pass and Fallon booted the loose ball over the line.
The London captain, David Pegler, said afterwards he was disappointed that his team did not play to their full potential, and their coach, Dick Best, felt the same.
‘We didn't get out of second gear,’ he said, ‘but we are looking to get into third gear and, hopefully, top for next Saturday.’
SCORERS: London: Tries: Pegler, Pilgrim, Clarke.
Conversions: Andrew 2.
Penalties: Andrew 4.
South-West: Try: Fallon.
Conversion: Livesey.
Penalties: Livesey 2.
LONDON: S Pilgrim (Wasps; J Buckton, Saracens, 69min); S Smith (Wasps), F Clough (Wasps), W Carling (Harlequins), E Davis (Harlequins); R Andrew (Wasps), S Bates (Wasps; C Luxton, Harlequins, 39); J Leonard (Saracens), J Olver (Harlequins), J Probyn (Wasps), N Edwards (Harlequins), P Ackford (Harlequins), D Pegler (Wasps, captain), B Clarke (Saracens), M Skinner (Harlequins).
SOUTH-WEST: J Webb (Bristol); J Fallon (Richmond), A Adebayo (Bath), S Halliday (Bath, capt), S Walklin (Plymouth Albion); M Livesey (Richmond), R Hill (Bath); A Sharp (Bristol) K Dunn (Gloucester), R Pascall (Gloucester), N Redman (Bath), J Etheridge (Gloucester), I Smith (Gloucester), D Sims (Gloucester), M Teague (Gloucester).
Referee: F Casteret (France)..
First Division Manchester United 1, Crystal Palace 2 United stocks lower.
By Cynthia Bateman
AS UNITED were booed off the pitch, a supporter leaned into the director's box and tried to thrust a £5 note into the hands of Amer Midani, urging him to buy out the chairman, Martin Edwards.
He declined the offer.
United are rapidly reaching the stage where you would be lucky to give them away.
Give Palace's manager Steve Coppell the dosh and he will show you what to do with it.
Nigel Martyn, the goalkeeper he bought from Bristol Rovers for £1 million, has turned out to be a snip, his acrobatics saving the day when United penetrated Palace's back four, newly shored up by the strapping Andy Thorn.
The Palace defence, once as leaky as MI5 (remember the 9-0 defeat by Liverpool) was under pressure most of the time but withstood it, and the striker Bright, on the three occasions he was given a chance, hit the bar once and scored twice, with characteristic headers, giving Palace their first away win in the League this season.
United's manager, Alex Ferguson, must despair.
He cannot put a foot right.
His decision to drop Hughes to see if McClair could recover his striking form of the season before last proved to be popular only with Palace.
Apart from a header comfortably collected by Martyn, McClair could only chase the game.
When Hughes, who had been cheered every time he warmed up, was brought on with United 2-1 down, Ferguson again incurred the crowd's wrath by bringing off Sharpe, who like all United's young players is popular with the supporters.
Wallace, who had been playing up front with McClair to no devastating effect, moved out to his usual position on the left wing, with similar results.
It was left to another youngster, Russell Beardsmore, playing so tiny he looks like a mascot among the big central defenders, to show United the way.
Lethal as a sliver of glass, he scythed a flying header through a ruck of defenders' armpits to put United ahead after nine minutes.
Robson chipped cleverly, delightfully and frequently; Ince, at right-back, cut diagonal gashes across midfield; Pallister, safer going forwards than backwards, swept Palace aside.
Unfortunately, they never did it all in one move.
United are a variety show when they should be the movie.
But The Mad Axeman could be coming soon.
Forest loom in the FA Cup in the New Year, and if United, who had their lowest League crowd of the season on Saturday and are now only six points ahead of the bottom club City, still cannot see the wood for the trees, somebody will be in for the chop.
SCORERS: Manchester United: Beardsmore (9min).
Crystal Palace: Bright (40, 55).
Manchester United: Leighton; Beardsmore, Martin, Bruce, Phelan (Blackmore, 80), Pallister, Robson, Ince, McClair, Sharpe (Hughes, 56), Wallace.
Crystal Palace: Martyn; Pemberton, Dennis, Gray (Barber, 78), Hopkins, O'Reilly, Thorne, Thomas, Bright, Wright, Pardew.
Referee: T Simpson (Halifax).
Bridgend 16, Neath 22 Close encounter.
By Martyn Williams
THE SIEGE mentality suddenly occupies all thoughts at Neath.
Denied access to Europe and elsewhere by the Welsh Rugby Union, awaiting a lengthy ban on the international lock Gareth Llewellyn, they battled against Bridgend within the confines of a 20 square yard area.
Few games have been played in such restricted space yet provided so much furious forward movement and pace.
If the approach was to impress the reported carloads of northern scouts, they would have returned home with the memory of short explosive bursts, close support play and dogged determination, but little else.
Glen Webbe, of international fame and a target for League clubs, might just as well have stayed home decorating his Christmas tree for what he was called on to do.
Little of the frantic and customary Neath 15-man handling movements were seen and until late in the game, three-quarters and full-backs stood motionless, until they also found the driving maul and battering game too appealing.
All four of Neath's tries were close-to-the-line affairs, including a penalty try award.
Mark Jones at No.8, impressive within the legal bounds of the game, less so outside them, scored two, Paul Williams the other, with Paul Thorburn contributing three conversions.
Such a pulsating close battle required firmer handling than administered by Brian Wallis, for there were quite a few personal grudges raging.
As soon as the Bridgend flanker, Gerald Williams, triumphantly ‘spiked’ the ball, American Football-style, after scoring his team's opening try, his card was marked.
And so it proved, with a blood-stained Williams replaced by John Berrington in the second half.
Gareth Williams, celebrating his 500th appearance for Bridgend, fears for the game's future, if the thuggish element is not removed.
The durable former Wales and Lions forward accepts controlled aggression but recognises the need for attractive rugby.
Much to their credit in launching a spirited assault on the Neath lead, Bridgend did attempt to spread the ball wide.
Even they, though, found the battering-ram principle too convenient yet unproductive.
Had they followed the example of Aled Williams, who scored a scintillating try around the Neath cover, the game might have released itself from the siege strangehold.
Neath's formula has destroyed most opponents this season.
It is to Bridgend's credit, their pack and the battling scrum-half Kevin Ellis, that they did not wilt when others would have submitted.
SCORERS: Bridgend: Tries: G Williams, A Williams.
Conversion: A Parry.
Penalty goals: A Parry 2.
Neath: Tries: M Jones 2, P Williams, penalty try.
Conversions: P Thorburn 3.
Bridgend: A Parry; G Webbe, L Evans, J Apsee (capt), R Diplock; A Williams, K Ellis; D Austin, L Phillips, C Connolly, N Spender, Gareth Williams, S Apsee, S Bryant, Gerald Williams (J Berrington).
Neath: P Thorburn; C Higgs, C Laity, J Ball, J Riggs; P Williams, C Bridges; B Williams, K Phillips (capt), J Pugh, Glynn Llewellyn, Gareth Llewellyn, R Phillips, M Jones, D Pickering.
Referee: B Wallis (Cwmbran).
Midlands 9, North 17 Hodgkinson put in a position of weakness as North march on.
By David Irvine
AS England's selectors nowseem happy, or spoiled for choice, in all positions bar full-back and No.8, it was perhaps inevitable that Saturday's irrelevance at The Reddings should broaden the hunt and thrust Messrs Hodgkinson, Langford, Rodber and Charles Cusani into the spotlight.
Inevitable, yet a pity too.
For while Baldwin offered a rare but masterly dislay of two-handed catching; the ever-active Hitchen a taste of the modern hooker's arts; and Packman, Heslop, Wells and Buckton some excellent individual touches, the four candidates with the best chance of recognition fell some considerable way short of hopes and expectations.
Though the North scored three tries to nil for their 11th win in their last 12 matches in the competition, it would not be far-fetched to suggest that with Hodgkinson at stand-off — and, overall, he produced more thrust than any other midfield player — the Midlands might well have won.
Unfortunately he failed to impress as a full-back.
His positional play and line kicking were poor.
Opposite him Langford made some thundering tackles but then blotted his copybook with a stupid kick which, but for Underwood's timely intervention, might have cost his side the match.
Rodber looked raw while Cusani's insistance on picking the ball up at every second scrum was one of the main reasons why the North's centres never made much headway.
The North's match with London at Otley next Saturday will decide the championship — as if anyone cares.
Certainly there was little at Moseley to suggest anyone does.
As a contest it was neither designed to set the pulses racing nor win converts.
Without Underwood's pace — he overhauled Evans three times when the Midlands wing looked clear — Pears, who squandered possession and missed five kicks, could have sealed his side's fate.
Instead the day was saved by some unexpectedly strong finishing.
Underwood got the first try, following a searing diagonal run by Heslop, and then returned the compliment by giving Heslop the scoring pass for the second.
Morris claimed the third from short range.
SCORERS: Midlands: Penalties: Hodgkinson (3).
North: Tries: Underwood, Heslop, Morris.
Conversion: Pears.
Penalty goal: Pears.
MIDLANDS: S Hodgkinson (Nottingham); B Evans, T Buttimore, I Bates (all Leicester) F Packman (Northampton); A Sutton, B Gabriel (both Nottingham); G Pearce (Northampton), T Thacker (Leicester), M Linnett (Moseley), M Bayfield (Bedford), D Hindmarsh (Nottingham), J Wells (Leicester), G Rees (Nottingham), T Rodber (Northampton).
NORTH: S Langford; N Heslop (Orrell); G Childs (Northern), B Barley (Wakefield), R Underwood (Leicester); D Pears (Harlequins), D Morris (Liverpool St H); M Whitcombe (Sale), N Hitchen, S Southern (Orrell capt), D Baldwin (Sale), D Cusani (Orrell), S Hodgson (Sale), P Buckton (Liverpool St H), C Cusani (Orrell).
Referee: E Morrison (Gloucestershire).
Basketball Riders gallop on last legs.
By Robert Pryce
THERE are only six Leicester Riders left in the saddle, but yesterday they came within a basket of carrying off the weekend's biggest surprise.
The Sunderland 76ers, who are surging up the Carlsberg League table, almost came a cropper at the Granby Halls.
Though Clyde Vaughan (24 points), Scott Wilke (23) and Russ Saunders (20) were all firing, they struggled to put away the weakened Riders, 89-88.
With just under two minutes left, Leicester led 88-83.
Then Saunders stole twice from Mike Landell, Vaughan sank four free throws and Sunderland had nicked the points.
Cat Johnson, the Leicester player-coach, has injured an ankle, Dave Harris is out with a recurring leg injury, and Pat Morrison was released last week.
In their absence, Jerry Jenkins, a veteran so aged that his court time is usually handed out in short and widely spaced passages, was required to carry a heavier load.
He responded with 20 points, his best haul of the season.
The 6ft 10in Scott Paterson led the Riders' scoring with 26 points.
Landell and Whitney Dabney contributed 14 each.
Though Perry Bromwell (12 points) returned yesterday to the London Docklands line-up after injury, the Eastenders had no answer to their visitors from the royal borough of Kingston.
The Kings did not need to be at their pearly best to win 111-77.
Micah Blunt and Martin Clark led the league leaders' scorers with 20 points each.
Balding's Beech Road appears to be on the right trail for a Champion double.
By Richard Baerlein
TOBY BALDING returned home to his Weyhill stables after racing at Cheltenham on Saturday secure in the knowledge that in Beech Road and Morley Street he trains the two best hurdlers in the country.
In the Champion Hurdle, which he won at 50-1 and in the Sandeman Hurdle at Liverpool, where at 10-1 he gave weight and a beating to some of the best hurdlers in training, Beech Road established himself as an outstanding champion, and although he did not win the Charles Heidsieck Champagne Bula Hurdle on Saturday, he confirmed his position at the top of the tree.
For his seasonal debut on going which was too fast for him, it came as no surprise that he drifted from 7-2 to 5-1.
Yet his storming finish carried him into third place, a head and 1 ½ lengths behind two super-fit hurdlers, Cruising Altitude (rec 6lb) and Nomadic Way (rec 10lb).
As the winner of both his races this season, Cruising Altitude was fully entitled to start favourite at the weights and he set a course record beating the time of Run For Free in the opener who had himself just broken the previous record.
Cruising Altitude passed the pacemaking Floyd as they crossed the final hurdle and he looked all set for a comfortable victory.
Then Nomadic Way brought the stamina which enabled him to win the Cesarewitch two years ago into play and finishing well up that final testing hill, he failed by only a head to catch Cruising Altitude.
When they met at Newbury on November 25th, Nomadic Way finished 10 lengths behind his rival, and now, on only 1lb better, Nomadic Way improved about ten lengths.
No doubt he will make further progress but how either of them are going to hold Beech Road when they all meet at levels is answered by the new prices on the Champion.
Corals offered him at 5-1 but soon had to come down to join Ladbrokes at 4-1.
Both firms moved Kribensis out to 6-1 and Cruising Altitude to 8-1.
If all goes well, Beech Road will start at 2-1 or less at Cheltenham as there is no mistaking his superiority.
Morley Street, against weaker opposition, was even more impressive.
The winner of five of his six races as a novice last season and probably an unlucky loser of the other, where he made mistakes at two consecutive hurdles, Morley Street was ridden with considerable discretion by Jimmy Frost, who brought him on the scene with a double handful between the last two flights, jumping to the front at the last, which he hit quite hard.
He still managed to finish seven lengths ahead of Deep Sensation of whom much more will be heard.
By March, Morley Street will probably be good enough to win any normal champion hurdle, but Balding does not relish the idea of running two in the race.
His next race will be at Chepstow in two weeks time.
After that it will be decided whether or not he goes chasing in the New Year.
I understand he has already been schooled over fences with considerable success.
He is ideally bred for the job being by the champion sire, Deep Run, from a granddam, Matchboard, who won 11 chases and five point-to-points.
Morley Street cost the bargain price of 14,000gns as a yearling.
The A.F. Budge Gold Cup Handicap Chase, produced a field of six and unless it rains soon even that number will be welcomed by racecourses.
David Elsworth chose this race to give Barnbrook Again his preliminary for the King George VI and the topweight winner of all his four races last season was made the 2-1 favourite, though some optimistic betting forecasts had him as a ridulous 8-1 chance.
The ground and the weight seemed too much for him and he had retired from contention before the penultimate fence.
By this time Clever Folly had shaken off all opposition and proceeded to break the course record by 4.7 seconds in spite of 4lb overweight.
Welsh Oak stayed on to finish ten lengths second and there was another six lengths to Barnbrook Again.
David Elsworth seemed quite satisfied with the performance of Barnbrook Again, observing that he still had 17 days before the big race.
Martin Pipe's Rusch de Farges was never going well.
This is proving a vintage year for Cumbrian trainer, Gordon Richards, whose Clever Folly was winning for the fourth time.
Over in Ireland Jim Dreaper gave Carvill's Hill his seasonal debut in the Durkan Brothers International Punchestown Chase, where he was beaten three lengths by last season's Irish Grand National winner Maid Of Money, who was receiving 5lb and started favourite.
It was a two-horse race but there is no doubt Carvill's Hill's jumping has improved since last season when he won all the four races in which he finished.
He unseated his rider once and fell at the 7th in the Cheltenham Gold Cup.
Again Corals had to reduce their early odds of 6-1 on Carvill's Hill for the Gold Cup to 5-1.
This would be generous if the ground proved soft but as he will not run if it is firm, there is no point in betting before the day.
Maid Of Money, 12-1, will also go for the Gold Cup but they are likely to meet again in the Black and White Gold Cup at Leopardstown.
RICHARD BAERLEIN'S SELECTIONS: NAP: Woodchester Glen (12.45 Edinburgh).
NEXT BEST: Between The Sheets (3.30 Warwick).
AAA to see lawyers.
By John Rodda
AN accusation made yesterday that the British Amateur Athletic Board was manipulated into bankruptcy, is to be examined by the solicitors of the Amateur Athletic Association.
The charges were made by Derek Johnson of Southern Counties, a silver medal winner at the Olympic Games in 1956, who told the board's annual meeting that he wanted to correct the record on how the board came to be wound up in 1987 and its financial affairs taken over by the AAA.
Johnson wanted to read papers relating to sponsorship and televised meetings.
But the chairman, Ewan Murray, said that he could not do so without permission from the AAA.
Johnson told the meeting that the board was ‘bullied out of £300,000.
It is important for history to show that despite what happened the board was responsible in its conduct and its financial affairs’.
Sir Arthur Gold, the former president of the European Athletic Association, a life vice-president of the board and now chairman of the British Olympic Association and supported Johnson, saying there had been ‘wicked distortions’.
The board confirmed that Les Jones, is to continue as Britain's team manager until the 1992 Olympic Games with Joan Allison leading the women's team.
Matthew Belsham, of Sale Harriers has been added to England's Commonwealth Games team, in the pole vault, taking the place of Michael Edwards, who was withdrawn on grounds of misconduct.
Romania lock asks to stay.
By Donald Stewart
CHRISTIAN Raducanu, the 22-year-old Romanian lock, disappeared from the party after his team's 32-0 defeat by Scotland at Murrayfield on Saturday.
He arrived at Edinburgh's Blair Street station early yesterday and told police he wanted to stay in Britain.
Raducanu attended the official dinner that followed the international but then left his team-mates.
He was not in the aeroplane when the Romanian players and officials went home from Heathrow yesterday.
Several Scottish players said that there had been talk at the dinner about the possibility of one of the Romanians hoping to stay in Scotland.
‘It is not a police matter but an immigration matter, and he is being interviewed,’ a Home Office spokesman said.
‘He told police he wanted to extend his stay.
We do not know yet whether he wants to extend his visit for a short time to see friends, or become a student, or stay permanently.’
Two members of Wales's championship side last season, the Bridgend prop, Mike Griffiths, and the Newbridge outside-half and captain, Paul Turner, are being linked with Cardiff and Newport respectively, writes David Plummer.
Griffiths, who has not played for a month because of a rib injury, watched Cardiff overwhelm London Welsh on Saturday and is expected to train with the club next week.
He was linked with Cardiff in the summer when he decided to stay at the Brewery Field.
Turner may have finally made up his mind to move after being dropped from the Newbridge side which travelled to Swansea on Saturday after Newport announced he was on his way to Rodney Parade.
He is expected to transfer by tomorrow.
Turner has been offered employment by the company of Newport's new coach, Gareth Evans, at a better salary than he currently enjoys.
And he is no stranger to Rodney Parade, having spent a couple of seasons there from 1985, moving from Newbridge, before flirting briefly with London Welsh.
His impending move brings the punitive changes to the amateur regulations into a sharp focus.
In the past, reasons for changing clubs have been couched in euphemistic terms, such as the need for a fresh challenge.
Now, it is a players' market.
The North expect to have Peter Winterbottom back for next Saturday's Divisional Championship decider against London at Otley.
The England flanker showed he has recovered from a rib cartilage injury by playing in Harlequins' 57-10 victory over Bedford.
The Midlands will make one change against the South-West at Bath, recalling the England hooker Brian Moore, who has twice withdrawn from the side late on with a twisted knee.
Athletics: Morrell dispels fitness doubts.
By Sandy Sutherland
THERE was a resounding message sent to Steve Cram, the man England have left out of the Commonwealth Games team, from the Scottish Indoor Championships yesterday.
It came from Tony Morrell, the Hartlepool-based athlete who has been preferred to Cram in the 1500 metres and whose fitness had been queried in some quarters.
Morrell won the 1500 metres at the Kelvin Hall with an impressive display of strength in 3min 44.09sec, then declared: ‘It was an easy run — I came prepared to run 3min 40sec and that should show people whether there's anything wrong with my calf.’
Morrell's race plan was upset when Gerry McCann, from the local Glasgow University club, set off at a suicidal pace.
He was eventually caught with three laps left and as the pack came past him he unfortunately caught the heels of another member of England's Commonwealth Games team, Ikem Billy, who dropped out.
Morrell went on for a comfortable victory over three seconds clear of the defending champion, Mark Kirk, of Ballymena.
A trio of English runners featured in the women's 1500 metres where the two 800 metres runners got the better of the specialist at the distance, Christina Cahill.
Diane Edwards made a long run for home to defeat Ann Williams in a modest 4min 19.46sec with Cahill just unable to get back on terms.
There was nothing modest about the manner of Linford Christie's 60 metres victory.
The Seoul 100 metres silver medallist, who had won the 200 metres unpressed in 21.30sec on Saturday, had more formidable opposition in the 60 metres from Michael Rosswess.
The 24-year-old Birchfield Harrier failed to win selection for Auckland and has turned his attention instead to the European Indoor Championships to be held in Glasgow in early March.
Christie, too, wants to run in the European, preferably in both sprints and not just the 60 metres for which he has been pre-selected.
Christie was away smoothly out of his blocks and never looked like being caught, though the bustling Rosswess pulled clear of the remainder of the field, including the two Scottish Commonwealth Games representatives, Jamie Henderson, who was third, and Elliot Bunney.
Christie's time was a championship record of 6.64sec.
Mark Breland took less than four rounds to come through the third defence of his WBC welterweight title yesterday in Tokyo, opening up a bad cut above the right eye of his Japanese challenger, Fujio Ozaki.
Lachie Deuchar, the world Real Tennis No.2, won the French Open Championship at Bordeaux yesterday, but was kept on court for 3 |C hours by an amateur, James Male, the world rackets champion.
Deuchar won the final 3-6, 6-2, 6-5, 4-6, 6-5.
The European champion, John Whitaker, won the £15,000 Frankfurt Grand Prix on Next Milton yesterday, improving his chances of taking the Renault series which conludes at Grenoble next Sunday.
Peter Senior took his third Australian title in four weeks yesterday, collecting his biggest purse in the process, by winning the Australian Classic in Melbourne.
The Queenslander won by five shots from the world No.1 Greg Norman, who finished on seven under par, with Britain's Howard Clark one stroke further back in third.
David Frost of South Africa took the sport's richest prize when he took the $1 million winner's cheque in the Sun City Challenge.
Whitley Bay 2, Preston 0 Draw dampens Bay's party.
By David Hopps
FOR Whitley Bay, the hangover arrived several hours too soon.
A night of beer-swilling revelry was abruptly deflated at 11.30pm when someone switched on the television for the draw for the FA Cup third round.
The proudest moment in Whitley Bay's history, the conquering of Preston North End, twice Cup winners, had been loudly celebrated.
But the sober, clipped tones of the FA representatives told that the party was over: the reward, if reward it could be called, was an away tie at Rochdale.
Away at Rochdale.
Enough to make the room swim, send the beer flat and the chicken legs glutinous.
If the adventure had to end, no one among the HFS Loans League side dared to imagine that it might end in less than a month's time in front of a few thousand at Spotland.
How Preston had been sent packing.
They were brought up on Deepdale plastic, gleaming under powerful floodlights.
In the murky shadows of Hillheads, on a yielding surface which Whitley diehards reckoned was more clarty than claggy, their appetite for a fight soon deserted them.
A crowd of 4,500, packed into the tiny ground just behind the ice rink, roared its approval at every stout tackle, every lung-bursting sprint.
Preston's preference for two wingers allowed Bay to clamp the midfield, and they soon set in motion a stream of direct attacks of surprising accuracy.
The goals were roughly hewn.
The central defender Peter Robinson, a student teacher, struck the first from 10 yards in the 33rd minute after Lawrie Pearson's low shot had scudded against the heels of another Bay player, Kevin Todd.
Todd's follow-up on the hour, from similar range, arose from Pearson's cleverly squirted pass, but only after Atkins, swinging wildly, had made a hash of his clearance as Dawson's barnstorming run down the right seemed sure to be betrayed by a poorly-struck cross.
Whitley's goalkeeper Brian Dickson, a chef for a hospital catering company, bubbled away underneath the flat, old-fashioned crossbars.
He only regained his place when Tony Harrison broke an arm in the second qualifying round, but his two saves around the half-hour, first scrambling Hughes's shot around the post, then pawing away Joyce's looping header, left Preston's brightest period unrewarded.
There was so much to savour, much of it blissfully recalled in an hilarious after-match comedy entitled, I'm Sorry We've Left The Tannoy On.
As spectatators streamed from the ground, the public address crackled out its satisfied message: Whitley Bay had stuffed ‘em, good and proper.
So they had.
SCORERS: Whitley Bay: Robinson (33min), Todd (60).
Whitley Bay: Dickson; Liddle, Teasdale, Robinson, Gowens, Johnson, Walker, Dawson, Chandler (Gamble, 80), Todd, Pearson.
Preston North End: Kelly; Williams, Swann, Atkins, Joyce, Hughes, Mooney (Flynn, 67), Ellis, Bogie, Patterson, Harper.
Referee: W Burn (Scarborough)..
The League's bottom club Hartlepool have named Cyril Knowles as manager in succession to Bobby Moncur, who resigned a fortnight ago.
Southampton 2, Manchester City 1 City ripe for Kendall salvation if Swales gives him the time.
By Martin Thorpe
MANCHESTER United get through money; City get through managers.
Nobody gets success.
Today Maine Road welcomes its tenth manager in 16 years.
Step forward, Howard Kendall.
The former Everton manager is swapping a reign in Spain for the pain of a reign at Maine.
Time will tell which ended better.
Statistics show that bringing in a new manager tends not to be a pancea.
Last season there were 35 changes of manager in the League.
None of the clubs involved won promotion, and seven were relegated.
But it all depends on who your new manager is.
If the City chairman had sacked Mel Machin to bring in a John Bond or Malcolm Allison then heads really would have been shaking in wonderment at another Peter Swales masterstroke.
But in Kendall, City seem at last to have hired a manager with the credentials to match the club's aspirations.
Looking at City at Southampton on Saturday and thinking back to the Everton sides that twice won the championship, Kendall appears just the man to implant the discipline and experience needed around some otherwise exciting talent.
Already the former Everton manager is being linked with old colleagues such as Peter Reid, Adrian Heath and Kevin Sheedy, plus Mark Hughes and Scott Sellars.
Looking at City's first-half performance at The Dell, he must have wondered if any change was needed at all.
Though bottom of the First Division, City played intelligent, skilful soccer, full of simple passes, with players such as Bishop and Lake comfortable enough on the ball to create space, and a striker in Allen sharp enough to take the half-chance that put City deservedly ahead.
But City are prone to concede goals in the last quarter of an hour and bang on the 75th minute the impressive young Dodd fed a wonderful 30-yard pass to Rod Wallace, who held off two defenders to equalise.
It was a quality goal nearly upstaged five minutes later by a 25-yard screamer from the substitute Horne.
But the signs at City are encouraging.
Swales might, at last, have made a wise decision — if he does not go back on it at the first sign of failure.
SCORERS: Southampton: Wallace (75min), Horne (80).
Manchester City: Allen (11).
Southampton: Flowers; Dodd, Benali, Case, Ruddock, Osman, Le Tissier, Cockerill, Shearer (Moore, 73), Rideout (Horne, 73), Wallace.
Manchester City: Dibble; Seagraves, Hinchcliffe, Bishop, Hendry, Redmond, White, Morley, Allen, Oldfield (Ward, 87), Lake.
Referee: D Elleray (Harrow)..
Crowd crush renews fears.
ONLY a month before the publication of Lord Justice's Taylor's full report on football safety there were disturbing suggestions yesterday that some clubs have failed to implement interim recommendations made in the wake of the Hillsborough disaster, writes David Hopps.
A crowd crush at Ayresome Park on Saturday forced Middlesbrough's match with Leeds United to be suspended for 15 minutes, and so alarmed the Leeds manager, Howard Wilkinson, that he clambered on to the perimeter fencing to appeal for calm.
Yesterday, Bob Schofield, treasurer of the Leeds supporters club, alleged: ‘People were very disturbed.
There was no exit in the perimeter fence and the gates in the side fence were locked.
Anyone trying to climb the fence could have been impaled on spikes the size of joiner's nails.
Clubs are not acting upon the Taylor report.’
Cleveland police will hold an inquiry.
Chief Supt Terry Tasker stressed there was no crowd fighting, adding: ‘Some Leeds supporters bought tickets for other parts of the ground and they were flushed out and taken to the enclosure set aside for them.’
The capacity of the south-east corner is only 2,108 and such was the demand for tickets in Leeds that 8,000 fans watched the match on close-circuit TV at Elland Road.
The crush was eased by moving some fans to an empty, condemned section of the ground.
All five spectators taken to Middlesbrough General Hospital were released yesterday, one with a broken leg.
Ten had treatment on the side of the pitch.
Swindon Town 0, Sheffield United 2 United victory marred as Duffield breaks leg.
By Jeremy Alexander
SHEFFIELD UNITED, deposed on Saturday by Leeds, reclaimed the summit of the Second Division yesterday with their sixth away victory of the season and their second 2-0 defeat of Swindon.
Since their infatuation with Bolton in the Littlewoods Cup, Swindon, still lying ninth, have lost their way in the League with only two points from four games.
United made a marvellous start, scoring after six minutes, but the goal was costly as well as precious.
Bodin's pass back was under-hit, Duffield and Gittens seized on it and, while Gittins did what Duffield was intending, sliding the ball under the advancing Digby, Duffield stayed down and was carried off with a broken leg.
United looked like traffic controllers, directing the flow straight down the arterial routes towards Swindon's goal.
Before they scored, they carved a golden chance but Booker won no prize for his volley over the stand.
Swindon's approach was more along the byways, with frequent midfield pauses to check the map or signposts.
It was all in the darting style of their manager, Ossie Ardiles, without the penetrating vision.
After the interval, Swindon sharpened their wits and began to make the heart of United's defence look ponderous.
Shearer and White, each fed by Jones, were denied by Tracey's spread and agility but the traffic had turned about, although five minutes from time, Jones cracked another shot against the bar.
By then, though, in a rare escape from their own half, United had scored their second.
From a free-kick on the left, Gannon swung the ball deep and Morris, not as heavy as he had appeared from the previous half-hour, made the game safe with a soaring header.
Swindon: Digby; Kerslake (Cornwell, 60min), Bodin, McLoughlin, Calderwood, Gittens, Jones, Shearer, White, MacLaren, Foley.
Sheffield United: Tracey; Hill, Rostron, Booker (Lake, 87), Stancliffe, Morris, Bradshaw, Gannon, Duffield (Francis, 6), Deane, Bryson.
Referee: D Axcell (Southend).
Young McEnroe saves his best until last.
By Martin James
PATRICK McENROE not only revived an old family tradition at the Royal Albert Hall yesterday but also managed to give his watching parents a welcome 33rd wedding anniversary present when he added his name to the Nabisco Masters doubles trophy.
Considering he was joining an honour roll that included his big brother John, it was somehow fitting that Patrick played the leading role in the two-hour 48-minute finale to the grand prix circuit which saw the younger McEnroe and Jim Grabb dismiss the more experienced Anders Jarryd and John Fitzgerald 7-5, 7-6, 5-7, 6-3.
Throughout the week, McEnroe MkII was impressive in everything he tried.
Even his serve, which he does not really rate as a weapon, could hardly have been faulted.
Going into the final he had surrendered it just once.
It appeared just as impregnable yesterday as he survived the first two sets without being broken.
Ironically, however, at 5-5 in the third set with the match almost in the Americans' grasp, he faltered, losing his delivery to 30.
Fitzgerald then served out for the set to turn the match into a real struggle, or so we thought, but Grabb and McEnroe stepped up a gear midway through the fourth set to take control.
It made Patrick cringe of course, but the inevitable comparison with his brother was high on the agenda when, clutching his share of the £45,000 winners' cheque and £15,000 for finishing eighth in the Nabisco points table, he walked into the interview room.
Fitzgerald, who lost his rag with John McEnroe at Wimbledon, had already offered his view of the pair.
‘They're like chalk and cheese.
He's a very very pleasant young fella.
You have got to give him credit.
It is very difficult to play under the shadow of an older brother who's had so much success.
But he's developed his game over the last couple of years very well.
Now he's a very accomplished player,’ the Australian Davis Cup stalwart said.
‘I am obviously very pleased about winning but it was also great that my parents were here.
It was a special week for all of us,’ said Patrick, who was only 11 when brother John won the first of seven successive Masters doubles titles in 1978 with Peter Fleming.
Victory would have secured Jarryd his place at the top of the points table, a feat worth £110,000.
Instead, he came second and had to make do with £80,000.
The final yesterday was the last under the auspices of the Men's Tennis Council, which had controlled the Grand Prix circuit since 1970.
Next year the Association of Tennis Professionals takes command.
Imran joins the 350 club.
IMRAN KHAN became the fifth player in Test history to take 350 wickets — joining Richard Hadlee, Ian Botham, Dennis Lillee and Kapil Dev — when he held on to a fine one-handed return catch to dismiss Ravi Shastri yesterday as India lost their last seven wickets for 143 on the second day of the fourth and final Test in Sialkot.
In a day that saw 100 minutes of playing time lost, first to crowd trouble and then to the weather, Wasim Akram finished with five for 101 after the tourists had gone from 181 for three overnight to 324 all out.
Play was briefly suspended at the start of the Pakistan innings when Sachin Tendulkar, fielding on the boundary, was pelted with fruit by the crowd.
A public appeal restored calm, and the home side were 23 for one when bad light and more rain drove the players off an hour early.
In Brisbane, Sri Lanka ground out their highest score in the three Tests they have played against Australia, adding 194 in six hours yesterday to end the third day of the first Test on 275 for six.
Aravinda de Silva anchored the tourists with an unbeaten 75, but their progress in reply to Australia's first innings of 367 was painfully slow on a hot day, with the first session yielding only 50 runs.
Richard Edmunds, the 19-year-old Leicestershire left-arm pace bowler who suffered severe chest injuries in a car crash last month, has died in hospital.
He made his first-class debut for his county last season and played for Young England.