

Former Bolivian minister in US court.
By Mark Tran in Washington
THE wheels of justice began turning yesterday for the former Bolivian Interior Minister, Mr Luis Arce Gomez, when he appeared before a Miami magistrate following his arrest and deportation from Bolivia.
Mr Arce Gomez, who once enlisted the services of the former SS officer Klaus Barbie to advise Bolivian death squads, was seized by a joint force of Bolivian commandos and US drug officials while attending a family party on a ranch outside Santa Cruz.
He was put on a US Drug Enforcement Administration plane and whisked to Miami on Monday.
Held amid tight security at the federal correctional centre south of Miami, Mr Arce Gomez faces a 1983 indictment on allegations of conspiracy to distribute cocaine.
The present Interior Minister, Mr Guillermo Capobianco, said his predecessor — who is also wanted in Bolivia on murder charges in connection with a 1980 coup — was sent to the US despite the absence of a formal extradition treaty between the two countries.
Calling the deportation a sovereign act, Mr Capobianco said the move was ‘a demonstration before the international community’ of Bolivia's commitment to the war against drugs.
The US welcomed the co-operation of the Bolivian authorities.
‘The arrest of Arce Gomez sends a message that the President will work with other governments to pursue vigorously individuals who traffic in drugs,’ said a White House statement.
Known in Bolivia as the ‘minister of cocaine’ after he allegedly created a paramilitary squad to confiscate cocaine from drug dealers who refused to pay him bribes, Mr Arce Gomez also has a grisly human rights reputation.
Human rights group say he was in charge of Bolivian death squads responsible for murdering hundreds of journalists, political and labour leaders, and church officials.
He is accused of hiring Barbie to advise the country's paramilitary forces on torture techniques.
Gorbachev wins on party role.
By John Rettie in Moscow
GUIDING deputies with a firm hand, President Gorbachev yesterday got his way at the opening session of Congress, which duly voted against a proposal by the poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko to discuss the Communist Party's monopoly of power.
But the price for this success was an entire day spent on discussing the agenda for the 10-day meeting, and a debate with much friction between Baltic delegates and the Russian majority.
On behalf of the Inter-Regional Group of some 400 radical deputies, Mr Yevtushenko moved to include on the agenda discussion of Article 6 of the constitution, which enshrines the ‘leading and guiding role’ of the party.
The proposal was supported by many delegates from Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, as well as Moldavia and reformist delegates from Russia and elsewhere.
They included the human rights activist, Dr Andrei Sakharov, whose efforts to call a strike in support of discussing Article 6 were sharply criticised.
Replying to Mr Yevtushenko, the President briskly appealed to deputies not to take ‘hasty decisions’.
He had already clearly laid down his view in his opening speech to the session, in which he recognised that perestroika had so far made little impact on the acute social and economic crisis.
‘The transition to a new economic system is proving difficult.
The results on which we counted have yet to come,’ he said.
That was why the Congress of People's Deputies was being recommended to give priority to the government's report on the economy.
People would judge it ‘by how it considers questions of revitalising the economy, curbing shortages and improving the life of the workers,’ he said.
The implication was clear: to discuss Article 6 would be an irresponsible aberration.
By 1,138 votes to 839, with 58 abstentions, the delegates agreed.
In the afternoon session there was an equally irritable wrangle over a proposal to adopt a law on compliance with the constitution, and to set up a committee for the purpose.
Deputies from the Baltic republics, some of which have passed laws denounced by Moscow's Supreme Soviet as unconstitutional, saw this as an attempt to limit their sovereignty.
Some described the existing ‘Brezhnevite’ constitution as outdated, and said it would be undemocratic to enforce compliance with it.
An Estonian history professor, Arnold Palm, said Balts regarded their status within the Soviet Union as ‘political, not juridical’, and ‘by no means definitely established’.
But representatives of the Russian minority in the Baltic accused Baltic republican government of violating the Soviet constitution.
Rush to find defence team after sudden arraignment Hit-squad informer faces murder trial.
By David Beresford in Johannesburg
THE man responsible for uncovering South Africa's hit-squad scandal, the condemned security branch policeman Almond Nofomela, is being brought to court tomorrow by the authorities who are seemingly intent on hurrying him on to his postponed appointment with the hangman.
Mr Nofomela is to appear in a Natal magistrate's court to be charged with the murder of the Durban civil rights lawyer, Griffiths Mxenge.
It was Mr Nofomela's confession to the killing — the day before he was due to be executed for the murder of a white farmer — which led to the disclosures that the force has been running professional death squads.
The civil rights organisation, Lawyers for Human Rights, was yesterday hastily making arrangements to find a defence team for Mr Nofomela.
A director, Mr Ahmed Motala, said they had been informed by the Attorney General's office ‘that no request for a postponement will be entertained’.
So far as is known, nobody else has been arrested or charged in connection with the murder of Mr Mxenge The State President, Mr F. W. de Klerk, last week refused to order a judicial commission of inquiry into the death-squad allegations on the ground that it would be faster to use the ‘tried and respected prosecution mechanisms of the state’.
He said it was crucial that the matter be settled quickly so that the police could ‘continue unhindered with the important tasks that lie ahead’.
An opposition MP, Mr Jan Van Eck, yesterday accused the police of complicity in the latest fighting to break out at the Cape Town squatter camp, Crossroads.
Mr Van Eck said that he had recorded documentary evidence that police — some in plain clothes — had been shooting supporters of local headmen who had broken away from the committee running Crossroads, alleging fraud and corruption.
Five people have died in the violence, which broke out on Sunday night.
In townships outside Durban another three deaths were reported yesterday in continued fighting between supporters of the Zulu leader, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, and the United Democratic Front — bringing the weekend death toll to 21.
The violence appears to been started by an offensive against the UDF by Zulu warlords which began in the early hours of Saturday morning.
In Johannesburg two men died in overnight bomb explosions at the city's main railway station.
Police said they believed the men — Yusuf Akhalwaya, aged 23, a fourth-year student at the University of the Witwatersrand, and Prakash Napier, aged 24, a part-time student — were carrying landmines which exploded prematurely.
A Soviet-made pistol was found at the scene of the explosion and a large arms cache — including 17 mines, assault rifles and hand grenades — was later discovered at the home of the two men.
Another bomb blast was reported on a railway line outside Cape Town.
The explosions may have been linked with a particularly violent six-week strike by railway workers in which seven people have died.
Much of the violence has been blamed on mysterious ‘vigilantes’ who have attacked township commuters refusing to pay their fares in solidarity with the strikers.
President De Klerk will visit Maputo on Friday for talks with the Mozambican President, Mr Joaquim Chissano, the national news agency, AIM, said yesterday.
No details of the agenda were immediately available.
UN agency anger as first repatriates fly out.
By Iain Guest
OFFICIALS at the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Geneva reacted with resigned anger to the news of yesterday's forcible repatriation of 51 Vietnamese from Hong Kong.
The public response has been muted because of the power vacuum at the head of the agency after the resignation of Mr Jean-Pierre Hocke as High Commissioner.
But there is a growing fear here among diplomats and UN officials that Britain's policy — aimed at deterring any new arrivals in Hong Kong — could backfire badly.
By forcing the pace on compulsory repatriation, Britain could, it is feared, jeopardise the package of measures agreed here by governments in June.
It could also set a precedent for other governments — like Thailand and Malaysia — which have both pushed boat people back out to sea.
In addition, some diplomats based in Switzerland predict riots and worse in the camps of Hong Kong if more Vietnamese are sent back against their will.
The principal concern at the UNHCR is that Britain has not given voluntary repatriation time to work.
So far, 637 Vietnamese have returned voluntarily, and more than 1,000 have indicated willingness to go back.
This may not seem much in terms of Hong Kong's caseload of more tha 40,000 Vietnamese, but set in a historical context it is an achievement.
No one expected to reverse the pull of 14 years of refugee resettlement overnight, and there is little doubt that voluntary repatriation would pick up speed if the Hong Kong authorities used quiet persuasion instead of the big stick.
Every time the camps are invaded and Vietnamese taken out, resistance grows.
On October 31, 200 police in riot gear dragged 48 Vietnamese out of the camp of Chi Ma Wan, injuring several children.
Applications for voluntary repatriation virtually dried up.
The 51 Vietnamese sent back yesterday were all reviewed by the UNHCR, which is satisfied that none was a refugee.
So far, 3,115 Vietnamese in the colony have been refused refugee status and had appeals turned down.
Two hundred and forty individuals have been accepted.
The conference here in June agreed that voluntary repatriation should be given time to work and that only then would ‘alternative measures’— including compulsory repatriation — be considered.
Governments are expected to meet again here on January 18 to review the past six months, and many, particularly the US, are expected to argue that it is far too soon to be sending Vietnamese back against their will.
Yesterday's action has probably ended any prospect of the UNHCR helping to monitor any compulsory repatriation to Vietnam.
Quiet reaction in camps masks desperation of boat people.
By Our Correspondent in Hong Kong
JAMES CLEMENTS, a jovial rotund Englishman who runs the Sek Kong detention centre for Vietnamese boat people, could barely contain his satisfaction when telling reporters that nothing out of the ordinary happened when camp inmates heard news of the first deportations from Hong Kong.
The Sek Kong centre, planted uncomfortably in the middle of the colony's only military airfield, has a reputation for riots, murders and wide-scale intimidation.
Forty policemen were drafted in — just in case— but they were not needed.
But an aid worker who has daily contact with camp inmates does not believe this means that the Hong Kong government has managed to persuade the Vietnamese to quietly accept their fate.
‘You can't see anything, it's all under the surface,’ she says.
‘It was a big shock to all the people.
When they heard the news they didn't know what to.’
Joan Summers, who runs the Save the Children Fund programmes in the camps, says she is not surprised at the lack of overt reaction.
‘I wouldn't expect any dramatic response initially,’ she says.
She believes that protests will soon emerge.
Most of the Vietnamese in Hong Kong arrive in tiny boats with barely enough space to stretch out while sleeping on the decks.
After landing, they are given a number and expected to conform quickly to an institutional existence in conditions worse than many of Hong Kong's prisons.
They can forget about privacy and often fall prey to gangs operating a regime of intimidation.
Camp authorities are either unaware of this or turn a blind eye.
Hong Kong authorities believe that most boat people will acquiesce rather than violently resist attempts to send them back to Vietnam, but this apparent passivity can be deceptive.
Violent rioting has broken out in the camps many times in recent weeks.
No one can confidently say that the initial calm which has greeted the news of the deportations will not give way to a far more vigorous reaction.
Call made for a second EC constitutional conference Delors seeks wider parliament powers.
By John Palmer in Strasbourg
ONLY days after the European Community summit agreed to convene a conference next year to change the EC constitution and prepare for monetary union, demands were raised by EC leaders yesterday for a second such conference to extend the powers of the European Parliament even further.
The president of the European Commission, Mr Jacques Delors, said yesterday that, quite apart from the issues of democratic accountability raised by European economic and monetary union, the role of the European Parliament should be extended.
Both, he said, would require changes to the Treaty of Rome.
‘I am a partisan of the idea of two inter-governmental conferences, one dealing with economic and monetary union and related institutional reform by the end of 1991, and another which deals with European political union, one or two years later or even at the same time,’ Mr Delors told MEPs in Strasbourg yesterday.
‘I believe that if we deal with both of these subjects in one such conference we risk overloading the boat.’
Mr Delors said that in the short run MEPs should be given greater powers to hold the EC executive responsible when national governments transferred powers to Brussels — under a new European treaty for economic and monetary union.
But as the Community moved towards the goal of political union the European Parliament would have to give greater co-legislating powers to the Council of Ministers.
The majority of EC governments support Mr Delors in using the impulse of the moves to democracy in Eastern Europe, and the overwhelming backing for EMU shown at last weekend's Strasbourg summit, to secure a bigger role for the parliament.
Some MEPs want ultimately to take over from the council the main responsibility for passing EC laws, while others want to concentrate on the right to appoint the European Commission.
However, Mr Delors's suggestion of not one but two inter-governmental conferences is also designed to prevent any unnecessary obstacle delaying the advent of supra-national economic and monetary union.
Mr Delors' upbeat report to MEPs on the Strasbourg summit was also reflected by the French Foreign Minister, Mr Roland Dumas, in giving his end-of-term report on the French presidency of the European Council of Ministers.
Although progress in passing European single market laws was painfully slow during the first months of the French presidency, Paris hands over to Dublin this month amid a last-minute rush of important agreements.
These have covered telecommunications liberalisation, taxation, decontrolling air fares, common financial services, and the protection of the environment.
In the remaining working days of this month there are hopes that the council will also agree measures to control trans-national mergers.
Moreover, in a clear indication of the growing influence of the European Parliament, Mr Delors assured MEPs yesterday that the commission would bring forward three important measures to improve the rights of Europe's workers.
They will form part of the European Social Charter, which was endorsed by the weekend summit here, and deal with working hours, rights to information and consultation, and measures to protect temporary workers.
Last month the European Socialist group, the largest in the European Parliament, threatened to sack the entire commission because the charter had been watered down in a vain attempt to secure Mrs Thatcher's backing for it at the Strasbourg summit.
Commentary, page 23
Baker urges EC to help shape emerging Europe.
THE call by the US Secretary of State, Mr James Baker, for an enhanced European Community role in the new Europe emerging from the disintegration of the Eastern Bloc was made during an address to the Berlin press club.
This is an edited version: The new [European]architecture must continue the construction of institutions — like the EC — that can help draw together the West while serving as an open door to the East.
The future development of the European Community will play a central role in shaping the new Europe.
This experiment has succeeded because it held out the goal of political as well as economic barriers overcome, of a Europe united.
As Europe moves towards its goal of a common internal market, and as its institutions for political and security co-operation evolve, the link between the United States and the European Community will become even more important.
We see no conflict between European integration and an expansion of co-operation between the European Community and its neighbours to the East and the West.
The European Community is already an economic pillar of the transatlantic relationship.
It will also take on, perhaps in concert with other European institutions, increasingly important political roles.
Indeed, it has already done so, as evidenced by the Community's co-ordination of the Western effort to support reform in East Europe.
And as it continues to do so, the link between the US and the European Community should become stronger, the issues we discuss more diversified and our common endeavours more important.
At the same time, the substantive overlap between Nato and the European institutions will grow.
This overlap must lead to synergy not friction.
Working together, we must design and gradually put into place a new architecture for a new era.
This new structure must accomplish two special purposes.
First, as a part of overcoming the division of Europe there must be an opportunity to overcome through peace and freedom the division of Berlin and of Germany.
Second, the architecture should reflect that America's security — politically, militarily and economically — remains linked to Europe's.
The charge for us all then is to work together toward the New Europe and the New Atlanticism.
We have moved significantly closer to concluding an agreement limiting conventional armaments from the Atlantic to the Urals.
In Malta, President Bush proposed a summit meeting to sign such an agreement in 1990.
Today, I further propose that the ministers of the 23 Nato and Warsaw Pact nations take advantage of our February meeting in Ottawa, where we will launch the Open Skies negotiations, to give a further push to the Vienna talks on conventional forces.
I invite Allied governments to consider establishing a Nato Arms Control Verification Staff.
Such a new staff would be able to assist member governments in monitoring compliance with arms control and confidence-building measures in Europe.
It could provide a clearing-house for information, contributed by national governments.
Regional conflicts — along with the proliferation of missiles and nuclear, chemical and biological weapons — present growing dangers.
Intensified Nato consultations on these issues can play an important role in forming common approaches to these threats.
Nato should also begin considering further initiatives, through the CSCE process in particular, to build economic and political ties with the East, to promote respect for human rights, to help build democratic institutions, and to fashion, consistent with Western security interests, a more open environment for East-West trade and investment.
Leipzig church calls for calm as unity movement gathers strength.
By Anna Tomforde in Bonn
CHURCHMEN and intellectuals in East Germany, worried about the new, aggressive tone that has crept into the emotional issue of reunification, yesterday warned against confrontation and called for a temporary end to mass street demonstrations.
Meanwhile, evidence has emerged that the West Berlin branch of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union party (CDU) has been active in stirring pro-unity emotions in Leipzig, supplying demonstrators with West German flags and handing out stickers in the black, red, and gold of the two German flags with the slogan: ‘We are one people.’
Mr Stefan Heym, the East German author, warned yesterday that the dream of a democratic revolution could turn into a nightmare.
At demonstrations, he had seen faces ‘filled with hatred’ which reminded him of the months preceding Hitler's rise to power in 1933.
Leipzig's Protestant Church leader, Mr Friedrich Magirius, called on East Germans to turn next Monday's demonstration into a silent march for the victims of Stalinism, and to suspend protests over Christmas to gain a ‘pause for reflection’.
Pro-reunification protestors dominated Leipzig's Karl Marx Square on Monday, shouting down other groups who spoke out for an independent and socialist East Germany.
These, in turn, screamed ‘Nazis out’ in an atmosphere described by participants as explosive.
There can be no doubt that the momentum in favour of German unity, as one state or a confederation, has been growing in East Germany.
But there were also a fair number of ‘imported’ protesters, in Leipzig on Monday, including rightwing skinheads and supporters of the CDU youth wing.
In Bonn yesterday, the CDU's Secretary-General, Mr Volker Ruehe, dismissed suggestions that his party was interfering in East Germany.
‘East Germans see our slogans on Western television.
Why shouldn't there be slogans that are mutually stimulating?’
Only obeying orders, page 23
International protest fails to sway Foreign Office.
By Michael Simmons
THE government's programme of forcibly repatriating Vietnamese boat people will proceed despite the international outcry provoked by the first removal operation on Monday night.
Officials said in London last night that the programme would take ‘months, if not years’ to carry though.
It was denied that force had been used in the initial operation.
Foreign Office officials said uniformed men seen on television film wearing riot gear and carrying protective shields were correctional unit staff ‘on stand-by’ but they had ‘played no part in the evacuation’.
‘It went off pretty quietly,’ a spokesman said last night.
‘What we did yesterday was a perfectly normal removal of people who are refused the right to stay.
It is uncomfortable for us all, but it happens all over the world, every day of the week.’
Asked why the operation had been conducted in the middle of the night, officials said: ‘We wanted to avoid riots and disturbance in the camp.
There is a lot of aggravation and frustration there, and anyway they are understaffed.’
It was confirmed that, under the terms of a confidential agreement with the Vietnamese, independent monitoring ‘arrangements’ will be set up in Vietnam, and the hope was expressed that the UN High Commission for Refugees will play a full part in this.
No such arrangement seems to be in place.
One official said last night: ‘It would be disingenuous to rely on the Vietnamese.
We don't have a very high regard for the regime.’
Government concern is to develop what the Foreign Office called a mechanism to turn people round more quickly and prevent them from arriving at a destination where they were unwanted.
Officials said talks would be held next month to see if other methods of repatriation could be employed, but vetting procedures to determine who was and who was not a refugee prevented ‘international migratory chaos’.
Concern was expressed that large numbers of would-be boat people would start paying cash to ‘unscrupulous people’ when the sailing season started in February.
A spokesman said last night that all the Vietnamese lifted out of Hong Kong on Monday night had been screened to determine that none was of refugee status.
Each had appealed against this finding, and each appeal had been turned down.
The Foreign Office said last night that most of the people in the camps were fishermen and farmers from the north seeking a better life.
‘They are chasing a dream that doesn't and can't exist,’ a spokesman said.
‘We hope that Monday evening's operation will act as a catalyst to get others to volunteer to go back,’ an official said.
‘Otherwise, if they keep coming in at the same rate, Hong Kong will be totally swamped and will not be able to cope.
We want to get people back in as orderly, humane and unstressed way as possible.’
Zhivkov's image takes a tumble.
By Mike Power and Denise Searle in Sofia.
SENIOR Bulgarian Communist Party leaders yesterday offered to resign after high-level accusations that they were closely associated with the fallen hardline leader, Mr Todor Zhivkov, and had implemented few changes since coming to power.
The harshest criticism came from the party ideologist, Mr Stoyan Mihailov, who was dismissed from the central committee last year following disagreements with Mr Zhivkov.
He told the central committee that the new party leader, Mr Petar Mladenov, and many members of the ruling politburo were little better than the old regime.
Mr Mladenov then offered his and the politburo's resignation and suspended proceedings.
The meeting was hurriedly recovened and the resignation threat withdrawn.
The central committee meeting was also told by the head of its history department, David Elazar, that ‘Todor Zhivkov lied about his prominent role in the party's history and wartime anti-fascist struggle’.
The Communist Party newspaper, Rabotnichesko Delo, revealed that unknown sums of convertible currency had been paid to foreign publishers to produce Mr Zhivkov's books.
Pergamon Press, owned by Robert Maxwell, handled publishing in Britain.
Sofia Press Agency, the state publishers, has paid Mr Zhivkov 190,000 levs (about £150,000) since 1980.
His two most recent books on Bulgaria's political and economic restructuring netted him 42,000 levs, which is a 14-year salary for an average Bulgarian.
Mr Zhivkov's 44-volume collected works has disappeared from Sofia's bookshops since he was removed.
Sofia's International Peace Foundation, named after Mr Zhivkov's late daughter, is being investigated following allegations by a central committee member that it was used to send convertible currency abroad for the family's use.
Opposition groups are preparing to take on the Communist Party in Bulgaria's first free elections for more than 40 years which are to be fixed by next May, but dissident leaders have called for a postponement.
‘We want these elections, but we must have equal access to the media, and time to organise,’ said Dr Petar Dertliev of the newly reformed Social Democratic Party.
‘The Communist Party still controls everything and a quick election will not be truly free.’
Ecoglasnost, the dissident environmental movement, is considering running independent ‘green’ candidates if the elections are pushed through.
Peruvian officers jailed for killings.
By Mike Reid in Lima
TWO police officers are to go to jail for their part in the massacre of guerrilla prisoners in a Lima prison in June, 1986.
Another 76 other police and troops, including an army general, were absolved by the military court after a 15-week trial.
The charges focused on events at Lurigancho prison, where 124 inmates died — 89 of them shot in the head — after they had surrendered, according to an investigation by Peru's Congress.
The massacre occurred at night after President Alan Garcia ordered the security forces to put down a co-ordinated rebellion in three jails by prisoners associated with the Maoist guerrilla movement, Sendero Luminoso, on the eve of a Socialist International congress here.
Mr Garcia, who accepted that ‘excesses’ had been committed, said of those reponsible: ‘Either they all go or I go.’
The case, however, moved to trial only after Mr Garcia himself proposed the use of military courts against guerrilla suspects, because of their alleged greater efficiency.
The court sentenced Colonel Rolando Cabezas of the Republican Guard police to 15 years for murder, while Lieutenant Javier Marquina got seven years.
Both men plan to appeal.
The court also absolved General Jorge Rabanal, who led the operation, on the grounds that from his post he could not see the slaughter of the prisoners.
Many other defendents were released for ‘lack of proof’.
Witnesses at the trial described how Col Cabezas had urged his men to kill the unarmed prisoners.
A minority report, signed in 1987 by opposition members, accused President Garcia and his cabinet of choosing to stage a ‘violent reprisal’ against the prisoners.
A total of 49 people are reported to have been killed by the Maoist Sendero Luminoso in attacks on villages in the central Andes.
Many of the dead were said to be members of anti-guerrilla vigilante self-defence organisations.
US army plan to reduce European forces by half.
By Martin Walker in Washington
SPURRED on by the prospect of imminent defence cuts, the US Army has drawn up plans for cutting its forces in Europe by half, and recasting the army of the future into a rapid-deployment force, able to intervene in Third World trouble spots, in terrorist situations and to fight the war on drugs.
Under the title Strategic Force for the 1990s and beyond, and drawn up by army chief of staff General Carl Vuono, the plan calls for an entire army corps to be withdrawn from Europe, and for the US Army to be cut from 764,000 men to 630,000.
One of a great flurry of plans being prepared in the Pentagon as the politicians on Capitol Hill sharpen their knives to carve the ‘peace dividend’ from the budget, the plan will arouse great controversy, since it invades the functional territory of the US Marine Corps.
The plan was leaked to the New York Times yesterday, in time for the strategy hearings of the Senate Armed Services Committee, and the hearings on possible defence cuts before the Senate Budget Committee.
Mr Paul Wolfowitz, under-secretary for defence policy, warned against trying to cash in the potential defence savings too early, by bringing home the troops and scaling down the armed forces before the situation in Europe had stabilised to the point where a sensible long-term policy could be drafted.
‘The magnitude of the changes we are seeing introduces a fundamental unpredictability on to the situation in Europe.
Paradoxically, these momentous changes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe open up great uncertainties, along with great possibilities,’ Mr Wolfowitz argued.
The army plan envisages a corps of about 150,000 US troops remaining in Europe.
They would be a classic mix of tanks and infantry and artillery, capable of fighting a conventional war on the traditional Nato-Warsaw Pact frontier.
But back in the US, the army would be transformed into three different groups.
There would be special forces, based on the current Ranger Battalions and Green Berets, trained to rescue hostages and conduct counter-terrorist operations.
The second unit would be based around the XVIII Airborne Corps, and include a division of paratroops, an air cavalry division equipped with helicopters, light infantry divisions and a mechanised division equipped with tanks and mobile artillery, and all available for rapid deployment.
The third unit of the future army would be the traditional armoured and mechanised infantry divisions, available to reinforce a European front, or fight an all-out conventional war elsewhere.
Mr Wolfowitz faced a difficult panel yesterday.
The committee chairman, Senator Sam Nunn, was clearly furious at a report in this week's Washington Post that showed the Pentagon and White House sitting on intelligence reports showing cut-backs in Soviet defence spending, even while the Senate was being assured that the Soviet defence budget was still growing and the US had to match it.
Japan split on plutonium imports.
By Kevin Sullivan in Tokyo
JAPAN's ruling party is deeply divided over a proposal to use armed naval escorts to guard shipments of plutonium from terrorist attack.
Japan's post-war constitution forbids the use of its navy outside territorial waters, but there are concerns to safeguard the imports of plutonium, which are intended to deal with Japan's approaching energy crisis.
The ruling Liberal Democratic Party's National Defence Committee is split over whether to use the navy, or to spend 15 billion yen (£68 million) on a new vessel for the coastguard to escort the ships.
The coastguard is designated a non-military organisation under the constitution, and its use as an escort would therefore not be as controversial.
Japan's Atomic Energy Commission had planned to begin the shipments of imported plutonium from Europe from the autumn of 1992.
Japan does not have the facilities to produce as much plutonium as it needs and plans to import 153 tonnes of the highly volatile material from Britain and France between 1992 and 2000.
Japan, which has no fossil fuel reserves of its own, wants to stockpile plutonium because it believes that it can develop the technology to transform it into plentiful and cheap electricity.
About 140 rightwing members of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party believe that the Maritime Self-Defence Force, the Japanese navy, should accompany the shipments of plutonium.
They insist that because the warships would be protecting Japanese property, they would not be contravening clauses in the post-war constitution which forbid the use of armed forces outside territorial waters.
However, their opponents warn that other Asian countries are bound to protest if the Japanese navy once again takes to the high seas, whatever its reasons.
The Prime Minister, Mr Toshiki Kaifu, favours the construction of a 6,000-tonne coastguard armed patrol vessel, specifically for protecting plutonium shipments.
The coastguard or Maritime Safety Agency, is designated a non-military force, and its use would circumvent the constitutional stipulation against foreign military operations.
However, the navy and many MPs are likely to oppose Mr Kaifu's plan, currently the government's official position, when next year's budget comes before parliament on the grounds that it is too expensive.
Japan currently sends irradiated uranium imported from the US to Sellafield in Britain and Le Havre in France for processing into plutonium.
The US, as the country of origin for the uranium, had originally insisted that shipments be made by air, but the Japanese do not have containers which would withstand impact in the event of a crash.
Washington then agreed to allow transport by sea.
A spokesman for the opposition Socialist Party contended that transportation of plutonium was dangerous, whether by air or by sea and in itself.
He claimed that importing plutonium contravened Japan's non-nuclear constitution.
‘Making plutonium is not 100 per cent safe,’ he added.
‘There have been nuclear accidents in Japan before and there could be accidents again if the government persists in using this technology.’
Leaders call for rebels to disband.
By Scott Wallace in San Jose, Costa Rica
THE five presidents of Central America kept the beleaguered regional peace process alive yesterday with an agreement that bolstered the governments of Nicaragua and El Salvador by calling for the demobilisation of rebel forces in both countries.
‘Everybody is a winner here,’ the Nicaraguan government adviser, Mr Paul Reichler, told reporters.
‘Nicaragua is certainly very pleased with the progress made towards demobilisation [of the contras]…and I think the government of El Salvador is very pleased.’
The presidents agreed on a number of points relating to the 10-year-old civil war in El Salvador and the sanctuary given to Nicaraguan contra rebels in Honduras.
The meeting called for the immediate demobilisation of the contras and urged that funds approved for the Nicaraguan rebels be channelled through a commission they had established earlier.
The appeal appears to be aimed at preventing further American ‘humanitarian aid’ to the contras.
The presidents of Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica, and Nicaragua expressed their ‘decided support’ for El Salvador's President Alfredo Cristiani and issued an ‘urgent call’to the leftwing rebels of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN) to cease hostilities and return to the bargaining table.
The FMLN should ‘publicly renounce all violent action that directly or indirectly affects the civilian population’, the accord said.
The agreement — which condemned terrorism and the use of violence to achieve political ends — was seen as crucial to the peace process.
But observers were sceptical about the prospects of an end to rebel military activity in El Salvador and the call for a larger United Nations role in verifying compliance with the accord and aiding in the disarming of rebel forces.
The agreement called on El Salvador and Nicaragua to renew contact aimed at re-establishing diplomatic relations, suspended by Mr Cristiani last month amid allegations that Nicaragua had sent surface-to-air missiles to the FMLN guerrillas.
Diplomats said the agreement has strengthened the Cristiani government in El Salvador at a time when it was besieged by a rebel offensive and extreme rightwing elements within the armed forces and the ruling Nationalist Republican Alliance party.
Mr Cristiani appears to have succeeded in isolating the FMLN, but it is unclear whether the agreement will have any impact on the guerrillas' military activity.
The rebels have vowed to keep up the pressure on Mr Cristiani until his government agrees to negotiation that would lead to full guarantees for human rights and civil liberties, as well as the dismissal of several high-ranking army officers.
The government has set demobilisation of the guerrillas as a condition for reforms.
The meeting dragged into the early hours of yesterday morning as the Honduran President, Mr Jose Azcona, stormed out of the session after Nicaragua's President Daniel Ortega refused to withdraw his suit to the International Court of Justice in The Hague over the continuing presence of contras in Honduras.
Salvadorean guerrillas yesterday rejected the agreement.
‘We indignantly reject the declaration by the presidents because, contrary to the international trend and the demands of democratic, social and religious forces inside the country, it unconditionally supports the main violator of human rights in the region,’ the rebel FMLN said in a statement, referring to the government.
Children ‘die as money goes on debt and arms’.
By Our Foreign Staff
THIRD World governments are allocating half their total spending to armaments and debt servicing, at a cost of nearly $1 billion or $400 for every family, according to Unicef's annual report, The State of the World's Children, published yesterday.
At the same time, the report says, about 40,000 children are dying each day — nearly one every two seconds.
Of these, nearly 8,000 children die because they have not been immunised, nearly 7,000 from dehydration caused by diarrhoea, and nearly as many again from pneumonia.
‘Death and suffering on this scale,’ says Mr James Grant, executive director of the UN Children's Fund, ‘is simply no longer necessary.’
In his annual report, he states that the cost of immunising these children and providing the medicines necessary to treat the dehydration and pneumonia would be about $2.5 billion.
‘It is a great deal of money,’ he adds.
‘It is as much as the Soviet Union has been spending on vodka, as much as US companies have been spending on advertising cigarettes, or 10 per cent of the EC's annual subsidy to its farmers.’
The report notes that if present trends continue, more than 100 million children will die needlessly in the next 10 years.
‘Assuming some progress in resolving the debt crisis,’ Mr Grant says, ‘then even a 5 per cent or a 10 per cent diversion of military spending could provide the additional $50 billion or so each year which is needed to end absolute poverty on the planet within the next 10 years.’
Unicef argues that only high-level political commitment can put low-cost solutions into practice on the scale that is needed.
To this end, it is calling a World Summit for Children to be held at the UN in New York next September, bringing together heads of state for the first time to discuss an important social issue.
Mr Grant adds: ‘It is time that the needs of children were given this kind of priority.
‘Protecting the physical and mental development of children is the most important of all investments in the social and economic development of our societies.’
The State of the World's Children, 1990, is published by OUP, price £3.50p.
Colony spends $1,000 to send back each Vietnamese Thailand may start own deportations.
By Stephen Vines in Hong Kong
THAILAND may soon follow Hong Kong's example in deporting Vietnamese boat people not considered to be genuine refugees, reports reaching here suggest.
Diplomatic sources say that other South-east Asian countries which, like Hong Kong, have offered a port of first asylum to the fleeing Vietnamese, are closely watching the mandatory repatriation programme.
Thailand is keen to follow Hong Kong, but has reservations about the sums of money being paid for the resettlement of the boat people.
Yesterday, the Hong Kong Government confirmed that it was spending about $1,000 per head for those deported.
The cost will be shared equally between Britain and Hong Kong.
This sum includes transport to Vietnam and a ‘reintegration assistance package’ of $620 paid to the boat people once they are back in Vietnam.
Each adult in the group of 51 who were sent back yesterday was given $30 pocket money, and each child $15.
The deportations drew a strong protest from Mr Robert Van Leuween, the head of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees office in Hong Kong.
He said that he had been given no information about the departure and even late yesterday, had been unable to reach government officials responsible for refugee matters.
Mr Van Leuween described the deportations as premature and argued that more time should have been given to establish whether the voluntary repatriation programme was working.
He said that the deportations could jeopardise international negotiations aimed at finding a long-term solution to the boat people problem.
However, Sir David Wilson, the Governor of Hong Kong, yesterday accused the critics of the mandatory repatriation policy of failing to ‘put forward practical alternatives’.
He said the deportations had been carried out only ‘after a great deal of heart-searching’.
The government had concluded ‘that it is quite wrong that we should build up artificial hopes’ by allowing boat people to remain in the colony in the belief that they would be resettled.
China has welcomed the British action.
The Vice-Foreign Minister, Mr Zhou Nan, told Hong Kong reporters that China wanted the Vietnamese problem solved by 1997 when it resumes sovereignty.
He said that mandatory repatriation would help to achieve this.
Members of the colony's legislature welcome the deportations, supporting any policy which will help reduce the Vietnamese population.
A rare voice of dissent came from the leading liberal legislator, Mr Martin Lee, who argued that the deportations would give Hong Kong a bad name.
A small group of Christians also expressed their opposition by demonstrating outside the government's headquarters.
The Hong Kong Government emphasises that its deportation policy for the Vietnamese is no different from its policy of sending illegal Chinese immigrants back across the border.
Some 60 to 100 Chinese are sent home every day.
The Chinese, many of whom have friends in Hong Kong, do not have the opportunity to prove they are genuine refugees by taking part in a screening process.
The contrast in treatment between the Vietnamese and Chinese helps to explain the depth of bad feeling towards the boat people.
Details of the operation to remove the boat people are now emerging.
It is understood that unarmed policemen accompanied the returning Vietnamese, and that two very senior government officials were on the plane when it landed in the Vietnamese capital, Hanoi.
Now that the first batch of boat people has successfully been dispatched, the government intends to move swiftly to step up the deportations.
Leader comment, page 22