

COMMENT THE GUARDIAN Wednesday December 13 1989 The grim cargo of lost dreams.
EVERY day of the year, blue Hong Kong police buses with barred windows climb to the border with the Peoples Republic.
There, without ceremony and possibility of reprieve, an average of 50 men and women, the day's catch of illegal immigrants, are bundled back into China.
The number repatriated in this way has amounted to tens of thousands annually since 1980, when the present rules were instituted — a figure not too far from that of the boat people whom Britain and Hong Kong governments expect to send home to Vietnam.
It is a comparison which should give pause to those tempted automatically to condemn the Government.
Every day of the year, all over the world, governments work to control and manage the flows of migrants that wars, disasters, and, above all, the magnetic pull of centres of economic and cultural power, keep in constant motion.
Sometimes this means making extraordinary efforts to deal with desperate human need on a mass scale.
Sometimes it means making judicious individual decisions about marriages and family relationships.
And sometimes — often — it means sending people back, by force if necessary.
Heart and head pull against each other.
There can be no reasonable argument about migrants if one side takes the position that nobody should ever be sent back to anywhere, that the mere act of emigration in itself constitutes grounds for supposing that circumstances were unbearable in the country of origin.
But that is the position which some of the Government's critics seem now to occupy.
It is particularly illogical that this kind of argument should be coming from politicians who, in other contexts, would be the first to argue, and rightly, that Vietnam is not some kind of monster State, but merely a ramshackle and inefficient one that has lost its way.
It is a miserable and heart-breaking business to take peasant families who left Vietnam's poor northern provinces with visions of a new life in America dancing in their heads, who endured dangerous sea voyages, and who believed that Hong Kong's camps, however dreadful, were a way station to their dream — to take these families and to return them to the red dirt farms and meagre fishing villages from which they came.
And of course they will suffer consequences — at the very least those of wasted time and lost opportunities.
But neither London nor Hong Kong can legislate for dreams which are no longer capable of realisation.
The United States will not take these people.
Other affluent Western countries, which the migrants would accept as second best, won't take them either.
It is no good saying that, if Britain made a special effort, it might be able to persuade the United States and other countries to change their minds.
About this 40,000, maybe; but not about the next 40,000 who would fill the camps as soon as they were cleared.
Indeed, at root, that is what this dismal affair is all about.
It is about sending a clear signal to the villages of Quang Ninh and Ha Giang and Lang Son that there is no longer a road to Los Angeles by way of Hong Kong or, for that matter, of Thailand or Malaysia.
That road came into being after the end of the Vietnam war in 1975.
Along it came, at first, ex-soldiers and civil servants of the losing regime, men escaping detention or worse, middle class families pushed to the margins of society by new authorities with more ideology than common sense, southern farmers stripped of their affluence by misguided economic programmes.
America led the way in setting up an international system for dealing with the Indochina refugees.
The United States wished to discharge its debts to those with whom it had fought during the war; but it also came to see the volume of refugees as a kind of continuing proof that it had waged a just struggle against evil forces.
That is how a system for dealing with genuine refugees — the losers in Indochina's civil wars — became insensibly a system for turning North Vietnamese peasants into New York waiters.
As the number of former South Vietnamese army majors and persecuted intellectuals drifted down to infinitesimal proportions and the number of economic migrants grew, the United States looked the other way.
Vietnam was an evil State, the number of boat people coming out proved it; therefore any measures to discourage the refugees would be wrong.
It is a measure of hypocrisy that, at the same time, the United States took fewer and fewer of the migrants.
But, since last year's Geneva conference on Indochina refugees, all of the concerned countries, including the United States, have agreed that the flow of economic migrants from Vietnam should be stopped.
The only difference is between those countries, naturally not the most directly affected, who can pretend that voluntary repatriation will work, and those, like Hong Kong, who know it will not.
The inevitable short-term aim is to affect the decisions of would-be migrants.
There is, in glum reality, only one thing that will affect that: the knowledge that they will be sent back.
That has been the dilemma for Hong Kong — the necessity of staunching the flow — and they deserve understanding for a decision that carries all manner of risks for their own future as 1997 nears.
But it needs to be said clearly, too, that there is a longer term.
That, in an age of wonders in the Communist world, involves a fresh Western approach to the heart of the matter, the hopeless poverty of Vietnam.
Nobody should be too blithe here either.
Mr Douglas Hurd in the House yesterday shuffled uneasily between Washington wrath and Hanoi despair.
Nonetheless, as the Government endures months of opprobrium, there is a clear imperative to begin addressing the long-term, and small ways to make a start.
Vietnam, remember, shares with Argentina the distinction of being a country where the British Government doesn't match the aid resources of non-governmental relief organisations like Oxfam.
Getting moving here won't mitigate the despair; but it would at least show some capacity to think beyond the sourly inescapable.
Hot off the press.
YESTERDAY, by neat irony, featured the morning of the Master of the Rolls and the afternoon of the Press Council.
Before lunch, Lord Donaldson pronounced further on the case of William Goodwin, 23-year-old journalist for The Engineer.
‘Notwithstanding the general need to protect journalistic sources,’ he said, ‘this is a case where the balance comes down in favour of disclosure.’
After tea, the Press Council published — for further discussion — its 119-page self-reforming review, including a new code of practice.
In that code you will find the following injunction.
‘Journalists have a professional obligation to protect confidential sources of information.’
A general need: a professional obligation.
Two texts for our increasingly beleaguered times.
The Press Council review has seemed an age in gestation; and it is not in all respects wonderful.
Those who fought through the months to make it a much leaner, quicker body exercising true peer group pressure will be a touch disappointed.
The prospective councillors will number two dozen (rather than the sparse but active dozen originally sought); there will continue to be a rather odd balance of journalists and lay members, selected rather than nominated by a quangoid committee.
The weight of bureaucracy still hangs a trifle heavy.
Nevertheless, the review represents substantial progress.
It holds out the promise of swifter verdicts.
It appends that promise to a clear and comprehensive code of conduct (one that builds helpfully on the recently published Fleet Street set of principles).
And it adds to the sanctions the Council may take — positioning of judgements in offending papers; a privacy hot line; and, more controversially, hauling in proprietors to discipline editors.
The Council, in sum, is seeking most of the tools it needs to relaunch itself as an active, respected self-regulator.
It sees ways of making certain that small points of correction are dealt with speedily, and thus the chance of devoting extra energy to the broader guidelines and the delineation of greater issues.
This is the crucial change.
Through most of its existence, the Council has viewed itself as a slightly pettifogging, rather legalistic arbitrator.
But there was an introversion to that which meant that too few readers of too many newspapers knew what it was there for.
That was bad for newspapers and bad for the Council: but, worst of all, it meant that there was no independent body able to speak up for press freedoms under threat.
Perhaps, as the review gathers steam, this can now change.
It needs to.
The entrails of the law have been choking press freedoms throughout the nineteen eighties.
(Look back to the supposedly liberalising 1981 Contempt of Court Act and ask yourself whether its parliamentary proponents intended the general outcome that Lord Donaldson now proclaims).
The future — and the hope of escaping yet more damaging legislation — rests on greater attention to the Council and greater respect for its findings.
In short, professional regulation for a rough trade aspiring to become a profession (with the professional responsibilities invoked above).
This is not, in all respects, an appealing road.
Journalists aren't barristers or doctors.
They are imperfect players in an imperfect democracy; and they are there, from time to time, to write and investigate things that the closed worlds of the British professions would grind their teeth over.
A truly free press is a press which irritates and infuriates along the way.
A reformed Press Council, by these lights, tugs in the wrong, conformist direction (and, see its proferred code, is a sight too deferential to great and good bodies, like itself, who want to make papers toe the line).
But such philosophical dissent, at this point, is the stuff of dreams in a dreamworld.
As the Fleet Street editors themselves recognised a couple of weeks ago, many British papers have forfeited the strength on which their freedom depends: they are not seen as the defenders of freedom by their own readers.
With that relationship gone, they are at the mercy of more laws and more political meddling.
In which case, the only respite is too regain vestiges of trust; and the only clear mechanism for that is the over-arching responsibility of the Press Council.
Louis Blom-Cooper and his team made a reasonably promising start yesterday.
They deserve a brisk and supportive response from the industry.
They want to be the court of principle and last resort for British press standards.
It is crucial that they be given a wholehearted, well-funded chance; for otherwise the court of last resort may turn out to be the one where the Master of the Rolls holds sway.
PAGE
Diary.
By Andrew Moncur
WE STILL don't know which Tory backsliders dared to second Sir Anthony Meyer's nomination papers in his bid for ultimate power.
But we do know that while the votes were being counted Her Indoors was in the company of a notorious Tory wet and dissident.
Viz. HM the Queen.
One version circulating at the Palace is that Her Majesty realised that Her Other Majesty didn't yet know the result when she arrived for their weekly get-together.
So HM spun out the agony.
Yes, we've seen it on TV but — oh, dear — we can't remember the figures.
Margaret Hilda was left in nail-biting tension until Sir William (no relation) Heseltine, the Palace's chief bag-carrier, popped his head round the door with the vital data.
IT'S TIME to announce the Diary Press Awards for 1989.
These mark some remarkable achievements.
It's also an opportunity to say that the US supermarket papers are streets ahead when it comes to headline writing.
For instance: ‘Man Explodes On Operating Table’(The Globe, California).
Well done.
The judges are breaking new ground this year by bestowing the diary's Bon Mot Trophy on a piece of work as yet unpublished.
Namely, the Christmas issue of Radio Times.
It gives details of Radio 4's New Year Day item based on the Lady Chatterley trial, with this note by Michael Green, the controller: ‘It's not just a seminal piece of history…‘
THE SPECIAL Kurt Waldheim Award for War Reporting goes to Paul Johnson for his Spectator column (February 18).
This suggested, basically, that machine-gunning prisoners-of-war is OK.
Specifically, in the case of Anthony Miers, the Royal Navy submariner who finally came in for a teeny bit of criticism over his methods of disposing of German seamen who rather inconveniently surrendered.
‘We could have fought an honourable, Observer-Guardian-style war with the Ludovic Kennedys in charge, but we would have lost it and Britain would have been enslaved,’ he wrote.
‘Miers could not take the German prisoners on board his sub, and if he had left them to paddle ashore they would immediately have gone back into the German forces…
So, whether or not they were armed, or he believed they were armed, he was right to kill them.’
Jolly good.
NEXT, the diary's award for Strictly Objective Reporting.
Rupert Murdoch's Sun used a splash story on November 30, headlined TV Licence Sensation.
‘Battling Barry Neal won an astounding legal victory yesterday — giving viewers the right to watch Sky TV without a telly licence…‘
THIS YEAR'S Peregrine Worsthorne Memorial Trophy is awarded to Peregrine Worsthorne.
His Sunday Telegraph column of October 29 was written after the case of the Guildford Four.
It dwelt on the problems arising when Irish suspects, caught in police trawls, turned out to be only Republican sympathisers rather than terrorists.
They might not positively help the IRA but they're not, properly speaking, innocent.
‘In the light of these realities, is it really reasonable to expect the police to apply to the Irish population in this country the presumption of innocence that they apply to other citizens?
I don't believe that it is…‘
THE LEADER Writer of the Year award goes, again, to the Sun.
It worked up a fair frenzy over the Tory leadership contest, describing Herself's terribly threatening opponent as, variously, a ‘dotty baronet’(November 29); ‘the Bufton Tufton of the Tory back benches’(November 30); and ‘The fossil’(December 1).
But the winning entry was the leader of October 24: ‘Thank God for our bobbies.
Their image has been severely damaged recently.
But how many of the Guildford Four were driving ambulances in London yesterday?’
ANEW title.
The citation reads: ‘Today, the Murdoch tabloid, has distinguished itself chiefly by its self-description throughout 1989 as ‘Newspaper of the Year’.
That title relates, in fact, to 1987.
The judges hope that Today will adopt the accolade now bestowed: Not The Newspaper of the Year.’
NOW, JUST one winning entry for the Vicar's Competition: captions for the nineties.
‘Jubilation in North-East as Sunderland is chosen for Japanese nuclear test zone.’
(A.Hird)
AFINAL, topical word.
The Common Cold research unit, in Salisbury, was hard pressed to deal with inquiries yesterday.
Yes.
F-L-U.
PAGE
Quote….
COMPARED with the changes sweeping through Eastern Europe, Fidel Castro seems a Marxist museum piece — staging show trials, jailing dissenters, resisting any dilution of dogma.
Now he edges closer to an open break with his Soviet benefactors.
In a tirade Thursday, he complained that Mikhail Gorbachev's reforms were ‘slandering socialism, destroying its values, discrediting the party and liquidating its leading role’…
as if to prove he cannot be ignored, Mr Castro boldly tests the limits of Moscow's tolerance.
He simultaneously dismisses all reforms as a surrender to capitalism, and undermines a fragile peace pact in Central America.
But he can play the spolier only with Soviet aid.
This leaves an opening for President Bush…
Fidel Castro may bark, but his bite depends on Communist allies he now scorns.
New York Times, December 11
Only obeying orders — forty years on Why are East Germans bent on punishing their former leaders?
Anna Tomforde reports.
WHAT East Germans are now openly calling their ‘revolution’ is far from over.
It has only just begun.
Seen from the outside the nature, and above all, the neck-breaking speed of achievements over the past two months may seem remarkable.
But in East Germany, getting rid of old leaders, abolishing the Communist Party's monopoly of power, and securing free elections is not enough.
The word widely used to describe the sequel is Konsequent.
It translates literally as ‘consistent’ but means more that things must be seen through.
Hence, the large broom that party members handed to the new Communist leader, Doctor Gregor Gysi, to enable him to pursue ‘radical renewal’.
It is a revolution more obviously compared with the French than with any other revolution because of its stages of progression, even though it has so far been peaceful despite the anger.
Nonetheless cries of ‘Kill them [the Communists]’ have been heard on the fringes of the Leipzig demonstrations as protesters stormed the offices of the hated secret police.
One Stasi officer shot himself in front of intruders in the southern town of Suhl.
Whereas in other countries the old guard is pushed into oblivion, here it is put behind bars to prepare what could become the show trials of the 1990s.
In Hungary, Janos Kadar was almost gently pushed aside, in Poland the Communists were swept from power, and in Czechoslovakia Mr Husak retired — but nobody called for his arrest.
In East Germany, Mr Honecker, gravely ill, is under house arrest for which the prosecutor admitted there was no basis in law.
‘The justification is the will of the people,’ he said.
General Erich Mielke, the much-decorated veteran of the Spanish Civil War, in his 80s, is now languishing in prison.
And as for Mr Willi Stoph, the former prime minister, a major mark against him is that 100 different brands of whisky were found in his cellar — in other countries that would be admired.
None of this is being said to arouse, in any way, pity for East Germany's former Communist leaders, who have so thoroughly disappointed their people and betrayed the ideals of socialism.
It is said only to underline the specific nature of the German revolution.
At East Berlin's Rosa Luxemburg Platz underground station, the post-First World War posters urging ‘Kill Luxemburg — kill Liebknecht’ come as a chilling reminder of the past.
In the course of the present campaign against corruption, East German newspapers, wireless and television have published urgent appeals to citizens, complete with addresses and telephone numbers to turn to, to report any signs of abuse and malpractice.
There is also a north-south division in East Germany's revolution.
In 1946, the more moderate people of the north long resisted the southern fervour for the confiscation of private land, and the forced alliance between the Social-Democratic and Communist Parties.
This, the revolutionaries in the south, in Dresden, Leipzig, and Karl-Marx-Stadt, have not forgotten.
Visitors from the north find that they are denied petrol at garages and that their cars are sprayed with ‘Traitor’ slogans.
But both the period of the ancien regime and the period of change in East Germany have revealed another German characteristic — that of going along with authority.
Lieutenant-general Wolfgang Schwanitz, the new head of the Office for National Security, the former Stasi, was asked the other day why he had not opposed and exposed excesses when he was deputy head of the organisation.
He replied: ‘We had our orders and they would have shot me if I had resisted.’
It sounds a familiar excuse, marking the darker chapters of recent Germany history.
Last Saturday, some 30 children of former Stasi officers held a demonstration in East Berlin's Lustgarten.
They held up posters rejecting the idea that their fathers were anything like the Gestapo, and calling for ‘full social security’ for Stasi officers expected to lose their posts in the process of trimming the service.
‘Our fathers were no criminals, they just obeyed orders,’ a young boy said in a discussion.
Doctor Gysi, also calling for ‘social integration’ of Stasi members, told the party's congress: ‘There were many honest comrades in the Stasi who loyally fulfilled their duties and who were not able to choose the tasks they were given.’
The past also played a part at the Communist Party's congress.
A high-ranking army officer confessed: ‘We showed too much discipline, too much blind obedience.’
An ordinary delegate said he rejected the idea of blaming only the previous leaders for past mistakes.
‘It is as in 1945.
Too many of us now say that they didn't know what was going on, and that they were long opposed to what was happening.
There are similarities between National Socialism and Stalinism: the methods are almost the same,’ the delegate added in an unusually frank contribution.
East Germany's revolution also has an extremely puritanical and Protestant streak.
An interesting parallel for this is provided by an exhibition that has just opened in East Berlin, commemorating the 500th anniversary of the birth of Thomas Muntzer, the theologian and Protestant reformer, who led the 16th-century Peasants' Revolt.
The prints and drawings on display by Durer, Cranach, and others reveal the cruelty and revenge inflicted on both sides during the uprising, and in Muntzer's execution in 1525.
With German exactness, they show in elaborate detail the instruments of torture and execution.
When Mr Honecker chaired a meeting of the exhibition committee last February, he adopted Thomas Muntzer's central demand that ‘all power shall be given to the common people’.
Eight months later, Mr Honecker was chased from office and in disgrace.
A slightly comique night at the opera.
The opening of the Opera de la Bastille is now firmly promised for March — after years of political and artistic tumult.
In the end President Mitterrand chose his friend Pierre Berge, head of a fashion house, to sort out the mess.
Peter Lennon reports from Paris.
IN PARIS a certain elite will refer to the new Opera de la Bastille with pinched disdain as ‘tres TNP’.
Very Theatre National Populaire — the noble soup kitchen of theatrical nourishment at Chaillot created by a saint of the Left, Jean Vilar; probably the most successful example in French cultural life of persuading the hoi polloi to vary their entertainment diet.
In fact President Mitterrand's grandiose opera house ‘modern and popular’ was originally an idea of Vilar's — an opera with immense auditoria to replace the old Palais Garnier.
Vilar's report, produced in 1968, went the Humpty Dumpty way of most projects that revolutionary year.
This week the Opera de la Bastille finally announced an opening date, March 17, and revealed its opening programme, a full performance of Berlioz's six-hour Les Troyens.
So after an unsuccessful attempt by a right wing government to have the Opera buried; a series of firings and resignations — Barenboim, Boulez and a rupture with Nureyev — the Bastille is preparing to open.
Mr Pierre Berge is now supremo of President Mitterrand's grandiose project — an auditorium seaing 2,700; a smaller salle modulable with from 600 to 1,300 places, a studio with 280 places, rehearsal rooms for dancers and choir, bars and a Tour d'Argent resturant.
However it will not open too wide.
At the press conference at the Bastille on Monday Mr Berge was only offering a ‘petit saison’.
At the conference Mr Berge was flanked by Daniel Bareboim's replacement, the Korean conductor, Myung-Whun Chung Mr Berge's role was to be cocky and confident and dismiss scepticism about the chances of the opera house becoming a permanent reality.
This was no great problem for Mr Berge; being cocky and confident comes naturally to him whether he is presiding over his other little empire, the Yves Saint Laurent fashion house, or standing over a gaping hole in credibility.
None of the French journalists embarrassed him by pointing out that this first ‘petit saison’ of the Opera — and even the next season — fall far short of the target for the Opera de la Bastille, which is 250 performances a year.
Mr Berge, appointed in September last year by his friend President Mitterrand, opened the conference with the declaration that despite the jealous and envious reports of the foreign press they now had at the Opera a ‘welded team’ and were in a condition of being ‘resonant and reasonable’.
Mr Berge asked what could be more appropriate than to open with a French composer?
There is a particular kind of French personality who always pronounce the word francais as if it were a football he is heading towards less privileged mortals.
Mr Berge's tossing delivery is a classic of this kind.
Later that afternoon I had an audience with the opera's new boss.
Mr Berge is one of those Frenchmen, his manner distrait, who gives you the impression that you have outstayed your welcome before you have even sat down.
The exchanges were exceptionally unfruitful because of Mr Berge's way of delivering every reply as if it were the last word any resonable man would wish to hear on that particular matter.
We sat facing across a desk in a rather denuded office in Carlos Lott's building which resembles an unravelling hat box.
I sought clarification on a point he had made at the press conference.
Did you actually say that the Paris opera ballet was the best in the world?
‘Yes,’ Mr Berge retorted, surprised that the matter needed checking.
You said it was incontestably the best?
‘It is incontestably the best.’
Moscow?
‘No, no.’
New York?.
‘No, no.
They don't have the tradition we have.’
Shouldn't you be a little more…?
‘Modest?’
Mr Berge anticpated, making it clear that he could see no necessity for such an attitude.
Aged 59, born in the Ile d'Oleron, Pierre Berge in his teens was a close friend of Jean Cocteau.
In 1949 he founded a magazine, La Patrie Mondiale, which published contributions from Camus, Raymond Queneau, Breton and Sartre.
In 1950 he met the painter Bernard Buffet and was his business manager for 8 years.
But it was in 1958 that he formed the central personal and business partnership of his life.
He met Yves Saint Laurent, then at Dior, and helped him found his own fashion house.
Berge is known for his fierce defence of Saint Laurent.
He has been known to ban from his salon journalists who have criticised Saint Laurent's more feeble efforts.
You edited a journal once?
‘It was a political journal.
That was just after the war, 1949, and I was passionately interested in all the political movements.’
You are left-wing?
‘Always!
Very left even.
But I was never a Communist.
I have never been a Marxist.
I have realised an equilibrium between Left and Right by being an anarchist.’
An anarchist?
‘An anarchist.’
What do you mean by anarchist?
‘I had an anarchist education.’
Who did you read?
‘Is this a philosophical interview?…
I read Bakunin — people like that.’
Mr Berge's special brand of anarchy seems to be particularily suited to capitalism.
Founder of one of the most successful fashion houses in Paris, he is also founder and President of the Syndicate of Designers and Creators of Ready-to-Wear which brought haute couture into the open market place, particularly in America.
But well heeled Frenchmen often wear political allegiances like fragrant button holes: it is part of their personal decoration rather than a constraint on their way of life.
DO ANY singers still boycott…
‘No,’ Mr Berge interrupted.
Not a single one?
‘No.’
Did you say something about Mr Boulez perhaps returning to work at the opera?
It was Boulez who last January led a boycott by international singers and conductors following Barenboim departure.
‘Mr Boulez has been associated with the project from the very first days so I say he can consider this house his home.
If he comes he is welcome.’
When I spoke to his assistant she told he had said his last word on the subject and did not want to hear of it again.
‘It's up to him,’ Mr Berge retorted.
You are also President Director General of the Saint Laurent fashion house.
Is it much the same there as in an opera — panic, temperament, drama?
‘Exactly the same.
I work in fashion certainly but I could work in many things.
There is no difference for me between working in a fashion house and working in an opera.
Mr Chung is only Musical Director?
‘Only?’
Mr Barenboim had a more authoratative title, Artistic Director?
‘Mr Barenboim had all the titles.
It is precisely because he had many titles that we did not see agree, he and I. Voila.’
The Barenboim affair is complicated.
Despite the initial support of the boycott by international operatic stars — most of whom were at the time on contract to work with him — Barneboim's case did not excite much public sympathy in France.
It was discovered that the five year contract he had signed with the right wing government three days before the general elections entitled him to £724,000.
For this he only had to spend four months in France, thus profiting from considerable tax concessions for non residents.
When the Socialist government came to power there was a furious public row.
The contract was declared null and void.
Berge offered Barenboim less than half the money.
Barenboim could not back down and the great exodus, Boulez, Chereau, began.
You said that the international press had written some disagreeable things about the opera?
What were you referring to?
‘To a lot of things.
The French press is not as bad as the English.
We don't have gossip papers in France while in England you have many.
When we have a little technical problem they transform it into a big one.’
What are the present technical problems?
‘The elevators in the main auditorium for scene changing don't work well and they have to work well.
We have asked the people who constructed this building to take over the theatre in January until March.
They will give the theatre back to us for the opening and then we will give it back to them for the Summer during which they should solve the problem.’
Why did you choose Mr Chung?
‘I chose him because he is a very great conductor.
Because Mr Karajan told me he was a very great conductor — that was the last message he gave me.’
What was the problem with Barenboim's programme?
‘There was no audacity.
While I will put on Les Troyens, which is perhaps the greatest piece of audacity in the history of opera.
Voila!’
At the press conference Mr Berge had declared that they were not ‘frileux or ashamed’.
The exact sense of frileux had slipped my mind; I asked Mr Berge for clarification.
He drew an imaginary scarf across the bridge of his nose.
Suffocating?
I suggested.
Covered?
It began to feel like a night at the Marx Bros opera where you had to guess what Harpo was trying to say.
Veiled!
I shouted?
Veiled, Mr Berge agreed.
At the Opera de la Bastille they do not have to veil themselves in shame because they are resonant and reasonable: that is the message.
By Clare Colvin
IN THE dim half-light of a winter's afternoon, the gradual incline of Cranley Gardens in Muswell Hill stretches bleakly ahead, bringing to mind the lonely victims of the street's most notorious resident, Dennis Nielsen.
Two-thirds of the way down is Buchi Emecheta's house, built in the anonymous style of 1930s ribbon development.
On the porch a notice announces that the occupier takes part in the neighbourhood watch scheme, despite which Emecheta opens the door without checking, providing the first feeling of welcome in the slough of despond.
She has the bulkiness of a mother figure, plaited Afro braids and, at first, a cautious smile that only gradually gives way to full-hearted laughter.
Buchi Emecheta is best remembered for her first book, In the Ditch, an autobiographical account of life in 1960s London for a young Nigerian woman with five children.
It was like Poor Cow or Cathy Come Home except that the woman at the sharp end of the social services was also the author.
Emecheta determined then that she would write herself out of her poverty.
Her eleventh novel, Gwendolen, has just been published and she says that for the first time she is writing for her soul.
Unlike many of her earlier books, set in her birthplace of Nigeria, Gwendolen is in Britain of the recent past.
Gwendolen is a Jamaican girl who is sexually abused first by an ‘uncle’ in Jamaica and then, when she joins her parents in London, by her father.
She becomes pregnant by him and is forced to leave home but is determined to keep the child.
‘I have met girls like Gwendolen,’ says Emecheta.
‘A few years ago I gave a lecture at Preston Polytechnic and afterwards nine black girls, some of them with toddlers, stayed behind and we began to talk.
All but two of them had been abused and I remember one girl saying to me, ‘By the time I was nine I knew what it was all about.’
I wanted to bring their story out into the open.’
She has set her book in Tottenham of the 1970s — a pressure point for racial tension between white and black, and between African and Caribbean.
As an Ibo from Nigeria, Emecheta's antennae for racial differences are acute.
When she was first looking for rooms to rent, she had to pretend to be Yoruba rather than Ibo in order to persuade a Nigerian landlord to accept her as a tenant.
Most of Emecheta's life has been a fight to get what she feels is her due.
Born in Lagos in 1944, she was brought up by relatives after her father died as a result of war service in Burma and her mother returned to Ibo.
Emecheta insisted that although she was a girl she wanted an education and managed to get a scholarship to the Methodist Girls' High School.
An early marriage and five children would have tempered most women's ambitions and had Emecheta's marriage been happy, she might have settled for domestic life.
But after they arrived in England her husband became a perpetual student and their life deteriorated.
Five months pregnant with her fifth child, Emecheta fled and ended up in a council block for problem families, which became the setting for In The Ditch.
She wrote it as a series of articles and sent the first three to Richard Crossman, then editor of the New Statesman.
An encouraging letter from him was followed by six weeks' silence, so eventually she walked into his office and confronted him.
He was none too pleased at her unheralded visit, but the series Life In The Ditch began, and was later published as a book by Barrie and Jenkins.
Emecheta followed its success with Second-Class Citizen and The Bride Price but when her publishers, Allison and Busby, went broke, she decided to publish the hardbacks herself and sell on the paperback rights.
It was very much a cottage industry: she and her two sons would drive around with books in the car, being their own distributors.
Only now has she come in from the cold with her eleventh book being published by Collins (at £10.95).
Writing has always been fitted in before other demands on her time — two hours in the morning before the children were awake when they were living at home.
She took a BSc honours degree in Sociology at London University, worked as a community counsellor for one-parent families in Camden and was on the literature panel of the Arts Council until their decision to return to the Government some money designated for writers' bursaries led her to resign in disgust.
In 1980 she was appointed Senior Research Fellow at the University of Calabar, Nigeria, is now a Fellow at London University and takes creative writing groups at Goldsmiths College.
‘If I was starting out today I would have found it much more difficult,’ she says.
‘For a start, there are no private landlords now who would take in a 22-year-old mother with five young children.
I would probably end up in a bed and breakfast hostel, in which it would be impossible to write.’
Despite her success, Buchi Emecheta still feels about this country much as she did when she first arrived 30 years ago, on a grey March morning in Liverpool.
A country that gave her a cold welcome, in which the To Let signs specified ‘No Coloureds’, and of which she wrote in Second-Class Citizen, ‘If I had been Jesus I would have passed England by and not dropped a single blessing.’
In Gwendolen she writes of the way a black woman like Sonia, Gwendolen's mother, is treated, either with polite indifference or as if she is not there.
‘In England people just leave you alone because you are black.
At first you resent it, but then you get used to it, and it is good for being a creative writer.
I have spent my adult life here but because of little pinpricks I feel I don't belong.
There is a much more welcoming feeling in America or Holland.’
Her Nigerian roots are still very much part of her.
She goes back therefrequently, and whenever she returns she takes books to distribute in the villages — they are highly prized in Nigeria, where it takes half an average month's salary to buy a hardback.
The collection of mementos on her mantelpiece sums up the different strands of her life.
In the centre is a model of the Statue of Liberty, which represents an award from an American university.
There is a diploma from another university and several children's photographs.
Perched to the left of them is a bulky wooden figure which came from her village of Ibusa.
This, Emecheta explains, is a very strong goddess of the Ibos, so strong that Hausa soldiers dare not attack her for fear of being made impotent.
Somehow you are not surprised to learn that Emecheta borrowed the goddess' name, Ogwuguwu, for her publishing imprint.
It seems appropriate.
Guardian Women is edited by Louise Chunn PAGE wom
Small change for a great two-way favour Input /Nigel Fountain.
AT LAST week's meeting of European Community leaders, the rich countries of Western Europe decided to provide funds to help develop the economies of their neighbours to the east.
A development bank is to be set up, Poland will get more than $500,000,000 from the EC, and Hungary too is getting assistance.
Now wait for the gripes to start.
Despite the enthusiasm which greeted the revolutions in the East, some people will probably complain about greedy foreigners hogging our hard-earned cash.
Such views are daft.
At last the Eastern Bloc nations might have a chance of catching up with the West, and we owe them a debt.
Another daft view is that all the woes which have beset the Soviet Union and its satellites are because these countries didn't know how to run their economies.
Sure, there is inefficient production, horrific pollution, shortages and corruption from East Berlin to the Soviet Union's Pacific coast.
A lot can be blamed on years of dictatorship and rotten planning — but not all.
The Soviet Union paid the highest price for the Allies' victory over Hitler's Germany in 1945.
The Soviet dictator, Stalin, hadn't wanted to fight the Nazis, and panicked when they invaded in 1941.
But one of the great ironies of the second world war was that the freedom and democracy that was won back in Western Europe was largely paid for by the blood of Russians.
While the West recovered and prospered, the peoples of the Soviet Union were left with another four decades of dictatorship.
By 1945 the Russians had lost more than 20 million people (British losses were 400,000) and 25 million people were homeless.
The country was devastated, but ruled by a regime with the world's largest army, which dominated Eastern Europe.
Western rulers were scared of the Soviet Union.
And that was one reason why the United States was willing to aid European countries.
The aid the US — and Canada — gave to Western Europe dwarfs anything on offer to the East today.
Between 1948 and 1952 more than $55 billion was provided.
Did the scheme — the Marshall Plan — work?
Look at the evidence.
There is plenty of poverty in Western countries but there are democracies too, and Western Europeans are amongst the richest, and most productive people in the world.
Attempts to extend the Marshall Plan to Eastern Europe failed, largely, but not entirely, because of Stalin's hostility to US influence within his ‘empire’.
Instead he looted Eastern Bloc countries to rebuild Russian industry.
Up to a point his ruthlessness succeeded.
The Soviet Union and the countries it controlled have recovered from the war and, compared with the peoples of the poorer countries of the southern hemisphere, even the Poles are well off.
Fears of what might happen in the East are one reason EC leaders have been willing to offer some help to those on the other side of the broken Berlin Wall.
But they are often pretty mean about it.
Lech Walesa was probably more popular when he was a freedom-fighter in Poland than when he came here recently and complained about the low level of enthusiasm for investing in his country.Today the only country to spend more than 1 per cent of its output on aid is Norway, with Holland and Denmark close behind.
Britain shells out only 0.3 per cent, and the US 0.2 per cent .
Events like Live Aid showed we are prepared to assist our fellow world citizens — even if there's a hefty dose of self-congratulation about how noble we are.
But without proper government action, they only scratch at the problem.
They are also fogged by the dumb idea that we are just doing someone else a favour.
A shrewd aid programme does us a favour.
It would prevent the destruction of rain forests and save our climate.
And it can open up new export markets.
It does something else too.
Hitler and Stalin emerged from war, revolution, inflation and famine.
Help to prevent these conditions and you help to stop another Hitler or Stalin.
Law Report: Solicitors must pay for their negligence Queen's Bench Division Dickinson v Jones Alexander & Co Before Mr Justice Douglas Brown October 16 1989.
Awife whose solicitors have been negligent in negotiating a financial settlement in her divorce proceedings is entitled to damages against the solicitors.
The measure of such damages should be calculated by assessing the amount that a court could have ordered the husband to pay to the wife under the statutory provisions.
She is also entitled to damages for her mental distress caused by the solicitors' negligence.
The facts.
A wife, who had been married for six years, consulted the defendant firm of solicitors about her divorce proceedings.
Her husband was a wealthy man who belonged to a family that owned a successful printing and publishing business, and the parties had enjoyed a comfortable life-style during the marriage.
When the marriage broke down the husband asked the wife to leave the matrimonial home.
The defendants' articled clerk handled the wife's affairs and negotiated a financial settlement with the husband's solicitors.
The wife was told that the only asset available to her was the matrimonial home and she agreed to take a lump sum of £12,600 with £2,473 maintenance for the two children.
A consent order was made in those terms.
The articled clerk then advised the wife to buy a small house in an unsuitable area with a mortgage in order to obtain mortgage relief, even though she had no taxable income against which she could claim relief.
A senior partner of the defendants endorsed the articled clerk's advice: the wife later went to other solicitors, and proceedings were issued claiming damages for negligence against the defendants in handling the financial provision side of her divorce.
The decision.
Mr Justice Douglas Brown said that the defendants were negligent (1) in failing to appreciate that they were dealing with a husband of substantial means who might well be able to afford to pay, not only a lump sum, but also substantial periodical payments;(2) in failing to obtain full disclosure of the husband's financial affairs;(3) in failing to realise that because of family trusts and wills the husband had an expectation of further assets;(4) in advising the wife to obtain a mortgage when she had no taxable income;(5) in recommending a settlement which removed the wife's undoubted right to maintenance; and (6) in failing to use ouster proceedings to remove the husband from the matrimonial home.
The damages should be assessed as such sums as represented what a judge or registrar in the Family Division would have ordered the husband to pay or transfer under the provisions of section 25 of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973.
It was argued for the defendants that the wife would not be liable to tax on the damages she received, while her lost income would have been taxable in her hands, and that therefore she should be awarded damages in respect of her net loss after deducting tax.
His Lordship said that it was quite likely that the Revenue would seek to argue that all or some of the award was liable to tax.
In his Lordship's view, the wife should receive the full sum and in due course account to the Revenue for any tax due.
It was also argued for the defendants that the example of judges in personal injuries cases should be followed, and the wife should give credit for amounts of supplementary benefits received.
His Lordship rejected that argument and said that there was here no true analogy with personal injuries cases.
The wife also claimed damages for mental stress, vexation and strain caused by the defendants' negligence.
The defendants accepted that damages could be awarded for mental distress and that the wife actually suffered mental distress.
But they submitted that the damage was too remote.
His Lordship said the defendants were employed, so far as professional skill could, to relieve the wife from the pressures of her matrimonial situation.
They performed that task so unskilfully that the wife's pressures and problems were exacerbated rather than relieved.
In the light of the defendants' knowledge of her state of health it was reasonably foreseeable that that would happen if they were negligent and did not obtain a satisfactory resolution of her affairs.
The wife was entitled to compensation for her vexation, anxiety and stress which were the direct and foreseeable result of the defendants' negligence.
The wife was awarded £10,000 as a lump sum, £103,608 for loss of past maintenance, £203,000 for loss of future maintenance, £6,100 for inadequate property settlement, £2,500 for loss on mortgage payments and £5,000 for mental distress: a total award of £330,238.
Appearances: Donald Hart QC and John Haig-Haddow instructed by Irwin Mitchell, Sheffield for the wife; Nicholas Davidson instructed by Willy Hargrave, Leeds for the defendant solicitors.
Shiranikha Herbert barrister
The Dowager Duchess of Rutland:.
THE death of the Dowager Duchess of Rutland has taken from us the last and most loved of our nieces (for niece she was, although older than the present writers by five and ten years).
Her father, Frank Tennant, one of the ‘Souls’, was our half-brother.
Sir Charles Tennant the industrialist, later Lord Glenconner, was her grandfather and our father.
This unusual relationship gave us the joy of knowing her very well.
Kakoo, as she was always known, was a unique person, one of the loveliest girls we ever saw, and all her life she remained beautiful, with a marvellous sense of humour and a true enjoyment in everything she did and everyone she knew.
Lady Diana Cooper, one of her sisters-in-law, called her as ‘lovely as an anemone’.
She had a wonderful memory and recalled much that happened in both world wars.
(One of her brothers was killed in the first.)
Another of her aunts was Margot Asquith.
Winston Churchill stayed with her at Belvoir Castle and she entertained many friends with wide-ranging interests, among whom were many writers and artists.
Belvoir was not her only house, for her late husband the 9th Duke restored Haddon Hall where she took particular pleasure in the rose terraces.
Her public life lay largely in the country in which she lived.
She did much for the Red Cross, Girl Guides and the Royal Society for the Blind, and was a magistrate for many years.
Visiting her in her London house was always a joy.
She took such a keen interest in politics, in literature, and the various lives of her children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
She was always accompanied by her green parrot, who showed his pleasure, or displeasure, when her guests arrived as he followed her about.
Kakoo's life spanned almost a century and her wonderful memory made everything so vivid for all the generations who knew her.
She was loved by everybody she met.
We never heard anyone say an unkind word about her.
She will remain a happy memory with us always.
Dame Margaret Wakehurst Elliot of Harwood Kathleen Tennant, Dowager Duchess of Rutland, born January 30, 1894; died December 4, 1989
Edmund Garvey.
Hard on the gardai:.
EDMUND Garvey was an old-fashioned policeman who became a controversial head of the Irish Republic's force during one of its most turbulent periods.
Commissioner of the Garda Siochana for little more than two years in the 1970s, he presided over a force struggling to cope with a surge in urban crime and the spillover violence of the IRA campaign in Northern Ireland.
His response was to try and impose tough discipline and demand greater results at the same time.
The result was to create disaffection in the ranks and lead to accusations of police brutality from Amnesty International among others and to Garvey's sacking.
A career policeman, Garvey had spent most of his life as a detective in Dublin, becoming assistant commissioner in charge of the anti-terrorist C3 section in 1973.
He was appointed commissioner in 1975 and was quickly identified with the tough law and order stand of the then coalition government.
During his leadership, the gardai had to deal with major acts of IRA-related violence, including the assassination of the British Ambassador to Dublin, Christopher Ewart Biggs, and the kidnapping of Dutch industrialist Tiede Herrema.
Both events led to controversy: fingerprints found at the assassination site were not, as claimed, those of an IRA suspect but of a detective; Herrema's release after a lengthy siege followed an agreement with his kidnappers, signed by Garvey but repudiated by the gardai.
Persistent allegations of ill-treatment of suspects and discontent with his old-style discipline left him in the cold.
He was dismissed by the Fianna Fail government and challenged the decision in court.
He was awarded damages and drew his salary to retirement age.
But his career was finished.
Joe Joyce Edmund Garvey, born Bradford, 1915; died Dun Laoghaire, November 29, 1989.
20 Blowing warm and cold on Europe News round-up.
By us75Melanie McFadyean
LAST WEEK the Seasick Summit, this week the Strasbourg summit, which saw Mrs Thatcher, so often the scourge of Europe, being polite and conciliatory, eliciting applause from the other 11 members of the EC.
But she hasn't altered her position against economic and monetary union (EMU) or the exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
Germany and France did a deal to accelerate the process by which these will come about, in exchange for France supporting West Germany's drive towards re-unification with East Germany.
President Mitterrand of France (and he's not alone in this) has been anxious that too swift a move to reunify the two Germanys could destabilise Gorbachev, something that could spell disaster not only for the West but for the balance of world power.
Mrs Thatcher was in a minority of one voting against the Community's Social Charter, a concession to European workers facing greater competition when the European market is completely open.
For Mrs Thatcher, at loggerheads with many of her own party over European issues, this summit was crucial, as it set the tone for debates leading up to 1992 — not only for European unification but for the next British election in which Europe will be a deciding factor.
BOB REID took over from Bob Reid as chairman of British Rail, a job described as a poisoned chalice since there is much trouble on the railways.
The name may not have changed but the new Bob will earn £200,000 a year, the old Bob had to make do with quite a few bob less — £93,000.
‘I'm not doing it for the money,’ said the new Bob.
‘I can earn £400,000 somewhere else.’
THE Broadcasting Bill, to be debated by MPs tomorrow, directly affects the future of independent broadcasting.
Controversy rages over government proposals to sell new franchises to the highest bidders.
Many fear that quality will be sacrificed for cheap and easy quantity, envisaging a fifth channel dominated by low-cost imported programmes.
A recent poll showed that 60 per cent of Conservative MPs think standards will fall if some of the proposed changes take place.
But advertisers love it — it means more air time to sell products because the more popular a show is, the more people watch the ads.
But what is more important?
Advertising revenue or quality?
Many ‘minority’ viewing programmes — such as children's, documentaries, religious, educational and scientific — may not attract huge audiences, or lots of advertising, but they reach parts quiz shows, soap operas, American series and adverts don't.
ELLO Ello Ello…
Ever been to Shawdicth, Sidnum, County Kork, Redding or Hybry Corner?
Ever heard of anyone stealing a Grandfather, an England Goalkeeper worth £31, a four-birth tent, a navel telescope or a Bathoven music book?
Perhaps you've seen a man with large plates in his hair, or a brusie on his arm.
Maybe he was wearing a leather berry or a pale blue suite.
Who was the burglar breaking in through an entryphone?
Perhaps he was in cahoots with the one who got in through a skylark?
There were 48 mistakes of this sort in crime sheets written by police constables at the same police station.
AFIVE-year-old father of 100,000 was spared a horrible fate.
Had it not been for human kindess he would have ended up in a pork pie.
Instead he celebrated his fifth birthday with a pig-shaped cake.
Why pig?
Because he is Britain's most venerable pig.
He has retired with a Jersey cow, 10 cats and some geese to a cosy smallholding.
But his new owners intend to keep the porky Casanova away from the young female pigs.
LITTERBUGS: 15,600 plastic six-pack beer rings were found in three hours along 300 miles of Texas shoreline.
Letterbugs: Americans get enough junk mail in one day to produce energy to heat 250,000 houses.
Forty-four per cent of the junk mail is never even opened.
Having a real say in Europe * Commentary.
By John Palmer
MRS THATCHER is right.
The gathering speed of the movement to European union following the Strasbourg summit does pose a potentially serious threat to democratic accountability and hence to the future of Parliamentary government.
Ignore for a moment the contradiction in the Prime Minister's simultaneous espousal of an essentially unaccountable German Bundesbank system for future European monetary union and her insistence that the Delors plan for EMU violates Parliamentary control of EC decision making.
Her senior officials and expert advisers coyly describe this as ‘a contradiction in reality which will take time to work through.’
The fact remains that the ‘democratic deficit’ in European Community affairs is already too great and is set to grow unless some very radical changes are made to the way the EC institutions operate.
In a sense what we are witnessing are the birthpangs of ‘a European bourgeois state without the usual trappings of bourgeois democracy’ as 19th century historians described the emergence of the newly united Kaiser's Germany.
This may partly explains why the West German centre-right Conservative led government is adamant that there can be no further move to supra-national European Union that is not accompanied by a demonstrable system of Parliamentary accountability.
They will look with justified suspicion, therefore, at Jacques Delors's suggestion yesterday, that there should be two constitutional conferences next year — one to transfer powers from the national state to the EC on economic and monetary policy and the other, later, to tackle democratic control.
Downing Street strategists planning their tactics as the battle for hearts and minds over monetary union enters a crucial phase would be wrong, therefore, to assume that Bonn is a natural ally.
Nor is it the case that the Federal Republic is using the issue of democratic accountability to drag its feet on EMU.
Moreover the British Government and the Federal Republic mean something quite different about democratic accountability.
Where London sees this in terms of restoring some increased role to Westminster MPs, Bonn envisages a much greater role for Members of the European Parliament.
The truth is that national Parliamentarians lost their powers to control the Brussels embryo government the moment their governments signed the Treaty of Accession on joining the Community.
The Single European Act, signed by Mrs Thatcher and the other EC leaders in 1986, went a significant step further in removing powers from national Parliaments.
What Westminster MPs tend not to understand is that the beneficiaries of this process have not been their cousins in the Strasbourg Parliament, nor even the European Commission, but the Council of Ministers.
The Council is, thanks to the SEA, more than ever the true ‘Parliament’ of the European Community in that it — rather than the Strasbourg assembly — passes the Community's laws and does so, moreover, behind closed doors in ways which would not be tolerated in any individual national member state.
Where does the Government stand on this?
Will UK ministers now demand that when the Council meets to legislate its sessions are open to public and Parliamentarians alike?
That said, there is no future in trying to make an increasingly supra-national executive (the Council and the Commission) answerable merely to national Parliaments.
This might have made sense when all Council decisions that mattered were passed on the basis of unanimity.
But more and more decisions are now taken by qualified majority vote.
The importance of majority voting will increase since more and more European economic and social legislation will be deemed necessary because of the single European market.
To this extent, the Council is literally unaccountable to anyone, even where individual governments remain — in theory — answerable to their national Parliaments.
The only effective control over an expanding European embryo-government can be exercised by the directly elected European Parliament.
That does not mean, however, that there is no role for MPs (and other national legislators in the EC) as we move through a transitional phase from a mainly inter-governmental type of Community to a more fully fledged federal union.
Indeed MEPs in Strasbourg would be well advised, as they prepare their demands for greater powers under EMU, to strike a united front with their national colleagues.
The way Westminster now treats MEPs is little short of a disgrace.
They have no rights in the Palace at all and are, at almost every opportunity, shunned by MPs who mistakenly believe that the European Parliament (and not the Council) is their natural adversary.
This contrasts with the situation, elsewhere and notably in West Germany, where MEPs sit along side Bundestag deputies on their EC legislation vetting committee, with full speaking rights.
Both West German federal and regional Parliamentarians also want a bigger say over EC legislation but they believe this should be assured by being made members of a new, upper house of the European Parliament.
This is similar to the proposals made by the Conservative MEP, Mr Bill Newton-Dunn and latterly by Mr Michael Heseltine.
Some Labour MEPs and independent socialists have long argued this is the way to prevent a stranglehold over European integration being exercised by national governments.
Ironically Tory MEPs may secure a better working relationship with their Westminster cousins than the Labour party, thanks in part to the respect the Tory MEPs have won for refusing to buckle under Thatcherite pressure over European union.
At a recent Labour national executive meeting the leader of the Labour group in the European Parliament failed to get a seconder from either left or right for a motion to have this whole issue discussed by the party conference.
Yet Labour has a bigger vested interest in there being a European Parliament which — during the transition to a more federal union — co-legislates with the Council, rather than exists as a largely powerless consultative assembly.
A stronger European Parliament would be a powerful ally in ensuring that social rights, the environment, a peace oriented foreign policy and democracy itself, are forced higher up the European political agenda.
The first step in forging an alliance of Euro-Parliamentarians would be for national MPs to be invited to the special hearings on changes to the Rome Treaty being organised by the European Parliament.
But there must first be a common line of action worked out by MPs and MEPs in the political parties.
If Westminster MPs are too haughty to consider a role for themselves as a junior revising chamber of the European Parliament and too short sighted to invite Strasbourg experts on to their own select committee on EC affairs, they, not the MEPs will be the eventual losers.
Tenants' association club on the Sparrow Farm estate…it is alleged that people who had been drinking at the club attacked the family in the off-licence opposite PHOTOGRAPHS: KENNETH SAUNDERS Bitter questions of racial violence Ramesh K and his family were hounded out of their Feltham off-licence by 18 months of abuse and attacks, during which time they became pawns in a battle between the local council, the police and two rival race relations bodies.
David Rose reports.
AT SPARROW Farm, a bleak post-war council estate in Feltham, deafeningly close to the runways of Heathrow Airport, the off-licence in the little parade of shops has changed hands again.
Ramesh K, who took on the lease two years ago, has sold up and moved out.
In the preceding 18 months, Mr K and his family were repeatedly attacked.
They suffered internal injuries and broken bones, had racist slogans daubed on their premises and racist posters thrust into their faces by the perpetrators of previous assaults.
The Ks — who have asked not to be named in full— are now physically safe.
But their case has been the catalyst for a bitter political row, raising fundamental questions about society's ability to deal adequately with racial violence.
It has brought claims that the police have failed even to recognise the nature of the problem, much less contain it.
It has led the head of the local police, Chief Superintendent Alastair McLean, to accuse Sparrow Farm's owners, Hounslow Borough Council, of left-wing extremism and bad faith towards the police, and Scotland Yard of failing to provide support.
It has involved the police in other, hotly contested local struggles: between the Hounslow Community Relations Council, a cautious, conservative organisation, and the Southall Monitoring Group, a body which attempts to support the victims of racial attacks.
In both 1988 and 1989, combatting racial violence has been a priority for the Metropolitan Police.
Scotland Yard's policies have become ever more sophisticated, backed by expensive publicity campaigns.
The Ks' story illustrates the pitfalls which lie in the way of practical implementation.
The Commissioner, Sir Peter Imbert, has stated that the police must now be ready to share knowledge and power: to respond to local authorities and other organisations with an ‘unswerving commitment to communication and consultation, within which the police and the community are equal partners.’
The Ks' case demonstrates that his intention may not be easily carried out.
According to Mr K, it all started with an argument with a customer over a faulty toy in an Easter egg last year.
The customer's brother — who cannot be named for legal reasons — came into the shop a little later and started an argument.
He headbutted Mr K and broke his nose.
Worried about security, Mr K fitted steel grilles to his windows.
Next day, the building and pavement outside were thickly painted with the slogan ‘Sieg Heil Sparrow Farm’ and swastikas.
Through the summer there were less serious, though very unpleasant, incidents — and all the while, despite Mr K's frequent requests to Hounslow Borough Council, no one came to remove the racist graffiti.
Glue was squirted into Mr K's locks, and windows were broken.
A youth clambered on to the roof at the back of the shop for a dare and fell through.
On December 1 last year, four youths attacked the Ks outside the shop.
Later that evening, one returned with his father, John Finn, who was armed with a baseball bat.
He turned the shop upside down, smashing stock, breaking bottles.
Anoup K, aged 16, suffered broken ribs, internal bleeding and damage to his kidneys.
He was hospitalised for a week.
Finn senior was convicted of criminal damage, wounding and possessing an offensive weapon.
He was sentenced to a year's imprisonment, suspended for 12 months, and ordered to pay £500 costs and compensation.
For the next six months, the harassment returned to lower, more manageable, levels: frequent racist abuse, according to Ramesh K, but no violence.
On May 29, a window was broken by a stone.
A youth was charged and convicted.
On July 2, the attacks began again in earnest.
Ramesh was punched in the face, and the premises damaged.
From then until the middle of August, there were incidents at least once a week.
On several occasions, people who had been drinking in the Sparrow Farm tenants' association club opposite the shop left the club and attacked the Ks, both inside the off-licence and, sometimes, as they left after closing for the night.
At least four people have been charged with offences in relation to the events of July and August.
The last straw came on August 17.
Two men entered the shop and insisted that the Ks display two posters.
One consisted of a photograph of Salman Rushdie and the slogan ‘Rushdie in, Pakis Out.’
The other was a photograph of Enoch Powell and the message ‘Enoch says keep the Farm white.’
Up to that point, says Mr K, ‘we couldn't let them win.
We could have just put the shutters up, but they'd have said, ‘yeah, we got the Pakis out.’
We had to keep going, not let them see how we felt.’
But now the fight went out of the family: ‘What would you do?
Would you stay there when you were getting attacked night after night?’
Within a month, Mr K had found a buyer for the lease.
‘It made money, but not a great deal,’ he says.
‘I thought we could move up through the shop, better ourselves.
We had our dreams.
Now I'm not interested.’
Chief Superintendent McLean says that last summer the resources he allocated to the protection of the Ks were greater than those given to anything, other than really serious crimes such as murder, in the two years he had been in charge of Hounslow division.
He admits that at times incidents were not handled perfectly.
But, he maintains, 24-hour protection for the Ks was simply not possible.
Even before the final wave of incidents, the police operation had been sharply criticised, principally by the Southall Monitoring Group (SMG).
First funded by the Greater London Council in 1982, the SMG operates a 24-hour helpline for the victims of racial harassment.
It is headed by Suresh Grover, who, like many associated with the organisation, has been active in radical Asian politics since the mid-1970s and the bitter campaign which followed the death of Blair Peach from a police truncheon blow in 1979.
FOR YEARS, the SMG has claimed that the police do not deal effectively with racial attacks, that they are slow to respond, reluctant to arrest, and ineffective in presenting the case against alleged assailants in court.
It has not been slow to go to the press.
The group has also mounted numerous demonstrations and police station pickets.
As its name implies, the SMG is based not in Hounslow but in the huge Asian community of Southall, in the neighbouring borough of Ealing.
In 1987, the SMG was the subject of a report by PC J. E. Black, the Ealing police intelligence officer.
It noted that Ealing Council, which, like Hounslow, is Labour-controlled, had made a grant of £50,000, and listed a number of events: ‘April 1986, organised a meeting at Southall Town Hall on the seventh anniversary of Blair Peach's death, called for full inquiry…
August 1986, Labour councillor Pandura Perera cites SMG as example of political cell set up by GLC ostensibly as community group…
January 1987, unnamed spokesman of SMG quoted in Asian Times attacking Commissioner's initiative on racial attacks, doubting motives and intentions.’
The report concluded: ‘In general the group have continued their efforts to link with the militant left-wing trade unionists on campaigns and demonstrations.
They actively seek to expand their influence and would appear to be aiming to cover most of west London…the group can be expected to continue in their attempts to undermine the police, but are unlikely to be successful except in conditions of widespread disorder, general strike, etc, when they might have a potential for destabilisation.’
There are contradictory versions of how the SMG came to work in Hounslow, eventually receiving funding from Hounslow Council 18 months ago.
According to Suresh Grover, it began to be active there in 1987, as a result of a serious racial violence case.
The organisation's persistent lobbying of the council led, he says, to pressure for new policies in the borough, and eventually further funding for the SMG.
Chief Superintendent McLean has an alternative explanation.
Hounslow Labour group, led by Dave Wetzel, once the architect of the GLC low fares policy, is controlled by the left.
The purpose, he says, ‘was not to give succour to the victims of harassment, but to polarise the ethnic minorities and the police.’
The attraction of the SMG to the left was not, he believes, its commitment to monitoring racial violence and assisting its victims, but its second stated purpose of monitoring and campaigning on cases of alleged ‘police harassment.’
Hounslow councillors say they had been under the impression that relations between them and the police were slowly improving, although Mr Wetzel and John Connolly, the influential chair of housing, continue to boycott the statutory police consultative group.
Mr Wetzel finds labels like ‘extreme left-wing’‘paranoic and outmoded.’
In the case of the Ks, the SMG claimed the police had been slow to take statements and prepare cases, and that, inexplicably, weeks elapsed before anyone was charged with the December attack on Anoup K although there had been clear identification.
The group also said that the police had failed properly to appreciate the seriousness of what was taking place: that despite the racist nature of the attacks, local beat officers had lectured the Ks themselves on their ‘attitude problem.’
The victims, according to the SMG, were being partly blamed for the actions of their assailants.
EXACTLY such a view of the attacks is now espoused on Sparrow Farm.
Among the estate's residents, the fact that several people have been charged or convicted of offences against the Ks cuts no ice: the estate version is that what took place was no more than a personal vendetta, between Ramesh K and the man who broke his nose.
‘It was never racial,’ says Helena Bagwell, secretary of the tenants' association club where some of the Ks' attackers used to drink.
‘It was a situation between a white person and a coloured person.
There is no racialism on this estate.’
Mrs Bagwell says she bears no responsibility for the club's role in the attacks.
‘We condemn what they did, but we can't stop them drinking.
You can't blame the whole estate for what they did.’
But, she hints, there were ‘two sides to the story.’
In the newsagent, run by an Asian family, next door to the off-licence, Henry, aged 14, echoes this view: ‘They had an attitude problem.
If you told them to fuck off, they'd tell you to fuck off back.’
Was that not what he expected from Asian shopkeepers, and did that justify breaking their bones?
‘I dunno.’
What about those who attacked them, were they racists?
‘I'm not saying anything.
Because I don't want to get smacked in the mouth.’
The newsagent Asians have spent 10 years at Sparrow Farm, without being attacked.
‘You've got to have a laugh with the kids,’ says the proprietress, ‘they're alright.’
The new occupants of the off-licence, also Asian, have not been attacked since moving in three months ago.
This, say Mrs Bagwell and her supporters, the swastikas and posters notwithstanding, is the final proof that the attacks on the Ks were not racially motivated.
Their doubts are shared by Chief Superintendent McLean.
There was a racial element in the attacks, he says.
‘But you've got to ask the questions: why didn't the other shopkeepers have a problem, why haven't the new owners of the off-licence?
You've got to be able to draw your own conclusions, that this was to an extent a personal vendetta.’
According to the policy of the Metropolitan Police, an incident is classified as racial if the victim, or any other person, alleges a racial motive.
The policy states: ‘Police action alone cannot achieve positive results,’ and they must adopt a ‘multi-agency’approach.
All racial incidents are carefully monitored at divisional and area level, and senior officers are instructed to be vigilant of possible rising trends.
At the beginning of August, a new political dimension entered the Ks' story.
Inder Uppal is the senior officer at Hounslow Community Relations Council (HCRC), funded by the borough and the Commission for Racial Equality.
Mr Uppal took pleasure in inviting the former Home Secretary, Douglas Hurd, to Hounslow last year, presenting the borough as a harmonious model of good race relations.
Locally, however, the skids are under him.
‘Mr McLean is a very good friend of mine,’ he says.
‘I can say that the police are definitely trying to stamp out racism.
I have yet to come across a police officer who is not interested in stamping out racism.’
But, as he admits, Mr Wetzel and his colleagues want to ‘disarm me completely.’
Council funding of an HCRC cultural centre and other projects has been cut off, and vacant staff posts frozen.
Mr Wetzel says: ‘I'm looking forward to a reformed HCRC in 1990.’
Mr Uppal would have no role in such a body.
The scene was now set for the final explosion.
In August, the SMG began to press Mr McLean for a meeting to discuss the case, claiming that police protection was ineffective.
He replied on August 15, suggesting that the SMG's Balwinder Gill telephone the community liaison officer, adding ‘should you wish to meet with me in the meantime, again this can be arranged.’
HER REPLY on August 21 appears to have tipped him over a political brink.
Apparently disregarding his offer, she wrote: ‘We are concerned that you do not consider the above case to be serious enough to warrant a meeting.’
Detailed criticism of his handling of the case ensued.
There was a further element to Mr McLean's rapidly boiling anger: the sudden arrival of Mr Uppal, who hitherto had taken no interest in the case.
Mr Uppal regarded the SMG as an extremist organisation which manipulated racial violence on behalf of his enemies in the council Labour group.
He saw their referral of cases to the SMG as a further way of undermining him, and he was determined to fight back.
After an initial visit to the Ks from Mr Uppal, the SMG claimed in a letter to him and Mr McLean that the Ks did not want Mr Uppal to become involved in their case.
He again went to see them and persuaded them to accompany him to a meeting at the police station with Mr McLean on August 24.
Mr Uppal now claims to have been an ‘old friend of the family.’
Ramesh K says that he had not met Mr Uppal before, and his brother, Kewal K, says that he briefly met Mr Uppal some years ago.
‘He said, ‘let's try my method, you've had the SMG, now try going to the top person and everything will be OK,’'says Ramesh K. ‘After the amount of hassle we'd had, we thought we'd give it a go.’
Most of the police station meeting was taken up by discussion between council officers and the police on security for the Ks and ways of dealing with the club — to which the council, just to complicate matters further, had indemnified a £100,000 loan.
Mr McLean made his hostility to the SMG plain.
Ramesh K was then brought in for a few minutes.
To his surprise, he was not asked for McLean: ‘Widening gulf’ details of the attacks, but about the origins of the SMG's involvement with the case, which had originally been referred to the SMG by the council.
Later that day Mr Grover of the SMG hand-delivered a letter from the K brothers to Mr Uppal, copied to the council and police.
It told him to have nothing more to do with them: ‘We have reached this decision as a result of the meeting with you and the police this morning.’
At the meeting, however, Mr K had told Mr McLean that he had no view about Mr Uppal's involvement.
To Mr McLean, this was the last straw: proof that the SMG was ‘manipulating its clients.’
He had no inkling that Mr Uppal's relationship with the family was other than he had claimed.
He wrote immediately to the SMG, cutting off all contact: ‘I am not interested in agencies who politic and posture for no other reason than to promote themselves…secondly, as I am not presently able to place any trust in you, I must insist that any further matters you wish to raise are channelled through to a suitable agency, viz the local council or HCRC.’
The SMG make an identical charge against the police and Mr Uppal: ‘The Ks were just being used.’
Mr Uppal says much the same about the council and the SMG: ‘They are using racial harassment for their own ends.’
And so in correspondence, in the local press, on local radio and in various public forums the row has raged on.
But of all the participants, it is Mr McLean who goes furthest.
The affair, he believes, is evidence of a deep-seated political campaign against the police, of which the most recent evidence is the fact that Balwinder Gill, late of the SMG, has now taken up an appointment as a race officer with Hounslow council.
In one of the most outspoken statements ever made by a Metropolitan Police officer of his rank, he says: ‘The council has been ensuring that as many cases as possible are referred to the SMG, a pernicious organisation spewing out lies and propaganda in pursuance of their own ideological aims.
The sad fact is that the SMG is financed by two boroughs, Ealing and Hounslow, members of which are sympathetic to their aims.
What results is not a better deal for victims, but a widening of the gulf between the ethnic minorities and the police.
To my mind, any council which actively engenders support for such an organisation is in breach of the trust and duty placed in them by the electorate.’
Mr McLean goes still further.
The senior management of the force has required him to involve himself in politics, to deal with an authority out to undermine him, without adequate resources or support: ‘I am conscious that this job gives no backing to senior officers who are libelled, and as far as I am concerned, the job is derelict in its duty to police chiefs.’
An active member of the police Superintendents Association, Mr McLean says that at a recent meeting disgust was expressed at the Met's failure to hit back at criticism of this kind — such as the comment by Bernie Grant, MP for Tottenham, that the divisional chief in his constituency was ‘incompetent.’
He adds: ‘I have to get into the political arena without support.
I have to say that I am now prepared to act as I see it: with the same political cunning as any politician.’
Faced with Mr McLean's fury, Suresh Grover professes himself stunned.
‘We are prepared to work with the police and to provide the information needed to bring the perpetrators of attacks to justice,’ he says, adding that he would like to see Mr McLean in the hope of building a relationship.
He accepts that the letter which provoked the final breach with Mr McLean, with its confusion over the proposal to meet, ‘may have been a misunderstanding.’
But he says: ‘He used this case to get at us.’
Mr McLean will have none of the stirring signs of contrition on the part of the SMG.
Admitting that the August 21 letter was a mistake was ‘purely for the benefit of the Guardian,’ he says.
‘The Ks were absolute pawns in a very dirty game.’
To them must belong the last word.
The SMG, says Ramesh K, ‘did not use us.
We're the ones who used to ring them up in the middle of the night.
We used them.
We were always looking for someone who could give us help.
Because they are Asian they give extra help.
Being the same colour, you feel more at home.
They put in a bit of effort.’
Grover: ‘We are prepared to work with the police’ OVERNIGHT FILE
The costing of care…the NHS White Paper's plans for ensuring competition will mean integrating medical and nursing staff into the management processPHOTOGRAPH: ROBIN LAURANCE Reform's long haul to health Agenda.
By Chris Ham
THE Government's health service reforms are running into difficulties.
The source of these difficulties is not the campaign of opposition waged by the British Medical Association, nor is it an incipient revolt among backbench MPs.
More modestly, and yet in many ways more significantly, it derives from the practical challenge of implementing the reforms outlined in the NHS White Paper, and the failure to convince those who work in the health service of the need for change.
At the heart of the Government's programme is the introduction of competition into the provision of health services.
By separating responsibility for funding services from their provision, the Government hopes that providers will compete for contracts from health authorities, GP budget holders and private buyers of care.
The aim is to turn health authorities into discriminating purchasing agencies, seeking the best deal for their residents by buying services from a range of public, private and voluntary providers.
GPs who volunteer to hold practice budgets will act in a similar way for those services for which they are responsible.
This process will be carefully regulated to ensure that appropriate services are available in each locality.
Managed competition, rather than a free market in health care, is the leitmotif of the reforms.
Yet for managed competition to work, a number of conditions have to be met, and this is where difficulties have arisen.
First, health service managers must be able to price their services reasonably accurately for trading purposes.
At present, this is just not possible in the vast majority of NHS hospitals, because the quality of management information systems is so poor.
Work going on as part of the resource management initiative is designed to overcome this problem, and eventually it will produce the information that is lacking.
But for the next three to four years at least managers will have to rely more on their judgment than on hard data in deciding what to charge for their services.
Second, the purchasers of care need to be skilful in negotiating with providers and in specifying service contracts across the full range of NHS provision.
As ministers have emphasised, contracts should deal with quality of care as well as quantity and cost.
Although there is some experience of contracting in such services as catering and cleaning, the scale of the programme set out in the White Paper is of a different order.
Initially, most contracts are likely to include only a broad specification of the service being purchased.
The finer details will have to be added at a later date when experience of operating in a contract culture has been gained.
Third, before entering negotiations about contracts, purchasers will have to make an assessment of the services required to meet the health needs of their population.
This involves analysing patterns of illness and mortality, as well as conducting market research to discover what local people perceive to be their needs.
On this basis, health authorities will be able to establish a picture of the health of their population, and they can then draw up specifications of the services they wish to buy.
An important element of this process will be to evaluate the effectiveness of the services on offer in tackling the needs that are identified.
The skills required to carry out these tasks are in short supply, even though assessing health care needs and evaluating service effectiveness have long been the responsiblity of directors of public health and their predecessors.
A significant increase in the range and quality of staff in areas such as community medicine and health economics is required to enable health authorities to discharge their new purchasing function effectively.
A fourth challenge is to develop management arrangements within hospitals to support the introduction of competition.
If managers are to deliver on the contract they negotiate with purchasers, there needs to be a means of integrating medical and nursing staff into the management process to ensure that the terms of these contracts are met.
This requires that each major service area within hospitals has a designated chief who can negotiate on behalf of colleagues with the hospital manager.
The arrangement evolving at a number of the resource management pilot sites, in which a doctor acting as clinical director takes on this role with assistance from a nurse manager and a business manager, indicates the likely direction of change.
Where these arrangements co-exist with planning agreements for service areas, as at Guy's Hospital, there is a basis for linking these negotiations with external contracts.
However, most NHS hospitals are not yet in this position, and experience at Guy's and other hospitals indicates that the process of giving doctors and nurses a bigger role in management cannot be rushed.
Given these difficulties, implementing the White Paper is likely to be a long haul.
The period between now and the next election will be spent developing the instruments to enable competition to take place.
Much of the responsibility for this will rest with health authorities who will play the key role in demonstration projects recently announced by the Government.
These projects, covering issues such as information requirements and the purchasing role of health authorities, are designed to work through the implications of the White Paper at a local level.
The aim is to learn from experience gained in the demonstration districts and regions and to disseminate the lessons throughout the NHS.
While this work is proceeding, and while the first wave of self-governing trusts and GP budgets are established, competition will be limited to a narrow band of services, such as waiting list surgery.
The full impact of the reforms will not be felt until the mid-1990s.
And that, crucially, depends on the Government winning a fourth term of office.
With opinion polls showing Labour ahead of the Conservatives, many health service managers are biding their time, not prepared to press forward rapidly with changes which could soon be reversed and which in any case they are reluctant to endorse.
The failure of ministers to persuade many of those who work in the NHS of the need for reform thus emerges as the key factor shaping the pace of implementation.
Despite the blaze of publicity which accompanied the launch of the White Paper, the Government has not been successful in generating support for its proposals.
This poses as much of a challenge for a future Labour government bent on reform as for Kenneth Clarke and his colleagues.
Although the NHS represents remarkable value for money when viewed in the international context, it has a number of weaknesses, including limited incentives for efficiency and a lack of responsiveness to consumers.
Managed competition represents a clear if ambitious strategy for tackling these weaknesses.
The Labour Party will need to develop a plausible vision for the future of the NHS if it is to be seen as a credible alternative to the present government.
With the status quo no longer an option, the question is how should health services be reformed, not whether.
Chris Ham is a policy analyst at the King's Fund Institute and a Fellow of the King's Fund College.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE soc