

for 1st and 3rd south arts Half Moon..
By John Connor Circus Moon.
NEW Circus — the mixture of traditional skill matched to modern theatrical interpretation — has been a growing world movement since the beginning of the Eighties.
Four years ago, at the Albany Empire, the first British production was tried by Circus Senso.
It was gawky, hesitant, and brash.
But it was a start.
Now, with the same director, part of the original company, and an influx of the new wave of circus talent that has surged up from the streets something magical has happened.
For once, the Half Moon's design is actually an asset — a Cortina is revealed crashed into the back wall.
Out of the cracks and the shadows a company comes to play — juggling, magic tricks, tumbling, and slapstick fill the stage.
The eye cannot rest on one thing, as in traditional circus, but you are constantly seeking the next thrill.
It is the trick of the big-stage musical number but applied to circus with finesse and much tongue-in-cheek humour.
The pace never slackens, even though on the night their big set-piece, the cloud swing, had to be cancelled because the performer had injured herself: not from doing what is actually one of the most dangerous of aerial tricks, but as is so often the way of circus, from doing something offstage unthinkingly, in this case, dancing.
What is most remarkable about this piece is its level of pathos — the company are battling to perform against the wishes of the big, bad man (on stilts) in a suit.
It is above all a joyous celebration of all who break down barriers between people set up by authority.
Covent Garden.
Der Freischutz.
By Tom Sutcliffe
GOTZ Friedrich's 1977 staging of Der Freischutz, soberly revived at Covent Garden by Wolfgang Bucher, makes a straightforward and unambitious introduction to Weber's melodious nervy masterpiece about the young huntsman who tries to cheat his way to the head ranger's job and daughter with magic bullets.
Schneider-Siemssen's blasted post-Thirty Years War landscape catches well the insecure mood of the opera, conceived in the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars.
But the projections for the Wolf's Glen scene are feeble, compared with Achim Freyer's raw satire on German red-cheeked feather-hatted nationalism, in Stuttgart.
Friedrich's narrative simplicity disturbs few interpretational skeletons in the closet.
This is a wonderful score for Colin Davis's long-limbed, affectionate, supremely musical conducting.
A pity that the orchestra lacked polish and that the chorus (and even Gwynne Howell's Hermit) were inclined to rush ahead regardless.
Davis's way with the overture was beautifully supple, his gradual unfolding of the emotions of the work deeply moving.
Covent Garden field a strong cast, especially Rene Kollo's marvellous Max.
Dramatic interpretation in a revival of such an old staging is inevitably not fresh, but Kollo sings with supreme verve and flexibility for such resonant heldentenor.
Perhaps it's his ideal part, though at times too low.
Top notes present thrillingly, and Kollo's technique is in mint condition after nearly 25 years.
Wonderful to hear.
Hartmut Welker's dark, neat and precisely turned Caspar is less obsessive than WNO's remarkable Richard Paul Fink was, but makes a rather depressed servant of the dark.
Karita Mattila started on the flat side, but eventually developed the right glow and intensity.
Her cavatina had gorgeously relaxed sweeping lines.
Judith Howarth's Annchen was chirpily sung, if overplayed.
Wigmore Hall.
Gerard McChrystal.
By Edward Greenfield
WE OWE it above all to the example of John Harle, himself still young, that the saxophone is fast shedding its jazz/pop image.
Here as one of the latest winners of the Ivan Sutton Recording Prize was a former pupil of Harle, the Irishman, Gerard McChrystal, a performer of such striking personality that, given the right backing, he might become the James Galway of the saxophone, though not every musician would want to.
It was daring of McChrystal to start with Bach on the saxophone, even if this sonata — normally for violin or flute — is of very doubtful authenticity.
What emerged was quite a revelation.
He drew from the high soprano instrument sounds totally different from what we think of as saxophone tone, remarkably pure and wide-ranging in timbre and dynamic.
His natural musical imagination silenced any lingering doubts, and when it came to music expressly written for the instrument — a brilliant showpiece sonata by the American, Paul Creston; a new work commissioned from the young Irishman, Kevin O'Connell; and Dave Heath's vigorous fantasy, Rumania — McChrystal could not have been more persuasive, brilliantly supported by his accompanist, Kathryn Lenahan.
McChrystal was one of the two young musicians, just leaving music college in 1988, whom I and two other judges chose earlier this year as the latest Sutton Recording Prizewinners on the basis of tape recordings they had made.
The other outstanding candidate on tape was the violinist, Simon Smith, and he too emerged just as impressively in live performance.
Accompanied by Sophia Rahman, he made a most imaginative choice of programme — the surprisingly neglected Schumann A minor Sonata, Dallapiccola's Two Studies and, best of all, Szymanowski's Nocturne and Tarantella.
Smith's technical mastery blossomed in the hushed mystery of the Nocturne but above all in the fireworks of the Tarantella.
Hammersmith.
By Adam Sweeting Marillion.
THE departure of their vocalist Fish might have caused Marillion something of a mid-life crisis.
Fish used to lumber and shamble around the stage like a confused and wounded animal, bellowing out his lyrics as if only this could ease his pain.
He also liked the occasional drink, for much the same reasons.
He was the band's figurehead, but the head grew too heavy for the body to bear.
In his place, the band have hired Steve Hogarth, a frail-looking fellow with lank black hair who addresses the audience with vaguely timorous deference.
He refers back to the Fish era as if in awe, and introduces the other Marillionauts with grovelling reverence.
They're only a bunch of old musos, for God's sake.
But any doubts about Marillion's future were clearly ill-founded.
While Hogarth is much less of a presence than his aqueous predecessor, his arrival has caused Marillion to bind closer together as a unit.
Remember Genesis.
Once Peter Gabriel quit, they got really big.
Marillion are now looking like the full-scale international merchants of pomp they've always aimed at being.
They release albums in lavish Seventies-style gatefold sleeves.
The songs are carefully arranged, played with the anonymous perfection we've come to expect from people like the Floyd, and last about a quarter of an hour.
And for all that, there's something endearing about them.
Sludgeful though they may be in pieces like The Space…(complete with pseudo-planetarium backdrop), and while Warm Wet Circles keeps receding and then returning like some particularly tiresome romantic symphony, Marillion sometimes achieve genuine vastness.
The heavy, overripe Season's End soars plaintively off into the distance, and Holloway Girl has a sort of oceans-and-mountains quality you won't find in, say, the music of Debbie Gibson.
They don't fare quite so well in their efforts to ‘rock out’.
Incommunicado, which Hogarth saw fit to sing from the top of a heap of loudspeakers, blustered along with lots of fists punching the air, but was basically turgid.
But this was what the fans had come to hear, from the downy-cheeked chaps in jeans with their shirts hanging out, to the heavy metal chicks and rock'n'roll babes in their sleeveless leather jackets, chains and biker boots.
White pants black looks Outloud.
By us75Lucy Steggle
IWAS seven in 1980 and the main excitement was the arrival of a baby brother.
In 1981 I was an avid spectator of Charles and Di's wedding.
Other international news holds more relevance now.
But adolescence, apart from the inevitable emotional roller-coasters, has been fun.
From Madonna, stick-on earrings and sobbing over the phone about best friends, to Suzanne Vega, CFC-free hairspray and sobbing over the ‘phone about boyfriends…
How far have we really come?
Margaret Thatcher seems to have been Prime Minister all my life, and the Falklands War is just a vague and fearful memory of someone else's brother going off to fight.
The problems of Russia suddenly became topical two years ago at school, and although I'd grown up with a faint mistrust of ‘Commies’, in 1988 I started writing to Murat, a young Russian.
In 1985 everyone was into the youthful exuberance of Wham! and white trousers and bleached fringes.
At the end of the decade it seems we're either yearning for an American Fifties image or sinking into a nihilism of all-black clothes.
Is this significant?
With the spirit at mass events like Band Aid and Mandela Day, it would be easy to see the Eighties as a humane, caring decade.
But sometimes you can look at the Third World, animal slaughter, pollution and so on and just feel the depressing resignation that ‘young’ people are supposed to kick against the establishment.
My elder brother, one of the last O-level year, pretends to sneer at my GCSE passes, but I'm glad we didn't have to go through all the cramming and regurgitation of the old exams.
Well, it's nearly the Nineties, and frankly I'm disillusioned.
My little brother is quite revolting.
Thanks to the several hundred Young Guardian readers who wrote their accounts of Growing Up In the Eighties for the Outloud column.
As we go into the 1990s we'll run your articles about bullying.
If you have been bullied, witnessed bullying or been a bully yourself, write about it.
Send 400 words to Young Guardian, The Guardian, 119 Farringdon Road, London EC1R 3ER.
Where you can help the good guys to win every time *Input /Nigel Fountain.
IWENT to the theatre last week.
This is rare in itself.
I grew up on movies and have always believed that if cameras had been invented before Ur and Og first trod the stone age boards then no one would ever have bothered to invent plays, they would have just leapt straight into the cinema.
Films always seem more realistic to me.
This just shows what a Philistine I am.
But last week's production had everything.
Robbery, rebellion, cooking, football (in small doses), infants threatened with death, song and dance, Maid Marion and Robin Hood.
It was, of course, a pantomime, a very good one, Babes in the Wood at the Hackney Empire in east London.
You might ask (I'll ask for you) what the Babes in the Wood have to do with Robin Hood.
Well, they all wandered around forests, chased by villains, and won through in the end.
The programme suggested that maybe the Babes were based on the Princes in the Tower, allegedly murdered by Richard III.
But that is another story, and anyway poor old Richard was framed.
These Babes were being pursued by the Sheriff of Nottingham.
He got big, so the legend goes, while good King Richard I was off crusading, leaving King John (not a good man) and the villainous Sheriff to take care of business.
This story went over big with the seven and five-year olds in my party.
It went over big with me too.
I was booing and hissing the bad guys with the best of them, and I usually hate audience participation.
One of the production's virtues was that, although it had TV stars, it wasn't just a succession of tacky TV turns.
A friend once told me of a Northen Ireland tour back in the 1970s, by a group of bogus Wombles.
In those days Womblemania stalked these islands, and so a large audience had gathered to witness Uncle Bulgaria and Co as they strutted their stuff.
It soon rumbled the furry frauds' deceit.
‘Shove off!’ they shouted.
‘You aren't real Wombles!
Don't think you can fool us!’
Amid the weeping of small children and the anger of adults the pseudo-Wombles fled, leaving only the sound of Remember You're a Womble echoing through the theatre.
No such scenes marred the Empire.
Like all good pantomimes it scrambled history and myth with some good topical jokes.
The Sheriff had a sideline flogging water shares, while Richard I was depicted as the England football manager off to play, as I recall, Saracens FC.
A neat bit of rewriting there; the real Richard was one of the leaders of the Second Crusade which laid waste to Palestine, before ending up with a score-draw against the Arabs whose land he was invading.
The Middle East often intrudes on old English stories.
Genies and lamps, Ali Baba and the 40 Thieves, and Sinbad the Sailor all come out of that civilisation and end up singing Neighbours down at theatres across the land.
That, to get gloomy, left me brooding on two other things.
The two small children I went with loved the show because it was, I suspect, magic.
I realised why I was wrong about good theatre, about how it can enthrall in a way cinema and television rarely does.
It was much deeper and bigger than most of what we pick up on screens, our primary source of entertainment today.
And the other point?
It is great to have pantomime villains, heroines, and heroes to boo and cheer.
Off the stage of the Hackney Empire they don't exist.
The Jerusalem that Richard tried to capture 700 years ago is proof of that.
It remains a holy city for Muslims, Christians and Jews, all of whom for the very best of reasons — they are the good guys — have slaughtered each other within its walls.
And they didn't get up and take a bow afterwards.
Lee Van Cleef.
A lucky talent for looking mean:.
THE screen persona of Lee Van Cleef suggested that if he met a rattler, the snake would come off worse.
From the mid-sixties, Van Cleef's face became instantly recognisable — pencil-thin moustache, prominent nose, slitted eyes and the head of a baldvulture descending to pick the scraps off a corpse in the badlands.
‘I just look mean without even trying’ he once said.
He might also have considered himself a very lucky man, as an actor of limited range who made his screen debut in the classic High Noon (1952), playing the harmonica-playing member of the gang out to kill Gary Cooper.
His impact was such that it led to further villainy — as the probably gay hit man in the Big Combo (1955), as a rapist and murderer in Ride Lonesome (1959), as Lee Marvin's psychotic side-kick in The Man Who Shot Liberty Vallance (1962) as well as more conventional heavies in Gunfight at the OK Corral (1956), The Tin Star (1957) and How the West Was Won (1962).
He rarely survived to the final reel, because the notion of Van Cleef nobly agreeing to a duel in a deserted street was ridiculous.
He shot people in the back and expected nothing less for himself.
Following Liberty Vallance he suffered a heart attack which forced him out of movies and into a career as a composer and painter, in the way that many Hollywood tough guys conceal a private sensitivity.
Then came the call from Sergio Leone.
Leone had problems casting his spaghetti westerns: stars like Henry Fonda, James Coburn and Lee Marvin were too busy, too expensive or both.
Clint Eastwood was cheap and available.
‘Then I remembered Van Cleef,’ said Leone.
‘When I went to see him, he had been very ill for three years.
I saw him from some way away, and was struck by his seductive silhouette.
He was perfect for my character.’
Van Cleef was cast opposite Eastwood in For A Few Dollars More (1965) and The Good, The Bad and The Ugly (1966) and immediately became a major star and a poster pin-up.
Oddly enough, it is not the silhouette one remembers from the Leone films but the extreme close ups, the sweat and the twitching mouth.
Van Cleef was wonderfully evil and perhaps not a little of Eastwood's taciturn appeal lay in the compelling menace of his adversary.
After the two pictures for Leone, Van Cleef stayed in Europe to make pale imitations of them and only returned to Hollywood in 1970 for El Condor which unwisely made him a sympathetic character.
In his final years he tried to revive his career in an American television series about martial arts called The Master (1986) but it failed and another series never got beyond the pilot stage.
But his finest hour in the Leone films is to be on television next week.
Adrian Turner Lee Van Cleef, born Somerville, New Jersey, January 9, 1925; died Oxnard, California, December 16, 1989.
Paul Collaer, the Belgian pianist, conductor and musicologist, died in Brussels on December 18, aged 98.
A friend and promoter of the music of Hindemith, Satie, Honegger, Alban Berg and Milhaud, he wrote well-received books on Milhaud and Stravinsky, and was for 15 years director of Belgian State Radio's music programmes.
He received the Unesco International Grand Prix for his work in musicology in 1985.
Collision culture The Other Story at the Hayward is told by many different voices.
The once common factor is the frustration of being a Black artist in Britain, argues Tim Hilton.
THE title of the exhibition of African, Asian and Caribbean art at the Hayward Gallery is The Other Story, as though it were an account of an alternative and continuous tradition, independent of Western European and American modern art.
There are many such traditions, of course, and in fact the Hayward show has little to do with any of them.
It's about collison of cultures in Britain since the end of the war, and it looks at the way that some artists of non-British origin have come to terms with modern art — or, rather, have made a personal art by calling on ways of expression that might have been absolutely native to them in other countries than this.
The result is a mixed and discontinuous exhibition, full of surprises, but also a record of frustration and disappointment.
It seems that scarcely one Black artist in Britain has had the benefits of an extended professional career: a dealer, regular exhibitions, interested critics, sales and the support of one's peers.
So the occasional gallery owner prepared to support a Black artist gets much credit in this show.
Curiously enough, there's even a hint of a good age for Black artists: in the 1950s, before the Notting Hill race riots of 1958 and before the era of public subsidies, when Denis Bowen of the New Vision Centre and Victor Musgrave of Gallery One consistently showed unknown international artists, many of whom had turned up in London in the post-coronation years because they had heard of the Commonwealth.
One of these was Francis Newton Souza, who arrived in Britain from India in 1949 and had some success, nationally and internationally, in the Fifties and early Sixties.
Souza's commitments were no doubt the more complicated because he had been raised as a Catholic, and had been taught that the eroticism of Hindu religious philosophy was wicked.
Much of Souza's work can be interpreted as a sort of attack on the mixed nature of his upbringing, as though a restless and pugnacious way with paint might overcome all circumstances and proclaim the painter alone.
This highly characteristic Fifties attitude makes Souza's work look as if it belongs to a time rather than a place.
His Mr Sebastian of 1955 and the interesting Red Road of 1962 might have been painted in France or Germany rather than London.
On the other hand his most impressive contribution, the Black Nude of 1961, has many design elements of English painting of the day, if treated with some passion.
Souza has lived in New York for the last 20 years.
A recent painting is The Game, which mingles the imagery of sport and political repression.
Social themes are not of major importance in the first part of the exhibition.
The Hayward's lower galleries are mainly devoted to personal contributions, to semi-abstract painting (and the absence of sculpture in this section suggests that it was easier to join international art by painting rather than sculpting).
Avinash Chandra's canvases reveal that, even while he was still in India, he felt the attraction of Soutine and Van Gogh.
Chandra came to England in 1955.
He made accomplished paintings for some years thereafter, but his recent work, like Souza's, disappoints.
Although one cannot believe that times were good for immigrant artists in the 1950s, a quantity of painting seems to belong to the period, though done a decade or more later.
This is so of Aubrey Williams, who came to Britain from Guyana in 1952; of Ahmed Parvez, a Pakistani who arrived in London in 1955, and of Iqbal Geoffrey, a highly uneven artist whose splashings and fuzzed calligraphy have genuine feeling for improvisation.
Geoffrey's conceptual work, on the other hand, appeals only to curiosity.
It tells us about his pride, humour, fixation with the Royal Family, longing for justice: but in pieces of this sort he loses touch with his gifts.
Here is a crucial point of the exhibition.
The overbearing sophistication of conceptualism and minimalism did not guarantee success in art for anyone.
The organiser of The Other Story, Rasheed Araeen, has made much study of the art criticism of the early Seventies and the post-modernist theories of the Eighties, and his work looks as though it has no knowledge of the world not gleaned from art magazines.
The minimal sculptures by Araeen and Avtarjeet Danjal have a dated, anonymous air.
To my surprise, the space devoted to the kinetic sculptures by David Medalla had a lively and progressive atmosphere.
The old Signals Gallery, largely Medalla's creation, was one of the last places where one found the undirected avant-guardism of post-war years.
By 1965 or so this had all gone, but Medalla himself has been too bouncy and inventive to obey the arid strictures of minimalism.
Rasheed Araeen writes a lot, very confidently, about modernism.
Strange, isn't it, or perhaps not so strange, that the word is so much used by theoreticians and so little used by artists themselves?
I would like to have read more on the subject by Frank Bowling, whose views seem not to be harmonised with Araeen's somewhat dogmatic viewpoint.
Bowling resembles a number of older artists in the exhibition in that he came to England (from Guyana, in his case) to be an artist, had some success, then moved to and fro between London and New York when his public career went downhill in the Sixties.
Could it be that there was then more racism in the art world, and that Black artists were being squeezed out at just the time when young working-class artists from the British provinces were finding unprecedented and immediate public fortune?
Hard to know.
In any case, the commercial record of Black artists in recent years is a minor and unimportant part of the general Black experience of British life.
I'm less interested in Araeen's assertions about modernism than in the following questions: what are the differences between the older artists who came here as immigrants and the young artists who were born in Britain?
Of the British-born Black artists, who went to art school, how did they get in and how did they get on?
Does it matter, in 1990, whether a Black artist goes to art school?
It looks to me as if-in accord with our country's culture generally-recent Black art is harsher, more hurt, more despairing.
The work of Eddie Chambers (born 1960, Wolverhampton) and Keith Piper (born 1960, Birmingham) comes in the form of angry collage, taking elements from, for instance, National Front posters.
Both went to art school: neither needed art school to learn how to do the work they have put up in the Hayward.
Sonia Boyce (born 1962, London) is a far more skilful artist: but her very accomplishment inclines her towards the illustrational and sentimental.
There are many worrying aspects of Araeen's exhibition.
One is summed up by Boyce's statement ‘I have a problem with my success’.
Nearly all the artists at the Hayward have some standing within the ‘art establishment’ that Araeen says he has stormed.
I think the show would have been less timid if he had sought out more of the artists in their 20s who nowadays keep coming up in mixed exhibitions in Liverpool, Birmingham, Leeds, Whitechapel and so on.
But perhaps he could not have attracted them to The Other Story.
As we know, this latest generation of Black, British-born artists wants to exhibit alongside people of any colour.
At the Hayward Gallery until February 4.
A restless and pugnacious way with paint…
Francis Newton Souza's Girl With Goat (1949).
Obituary: Stella Gibbons.
Much for our comfort:.
IT'S rotten luck for a prolific writer of talent to be known for only one work, a masterpiece which overshadows any later writing.
Such was the fate of Stella Gibbons.
She wrote more than 30 novels and collections of verse.
A friend of mine who is a keen admirer has not read 25 of her books.
I would guess that most of her readers have not read 29.
But the one that they have read, Cold Comfort Farm, they have probably read to destruction.
The yellowing pages of the Penguin edition will be crumbling, the spine will have collapsed, the signatures will be disintegrating but what the hell?
But the old comfort farmer will hardly need the physical object any longer.
It's one of those rare books of comic genius that imprints itself on the brain and can never afterwards be eradicated.
What is Stella Gibbons's rating in the academic Eng.
Lit. world I do not know.
It ought to be high.
(Not least is Cold Comfort Farm to be treasured for the fact that an American literary critic took it straight, commenting that some of the characters were overdrawn.)
Her hilarious novel achieved at least four things.
On the level of popular literature it demolished Mary Webb and Precious Bane (Stanley Baldwin's favourite).
On the higher literary level it rubbished quite a bit of Hardy and much of D.H.Lawrence.
It introduced to the language the phrase about ‘something nasty in the woodshed’.
And finally, it brought on that rich cast of wooden-topped rustics, the Starkadders, with Aunt Ada Doom in the star part, not to speak of the simpleton whose main pleasure in life was doing the washing up, or as he called it, clettering the dishes with his liddle mop.
Then there was Big Business the bull, and Our Graceless, a three-legged cow with a wooden leg.
Perhaps I take a special pleasure in Cold Comfort Farm from the fact that I was myself brought up in a rural setting, surrounded by wild-eyed manic depressives of the Starkadder school, while I was reading the works of D.H.Lawrence and F.R.Leavis, whose loam-laden versions of country life didn't quite chime with mine.
That of Stella Gibbons did.
She herself, incidentally, came from a family which was violent both emotionally (they lived on rows and scenes) and physically (her father threw knives).
Moreover, ‘They were all madly highly-sexed like the Starkadders’, she told an interviewer earlier in the decade, ‘and I think a lot of the laughing at that kind of thing in Cold Comfort Farm comes from a ‘distaste’…if you have it thrust on you from an early age, with divorces left, right and centre and people chasing each other round tables…well.’
But gosh, that book is still funny.
One of her innovations was to put asterisks in the margins whenever a piece of particularly fine writing came up.
Style of Michelin or Baedeker guides.
She gives herself two stars for ‘The cries from the little hut had stopped.
An exhausted silence, brimmed with the enervating weakness which follows a stupendous effort, mounted from the stagnant air in the yard, like a miasma…’
And so on.
I'd give it three stars, or (as Michelin says) vaut le detour.
Richard Boston Stella Gibbons, born January 5, 1902; died December 19, 1989.
Dimples before bedtime.
By Robin Thornber in Manchester
THERE was a time when the television variety spectacular threatened to take over popular entertainment completely, so that pantomime and seaside summer shows would be indistinguishable, all one poor man's Palladium.
But the tide must have turned when even a big commercial panto like this at the Manchester Palace — one of 21 that Paul Elliott is producing this year — rediscovers its roots in traditional storytelling.
Tudor Davies's script has the style of an authentically naff pre-1914 original, up-dated by a sharper intelligence.
For once it doesn't treat the audience as idiots.
This Aladdin goes right back to the 1,001 Nights, showing us Scheherezade (Eartha Kitt) being turned into the Genie of the Ring and the Caliph of Baghdad (Sylvester McCoy) into the Slave of the Lamp by the Grand Vizier Abanazer (Peter Blake as a deliciously over-the-top wicked uncle).
Miss Kitt makes even her gauche opening line —‘The amount of stars are infinitesimal…’— sound sensible and exotically sexy; from there on she slinks effortlessly through the role, prowling like a panther caged in a pet shop.
Paul Nicholas dimples charmingly as Aladdin, which gets the girls screaming; Paul Shane holiday-camps around as Widow Twankey; and the Simmons brothers' double act as the Chinese Policemen is actually quite funny.
Their sword cabinet routine can't have come from MFI ‘because there aren't any bits left over’.
The special effects work, the special appearance of that awful kitsch cat, Garfield, is written in, and the choreography by director Carole Todd is slick.
It doesn't drag on beyond bedtime but you feel you had your money's worth.
Manchester Palace (061 236 9922) until February 25.