

‘Arrest warrant out for Clowes’ partner years before collapse'.
By Daniel John
AWARRANT for the arrest of the former partner of Mr Peter Clowes was issued seven years before his Barlow Clowes investment empire collapsed, according to evidence submitted to the Parliamentary Ombudsman.
Sir Anthony Barrowclough was told that police had wanted to interview Mrs Elizabeth Barlow in 1981 over the collapse of a stockbroking firm which had links with another investment company, Farrington Stead, a similar operation to Barlow Clowes.
According to the liquidator of the stockbroking firm which crashed as a result of the Farrington Stead failure, the summons for her arrest was issued late that year.
However, Mrs Barlow, who quit her partnership with Peter Clowes in 1978, was said to have left Britain.
In his report published two days ago in which he accused the Department of Trade and Industry of ‘substantial maladministration’ over the Barlow Clowes affair, Sir Anthony wrote: ‘He (the liquidator) believed that the warrant for her arrest still remained outstanding.’
Mrs Barlow is now thought to be living in the United States.
Part of the evidence about Farrington Stead was supplied to the Ombudsman by Manchester solicitors Alexander Tatham, the legal advisers to the Barlow Clowes investors group.
Tatham also represented investors who were caught up in the Farrington Stead collapse.
Farrington Stead dealt in gilt-edged securities, investments also offered by Barlow Clowes which went into liquidation in June 1988 owing £190million.
It is understood that Farrington Stead was set up by former employees of Barlow Clowes.
Farrington Stead failed in the early part of 1981 owing substantial debts to Hedderwick Stirling Grumbar, a London stockbroker.
As a result, Hedderwick collapsed and was ‘hammered’ by the Stock Exchange on April 10 — a move which forced it out of broking.
Barlow Clowes' indirect links with the case were raised with the DTI by the Stock Exchange when Hedderwick's liquidator contacted the head of its licensing unit.
The Ombudsman's report notes the liquidator expressed surprise then that Barlow Clowes was operating without a licence.
Ex-Bond man held over phone tapping.
By Jan Mayman in Perth
ABOND Corporation director confirmed in Perth last night that a man helping the Australian Federal Police with inquiries about alleged bugging on Mr Robert Holmes a Court's phones was a former Bond employee.
Mr Peter Lucas, a director of Bond Corporation, named the man as Mr David Michael, who, he said, had been responsible for top-level corporation security until his dismissal last October.
Mr Michael, 49, is believed to be a former British Army officer and is now in hiding along with his wife Jane, in a safe house near Perth under the protection of the Australian Federal Police.
The couple disappeared from their Perth suburban house about two weeks ago after telling friends they were seriously worried about their personal security.
Mr Lucas said Michael worked for Bond Corporation for around five years and was trusted so greatly he was given responsibility for the security of international VIPs who visited Western Australia during Bond's America's Cup defence three years ago.
This year Michael had received a special briefing from the Bond Corporation to check the source of leaks of some highly confidential commercial information.
There were suggestions that Bond Corporation executives had been under regular surveillance and that there had been interference with telephone communications, Mr Lucas said.
Mr Michael had been asked to arrange electronic sweeps of all office communication equipment in the interests of personal security.
Earlier another Bond director Mr Tony Oates said the corporation vigorously denied it had any knowledge of the alleged phone-bugging operation.
The Australian Federal Police are saying little about the affair, which has become a national scandal, but they have admitted the discovery of illegal bugs on the phones of Mr Robert Holmes a Court, Sydney stockbroker Mr Peter Burrows and a leading Australian financial journalist, Mr Terry McCran of the Melbourne Herald, a trenchant critic of the Bond Corporation.
Junk bond setback.
The US junk bond market suffered its latest setback yesterday after buyout firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts said one of its companies was on the verge of bankruptcy, writes Mary Brasier in New York.
KKR said that if Hillsborough could not refinance the debt it took on when it launched a $2.4billion leveraged takeover in the building industry, it might have to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
Seasonal relief.
The US Federal Reserve prompted a fall in market interest rates to 8 ¼ per cent yesterday when it injected $2billion into the banking system.
It was seen as a temporary move to improve liquidity over Christmas, rather than an indication of a new trend in interest rates.
Bumper pay rises.
More large pay rises for directors have been revealed.
Trafalgar House raised chief executive Eric Parker's salary by 62.7 per cent to £480,000 and chairman Sir Nigel Broackes' by 37.6 per cent to £300,000.
Kwik Save, the supermarket group, gave retiring chairman Ian Howe a 43 per cent rise to £187,000.
Magnet restructure.
Magnet, the troubled kitchen and DIY retailer, is expected to announce a financial restructuring today including extended interest and capital repayments on £562million of debt incurred by the £630million management buy-out.
Charge dismissed.
The Stock Exchange has dismissed a disciplinary charge against market makers Smith New Court which arose when it carried out an £80million ‘programme trade’ for fund managers Ivory&Sime a year ago.
Unit trust boost.
Net new investment in unit trusts last month was £339.4million, some 30 per cent higher than the monthly average so far this year.
Gross sales were the third highest at £960.2million, while repurchases fell by £300 million to £560.8million.
Wall St lower.
The Dow Jones stock index closed down 7.68 at 2,687.93.
Outlook held over.
Outlook has been held over because of lack of space.
It will return tomorrow with the first in the annual series of company performance league tables.
British Land drops £1.8bn break-up plan.
By James Morrow
JOHN Ritblat's controversial plans for the break-up of British Land's £1.8billion of assets have been withdrawn after strong institutional pressure.
Several leading City investors had opposed the proposals to dismantle British Land by selling off the larger properties and putting the smaller ones into a newly formed group, New British Land.
Shareholders were to get shares in the new company and a series of cash pay-outs as the various properties were sold off.
John Ritblat, chairman of British Land, said: ‘The proposals, now withdrawn, represented a major innovation by the board and its advisers.
Having had the benefit of extensive discussions with many of our large shareholders it became clear that the proposals in their entirety did not have support although many features won warm approval.’
Major institutional investors felt the deal gave too much to Mr Ritblat, his family and British Land management — New British Land was to be paid £15million a year in management charges for the first three years, coming down to £10million as properties were sold.
One City analyst said he thought Mr Ritblat would not be deterred by ‘a little setback’ and that the original offer was not too bad being a tax-efficient distribution of British Land assets to shareholders.
It is thought that merchant bank Warburg, adviser to British Land, will work on a new scheme to distribute more to shareholders.
Panama thrusts Third World back on to centre stage Notebook.
By Edited by Alex Brummer
THE United States invasion of Panama has instantly diverted global attention from Eastern Europe to Latin America.
Last week it was the Deutschmark which was everybody's darling, now it is the dollar and oil prices.
What is most interesting, however, is that after a long famine, Latin America and its political and economic uncertainties have been thrust back on to centre stage.
Despite the US decision to lift economic sanctions in the hope of giving the newly installed government of President Guillermo Endara a chance, Panama, like much of Latin American and Africa, remains deeply in debt.
As the focus of the Bretton Woods institutions has moved across the Atlantic to central Europe deep-seated fears have arisen that time, resources and energy will be diverted from the economies of the southern hemisphere.
Although the Brady debt initiative has gone some way to potentially alleviating the debt problems of Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico and Uruguay — those countries which have made serious adjustments — two of the biggest debtors, Brazil and Argentina, remain outside the ring.
As the World Bank noted in its debt tables released this week: ‘The large foreign debt burden, in conjunction with domestic fiscal crises, continues to feed uncertainties regarding long-term investment and represents a drain on resources.’
Despite debt relief in almost every category, Latin American and Caribbean overdrafts climbed in 1989 to an overall $434billion, according to World Bank projections.
It is not just the Latin American economies which are hurting.
A plaintive cry from the Organisation of Africa Unity will largely go unheard in the world's chanceries.
The OAU stated publicly what has been the worry among many developing countries: it welcomed rapprochement between East and West but warned that funds which might have helped alleviate poverty in Africa may be diverted to central Europe.
Africa emerges from the eighties worse off in living standards, education and health services, agriculture, mining, industry, inflation and balance of payments.
Debt has jumped fivefold.
Such figures underline how important it is not to forget the North-South divide amid the dust thrown up by the Eastern Europe upheaval.
Shabby treatment.
THE Department of Trade may have been slow to acknowledge financial — though not supervisory — responsibility for the victims of Barlow Clowes.
But spare a thought for the Isle of Man Government's treatment of depositors in the Savings and Investment Bank.
Next summer will be the eighth anniversary of the £42 million collapse, but the Manx Government has fought claims for compensation every step of the way.
Two key reports have remained secret.
The first, by a Bank of England official, must be presumed to have been highly critical because it led to drastic reform of the island's supervisory procedures.
The second report by a banking inspector has also been kept under wraps.
But the Manx courts have now agreed that copies may be made available to defendants in a criminal case to be heard next year against eight people involved in the Savings&Investment collapse.
This has led to cracks in the wall of secrecy surrounding the government's role in the events leading up to the bank's collapse in 1982.
Documents from the report have begun to circulate on the island.
Those seen so far by the Guardian are highly unflattering.
There is even a suggestion of official encouragement to depositors to use the Manx bank shortly before it went bust.
The appointment yesterday of a new Manx Treasury minister, Mr Donald Gelling, at least gives the island the opportunity to make amends for its shabby treatment of the Saving&Investment Bank's victims.
The money should be paid back with interest.
Conflict of interest.
IT IS sometimes difficult to remember that company directors are merely the custodians of their shareholders' money, rather than the owners of the business free to do with it what they will.
While the latter is the practical reality in many cases it is certainly not the legal position.
And the Companies Acts stand to remind directors of their responsibilities.
Grey areas still remain, however, and the Takeover Panel has now attempted to clear one of those concerned with the current fashion for buy-outs.
The trouble is that directors involved in buying the company from existing shareholders clearly face a conflict between their own interests (as buyers) and their shareholders' interests (as sellers).
The Panel, and the Institutional Shareholders Committee which has been worried about this conflict, say there is no problem with traditional buy-outs of subsidiary companies.
That may be too optimistic, since directors facing competing offers might well be influenced by the fact that one offer comes from their mates.
Their main concern is with buy-outs of complete listed companies — such as Magnet, Virgin and International Leisure.
The Panel has introduced new rules trying to make sure that shareholders do not sell out too cheaply due to lack of independent advice and information.
That is not easy, since the directors engaged in buying the company clearly have more information than anybody else.
But the new rules require any directors not involved in the buy-out to obtain independent advice.
And to provide the same information to shareholders and competitive bidders as they provide to the banks which are coming up with the funding.
Of course, as the ISC says, if there are no independent directors it is rather more difficult for shareholders to get an independent view of the directors' offer.
But even in those circumstances the new rules hopefully should make sure that it is more difficult for managements to buy companies on the cheap from under the noses of their shareholders.
Freeing credit: the sting in the tail?
Economics.
By Christopher Huhne
LIBERALISATION has been one of the key concepts of eighties' economics, a word which has acquired such power in Anglo-Saxon officialdom that there is virtually no argument about its virtues.
A consequence of this unquestioning enthusiasm is that the implications of change have not been thought through, and may yet have a sting or two in the tail.
Much of the nineties will be about clearing up the fall-out of the liberal eighties.
This is not a reference to problems such as the environment, about which there is a consensus.
It strikes deeper than that.
Although deregulation in the markets for products, services and labour has brought benefits in the form of more choice and lower prices, the liberalisation of financial markets may leave a less happy legacy.
Governments have already decided that they cannot accept a free currency market.
A question for the nineties will be whether credit markets are any different.
One problem is whether companies will be able to bear the debt burdens heaped on them by leveraged buy-outs, particularly in the United States.
But an equally significant problem may well be the behaviour of the personal sector — people.
Most people's savings are contractual, through pension funds and life assurers.
They vary the actual level of their net savings through their borrowing.
Because borrowing has become easier, and because confidence has been high, personal savings have been falling around the developed world.
This phenomenon has been particularly acute in the three Anglo-Saxon countries where liberalisation has moved fastest: Britain, Australia and the United States.
It has landed all of them with serious stabilisation problems.
Their balance of payments deficits have been alarmingly large, and their currencies have dropped sharply, aggravating their inflationary problems.
Indeed, it is arguable that the different speeds of financial liberalisation are a prime cause of world trade and savings imbalances.
Take Britain.
The extraordinary 19 per cent rise in real consumers' spending between 1985 and 1988 was mainly due to the real wage rise of 14.1 per cent.
But it was the rise over and above the increase in real incomes which caused most grief for inflation and the payments balance.
We borrowed and spent far more.
The biggest influence on this behaviour has probably been the large increase in wealth, which in turn boils down to the sharp rise in house prices.
The average house price, according to the Halifax sample, was £30,952 in 1984 and is now £60,837.
It is not surprising that many people, some of whom may have seen the equity in their homes rise tenfold, should decide to spend more.
This is what the graph shows.
One line shows what has happened to personal wealth divided by personal income: if wealth merely rose in line with incomes (which would be represented by a flat wealth line on the graph), the theory would suggest that it would not have any independent influence on savings.
The rise means that wealth has been increasing faster than incomes.
The second line shows the fall in the savings ratio.
In order to highlight the way in which the rise in wealth and the fall in savings have moved together, the axis showing the savings ratio is inverted: a lower savings rate is represented by a rise in the line on the graph.
So far, so good.
Clearly, wealth has recently moved in tandem with the savings ratio.
But does financial liberalisation cause the wealth increase?
Some analysts argue that the rise in wealth and the fall in savings are both caused by a third factor: people's belief that their incomes will grow more rapidly in future.
Understandably, people want to borrow more today in order to spend on houses (thus boosting prices) and on other goods.
This may be part of the explanation in Britain, where there has been some improvement in the potential of the economy.
It seems less plausible in the United States, where productivity growth has slowed down and foreigners' have built up large claims on US output.
Yet almost exactly the same phenomenon of rising wealth matched by falling savings has been occurring in the US, as the second graph shows.
It is, of course, possible that factors specific to both economies account for the same movement.
But it seems more plausible to highlight the financial market liberalisation which has taken place in both economies.
The key point is that the old, regulated financial systems stopped people from borrowing as much as they wanted at a given level of interest rates.
When the constraints eased under the pressure of fresh competition, people were able to borrow what they were previously prevented from borrowing.
Some bought more houses, pushing up prices.
Those who did not want to buy a bigger or better house were able to borrow more to extract equity from their fast-appreciating assets.
The liberalisation thus boosted both house prices and consumption.
In Britain, the key change was the removal of the ‘corset’ on banks in 1980.
After 1982, the Third World debt crisis also turned banks towards the home market in the search for creditworthy borrowers.
The result was a sharp rise in mortgage lending by banks, competition which scared the building societies into relaxing their traditional rules of thumb.
The institutions are now prepared to lend larger multiples of income, and higher proportions of the purchase price.
How much was the liberalisation worth on house prices?
In other words, how many people were constrained by credit rationing?
The question is important because it gives some clue as to the likely rise in the long-run house price to income ratio (because demand for housing has shifted upwards, while supply remains relatively constant).
This in turn gives us a clue as to whether the ‘feelgood’ aura from rising house prices is likely to be reversed quickly.
There are, as yet, no estimates based on hard research but some back-of-the-envelope guesses have been made by David Miles, a former Bank of England economist now at Birkbeck (1).
The essential point is that real interest rates effectively determine the cost of housing to the homebuyer.
The lower the interest rate when credit is liberalised, the higher the rise in demand for (and price of) housing.
Mr Miles reckons that the house price rise needed to clear the market — to balance demand and supply — could be 45 per cent if real mortgage rates are a low 3 per cent.
By contrast, the removal of credit rationing would boost prices by only some 4.5 per cent if real mortgage rates were as high as 10 per cent.
The real mortgage rate is currently a relatively high 7 per cent, implying prices 10.5 per cent higher than under rationing.
With real mortgage rates on extra borrowing normally between 4 and 5 per cent, it is quite plausible that about a quarter to a third of the value of housing equity — estimated at £830billion at end-1987 — could be due to deregulation.
Clearly, liberalisation is a crucial factor explaining both the rise in house prices and in wealth, and the increase in consumers' spending, inflation and the balance of payments deficit.
In the United States, a similar shift from credit-rationing to price-rationing also took place between the seventies and eighties.
A recent OECD study (2) shows that households also benefited from innovations such as the securitisation of mortgage debt — making mortgages tradeable between lenders, so that the institution which originally lent the money might sell its mortgage claim to another bank or thrift when it needed cash.
This in turn attracted more lenders into the market, and made borrowing more attractive.
Liberalisation also gave US consumers a new deal by cutting the cost of car credit.
The spread — the banks' profit margin over its cost of funds — charged on auto loans dropped by 4 percentage points and consumers had longer to pay.
Monthly car payments declined by about 40 per cent, the OECD notes.
It is by no means clear that the process of financial innovation has run its course.
High interest rates, themselves necessary to hold spending within non-inflationary bounds because of the liberalisation, may put the process into reverse for a while.
But what will happen to the housing market and consumers' spending when, for example, the lenders increasingly introduce shared equity loans, widening the housing market to a new range of low income buyers?
Either the more prudential economies like West Germany and Japan will have to de-regulate — at the cost of still higher real interest rates — or the liberals will have to re-regulate in order to avoid macro-economic retribution.
But it is a fair bet that, during the nineties, something will have to give.
(1) David Miles ‘Financial liberalisation, the housing market and the current account’, Birkbeck, mimeo, September 1989. (2)‘United States: OECD economic survey 1987-8’ Paris, 1988.
Beecham sells UHU for £97m.
SmithKline Beecham is selling its German-based UHU adhesive business to HSG-Vermogensverwaltungs GmbH of Frankfurt for £97.5million, of which £91million will be paid in cash.
Beecham bought UHU — which sells its products in 50 countries — in 1970.
SmithKline Beecham is to continue the manufacture of Badedas and Duschdas shower gel at the same West German plant at which UHU is made.
The move completes SmithKline Beecham's withdrawal from the home improvement business, begun by Beecham with a series of disposals in 1986 and 1987.
Since the merger of Beecham with SmithKline Beckman last summer, the group has emphasised its health care business.
It is keen to cut its gearing from over 200 per cent.
Boost for Batleys' hopes.
Batleys, the Huddersfield-based cash and carry wholesaler, whose controlling family shareholders are considering whether to buy out minority holders after about 17 years on the stock market, has reported a good interim profit.
Stock gains and the absence of new opening costs are behind the rebound, which spurred the shares to a new peak.
Discussions about the chairman's bid approach, announced on November 3, are continuing.
Sales jumped by £26million to £181million largely as a result of inflationary price rises by suppliers.
There were no new openings in Scotland or the north of England, where the main urban areas are supplied and interest charges were almost steady at £528,000.
Pre-tax profit, therefore, jumped back to £2million, from £521,000.
The interim dividend stays at 0.5p, though earnings leapt to almost 10p.
The shares soared l2p to 143p on hopes of a generous buy-out price.
Switched-on Yorkshire.
Yorkshire Radio raised pre-tax profits by 76 per cent to £1.4million in the year to September on turnover up 56per cent at £6.8million.
Yorkshire was floated on the Unlisted Securities Market in August and the chairman, Michael Mallett, says the recent ‘heady growth’ in revenue is slackening as the squeeze on retail sales tightens.
But unlike other UK radio companies, Yorkshire has engineering interests and a South East Asian cable broadcasting company based in Singapore, where Mr Mallet says opportunities are ‘virtually unlimited’ to cushion the impact of the slump in UK consumer spending.
In the Yorkshire Radio area, where the company's broadcasts are aimed at the under-35s, listening figures rose 32 per cent to 13.85 hours a week over the year.
In short…
ROSEHAUGH shares jumped 5per cent to 494p yesterday on news that BPC Associates, a partnership affiliated with JMB Realty of Chicago, had bought a near 5 per cent stake.
It is not expected that a bid will follow.
BLUEBIRD TOYS saw brokers downgrade profit forecasts for the group from £3million to £2million against £2.3million a year ago after £1million of orders failed to come through.
The shares dropped 17 per cent to 150p.
AMI HEALTHCARE, the private hospitals group, raised pre-tax profits by 15 per cent to £6.6million in the three months to the end of November.
Turnover was 12 per cent higher at £36.3million, showing profit margins at almost 19 per cent.
The group maintains that average in-patient charges have risen by only 8 per cent.
Out-patient visits were 8 per cent higher than the previous year.
The markets.
Gilts rose half a point as the prospect for interest rates continued to brighten, while a broadly-based advance in equities took the FTSE 100 index up 18.6 points to 2,360.7.
Insurances, both lifes and composites, led the way on renewed takeover talk.
Textiles had a late flat spot in Tootal, 12p down at 99p, as the company ended its bid talks with Coats Viyella, 4p lower at 136p.
Some stores were bright on reports of an eleventh-hour Christmas buying spree.
Hong Kong: Steady in moderate trading.
Hang Seng Index: 2,868.49 (2,879.42).
Tokyo: Closed mixed.
Nikkei Index: 38,512.00 (38,439.10).
Frankfurt: Shares extended rally.
FAZ Index: 700.70 (688.47).
Paris: Stocks closed higher in moderate trading.
CAC Index: 538.7 (538.7).
Agreement on pan-European code delayed.
By Patrick Donovan Industrial Correspondent
AGREEMENT on a long-awaited pan-European takeover and mergers code is being held up by West Germany, consumer affairs minister, John Redwood, claimed yesterday.
He claimed that Britain and other leading European powers are at odds with the Germans over crucial aspects of the European Commission code on community take-overs.
‘The other member states regard Germany as quite isolated.’
With no immediate compromise in sight, Mr Redwood refused to speculate on when the directive will come into force.
Merger policy is on the agenda of today's Brussels meeting of the Internal Market Council.
Discussions are being held up by Germany's insistance on the involvement of a national body to help decide on any major takeover.
Britain and other EC partners argue that this policy defeats the point of a unified EC take-over code.
Mr Redwood described the German move as setting up a ‘two stop merger policy’.
Other stumbling blocks include differences in the regulations of individual stock exchanges on voting rights of shares in take-over targets.
Germany has also resisted the setting up of a unified life assurance market.
‘They are very reluctant to see brokers included in the remit.
We'll have to decide what compromise we can agree on.
We are desperate to see some progress,’ he said.
East German industrial output dips.
By Reuter in East Berlin
EAST Germany's industrial production dropped last month and the number of unfulfilled output targets has more than doubled, worsening consumer shortages and hurting export commitments.
The Communist Party daily Neues Deutschland gave a dismal report on the economy yesterday, against the backdrop of a visit by West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl for talks focusing on emergency aid for East Germany.
Industrial output dropped 2.5 per cent last month from the corresponding period last year, Neues Deutschland said.
It linked the poor performance with the exodus to the West of more than 330,000 East Germans disgruntled with Communism.
This had reduced the workforce by 53,800, or 2 per cent, from last year, strapping many key industries.
Of the 383 state production plans, 148 had been unable to meet their target — more than double the previous figure of 65.
This increased consumer good shortages and hampered fulfillment of export commitments, the paper said.
Consumer goods worst affected by production and supply bottlenecks included car tyres, high-tension electrical switches, spare parts for agricultural machinery and telecommunications equipment.
East Germany also fell far short of targets for residential construction despite stepped-up efforts to rectify a longtime housing shortage.
Builders were 7,921 units behind the 1989 plan as of the end of November.
PAGE
Ferranti trustees threaten legal action.
By Mark Milner
FERRANTI International, the troubled defence electronics combine, could face a legal challenge from the trustees of the estate of its founder over a report into frauds totalling £215million.
At the annual general meeting of the company yesterday, Mr Ian Mackeson-Sandbach, a trustee and executive of the estate of the late Sir Basil de Ferranti, called on the board to publish the investigation findings of accountants Coopers & Lybrand into the frauds at ISC Technologies, part of Ferranti's US subsidiary.
When his call was refused by Sir Derek Alun-Jones, the chairman, on the grounds that it was likely to form the basis of future litigation, Mr Mackeson-Sandbach said the trustees would be seeking ‘legal advice on the means open to them to examine this report’.
Mr Mackeson-Sandbach also called for the board to be strengthened, a demand subsequently reinforced by one of Sir Basil's sons, Mr Adrian de Ferranti.
The trustee was later one of a handful of shareholders to vote against the re-election of Sir John Hoskyns to the board.
The meeting comes after months of turmoil at Ferranti, from the discovery of a series of bogus contracts at the International Signal subsidiary, most of which were committed before it was bought by Ferranti in 1987.
As a result Ferranti had to write off £215million, reissue its annual report and negotiate financial support from its bankers.
It is also planning a £187million cash call on shareholders early next year, unless a bid for the company emerges in the meantime, though that now looks unlikely.
The group has issued a series of writs against several former ISC employees, including Mr James Guerin, the head of the company at the time of the merger with Ferranti.
He became deputy chairman of the merged business.
Yesterday's meeting, which saw the group change its name from Ferranti International Signal to Ferranti International, also approved changes in its articles designed to prevent it breaching borrowing powers as a result of the decimation of its equity base by the £215million write-off.
Sir Derek came under fire from several shareholders.
One asked why directors responsible for the ISC acquisition were still on the board.
In reply, Sir Derek said that though he could not speak for other directors, ‘my resignation has been available to the board from the day all this started.
It will remain available and can be used at any time the board thinks appropriate.’
DTI sinks Sealink, P&O cartel plan.
By Daniel John
APLAN by cross-Channel ferry rivals Sealink and P&O to operate a joint service to combat the threat of the fixed tunnel link was blocked by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission yesterday on anti-competition grounds.
The companies had sought to merge their fleets on the currently lucrative Dover, Folkestone and Ramsgate routes to France which would have fixed prices at one level and allowed them to operate a single timetable.
The proposal, unveiled in April, was initially investigated by the Office of Fair Trading and then referred to the MMC three months later for a more detailed probe.
In its report, the MMC ruled that the price-fixing cartel may be expected to operate against the public interest and should be blocked.
Its recommendation was accepted by Nicholas Ridley, the Trade and Industry Secretary, who said his prime concern was to ensure ‘effective competition’.
Mr Ridley said: ‘It is clear from the MMC's report that this proposal would have reduced competition in the period before the tunnel is operational (in 1993).
I also accept the Commission's view that any joint service intended as more effective competition would not need to be introduced so far in advance of the tunnel's opening.’
The decision was particularly sensitive for the Government as P&O's chairman, Sir Jeffrey Sterling, is a special adviser to the DTI — a post he has held since 1983.
A favourable decision would have almost certainly provoked parliamentary uproar given Sir Jeffrey's position and the time lag between the formation of the joint service and the tunnel's opening.
P&O European Ferries described the DTI's decision as surprising.
‘However, it does not alter our stated objective to provide a first rate competitive alternative service to the tunnel,’ said a spokeswoman.
Disappointment was also the reaction of Sealink British Ferries, whose parent company Sea Containers is currently fighting a $1.036 billion bid from Temple Holdings which would involve the UK ferry business ending up in Swedish hands if it succeeds.
Sealink disagreed with the MMC's findings that reduced choice, higher fares and a poorer quality service would result in the pooled operation before the tunnel's opening.
‘The ferry operators undertook not to reduce services or increase fares by more than inflation during this period.’
The company said the MMC's view that ferry prices may rise post-tunnel appeared to take into account the higher cost of building the link, now set at more than £7 billion.
‘Sealink shares the view that scope for higher fares may now be greater but the economies of pooling would enable the ferries to offer a superior, uniform product and have a better chance of survival if the tunnel competition proves to be severe.’
The two companies had sought to have withdrawn undertakings given to the MMC 15 years ago when it last investigated their grip on cross-Channel routes.
Sealink and P&O are estimated to have 80 per cent of the market and the undertakings barred them from pooling their services.
Mr Ridley said it would be open to the companies to approach th OFT again closer to the opening of the tunnel.
‘I will have regard to how vigorous competition with the tunnel can be best assured as well as with how well the current competitive arrangments have operated,’ he said.
However, Sealink considered that the effect of the MMC's decision could result in a pooling service operating anyway following the link's opening, though it would have to comply with UK and European Commission competition law.
Warning over inflation battle.
By Larry Elliott Economics Correspondent
THE GOVERNMENT was warned yesterday that a heavy-handed approach to curbing inflation could jeopardise Britain's chances of exploiting the opportunities provided by the creation of a barrier-free Europe in 1992.
The message from the influential backbench Treasury and Civil Service Committee came as the latest official figures provided further evidence of the economy grinding to a halt.
According to the Central Statistical Office, gross domestic product rose by 0.5 per cent in the third quarter of this year, but almost all the increase resulted from the recovery in North Sea oil production after the series of pipeline accidents in 1988 and early 1989.
Essentially, the economy was flat over the past six months, with the annual growth rate in the year to the third quarter 1.9 per cent, compared with 2.7 per cent in the year to the second quarter and 4.1 per cent at this time last year.
Meanwhile, money supply figures from the Bank of England showed that borrowing increased by £4.9 billion in November, the smallest monthly rise since February 1988.
In September, bank lending rose by more than £10 billion, but this fell to £5.2 billion in October.
Mr John Shepperd, analyst with Warburg Securities said firms may have started to destock rather than continue borrowing at high rates of interest.
That would cause a sharp slowdown in the economy next year, but could also herald an improvement in the UK's record trade deficit.
‘The feeling in the market is that there could be a good trade figure in store,’ Mr Shepperd said.
The considerable scope for destocking — the main cause of the recession of the early 1980s — was highlighted by the CSO, which said industry had been building up inventories of unsold goods for two years.
Officials estimate that supply has exceeded demand by £7.5 billion since the beginning of 1988.
Although the economy grew by 2 per cent over the year to September, the drain caused by the deterioration in the current account meant national wealth increased by only ½per cent.
After increasing by 9 per cent in 1989, manufacturing investment is expected to rise by just 1 per cent next year as firms lower their growth expectations in the light of high interest rates and muted consumer demand, according to the CSO's investment intentions survey.
The Government's main fear for the coming year is that the economy will enter a period of stagflation, with minimal growth combined with stubborn inflationary pressures.
In its report on Nigel Lawson's last Budget earlier this year, the TCSC said the Chancellor was walking a tightrope, with inflation on one side and recession on the other.
It said yesterday that Mr Major remained in the same predicament as his predecessor.
One important element of inflationary pressure — the level of wage settlements — has shown no signs of abating in recent months, according to the Confederation of British Industry's pay databank.
Deals in manufacturing industry struck in the third quarter averaged 8.3 per cent, up from 7.6 per cent in the second quarter.
The TCSC was sceptical about the Treasury's forecast of inflation dropping to 3 per cent by 1992 given that official predictions have been wrong so often in the past.
‘Repetition in the face of failure has not added credibility to this forecast,’ the report noted drily.
It added that control of inflation was necessary, but it was important that ‘a reduction of a few percentage points in the headline inflation rate should not be achieved at a disproportionate cost in terms of income creation and employment’.
NatWest rap for DTI investigators.
By Peter Rodgers City Editor
DEPARTMENT of Trade inspectors should not pass judgments on individuals, NatWest chairman Lord Alexander yesterday told a Commons trade and industry committee hearing.
Instead their reports should stick to investigating and reporting the facts, he told the MPs' inquiry into the methods of company investigations.
Conclusions about criminal or other responsibility should be left to the police or regulatory bodies such as the Bank of England to decide.
Speaking from NatWest's experience of the DTI report on its role in Blue Arrow's rights issue, Lord Alexander said: ‘I find it a simply awful process that people of 40 years’ experience should have to resign on the basis of judgments in the report without having the opportunity of going through the regulatory process that you in Parliament provided.’
It was, he said, ‘more Draconian than any deselection committee’, affecting people's future in what he saw as a ‘most sad process’.
Careers could be destroyed without any adequate appeal.
Technically, judicial review was available, but it was rarely used.
Three NatWest executive directors resigned after being criticised in the inspectors' report.
Since then, six NatWest executives including two explicitly cleared by the inspectors have been charged with fraud.
But the three directors who resigned have not been charged.
NatWest's evidence to the committee, signed by Lord Alexander and his chief executive Tom Frost, says inspectors should ‘complete their inquiries independently, indicating what are their findings of fact, but not pass judgment by drawing conclusions’.
Lord Alexander told MPs that inspectors should record where facts are in dispute, whatever their own views.
They should also give everybody named in the report an opportunity to respond, rather than the current practice of approaching only those criticised.
People criticised should be given drafts of all references to them, including the evidence cited.
He also urged speed and independence and said there should only be administrative contact between inspectors and DTI officials during an investigation.
Any other questions should be dealt with at ministerial level.
There may have been press briefings by regulatory bodies during and after the Blue Arrow inquiry which he said called into question their impartiality.