

A Country Diary: EGGLESTON BURN, Teesdale: Small burns that feed the main rivers of the Pennine Dales create some of the wildest features of the landscape.
Sit on the bank of one of these fast-flowing rocky streams and close your eyes.
The smell of the peat, gurgle of water racing over boulders and chuckle of flocks of fieldfares searching for mountain ash berries are as characteristic as the scenery itself.
This was the first time we had returned to Eggleston Burn since a summer visit in search of the Grass of Parnassus and butterwort that grow in its boggy flushes.
Today we approached from the most picturesque direction, through a stile set in the wall of the narrow stone bridge whose elegant arches span the burn's deep-cut ravine.
The muddy track skirted the precipitous drop to the water one hundred feet below, then descended to the stream edge and meandered through ancient alders with red-tinted catkins, through poor pastures, passed blackthorn covered in deep purple sloes withering on spiny twigs and wound upstream into open moorland.
It's here that this particular burn springs a surprise, cutting a deep and narrow, zig-zag ravine through rock, beckoning you to explore around the next corner.
When we entered the chasm the steep rock sides, fringed on the skyline with twisted birches, had a vaguely threatening air.
Jagged boulders from rockfalls triggered by ice and rushing water made progress difficult.
Concentrating on maintaining a foothold on rocks worn smooth by winter torrents, I put up a startled grouse that exploded into flight.
The sudden shock and noise of whirring wings broke the stillness and left our pulses racing.
From around the next bend in the stream its ‘go-back, go-back, go-back’ call echoed off the rock walls.
In fading winter light that seemed wise advice and we retraced our steps to the gentler landscape of Teesdale itself.
PHIL GATES
Pocketing a new generation of little big games.
Jez San finds that games consoles are shrinking in size but expanding in range and addictiveness potential..
COMPUTER games consoles are getting better, cheaper and smaller than ever before.
And the latest clash of pocket-sized titans is Nintendo's GameBoy versus Atari's Lynx.
Both have dinky LCD (liquid crystal display) screens, tiny flat joystick pads, and plug-in games on equally dinky cartridges.
Both are built in Japan, though the Lynx was designed in California by Epyx, a software house which ran out of development funds and sold the product to Atari.
Nintendo's is a pocket version of its Entertainment System currently gracing over 15 million American TV sets, though it is actually incompatible with it.
The Walkman-sized GameBoy fits comfortably in one hand, and has a two-inch yellow monochrome screen on which it is often hard to get the viewing angle right.
It comes with Tetris, a simple but addictive Russian game, for $89 in the US, or £99 here as an overpriced import from Toys R Us.
It's an expensive Christmas present, but worth it to keep the kids quiet on long plane, train and car journeys.
Only a few simple cartridges are available, including Tennis, Baseball and Super Mario Land.
Most remind me of the Sinclair Spectrum games of a few years ago, but that last one is a typical Japanese ‘happy jumpy scrolly’ game — weird, but compulsive.
If you have five minutes to spare, plug in Super Mario and spend half an hour trying to rescue the princess!
Atari is now Nintendo's arch-rival, but 10 years ago, it owned the video games market.
Its VCS (Video Computer System) was the first colour home game system, and sold over 20 million.
But the market saturated, the bubble burst, and everyone thought the console business was finished.
However, strange to say, the Atari VCS never penetrated Japan, and this allowed Nintendo — previously known mainly for board games and packs of cards — to dominate the market there.
A few years later, with Atari in deep financial trouble, Nintendo was able to take over the US market too.
Nintendo exerts strict control over the market by not allowing anyone else to put games on its machine (which Atari Games claims violates US anti-trust laws) and by its powerful marketing.
Now over 20 per cent of American households have a Nintendo, and the Atari VCS is just a fond memory.
Atari needs a VCS-successor, and the Lynx may be it.
It has a full-colour 3.5-inch backlit screen, which compares favourably with the GameBoy's small, blurry black and white LCD.
Atari is sure that people are used to colour, and will not go back to black and white, even if the machine is pocket-sized.
The Lynx is larger than the GameBoy and you need two hands to hold it.
You need a big pocket, too: it is video-cassette sized, and nearly twice the price ($170 US, probably £130 here in a few months) with one cartridge, California Games.
As well as an excellent display, the Lynx has a much louder speaker and — in the tradition of the Atari 8-bits and Commodore Amiga — a powerful set of chips to help it with the animation needed for superior three-dimensional games.
With 64K, it also has four times the memory of the Nintendo.
Lynx games will appeal to kids of slightly older ages.
The first batch includes California Games (a set of four sports games), Electro Cop (a Robocop-style adventure), Gates of Zendocon (a scrolling shoot-'em-up) and Blue Lightning (an Afterburner-style game).
They are fast-moving, colourful, noisy, and as good if not better than anything you can buy for home computers.
Where many GameBoy cartridges are puzzle-orientated, due in part to the blurry display not being ideal for fast movement, the Lynx's offer arcade excitement.
The images are fast and sharp, so it's much easier to see what's going on.
The Lynx has some other novel features, including a ‘flip’ button that turns the display upside down.
You can then turn the machine around to play left- or right-handed.
If your fingers get tired, you can even swap round in the middle of a game.
It turns itself off if you leave it untouched for five minutes, a feature sadly lacking on the GameBoy.
Both machines have a pause button for interruptions.
Battery life on the Lynx is about four hours with six AA batteries, but a mains adapter is included in the package (the GameBoy adapter is extra).
The GameBoy runs for about 15 hours on four AA cells.
The hottest new concept in pocket gaming is multi-player games.
If you and a friend own the same game, you can often plug them together (with the supplied cable) and play against each other.
Adding a human opponent gives a game an extra, unpredictable excitement that a computer opponent lacks.
The Lynx goes further and allows up to eight players to link together.
And multi-player games are good for business: groups of friends will have to buy more than one copy of each game, rather than sharing a set of different games.
Which one do you buy this Christmas?
That's easy.
Only the GameBoy is available.
Tracking down a Lynx is hard enough in New York, but impossible in the UK.
In a few months, however, the Lynx should be on sale here, and the tables will turn.
The Lynx is the superior machine.
I have owned a GameBoy for a few months now, and still use it.
The games are addictive, and I carry it whenever I'm likely to be bored somewhere.
I've just got a Lynx, and it's going to be much harder to smuggle it around.
But I'll try.
Jez San is managing director of Argonaut Software, which specialises in games (eg StarGlider) and flight simulators.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE mc1