

Ruthless cuts are being made to Canada's railway system and the last whistle is soon to blow for the country's most famous train, The Canadian.
Matthew Engel climbed aboard in Montreal Last train to Medicine Hat.
TRAIN No. 1, The Canadian, leaves Central Station, Montreal every morning at 9.55.
It arrives, theoretically, in Vancouver three days, three hours and five minutes later, having crossed 2,887 miles of pine-wilderness, prairie and mountain.
The official guidebook calls it ‘the world's most spectacular rail journey.’
In my childhood encyclopaedia it was listed among the marvels of the world, along with the Taj Mahal and Everest.
The distinctive dome-cars were almost as potent a symbol of Canada as the moose and the Mounties.
Three weeks hence, The Canadian will head west for the last time.
Then it will be abolished, along with more than half the country's other trains.
Brian Mulroney's Conservative government in Ottawa has imposed, through an order-in-council subject to no legislative scrutiny whatever, what is probably the greatest single cutback in public transport attempted anywhere.
January 14 will see the Last Train to Medicine Hat, to Moose Jaw, Locust Hill, Swift Current and Indian River; to Antigonish, Merigomish and Hectanooga; and — because Canadian placenames reflect a variety of influences — to Weymouth, Berwick, Peterborough and Pontypool.
Government funding is to be pruned over three years from £350 million to £200 million.
In one daring Beechingesque stroke, VIA Rail, the national passenger service, will cut its 405 trains a week to 191, and its workforce of 7,000 to 4,000.
From seven million passengers this year, the system will carry an estimated four million next.
This sort of thing is known here, in a touchingly post-colonial manner, as ‘Thatcherism.’
It will still be possible to cross Canada by train, just.
But there will be three trains a week instead of 14, all going by the less attractive and evocative northern route and not over the historic line of the Canadian Pacific Railway.
No one expects this rump of a service to be viable.
It is possible that by the mid-1990s — barring a few suburban services — Canada will become the first industrialised country to abolish passenger trains completely.
Yet this was the nation created by railways.
The completion of the Canadian Pacific was the condition of the west joining the confederation.
The related arguments and scandals dominated Canadian politics throughout the 1870s and 80s.
Its construction, by 30,000 men over vast tracts of unexplored Canadian trains are among the last refuges from the characterless hell of modern travel.
country with an outrageous climate, was probably the greatest of all navvying adventures.
The cities of the west only exist because the railway came through there.
And there is something about rail travel that is essentially Canadian: the US, deep down, was always a stagecoach society, wayward and unpredictable; trains seem right for Canada, exciting but disciplined.
The Canadian West was never that wild: the Mounties and a strong puritanical streak saw to that.
‘Every country has a great national epic,’ said Pierre Berton, Canada's best-known journalist.
‘Most of them are bloody wars.
Ours was the building of a railway.
It is our seminal story.’
Berton wrote two popular history books on the subject — The National Dream and The Last Spike.
Both phrases have been much invoked in recent weeks as in: ‘Mulroney has driven the Last Spike into our National Dream.’
The decision was announced by the Transport Minister Benoit Bouchard (‘Benny the Butcher’) in October.
It was greeted with some fury: ‘It's the beginning of a war,’ said Fernand Daoust of the Quebec Federation of Labour.
‘No one will rest.’
But this is Canada and wars happen elsewhere.
In the small city of Sydney, Nova Scotia, a thousand did turn out to protest at the loss of the local train.
There have been complaints in all the affected towns: about the lost jobs, the hardship to students and the old, the economic and environmental effects.
But when a national day of action was organised in Ottawa earlier this month just 200 stood in the cold outside Parliament.
It takes a lot to arouse nationwide indignation in Canada.
It is a country of strong, clean, wholesome, enviable communities, leading American lives without quite being part of America.
But it hardly exists as a nation in a recognisable sense.
St John's, Newfoundland is nearer to Liverpool than to Winnipeg.
Vancouver is another world.
Traditionally, Canada was said to be bound by the Canadian Pacific's ribbon of steel.
And what else is there?
The monarchy?
Excuse me.
A shared culture?
A third of the country speaks French.
Ice hockey?
Maybe.
A shared distrust of the United States?
Most likely.
Canadians do not even travel across the country that much.
There is none of the restless westwardness of the US.
When a Quebequois or a Torontonian gets fed up with life 30 degrees below freezing, he heads south to the Caribbean not west.
Hardly anyone ever travels the full 3,727 miles from sea to frigid sea — Halifax, Nova Scotia to Vancouver, British Columbia — except the odd, crazed British journalist.
And yet it is such a magnificent journey.
It is not the scenery — after the first million pine trees there are a billion more.
It is the trip itself.
Canadian trains are among the last refuges from the pre-packaged, plastic, characterless hell of modern travel.
No wonder they are being abolished.
Trains called The Atlantic and The Ocean make the 21-hour trip from Halifax to connect with The Canadian at Montreal.
This, however, turns out to be a polite fiction.
The Canadian's carriages actually start from Toronto.
The train that leaves Montreal comprises only a couple of day coaches, linking up with the main service 10 hours later at the junction town of Sudbury, Ontario.
No one, however, dare tell the Quebecois that their train is not No.1.
A roomette on The Canadian, when you eventually join it, is slightly under seven foot by three (which includes a private lav) with a bed that slides out from the wall; it thus manages to combine the characteristics of both the womb and the mortuary.
It is totally private, there is no need ever to leave it and I swear the Japanese woman opposite never did.
Define heaven.
A jug of wine, a loaf of bread and thou?
Pate de foie gras to the sound of trumpets?
Or miles to go, a good book, a comfy seat and no decisions to make except first sitting or second, beef or sole (both freshly-cooked), red or white?
Yet no one can ever be lonely on The Canadian.
Within five minutes of ordering lunch or a drink, someone will tell you his life story.
Ordinary bland rich Canadians go by plane, which is quicker; ordinary bland poor Canadians go by bus, which is cheaper.
This leaves the train free for the unbland minority.
There was Gerry who made a fortune in the Californian avocado boom and now just wanders the world.
There was Ian, Canada's leading advocate of childhood suffrage.
There was Libby, a middle-class city girl who lives in a log cabin in the sub-arctic woods.
There was Joshua, whose arms were covered in tattoos.
On his left bicep was the grim reaper with battleaxe; on his right wrist was the motto ‘Live Free or Fuck Off’; Where, I asked coversationally, did you get that done?
‘Oh, in prison,’ he said casually.
We sat, a strange but contented group, in the dome-car bar as the train swayed through Western Ontario.
When the line came through here, it was built inch by inch through solid rock.
Its progress now was often no quicker.
The temperature outside dropped: 20, 30 degrees below freezing.
Icicles the size of stalactites hung from the eaves of wayside stations.
The track itself is often obliterated and a large part of a rail man's job is hacking ice and snow away from the points or the platforms between carriages.
Inside, everything The bar was like a cruise ship passing through the tropics — but without quite the same sexual charge.
was cosy.
Except for the new diesel engines, the trains date back to 1954.
They were built, in steel and chrome, to last — but not quite this long.
As the railways run down and maintenance gets neglected, they keep going wrong: the steam-heating in particular.
Happily, it usually becomes over-cosy rather than frozen solid.
The bar was like a cruise ship passing through the tropics without, I thought at the time, quite the same sexual charge.
But after almost everyone had tiptoed tipsily to bed, one couple — or so I was told over breakfast next day — stayed behind in the darkened dome-car and made love softly, to the rhythm of the rails.
It is too good to last, of course.
Only three per cent of Canada's inter-city journeys are made by train.
Professor Julius Lukasiewicz, professor of aerospace engineering at Carleton University, Ottawa, has advocated the abolition of the passenger service for years.
‘It will be scrapped, of course,’ he told me.
‘It is not that I am in favour of it, it is what is happening.
We are subsidising users of The Canadian 300 per cent and there is no justification for it.’
What about the environment, I said.
‘The diesel engines are much more of a pollutant than buses,’ he said dismissively.
‘I know it's a nice way to travel.
I would love to have a chauffeured Cadillac but I can't afford it.’
The pressure group Transport 2000 (Transport 1800, as Professor Lukasiewicz calls it), loosely linked to its British namesake, is fighting a rearguard action, which is less of a defence of the railways than an attack on their management.
‘It is not that the Canadians have deserted the railways,’ says Roy Jamieson, their policy officer, ‘the railways have deserted Canada.’
VIA Rail was set up in 1977 after the competing giants, Canadian Pacific, now grown into a huge conglomerate, and its nationalised rival Canadian National had found passenger travel a distraction from the main business of moving freight.
VIA was given no clear brief, no money for investment, an absurdly top-heavy management structure and a board described by Roy Jamieson as ‘a dumping ground for political hacks.’
VIA also has to pay heavily to use the tracks and it is almost universally agreed that CP in particular has spent the last 12 years over-charging and trying to find ways of clearing the passenger trains from the path of its lucrative freights.
CP is certainly not protesting about Benny the Butcher.
The original payoff for building the railway was a swathe of the adjoining land.
Cities naturally grew up next to the tracks and railway land thus became Canada's prime real estate.
The mere business of shifting passengers has long been a dreary distraction.
The railways are also a sink of ancient union restrictive practices.
The Canadian has an operating crew of five (excluding the dozen or so service staff) and no one is entirely clear what they all do: fill out forms mostly, so far as I could see.
The employees are accepting their fate with the usual mix of bitterness and resignation.
‘Twenty-two years,’ sighed Mike Wolfe, the service director on The Canadian.
‘I grew up on this train, eh?
It's not very nice, is it?’
Mr Wolfe had just been doing his customary job of explaining to the passengers why we were late: ‘We have an emergency situation which is not a real alarm situation.’
The train had been forced to brake hard at a level crossing to miss a taxi and one of the wheels had been damaged.
We waited an hour, two hours, three hours.
Outside, it grew ever colder.
The snow started again, gently.
Inside, the water in one of the bathrooms froze.
No one worried much; people in a hurry have long since found another way to travel.
Four hours late, the train limped into Winnipeg at midnight.
They released the valves on the heaters and vapour poured from every orifice, turning the station into something like Monet's Gare St Lazare.
Dawn on Day Three and we were crossing the prairies.
There was only a scattering of snow across the wheatlands, the area which needs it most to moisten the soil for the growing season.
Whenever there was a stretch of double track, we would usually stop to let through a freight train.
The towns here — Portage-la-Prairie, Brandon, Regina, Medicine Hat — were created by and for the Canadian Pacific.
It is supposed to be the boring part of the journey and if the train were on time would be crossed at night.
I was enthralled by the emptiness.
We had some excitement too.
A couple got off the train, were met by the police and put up a ferocious but unsuccessful fight: suspicion of a bank robbery the previous day, apparently, back down the line in Thunder Bay.
After Calgary (population: 400,000; rail service after January: one train a week, summer only) we were in the mountains, and people crowded into the dome car for the high spot of the trip.
But we were so late it was growing dark.
I decided to stop in Banff, a ski resort created by the railway, for 24 hours.
It was 26 hours, actually; the next day's train was even later.
And the mood on this one was far grimmer.
The passengers had spent six hours stuck without explanation in Winnipeg.
The conductor, who has overall charge of the train, was less friendly than most.
The cast of characters was less interesting: mostly Japanese honeymoon couples, travelling en masse, and train buffs.
But the lateness meant that the thrilling descent towards Vancouver, down the Fraser River Canyon, took place in daylight.
I would have done it all again.
I am not so sure about the Japanese honeymoon couples.
It will still be possible to make this part of the journey next year.
The Rocky Mountaineer will continue to make one round trip a week in summer from Vancouver to Calgary.
But that is tourism not travel, and the fares are about to double.
A private firm is also trying to start a luxury train — the Occident Express, I suppose — but if it happens the fare will be over 1500 pounds.
Ian and Libby and Joshua will be travelling by bus or car; it might suit Avocado Gerry, though.
And the bank robbers.
Maybe we could all find space aboard one of CP's freight trains.
Hobby hoboism has become quite fashionable among bored yups in California.
But it is perhaps a little too wild for a Canadian weekend.
Rather cold up here, too.
For most, this does seem like the last ride over the Canadian Pacific.
Pierre Berton, who wrote the books, has just got back from Vancouver.
How was it?
‘A good flight, thank you.’
Flight?
‘Look,’ he said, ‘I went across Canada 12 times during the war on trains with slatted seats.
They smelt of oranges and babies.
I hate railways.’
Richard Sarson considers the task facing Steve Shirley, the admired new president of the BCS Aiming high.
GERMANS are not often polite about British managers.
But Ralf Dahrendorf, when he left the post of director of the London School of Economics, answered the question ‘Has Britain got a future?’ by singling out Steve Shirley.
He saw F International, her company of home-working software writers and consultants, as a model of successful innovation.
Ms Shirley is now faced with a tougher challenge for her revolutionary management skills.
She has just taken office as president of the British Computer Society, and needs to make it jump from the seventies, where some believe it is still stuck, into the nineties.
She says she ‘wants to bring it centre-stage’.
It is far from centre stage at present.
None of its suggestions to the DTI Select Committee last year on training, infrastructure, and government procurement policy were accepted by the Government.
But another forum for part of the computer industry, the Computer Services Association (CSA), got what it wanted — a promise from the Government to buy in from software houses at least one-third of the applications software needed to run the ministries.
This reflects a Thatcherite judgment that the CSA, an employers' association representing over 300 companies, has more clout than a chartered professional institute with 30,000 registered members.
That figure sounds a lot, but does not rate very high against the estimate of 300,000 professionals — programmers, systems analysts, project managers, networking specialists and support staff — in the industry.
This one-to-10 ratio makes the computer profession unlike law, architecture, medicine and even engineering, where you need to be registered and qualified before you start practising at all.
The letters MBCS after your name cut little ice with personnel managers and head-hunters, except in academia and in software houses whose chairmen are pillars of the BCS.
The others tend to say ‘experience is more important than qualifications,’ and ‘in a fast-moving industry like ours, paper qualifications are obsolete before they are printed.’
They say the same about computer science degrees.
So, why bother to spend years jumping over the BCS hurdles?
There are other grumbles about the society, very often coming from members themselves and sometimes published in the society's own organ, the Computer Bulletin.
One recent letter deplored the excessive influence of academia, pointing out that 10 out of 12 of the Bulletin's editorial board are from universities.
David Mann, managing director of Logica, wrote in an editorial that the BCS ‘is regarded as more of an enthusiast's club than a professional institution and is considered to have an academic bias with insufficient relevance to the problems of implementing real-life industrial and commercial systems.’
Away from London, however, BCS branches are places where computer people, both academic and business, can huddle together for warmth in a hostile world.
The Belfast branch, for instance, with 700 members, draws its officers from the civil service, the Electricity Board, local software houses and the University of Ulster.
It has a young professionals group and the bootstrappers club for teenagers.
This branch's annual programme covers every aspect of computing from Transputers and Women in Computing, through Document Image Processing to 4GLs (fourth generation languages).
It holds joint meetings with the British Institute of Management, the Institute of Electrical Engineers, the NCC, and the Irish Computer Society across the border.
Des Vincent, this year's branch president, says that the BCS ‘pulls things together.
It's the communication vehicle which we desperately need over here.’
The BCS does lots of other good things, like sitting on 31 standards committees, working with 15 European computer societies to harmonise professional qualifications for the single market, accrediting computer science courses to make them less theoretical and more oriented towards projects, maintaining a register of expert witnesses, setting up ad hoc specialist groups very quickly on new areas like expert systems, natural language translation and parallel processing, and helping the disabled.
It even has a strategic review panel to act as a think-tank.
So, while it can seem churlish to knock the BCS, what has so far been lacking is someone to harness these scattered initiatives and local enthusiasms into a national force.
The main block is that the London-based mandarins of the BCS still appear to see the world from the seventies standpoint of the large data processing installation or university department, full of Cobol or Fortran programmers, churning out hand-crafted systems for mainframes.
The nineties are not going to be like that.
The micro-revolution of the eighties gave the world not only cheap machines — which are now more powerful than the mainframes of the seventies — but tools like spreadsheets, 4GLs, Case (computer-aided software engineering) tools and data management languages.
These systems are going to become more and more simple, to accomplish more and more complex tasks.
The BCS has got to decide whether it is just for computer people who produce systems, or also for those — accountants, engineers, project managers, architects, writers, artists, musicians and designers of arcade games — who apply them.
If it is the latter, then the BCS must revamp its qualifications, to attract the new membership.
This need not reduce the rigour of the professional disciplines demanded, but it would make the qualifications less technical and inward-looking.
One BCS initiative has started to produce a ‘hybrid’— a computer-person who understands the outside world, or conversely an outsider who understands computers.
It might even bring British computer people up to the level of their more professional continental opposite numbers.
If membership of the BCS becomes more relevant to the nineties then government departments, personnel managers, and recruitment consultants will start demanding the letters MBCS after the candidate's name, as in other professions.
The 30,000 should swell to 100,000 in five years, and the BCS would move centre-stage.
PAGE mc1
In Real Women Don't Take It Lying Down (December 14), Tony Parsons accused women of giving up the fight against sexism.
The response — from tacit agreement to outrage — was enormous….
Real women — and men — answer back
IN RESPONSE to Tony Parsons, there are several reasons for so-called post-feminism.
One is the influence of the media (which created the mythical bra-burners).
The ‘new angle’ must be sought to retain reader interest, and this goes beyond the cynical.
What's in will be out and vice versa.
And movements follow the finite.
Secondly, the second generation, by its nature, must reject its elders, taking their hard-won social victories for granted.
And with the cold-eyed realism that not a lot has been achieved by feminism, many younger women have sought to take on men on their own ground, accepting extant values and the handicaps of modern commerce and industry.
Hatred and fear of women is not new and is overt in religions, so much so that the evolvement of codes of courtesy to the female has been felicitous.
Male and female roles were separate and complementary, and based on the primitive, that the male was the stronger and not exposed to the constant and deathly risks of the childbed.
But that began to give way in the Industrial Revolution.
An increasingly complex society began to need new skills — quick-wittedness, dexterity, verbal skills, all traditionally associated with the female.
So women's labour was needed in the market, and men became reactive on three counts.
Their jobs were threatened; their cradle to grave support system was threatened; and, most dangerously, their view of themselves, of their maleness, their dominance, their bravery, was threatened.
It is this, I think, that causes such venom, such reaction.
Tony Parsons says get tough.
There are those of us who don't want to be tough, who think that tough leads to murder.
Who wants a society that reduces men to predatory thugs, when there is so much to be done?
Perhaps with society more dominated by the old, there will be more respect for wisdom, sagacity.
For men to model themselves on Ulysses rather than Hercules.
And women?
Perhaps they can be let off the hook, be allowed their complexity.
Pam Gems London W2
THERE'S no shit from Tony Parsons, he knows he's a sack of scum.
So are all the lads.
Trouble is, you can't expect a man to change himself.
No, ma'am.
You women are neglecting your duty.
You must take our hands and show us the way, like Mum did.
And if you don't?
Well, Tony and the boys will be forced to remain scumbags.
Peter Francis-Mullins London SE22
THANK you so much for Tony Parsons' brilliant article.
I agree with every word.
Thank God someone's said it.
We really need more help from you good men to stand up and be counted!
Kate O'Connor London NW1
PARSONS' piece was well meant, but very revealing about the attitude of a supposedly enlightened male.
He spoke of men's ‘sexist’ behaviour, but laid the responsibility for providing a remedy with women, who must exercise a ‘civilising influence’on these infantile people.
No, thanks.
This is patronising to men and idolises women.
Parsons wrote that he ‘hates post-feminists’.
A touch of misogyny there perhaps?
These women he decries are simply weary with having to be constantly on guard against abuse, and why should they have to justify their position when the men are at fault?
When women do confront sexism, the glib reply is often that it is a joke.
Parsons concludes with a purposely provocative comment about an actress: ‘Great pair of tits…’
Oh, I see, it was only a joke.
You're not really ridiculing the anger I experience at your flippant pseudo-feminist attitude.
With friends like you…
Catherine Jeffrey London N8
IT MAY surprise Tony Parsons to know that real feminists have more important things to do than comment on the way he holds a teapot.
They are too busy campaigning on issues like equal pay, childcare, child benefit, violence against women, homelessness, carers, the representation of women in Parliament and public life, rights for part-time workers and the myriad other urgent issues with which they are confronted each and every day.
Amongst those concerns, the issue of the portrayal of women in the media features prominently.
Serious feminist magazines like Spare Rib and Everywoman, and both specialist and generalist groups, such as the Campaign Against Pornography and the Townswomen's Guilds, all tackle these issues in an informed, responsible way.
For Tony Parsons to imply that he has a monopoly of concern on these matters or that so-called ‘post-feminists’ have copped out of the struggle is an insulting travesty of the truth.
Jane Grant Director, National Alliance of Women's Organisations London E1
BY SUGGESTING that women have a monopoly on being civilised, does Tony Parsons not open the door for double standards of judgment to be applied to the behaviour of women and men?
Is this not the worst and most pernicious kind of sexism?
Jonathan Chalstrey Woodstock, Oxfordshire
TONY Parsons' article was a mixture of self-indulgent bullshit and pure shit-stirring.
I am, I am told, a post-feminist merely because I prefer a constructive approach to the achievement of equality rather than one that is essentially negative.
‘Making a fuss’ has always been counterproductive and superficial.
To achieve profound change, women must necessarily work within the existing structure.
An attempt to revolutionise social attitudes is no less revolutionary merely because it is subtle.
I like the Fat Slags because they scare the shit out of men.
Millie Tant, who also graces the pages of Viz, is viewed with contempt.
The question has to be: who is the more liberated?
I plump (!) for the Fat Slags every time.
HSMorris Bristol PS I did find the article amusing and am no less a woman because I did.
Men do not have the sole franchise on a sense of humour.
HAVING just read Tony Parsons' article, I feel like exploding.
I'm so angry that he would be proud of me!
Can women ever win in this male world?
When women march and protest, they are howled down.
When they try sweet reason they are ignored.
When they stoop to the level of men and try to be ‘good sports’, they're accused of being wimps.
I would like to ask Tony Parsons if he ‘liked’ the ‘old’style feminist?
Did he stand up to be counted in the old days?
I think not!
Let me tell you, Tony Parsons, what I as a woman hate.
I hate men like you who proclaim that they are supportive of women and their efforts for equality.
Where are these men when, as you say, there are men literally getting away with murder?
Why don't you protest loud and long when women are depicted in the media and the arts as sexual stereotypes?
If men ‘need — crave, cry out for — the civilising influence of women’, my advice is to shout a little louder because women can't hear you.
MERule Ormskirk, Lancs
SORRY, pal.
If you are waiting for post-feminists to hasten to your rescue, girding their loins and hairy-leggedly taking on the Viz comics and Dennis Potters of this world on your behalf, I would suggest that you don't hold your breath.
Here is one post-feminist who has better ways of occupying her time.
Lesley Maltman Tonbridge, Kent
WHAT WE ‘post’ feminists need are more men like Tony who are prepared to stand up in their men's self-help groups — instead of wasting space on the semen-stained women's page — and acknowledge together that they are basically ‘sacks of scum’.
Men have been getting away with murder for years.
Go and cut your own mustard, Tony.
We're too busy trying to avoid the bullets.
Karen Stowe, Michelle Rogers London N5 Guardian Women is edited by Louise Chunn PAGE wom
Audrey Segal.
Caring career woman:.
AUDREY Segal was a remarkable woman who overcame her disabilities — she was confined to a wheelchair for 23 years after contracting a virus in Morocco — to invent and develop careers education in this country, and to remain its foremost exponent for more than 20 years.
Her extraordinary enthusiasm for her work (including regular contributions to the Guardian and Observer), was registered in guffaws of delight at new discoveries and scoops.
She could virtually match the data bases of bodies like UCCA for up-to-the-minute information, and she saw earlier than most the new opportunities opening up in Europe for higher education students.
For many years she had worked as a librarian before switching to journalism, training ‘on-the-job’ under an American industrial and securities correspondent and as personal assistant to Dan Rather, now CBS's news anchorman, then becoming a freelance writer.
Audrey was famous for her accuracy, and her appetite for information was voracious.
She compiled a 1300-page Careers Encyclopedia for school-leavers, graduates, parents, teachers and advisers (She was working on its thirteenth edition when she died.
She also edited Which Degree? and Which University? from 1966-80, as well as Graduate Studies, and the Directory of Graduates.
Her disability never stopped her attending meetings, briefings and conferences, often aided by her twin sons, Paul and Mark, and she would ask uncommonly fierce questions from her wheelchair.
But, above all, she will be remembered for her passionate caring for young people and their prospects, dedicating her career to enhancing theirs.
David Gow Audrey Segal, born April 9, 1932; died December 12, 1989
Closed minds on the closed shop Commentary.
By Hugo Young
THE MOST interesting reaction to the Labour Party's abandonment of the closed shop is not that of the Left or the unions but of the Conservatives.
They are deeply shocked.
Their response encompasses indignation yet also disbelief.
They cannot accept that one of their most cherished foxes has been shot.
So they choose to contend that it has not really happened: and in so choosing raise a timely question about the nature of political belief.
For this is not the first such episode.
Every shift towards plausibility which Mr Kinnock has led the Labour Party into making has received a version of the same response.
Because Labour was once against Europe, it cannot now be for Europe.
Because it was once the party of nationalisation, it cannot now be the party of the small shareholder.
Because it used not to understand markets, it cannot conceivably have rectified this gap in its political intelligence.
Furthermore, although it may sincerely believe it is a new party, the very fact that it has often changed its mind should debar it from being taken seriously.
These changes, the argument runs, are not real and will not stick.
By deserting its past, Labour has misled us about its future.
Without a shred of embarrassment, the sentimental Tory takes out his hanky and invites us to watch him dripping crocodile tears of fond reminiscence for the days of that most honourable of men, so lauded by the Conservatives of his era, Mr Tony Benn.
Coming from Thatcherites, this is a puzzling charge.
They are, after all, the arch exponents of a political style in which denouncing the past was the most satisfying of activities.
From 1975 to 1979, Mrs Thatcher was engaged in a process not dissimilar from that which Mr Kinnock now presides over.
She tore up the inheritance of Edward Heath, as if she had had no part in it.
She began to re-write Tory policy on tax, on public spending, on welfare, on corporatism.
She eventually articulated a philosophy which depended in large and explicit measure on repudiating what Conservatism had said about the role of the State for the past 30 years.
For a party with that record now to deride as unreal, and even denounce as illegitimate, opponents who are also re-examining their past suggests the presence of a certain myopia.
Nor is that all.
For is this not also the party which is led by a woman who has devoted much effort to preaching the virtues of abolishing precisely what Labour is trying at least to re-define: socialism itself.
When Dr Owen left Labour to form the SDP, Mrs Thatcher's outrage was genuine.
She always said he should have stayed to fight his corner.
Now that Mr Kinnock is achieving the same effect, ought this not to attract the modest admiration of an opponent whose vision of British politics has, in any case, always seen Republicans and Democrats — capitalist parties both — as the model which a well-ordered, post-Thatcherite country should emulate?
One part of this myopia can doubtless be attributed to simple electoral panic.
If Labour looks like becoming credible, Conservatives must find any stick with which to mutilate the appearance of a smooth conversion.
But lying behind this is a rather higher claim which deserves not altogether sceptical consideration.
What does distinguish the Thatcherite from the Kinnockite conversion is the connection it originally made with party roots.
Although Thatcherism denounced past policies, it affected to return to past philosophy.
It was radical, but also reactionary.
It proclaimed the rebirth of right-wing ideology, a term which readily entitled its new exponents to talk about their pure ‘convictions’.
Possessed of such, and revelling in the distance set between them and miserable ‘pragmatism’, Mrs Thatcher's Conservative Party can still persuade itself to see the last decade as a period when undeviating conviction wrought a miracle in the land.
The Kinnock conversion has gone in the opposite direction: away from ideology, towards ‘realism’.
And realism, it is argued, is a poor basis for belief.
Lacking such belief, will not Labour be wrested from its pragmatic and up-to-date policies at the first whiff of hot breath on Prime Minister Kinnock's neck?
For firmness of purpose, surely, can only be associated with the missionary attachment to first principles which he has been energetically abandoning.
This seems to me to be mostly self-regarding poppycock.
The record of this government, conviction-inspired though it thinks of itself as being, is replete with pragmatic compromise of every kind.
It has deviated from passionately enunciated principles on monetarism, on public spending's rightful portion of GNP, on Ireland, on state control of education, on (soon) immigration, and much else.
Shouting about convictions is no guarantee that they will survive a period in government.
Still more tendentious is the Tory claim as it relates to a potential Labour Government.
For the implication it carries is that Kinnock is in truth a ravening left-wing wolf but briefly clad in the sheepish woolies of a moderate man.
Thus, his new commitment against the closed shop, through the acceptable voice of Mr Tony Blair, awaits only the sniff of power to be countermanded.
Europe, on this reading, will swiftly go the same way.
All in all, the entire Labour package is a massive con-trick, which a sinister shadow cabinet, behind its smiling mask of reassurance, is even now preparing to abandon under the narcotic influence of power.
There are certainly some Labour MPs who would like that to happen.
But to suppose that this picture bears the faintest resemblance to what the Labour leadership wants betrays something like paranoia cubed.
The truth is almost exactly the opposite.
One does not need to scrutinise Labour's policy positions for their mystical inner sincerity in order to evaluate the leadership commitment to them.
The fact is that Mr Kinnock and his friends understand well enough not only that they could not be elected but that Britain could not be governed without some serious accommodations of the kind they now stand for.
The leadership wants the old baggage left behind; wants to avoid legislating against public opinion, as with the closed shop; wants to stick with a hard-headed economic programme.
The leadership also has a new control, which makes it less likely to be unhorsed by its own interest-groups than the Callaghan Government was in the late 1970s.
So it is fanciful to suppose that Labour's conversion somehow cannot last and is not real.
On the other hand, it does badly need shoring up.
Labour may not be in the business of re-connecting with the past, but its attachment to the future is still confused.
What this debate about conviction highlights is the continuing absence in the new Labour Party not of sensible policies but of an enveloping conviction that can be easily summarised, passionately preached, readily understood.
It has legitimately changed its mind.
Its leaders have policies they want to stick to.
What they still lack is what the Tories would fear rather than scorn: three easy sentences to ring the bell.
Quote….
BECAUSE the United States is to reduce its military spending, it is inevitable it will withdraw some of the US military forces now based in Japan and reduce forces deployed for emergencies.
The United States would request its allies to fill in the ‘vacuum’ created by such cutbacks — this would increase the so-called burden sharing.
Japan, especially, is likely to be pressured to take on more of the burden sharing.
It is likely that Japan's defence spending will continue to grow on the theory that circumstances in Asia are different from those in the West, and that burden sharing is a matter of course under the US-Japan security treaty.
We must be prepared for an ironic result — that the reduction of US military spending will lead to an increase in Japan's defence spending.
Ashai News Service,
December 18
Herbert Blaize.
Their man in Grenada:.
HERBERT Blaize, a courtly politician of a bygone Caribbean era, believed God had chosen him to restore democracy to Grenada after 7,000 US troops invaded his island in 1983 to overthrow its marxist rulers.
In the eyes of many, especially Washington, he succeeded, with a free press, elections and liberal economics.
But to others, he was a stubborn old man, in constant physical pain, who harassed his opponents, drove his ministers to resign and clung ignominiously to power after losing his once-crushing parliamentary majority.
One of his last acts, two days before his death from prostate cancer, was to accept formal leadership of a new political party after his own had sacked him.
He tried to speak from his wheelchair, but his voice was gone and he gave up.
Such indignity had better beginnings.
The son of a labourer from Grenada's sister island of Carriacou, which he represented in parliament for nearly 30 years, he cut his political teeth, like many other Caribbean leaders, working at the giant Lago oil refinery on Dutch-ruled Aruba in the 1940s.
But he returned to Grenada to throw his lot in with the mostly light-skinned urban middle class to which he only half belonged.
By 1957, he was in parliament, leader of the Grenada National Party and head of government.
His lifelong political rival, the charismatic, unlettered Eric Gairy, mocked Blaize's kindly manner as weakness.
But except for a brief interval, Blaize ruled for 10 unmemorable years until Gairy decisively beat him at the polls a few months after Britain granted the island wide autonomy in 1967.
His political career was apparently finished.
He returned to Carriacou and qualified as a solicitor through a London University correspondence course.
No-one saw him as an alternative to the increasingly-authoritarian left-wing regime of Maurice Bishop in the early 1980s.
Yet after 7,000 invading American troops had swept away the revolutionaries, Blaize was imposed by the US and its Caribbean allies as the harmless head of a reluctant coalition of squabbling younger politicians, a half-respected figure from the past who might block the eccentric Gairy's return to power at the polls.
A heavily US-financed campaign did the trick and Blaize, with a 14-1 majority, took over and thanked God for sending the Americans to save Grenada.
Washington declined his invitation to keep its troops on the island and disappointed Blaize by failing to come up with promised investment to reduce huge unemployment.
Although the economy improved in recent years, Blaize was soon politically stranded.
His leading ministers walked out on him because of his heavy-handed behaviour.
He was also obsessed by an imagined threat from the few remaining ex-revolutionaries.
He banned books, seized passports, expelled foreigners, legalised detention without trial though he did not use it and dismissed international protests about torture of the still-gaoled leftist ex-leaders.
An enthusiastic member of the US-sponsored Caribbean Democratic Union of right-wing regional leaders, he did not hesitate to call in soldiers from neighbouring islands to guard against imagined plots.
At the end, between lengthy visits to Walter Reed Hospital in Washington and crippled with arthritis as a result of a youthful bicycle accident, he turned a deaf ear to opposition calls to resign after losing his majority.
‘I'm staying,’ he told me when I visited him last July.
His wife Venetia had wheeled him, perspiring with illness, to his desk at Mount Royal, his official residence overlooking the capital.
‘Water will find its level,’ he said softly of his divided opponents' noisy threats, never carried out, to vote him from office.
Greg Chamberlain Herbert Augustus Blaize, born February 26, 1918; died December 19, 1989.
Deaths: General Albert Wedemeyer who died on Sunday aged 92 was described by John Keegan as one of the most intellectual and farsighted military minds America produced.
The son of an army bandmaster, he was a brilliant student at the United States Military Academy and at staff college, studying Chinese during a posting to Tientsin and in 1936 attending the Kriegsakademie in Berlin.
His report on the German military brought him to the attention of General George Marshal, on whose staff he later served.
In 1943, he became deputy chief of staff to Lord Mountbatten in South East Asia and in the following year chief of staff to Chiang Kai-shek and commander of the American forces in China.
After the war he favoured stronger support for the South Koreans and a more interventionist policy with regard to China than President Truman would entertain, retiring in 1951 and going into business and right wing Republican politics.
Olive Booth, lieutenant Colonel in the Salvation Army and a grand-daughter of its founder, has died at the age of 98.
Before retiring in 1951, she had been director of the Army's European relief project, arranging the return to Germany of refugees from Russia and elsewhere after the huge migrations at the end of the war in Europe, and was later secretary of the war graves' department.
She was one of three long-lived sisters who rose to senior posts in the Army.
Her older sister Catherine died in 1986 at the age of 104 and Dora, her younger sister last February, aged 95.
Diary.
By Andrew Moncur
IT'S TIME to name some winners in the diary's annual Squishy Satsuma Awards for Christmas card initiative.
A commendation in the category for slightly bewildering greetings goes to Romola Christopherson, director of information at the Department of Health.
Her card features a caricature of her boss Kenneth Clarke, the ambulance crews' friend, looking like a cross between Tigger, a scalded cat standing on its tail and a whirling dervish.
This creature is set against a background recalling the Somme 1916 (shell craters, explosions, etc).
Question: does this suggest that (a) his nine lives are up; or (b) this is some sort of vision for the future of the health service?
A special mention for the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, whose very exciting card shows a view of the Smedley Hydropathic Establishment, Southport, 1890.
The North West Thames health authority's greeting depicts a large apple core.
I won't pretend to understand this.
Congratulations to the Department of Social Security for its choice: Boticelli's Virgin And Child With Singing Angels (obviously scroungers).
A small prize to the Treasury which has, remarkably, picked a picture of a Liberal and — worse — one-time Chancellor of Oxford University, George Goschen (1831-1907).
The Luncheon Voucher trophy goes to Mrs Cynthia Payne for the card she has sent to, among others, Jean Rook, the First Lady of Fleet Street.
This shows a scene at one of her famous parties, with the greeting: ‘Hope you can come in more ways than one.’
What can this mean?
DERANGED woman held in Downing Street.
Police swoop.
Read all about it.
There was a small disturbance early yesterday, it emerges, at the famous entrance which is soon to be closed by Mrs Thatcher's ornamental security gates.
A woman appeared, brandishing a knife and uttering threats against the person of Her Majesty the Queen.
She was clearly confused, not least about matters of geography — or something.
PLUCKY little Minister for Sport Colin Moynihan has wisdom teeth, shock.
Who would have thought it?
And who could have guessed that, with said gnashers playing him up, he would have to hand over one of his duties — and that a Labour MP would be called in from the subs' bench.
Step forward Tom Pendry, who chairs the Labour Party sports committee.
He was whisked in to open officially the new offices of the British Paralympic Association.
YOU MAY recall the departure of Andrew Ellis, known among jobbing politicians as a sort of one-man byelection-winning machine, from his top job with the Liberal Democrats (as they have since become).
His post as chief executive more or less folded up under him in a wholesale shake-up of staff.
Now he pops up at Rupert Murdoch's Sky TV, as a pundit.
Or, more precisely, as a consultant (election coverage a speciality).
NOW FOR some more winning entries in the Vicar's Competition: captions for the Nineties.
‘A jubilant Mrs Thatcher (waving stick) outside No.10 prior to starting her sixth term.’
(Tim Gunn); ‘British justice again proved best in world, claimed Ivor Stanbrook MP (right) seen here congratulating the Birmingham Six on their release after admission by Home Secretary of wrongful conviction 20 years ago.’
(Geoff Neil); ‘In Oslo, workmen install Britain's annual gift to the city of a Christmas tree unaffected by acid rain.’
(Ted Gunby).
WELL, IF you want to go on strike, the place to do it is obviously the London borough of Barnet.
Witness this letter sent by the Director of Educational Services to college lecturers who took action on October 17.
‘You will probably have realised that, due to an administrative error in our payroll section, you have been given an extra day's pay…instead of having a day's pay deducted.’
The bad news is that they're snatching it back.
DEFINITE sightings are now being recorded of Uncle Joe Stalin's 110th birthday party.
This event, billed to take place in London this week under the auspices of the Revolutionary Communist Party of Britain (Marxist-Leninist), was previously thought to be some sort of mirage.
Eye-witnesses insist that it did happen and, further, that 80-odd (or even very odd) people showed up.
So there.
LOST for gift ideas?
All the rage in California: a fax machine for your car.
A snip at $1,400.
Why Bush finally came to shove.
ON TUESDAY evening in the White House, while the camouflaged C-141s carried the paratroops of the 82nd Airborne through the Caribbean night towards Panama, President Bush held hands with his wife, smiled at his guests and sang Silent Night under the White House Christmas tree.
No scene could have been more peaceful.
But it was all a bluff.
This may be the season of goodwill, but the Imperial Presidency is back with a vengeance.
Nobody kicks sand into George Bush's face and gets away with it.
We can dust off the Rambo movies, and Mikhail Gorbachev can sit back amid the ruins of the Soviet empire and watch how a superpower really behaves.
It has seemed this month as if Ronald Reagan never left town, as President Bush decisively buried his lingering image as a White House wimp with a series of interventions that stamped his own authority on US foreign policy, and America's will upon the world.
This month of Super-Bush began with the decision to defeat the coup against President Cory Aquino of the Philippines.
That first presidential order to send American troops into possible combat was taken on the run, as Bush was preparing for his first superpower summit with Mikhail Gorbachev at Malta.
Bush was affable and even supportive of Gorbachev's reforms, keen to make the meeting a success.
But this readiness to intervene in the Philippines was a useful message to send to a Soviet leader still exploring the thinking and the reactions of the new US President.
Mr Bush's clear determination to continue with America's global role added force to his blunt rejection of Gorbachev's call for naval nuclear disarmament.
The message to Moscow was clear, that George Bush was no wimp.
It has now been conveyed to the rest of us, and we should not too quickly dismiss the thought that this message might resonate usefully in Nicaragua, in Iran and the Lebanon, and perhaps even in the two Germanys.
‘The 1979 Canal Treaties were not in jeopardy, there was no sign of danger to the Canal, and the war declaration by Noriega was more rhetoric than reality,’ commented Mr Larry Birns, director of the respected regional think-tank, the Council for Hemispheric Affairs.
‘The military action has more to do with White House fears of ‘wimpdom’ than any realistic threat to US national security.’
In between came the almost arrogant announcement that President Bush had decided unilaterally to end the diplomatic isolation China had suffered since the massacre of Tiananmen Square.
His decision to send National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger to Beijing not only flouted international opinion, it suggested a commitment to Realpolitik.
As a former director of the CIA, Bush was familiar with the secret world, and comfortable with its tradition of covert operations.
And as the first US Ambassador to the Communist regime in Beijing, he believed that secret emissaries to his old Chinese contacts was the way to launch his personal brand of presidential diplomacy.
‘Operation Just Cause,’ yesterday's surprise invasion of Panama, will certainly wipe any lingering concern about the White House's Chinese Realpolitik from the front pages.
In his TV statement as dawn broke over Washington, the President maintained that the invasion had been prompted by the weekend of harassment of US soldiers in Panama City.
Doubtless that was the trigger, but an operation of 24,000 men is not thrown together in a few days.
‘Just Cause’ was a carefully planned invasion just waiting to happen, poised at the starting gate for the kind of justification that the macho thug in Panama City was bound to provide sooner or later.
Bush had every reason to expect an easy victory, the ultimate Christmas gift to an adoring American public, who have granted him a record approval rating in the opinion polls.
The Panamanian Defence Forces are hardly a formidable foe.
They contain some 6,000 troops organised into three infantry battalions, and backed up by a small Air Force with a squadron of A-37 attack planes and six Huey helicopters.
Their officers still demoralised by the Noriega purges which followed the abortive coup in October, the PDF are massively outgunned by the US forces, although the armed militia of the ‘Dignity Battalions’ will help redress the balance.
But this kind of assertive coup de main carries a huge risk.
It has to work.
A sudden reminder to the world that while the Russian Bear may be slinking back into its cave, the American Eagle can still scream through the skies, is one thing.
A protracted guerrilla war in Panama, with back-street snipings on Christmas Eve and exploding Canal locks on Christmas Day, is something else altogether.
The Democratic Congressmen and Senators, who yesterday scurried to give bi-partisan support to what looked like a patriotic pre-Christmas success, may be forced to think again if this drags on into a stand-off with American hostages in Noriega's hands.
President Bush took a considerable gamble with this invasion, and it has not yet paid off.
The price in Panamanian civilian casualties has yet to be counted, and world opinion has yet to give its verdict.
As the Christmas Carol services recommend Peace on Earth to Washington's Merry Gentlemen, George Bush waits to learn whether Panama will be his Grenada, or his Iran.
As US troops occupy Panama, Richard Gott surveys the country's multi-layered society and the origins of the conflict, and below Martin Walker explains how the White House wimp became a warrior Still trapped in the jungle.
FOUR different countries are hidden away in the damp jungles of Panama.
The first is usually ignored and forgotten: it consists of farmers and peasants who live miles from anywhere in the largely inaccessible tangle of mountain and forest that make up much of the land area of the eastern end of the Central American isthmus.
I travelled there once with Omar Torrijos, friend of Fidel and Graham Greene, and charismatic leader of all the Panamanians — except for the rich and privileged class that used to live more in Miami than Panama.
We landed at overgrown grass airstrips (Torrijos at the controls) and were soon surrounded by ragged children and earnest villagers.
Torrijos loved these expeditions, and the peasants loved him.
Their huts were 12 hours' journey from the nearest main road, and the occasional and always unexpected arrival of the maximo lider was a cause for rejoicing and an indication that somebody, somewhere actually cared for them and took an interest in their otherwise isolated and neglected lives.
This particular pattern of political life is a familiar one in Latin America: the caudillo who rides in on horseback (nowadays a Cessna or a helicopter) and gives personal attention to the grievances of his supporters.
It is a technique used both on the Left and on the Right, by General Pinochet as well as by General Castro.
Torrijos played the role better than most.
It is a familiar theme in Latin American fiction, and something of the flavour of this part of Panama can be gleaned from Garcia Marquez's One Hundred Years Of Solitude, set in the forgotten swamps of Colombia (of which Panama once formed part).
The difficulty with this direct form of government is that it rarely survives the death of the caudillo.
When Torrijos's plane fell out of the sky one stormy day in 1981, his political project died with him.
His successor was General Manuel Noriega, his intelligence chief.
Noriega did his best to continue the
Torrijos tradition, and his political skills were considerable.
He was never a typical military dictator, nor was his Panama to be compared with Pinochet's Chile.
But he lacked the charisma and charm of Torrijos.
He had little vision of what Panama could become.
The peasants were abandoned, and even the urban poor (long a bastion of support for the regime) lost their early enthusiasm.
These are the inhabitants of the second country contained within Panama: the poor slum dwellers of Colon and Panama City, many of them black (and many still English-speaking), descendants of the Caribbean workers brought in to build the inter-oceanic means of communication, first the railway, then the canal.
The damp and leaky shacks they inhabit have not changed much since the famous sepia photographs that sometimes decorate contemporary colour magazines were taken nearly a hundred years ago.
The Americans think they constructed the canal — and the lasting folk memory of that achievement in the United States provides much of the emotional underpinning that sustains the American anti-Noriega hysteria — but it was actually built by black workers from the Caribbean.
SOME residual sense of pride from that era infuses the strong brew of nationalism that has characterised Panama's independent history, a nationalism more potent and anti-American than that of any other country in Latin America (except for Cuba and Nicaragua), and fuelled (like theirs) by years of military occupation.
There is rich irony in President Bush's complaint yesterday of sexual harassment against the wife of an American soldier.
For were not the brothels and whorehouses of Panama City and pre-revolutionary Havana developed for the most part for the benefit of American troops?
Other people's nationalism is never easy to fathom, but Panama's is more than usually overlaid with issues of race (white and black) and class (rich and poor).
In the poorer neighbourhoods, the atmosphere of suppressed rage is sometimes palpable.
The Americans used to be so arrogant that they refused even to allow the Panamanian flag to fly.
(The national currency today is still the US dollar.)
An event a quarter of a century ago sparked off the nationalist project that has now been brought so violently to an end.
Panamanian students were shot in January 1964 for daring to demonstrate in favour of their flag.
Torrijos seized power four years later, vowing to put an end to what was perceived as a long era of national humiliation.
The Canal Treaties he signed with Jimmy Carter were the fruit of his long labours.
The urban poor were the backbone of Torrijos's support, and they continued initially to cheer for Noriega.
But over the years enthusiasm gave way to mere tolerance.
People abandoned hope that things would get better, fearing simply that change at the top would mean change at the bottom — for the worse.
Earlier this year, in May, they voted for change, but when Noriega disavowed the election result the mass of the people shrugged their shoulders and went back to work.
When the Catholic archbishop came out against Noriega, and fatwahs against him were read out in church, the church services in the middle class suburbs turned into political demonstrations against the regime.
But when I toured the poorer areas of Panama City, the church congregations there were silent, sad and confused.
They were not prepared to demonstrate against Noriega, but neither would they come out in his support.
They had little interest in the apparent winners of the elections; and they seemed no longer to care much what would happen next.
It was clear then that Noriega only held on to power by two threads — popular apathy and the loyalty of the Panama Defence Force.
But the hostility of the United States, and its rather too blatant financial involvement in the election campaign, may well have prolonged his regime — wrapped in the armour of outraged nationalism.
The third country in Panama still belongs all too obviously to the United States.
It is not just the canal and its still extraordinary miracle of turn-of-the- century engineering.
Nor is it just the lawns and bungalows and supermarkets of what was once the Canal Zone that make up the fabric of a colonialism with which several European countries have been historically familiar.
Nor is it just the exported population of thousands of American suburbanites, the wives and families with their attendant schools and hospitals and tennis courts.
It is more the fact that this is still a vast military entrepot, an extension of America's armed might projected down towards South America.
Although the training grounds of US
Southern Command have been whittled down by the Carter-
Torrijos treaties, this part of Panama remains a formidable military affair.
Even the canal is owned by the Pentagon, still a state-run company in an era of privatisation.
Paradoxically, the Pentagon has never been as preoccupied as the State Department with the vagaries of General Noriega.
Better a tough general in charge, was their argument, to ensure the stability of the US-Panama relationship, than a weak civilian regime unable to control nationalist hotheads.
THERE is, finally, a fourth country in Panama.
Never quite perceived as such, it is one of the more important countries in the world.
It has a history that goes back to Morgan and Drake, a history of piracy and corruption that reaches down to the present day.
Much of the West's money is laundered through its huge concentration of banks; its registered shipping clogs the sea-lanes of half the globe; its duty-free stores (once the repository of Peruvian silver) now hold immense quantities of electronic goods from the East; and its beaches and airports bear daily witness to the transfer of cocaine from the impoverished producers of South America to the insatiable markets of the North.
Panama gets its cut.
It is a country largely hidden from view (apart from the skyscraper banks that clutter the skyline of Panama City).
It is a land almost entirely owned and run by foreigners, though there must be few of Panama's oligarchs — soldiers and landowners and bankers — who do not have an honorary passport or draw a regular remittance.
Until the last two years, when the United States imposed economic sanctions, this ‘Panama’ did pretty well in the Noriega era.
And Noriega did pretty well too.
These are the four countries that make up contemporary Panama.
They, and the delicate balancing relationship between them, will all have been dramatically upset by the decision of the American commander-in-chief, George Bush, to initiate military action yesterday to overthrow General Noriega.
In theory, it is a simple matter to overthrow a wilting strongman and replace him with a civilian president conveniently waiting in the wings.
But will the money launderers and the drug-runners suddenly find they have no friends?
Unlikely.
Will Panamanian nationalism, and the threat it poses to America's commercial and strategic interests, suddenly disappear?
Improbable.
Will the urban poor benefit from the change of regime?
Not a chance.
Will the forgotten peasants suddenly find that someone has remembered them?
Faint hope.
And there's the rub.
For when the military regime goes and the era of democracy dawns, the problems tackled by Torrijos (with some success) and by Noriega (with little or none) will still remain.
Military action may solve a little domestic difficulty in the United States, with sections of American opinion hyped up for the kill.
But for Panama — the many Panamas — it will only make life more difficult.
The face of nationalism…
Panamanians on the Canal Zone border celebrate the coming into effect of the Canal Treaties in 1979 by tearing up the American flag
Another day Our camps and theirs.
By Christopher Driver
CHRISTMAS Day in the Workhouse used to be an Edwardian party-piece.
Concentration camp Christmases are too painful for memories.
Christmas in the Scrubs ought to crop up in some colour magazine, Home Office permitting.
But there are two internment Christmases, half-forgotten episodes separated by 35 years in wars between the same countries, that deserve a retrospective.
Internment — as opposed to prisoners-of-war camps — has a unique sociological flavour.
There, two national cultures were on trial, both uncertain how to proceed in both situations.
One of the chief differences between 1914 and 1939 was the blue-sky outbreak of war in August 1914, and the gathering storm in 1938-39.
This too affected the social and political complexion of the internees, both British and German.
From November, 1914, Ruhleben (racecourse stables outside Berlin) housed for up to four years about 4000 Britons, who ranged from several honeymoon couples just arrived in Germany for their August holidays to dons and students on walking or reading parties, musicians and sportsmen snatched from festivals, and even a journalist with an ear supposedly close to the ground, Israel Cohen, a German correspondent for the London press who had cheerfully left on July 29 for his vacation near Dresden.
(He ended up writing one of the best books on Ruhleben.)
Some internees were resident German-speakers, British only by background; others were a large squad of Merchant Navy officers and seamen, British to their tough cores.
All were unheated, congested, and meagrely fed, and the miracle was that a disease-free, self-governing, microcosmic version of male England emerged and survived — not without tensions and tragedies and an element of anti-Semitism — till the end of the war.
For a German observer who had been interned in Britain 1914-18, ‘the great secret of masculine psychology is that all men of all ages act and behave like schoolboys as soon as their individualities are merged in a crowd.’
Lower-deck language infiltrated the upper-lip middle classes at Ruhleben and a diarist had to remind himself, against his ultimate repatriation, ‘Don't stick your spoon in your button-hole and go to the kitchen with your plate at a restaurant with a lady’.
Laughter helped.
In Cohen's Ruhleben description in March 1915: ‘It was an ideal morning for an official inspection from the Berlin Kommandatur.
The rain had fallen throughout the night, and the largest pond, as usual, had formed around the Stores.
A prisoner fixed a pole into the muddy soil, bearing the cardboard inscription: ‘Good Fishing Here.’
The military visitors saw a prisoner in top boots, oilskin and sou'wester angling and pulling out a dripping clog.
One of them remarked: ‘Die Englander haben Humor.’
As at Auschwitz, even, music flourished.
A young aspirant conductor, F.Charles Adler, and instrumentalists of the calibre of Carl Fuchs of the Manchester College of Music, rehearsed for Christmas Eve an orchestra of 25 and a chorus of 100 the Messiah (‘realised’ by feverish copyists, unable to arrange the score for male voices.
As the camp magazine critic noted: ‘The effect of soprano and alto parts an octave lower than written by Handel was peculiar but…the aged Commandant, Graf Schwerin, thanked the men for the music with trembling voice and tears on his cheeks.’)
A few months later, along with adult education, commerce, cobbling, tailoring and printing, arts both heavy and light were flourishing.
While Benjamin Dale, the composer, or Leigh Henry, the critic, lectured on Stravinsky and Schoenberg (in 1915!), two companies of music-hall artists competed with Legs and the Woman (the title after Shaw…) and with the camp's first ragtime chorus in drag: Down in Ruhleben, there I want to be, Four thousand boys would be enough for me!
For we're the girls, girls, girls, And we would charm you With our curls, curls, curls — We wouldn't harm you To quote Davidson Ketchum — who with the magazines ‘In Ruhleben Camp’ is the principal source of this account —‘Few small towns since the Middle Ages can have had so productive a group of artists.’
In both wars and both countries, internment was an abomination and an absurdity.
In Germany in 1939, a British Gentile, let alone a Jew, knew what to expect of the Nazi authorities and got out if they could.
In Britain, although no one except Beaverbrook Newspapers were under any illusions that war was imminent, there was still surprise among German and Italian nationals by then resident in Britain that Conservative ministers (led by Sir John Anderson, Home Secretary) interned all aliens without distinction of friend, refugee and enemy, shamelessly abetted by the press of the Fascist-sympathiser, Rothermere.
Hence the community of subsequently famous musicians (the Amadeus Quartet, Egon Wellesz, Peter Stadlen), architects (Bruno Ahrends, Schwitters), scholars (Richard Friedenthal, Stefan Zweig's literary executor), and above all, perhaps, Eugen Spier, who was one of the moving political and industrial spirits behind British anti-Nazism throughout the 1930s, and was imprisoned for two years in spite of very high level representations (another Official Secret never explained).
Refugees from Nazi persecution were interned with their former tormentors.
Even they could consider themselves lucky compared with the shackled Italians torpedoed on the Arandora Star on their way to Canada, or other internees beaten and robbed on their way to Australia by British officers and NCOs on the Dunera who gave a pretty good imitation of Hitler's Stormtroopers.
(Little of all this would have reached the public but for two courageous soldier-MPs, Col. Josiah Wedgwood and Maj. Victor Cazalet).
Perhaps the strangest ‘Christmas’ internee festival of either country or war took place fifty years ago today.
Like Ruhleben, one British internee camp was another racecourse, Lingfield.
It was Winter Solstice, 1939.
For the pagan celebration, ‘huge baulks of timber were piled high and set ablaze.
Putzi Hanfstaengel, Hitler's former friend who had fled his own country, presided and read passages of the nordic Edda.
Runes were cast, followed by chanting of the Horst Wessel.
British officers watched what Spier called ‘a mockery of christianity’, while the rest of the internees looked on with disgust from the members' box on the grandstand.’
Stille Nacht und Nebel?
J.Davidson Ketchum, Ruhleben (University of Toronto, 1965).
Ronald Stent, A Bespattered Page?— The Internment of ‘His Majesty's most Loyal Enemy Aliens’(Andre Deutsch, 1980)
Microfile.
By Jack Schofield Computer editor
XEROX filed a $150 million lawsuit against Apple Computer in the US District Court, San Francisco, last Thursday.
The suit claims Apple pirated key elements of Xerox software for its Lisa and Macintosh user interfaces.
Xerox developed the first graphical user interface for its Star computer in the seventies.
Apple staff saw it when visiting Xerox Parc and at a trade show in 1981.
Apple also hired several Xerox employees, including Star software developers.
Xerox further claims that Apple copied substantial portions of its Lisa and Macintosh Finder programs, including the design and appearance of the main application windows, dialogue boxes and menu, and some of the icons used.
Apple spokesmen commented that Xerox's software concepts were not protected by copyright any more than depictions of birds and trees are protected by the copyright on a painting.
‘The complaint confuses the difference between ideas and expression; the copyright protects expresssion, not ideas.’
Whatever the rights and wrongs of the case, some software developers regard the suit with glee.
Apple has made itself unpopular by suing Digital Research, MicroSoft and Hewlett-Packard to protect the ‘look and feel’ of the Apple Macintosh graphical user interface.
Now it's the biter bit.
Dead Zebra.
ZEBRA Parallel, a start-up company based on Alvey research at the Polytechnic of Central London, is to be closed down with the loss of eight jobs.
The firm had developed novel parallel processing software which worked like a ‘worm’, spawning segments which moved from processor to processor.
It received backing from venture capital firm 3i.
Zebra lost around £240,000 in its year of existence.
It did not make any sales.
Live Owl.
MATSUSHITA has taken over Office Workstations Ltd, OWL, a £2 million British software house and a world leader in hypertext systems.
OWL, which has 89 staff, has developed Guide hypertext software, based on work done by Professor Peter Brown at the University of Kent.
Matsushita is one of the world's major manufacturers, well known for its Panasonic, Technics and National brand names.
Konosuke Matsushita, who founded the company in his front room with 100 yen capital in 1917, died earlier this year leaving a record 245 billion yen (over $1 billion).
Dial Plus.
FROM January 31, British Telecom will offer PSS Dialplus, a much-improved version of its dial-up packet switched data communications service.
Dialplus doubles the sqeed of communications to 2400 bits per second and introduces V42 standard error correction (MNP Class 2 and LAP-M).
In fact the Microcom Networking Protocol is supported up to MNP Class 5, which provides data compression to double the throughput of data.
With Dialplus, users need call only one PSS number, instead of there being a separate number for each modem speed.
Also, subscribers can use any Dialplus node instead of having to register their password on each one separately.
And whereas ordinary PSS is famous for being user-hostile, Dialplus has a menu-driven front end which is far easier to use.
Best of all, Dialplus usage is charged on time only, not the volume of data transmitted.
This offers high-speed modem users the chance to cut costs.
Cheap modems.
WITH the arrival of 2400 bps access to services such as Telecom Gold electronic mail and data services, there should be a large market for cheap high-speed modems.
Many firms are interested.
3Net has launched the Net 45 Smart Quad at £350 plus VAT.
It has speeds up to V22bis (2400bps) and MNP Classes 4 and 5 (tel.: 0256 840429).
Hi-Tec has just received BABT approval for its EC-2400 modem quad modem, which also offers V22bis and MNP up to Class 5.
The price has been cut from £699 to £399 plus VAT.
(Tel.: 0733 897333) Frontier Software is also close to shipping a full V42 quad speed modem with MNP up to Class 5.
The Supra 2400 Plus will be a development of the established Supra 2400, and the target price is £230 plus VAT.
(Tel.: 0423 67140) Today the £299 Amstrad SM2400 seems to dominate the low end V22bis market.
This lacks both error correction and data compression — though PC users can use Micropack Ltd's Odyssey (£70 plus VAT) to provide MNP Classes 4 and 5 in software (tel.: 0224 631100).
Keyline.
KEYLINE, the forthcoming home shopping service based on a new portable terminal (Computer, July 7, 1988 and September 7, 1989) has finally announced the names of some of the firms who will use it.
These include Freemans, Kays, Littlewoods, Gateway Foodmarkets, W H Smith, Philips, Thorn EMI, Commercial Union, General Accident, Sun Alliance, the Bank of Scotland, the Nat-West, Ladbrokes, Coral and British Telecom Directory Enquiries.
Le mail.
BEFORE language students at Exeter University send letters to their European pen-pals by electronic mail, they can get help with their grammatical errors from an expert system.
The human pen-pal can then correct any semantic errors.
The Pen-Pal project is part of a teaching experiment in which the School of Modern Languages and the Department of Computer Science are taking part.
It is also a feasibility study of Le-Mail, a multilingual comms network, and has won financial backing from both the Societa Italiana per l'Esercizino della Telecomunicazioni and the Deutsches Bundespost.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE mc1
Is organic sheep farming a natural career move for an ageing Playmate?
For Arabella Melville — BSc, PhD and sexual libertarian — it is A wolf in sheep's clothing.
By Carmel Fitzsimons THE cut-price wellingtons (blue, £4.99, Harrow Road) were at my feet.
The sun was shining over the Gower Peninsula and the train was sending me all how-green-was-my-valley.
Idly I turned to a 1975 profile of Dr Arabella Melville.
The description by Jill Tweedie of the organic sheep farmer I was travelling to meet bounced from the page: ‘This once respectable female stripped off and began sitting around in front of cameras with her legs apart and her hands in unmentionable places.’
What?
‘Dr Arabella, 26 year old, BSc, PhD, and fallen woman.
Unclothed, clothed, gartered, suspendered, unknickered, arranging her front and hind quarters in revealing positions.
‘She also dashes about London trying to redress the sexual balance by finding out where a woman goes for paid sex, trying it and telling you how it was and how much.’
Trying it.
Telling you how it was.
Paying.
I've spared you the bit about sleeping with a famous broadcaster and writing in her magazine, The Libertine, that he was as ‘good’ as he boasted.
Honestly, it's not prudery.
It's just that there are some things the mind-set is not adjusted to and I was tuned in for bracing winds, long place names and snatches of Tom Jones.
I expected ecological debate, the odd clash over vegetarianism and a hint of hippiness.
Sex, I was not expecting.
At Carmarthen I and my now derisory wellingtons were feeling flustered.
Dr Arabella had written to the Guardian from her innocent sounding Old Vicarage Farm, in Cenarth, Dyfed, about the agonies suffered by sheep under normal farming methods.
‘As one of a growing band of organic sheep farmers, I know that sheep can be reared without cruelty.
My flock is extremely healthy, charming and friendly.’
We'd all loved the charming flock.
Porcelain shepherdess and fleeces white as snow.
But when her letter said how tasty these little organic chaps can be when placed close to carrots, peas and gravy, I should have seen that she was open to contradictions.
Arabella Melville was waiting at Carmarthen station in a tartan dress.
Not a hippy.
And not an ageing Playmate.
She seemed a very candid person.
‘Isn't it a lovely article?
It was 1975 and I was being charged under the Obscene Publications Act and it was like the Oz trial, so I was interviewed.
I only did the nude modelling because my sister did it.
It didn't grow into The Libertine magazine and become an anti-censorship campaign until after I met Colin.’
Colin Johnson is driving the van and has been Bella's lover for 15 years.
He is one of the world's stirrers and shakers, and even more than Bella he seems to wolf life down in big mouthfuls.
‘We don't mind what the locals know about our ‘I thought it was fun.
I was over-qualified and signing on and I realised there was more money to be made taking my clothes off’.
past.
This is a country stuffed full of homes out of the Daily Mail Book of Bungalows.
Let's face it, Wales is a huge monoculture, all inward looking and local.
They always feel beleaguered.
It's inevitable that they don't accept us.’
He cheerily negotiates a hairpin country road.
It's still pretty difficult to understand why someone with lots of other opportunities (that BSc in psychology, the PhD in psychopharmacy and the lectures given at Iowa and McGill University) should be a porno model.
Melville is fearless: ‘I thought it was fun.
I was over-qualified and signing on and I realised there was more money to be made taking my clothes off.
It didn't hurt me.’
‘We were anti wank magazines, too,’ says Johnson robustly.
‘That's why we started The Libertine.
We wanted to break the dreadful sex magazine mafia, allow people to buy what they wanted and maybe get them to understand the plumbing of sex.
That it can be great fun.’
Johnson is 50, Melville is 41 and sometimes as you hear this playground talk about sex you hear echoes of a world ignorant of Aids.
Sex-plumbing and sex-fun seems far, far removed from the complex business we now all say it is.
Melville explains, ‘The downside got overlooked because of the crusading side, but eventually I got the sex mag blues.
It made me anxious, focusing on my physical self, keeping a certain shape.’
But you did sleep with people just to report back on it.
As did Johnson?
‘We were very open.
I've never had difficulties about Colin sleeping with other people.
I'm just as likely to start feeling insecure about someone in his past as someone now.’
We are in the Old Vicarage Farm now, which Johnson describes as a pretentious heap of shit built to impress the local peasants.
It is large and grey and chilly but surrounded by beautiful land.
They have a mobile cordless phone and post-it yellow reminder stickers above the old hearth saying No Smoking.
The place is full of the aroma of Spot-Knee, the ram lamb who recently copped it after a blissful organic life.
On the wall is the Soil Association certificate showing that no nasty pesticides have been used on the farm for two years.
You can't be Green without one.
Talking about the old days is fun.
They laugh about the time when Colin was making love with a girlfriend and Bella, in the room next door, heard her moan that her feet were cold.
So she ran in and whipped a pair of socks on to the girl's feet.
I am beginning to wonder if I inhabit the same planet.
Johnson and Melville are used to this.
My children, Johnson says, are in their twenties and they can't handle all this swinging talk.
It's a question of morphology, he says, cultural movements.
You can predict that the romantic will be followed by the realistic.
Punks hate hippies.
The Yuppies presage the New Age.
The Green movement is partly due to the flower people reaching a crest of economic power.
So how did sex magazine entrepreneurs become organic sheep farmers of the late Eighties?
They tell it in a way that makes it make sense.
They won their obscenity trial but poverty drove them to a caravan beside a Methodist chapel where they lived off skips, meeting other swinging exiles and learning how much people waste.
By chance, and on the basis of her scientific qualifications, Melville got a job at Swansea University researching doctors' prescribing habits.
With Johnson, ‘a denim capitalist’, she wrote Cured To Death about the chronic effects of prescription drugs.
She realised people needed drugs because they were sick from stress and poor food.
‘The book made us think about the nature of health.
We could see that the health of the person is directly tied in with the health of the planet.’
With the profits from their books they made enough finally to buy Old Vicarage Farm, with four others, as an organic co-operative, in 1987.
But now the duo are selling up.
‘It's not been a failure of the organic principle, it's been a failure of people,’ says Melville unhappily.
Johnson is about to explain with lots of big words but it's agreed he should shut up.
Melville continues: ‘The young people had no idea of how hard it would be.
We became like their parents.
It was weird.
From the first day they completely opted out, wandering around saying how beautiful it was while we dug the vegetable garden.
‘I fell in love with this place the first time I saw it.
Colin loved the land but he wouldn't even get out of the van to look at the house.’
Johnson says, ‘It's too big.
It was the wrong people.
We brought tools, they brought gonks.’
The evening is drawing in early but it's sad how the shadows lenghthen around Melville's words.
‘I tried to hang on.
But it's emotionally draining living here with someone who does not want to be here.’
The young people have left.
Says Melville, ‘We learned that it's very difficult to live and work together.’
Johnson adds that the definition excludes them because they are in love.
Melville says she would prefer it if he said that they loved each other, and that subtle point is not lost on anyone.
It's not the sex mag blues nor the poverty in the caravan nor the midnight tending of newborn lambs that saps us.
It's someone stealing your dream away.
We visit the charming sheep and I get a chance to wear my wellingtons after all.
In their generosity, or relief of getting out of the kitchen, they ply me with bag loads of organic vegetables.
They say I must come and see them on their new organic farm — more land, less house, says Johnson.
And, like the movers and bustlers they are, when we miss the train at Carmarthen because we are talking too much, they summon a cab to race the train to Swansea.
Propelled by their energy I arrive, naturally, 20 minutes ahead of the commuters.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE wom
Search for a safe passage.
OVER the last 10 days, tens of thousands of PC users have received a floppy disc from the PC Cyborg Corporation offering information about Aids — but, like the Trojan horse, it is more than it seems.
Its other function is to take over your hard disc and encrypt all the file directories, rendering the disc unusable.
If you have received such a disc, don't run it.
If you have already run it, then you need a copy of a program called Clearaid.
Exe, written by Jim Bates.
Essentially the ‘Trojan’ demands money with menaces — exactly as predicted on this page by Rupert Goodwins many months ago (Computer April 7, 1988).
Virus-expert Alan Solomon of the IBM PC User Group explains how it does it.
If you run the Install program, it creates two subdirectories with ‘impossible’ names.
One of these consists of one invisible character,[Alt-255].
It then copies your Autoexec.Bat to a file called Auto.Bat and creates a new Autoexec.Bat file which is both hidden and read-only.
This runs the other hidden file whenever you start up your PC.
After the computer has been started up a number of times — possibly 90 — the damage starts.
The program tells you to turn off your PC, and it encrypts your directory, hiding all the files on your hard disc except one, called Cyborg.Doc.
If you start the PC from the hard disc, it tells you your software licence has expired and demands money ($378) to renew it.
This must be sent to a PO Box in Panama City.
Before that stage, the program may also have provided instructions to encourage you to copy files on to a blank disc in drive A:, to ‘please insert this in another machine’ and type A:Share.
(Obviously you shouldn't do this!)
Experienced PC users can deal with the Trojan by using software tools to make the new Autoexec.Bat file visible and read/write, before deleting and replacing it with a correct version.
However, it is not certain that this completely solves the problem.
Users should also start their machines from a virus-free floppy disc and do a file copy to back up all their files onto clean discs.
(Do two copies!)
Protected applications software should be de-installed.
The hard disc can then be formatted before all the files are restored.
Jim Bates has written two programs to deal with the Trojan.
The first, Aidsout.Com, can be used before the damage routine has been triggered.
The latest version, Clearaid.Exe, works both before and after.
Bates's efforts have been sponsored by Personal Computer Business World magazine, which innocently provided the mailing list used to distribute 7,000 Trojans to readers with PC/XT computers.
Editor Mike Magee is keen to supply afflicted users with copies of Clearaid.
It can also be downloaded from Power Tower, Jim Bates's bulletin board, and may be available from other magazines such as PC Magazine.
Although the Trojan has been described, sensationally, as ‘the biggest computer crime in the world,’ what law does it break?
A disc has been sent out with a software licence asking for $189: don't users install this at their own risk?
Some commerical software suppliers take pains to protect their programs, and the Trojan could be considered as such, albeit in a dangerously extreme form.
But those who wish to make a formal complaint can contact Detective Sergeant Donovan of the computer crime unit, tel.: 01-725 2434.
There's also Data Integrity's Systems Perils Policy, available from any Lloyds broker, for bolting the stable door after the horse has bolted.
Further information: Alan Jay, IBM PC User Group, 01-863 1191.
Clearaid: Personal Computer Business World, 01-831 9252.
PC Magazine, 01-661 3662.
Power Tower bulletin board, 0533 880114 (8 data bits, one stop bit, no parity, baud rate self sensing).
Data Integrity Ltd: Graham Hore, 01-636 1971.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE mc1
Out for the count.
By Walter Gratzer Innumeracy, by John Allen Paulos (Viking, £12.95) Ideas and Information: Managing in a High-Tech World, by Arno Penzias (W.W. Norton, £12.95)
THERE is, as James Thurber sagely noted, no safety in numbers or in anything else.
Consider for example the proposition that the average human possesses one breast and one testicle, a grievous misapplication of statistics no doubt, but less of an affront to logic than the argument of the weather forecaster, seized on by John Allen Paulos: with a 50 per cent chance of rain on Saturday and a 50 per cent chance on Sunday, he declared, ‘it looks like a 100 per cent chance of rain this weekend’.
No wonder, Paulos argues, that in a society in which such lapses are common, and indeed go unremarked, the citizenry should be prey to every form of delusion and chicanery, political or mercenary.
Paulos is a professor of mathematics; his book, he owns, was born of indignation and he writes with passion, tempered however by good humour.
It is, I suspect, a sad inevitability that he will be read mainly by those least in need of the lessons he teaches.
Certainly their substance should be accessible to anyone not so far gone in the contemplation of astrology — a science, so it is widely held, on the cogent grounds that its practitioners use computers — homeopathy, aromatherapy, or telekinesis as to be beyond the reach of reason.
Paulos is admirable on the nature of coincidence — the inevitability of improbable events — on the logic of gambling in its various forms from coin-tossing to the Stock Exchange; the Gambler's Fallacy (the belief that when a coin has landed heads several times over, there is an increased probability that tails will turn up on the next throw); Pascal's wager; Condorcet's paradox; the prisoner's dilemma.
They are all here.
I wish I could remember the name of the functionary who pronounced on the news that a union vote had gone 70/30, at least three to one in favour: I would gladly lend him my copy.
It is a sound maxim that you do not ask the barber whether you need a haircut, and if Prof Paulos is not a wholly disinterested party in matters of numeracy, you will certainly not expect Arno Penzias, a distinguished physicist and vice-president for research at the Bell Telephone Laboratories of AT&T, to be less than sanguine about the remorseless advance of information technology.
Ideas and Information is a guide for the perplexed.
The subtitle contains, as I take it, a deliberate ambiguity, for most of the book is concerned with managing in the sense of coping, but in the last chapter Penzias dilates on how technologically based organisations should be run.
He has no time for inefficiency, and he reserves a particular scorn for the manner in which the medical profession organises itself.
Penzias conveys a vivid sense of the pace of technological evolution in our time.
He recalls his days as a graduate student when the famous IBM 650 was the last word in computing wizardry.
It occupied an entire building and was similar in capacity to the programmable pocket calculator that one now buys at the stationers.
Printed circuits containing 10 million transistors are already available and will fit on a penny coin.
Penzias foresees that the number will have risen to a billion by the end of the century, with an untold gain in computing power.
Compact-disc technology for encoding sound and other information has gained ground rapidly and, Penzias believes, optical fibres will soon supplant communications satellites.
Open access to all this vast capacity for generation of information creates its own demands: in the US alone 18 million filing cabinets are manufactured each year to hold the paper output.
Perhaps the most alluring prospects lie in artificial intelligence and computers that learn.
Research in neutral networks has become a growth industry.
Penzias does not, though, embrace the philosophical heresy that computers can be said to reason, even if public credulity, reinforced by science fiction, often imputes sentient powers to them.
Psychotherapy by a programme (Eliza) consisting of a small repertoire of reassuring questions and answers, was pronounced a success by the patients on the couch.
Such applications were prefigured by Michael Frayn some 20 years ago in his novel The Tin Men which features a computer programmed to pray, so that its orisons might bring down divine favour in accordance with Christian teaching: the computer having no selfish motives, its disinterested sincerity cannot be doubted.
‘Benefit’ is a word on which the reader may frequently stub his toe in Penzias's pages.
The optimism is unremitting.
For a gentle corrective one could do worse than go back to H.L. Mencken who opined that Alexander Graham Bell — the progenitor of the institution in which Penzias holds sway — and Thomas Alva Edison had done more than any of their contemporaries to add to the sum of life's damned nuisances.
And yet Penzias makes a good case for the new golden age, and his urbane discourse is both enlivening and instructive.
His book undoubtedly fills a need; it may, besides, make you wonder whether we have most of us come all that far since the days of Babbage, the true father of the computer, who recorded in his memoirs that he often used to be asked by the mandarins of the English establishment, when they came to view his difference engine: ‘Pray, Mr Babbage, if you put into the machine wrong figures, will the right answers come out?’
Babbage adds: ‘I am not able rightly to apprehend the kind of confusion of ideas that could provoke such a question.’
Today the answer could be encapsulated in one word, the programmer's acronym, gigo: or garbage in, garbage out.
But, oh, how the garbage is sanitised and transmuted by the alchemy of the machine!
You can tell from the way it gets lapped up.
OVERNIGHT FILE
A 50-year odyssey through the dark.
By George Campbell Edna Manley: The Diaries, edited by Rachel Manley (Andre Deutsch, £14.95)
WHEN the artist Edna Manley died in 1987, she left her stamp on history as an inspired visionary, creative seeker, and chronicler.
With her passing, the nation of Jamaica appeared stunned.
She was unique.
She was the widow of Norman Manley, first Premier of Jamaica and the mother also of a then twice elected Prime Minister, Michael Manley.
There were also many other significant aspects of a remarkable life.
Edna Manley was born in Cornwall, England, on Leap Year's day, 1900; the fifth of nine children of an English Methodist Missionary and his Jamaican wife.
While studying at St Martin's School of Art, she married her first cousin, Norman Manley, a decorated first world war veteran and Rhodes scholar at Oxford.
After his graduation as a barrister, they returned to his Jamaican homeland.
And thus this odyssey began, encompassing almost 50 years in the strange new culture of her adopted country.
It was a land with no nascent art, save the reflected mirror of its colonial masters.
There she faced the challenge of developing a new form based on the realities around her and through her caring spirit and love in serving others, encouraged around her a vibrant movement, ensuring her the title of Mother of Jamaican Art.
She edited the first authentic magazine, Focus, whose contributors were accorded free access for their vibrant breakaway from Victorian (Wordsworthian) poetry.
Many of these artists and writers have become internationally known.
These diaries do not always follow conventional order, in that chronology is often ignored; but then she elaborates later on questions of importance.
A thematic key to the diaries was a haunting experience she had as a child in Cornwall.
As she expressed it: ‘I see two paths inextricably bound to each other, and yet in some curious way almost irrelevant to one another …
‘These two paths travel through country.
One country is full of people, people seen objectively and people seen subjectively, people in relation to myself, where the image is vivid, where the music is loud, sometimes overwhelmingly loud, and where the vision is nearly always distorted like a face in the back of a spoon…
Those are people who have made you, carved you, produced you.
‘But the other path passes through country that is without sound or sight or contact.
It is a world of twilight and in it something grows…that creature which is the inner you…
‘One is a world of natural phenomena, or light and rain and people passing down the roads, or things happening, or excitement and peace and of music ending.
The other is nothing, yet everything.
Nothing happens, nothing comes, only a growing in the dark, a state of being.’
These diaries — edited by her granddaughter, Rachel — reveal a remarkable literary talent.
In these pages she produces an almost rounded figure of her famous husband Norman, who abandoned a successful law practice to lead the masses.
She recalls him once campaigning in mountainous terrain: ‘When…
Norman was called upon, he was standing on the rock just behind Issaacs, swaying on his hips in that way he has, with his face turned up to the night.
Lit faintly by the moonlight and with the mighty peaks behind him, he looked a quiet, impressive figure.
‘When he stepped up, the storm lantern threw its uneven yellow light up under this face, making the hollows in his cheeks look carved and his eyes enormous.’
At times she is whimsical as on a visit by Princess Margaret to Jamaica in 1955: ‘May I go on record once and for all— I hate to bend the knee, except to God, and even then not too often.’
On talking with her son Michael —‘Talking with Michael is like going down a water chute and finding yourself in the same swimming pool, very much at the deep end.’
She writes about her country home: ‘The old toad is rolling his drum down at the foot of the hill, and the crunch, crunch of the cows is near to my window over the barbecue.
The dark and the light have lain down in each other 's arms to sleep in a bed of silver moonlight and a little shifting wind brings the scents from the nearby woodland on the other hill.’
She took her art seriously and in the agony of creative inspiration often turned to poetry and music for assurance.
As in the entry: ‘Tonight, this night of March 25, with the Andante of Schubert's A Major Sonata stealing out into the night, I swear all I have of passion, all I have of love, I will pour into a message of faith as I carve.’
And, at the advent of carving a crucifix for a church, she records: ‘I started work at around 9 am.
I knelt and prayed, not only for guidance and inspiration in the carving, but that a new era of peace and honesty should invade my life whilst I worked…’
A later entry reveals an undesirable recognition of her own skill as a wood carver: ‘I know I am a minor artist, but no one, but on one is a better woodcarver.
No one can bully, cajole, coax, batter, trick or beguile wood like I can!’
Plagued with illness after working with glass fibre, she gave up carving to work with other media for casting into bronze.
Finally, she turned to painting very successfully.
She died with an unfinished ‘Lazarus’ on canvas.
George Campbell's book of poetry Earth Testament was illustrated by Edna Manley.
His First Poems has been reprinted by Yale University, New York.
OVERNIGHT FILE