

Investigation hampered by lack of conclusive evidence Airport security criticised Town's muted anger on anniversary Bomb suspect convicted of terrorism.
By David Sharrock in Uppsala
TWELVE months after PanAm 103 crashed into Lockerbie killing 270 people, the first suspect to be officially identified was yesterday convicted of terrorism.
Mohamed Abu Talb will serve his sentence in a Swedish jail with three accomplices for a terrorism campaign carried out in 1985 and 1986 against American and Israeli targets in Copenhagen, Amsterdam and Stockholm.
One person died and 26 were injured in the attacks.
The four men — Talb, aged 35, Marten Imandi, and two brothers, Mustafa and Mahmoud Mougrabi — were known to the intelligence services, who linked them with a Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General Command (PFLP-GC) cell working in Frankfurt and Neuss.
Talb's record stands out for attention, even if evidence of direct involvement in the PanAm bombing for the moment appears to be largely circumstantial.
He received military training in the Soviet Union and Egypt in the 1970s, fought the Israelis in Lebanon in 1982 and first entered Sweden the following year after obtaining a visa through its Damascus embassy.
Dogged police work by the Lockerbie investigation team, allied with the forensic skill of the Royal Armaments Research and Development Establishment at Fort Halstead, Kent, established that the bomb had most likely been loaded in a suitcase at Malta before being transferred to PanAm 103 at Frankfurt.
While the Lockerbie investigation proceeded, Talb was in a Swedish prison awaiting trial for the 1985/6 bombings.
On May 18 of this year, Talb's former wife, Jamila Mougrabi, revealed during interrogation by Swedish police that her husband was in Malta in October 1988.
In a police statement she said: ‘On Malta he visited a friend who owns a bakery and a brother whose name is Abdes Salam.
He owns a clothing company where Abu Talb bought clothes.’
Three weeks ago Swedish and Scottish police searched Talb's flat in Uppsala, removing 15 bags of clothing.
It is believed that the Maltese shop owner, who recalled selling a bundle of assorted clothing which was in the bomb-carrying suitcase, has inspected the bags.
Two months before PanAm 103 was blown up, West German federal police raided the PFLP-GC cell in Neuss and Frankfurt.
Operation Autumn Leaves uncovered a large quantity of guns, ammunition, Semtex explosive and a bomb-making factory.
Sixteen arrests were made, but only two men were detained.
One of those was Hafez Dalkammoni, believed to be the cell's leader, who is now awaiting trial on arms offences.
Scottish police believe the men to be heavily implicated in the Lockerbie bombing.
Talb and Dalkammoni visited Malta together in October 1988 and met members of a PFLP-GC cell on the island.
Another of Dalkammoni's associates who was arrested during Operation Autumn Leaves was Marwan Khreesat, known to be an expert bomb-maker.
Khreesat was freed within days of his arrest for lack of evidence.
Police discovered a radio-cassette converted into a bomb hidden in one of the group's cars.
The bomb had a barometric trigger of the kind that had been used to bomb aircraft before.
The intelligence source which had originally tipped off West German police about the group's activities claimed that five bombs had been made.
Two were recovered in the raids.
Another two were found in the shop of a man called Hasham Abassi, Dalkammoni's brother-in-law, two months after the PanAm bombing.
Circumstantial evidence suggested that the fifth bomb was loaded at Malta and transferred onto PanAm 103 at Frankfurt.
The evidence gathered by Scottish, Swedish and West German police still refuses to cohere.
The West Germans believe that the PFLP-GC was not involved in the bombing, even though Talb's links with it appear to be a matter of record.
Ahmed Jibril, PFLP-GC's leader, also denies itsinvolvement.
Talb is believed to be a member of the Palestinian Popular Salvation Front, a PLO group.
The Lockerbie team hope of speaking directly with Talb was dashed earlier this week when he refused to co-operate.
Scotland's senior law officer, Lord Fraser has said he does not intend ‘at present’ to seek the extradition of Abu Talb from Sweden.
Mohamed Abu Talb…refused to co-operate
Judge rules out ad inserts.
MAIL Newspapers yesterday won a High Court ruling to prevent unauthorised advertising material being inserted between the pages of its two national newspapers and Sunday colour magazine.
Mr Justice Mummery ruled in favour of the publisher and owner of the Daily Mail, the Mail on Sunday and You magazine in an action against Mr Christopher Arnold, a businessman.
He said Mail Newspapers would probably ‘suffer damage to their goodwill and reputation in consequence of Mr Arnold's proposed activities’.
The judge said an ‘insert boom’ was spreading to Britain from the United States and Europe.
He ruled that placing advertising inserts in Mail Newspapers's publications without the company's authority or consent ‘constitutes or involves the making of a misrepresentation’.
‘Mail Newspapers and other newspaper proprietors clearly attach a great deal of importance to maintaining their goodwill and reputation with their readers by exercising careful control over who can advertise in their newspapers and what kinds of advertisements appear there,’ the judge said.
If Mr Arnold was allowed to go ahead, Mail Newspapers would have ‘no control whatsoever on who advertises or on the type of advertisement inserted’.
Council rents will span wider band.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
RENTS for council housing in 66 local authority areas will rise by £4.50 a week or at least 20 per cent next April, according to figures released by the Department of Environment yesterday.
These sharp increases will contrast with below-inflation rent rises of 95 pence a week in about 156 local authority areas, as the Government for the first time moves away from a single national rents policy for the 4.5 million council tenants in England.
Mr Michael Howard, the Housing Minister, said that the rent guidelines, published yesterday, assumed there would be a national increase of 10 per cent in gross rent income.
‘That produces an average guideline increase of £2.08 a week, compared with £1.95 last year.
‘However, unlike previous years, the determinations this year provide for different guideline rent increases in different authorities.’
It would move councils towards a ‘sensible pattern of rents’, in which they would generally be lower in parts of the country where the value of houses and flats was lower, and higher where the values were relatively high.
The highest rise of 27 per cent will be in Salisbury, where a £4.50 increase will bring rents up to £20.50 a week.
But weekly rents will now vary widely, from £43.24 a week in Kensington and Chelsea to £14.70 a week in Ellesmere Port.
Under the 1988 Housing Act, local authorities will have to increase their rents further if they allow arrears and fail to achieve 100 per cent rent collection.
Along with other changes to the £3 billion a year housing subsidy system, the Government yesterday also published the annual housing investment programme allocations for local authorities.
For the first time, the level of proceeds from council house sales accrued by each local authority has been taken into account in deciding the distribution of this year's £1,784 million of borrowing permissions and capital grants.
The Government says it will use the new system to allocate resources to those councils with the worst housing problems.
The Department of Environment also announced yesterday that it had abandoned the system it has used for most of the past 10 years to channel extra housing cash into the 57 worst affected inner-city areas.
Mr Howard said that the system was not only obscure but also ineffective.
Instead, the Housing Minister announced a £100 million allocation specifically for the target areas.
Tebbit tosses grenade on immigration.
Alan Travis cautions against parallels with Powell's ‘river of blood’ campaign.
‘ENOCH Powell once advised me: ‘Never go into the Chamber of the House of Commons without a verbal grenade in your pocket’,’ Mr Norman Tebbit wrote in his biography Upwardly Mobile.
The former Conservative party chairman certainly ignited a powerful piece of ordnance in the Chamber on Thursday during the statement on Hong Kong.
In the process his demand that there be no further large scale immigration infuriated the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, who retorted: ‘I do not need any education on the importance of strict immigration control for entry into this country.’
Mr Tebbit's attempt to build a backbench revolt over the question of passports for the Hong Kong Chinese has inevitably drawn comparisons with the role of Mr Enoch Powell in the 1960s.
As Mr Jim Lester, the MP for Broxtowe, on the left of the party, said yesterday: ‘I am quite sure he will get quite a lot of support.
It brings out the old policies of Enoch Powell way back and there are still a few Powellites in the Tory party.
But I don't think it is right.’
There is an important difference between Mr Tebbit and Mr Powell.
The latter was essentially isolated within the Conservative parliamentary party.
When Mr Heath sacked him from the Shadow Cabinet in 1968 after he had paraphrased Virgil's Aeneid and with foreboding claimed to see ‘the River Tiber foaming with much blood’ he began a journey into the wilderness.
London dockers and the Smithfield porters were alone in marching on Westminster demanding: ‘Don't Knock Enoch.’
Only periodically does Mr Tebbit seem to have looked to Powell as a politician who could express some of his gnawing doubts about the Heath government.
The doubts most clearly arose over the question of Idi Amin's expulsion of the Ugandan Asians in the summer of 1972.
Even then, the terms of the protests put forward by officials of his Chingford Conservative Association proved too strong for Norman Tebbit.
He told them both content and tone were unacceptable.
He does not reveal which way he voted in the subsequent secret ballot on the issue at the 1972 Conservative Party conference when Mr Powell's amendment was defeated by 1,721 to 736 votes.
But he does note that Heath's claim that it was a clear victory was based on just over half the representatives supporting the Government.
Mr Powell was never to regain any sizeable base among Conservative MPs but Mr Tebbit, after leaving the Cabinet, has proved again and again that when combining with Mr Michael Heseltine or other factions within the party he can rally a significant number of MPs.
Immigration, however, may prove to be a banner around which only the rightwing can rally.
Mr Tebbit has consistently made clear his opposition to large scale immigration but he has said he is in favour of‘attracting immigrants who are well educated and highly skilled…regardless of race’.
One Tory MP on the right summed up the difference: ‘Enoch was infinitely more interesting and distinguished than Tebbit.
There is a crude mateyness about Tebbit.
He reflects the social changes in the constituencies and the parliamentary party and because of that is much more effective.’
Mr Powell's lofty academic style made it difficult for him to approach MPs.
He would ask potential supporters: ‘Would you like a copy of my speech of the third of August.
I will leave a copy on the message board for you.’
Mr Tebbit was keen yesterday to distance himself from any comparison with Mr Powell.
He also said that he had never talked in terms of prospective violence nor had he suggested that ‘any of these people’ were in any way inferior to anybody else.
Whether he has any greater success in mounting a rebellion against Mr Heath's former political secretary, Mr Hurd, than Mr Powell had against the former Prime Minister 17 years ago remains to be seen.
Parkinson attacked over baggage screening delay.
By Michael Smith Transport Editor
THE TRANSPORT Secretary was attacked yesterday for failing to bring in screening of passenger baggage to be stored in aircraft holds, and for putting commercial interests ahead of tighter security.
Mr John Prescott, the shadow Transport Secretary, said the Department of Transport ‘seems as complacent as ever about its security responsibilities’.
Mr Cecil Parkinson rejected a demand from MPs on the transport select committee for immediate screening of passenger baggage on international flights, and instead promised ‘a progressive extension’ of screening.
He has accepted 21 of the 28 recommendations made by the committee, but turned down demands for baggage hold examination and the introduction of a levy on fares to pay for better security.
Mr Parkinson promised extra security inspectors at airports, some posing as terrorists to test security.
Mr Prescott, who plans to table amendments to the airport security bill, said Mr Parkinson was paying lip service to screening and giving no indication when this would be achieved.
‘The major obstacle to achieving that goal is money,’ Mr Prescott said.
‘Space is always available at airports for commercial operations such as shops and bars, but the authorities are not prepared to give up some space for security.’
He also expressed concern at private evidence submitted to the committee by American airlines that the US Federal Aviation Administration was waiving its requirement that all hold baggage should be examined because British airport owners would not provide the extra space.
The charge of putting profits before passenger protection was also made by the Transport and General Workers' Union, the aviation industry's biggest trade union, in a booklet launching its Aviation Security Charter.
The charter calls for a government-funded airport security system protected from the commercial pressures of privatisation and from the contracting-out of essential services.
It says private contractors should be banned from airports.
Mr George Ryde, TGWU national secretary for civil aviation, said: ‘Our members are involved in almost every aspect of airport work, and they tell a different story to the public relations myth that nothing is spared in providing passengers with maximum security.
‘Their experience is that commercial pressure is threatening proper security throughout the industry.’
The booklet, including the charter, is based on concerns expressed by transport union members in aviation at a conference organised by the TGWU in September.
The British Airports Authority and the Department of Transport said they could not comment until they had studied the union's findings.
Judge orders confiscation of smuggler's £1.5m assets Drugs baron faces 15 years in solitary.
DRUGS baron Rene Black was jailed for 15 years yesterday for organising a £15.5 million conspiracy to flood Britain with drugs from Europe's first cocaine factory.
His partner in the conspiracy, James Laming, who claimed during the trial to have invented a racehorse nobbling stun gun, was jailed for 14 years.
At Southwark crown court, Judge Gerald Butler, QC, ordered confiscation of all Black's assets, worth nearly £1.5 million, with the threat of 10 more years in prison if he defaulted.
He also ordered that Black, said to be in fear of his life after alleged death threats by former drug associates, be deported at the end of his sentence.
Black, a 35-year-old Peruvian, of Cranleigh, Surrey, faces the prospect of spending his entire sentence in solitary confinement for his own safety.
Like Black, Laming, aged 49, a car dealer, of Peckham, south London, was expressionless as sentence was passed.
Judge Butler ordered that assets worth £23,950 be confiscated under the 1986 Drugs Trafficking Offences Act with the threat that Laming serve a further 18 months in default.
A third defendant, Patrick Fraser, aged 38, of Catford, south London, was jailed for eight years for possessing 501 grams of cocaine with intent to supply.
The judge ordered seizure of his assets totalling £36,200 or Fraser would serve a further 18 months in jail.
Black's father-in-law, Ronald Fisher, aged 52, was jailed for 30 months.
He had admitted suspecting that money he helped Black to launder at banks was the proceeds of drugs trafficking.
Laming, who was convicted during his trial of conspiring with Black to supply cocaine, was also sentenced to nine years to run concurrently for possessing 501 grams of cocaine.
Black had admitted conspiring to import, produce, and supply cocaine, and to possessing 30 kilogrammes of the drug with a street value of £5 million.
Judge Butler said he had reduced Black's sentence ‘substantially’ because the Peruvian had co-operated with police.
The judge, who took just 45 minutes to decide on the sentences, said he accepted Fraser was a drug addict who had admitted what he had done.
But this in no way excused his crime.
Fraser had a previous criminal record that included convictions involving drugs.
He said Fisher's plea of guilty had been a mitigating factor.
The court had heard that Black and his brother Rudolpho, aged 32, used their fruit importing business as a front to smuggle raw cocaine from Peru to Britain.
The drug was refined at their laboratory in Cranleigh, with Laming acting as distributor.
Rudolpho is believed to be hiding in Peru.
Laming's defence hinged on his claims that Black was the backer for his plan to undermine racecourse betting and bookmaking in Britain with the stun gun device.
Laming claimed he knew nothing about the drugs ring and said Black put up £10,000 towards development of the stun gun.
Jockey Greville Starkey was allegedly unseated by an ultrasonic stun gun as he neared the winning post on Ile de Chypre at Royal Ascot last year.
The court heard that the converted binoculars could fire a beam of sound over 50ft, audible only to horses.
The effect on a racehorse would have been like ‘a firework exploding in its ear’.
Black's fortune from drug trafficking was put by the prosecution at £3.55 million.
He and his ‘playboy’ brother, Rudolpho enjoyed a luxurious lifestyle on the profits.
The brothers owned two penthouses in Florida worth $250,000 and paid £87,000 for a Porsche car.
In addition, Rene, a keen showjumper ranked fifth in Peru, spent £500,000 on the sport after arriving in Britain in 1982.
200 children may sue over tainted blood.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
UP TO 200 haemophiliac children infected with HIV, the Aids virus, through tainted blood products, are expected to join in the compensation claim against the Government under changes to the legal aid rules which come into force next April.
At a private hearing at the High Court in London next month, Mr Justice Ognall is expected to extend the original February 2 deadline for joining in the legal action for children under 16.
Children will become eligible for legal aid in their own right in April under changes announced last month by Lord Mackay, the Lord Chancellor.
Under the present rules, which require parents' means to be taken into account, most infected children are unable to sue because their parents earn too much.
Around 1,200 haemophiliacs, including children as young as six, have become infected through contaminated blood products, mainly imported from the US, in the early 1980s.
The judge has also decided not to go ahead with a preliminary trial on two key issues in the case, scheduled to begin on January 15, which would have broken new legal ground.
Without considering the individual cases, he was to have decided whether the Government can be sued over its policy on allocation of resources.
Lawyers for the haemophiliacs, 600 of whom have issued writs, argue that the Government was negligent in not becoming self-sufficient in blood products sooner and in not heat-treating earlier to kill the virus.
The second question was whether the licensing authority, which licenses medicinal products, owes a duty of care to individuals.
The judge's decision means that the case will not come to court before early 1991, when the issues will be decided in the context of the individual cases.
Mr David Watters, secretary of the Haemophilia Society, yesterday described the decision as ‘a bit of a blow.
It could have helped clarify a number of issues at an early stage and possibly saved people a lot of money and anguish.’
In the Court of Session in Edinburgh yesterday, Lord Morrison refused to order the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service to hand over the name of a donor whose blood allegedly infected a 26-year-old man with HIV.
The man, referred to as AB, suffers from Aids-related complex (ARC), a condition stopping short of full-blown Aids.
He received two blood transfusions after a bone marrow transplant and wanted the name so he could sue the donor.
Lawyers said the action for disclosure of the name was believed to be the first of its kind in Britain.
AB alleges he discovered, through records obtained before he launched a £200,000 legal action against the transfusion service, that the donor knew he was in a high-risk group for HIV infection.
Lord Morrison accepted arguments by Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the Scottish Secretary, that disclosure would endanger blood transfusion supplies because future donors would be reluctant to give blood.
He ruled that the public interest in ensuring enough blood outweighed the public interest in allowing AB to seek justice through the courts.
AB's solicitor, Mr Brian Donald, said he was considering an appeal.
Tebbit ‘aims to be leader’.
Mr Norman Tebbit attacked Cabinet policy for Hong Kong yesterday, convincing some MPs that he was manoeuvring to succeed Mrs Thatcher when she retires.
Page 24.
Brandenburg work.
East German border workers with a crane and a pneumatic drill last night began demolishing the top of the Berlin Wall at the Brandenburg Gate, which opens as a new crossing point between East and West Berlin today.
Page 10.
Pollution concern.
Discussion of the Environmental Protection Bill will be dominated by the breaking-up of the Nature Conservancy Council and not enough attention will be given to pollution and genetically-manipulated organisms.
Environment, page 25.
Drugs baron jailed.
A man who planned to flood Britain with cocaine was jailed for 15 years yesterday and his assets of £1.5 million were confiscated.
Page 5.
Children's claim.
Up to 200 children infected with HIV, the Aids virus, by tainted blood products are expected to claim compensation from the Government.
Page 8.
PanAm suspect jailed.
A man believed involved in the Lockerbie PanAm bombing was jailed in Sweden yesterday.
Report, page 24; Lockerbie one year on, page 3. £50m hope.
The European Community is expected to authorise a £50 million grant to help regenerate parts of Manchester, Salford and Trafford.
Page 15.
Indian victory.
India's new minority government has passed its first parliamentary test.
Page 13
Glenys Kinnock heads Third World trust in honour of victim.
ANEW charity backed by a host of public figures was launched yesterday in memory of Bernt Carlsson, a Swedish diplomat and United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, who was killed in the Lockerbie disaster.
The Bernt Carlsson Trust, which is chaired by Mrs Glenys Kinnock, wife of the Labour leader, pledges to ‘aid the poor and distressed in the third world’.
Mr Carlsson was on his way to New York to sign a Namibian peace settlement when the disaster happened.
The trust's first action will be to launch an appeal for Namibia, which is trying to rebuild after years of war.
Among the charity's trustees are actor Anthony Sher, comedian Ben Elton, rock star Peter Townshend and the news presenter Anna Ford.
The trust aims to relieve poverty and distress in the third world, educate the public about the third world, and promote research into finding solutions to third world problems.
A minute's silence was held in memory of the Lockerbie victims when the charity was launched yesterday at Transport House in London, headquarters of the Transport and General Workers' Union.
Mrs Kinnock spoke of the ‘idealism and courage’ of Mr Carlsson, whose career was dedicated to ‘peace, freedom and humanity’.
His brother, Tore, was at the launch.
BBC wins right to control satellite viewing fees.
BBC Enterprises, the corporation's commercial arm, yesterday won a crucial right to authorise and control the reception of its satellite television transmissions to Europe.
The BBC, which cannot collect statutory licence fees from European viewers, has been transmitting ‘scrambled’ programmes on the basis that it has a monopoly on the right to authorise the making and selling of the necessary ‘unscrambling’decoders.
Yesterday's Court of Appeal ruling overturned a High Court judge's decision last month in favour of Hi-Tech Xtravision, of Camberley, Surrey, which makes and sells rival decoders and which challenged the right of BBC Enterprises to grant an exclusive decoder distributorship to Northampton-based Space Communications (Sat Tel) Ltd.
Allowing the BBC's appeal, the Vice-Chancellor, Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson, sitting with Lords Justices Staughton and Beldam, said the 1988 Copyright Act created rights and remedies for broadcasters not against those who received the programmes, but against those who enabled viewers to receive the transmissions and thereby avoid the viewing fee.
The ruling means that BBC Enterprises can go ahead with its court action seeking a permanent ban on sales of decoders by Hi-Tech.
A further hearing of the case, to decide the viability of defences raised by Hi-Tech under European free trade laws, was adjourned until the new legal term which starts on January 11.
Mr Richard Aiken, counsel for BBC Enterprises, had told the court that a decision on whether to continue the BBC Europe service should have been made at the end of November but had been deferred until a meeting of the directors on December 29.
‘They are anxious that they should not go on running a system which may in the long term be at a loss,’ he said.
Hi-Tech, which has told the court it is willing to collect the £100-per-decoder viewing fee because it does not wish to ‘kill the goose that lays the golden egg’ is now restricted to fulfilling its existing orders for decoders pending the further hearing in the New Year.
A lawyer said Hi-Tech will seek to appeal to the Lords.
Troops kill US teenager in the silent suburbs *.
By Suzanne Dempsey in Panama
THE American soldiers at the roadblock in La Boca were exhausted and perplexed.
Their part in the campaign to liberate Panama had consisted of 34 hours in one place and had culminated in them killing an American teenager.
La Boca, a middle class suburb of the city, was yesterday preternaturally quiet.
There were no children playing, no neighbours talking, and the whole place had the deserted air of an American neighbourhood on Thanksgiving Day.
Close by the canal were two armoured personnel carriers and about eight US military policemen.
They were all tired; two were sleeping.
They told us they had been there since the outbreak of the war — approximately 34 hours previously.
Wire across the road forced drivers to slow down.
Very few cars passed — some with white handkerchiefs draped around their radio aerials.
The MPs said the only firing they had done was on two US teenagers — children of Panama Canal Commission employees.
The teenagers had been on their way home from a party just after the outbreak of hostilities and, according to one military policeman, had tried to crash the road block, almost running down one of the MPs.
We walked across to the teenagers' car, which had veered across the lawn of a local church.
One had been shot in the head and had later died, another had been wounded in the knee.
There were two bullet holes in the windscreen.
A shoe lay on the ground, next to the driver's side of the car.
There was a pool of blood in the passenger seat.
Further down the street, at the former Panama Defence Force police station, five Panamanian prisoners of war sat on the steep steps, bordered by hibiscus bushes.
They all had their hands tied behind their backs and one prisoner was in his underwear.
I asked the soldiers if I could take a photograph and was told: ‘Only if you keep moving.’
I crossed the road to the gutted police station.
A cardboard nativity scene on the gravelled forecourt was all that remained standing.
Some US troops were examining the rubble.
One shouted ‘No photos.’
Further into town, there were more people, many carrying white plastic bags, clearly filled with booty from looting expeditions.
Most of them looked dazed, but in a happy sort of way.
More prisoners of war sat in a car park under guard, their legs crossed and their hands tied behind their backs.
They looked dejected and as puzzled as some of their captors.
A few supermarkets and food shops were open, most with long queues of customers waiting in the intense heat, hoping to stock up on food and other necessities in case the paralysis of the city's life continues.
Near Albrook air base, a Panamanian passenger bus lay in a ditch.
Nobody seemed to know what had happened to the passengers.
Diary.
By Andrew Moncur
MEDICAL textbooks probably define the condition of Nicolae Ceausescu as barking.
The same could be said, but for different reasons, of one member of his retinue — small, big appetite, wears a black furry coat — who, rather uncomfortably, bears witness to the days of Anglo-Romanian entente.
I'm speaking of Gladstone.
He was handed over to the terribly liberal (sorry, I think that should be liberally terrible) dictator by Mr David Steel, hard-line leader of a British political grouping engaged in the notorious Lib-Lab pact, at a time when Ceausescu was still wildly popular.
Particularly with the Liberals, who struck up a sort of Bucharest-Ettrick Bridge accord.
The Queen, of course, installed Our Nicolae as a Knight of the Bath.
Mr Steel merely gave him a black labrador puppy.
The little chap is presumed alive and well — although anything's possible.
You know.
Sit!
Look, I won't tell you again.
Bang!
There were mutterings among Lib Dem MPs yesterday.
There's feeling that the Queen should withdraw the knighthood.
In which case, surely Mr Steel should ask for his dog back.
EVER stopped to think where Old Pineapple Face has stashed his ill-gotten fortune?
He's reckoned to have a minimum of $50 million put aside for an incredibly rainy day.
And the feeling in Washington is that a great pile of it is lying around (under the name of Noriega M.) at banks in London.
Further, there are signs that another call will be made on Mrs Thatcher, fresh from her latest triumph in her celebrated role as the Instant Megaphone, performing God Bless America.
Members of the Senate Intelligence Committee have been told that a formal request will be made to Britain to seize the general's dosh.
Can we?
Well, yes, theoretically, says the Home Office.
Under the 1986 Drug Trafficking Offences Act.
RATHER less will be seen in the public prints of the wit, wisdom (hold on) and waffle of Norman Tebbit.
He's been writing a column for the Sunday Express, occupying the space most famously enjoyed by John Junor, the laird of Auchtermuchty.
But, no more.
Out goes the Chingford Skinhead — who has a tiresome tendency to bang on about politics — and in comes a writer who takes a broader swipe, Tom Utley.
RIDING on horseback, with only your hairdo to conceal your parts, must have been hard enough in 11th Century Coventry.
At Congress House, headquarters of the 20th Century TUC, it simply isn't on at all.
The management has, very decently, been slapping up borrowed works of art.
A highly-coloured tapestry is hung.
Passers-by glance up and, well, pass-by.
Then the truth begins to dawn.
It's Lady Godiva and — good grief — those are naked bosoms.
A word to the staff office committee.
‘There is obviously a consensus that, generally speaking, it is useful not to work in an environment with pictures of naked women,’ said a committee spokeswoman yesterday.
Oh, dear.
A complaint goes off to the powers.
Yes, it's coming down.
Footnote: Lady G. rode out, starkers, on behalf of the long-suffering taxpayer.
YOU MIGHT also like to know that the University of Minnesota has banned the use of mistletoe this year.
It leads to sexual harassment, you see.
Honestly, no man is safe at this time of year.
YOU HAVE to spare a thought, too, for the University of Sussex.
A slight misfortune in the Christmas card department.
The one that bears a picture of an honorary graduate.
Dr Andrei Sakharov.
UNLESS I'm mistaken, it's time for the Vicar's Competition: captions for the nineties.
‘Nicholas Ridley (far right) hails opening of first Lada plant in Britain as beginning of renaissance of British industry.’
(Nigel Stanley); ‘Sunseekers sprinting through Gatwick in attempt to catch their flight to Spain.’
(Gloria Crick); ‘Prince William with fiancee Sharon at their comprehensive's disco.’
(Colin Smith).
LAST word from the Foreign Office (courtesy of Westminster's House Magazine) on the fate of the boat people.
A spokesman: ‘I have nothing new to say, except to say that when I do have something to say I will say it.’
Thank you.
EVIL empires may crumble, invasions might occur.
But through it all comes Douglas Hurd of the F.O. Finding time to write a seasonal short story for yesterday's London Evening Standard.
Happy Christmas.
River's farewell to a grand old man.
By Christopher Dodd
PUTNEY buried one of its favourite sons yesterday and bore testament to a passing era.
Dick Phelps, aged 92 — waterman to the Queen, the Thames Rowing Club, and British Olympic crews, was borne along the Embankment at Putney, accompanied by a phalanx of Doggett's Coat and Badge men in scarlet tunics and knee breeches.
The cortege started at from Dick's home near the river, paused at the rowing club, then progressed along the river front past the clubs which he and his father and his uncles, cousins, and brothers had served — Vesta, Lensbury, Westminster School, Barclays and NatWest and Midland banks, and the London Rowing Club.
Each club flew its flag at halfmast; each waterman stood sentinel at his boathouse door before joining the entourage, which was led by Bobby Prentice, Bargemaster to the Waterman's Company, to St Mary's parish church by the bridge.
There has been a Phelps working this reach at least since ‘Honest John’ Phelps was the finishing judge of the Boat Race, a duty from which he was forcefully retired after a controversial dead heat in 1859.
Phelpses built boats, maintained boats, became champion scullers, taught the gentlemen how to scull, and bowed and doffed their caps ‘below stairs’ at the clubs before the war when watermen were not allowed to drink at the bar.
Some Phelpses became English and world champions.
Doggett's race, which 10 of the Phelpses won, is the most visible link with the watermen's proud past.
The annual contest from London Bridge to Chelsea was founded in 1716 by the actor Thomas Doggett to commemorate the accession of the Hanovers to the throne.
Until recently, competitors only had one chance to win because it was only open to men in their first year after indenture to the Company of Watermen and Lightermen — so winning the buckled shoes, white stockings, silver badge and scull cap which complete the scarlet raiment is no mean feat.
Dick was indentured to the Company in 1917, ‘admitted, allowed, and registered’ to the Freemen in 1933, became waterman to Thames RC in 1931 after starting out as a boatbuilder, became a Waterman to Her Majesty in 1953, and an Extra Waterman to Her Majesty in 1967.
He retired from Thames in 1966, but not from the river.
He could tell of earning half a crown a week and leading the horse pulling the Putney clubs' boats home from Henley, and of the visit of Harvard to race Cambridge at Putney in 1906.
There are still professional watermen in the Tideway and still Phelpses on the river, but the former are a dying breed and the latter are amateur competitors.
Yesterday, the watermen acknowledged Dick as ‘one of the best’.
Picture, page 4
Rethink call from Tory peers follows banks' pull-out Minister in corner over student loans.
By David Gow and Martin Linton
MR JOHN MacGregor, the Education Secretary, yesterday came under pressure from MPs, peers and vice-chancellors to rethink completely the Government's scheme for student loans, following the major banks' decision to pull out.
Lord Boyd-Carpenter, chairman of backbench Tory peers, said it would be wise to use the Christmas recess to give further thought to the scheme.
Conservative peers are expected to criticise the scheme sharply when the Lords begin debates on the Education (Student Loans) Bill in mid-February.
Ministers are known to be bracing themselves for a series of defeats.
Lord Boyd-Carpenter said that criticism was unhappily ‘not confined to the other side’ and it would be many years before the scheme would bear fruit.
His colleague, Lord Beloff, asked why the Government had brought forward a bill without support in either House for a scheme the vice-chancellors had repeatedly told them was impossible.
Professor John Ashworth, vice-chairman of the committee of vice-chancellors and principals (CVCP), also urged Mr MacGregor to use ‘a heaven-sent opportunity to go back to the drawing board and look at the entire issue of how students are supported — grants, loans and fees.’
Professor Ashworth, Salford University vice-chancellor, said repayments of loans, worth up to £460 a year, should be made through the Inland Revenue — an option consistently ruled out by ministers and officials.
‘The university or polytechnic should administer the grant and loan and collect the full-cost fee.
The money would be provided by government.
We would administer it and the access and hardship funds connected to the scheme and inform the Government of the money to be repaid.
They would doubtless inform the Inland Revenue and the effect would be simple and administratively cheap.’
But, under the system now envisaged by Mr MacGregor's officials, higher education students would get a certificate proving they were on a recognised course and apply by post to the Glasgow-based Student Loans Company for a loan.
They would then automatically get one without their credit rating being investigated.
Repayments, according to officials, would be made by direct debit through the student's personal account with a bank or building society.
Mr MacGregor rejected Opposition charges that the Government's plans had been torpedoed by the banks' withdrawal when he made a statement to the Commons yesterday.
The principles and framework of the scheme were ‘completely unchanged.’
Opposition MPs mocked the Government's decision to take over the Student Loans Company as its first act of nationalisation.
Mr Jack Straw, Labour's spokesman, said the company would now be a nationalised corporation.
Mr Simon Hughes, Liberal Democrat spokesman, challenged the Government to say how it could reconcile a state-run loan system with its privatisation programme.
Other Opposition MPs called for the Ombudsman to investigate the issue and for Mr Robert Jackson, higher education minister and the scheme's author, to resign.
Mr Straw insisted that the banks' participation was absolutely central to the bill.
But Mr MacGregor, despite previous ministerial statements to the contrary, retorted that private sector involvement was not crucial to the bill.
Sir Peter Emery, a former Conservative minister, accused the banks of ‘highly irresponsible’ action and urged ministers to consider making student grants encashable only at co-operating banks.
Jailed men cleared by court.
AMAN jailed for 12 years for robbery after he was picked out on an identity parade because of his ‘frightening, evil, and sadistic eyes’, was cleared by the Court of Appeal in London yesterday.
Anthony John Allen, aged 23, of Huyton, Liverpool, was cleared by the appeal judges, along with William Willis, aged 23, who had been given an 11-year sentence for his alleged part in the attack three years ago on a Southampton publican, his wife, and a barmaid.
Lord Justice McCowan, sitting with Mr Justice Roch and Mr Justice Alliott, ruled that the robbery convictions were unsafe.
They said that there had been ‘serious and fundamental’ errors by Judge Lewis McCreery in his summing-up to the jury at Winchester crown court in February last year.
Criticising the trial judge's directions to the jury, they cited poor identification evidence against Allen, and held that accomplice evidence given in Willis's case had caused them great anxiety.
The court was driven to conclude that the jury would not necessarily have convicted had it been correctly directed.
Friday People.
Dennis Barker:.
Day of the Three Wise Ladies
BRITISH motorists must be grateful this festive time to three ladies who will not see a Christmas day lunch.
The Automobile Association skeleton staff trio will be huddled in front of their personal computer screens relaying road conditions to drivers.
Nick Simmons, manager of the AA Roadwatch nerve centre at Stanmore, Middlesex, hastily pointed out yesterday that those who drew the short straw for Christmas duty could just as easily have been men.
This year he has a perfect excuse — his wife is expecting their first baby during the time the Three Wise Ladies are picking up from police, local authorities, and others information about weather, congestion, and danger points, and relaying it to the media.
Most of the exchange of information goes on before the Christmas holiday — like yesterday and today when 12 people were at their computers.
‘The prospects at the moment look pretty good,’ said Simmons, a bright and optimistic 28-year-old who has been with the AA seven years.
‘At the moment it looks as if all major roadworks are suspended.’
The weather forecast was not too bad, either, except that the heavy recent downpours might lead to the cracking of some water, or even gas, mains.
The immediacy of the job is obviously an attraction to Simmons, born in Merton, south London, and a pupil at Dulwich college who never visualised a career with the AA.
He went to the National Broadcasting School on a programming foundation course, then worked for P&O liners for a year, presenting radio programmes on cruises.
‘I went to the AA — for six months or so, as I thought — at 22, because it was a job.
And I have stayed ever since because when I joined Roadwatch it was at a time when they were developing from just 15 information stations throughout the country — there are now almost 100.
Nick Simmons…taking off with the AA
US fungicide ban prompts safety review.
By James Erlichman, Consumer Affairs Correspondent
APROPOSED US ban on the most widely used fungicides has plunged the Ministry of Agriculture into another safety review.
The review was triggered when the US Environmental Protection Agency confirmed its intention to ban further use of maneb, mancozeb and zineb on most foods because the fungicides, used widely for 40 years, have been strongly linked with cancer.
The Guardian disclosed in July that the Ministry of Agriculture secretly agreed to an investigation as soon as the US findings were known.
The ministry said yesterday that an urgent review of the fungicides’ safety was in progress and ministers were expected to announce their decision early in the new year.
The review may lead to another clash of scientific opinion.
Last week, the Government declared the apple spray, Alar, safe but failed to study the evidence which led the US authorities to ban it.
Manufacturers of the three fungicides voluntarily instructed US farmers in October to stop using them on 70 out of 83 approved crops.
British farmers received no warnings and use of the fungicides has not been cut in Britain.
Mr George Bochanski, a spokesman for Rohm & Haas, the manufacturer, said: ‘We continue to believe these products are safe and it is not our job to pre-empt the regulatory bodies in the UK.’
But the US Environmental Protection Agency has decided that the voluntary withdrawal does not go far enough.
It said it would also seek to ban the fungicides' use on tomatoes, potatoes and bananas.
The ban is expected to come into force within 18 months.
Mr William K. Reilly, the agency's administrator, said the immediate cancer risk to children from fungicide residues was negligible.
But daily consumption of ETU, a component of the fungicides, posed a considerable long-term risk.
The agency believes at least 125,000 Americans will develop cancer from the current level of ETU residues being consumed.
British experts are likely to dispute these calculations which are based on mathematical models that attempt to extrapolate likely human cancers from laboratory studies.
The review will increase pressure on scientists at the ministry's Pesticides Safety Divison who say they are too understaffed to handle the backlog on older, more hazardous chemicals.
Fowler rounds off his industrial relations programme Bill allows choice on union membership.
By Keith Harper Labour Editor
MR NORMAN Fowler, the Employment Secretary, indicated that the Employment Bill published yesterday, which ends the closed shop, would be the last piece of trade union legislation in the present Parliament.
Apart from abolishing the closed shop, in a move which has TUC and Labour Party support, the legislation deals with unofficial strikes and outlaws secondary action.
The closed shop: Mr Fowler said the legislation would guarantee people the freedom to decide whether or not to join a union.
The law would make it unlawful to deny people a job either because they were union members, or because they did not want to belong to a union.
Mr Fowler said it was an historic step, because the closed shop had existed for more than 100 years.
Since 1980, the protection of the law against the closed shop had been progressively extended so that it now covered everyone in employment.
Mr Fowler said that while the existing law provided that it was automatically unfair to dismiss anyone for not being a union member, the bill completed the outlawing of the closed shop by extending the same protection to people applying for jobs.
Taking up the points made in recent days by Mr Tony Blair, Labour's employment spokesman, and the TUC, Mr Fowler said the dismantling of the closed shop need not wait for the passage of the bill.
Union leaders should take immediate steps to ensure that no one was ever denied a job because they did not have a union card.
He hoped that anyone over the coming weeks who failed to get a job because of not being a union member would write to the Government and explain the facts.
Secondary action: Mr Fowler said the law would no longer protect the sort of ‘industrial blackmail’ which last year prevented the Ford Motor Company building a new plant at Dundee.
The plan was strongly opposed by the unions, including the Transport and General Workers', which threatened to organise action to prevent the factory opening.
Mr Fowler said there was no reason why businesses and jobs should be put at risk by workers called upon to strike when they had no dispute with their employer.
Unofficial action: According to Mr Fowler, this is a ‘deep-rooted and long-standing problem’.
He claimed that last year nearly 1 ½million working days were lost through unofficial strikes, and that 75 per cent of strikes were unofficial.
He said the bill would end the situation where an employer had to dismiss either all the strikers or none at all.
If a union decided to repudiate a strike, it had to write to all its members taking part in the strike to tell them that the union would give no support, and that they risked dismissal without compensation if the strike continued.
Mr Fowler added that in the Government's even-handed approach to employment, people would have the right to belong to a union and could not be excluded from a job on the grounds that they were trade unionists.
This had nothing to do with the European Social Charter, which proposes to enshrine similar rights, he said.
Another measure in the bill will allow the Government to amend a code of practice without consulting the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service.
Also under the bill, all secondary school pupils will in future be eligible to participate in work experience schemes from the beginning of the summer term.
Industrial muscle…workers at Ford's Halewood plant on Merseyside show union solidarity in a vote at a 1984 mass meetingPHOTOGRAPH: DENIS THORPE
News in brief: Banker loses document fight.
Lorrain Osman, Britain's longest-serving unconvicted prisoner, failed at the High Court in London yesterday to have 30 bags of documents returned to him.
They were seized in a police raid on his home.
Mr Osman, 58, a banker, has spent four years in Pentonville Prison, fighting extradition to Hong Kong on fraud charges.
Acid apologies.
Three organisers of an Acid House party who were jailed for three months for breaching an injunction banning an event in Warwickshire were freed in the High Court in London yesterday after apologising.
Fire deaths rise.
The number of people killed in fires rose to 732 in 1986 from 710 in the previous year while the number injured reached a record 10,178, the Home Office said yesterday.
Pregnancy award.
Mandy Winston who claimed she was sacked by Oldham Crompton Batteries because she was pregnant has been awarded £5,798 by a tribunal.
Waite attack.
A 16-year-old girl from Bermondsey, south London, was sent to a young persons' institution for four months yesterday after being found guilty at Seymour Place juvenile court of causing grievous bodily harm to Francis Ruth Waite, 24, daughter of Terry Waite, held hostage in Lebanon.
Bolton fans charged.
Thirty-two Bolton Wanderers football fans appeared in Manchester crown court yesterday charged with a series of offences, including riot.
Justice trial.
PC Kevin Williams, aged 28, of Paddington Green and Sergeant Colin Moore, of West End Central, accused of perverting the course of justice, were sent on bail to stand trial at the Old Bailey by Bow Street magistrates yesterday.
Airliners in near miss.
An Aer Lingus BAe 1-11 airliner was involved in a near miss with a Trans World Airlines TriStar over Hertfordshire yesterday.
The pilots were alerted and passed a mile apart.
The Civil Aviation Authority is investigating.
Mr Tim Janman MP: a clarification.
IN YESTERDAY'S parliamentary sketch (page 5), Mr Tim Janman MP (Conservative, Thurrock) was reported as saying that Britain would take even one refugee from Hong Kong ‘over my dead body.’
Mr Janman has asked us to make it clear that, as he wrote in last Saturday's Sun, he recognises that both crown servants and substantial investors in Britain have an existing right to come here and that though at present he advocates the strict exclusion of all others, he would cease to do so if the Chinese were to attempt ‘a Tiananmen-style crackdown’ in Hong Kong in 1997.
Kent Opera goes into liquidation after Arts Council grant withdrawn.
KENT Opera went into liquidation yesterday, unable to continue after the Arts Council withdrew its £750,000 grant.
The touring company, founded 20 years ago, was to present King Priam at the Royal Opera House in London in February and March.
A statement from the company's offices at Dartford said that because of the Arts Council cut it had to go into voluntary liquidation.
Mr Alec Jessel, the marketing officer, said: ‘It is very sad that such an established company has to take such a step, but there was nothing more we could do.
The losers are the singers and orchestras we employed.
They will have their contracts honoured in full.’
The Duke of Kent, the opera's patron, and Sir Michael Tippett, composer and president of Kent Opera, both fought to save the company, the first in regional professional opera to tour the country.
As the company grew it began to tour abroad.
Jonathon Miller directed performances of Eugene Onegin and Rigoletto which were highly praised by critics and public.
Uncertainty over performances at the South Bank Centre in London ended yesterday when management and unions agreed a pay deal.
Striking absence of vital statistics.
By Keith Harper Labour Editor
THE Government admitted last night that it kept no statistics of unofficial strikes although Mr Norman Fowler, Employment Secretary, said yesterday that 75 per cent of all strikes were unofficial.
His department said that it only kept records of strikes lasting more than three days and involving more than 100 people.
It said that strikes usually lasted five days but it could not differentiate between official and unofficial disputes.
Mr Fowler said that the main plank of the Government's sixth piece of trade union legislation was an ‘even-handed approach’ to industrial relations.
For instance, it prevented people from being excluded from trade union membership and he denied that this clause was in because of the European Social Charter.
But the most controversial part of the bill relates to unofficial strikes, a legacy of the one-day summer stoppages on the London Underground.
A union would have to issue written warnings to all those members it had learned were threatening an unofficial stoppage telling them that they risked dismissal without compensation if the strike continued.
Mr Fowler conceded that a union might not always be able to do this but it would have to show that it had used its best endeavours.
The proposal would not prevent unofficial action taken on the day without any notice.
But the company would be able to dismiss workers selectively.
Later, officials at the department admitted that a legal ban would not be completely effective.
This part of the bill has already been criticised by wide sections of management.
London Transport said it would not have dismissed strike leaders even if it knew their identity, for fear of bringing the Underground system to a halt.
Mr Tony Blair, Labour's employment spokesman, said the bill had no genuine support in industry.
Its object in rerunning the debates of the 70s was to provoke bad industrial relations for the sake of the Tory party.
Granting employers the ability to sack union leaders selectively over unofficial action was ‘utterly offensive and would be opposed by most sensible managers.
‘It is surely wrong to make unions police unofficial action which they have not endorsed.’
Cold wind that stirs up bitter memories Peter Hetherington reports on ambivalent feelings created by a memorial service in the town scarred by last year's crash.
THEY stood in the chill wind in Dryfesdale cemetery — Lockerbie people, relatives of the victims of PanAm flight 103, and a scattering of dignitaries — to dedicate a garden of remembrance for the 270 victims of Britain's worst air disaster.
Where they stood, barely a mile from the aircraft's final resting place, there was no escaping a muted collective anger — directed as much at seemingly complacent airport authorities and governments as at the perpetrators of mass murder a year ago.
Small red posters, beside the many wreaths, told part of the story: ‘Remember PanAm 103 — demand airline security’.
Lapel badges told the rest: ‘The truth must be known’ and ‘Terrorism and apathy — a deadly combination’.
One year on, many still ask why the authorities did not issue a warning, based on intelligence reports, about a Christmas terrorist threat.
But as around 1,000 mourners shivered through a ceremony made all the more moving by its simplicity and brevity, there was little bitterness evident — only bewilderment.
‘To me, nothing helps’, said Ms Marina De Larracoechea, from New York, who lost her sister, Nieves, a stewardess, in the disaster.
‘I guess these things [memorial services]have to happen, but the reality is she's no longer around’.
The town's three clergymen, who played such an important part in counselling the victims after last December 22 — James Annand, Church of Scotland; Alan Neal, Scottish Episcopal; and Father Patrick Keegans, Roman Catholic — conducted the short dedication beside an impressive memorial, hewn from four tons of Finnish granite, bearing the names of the 270 victims, including 11 from Lockerbie itself.
It lies against a stone wall, shielded by birch and fur, overlooking a garden of remembrance, containing more memorials.
Local scouts and guides lined the route through the cemetery to the memorial, where Scotland's chief law officer, the Lord Advocate, Lord Fraser, stood alongside the US ambassador, Mr Henry Catto.
Mr Stevan Flannigan, who lost his parents and sister in the disaster, was comforted by the Princess of Wales' mother, Mrs Frances Shand-Kydd, who lives in Argyll.
Sir Hector Monro, the local MP, who lives nearby, welcomed relatives with the hope that the garden would prove a loving place full of compassion and warmth.
Father Keegans, whose own house was damaged as the remains of the plane exploded only yards away, said the 270 were deeply loved, sadly missed, ‘and will always be remembered.’
Then Mr Neal read from Romans 12: ‘Avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath…vengeance is mine: I will repay saith the Lord’.
Last night, before an ecunemical service attended by several thousand people outside Lockerbie town hall, some relatives gathered in the small church at Tundergarth, four miles away.
It is here that the nose section of the 747 landed, 150 yards from the church, and 120 bodies were found on the surrounding hills.
Mr Cameron Gibson, the local minister, comforted a steady stream of relatives all day.
‘I felt very inadequate but at least I was able to provide a shoulder to cry on.’
Just outside the church, a small building is being converted into a room of remembrance dedicated to the memory of the PanAm victims.
Beside it, a small wreath of red carnations read: ‘In loving memory of Raymond Wagner [co-pilot]from his wife Norma, and children Carol, Ray junior and Jenny.’
As Americans, and relatives from many other countries filed through the town, and walked over the surrounding countryside yesterday — over 20 nationalities were represented on the flight — Mr Joe Horgan, a spokesman for the American victims of Flight 103, spoke of a bond between the US and Lockerbie.
‘At times, we lost faith in our fellow man, and we just had to come here.
The town which was devastated itself reached out, held our hand, and guided us’.
At last night's service, which ended with a piper playing the lament Flowers on the Forest, Father Keegans said: ‘Quite simply, life cannot be the same again…
But to say that there is no recovery…is to say to the terrorists: ‘Here, you can have our lives as well’.
And that I refuse to give them.’
Minister ‘ashamed’ of tabloid journalists.
MR DAVID Mellor, the Home Office Minister of State, said yesterday that he was ‘almost ashamed and embarrassed to live in the same society’ as journalists working for tabloid newspapers.
He told Channel 4's Hard News programme that the popular press was ‘drinking in last-chance saloon’.
He said he was looking forward to the results of the inquiry chaired by Mr David Calcutt, QC, into press behaviour.
Mr Mellor said: ‘I think British journalism contains some of the best and worst journalism in the world.
I open some of the popular newspapers covering some people's private lives or great national tragedies and I feel almost ashamed and embarrassed to live in the same society as people who can produce that sort of stuff.’
He cited photographic coverage of the Hillsborough tragedy as an example of intrusive and morbid reporting.
He said the Government was reluctant to interfere, but it had become aware of ‘widespread detestation in Parliament’ of some trends in the popular press.
Fears for Mersey birdlife eased.
By Alan Dunn
FEARS that a power-generating barrage across the Mersey could seriously damage the estuary's international status as a wintering home for wildfowl and waders have been partly eased by preliminary studies of bird habits.
These show that the birds make little use of the lower mudflats, which would be permanently flooded when the barrage is built, preferring the higher levels, which would still be exposed.
But the studies, carried out by the British Trust for Ornithology for the Department of Energy and the Mersey Barrage Company, have still to indicate whether or how the bird population might be changed by a barrage.
‘At present the turbid estuary is continually re-depositing mud on the flats,’ says Mr Nigel Clark, of the trust.
‘If, post-barrage, water flows slow down, we may find that less mud is pulled in and the situation may stabilise.
Some birds may do better in that situation and some worse.
It could change the community of bird species.
But initial studies show there are higher concentrations of birds on the higher areas of the mudflats.’
The preliminary judgment is another hopeful sign that the barrage will receive government approval and could within the decade be feeding electricity into the national grid.
A decision is expected before March on the barrage company's application for a place in the non-fossil fuel obligation under the new Electricy Act, which gives the right to sell electricity to the privatised grid.
There have been 270 bids.
It is the biggest single concept, many others being devoted to using methane gas at waste product dumps.
In the meantime the company is seeking to win hearts and minds among communities on both sides of the Mersey and to attract national and international investment for the £880 million project.
Liverpool city council recently gave backing to the scheme, and on January 3 the company will present its plans to a special meeting of Wirral council.
The message they will receive from Mr Desmond Pitcher, chairman of the company, is that the 700 megawatts of pollution-free energy released by harnessing the 10-metre tidal rise and fall will be commercially attractive over the project's 120-year life.
The scheme would create up to 5,000 jobs during the five years of construction, beginning in 1994.
If the Government approves the company's bid, an application will be made in 1991 for a parliamentary bill.
Intruder gets to airbus controls.
ASWISS student was able to enter the cockpit of an empty airbus at Gatwick and tamper with the controls, a court heard yesterday.
After the case, the airport authorities issued a statement saying they were not even aware there had been a breach of security and that the matter was the responsibility of the airline, Wardair.
Wardair yesterday accepted responsibilty and disclosed plans to tighten security.
In future its aircraft will not be connected to passenger jetties during maintenance and the airline may employ full-time security teams to guard planes before boarding.
Prosecuting counsel Anne Toynbee told magistrates at Crawley, west Sussex, that the aircraft had been parked at a stand at Gatwick on Wednesday while engineers worked on an electronic fault.
‘Suddenly a sharp blast of high pressure air rushed downward from the engine,’ she said.
‘They went to the cockpit and saw Mark Schmit sitting in the captain's seat and noticed that certain instruments had been tampered with.’
When asked what he was doing Schmit told the engineers: ‘Leave me alone.
Can't you see I'm trying to fix the plane?’
Schmit, 19, of Liestal, told the police that he pushed the buttons in the cockpit because he was trying to start the aircraft but had no intention of flying it.
Ms Toynbee said Schmit had flown in from Zurich earlier that morning and was waiting to travel on another Wardair flight to Vancouver.
The incident delayed the Wardair Airbus on its flight to Toronto by three hours 11 minutes and she asked for compensation of more than £1,500.
Defence counsel Simon Scammell, blaming lax security by both airport and airline, said his client should not be expected to pay all the compensation.
‘It is horrifying that anyone in transit can find their way on to an aircraft undetected.
No-one was aware of his presence on board the aircraft until engineers saw the rush of air.
‘If someone can go on board an aircraft like this there must be something wrong.
One can only be fearful of what could have been the situation.’
He said Schmit had a considerable interest in aircraft but did not intend to cause damage.
If he had been spotted he would have returned, he said.
Schmit was fined £700 plus £30 costs.
The magistrates said the issue of compensation could be sorted out in the civil courts.
In their statement the Gatwick airport authorities said: ‘We are not aware that there has been a breach of BAA (British Airports Authority) security at Gatwick.
‘The man's presence in the aircraft is a matter for the airline which has sole responsibility under the Government's national aviation security programme.’
Mr Hugo Summerson, Conservative MP for Walthamstow, called on the Transport Secretary, Mr Cecil Parkinson, to carry out another review of security at Gatwick following ‘this grave breach.’
PAGE
Court upholds adoption veto.
AMOTHER'S objections to her two children being put up for adoption were upheld in the Court of Appeal yesterday.
But the ruling by two judges in favour of the mother, who in the interest of the children cannot be identified, was described as ‘cruel kindness’ by the third, dissenting judge.
Lords Justices Balcombe and Beldam ruled that the mother, aged 25, was at this stage entitled to block local authority plans to put her daughter, aged 5 ½, and her three-year-old son up for adoption.
They decided that her objections to adoption were not unreasonable and dismissed an appeal by the local authority against a county court judge's rejection of its adoption proposal on the grounds that it was premature.
The children were taken into care in mid-1987 because of their parents' inability to look after them properly and following suspicions of sexual abuse against the girl.
Lord Justice Balcombe said it was unlikely that a pending court application by the mother, who is divorced from the children's father, for access to her children would succeed.
He also warned that a future application by the council for the children's adoption against their mother's wishes might succeed.
Lord Justice Dillon, dissenting, said he would have allowed the local authority appeal.
It would be a ‘cruel kindness’ to uphold the county court order.
He viewed the chances of the children being successfully reintroduced to their mother as nil, and in these circumstances the mother — who was backed in yesterday's court action by the children's father — had unreasonably withheld consent for adoption.
The local authority was refused leave to appeal to the House of Lords.
Protest spreads throughout Romania ‘We are the people’ the demonstrators chant Czechoslovak Communists cut links Ceausescu unleashes carnage.
By Ian Traynor in Budapest
MASS brutality by the Romanian regime on the streets of Bucharest and cities and towns across the country cast a chilling shadow over Eastern Europe's momentous year of democratic change yesterday.
As reports emerged of unrest and violence which claimed scores of lives throughout Romania, the dramatic escalation of the uprising fuelled speculation about the future of President Nicolae Ceausescu.
But, while his security forces turned the streets of Bucharest into a killing field, it seemed that Mr Ceausescu was ready to stop at nothing.
Tens of thousands demonstrated last night in the Romanian capital after reports of at least 20 deaths there earlier in the day, and students at the heart of the protest movement have called for a general strike today.
The Czechoslovak Communist Party voted yesterday to cut links with the Romanian Communist Party immediately over the violent suppression of anti-government protests.
The US said it was considering sanctions.
A teacher in the Transylvanian city of Cluj told the Guardian that she saw corpses lying in the streets after troops opened fire on demonstrators.
Contacted by telephone, she said students and workers gathered in the city centre last night to protest and that the security forces used automatic weapons against them.
Gunfire could be heard in the city all day, she said, but the violence escalated late in the evening.
Late last night, the Hungarian news agency MTI said it had received telephone calls reporting more than 30 killings in clashes in Cluj, while another source reported clashes in Arad, 60 miles north of Timisoara, where demonstrators were massacred last week.
Timisoara and Arad were reported to be on a general strike.
Hungarian television also carried witness accounts of killings in Arad.
It quoted a Polish couple who arrived in Hungary yesterday as saying that they were in a large shop on the main square when two or three thousand people began chanting anti-Ceausescu slogans outside.
‘Suddenly, armed soldiers broke the shop windows and opened fire on those inside, at everyone, indiscriminately.
Those who could not escape met their horrific, futile deaths there,’ they said.
The television report said the couple fled from the shooting.
When they looked back ‘they saw that tanks were rolling into the demonstrating crowd’.
It added: ‘They also saw students from a college being ordered out in front of the building, made to stand against the wall, and shot dead.
Few people managed to escape.’
Budapest Radio said several people were killed at a demonstration in the Transylvanian town of Tirgu Mures yesterday.
It gave no figures but said Romanians and ethnic Hungarians took part in the protest which followed a strike in the area.
‘Shootings were heard and there were fatalities,’ the radio said.
A Romanian traveller arriving in Yugoslavia said he also heard of protests yesterday in the cities of Craiova and Suceava.
The strongest evidence yet emerged yesterday about the massacre in the north western town of Timisoara at the weekend.
The Hungarian Foreign Minister, Mr Gyula Horn, he had ‘reliable and authenticated’ information that more than 1,000 and possibly more than 2,000 people died in the attack.
He also said that as the unrest continued throughout Romania, there were clashes between the army and the huge internal security apparatus, the Securitate.
This dovetailed with reports that the Securitate shot soldiers who refused to kill demonstrators and that many servicemen joined the side of the protesters in Timisoara.
The security forces are said not to have intervened when up to 100,000 people demonstrated in Timisoara on Wednesday evening.
Some joined the insurgence and armoured vehicles left the scene of the protest draped in white flags.
The reports of the fratricidal strife among the security forces indicated a threatening polarisation in the country as the regime dug in, while a burgeoning opposition gained in confidence.
Tens of thousands were reported back on the streets in Timisoara yesterday, defying a state of emergency, a curfew, and a ban on assembly of more than five persons imposed on the region.
Factories were occupied and a strike was announced for tomorrow unless the security forces pulled out of the town, reports said.
The demonstrators threatened to blow up factories.
Budapest was abuzz with rumours that the embattled Romanian leader might be planning to seek refuge in China.
According to reports from the Romanian capital, the violence yesterday started when President Ceausescu sought to address a staged rally of support that rapidly turned into a huge protest.
Demonstrators ripped up the national flag amid shouts of ‘Yesterday Timisoara, today Bucharest.’
Mr Gyorgy Kellti, a Hungarian Defence Ministry spokesman, said that the crowd of 150,000 in Bucharest shouted anti-regime slogans, and an angry throng surrounded Mr Ceausescu, who was saved only by his ring of Securitate bodyguards.
As the protest grew, the troops came in with automatic weapons, armoured vehicles and teargas.
Mr Ceausescu remained intransigent in a speech to the rally, repeating his claims that the unrest was being fanned from abroad.
Romanians launch first opposition, page 10; Leader comment, page 22; Defending the indefensible, Commentary, page 23
Drug smuggler gets 16 years.
A Turkish lorry driver was jailed for 16 years yesterday for smuggling heroin worth £1.2 million in his vehicle.
Customs officers arrested Ahmet Ataban in September at Dover, Kent, when they found 13 kilos of the drug after removing the tyres from the wheels of his lorry.
Woman loses baby.
A pregnant woman lost her baby after she fainted as she waited for a bus and fell into the path of a lorry driven by her uncle.
Faye Herbert, aged 24, who was four months pregnant, was in a stable condition last night in hospital following the accident at Timsbury, near Bath.
Court clears soccer club.
Nottingham Forest Football Club was yesterday cleared of racial discrimination after an Afro-Caribbean group had alleged an application to hold a pop concert at the club's stadium was rejected on race grounds.
Nottingham county court accepted the club's explanation that the decision was made on commercial grounds.
Action on bus safety.
Measures to make automatic bus doors safer were introduced by the Government yesterday.
Doors will now have to be fitted with special safety devices to prevent people or objects getting trapped in them.
Poll tax protester fined.
Mr Mark Gale, who was fined £50 after completing his poll tax registration form in Arabic, said yesterday he will appeal against the penalty.
Legionnaires' death.
A pensioner, Mr Kenneth Sanders, aged 66, of Derby, has died in hospital after contracting legionnaires' disease while on holiday in Majorca.
Soldier fined £600.
A soldier who feared flying was fined £600 yesterday for endangering a civil aircraft and disobeying the captain's orders.
Rifleman Ian Richardson, aged 19, admitted his part in the incident on Wednesday.
Nuclear costs hit the CEGB.
By Patrick Donovan Industrial Correspondent
FRESH controversy gripped Britain's discredited nuclear power programme yesterday after the Central Electricity Generating Board admitted that the overall cost of decommissioning redundant power stations and dealing with spent fuel has nearly doubled to £13.3 billion.
The full extent of the taxpayer's liability over atomic energy has been flushed into the open because of accounting changes demanded by City analysts in the run-up to next year's electricity privatisation.
Disclosure of the massive ‘hidden’ costs followed an internal ‘reassessment’by the CEGB and an internal review by the Atomic Energy Authority.
The Energy Secretary, Mr John Wakeham, was obliged last month to remove nuclear power from the privatisationand announce a moratorium on the building of new power stations.
Casting a shadow over the CEGB's last set of accounts in the state sector, the company announced yesterday that decommissioning costs have doubled to at least £600 million a station.
This doubles to around £8 billion the total cost ofdismantling and making safe nuclear installations at the end of their commercial life.
In addition, the CEGB has more than doubled, from £3.1 billion to £6.4 billion, the extra provisions needed ‘for work still to be carried out on nuclear fuel and wastes from past years’.
A portion of this, however, is included in the decommissioning costs.
After the separate nuclear liabilities incurred by Scottish nuclear power stations are taken into account the overall sum for nuclear waste disposal amounts to around £13.3 billion, the CEGB said yesterday.
The CEGB disclosed the escalation in nuclear costs as it announced that operating profits are £603 million lower than expected at £355 million.
The return on assets works out at 1.8 per cent compared with a 3.75 per cent target set by the Government.
Most of the nuclear increases result from cost increases by British Nuclear Fuels, the reprocessing body which supplies both the civil and military atomic programme.
After revising its own nuclear liability, BNFL has passed these on to the electricity industry in the form of new fixed price contracts.
The findings again call into question the Government's attempt to privatise nuclear power despite constant warnings over the costs The shadow Energy Secretary, Mr Frank Dobson, claimed yesterday that the CEGB's accounts had been ‘massaged and adjusted to suit the Government's privatisation policies’.
They owed a lot more to artistic interpretation than to technical merit, he said.
Analysts at Smith New Court, the City stockbroking firm, said yesterday: ‘The costs are much higher than we thought.
They are a result of the auditors saying that the accounts must be prudent.
This is purely a reflection of the fact that we didn't clearly understand the cost of nuclear electricity’.
Lord Marshall, the CEGB's former chairman who has resigned with a £250,000 payoff, said the lower return would be especially disappointing to staff who had ‘devoted their customary high level of professional commitment to preparations for privatisation’.
Pointing out that the CEGB had achieved its highest ever nuclear power output at 18.7 per cent of all power generated, Lord Marshall said: ‘The plant is in good shape and our staff can take pride in a job well done.
Manpower productivity has continued to rise and we have brought down the price of electricity in real terms since 1958 when the CEGB was established.’
Bucharest protesters defy brutal clampdown.
By Foreign staff
SECURITY forces launched a fresh assault on tens of thousands of demonstrators in the centre of Bucharest late last night at the end of a day in which violent repression was reported to have cost at least 20 lives in the Romanian capital.
Reports from East European news agencies and diplomats gave graphic witness accounts of earlier violence in which armoured vehicles crushed demonstrators to death and police shot at anything that moved.
Western correspondents have been refused entry to the country.
The violence began after an attempt by President Nicolae Ceausescu to rally support for his regime turned into a massive protest against the Romanian dictator.
Late last night, Tass reported that bursts of automatic fire were heard all around the city as ‘several tens of thousands of people’ gathered on Bucharest's University Square.
The demonstrators were ‘surrounded by Romanian army soldiers, special troops armed with truncheons and plastic shields and security forces,’ the report added.
Two Tass reporters said tear-gas shells were fired over the heads of the demonstrators at around 11pm after an army officer had appealed in vain through a megaphone for them to disperse.
‘The whole square was filled with thick, suffocating gas,’ the Soviet journalists said.
‘Some of the demonstrators withdrew into narrow side-streets, but the square promptly filled again with people as soon as the gas began to disperse.
‘In response, the demonstrators began to chant ‘We won't leave’.
Two passenger cars were set on fire outside the Intercontinental Hotel.
‘Tanks and firehose trucks moved into the square several times in an apparent attempt to intimidate the demonstrators.
But the people on the square shouted at the security forces ‘We are the people’, ‘We are not terrorists’, ‘You eat the people's bread.’
As we write, fire-engines are trying to douse some burning lorries and huge volleys of tear-gas shells are continuing.
‘Choppers are patrolling over the city,’ Tass added.
‘Tanks are standing by in clouds of smoke with their motors running.
Groups of young people are crowding round in front of the soldiers chanting ‘The army is with us’ and ‘No violence’.’
The Yugoslav news agency, Tanjug, reported that about 5,000 students were building barricades of garbage cans in front of the Intercontinental Hotel.
‘There are indications…that police will intervene.
Weeping women are lighting candles throughout Bucharest,’ it added.
‘There is light in all the windows of buildings in the areas where the demonstrations are under way.
People have come out on to balconies and some of them are shouting slogans supporting the protests.’
In another report, Tass correspondent Nikolai Morozov said University Square in Bucharest had become a centre of the protests, with mainly young speakers taking turns to denounce the government.
‘Now and again, tanks and armoured cars move into the crowds but they cannot disperse them.
As dark fell, street lights went on in the square and many demonstrators lit paper torches.’
Mr Morozov, said when he sought comment from a security forces' official at University Square he was taken through four police cordons and lines of tanks to ‘a short, thick-set man in civilian clothes with a hard voice and authoritarian air.’
The man said: ‘What you see here is a generation brought up on videos.
What you've got happening back in Moscow you can see happening here now.’
The Tass reporter said the following conversation ensued.
Morozov: ‘I heard shots.
Who was firing?
Were there any casualties?’
Man: ‘There are no casualties, not one.’
Morozov: ‘But I saw wounded being taken away and ambulances.’
Man: ‘Those were people who didn't have enough for dinner, got excited and fainted.’
Morozov: ‘Who are you?’
Man: ‘I am an ordinary representative of the workers and I'm helping to keep order here.’
Earlier, Tanjug's correspondent reported from Bucharest that armoured vehicles ran over students, while police turned automatic gunfire on crowds chanting ‘Down with Ceausescu’ and ‘Down with the killers’during demonstrations that erupted at the government-organised rally in support of President Ceausescu.
Tanjug said police fired rockets from helicopters into the crowd and police sprayed automatic weapons fire into the demonstrators ‘shooting at everything that moved’.
Twenty youths were killed running to help two people who had been crushed by armoured vehicles on Student Square, said the agency.
‘The command rang out: ‘Aim!
Fire!’
Shots rang out and at least 20 demonstrators fell dead,’ Tanjug said.
Other witnesses spoke of the killings.
‘My colleagues have seen eight or nine bodies, mostly apparently students, visibly dead, bleeding from head wounds in the streets…,’ a British diplomat told BBC television news.
Tass confirmed the report of armoured vehicles running over students, saying demonstrators were killed by the personnel carriers.
‘When the group of witnesses rushed to pull those injured from under the wheels of the armoured personnel carrier, they were fired on by automatic weapons.’
Tanjug said demonstrators outside the Intercontinental Hotel tore up pictures of President Ceausescu and sang an old nationalist song, Wake up Romania.
‘Several thousand people, mostly pupils and students, found themselves surrounded by police and tanks,’ the agency added.
‘Police began firing on the trapped mass of people.
Eyewitnesses said many were wounded and probably dead.’
Nature council celebrates new species of fly.
By Nigel Williams Science Correspondent
TWO new species of fly have been discovered in Wales by scientists from the Nature Conservancy Council.
One was found on decayed plant material in peatland at Llyn Eiddwen, in Dyfed, and the other on the droppings in burrows of small mammals such as moles and voles in Merioneth.
The team of three, led by Dr Peter Holmes, have just finished the last field work of a three-year study of the effect on invertebrates of different peatland management strategies across Wales.
‘British insects have been so well recorded that the discovery of new species is the icing on the cake of the study,’ said Dr Holmes.
About one or two new species of insect are found in Britain each year but Wales includes some of the least-studied habitats.
The new species may be unique to Wales.
They will not be named until publication of details in an academic journal, but the second one belongs with the lesser dung flies in the Sphaeroceridae family: ‘a lovely little group,’ he added.
The team have also discovered six species of fly never previously recorded in Britain and more than 100 other species of invertebrates including beetles, plant bugs and spiders never before found in Wales from the study of 120 peatland sites.
‘The conservation of invertebrates is important because they are good indicators of the quality of the habitat’, said Dr Holmes.
Three die in salmonella outbreak at hospital.
By Tom Sharratt and James Erlichman
THREE elderly women patients have died after contracting salmonella at an Oldham hospital, it was disclosed yesterday.
Another five were said to be ‘very poorly’ after being transferred to a hospital specialising in infectious diseases.
Ten women patients and a nurse in the geriatric ward of the Royal Oldham Hospital in Greater Manchester have been infected by the disease since the first case was diagnosed last Thursday.
Admissions to the 17-bed ward have been halted and nurses have been ordered to wear special disposable gowns in the hope of preventing the infection spreading throughout the 1,000-bed hospital.
Investigations have so far failed to identify the cause.
Mr Peter Shrigley, general manager of Oldham health authority, said: ‘There is nothing to suggest any connection between hospital catering and this outbreak.
Inquiries are being pursued to try to identify possible sources.’
Hospital sources said that the Royal Oldham was not using the controversial ‘cook-chill’ method under which pre-cooked food is re-heated by microwave on the ward.
Mr Shrigley said two of the women had died from the serious illnesses for which they had been admitted to the hospital.
The death of the third, however, might have been hastened by the salmonella complication.
US invasion bogged down by Noriega's resistance.
By Martin Walker in Washington and Simon Tisdall in Miami
HEAVY fighting broke out in at least three districts of Panama City yesterday, as General Noriega and his supporters continued to defy the bogged-down 24,000 US invasion force with bitter resistance.
Heavily-armed US combat troops, supported by artillery and helicopter gunships, were deployed through the streets of the capital yesterday, after a night marked by sporadic gunfire, looting and continuing reports of hostage-taking.
Last night, the new civilian government declared a curfew at the end of a day in which helicopters firing rockets and machineguns were deployed against the pro-Noriega militia based in the sprawling poor districts of San Miguelito.
The invasion, additionally justified by the US as necessary to defend the Panama Canal, was showing signs of turning into an occupation — and, what was more, an occupation facing potential guerrilla resistance.
In Nicaragua, the US embassy in Managua was surrounded by troops in retaliation for American troops ringing the Nicaraguan embassy in Panama City.
Spain called for the fighting to be stopped after Juan Moreno, a photographer for the newspaper El Pais, was killed in crossfire.
A representative of the newly installed Panamanian government said yesterday that if Panamanian forces found General Noriega they would not extradite him to the US to stand trial.
Asked about Noriega's extradition, Mr Eduardo Vallarino told reporters: ‘The Panamanian constitution prohibits extradition, so if Noriega is apprehended he'll have to be duly charged and tried in Panama.’
In Washington, President Bush appeared in the White House press room to tell reporters ‘Yes, it has been worth it.’
At the same time, the first US bodies were flown home.
Journalists reported that forces loyal to General Noriega were holding the northern border regions of Panama.
US intelligence reports of ‘northern redoubts’ where Cuban advisers have been training the militia and storing arms and ammunition could also mean a far longer military operation than the Pentagon had originally envisaged.
The failure to capture General Noriega threatened to complicate and prolong the US intervention.
The White House spokesman, Mr Marlin Fitzwater, said yesterday that the troops would stay for ‘as long as it takes,’ while a subdued Defence Secretary, Mr Dick Cheney, added: ‘Within the next few weeks we'll be able to meet the objectives.’
There was growing concern yesterday for the fate of 11 US scientists from the Tropical Research Institute who were taken from their island laboratories on Wednesday.
At least two of the journalists seized at the Marriott hotel on Wednesday were still feared to be in pro-Noriega hands yesterday.
On the second day of ‘Operation Just Cause’ the US still had no idea of the whereabouts of General Noriega, according to General Colin Powell, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff.
Late on Wednesday night, a man purporting to be General Noriega spoke on the pro-regime National Radio, urging all Panamanians ‘to keep up the resistance’ and appealing for support from the outside world.
US troops later blew up the radio transmitter to prevent further broadcasts.
The official US casualty toll stood yesterday at 19 killed in action, 151 wounded, and one missing.
Panamanian casualties, military and civilian, were thought to top 1,000.
The Pentagon said it knew of 59 dead and 66 wounded, and of 1,500 prisoners from the 6,000-strong Panamanian Defence Force.
But US reporters at the military hospitals in Texas to which the US casualties are being flown said at midday yesterday they had counted 190 US wounded being flown in, with more planes on the way.
The casualties were expected to climb further.
Bickering began on the US side yesterday, with State Department officials angrily protesting to the White House that the Pentagon failed to provide any security for the US embassy in Panama.
The US ambassador to Panama, Mr Arthur Davis, who returned to the country with the 12,000 invading US troops,
Turn to page 24, col 7
Noriega forces still resisting.
continued from page one warned of retaliation by the Dignity Battalions (civilian militia) and advised all American civilians in Panama to take extreme care.
Describing the deployment of troops in Panama City as the start of a ‘mopping up’ operation, General Powell said the US forces would now attempt ‘to assist President (Guillermo) Endara's government to start functioning.’
He added that the freeing of Americans and others who were held hostage by Dignity Battalion gunmen would be ‘a priority for us today’.
The combat troops were drawn from the Seventh Infantry Division, part of an 8,000-strong party of reinforcements dispatched to Panama on Wednesday night.
The US now has an estimated 32,000 military in the country, including the 12,000 personnel permanently stationed in the Panama Canal bases.
Panama remained physically cut off from the rest of the world yesterday, with the national airport closed and under US control, and the northern border with Costa Rica sealed.
While the US claimed to have overrun all principal military installations, North American control of this tiny country of 2.4 million people was clearly not complete.
The Bush Administration has put a bounty of $1 million on General Noriega's head and offered $150 for every PDF weapon handed over to the authorities.
The US has also attempted to appease national opinion by lifting the trade embargo, unfreezing Panamanian assets in the US, and pledging to reopen the canal today.
But the slaughter and the destruction in central Panama City, especially in the Chorrillo area close to the Noriega Command HQ, appeared to have shocked and alienated many inhabitants.
Many families lost their homes in the fighting and the fires which followed.
The battle for Panama, page 14
Ambulance stalemate as breakaway talks rejected.
By Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent
HEALTH service managers last night ruled out further talks with the Association of Professional Ambulance Personnel after its members rejected a revised 9 per cent pay offer over 18 months.
In a statement released by the Department of Health last night, management said: ‘There is little point in meeting Apap in the near future because such a meeting would be bound to raise false expectations of an improved offer.’
The statement followed calls from the leadership of Apap — which is not affiliated to the Trades Union Congress — for fresh negotiations, after members on Wednesday voted by two-to-one against accepting the 9 per cent proposal.
The offer, already rejected by the five TUC-affiliated ambulance unions in the 15-week-old dispute, had been recommended for acceptance by Apap's leadership, after pay talks earlier this month.
Before the talks, the union had not been recognised by the Government for national pay bargaining, leading to the belief that recognition had been granted to give managers the opportunity to impose the offer on all ambulance staff if it was accepted by Apap.
The rejection of further talks means Apap now is bound officially to press ahead with industrial action, even though many of the union's members already have supported the action being taken by others.
The Society of Telecom Executives, representing 29,000 managerial and professional staff in British Telecom, yesterday instructed its staff not to cut off phone lines to ambulance stations if called to do so by BT.
The warning followed incidents in London and the West Midlands where lines to ambulance stations were disconnected.
A spokesman for BT yesterday refused to comment on whether the company had received instructions to cut lines.
But London Ambulance Service categorically denied that it had plans to cut off phone lines, saying that it had only authorised one disconnection at Park Royal Ambulance Station, West London, because crews had locked themselves in.
Baggage handlers at Manchester Airport voted last night to end their three-week strike after management and unions agreed on a peace settlement.
Some of the 490 handlers, members of the Transport and General Workers Union, were to return to work at 7pm last night.
The main night shift was due to start at 10pm.
They have accepted a compromise deal which will give them a special allowance for working an extra hour in the morning and late at night under a new roster system.
The airport was closed for six days last week when fire crews refused to cross picket lines by baggage handlers protesting against having the new system imposed on them.
Scotland sends in the poll tax bailiffs For councils that have to pioneer community charge collection, the nightmare is just beginning.
Peter Hetherington reports.
IN SMALL, anonymous offices around Scotland, well away from the public eye, computer printers are now busy churning out tens of thousands of warning letters to rebellious voters.
They represent the first legal moves against an estimated 400,000 people who, by accident or design, have made no contribution towards the poll tax, introduced last April north of the border.
After sending out up to four earlier warnings, Scotland's nine large regional councils have now reached the critical phase in collecting the community charge from 3.7 million Scots, including an additional 1.7 million new taxpayers drawn into the net.
It is proving the nightmare many anticipated.
Authorities, borrowing heavily to meet budget shortfalls caused by non-payment, concede that the system is creaking, with collection and rebate allocation well behind schedule after countless Government amendments.
Labour councils, desperate to avoid the final sanction — a sale of goods in a debtor's home — are now agonising at the prospect of taking legal action against their own supporters.
One controlling Labour group, Lothian, is literally falling apart.
Financial and legal pressures have forced councils to hand over debt recovery to private agents known as sheriffs' officers — Scottish bailiffs — in a surprisingly clinical fashion.
Computer discs, containing the names of defaulters, are being despatched to the men in the small offices so that final legal warnings can be printed and distributed.
For a few, the poll tax is proving lucrative.
Kenneth Simpson, the Perth-based spokesman for the Society of Sheriffs' Officers, says they are already getting results.
‘A woman might say ‘Sorry we haven't paid because my husband has lost his job and I'm unemployed’ so I say ‘OK, let's come to an arrangement, work it out.’
They usually agree.’
In the highest-taxed district, Edinburgh, some defaulters now owe over £400, which means that thousands of couples are almost £1,000 in arrears.
This week the local regional council, Lothian, revealed that over £25 million was outstanding.
It is now asking sheriffs' officers to take action against over 76,000 people — 12 per cent of its poll tax payers — who have paid no community charge.
The leader of the Tory group on the council admits anxiously that services will have to be cut if the defaulters are not vigorously pursued.
The picture in the biggest region, Strathclyde, is even worse.
An estimated 250,000 refuseniks — 14 per cent of voters — now owe an estimated £60 million.
With only 180 sheriffs' officers throughout Scotland, Simpson acknowledges that the collection process would be thrown into chaos if the non-payers persisted with their rebellion.
He admits that the final sanction, the warrant sale, provides the only alternative.
But for the moment he's not too disheartened.
Simpson's own practice recently received a computer disc from an unnamed council containing the names of over 5,000 defaulters.
They duly processed the information and despatched warning letters stating that offenders had five days to make a payment arrangement — with a 10 per cent surcharge — before a court order, a summary warrant, was activated.
‘As a result, we've had an awful lot of letters from people saying there'd been an oversight on their part,’ says an outwardly cheerful Simpson.
‘We've only had a couple of abusive ones, and a couple of nasty telephone calls.’
But for councils, who have already spent £40 million implementing a tax they profoundly dislike, the collection process is proving as difficult as most anticipated.
Roy McIver, secretary general of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities (COSLA) says the level of non-payment is giving ‘cause for concern,’ with cash flows less favourable than under the old rating system.
Supporters of civil disobedience, notably a loose, unholy alliance of Scottish Nationalists and the Militant Tendency -both out to embarrass law-abiding Labour councils as much as the Government — are adamant that a mass non-payment resistance is being mobilised, particularly on Scotland's huge, outer-city housing estates.
They point to hundreds of disaffected Labour voters being attracted to protest meetings.
The Government is equally adamant that councils' financial problems are being exaggerated and that the civil disobedience campaign is flopping.
The true picture lies somewhere between these extremes.
Authorities originally budgeted for a non-payment level of six per cent— about 250,000 Scots.
They are probably about 150,000 short of this figure.
Legal action, as Mr Simpson indicated, should bring the non-payment level substantially down.
The hard-core of defaulters will then face wages arrestments — either directly at work or, more likely, at a bank where sheriffs' officers will attempt to freeze accounts.
This will cause problems.
Scottish banks have warned council chief executives that they will be unable to cope with even a modest level of account arrestment.
This claim, while strengthening the hand of non-payment groups who say the system cannot cope with mass civil disobedience, will alarm the big Labour councils.
They are counting on bank arrestments to avoid politically damaging warrant sales in the run-up to regional elections next May.
In truth, the full non-payment picture will not emerge for several months yet — but those who argue that Scotland is now experiencing the calm before the political storm could well be proved right.
And with harassed English treasurers now seeking help from the Scots on how to implement the tax next April, one senior council official said he could offer only two words of advice —‘Expect chaos.’
Tebbit stirs row ‘in bid to be leader’.
By Michael White, Chief Political Correspondent
MR NORMAN Tebbit's decision to raise the stakes in the Conservatives' Hong Kong immigration row with a brutal attack on the Cabinet's policy last night convinced some MPs that he is preparing a bid for the party leadership when Mrs Thatcher retires.
The former Cabinet minister refused to rule out the possibility in the wake of his scornful accusation that the Prime Minister's shrewd political instincts had been led astray by the ‘Irish logic’ of the Foreign Office, though he did say it was ‘very unlikely’.
In the absence of a clear candidate of the right next time, some MPs suspect that Mr Tebbit may be manoeuvring to become a serious outside runner rather than a king-maker.
Coming on top of Wednesday's Commons confrontation with Mr Doulgas Hurd, the Foreign Secretary — in front of Mrs Thatcher — Mr Tebbit's column in yesterday's London Evening Standard dramatically departed from normally discreet Tory methods of party in-fighting.
He described the Cabinet as split between ‘bitterly opposed factions’ led by Mr Hurd on one side and his successor as Home Secretary, Mr David Waddington, on the other.
He even named the Government Chief Whip, Mr Tim Renton, and the party chairman, Mr Kenneth Baker, as Waddington allies who ‘saw the danger (but) failed to prevent such a folly’ which, Mr Tebbit argued, was in danger of handing back to an opportunist Labour Party the very ‘key group of voters whose support is vital for a fourth election victory’— by implication Tory populists sensitive to what he called ‘being swamped by people of different culture, history and religion’.
In another passage evocative of past attempts to play the race card, Mr Tebbit wrote that ‘most people in Britain did not want to live in a multicultural, multiracial society, but it has been foisted on them’.
Few Conservative MPs doubt the sincerity of Mr Tebbit's gut hostility to the plan to give British passports to up to 225,000 Hong Kongers as an insurance policy designed to ‘anchor’ them in the troubled colony.
But even some admirers were puzzled by the aggressively public way he has pursued it, the more so since he has been careful to acknowledge that there may not be enough rebels to defeat the Government's legislation with —‘a sad day for me’— Labour's help.
Critics were appalled at the split.
‘It's his bid for the leadership,’ one prominent ex-minister on the right of the party said.
‘It's the one thing he can outflank both Baker and Heseltine on.’
A party official said: ‘It's the Powellite coalition, anti-immigrant, anti-Europe.’
A Tory wet added: ‘He feels that the right has not got a standard-bearer or a contender.
He may begin as a standard-bearer and allow himself to be persuaded to go forward as a contender.’
Against such calculations were those MPs who believe the hard-right strategy would not work and that Mr Tebbit is too flawed, too shrewd and too devoted to his wife, Margaret — crippled in the IRA's Brighton bombing of 1984 — to make a serious bid.
To run as a spoiler, simply to block Michael Heseltine's ambition to become leader, is another option he has voiced.
Immigration grenade, page 6
Remote TV controls blamed for £12m waste of electricity.
By James Erlichman, Consumer Affairs Correspondent
ENOUGH electricity to light Basingstoke is being wasted every night by people too lazy to switch off their remote control televisions at the mains.
A television turned off by remote control continues to use a quarter of normal power because it needs to be electrically awake to receive the next remote signal to switch back on.
There are 14 million remote control televisions in Britain.
At least half are believed to be switched off by remote control every night.
The total energy consumed overnight is 70 megawatts, the amount needed daily to supply electricity to a town of around 70,000 like Basingstoke, St Albans or Methyr Tydfil, according to research published yesterday by Friends of the Earth.
The environmental pressure group calculates that the wasted energy costs £12 million a year and generates nearly 200,000 tonnes a year of extra carbon dioxide (the primary greenhouse-effect gas) from power stations.
‘People who can must start over Christmas by getting out of their seats and using the switch when they turn off the TV,’ said FoE energy campaigner, Mr Simon Roberts.
‘That way we stop this damaging and unnecessary pollution.’
Stripped, tied up and left to freeze It sounds like torture — and it is for some young workers forced to endure outdated initiation rites.
Stephen Cook reports.
IN AN alley-way outside a small London print works last week, a new employee was stripped by his workmates, tied to a chair, daubed with ink, flour and discarded food, and left out in the cold for two hours.
Even seasoned print workers felt that things went a little too far.
Such initiation ceremonies remain common in many jobs in Britain, despite growing disapproval by managers and trade unions.
The evidence that they can go tragically wrong came in Liverpool crown court this week when two teenagers were jailed for manslaughter.
They had doused a colleague's trousers with paint thinners, a regular initiation ceremony in their Skelmersdale factory.
But they had also struck matches to frighten him.
He caught fire and suffered fatal 80 per cent burns.
In other cases which have attracted recent headlines, trainee firemen in London were hosed with cold water and left in the street in baby doll nightdresses, a young policewoman in Manchester was handcuffed to railings through a freezing night, and army recruits in Colchester were forced to call out musical notes as a sergeant hit them on their naked buttocks with a baseball bat.
Although there has been some success in attempts to halt such ceremonies, or at least to make them less dangerous or humiliating, there is evidence that they are a perennial aspect of group behaviour unlikely to be eradicated.
Mr Allen Abramson, a London University anthropologist who has studied initiation rituals, said that most societies used them to mark important developments in a person's life, and that they often involved pain or privation.
‘Wherever you find a group within society which feels that what it's doing is seriously different from everyone else, then you're likely to find initiation rites,’ he said.
‘That's why they're common in the fire service and the army, where people are doing something out of the ordinary and taking greater risks than others.
‘It also happens in public schools, where new arrivals are considered ordinary weaklings until they've been pushed out to survive some sort of ordeal so they can re-enter the group with a new identity.’
Early last year the Ministry of Defence announced new measures to discourage bullying after young recruits revealed that they had been pushed into rivers, pelted with stones, and gassed with CS gas.
Commanding officers were asked to clamp down on harmful initiation ceremonies, and ‘agony aunts’ from the Women's Royal Voluntary Service were installed to provide a sympathetic hearing for bullied soldiers.
An MoD spokeswoman said yesterday that 92 ‘agony aunt’ posts had been established in Britain and Germany, and 24 filled.
‘Ill-treatment and bullying is being tackled with a range of measures including better training for junior officers,’ she said.
‘Harmful initiation rights are definitely out, but non-harmful ones would be okay.
It would be up to officers to decide what was dangerous and whether to discourage it.
But it might just take the form of going to the bar to buy drinks for everyone.’
The fire service clamped down on initiation rituals after a young firewoman in London revealed that colleagues had tied her to a ladder, hosed her down, poured urine over her, used foul language and exposed themselves to her.
Four officers had pay stopped, and London's chief fire officer said it should be possible to create group spirit without ‘the denigration and ridicule of individuals.’
Mr Dave Higgs, a spokesman for the Fire Brigades Union, said yesterday that initiation rites were ‘not widespread at all.
We don't condone them in any way, especially if they have racist or sexist aspects.
‘I would like to think that any sort of physical abuse doesn't go on any more, but this does not mean that people might not get a bucket of water over them sometimes.’
Printers, traditionally an exclusive ‘closed shop’ of workers, say that initiation ceremonies for apprentices are less common now than 20 or 30 years ago.
Rituals often involved the daubing of men's private parts with indelible inks or waste paper and glue.
A spokeswoman for the print union, Sogat, said such practices were on the way out.
‘Some could be quite nasty, with people being tied up with ink chucked at them.
We wouldn't encourage anything which was risky, and some were a bit near the mark.’
Mr Abramson said he thought that if management or officers tried to suppress or control initiation rites, the rank and file would usually devise new ones.
‘There'd be the official ceremony, then the men would take the new person off and say, now we're going to really initiate you.’
One print worker who was daubed and paraded on a trolley around Croydon in Surrey as an apprentice 25 years ago said: ‘The worst thing was if they didn't do anything to you at all— it showed you weren't wanted.’
Baker names research chief.
Mr Kenneth Baker, the Conservative Party chairman, yesterday named Mr Andrew Lansley as the new director of the party's research department, writes Alan Travis.
The post has been vacant for months and the lack of suitable candidates puzzled officials as the job proved the starting point for such politicians as Mr Chris Patten, Mr Iain Macleod and Mr Reginald Maudling.
Mr Lansley, who is currently policy director of the Assocication of British Chambers of Commerce and was Mr Norman Tebbit's private secretary when he was party chairman.
Mr Baker also said three MPs would act as campaign co-ordinators in London, Birmingham and Leeds for next May's council elections.
BR to test computerised safety system.
PILOT projects for a safety system aimed at preventing disasters like that at Clapham last December have been approved by British Rail.
BR will award multi-million pound contracts for the introduction of a computer-guided Automatic Train Protection system in the next few weeks.
The system will automatically prevent a train passing through signals in dangerous situations, and will also govern speeds in restricted areas, an advance on the present automatic warning system, which sends warning signals to the driver.
Installation for the ATP equipment is to be completed by 1991, and a standard system suitable for the national network will be introduced in 1992.
News of the pilot projects was given yesterday in Western News, the staff magazine for 16,000 BR employees in the South-west and South Wales.
The system was being given the highest priority by the BR board, it said.
Investigation work on ATP started before the Clapham disaster, in which 35 people died and 113 were injured.
A later inquiry blamed BR for ‘unacceptable and dangerous’ work practices, and revealed that faulty wiring in trackside signalling equipment had led to the crash.
BR has selected the high-speed mainline service from Paddington to Bristol, and the suburban Chiltern line out of Marylebone, to pioneer the project in Western Region.
Mr Knowles Mitchell, corporate affairs manager for BR's Western Region, said yesterday: ‘The introduction of the ATP system and other measures are intended to remove any likelihood of a recurrence of a Clapham-type disaster.’
He said trackside monitoring equipment would feed information to a receiver on the train.
A processor on the train would match that information with the train's performance, and the brakes could be applied if the driver did not take the required action.
BR has investigated similar ATP systems abroad.
Michael Smith adds: London Regional Transport is planning to extend the East London line north-eastwards from Bishopsgate in the City to Dalston, and from New Cross south-westwards to East Dulwich, in a £100 million extension of the Underground network.
The development will add seven new stations to the East London line and take the Underground deeper into south London, where the network is limited.
If the Transport Secretary, Mr Cecil Parkinson, approves the extension the line could be operating by 1994.
PanAm suspect jailed in Sweden.
By David Sharrock in Uppsala
ABU Talb, named in connection with the blowing up of PanAm flight 103 over Lockerbie a year ago, was jailed for life yesterday after being found guilty by a Swedish court of attempted murder during terrorist-related incidents in 1985.
Talb planted a bomb at a Jewish synagogue in Copenhagen on July 22, 1985.
He was also found guilty of attempted murder in a bombing in Amsterdam on September 30, 1985.
An accomplice, Marten Imandi, was found guilty of murdering a person at the North-West Orient Airlines office in Copenhagen on July 22, 1985, and was given a life sentence.
Brothers Mustafa and Mahmoud Mougrabi received one year and six years respectively for conspiracy to murder.
All four were acquitted of involvement in a bomb attack in Stockholm on April 7, 1986.
One person died and 26 were injured in the 1985 bombings.
Talb's lawyer, Mr Sven Eric Sjogren, said he would be appealing against the convictions.
He confirmed that Scottish police visited Talb on Tuesday but said his client refused to speak to them.
The Lockerbie investigating team is seeking further information about why Talb visited Malta before the PanAm bombing.
The detectives are concentrating on the theory that the bomb was loaded at Malta before being transferred to PanAm 103 at Frankfurt.
Three weeks ago Talb was described in Uppsala Central Court as being ‘suspected in Scotland of murder or as an accessory to murder’.
Swedish and Scottish police searched his flat, removing 15 bags of clothing.
It is believed that these clothes have been taken to Malta for comparison with items purchased there which were found in the suitcase containing the bomb.
Mr Sjogren said that Talb had agreed in principle to answer questions about the Lockerbie bombing.
‘The ball is now in Scotland, we wait for them to come back,’ he said.
Mr Sjogren repeated that his client insisted he had nothing to do with the explosion that brought down PanAm 103.
Talb's visit to Malta in October 1988 had been a business trip.
In Lockerbie yesterday the 270 victims of the bombing of flight 103 a year ago were remembered.
Last night 2,000 people filled the town's main square for a simple memorial service.
Earlier, 270 candles were lit after a ceremony attended by 1,000 local people in Dryfesdale cemetery to dedicate a garden of remembrance.
Lockerbie one year on, page 3
Japanese economic recipe ‘could improve British health’.
JAPAN'S economic miracle has contributed to its population having the longest life expectancy in the world and Britain's social and health policy makers could learn from it, two researchers claimed yesterday.
Between 1965 and 1986, life expectancy in Japan rose by 7 ½ years for men and eight years for women, said Professor Michael Marmot, of University College and Middlesex School of Medicine, and Dr George Davey Smith, of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
A Japanese boy could now expect to live 75 years, three years longer than a boy born in England or Wales.
Japanese girls could expect to live to 81, compared to 78 in England and Wales.
Writing in the British Medical Journal, the researchers said: ‘The success of the Japanese economy must be considered a factor in the rapid improvement in life expectancy.
‘If prosperity is related to health or, more importantly, if relative poverty is related to poor health, this may be one way in which Britain could act to improve life expectancy,’ they said.
The researchers said the Japanese growth in wealth seemed to have been accompanied by a narrowing in the difference in incomes between the richest and poorest, whereas in Britain the gap had widened.
Another factor contributing to Japan's good health was the country's low-fat diet, the researchers said.
Auctioneers cleared over Stubbs works.
AFIRM of auctioneers which sold two oil paintings for £840 five months before the works fetched £88,000 at Sotheby's after being attributed to the 18th century master, George Stubbs, won its appeal yesterday against a judge's ruling that it had been negligent.
The Court of Appeal set aside a High Court decision that Messenger May Baverstock, of Guildford, Surrey, should pay £112,000 damages to Mrs Penelope Luxmoore-May, of Dunsfold, Surrey.
Mrs Luxmoore-May, aged 66, and her husband, Paul — a former senior partner in the firm — sent the oils for auction to Messenger May Baverstock in October 1985.
The ‘rather dirty’ old paintings had been a wedding present at the time of Mrs Luxmoore-May's first marriage in 1948.
In March 1986, the oils were sold to an American art collector, Mr Paul Mellon, for £88,000.
Yesterday, Lord Justice Slade, sitting with Lord Justice Mann and Sir David Croom-Johnson, said Mrs Luxmoore-May deserved sympathy, as did anyone who had unwittingly parted with a ‘sleeper’— an item of hitherto unrecognised value.
But, while the opinion of Messenger May Baverstock might have been erroneous, negligence in law on the part of the auctioneer's had not been established.
Mr Justice Simon Brown, the High Court judge, had expected too high a standard of care and expertise in the firm's performance of its duties towards the Luxmoore-Mays.
The firm did not seek a costs order against Mrs Luxmoore-May, but she will have to pay her own costs for the original hearing and appeal.
Lord Justice Slade said that, in the case of ‘sleepers’, it was all too easy to be wise after the event.
The valuation of pictures, where the artist was unknown, involved an exercise of opinion and judgment and was not an exact science.
Providing the valuer had been honest and diligent, the court should be cautious before convicting him of professional negligence merely because he had failed to be the first to spot a ‘sleeper’.
The evidence did not justify the judge's conclusion that no competent valuer could have failed to spot the potential of the two oils.
Payment of the damages, which represented the difference between the two sale prices, plus interest, had been frozen pending appeal.
Immigration at four-year peak but below pre-Thatcher level.
By John Carvel Home Affairs Editor
IMMIGRATION into the UK is at its highest for four years, but remains below levels recorded before Mrs Thatcher introduced additional curbs in her first administration.
Home Office figures published yesterday show that 49,200 people were accepted for settlement in the 12 months to the end of September.
This was about 2,000 more than in the previous 12 months and the highest figure since 1985.
The number would have been higher if temporary recording changes had not been introduced.
The numbers accepted for settlement fell from 81,000 in 1976 to 70,000 in 1980 and 55,000 in 1985.
Since then immigration has been fairly stable.
The latest increases are mainly from the Indian sub-continent, but also from the Middle East, Australasia, Eastern Europe and Africa.
Fewer settled in Britain from the European Community and the Americas.
The figures include about 700 Vietnamese refugees.
The Home Office does not give a detailed breakdown of immigration from Hong Kong, but there was no significant increase in the ‘remainder of Asia’ category which includes the colony.
Inspection for puppy farms.
THE Government has promised random inspection of ‘puppy farms’— where dogs are bred for sale — after allegations in a Commons debate yesterday of ‘horrific’ treatment by a small minority of breeders, writes Martin Linton.
Mr Alan Wynne Williams, Labour MP for Carmarthen, said the pet shop window was sometimes the end of a ‘callous, cruel, and dishonest trail’.
Bitches were often crammed several to a cage, and dogs kept in old cars.
Mr Peter Lloyd, the Home Office junior minister, agreed that more powers for local authority inspectors were necessary, but to compel licensing of all breeders would place unnecessary restrictions on pet owners wanting to sell a litter.
Newspapers pay libel damages to footballer and two actors.
THE Manchester United footballer Viv Anderson was given a public apology and undisclosed libel damages in the High Court yesterday over a story in the Daily Star concerning a post-match clash between Anderson and the Wimbledon player John Fashanu.
His counsel, Mr Thomas Shields, told Mr Justice Popplewell that the article, headed: ‘Fash: I'd have knocked him through the wall.
Come clean, Anderson!’, could have been understood to imply that Anderson was lying over his version of the incident.
The film star Arnold Schwarzenegger accepted substantial undisclosed libel damages and apologies in the High Court for allegations in the News of the World in February 1988 that he held ‘fervent Nazi and anti-semitic views’ and was a ‘secret admirer of Hitler’.
The article also alleged that the star's father had been directly involved in rounding-up Jews and homosexuals who were tortured and murdered in Nazi concentration camps, the court was told.
The actor John Thaw accepted a public apology and undisclosed libel damages in the High Court over allegations in the People in December 1988 about his behaviour while filming the TV series Inspector Morse.
The article had suggested that, because of the actor's separation from his wife of 15 years, actress Sheila Hancock, he had behaved in an unprofessional and undignified manner, the court heard.
£200,000 EC aid for victims of flooding.
THE Government is to receive £200,000 in emergency European Community aid to help victims of flooding in south-west England, which has been battered by torrential rain and high winds since last weekend.
Worst hit were the Devon seaside towns of Sidmouth and Exmouth, which were cut off for several hours on Wednesday.
Some outlying villages were still under several feet of water yesterday and weathermen warned of more to come in the holiday weekend.
A warning was issued by the National Rivers Authority in Shrewsbury that the swollen River Severn was expected to burst its banks overnight for the second time in a week.
Emergency services were put on alert.
In the South-west, many roads were impassable after being swamped under five feet of water as an inch of rain fell in an hour.
Cars were abandoned in Plymouth as rain flooded main routes, and a landslide on the M5 near Exeter led to further disruption.
A woman who fell 50 feet down a cliff was rescued by a Royal Navy helicopter after she was trapped on Burgh Island in Bigbury Bay, near Plymouth.
The EC aim is to meet the priority needs of families hit by the consequences of the storms.
The money comes from the EC disaster fund.
The London Weather Centre said that people travelling for the holiday weekend will face more rain tomorrow and Sunday.
Bookmakers William Hill are offering 8/11 on a rainy Christmas and 11/10 on a dry one.
But the heavy rain has been welcomed by the British Waterways, as a much needed boost for its canals and reservoirs which have been kept low during this year's long, hot summer.
A spokesman said: ‘Our water engineer's prayers have been answered.
But he says we need a lot more heavy rain before he can roll up and put away his prayer mat.’
Under water…aftermath of the River Severn overflowing near Tewkesbury, GloucestershirePHOTOGRAPH: MICHAEL CHARITY
Minister's staff set to test rules.
By Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent
APROJECTED surge in strikes at the Department of Employment could lead to the Employment Secretary's own backyard becoming the testing ground for his Employment Bill.
Mr Fowler's decision to close nearly half the country's 2,000 JobCentres and unemployment benefit offices, to integrate the remainder, and to bring the much-reduced network under the control of a semi-autonomous agency has far-reaching implications.
Yesterday, sources in the employment services division of the department warned that industrial relations were deteriorating.
One claimed that a manager in the West Midlands had offered a Christmas bonus to employees who had worked through strikes in Coventry and Wolverhampton.
With the employment services division set to be transformed into a ‘next step agency’ in April, there are question marks over terms and conditions of employment.
There are fears that the restructuring of the division presages wider use of performance-related pay deals and special supplements, determined by local managers with greater autonomy.
This would threaten existing collective bargaining.
In recent months, after the computerisation of employment records, the service has been the focus of a wide range of stoppages over staffing.
Unions have argued for staff increases, claiming new legislation requiring claimants to prove they are ‘actively seeking’ rather than just ‘available for’work is labour-intensive.
Managers have agreed to 860 posts being created to cover computerisation but they have not acceded to further staffing demands.
The integration of JobCentres and unemployment benefit offices is expected to lead to redundancies.
Mr Fowler has conceded that about 100 higher executive officer posts are threatened, but staff fear more jobs could be lost.
MP ‘had history of depression’.
MR JOHN Heddle, the MP for Mid-Staffordshire who was found dead in his fume-filled Jaguar on Tuesday, had a history of depression, a Canterbury inquest was told yesterday.
PC John Burden, coroner's officer for Canterbury, Kent, said: ‘He had a history of depression dating back to the early 1970s and he had been depressed since September this year.’
He told Mr Richard Sturt, the Canterbury and Dover coroner, that Mr Heddle's daughter, Caroline, a 23-year-old veterinary nurse, had identified her 48-year-old father's body after it was found in the car in a chalkpit at Chartham, near Canterbury.
A post-mortem examination by Dr Alexander Gibson, a Home Office pathologist, gave the cause of death as carbon monoxide poisoning.
PC Burden said a note was found, written by Mr Heddle, but no details were given during yesterday's hearing, which was adjourned until February 15.
PC Burden said Mr Heddle lived at Lowndes Close, Belgravia, London, with his second wife.
He had two sons and two daughters from a previous marriage.
A coalman, Mr Martin Phipps, had been driving his lorry along the downs at Chartham at 7.25am on Tuesday when he noticed a Jaguar XJS parked in a chalkpit, said PC Burden.
‘He noticed a hosepipe attached to the exhaust of the vehicle, leading inside the vehicle.
Mr Phipps approached the car and switched the engine off.
The deceased, at that time, was sitting in the front passenger seat.’
Police were called and a police surgeon later certified Mr Heddle dead.
The coroner granted a request from the family, none of whom were in court, for a cremation certificate.