

Loosemore's Oxford place strains Britain's meagre resources.
By Mike Dickson
SARAH LOOSEMORE's award of a place at Oxford University means that the British game may again have to contend with the loss of one of its major assets.
The 18-year-old from Dinas Powys, currently Britain's best young player, learned this week that she has won a place at St Hilda's College for September 1991 to study physiology and psychology.
The award comes after she sacrificed much of her tennis year, including Wimbledon, to take her A levels.
After sucessfully completing the exams, she suffered a wrist injury which has virtually written off 1989, with her world ranking slipping to 298.
‘I don't regret anything I've done,’ she said yesterday after beating Julie Salmon 6-3, 6-3 to win the final of the BWTA Christmas tournament at Queen's club.
‘This news has justified the exams and I was thrilled when I heard.
I don't want to say much about making any decision.
It means I can now play solidly for the next 18 months knowing that tennis is not the be-all and end-all.’
There is a considerable drop-out rate in professional women's tennis around the age of 20.
Another reasonable prospect in world terms, Annabel Croft, dropped out in 1988 to present television game shows.
More recent and less celebrated examples include Teresa Catlin, Lisa Gould and Valda Lake.
Those who run the game in Britain will hope fervently that the Cardiff solicitor's daughter does not go the same way.
She has the ability and attitude that have raised expectations that British tennis may get the player of star quality it so desperately needs.
She had plenty of time to ponder things last night after flying off to Perth where she and Jeremy Bates are the stand-bys for next week's Hopman Cup.
Her progress next year should determine whether tennis's loss will be Oxford's gain or vice-versa.
Soviet team too costly.
THE Soviet team Stroitel Kiev, who were to play in this year's World International Club Championships at Crystal Palace next week, will not now do so after the organisers refused their demand for £1,900-a-game appearance money.
A spokeswoman for the competition said: ‘We never pay appearance money and that is always made clear in the contracts.
So to ask for it is really naughty.’
Stroitel will be replaced by Kingston, the current Carlsberg League leaders, who join the New York Lakers, Leverkusen, Solna, Maccabi, Brixton, Bracknell and Oslo.
The Chiefs' tank guns for Miami Mark Tran on a new ‘humble superstar’.
WITH so many teams vying for the play-offs, NLF officials and coaches are going dizzy trying to calculate the permutations.
‘In the seven years I've been doing this, there's never been anything like it.
It's driving me positively ga-ga,’ said Peter Abitante of the AFC, where 11 out of 14 teams still harbour play-off hopes, including all four teams in the AFC Central Division.
This is the former NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle's much-cherished parity run amok.
Heading into the last weekend of the regular season, a record 17 out of 28 teams remain in play-off contention.
When the dust or the snow settles, the play-offs will comprise 10 teams — six division winners and two wild-card teams (the best of the rest) from each conference.
So far, only San Francisco, Denver and the New York Giants have made sure of play-off slots.
One of the long shots for a wild card are the Kansas City Chiefs, who have to beat Miami on Christmas Eve while others lose.
However, even if they do not make the play-offs, the Chiefs have achieved a degree of respectability that has eluded them in past seasons.
A large reason for their success lies in their 28-year-old running-back Christian Okoye, the surprise rusher of the season.
Originally from Enugu, Nigeria, Okoye's combination of bulk (almost 19 stone) and speed (4.48sec for 40yards) make him a human tank.
‘To feel the force he runs with is amazing,’ says the Kansas tackle Irv Eatman.
‘He has slammed into my back on running plays a few times, and the only way I can describe what it feels like is to imagine standing on the street and getting hit by a car going 50 miles an hour.
And he's just getting a head of steam.
Imagine what's it's like to tackle him.’
The Seattle Seahawks know what it is like following their game in October.
Starting on the Seahawk 13, Okoye shrugged off an arm tackle from one linebacker and flipped another on to his back at the 11.
Two other defenders made a grab for Okoye but missed.
Two more made a futile dive for Okoye's legs at the five and he evaded a final defender at the goal-line.
He had just ploughed through seven Seahawks.
Of course, having a good offensive line helps and the coach Marty Schottenheimer has inherited one of the NLF's most underrated offensive units, averaging 6ft 5in and over 20 stone.
They prefer to block aggressively, opening the way for the run, instead of playing on their heels, containing pass rushers.
With Schottenheimer favouring the ground game, in contrast to his predecessors who leaned towards the pass, Okoye's career has flourished.
In only his third season, Okoye is still learning.
He runs too upright, relies too much on sheer strength instead of evading defenders, and so takes too many hits.
Most tacklers bounce off him, but the bumps take their toll.
‘I am very sore on Monday,’ he says.
Okoye also tends to fumble, because he does not protect the ball enough.
Okoye has endeared himself to team-mates and fans not only through his play on the field but through his incredibly modest behaviour off it.
Described by his colleagues as a humble superstar, Okoye earns a relatively modest $215,000 (£145,000) a year.
But his attitude is downright un-American.
‘Being too rich can be a problem.
Man does not live by money alone,’ he says.
His opposition to premarital sex — he and his university sweetheart stay in separate rooms — adds to the eccentric image.
But the way he is playing football, no one is complaining.
Sunshine break for Harris.
TIM HARRIS, the national professional road-race champion who has been left out in the cold by British team sponsors, will be basking in Spanish sunshine next year, writes Graham Snowdon.
Harris, who last season captained the Raleigh-Banana team which has now been disbanded, announced yesterday that he had been offered a contract by the Spanish Lotus-Festina squad.
‘I have got a very good deal, and it came virtually out of the blue,’ said the Doncaster-based rider, who until last week thought his future lay with a new team being planned in Belgium.
The luck of Lyle's caddie in picking the right year David Davies does a round of golf's library and rejoices in one man's rub of the green.
ON the golf course, 1989 was a vintage to declare and may well be the source of good things to come in the publishing world.
But, although the game continues to produce books by the yard, only one this year made any impact on a library already overstocked with histories and instruction tomes, and even that was published back in April.
Life With Lyle by Sandy Lyle's caddie, Dave Musgrove, breaks the mould, being a record, kept by Musgrove, of their times together during a period when Lyle won three events in America, including the US Masters, and three events in Europe, including the World Match Play Championship.
Such books are a good idea usually frustrated by circumstances.
A 1987 book on the four major championships, done for the British market, had as its winners Larry Mize, Scott Simpson, Nick Faldo and Larry Nelson — three bores out of four.
The following year would have yielded Lyle, Curtis Strange, Severiano Ballesteros and Jeff Sluman — only one bore out of four.
Where Musgrove and John Hopkins, who put it all together, got lucky was that they chronicled a period of success that may never have been equalled, let alone exceeded, by any British golfer.
All those wins, plus being top of the US Money List for 133 days — it was a fabulous run and it is all faithfully recorded, providing on second reading a clue as to why Lyle is now having trouble hitting his hat.
In addition to the wins, Lyle was in contention almost permanently and the pressure, for close on 18 months, was immense.
He is now undergoing a re-couping, re-generating process.
He will surely be back.
Some browsing books for the enthusiast have arrived on the market, and a couple for the fanatic.
Into the latter category comes John Ball of Hoylake by John Behrend.
Ball was the first amateur and the first Englishman to win the Open, at Prestwick in 1890, but the kind of loving research that has to go into books of this type invariably makes fascinating reading.
There is also a re-issue of The Encyclopaedia of Golf Collectibles, revealing that a matched set of irons, ‘Harmonised Irons’, could be obtained from MacGregor way back in 1926, and that golf balls coloured oriole orange and canary yellow were available from Wilson in 1928.
There are lots more facts like that.
For the browsers there is Golf: The Golden Years, a pictorial anthology by Sarah Baddiel celebrating the last few years of the 19th century and the first 40 or so of the 20th.
This is probably the best value of the Christmas publications.
Another in the same mould is Golf's Lighter Side, a selection of articles from Golf Illustrated from the last 100 years.
In The Best of Golf Peter Alliss and Bob Ferrier deal with the great players and the great deeds, plus some lesser and more interesting ones.
I particularly enjoyed the chapter on Cyril James Hastings Tolley.
He was good enough to be in six Walker Cup teams, sufficiently well heeled to be of independent means and later a Captain of the Royal and Ancient.
The authors have recorded an interview with him, reproduced verbatim.
The Official History of the Ryder Cup by Michael Williams is well researched and therefore surprisingly interesting while Ryder Cup ‘89 conveys the atmosphere of the event rather better than most instant histories.
There is the usual wodge of instructional stuff which, in general, is a waste of paper.
No book can do in two hours what any club's teaching professional can do in two minutes, and that, perhaps surprisingly, goes for the video too.
Golfers who know go to their pro.
Life With Lyle by David Musgrove; Heinemann Kingswood, £12.95.
John Ball of Hoylake by John Behrend; Grant Books, Droitwich, £18.
The Encyclopaedia of Golf Collectibles; Gazelle Book Services, Lancaster, £11.50.
Golf: The Golden Years by Sarah Baddiel; Bracken Books, £7.95.
Golf's Lighter Side; Lennard Books, £10.95.
The Best of Golf by Peter Alliss and Bob Ferrier; Partridge Press, £17.95.
The Official History of the Ryder Cup by Michael Williams; Stanley Paul, £14.95.
Ryder Cup ‘89; Virgin, £9.95.
Protests put Britain in lead.
By Bob Fisher
WITH only the Sydney-Hobart race to come, Britain leads the NorTel Southern Cross Cup series.
The lead changed hands after an excellent result by the three-boat team in the fifth race and some protest decisions from earlier racing.
It was certainly Britain's day yesterday in the 25-mile race around an Olympic course outside Sydney Heads.
Mike Peacock's 45ft Juno IV, skippered by Mike McIntyre, revelled in the choppy seas and 14-17 knot south-easterly breeze.
The Tony Castro-designed Juno IV was comfortably ahead of the other boats of her size and won on handicap by over a minute.
It was an all-round performance by Juno IV.
McIntyre was able to drive her almost as fast to windward as the 50-footers and lost nothing on the downwind legs.
At the finish, after nearly four hours of racing, Juno IV had lost only nine minutes to the leading 50-footer and was three minutes ahead of her close rival, Peter Kurts's Madeline's Daughter from New South Wales.
Alan Bond's Drumbeat led the fleet home, finishing almost 45 minutes ahead of Juno IV but was placed fifth on corrected time.
Heaven Can Wait, skippered by Harold Cudmore, led her group, finishing third overall on corrected time.
With Eddie Warden Owen 11th in Canon Express, Britain took second place.
But after the protest of the Hong Kong yacht Foo 2 against Cyclone for an infringement in the fourth race was heard, Cyclone was penalised nine places.
That put Britain into the lead and leaves the battle for the cup between Britain and the New South Wales team, as the Australian national side suffered several disasters.
First, the 40ft Southern Cross had to pull out of the race with rigging problems; Prime Factor was recalled at the start; and the third boat, Sagacious V, faces another protest which is likely to see her heavily penalised.
Already the Australian team are 64 points, or 13 places in the long final race, behind Britain, the 1985 winners.
The 630-mile NorTel Sydney to Hobart starts on Boxing Day.
TEAM POINTS (provisional after five races): 1, UK 469.5; 2, NSW 463; 3, Australia 405.5; 4, Hong Kong 394.5; 5, West Australia 363; 6.
Victoria 312; 7, USSR 91.5.
Lord Lichfield will not be racing aboard Rothmans when the third leg of the Whitbread race starts from Fremantle tomorrow.
The skipper Lawrie Smith has decided that the 3,450-mile leg is too crucial to drop one of the regular crew of 16 in favour of his sponsor's official photographer.
McLean may act as Scotland's spy.
By Patrick Glenn
DUNDEE UNITED have been invited to Central America to face Costa Rica, the dark horses in Scotland's group in the World Cup finals.
If the match takes place — some time next month has been suggested — it will provide ideal circumstances under which Andy Roxburgh, the national coach, may watch Costa Rica for the first time.
United, led by Scotland's former assistant manager, Jim McLean, will decide at a board meeting this morning whether or not to accept the role of fifth columnists for the Scots in the build-up to Italy.
Ernie Walker, the SFA secretary, confirmed yesterday that there would be no objections from the authorities if United decide to go.
McLean said: ‘It really would be great if we could fit in such a match.
It is a great compliment and a chance for us to find out about Costa Rica.’
United could also do England a favour by accepting another offer, this time from Egypt, for a match at Tannadice later in the season.
The Egyptians are in England's World Cup section.
They plan a tour of Britain to familiarise themselves with the British style and the first place they wish to stop is Dundee for the game with United.
That will be decided later, when the Egyptians reveal their itinerary.
The Scottish League management committee yesterday came out officially against the idea of a winter shut-down, but promised to canvass all 38 member clubs for their views.
‘There is no groundswell of opinion in favour of a break,’ said the secretary Jim Farry, ‘so we will continue with the present principle of playing when we can, and at the same time continue to exhort clubs to improve the fans’comfort.
It was recognised that the vagaries of the weather make pre-selection of a period for a close-down impossible.’
Racing: Scudamore and punters are keen on Bonanza Boy.
By Chris Hawkins
YAHOO, a length and a half runner-up to Desert Orchid in last season's Cheltenham Gold Cup, is being heavily backed to take his revenge in Boxing Day's King George VI Chase at Kempton, and Coral's yesterday cut him to 6-1 from 10-1 after laying him to lose £40,000.
Soft ground is essential for Yahoo and conditions should be to his liking, although if he could not beat Desert Orchid in the Cheltenham bog it is difficult to visualise him doing it at Kempton.
Pegwell Bay, who will be ridden by Carl Llewellyn, has also attracted support and is 6-1 from 7-1, while in the face of this Desert Orchid has eased from 8-15 to 8-13.
There seems to be plenty of confidence between topweight Bonanza Boy in tomorrow's Coral Welsh National and last year's winner is now 3-1 joint favourite with Ghofar following two bets of £7,000 to £2,000 with the sponsors.
That confidence was echoed by Peter Scudamore when I spoke to him at Towcester yesterday.
He poohed-poohed the suggestion that Bonanza Boy had too much weight, commenting: ‘The distance is the key, he'll love it.
Three miles is too short for him.’
There are no problems at Chepstow at the moment but if itfalls foul of the weather, Bonanza Boy will be re-routed to the King George at Kempton.
Incidentally, there will be an 8.30am inspection today to determine prospects for tomorrow's meeting at Hereford.
Following heavy rain the meeting is in danger.
Clerk of the Course Bob Davies said: ‘We could not have raced today.’
Jenny Pitman's Do Be Brief stepped onto a racecourse for the first time in the first division of the Christmas Pudding Novice Hurdle and made quite an impression in beating Sailor's Luck, but not half as big as his stable-companion Egypt Mill, who looked something special in landing the second division by 10 lengths.
Egypt Mill is a lovely, big horse by Deep Run and looks worth every penny of the 30,000gns he cost at the Ballsbridge Sales last year.
Established stable star, Golden Freeze, who misses the King George after grazing a knee in a fall on the road, has responded well to antibiotics and is expected to be sidelined for only two weeks, but this injury and all the firm ground have made a mess of Mrs Pitman's plans.
Golden Freeze is not well handicapped and has gone up 4lb since finishing second to Joint Sovereignty in the Mackeson.
This means handicaps are out for him in the immediate future and conditions races will have to be the order of the day on the run-up to Cheltenham.
‘Its still either the Gold Cup or National for him.
We'll have to see,’ said assistant David Stait.
‘But on a point of handicapping, why has he been raised 4lb after finishing second in the Mackeson, while Desert Orchid has been dropped 2lb for finishing second to Long Engagement?’
The answer to that is probably that Long Engagement was 15lb out of the handicap at Sandown and Desert Orchid therefore achieved relatively less.
Nicky Henderson's Mr Gossip justified favouritism and made a winning debut over fences in the second division of the Misletoe Novice Chase but it was only by a head that he got home from Bit Of A Clown, with Bronze Final a head away third.
Mr Gossip jumped left at his fences which mystified Henderson, who said he has not done it before.
The answer is probably to run him on a left hand track where such antics would not cost him so much ground.
Henderson is genuinely optimisitc about his triple Champion Hurdler, See You Then, who will be ten at the turn of the year, making a comeback next month.
The gelding's career seemed to be over when he broke down badly in the spring of 1988.
He was promptly retired but has made a remarkable recovery.
‘He needs at least two or three races if he's to have a go at the Champion again.
But it is either the Champion or nothing.
If he's not up to it there's no question of him running in anything else,’ said Henderson.
A cricket landmark vanishes with the final over for Gover Matthew Engel pays tribute to the academy which kept a straight bat for 61 years
TOMORROW afternoon, on the last shopping day before Christmas — perhaps the least cricketing day of the entire calendar — one of London's sporting institutions will close its doors forever.
Alf Gover has decided to retire and the Gover Cricket School in Wandsworth is to be demolished.
Gover prefers it that way: he could not imagine anyone else running the place.
Wisden says he is nearly 82; he still looks nothing of the kind, but lately he has started to feel it a little more.
‘I'm sorry,’ he says, ‘but you can't kick against the breeze.
Three years ago, I was fine.
You start to think you're immortal.
But there have been one or two things this year.’
His wife Marjorie puts it more graphically: ‘It's not ‘Come on, let's get upstairs’ any more.
It's ‘Ooh, we've got to get up those stairs’.’
It is the end of a very long era.
The school was opened in 1928 by two other Surrey eminences, Andy Sandham and Herbert Strudwick.
Gover took over from Strudwick in 1938 and has run it himself since 1954.
Since then it has become a complete family business.
Marjorie does the books; their son John runs the shop and helps with the coaching; his wife Janie does the typing, and when I was in the office the lad who brought in the post said ‘There you are, Grandad’ and turned out to be John's son, James.
But Alf Gover has become a sort of universal grandad.
No one has ever worn an England sweater longer.
He only played in four Tests but the sweater (and his knotted silk scarf) became his uniform.
He has got through a dozen of them over the years and generations of cricketers have passed by.
It is not entirely true to say everyone who is anyone has been coached there, but a heck of a lot have — Frank Tyson, Fred Titmus, Ted Dexter, Viv Richards and the teenage Ken Barrington, who hung around day after day asking questions.
Fewer of the modern English pros have come by, partly because most counties now have their indoor nets, partly because fashions change.
But foreign players have remained keen: the West Indians Phil Simmons and Ian Bishop are among recent customers.
But the Gover School has never depended on major names.
The speciality has always been genuinely private tuition, one-to-one coaching for anyone willing to pay (£16 an hour at the end) whether brilliant or hopeless.
Most cricket schools prefer group therapy.
For their money, they got traditional advice — Gover would always try to get batsmen to live up to the technical ideal of Jack Hobbs — put in an unstuffy and flexible way: ‘We would fit the mould to the customers, not the other way round.’
Gover is now planning to write his memoirs, which will cover quite a range of cricketing experience.
He reported three tours of Australia for the Sunday Pictorial and was the radio summariser with Alston, Arlott and Swanton for the Tests in the early Fifties.
His book will not just be the usual lament for the good old days, either: Gover first advocated one-day cricket in 1938.
Meanwhile, the old building will come down.
It has always looked a bit ramshackle, with its claustrophobic nets, which were gas-lit until the 1960s.
It will be replaced, most probably, by a modern sports centre which will have no room for cricket.
Gover is matter-of-fact about it, but 61 years is a long time.
Above the roar of the South Circular Road traffic I swear it will always be possible to hear the thwack of bat on ball and the occasional rasp of ‘One to drive’.
Hampson is given ten-week ban after third sending off.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
STEVE HAMPSON, the Wigan and Great Britain full-back, was suspended for 10 matches by the disciplinary committee yesterday after being sent off for a head tackle in Saturday's Regal Trophy quarter-final with at Leeds.
He had a good idea of what was coming.
After the match he was asked what punishment he thought he might receive.
‘Let's say that I'm booking my holidays for January,’ he replied.
Hampson, who had not been sent off prior to this season, has had a wretched past seven weeks.
He was dismissed in the opening minutes of Great Britain's third Test with New Zealand for head-butting and sent off the following day for tripping Castleford's Steve Larder.
Those offences cost him four matches.
Since then the League have been punishing heavily anyone guilty of illegal high tackles, with eight-match suspensions being the normal currency.
And when Hampson brought the Leeds hooker, Colin Maskill, to the ground with just such a tackle he must have known that the rest of his season would be cut short.
Widnes meantime, according to their coach, Doug Laughton, have accused the League of treating them ‘shabbily’ over the Joe Grima affair, perhaps the most two-faced quote of the Eighties.
The League ruled that the striking off of Grima from the Widnes register and an attempt to replace him with the Tongan forward, Boblyn Tuavao, was ‘unacceptable’.
To which Widnes have countered with three pages of questions to League headquarters, demanding answers.
Grima says that he is simply grateful that he has started to work off his eight-match suspension.
More disciplinary problems loom with the news that Alan Burke, the referee, has reported a brawl in Sunday's match between Batley and Trafford Borough — a game in which five players were sent off.
England may well save a place for in-form goalkeeper Clark.
By Pat Rowley
AN England cap may be the prompt reward for John Clark, who kept goal so well for East Grinstead in the Birmingham Midshires International Indoor tournament last weekend.
The national selectors indicated before England's unexpected success in the HDM international tournament at The Hague that they wanted to test other members of their squad before the team is announced for the first official internationals of the season, the Four Nation tournament at Crystal Palace in a month's time.
Neither Andy Forshaw nor Martin Langston stood out in the HDM event, so Clark, for so long on the fringe of national selection, could get his chance for England in the Buttermen Indoor tournament at Crystal Palace on December 29-30.
The other two goalkeepers in the England squad, David Luckes and Craig Winter, are sure to be on view at the Buttermen tournament, playing for England juniors and Bromley respectively.
In Pool A for the Buttermen tournament will be Roses (England), Harborne, Hounslow and Teddington, while Pool B will comprise England Juniors, Bromley, Fareham and Swansea.
The selectors have the opportunity to strengthen the England side with three World Cup reserves — Rob Thompson, Rupert Welch and Don Williams — who were unavailable previously because of World Cup training.
The draw for the new European Cup Winners' Cup is to be made today.
England's qualifiers, Hounslow, learned yesterday that their qualifier at Easter will be in either Barcelona or Stuttgart.
The venue for the second qualifier is yet to be decided, but the winners of the two qualifiers will meet in the final during the European Cup for Club (League) Champions at Frankfurt in June.
St Albans wait to hear the draw for the first official European Club Indoor Championship at Amiens in March, when their rivals will include Amsterdam, Holywood ‘87 (Ireland), MIM (Scotland), Swansea and Rot-Weiss Cologne.
By Patrick Agnew in Cagliari
DESPITE the encouragement of 65 degrees of bright Sardinian sunshine, Italy and Argentina contrived a predictable bout of pre-World Cup shadow boxing here yesterday and played out a dull if meaningful draw in a match dominated by the defences.
Neither team deserved to win.
The Argentinian goalkeeper, Pumpido, had a much busier afternoon than his Italian counterparts, Zenga and Tacconi.
Pumpido had to make two saves while neither of the Italians need have been there at all.
Although Argentina started ominously well, finding a lot of space down the Italian right, neither of the two front players, Dezotti and Maradona, looked likely to score before Christmas 1990.
What little excitement there was for the colourful Cagliari crowd of 30,000 came from the Italian midfielder Giannini.
On the half-hour he got on the end of a short pass from Vialli on the edge of the penalty area and hit a fine shot that brought an equally fine save from Pumpido.
In the second half Giannini again created the best moment, first intercepting a pass, then setting up Serena for the clearest chance of the match.
But Pumpido was again alert, coming quickly off his line to close down Serena.
In terms of penalty-area action that was about it.
The rest of the match, however, was not wholly uneventful.
Tough marking by the Argentinian defenders Batista, Monzon and Simon meant that the Soviet referee A Spirin, and the Italian magic sponge were kept busy.
Commenting afterwards on this unfriendly aspect to a so-called friendly, the Argentinian coach Carlos Bilardo explained: ‘Games like this are friendly in name only.
I had guys like Simon, Monzon, Dezotti and others all desperately trying to play their way into my World Cup team.
The same applies to some of the Italians.
In circumstances like that no one wants to make a mistake and no one is going to take things casually.’
He seemed happier than his opposite number Azeglio Vicini.
Though the match might have been short of entertainment, it was full of information from a technical viewpoint.
The sharp running and creative midfield work of Giusti and Burruchaga was a sweet sight for Bilardo.
Two of his 1986 World Cup winning heroes are back, as good as ever.
Another two, the defenders Batista and Ruggeri, have never been away.
They gave Vialli, Donadoni and Mancini a combative afternoon.
There was further satisfaction for Bilardo in the performance of less experienced players.
On his international debut the sweeper Simon looked the genuine article, while the central defender Monzon showed he can compensate for a lack of height with good positioning and excellent timing.
With all this reassurance Bilardo could afford the luxury of being relatively unconcerned about Maradona's performance.
According to the match programme Maradona was on the pitch, wearing the No.10 shirt.
The rumour cannot, however, be confirmed.
He can never have been more anonymous.
This was partly due to the excellent marking job by his Napoli team-mate Ferrara but possibly also due to off-field distractions.
His mind seems currently more on organising Hollywood-type weddings, extended holidays and wondering about the legality of the World Cup draw.
The worrying thing for other World Cup teams next summer is that, if and when Maradona recovers his best form — and he will most likely do so in June — then the rest of the Argentina side looks ready to set him up for another stupendous tournament.
It is hard to see what comfort Vicini will have derived.
He said he was happy that his side had done most of the attacking.
On the day, though, that was a small achievement.
He also admitted that on the balance of their performances against Brazil, England and Argentina this autumn, his side clearly lacked that extra something.
He must be hoping that the stimulus of playing the World Cup at home will provide the extra sparkle.
And so say 55 million Italians.
ITALY: Zenga; Bergomi, Maldini (De Agostini, 46min), Baresi, Ferrara, Berti, Donadoni (M Mancini, 46), De Napoli, Vialli (Fusi, 77), Giannini, Serena.
ARGENTINA: Pumpido; Ruggeri, Simon, Monzon, Olarticochea, Giusti, Batista, Basualdo (Troglio, 39), Burruchaga, Maradona, Dezotti (Caniggia, 81).
Referee: A Spirin (USSR).
Prean still the man to beat.
By Richard Jago
CARL PREAN, the man whose name does not appear in the English rankings, again showed that he is the country's current outstanding player by beating Desmond Douglas to win the Macartney and Dowie Classic in Brentwood yesterday.
Prean, who objects to the way the rankings are calculated, saw Douglas overcome the titleholder and England No.1, Alan Cooke, in the semi-finals, and then beat the 10-times former national champion 21-19, 19-21, 21-10 with a forceful forehand attack.
But Prean had been fortunate to survive from 10-15 down in the final game in the semi-final against the England No.3, Nicky Mason, who had beaten him last year, while Douglas, weakened by a stomach upset, survived a hard three games with Prean at the round-robin stage.
The 34-year-old still managed to win 21-17, 21-9 against Cooke, who has been struggling to find his best form all season.
David Lacey on the anti-climactic run-out at Rotterdam No samba in Brazil's new step.
BRAZIL's 1-0 victory over what amounted to a Holland B team in Rotterdam on Wednesday night continued the process of pragmatic regeneration they have undergone since the desultory performances in Europe last summer which left some observers wondering whether they would qualify for the World Cup at all.
Happily for their manager Sebastiao Lazaroni, the Brazilians are now unbeaten in 15 games and embarked on a run which they hope will carry them to Turin next summer on a wave of confidence and efficiency.
Sweden and Costa Rica must already be bracing themselves for a high tide.
Scotland, too, although the state of their sea defences will depend on the course the opening phase has taken by the time the countries meet on June 20.
Bobby Robson will be more immediately concerned with the mood and strength of the Brazilians when they come to Wembley on March 28.
While the match is only another World Cup warm-up, it is likely to be more of a searching test of England's potential than last month's goalless draw with Italy.
Of course that goes even more for the game against Holland in Cagliari on June 16, but on Wednesday the Dutch, deprived of most of their foreign-based players, were in no position to provide fresh portents.
Robson, who saw Brazil beat the Italians 1-0 in Bologna in October, flew on to Cagliari disappointed at the spectacle in the Feyenoord Stadium but impressed with Brazil's organisation.
‘They're going to be very difficult to break down,’ he said.
‘They beat Holland the same way they beat Italy, by defending tightly with a sweeper and breaking away cleverly to score.
I don't think they'll concede the sort of easy goals they have allowed in past World Cups.’
While agreeing broadly with the England manager's summing-up of the present Brazilian team, the thought did occur that in another footballing era he could have been describing an Italian side — brilliant in breakaways but giving nothing away at the back.
When Brazil beat Italy 4-1 in the final of the 1970 World Cup the style of their triumph was a cry of defiance against the organisation men, the managers and coaches who insisted on getting things right in defence before even thinking about the imaginative attacking play which should be the game's apotheosis at this level.
An impudent, illogical backheel by Clodoaldo inside his own half, for instance, allowed Boninsegna to steal an Italian equaliser before Gerson's wonderful goal restored Brazil's lead and Pele and Carlos Alberto completed a triumph which said everything about the samba approach to football.
Only the other day Robson was criticising Paul Gascoigne for attempting a similar back-heeled flick during England's B match against Yugoslavia…could be costly, might give the other side a goal, must cut out that sort of thing, and so on.
In strategic terms the England manager, who does not have a Gerson or Pele to bail his team out of the trouble caused by such indiscretions, was right, but if you drive the idiosyncrasies out of football altogether what is left can be grey indeed, which is what one finds a little disconcerting about the present Brazilian side.
They pass the ball sweetly, create space effortlessly, and in Alemao, Branco, Valdo, Dunga, Mozer and Jorginho possess players who should give them a formidable momentum next summer.
But after watching Brazil for a total of three hours, few gems of individualism stayed in the memory.
The free-kick from Cruz that beat Italy was one, and the run and cross from Jorginho which led to Careca heading the winner in Rotterdam another, but in these games Brazil have impressed as a team without making you want to leap out of your seat as Pele once did.
Still, Lazaroni has to be given credit for absorbing the pan-Europeanism of his squad into something the Europeans will need to be aware of in Italy.
This Brazilian team can mark and tackle with a cool realism that their 1974 World Cup side never achieved in West Germany, when toughness became confused with thuggery.
Wednesday's match marked the Dutch football federation's centenary, although considering the side Holland were forced to field, Queen Beatrix might just as well have stayed at home and sent the centenarians a congratulatory telegram.
It was a bit like going to the Rijksmuseum to see the original Rembrandts and being shown postcards instead.
Boxing.
Tony Wilson, whose previous fight ended in farce when his mother climbed into the ring and attacked his opponent, made an orthodox return to the ring last night.
The former former British light-heavyweight champion from Wolverhampton stopped Dave Lawrence in six rounds at Birmingham in a warm-up for his final eliminator with Southampton's Steve McCarthy for the right to challenge Tom Collins.
Athletics.
Carl Lewis, the American 100 metres and long jump Olympic champion, has filed a £120 million libel suit against the West German magazine Stern and a former team-mate, Darrell Robinson, a 400 metres runner, for a story which alleged Lewis used steroids to improve his performances.
He finished second in the 100 metres to Canada's Ben Johnson, later disqualified after failing a drug test.
Table Tennis.
Simion Crisan, a Romanian international, has defected and asked for political asylum in West Germany.
The West German club TTC Juelich said that Crisan, 27, had fled from his homeland and joined them.
Tennis.
Boris Becker has been confirmed as a definite starter at next month's New South Wales Open in Sydney.
Ivan Lendl, Mats Wilander and Yannick Noah will also be playing in the event.
Cycling.
The Belgian team ADR are to sue Greg Lemond after the American left them for their French rivals Z. Lemond, the Tour de France winner and world champion, was lured to Z in September for a record £3.5million fee, having served only half of his two-year contract with the Belgian team.
Olympic Games.
The East German Sports Federation is supporting an Olympic bid by Berlin for the Games of either 2000 or 2004.
Manfred von Richthofen, president of the West Berlin Federation, said a committee will be set up to examine the possibility of a bid from the city.
Fifa brands Maradona ‘stupid’.
DIEGO MARADONA's claim that the World Cup draw was rigged was yesterday dismissed as ‘stupid’ by Fifa.
‘What Maradona said is the most stupid declaration of the Eighties by a football player,’ said the Fifa spokesman Guido Tognoni, who added that no disciplinary action would be taken against the player.
The Argentina captain said yesterday he was unrepentant, but added: ‘If I have to say sorry I will,’ for his remarks on Tuesday that he believed the draw was decided in advance, putting Argentina in the hardest group.
Prost's racing glove conceals an iron fist Alan Henry finds that the three-times world champion does not pull many punches in his candid tale of life on the grand prix circuit.
IT is probably all for the good that Alain Prost left McLaren to join Ferrari at the end of the season because I doubt his autobiography, Life in the Fast Lane, will be nestling in the McLaren chief Ron Dennis's Christmas stocking.
The three-times world champion has a good tale to tell and, while the format could have done with more meat on the bones, this volume certainly does not pull any punches.
Yet throughout the narrative, Prost's awareness of the dividing line between professional respect and personal friendship is firmly evident.
Among other things he chastises Renault for their failure to respond to BMW's challenge which led to him losing the 1983 world championship, chides Dennis for his lack of punctuality and disinterest in anything that is not his own idea and expresses his admiration and respect for Niki Lauda, with whom he was partnered in 1984.
These are but a handful of key motor racing personalities round whom Prost weaves an absorbing range of anecdotes and gossip.
My favourite is one tale Prost tells against himself.
Beaten into second place by his team-mate Rene Arnoux in the 1982 French Grand Prix, he pulled into a service station on his way home only for the attendant to mistake him for his rival.
‘Well done Monsieur Arnoux,’ says the man, ‘that Prost is a proper little prick — he had it coming.’
Thinking on his feet, Prost whipped out a fistful of cash, sparing both of them the embarrassment had he paid by credit card.
His lukewarm relationship with Ayrton Senna comes across firmly, particularly bearing in mind that this book closes with the end of the 1988 season.
At least Senna and Honda can be grateful for that…
Their troubled relationship with Prost notwithstanding, Honda's successful assault on the bastions of Formula One is admirably chronicled by Christopher Hilton in Conquest of Formula One, although his somewhat hectoring style makes the first few pages something of a battle.
Yet Hilton has approached the story from a refreshingly energetic and revealing standpoint, his exhaustive researches producing hitherto unrevealed nuggets about the pioneering years of the Honda's Formula One involvement.
The photographic content, and captioning, left something to be desired, though.
I bet he wishes he could re-write the one which reads: ‘They liked and respected each other,’ referring to a photograph of Prost and Senna.
For those tiring of today's political grand prix scene, Gerald Donaldson's Gilles Villeneuve — The Life of the Legendary Racing Driver represents a long-overdue memorial to the heroic Canadian driver who was killed seven years ago practising in his Ferrari for the Belgian Grand Prix.
Donaldson, whose previous works have included a biography of the Canadian skier, Steve Podborski, has quizzed just about every available friend, colleague and observer of Villeneuve's.
The result is a sympathetic and charmingly balanced profile of this charismatic driver whose uninhibited spirit at the wheel made him so compelling to watch.
As Lauda remarked: ‘He was someone I took a great liking to, the craziest devil I ever came across in F1.’
Lauda crops up again in Maurice Hamilton's informative tome The British Grand Prix, an absorbing record of this country's most important fixture on the international racing calendar.
At first glance, you may wonder how the history of a single event could possibly be spun out to fill a 255-page epic, but this is far from a specialist lap-by-lap potted report of each race.
Although the official world championship did not start until 1950, Hamilton has wisely used a broader brush with excellent effect to put the race in an accurate historical perspective.
He starts with the pioneering days at Brooklands and has taken care not to omit the Donington grands prix in 1937-38 where Germany's Auto Unions and Mercedes were so dominant.
If you prefer some lighter reading to re-awaken forgotten memories, Nigel Roebuck's Inside Formula One is to be highly recommended.
Its title is rather misleading, for it amounts to an anthology of Roebuck's weekly columns which have appeared over the years in the motor racing magazine, Autosport.
Informative, sensitive, irascible and perceptive, Roebuck has distilled the flavour of grand prix racing in the Eighties.
Life in the Fast Lane, by Alain Prost (Stanley Paul, 12.95).
Conquest of Formula One, by Christopher Hilton (Patrick Stephens, 16.95).
Gilles Villeneuve — The Life of the Legendary Racing Driver, by Gerald Donaldson (McLelland & Stewart, £14.95).
The British Grand Prix, by Maurice Hamilton (The Crowood Press 17.95).
Inside Formula One, by Nigel Roebuck (Patrick Stephens, 14.95).
Sport in brief Table Tennis.
Simion Crisan, a Romanian international, has defected and asked for political asylum in West Germany.
The West German club TTC Juelich said that Crisan, 27, had fled from his homeland and joined them.
Tennis.
Boris Becker has been confirmed as a definite starter at next month's New South Wales Open in Sydney.
Ivan Lendl, Mats Wilander and Yannick Noah will also be playing in the event..
Cycling.
The Belgian team ADR are to sue Greg Lemond after the American left them for their French rivals Z. Lemond, the Tour de France winner and world champion, was lured to Z in September for a record £3.5million fee, having served only half of his two-year contract with the Belgian team.
Olympic Games.
The East German Sports Federation is supporting an Olympic bid by Berlin for the Games of either 2000 or 2004.
Manfred von Richthofen, president of the West Berlin Federation, said a committee will be set up to examine the possibility of a bid from the city.
PAGE
Green with envy for Norway.
By Stephen Lee
IT SEEMS the last Christmas of the decade will be more green than white.
The best area in Switzerland is the Grisons.
In the Engadin, Diavolezza is mostly open with new snow, Celerina has 15cm lower and 50cm upper slopes, Corvatsch (15-70cm with skiing to the valley).
Upper slopes at Flims-Laax are reasonable (0-90cm).
The Bernese Oberland and Valais have few reports of snow.
Verbier (0-40cm) and Zermatt (0-45cm) are skiable on upper slopes.
Andermatt has spring-like conditions, skiing on the glacier only.
Norway is well ahead with new snow everywhere, holding up in full winter conditions.
With 150cm Oppdal is set for the winter.
Voss and Geilo have 50cm new snow.
The United States has good skiing.
Killington has 50cm of fresh snow, 700 skiable acres and 105 trails open, while Jackson Hole, Steamboat, Sunlight, Vail, Cooper, and Beaver Creek are 95 per cent open.
Italian Courmayeur survives on artificial snow.
In France, Tignes has fair skiing on the glacier, but off piste is feeble.
Chamonix is closed, snow above 2600m, lower later.
Austria has 10 resorts with skiing down to valley level.
Skiable resorts are Bad Gastein (20-50cm), Bad Mittendorf (30-40cm), Flachau (30-30cm), St Anton (20-60), Obergurgl (10-70cm), Obertauern (20-40cm).
In West Germany, only the Zugspitze (Garmisch Partenkirchen) has snow, 100cm (10cm new) and four lifts open.
In Scotland only the Lecht is skiable (two runs).
Operators report varying attitudes from snow-hungry skiers.
The past two seasons have discouraged many from booking early, or from booking at all.
Other more experienced skiers are earmarking March or April as the best candidates for reliable cover.
A third group have packed their bags and are ready to travel immediately as the snow falls.
But there is a real danger that lucky resorts will be fully booked within hours of a good dump.
There is still a good case for booking ahead now, but look for high resorts, preferably with a glacier as well as access to some non-skiing activities.
Skiing weather is fickle.
The Swiss forecast last Monday (‘no snow until Saturday’) missed Wednesday's flurry.
France has been expecting heavy snow all week to 1200m…and still waits.
Chamonix locals are sticking to their prediction of a heavy winter.
If it does come, say the Swiss, it may not be until the second week in January.
For the moment Christmas on the slopes holds little promise.
The Alpine forecast from the Manchester Weather Centre is to become colder on the weekend with a good chance of substantial snowfalls.
The Ski Service resumes on Wednesday December 27.
Vale angry at the bill.
THE Port Vale chairman Bill Bell has called police costs at Vale Park ‘outrageous’ after recent figures revealed a 500 per cent increase in the last year.
The leap from £11,000 to £55,202 put Vale into the Football League's top ten with a policing cost of 35 pence per spectator.
Bell said: ‘Clubs cannot cope with these increases.
They are absolutely crippling and some clubs could even go out of business.
As far as I am concerned games are over-policed.
I can understand the caution in the light of the Hillsborough disaster, but the charges per officer are outrageous.’
Superintendent Gordon Thompson of Staffordshire police said: ‘Our prices are fixed by the council's police committee and agreed with Port Vale.’
Meanwhile, another change to the offside law is being proposed — this time by the Football Association of Wales — and it could be introduced at non-League level next season.
The new rule is ‘no player will be offside if he receives the ball directly from his own half of the field’.
Fifa has given approval via its technical committee and if the international board agree next June, the new experimental rule will be used in the Abacus League next season.
Fifa is also considering a rule change whereby an attacker level with the last defender would not be offside.
The use of Cardiff Arms Park for all future Wales games will be discussed by the FA of Wales and the Welsh Rugby Union next month.
The postponed Littlewoods Cup fourth-round replay between Southampton and Swindon will now be at The Dell on January 16, kick-off 7.30.
Ipswich staged a dramatic recovery to knock Wimbledon out of the Zenith Data Systems Cup at Portman Road last night.
First they equalised in injury time, when Joseph tripped Johnson to concede a penalty, then they scored twice in two minutes in the first period of extra-time to win 3-1.
Banbridge's Ascot form is first class.
DAVID Nicholson's Banbridge put up a fair performance when running Clever Folly to four lengths at Ascot last month and must be fancied for the Tanners Claret Handicap Chase at Ludlow this afternoon, writes Chris Hawkins.
Banbridge was receiving 13lb from Clever Folly but as the winner subsequently went on to triumph in the A F Budge Gold Cup at Cheltenham, breaking the track record in the process, there is little wrong with the form.
The improving Nearly Medina should make a market and although there are only five runners BANBRIDGE (1.0) should not be too short a price and merits the nap selection.
At Hexham George Moore introduces Afton Express, once thought to be champion hurdle material, to fences in the Portman Bloodstock Novice Chase.
With the stable now returning to form after a lean spell, Afton Express should go close but I slightly prefer the more experienced RIVER HOUSE (1.15), who jumped well when scoring over the course recently.
Oliver Sherwood's MIDNIGHT STORM (12.45) should be hard to beat in the Concord Business Park Novice Chase at Uttoxeter.
Midnight Storm made every yard of the running and jumped well when winning unchallenged at Nottingham recently.
With the Jenny Pitman horses in such tremendous form at the moment, MOSSGARA (2.15) must be greatly respected in the second division of the Knight Park Novices Hurdle.
Mossgara was hampered at halfway but stayed on well when second to Wizzard Artist at Plumpton on his debut and is bound to have derived considerable benefit from that experience.
She can complete a course double with BAGGRAVE LAD (3.15) in the Orbital Centre NH Flat race and earlier at Ludlow she may have initiated a treble by winning with her dual bumper winner RUN TO FORM (12.30).
Fellow Lambourn trainer Charlie Brooks also has excellent prospects of landing a double with BLACK HUMOUR (12.15) and WOLFHANGAR (1.45).
European Tour prize money climbs to record £16 million.
By David Davies
THE PGA European Tour, which started in Tenerife last year, will be moving north to Portugal for its first tournament of the Nineties.
Organisers of the Tenerife Open failed to make the requisite telephone call by 10am yesterday morning to tell tour officials that they could raise the money, so it has been replaced by the Atlantic Open at Estela, near Oporto, from February 15-18.
The second event is the Dubai Classic and the third the Mediterranean Open at Las Brisas.
The tour may have lost an offshore event but financially it is far from being at sea.
Prize money will rise by a further 18 per cent during the forthcoming year, which takes the total to £16 million, considerably more than the £1.3 million on offer in 1980.
The Atlantic and Mediterranean Opens are new events, the latter being sponsored by American Express, and there are four new tournaments in all.
The Murphy's Cup, a small-scale affair this season at St Pierre, Chepstow, next year becomes a full European Tour event at Fulford, York, while it is likely that the fourth event will have as one of its entrants no less a player than Jack Nicklaus.
It is the Austrian Open, to be played on a course at Gut Altentann, near Saltzburg, which is a Nicklaus creation.
He has a habit of playing in at least the inaugural event held on one of his lay-outs and in December 1988 fully intended to play in the Austrian Open of 1989.
He was disappointed to learn that there was no such event on last season's European Tour calendar, but seems sure to get his wish next year.
Two days ago the organisers of the NM English Open, to be played from August 16-19 at The Belfry, announced that their prize money would be increased from £250,000 to £400,000.
That kind of rise has helped to push the average purse available on the tour next year up to £340,000, whereas 10 years ago the prize fund for the Open Championship was only £200,000.
Golf continues to boom as never before.