

FOREIGN FIELDS: Deborah Pugh follows a session of the Cairo climate conference with David Trippier, British Environment Minister The can't pay, won't pay approach to the problem.
POLLUTION in Cairo is on a level with Los Angeles and even more crowded, dirty and chaotic than London.
Mr. Ibrahim Sadek, an Egyptian engineering consultant, lays the blame on the lack of unleaded fuel and to state production of outdated car engines: ‘We are producing Fiats with engines designed back in the Forties’, he told the World Conference on Preparing for Climatic Change which ended in Cairo yesterday.
This did not go down well.
Egypt, it seems, is not preparing, or more realistically, does not have the resources to change the environment.
Mr. Sadik shared the panel on Energy, Industry and Transportation with the Egyptian Minister of Oil, Mr. Abdel Hadi Kandil, who confirmed that Egypt had ‘no plans to introduce unleaded fuel’ and showed no interest in iniating any.
Sitting beside him, Mr. Maher Abaza, the Minister for Power and Electricity, dismissed solar energy and renewables with a sweep of his hand.
Egypt's nuclear power industry is still in the design phase, but according to Mr. Kandil, nuclear power was the only clean energy alternative for Egypt: ‘If developed countries want to enjoy a good climate, they should give us these plants at lower cost.
Then everybody would be accepting them gladly’.
In the hot debate that followed, the benefits of fuel efficiency and alternative renewable energies sources were argued persuasively by one of the acknowledged international experts in the field, but neither minister appeared to be actually listening to Amory Lovins of the American Rocky Mountain Institute.
Lovins dismissed the development of nuclear power as the primary source of energy for industrial growth in the developing world, by estimating that in order to generate the level of energy pro-nuclear scientists were calling for, a new plant would have to come on stream every eleven hours throughout 54 years of actual construction, a financial impossibility.
In the case of Egypt, with a staggering debt burden of $50 billion, a predicament similar to many other countries in the developing world, access to such capital is very limited.
The Americans and Germans have provided aid for the modernisation of electrical plant but the question of who will pay the multi-million dollar bill for Egyspt to produce cleaner cars is unananswered.
According to David Trippier, the British Enviroment Minister, if developing countries increased their per capita use of ozone depleting chemicals to just one tenth of the 1986 consumption rate in industrialised economies, and used them indefinitely: ‘Then we would never return to the levels needed for us to get rid of ozone holes, even if the rest of the world stopped using them althogether.’
Mr Trippier was one of a number of European government ministers who attended the conference and spoke of their committment to compensate developing countries for the expense they would have to entail in order to avoid adding to an ecological disaster that has been created by industrialised states.
However, the only individual who appears to have a plan that will appeal to the developing world is Dr. Mustapha Tolba, head of the United Nations Enviroment Plan who proposed a users' tax paid by the consumers of ozone depleting chemicals, to be collected by governments and used by developing countries both to modernise their production systems and to compensate the multi-nationals for the transfer of their most advanced energy effective technology.
Dr. Tolba, widely respected for the critical role played by UNIP in achieving the Montreal Protocol on ozone depletion, is looking forward to the London Conference on Climate next June aimed at toughening up the Montreal guidelines.
He ended by warning that if there was no indication of how the world was going to handle the issue of transfer of technology and financial resources needed by the developing countries, there would be no strengthening of the convention and even the ones already in might opt out.
‘I don't want that disaster to happen’.
PAGE
Pollution and the break-up of the NCC will dominate the debate around the green bill.
Environment Guardian analyses this week's proposals All muck but little money POLLUTION: The plans read well, says Julie Hill, but there is little evidence that the Government can make them work.
IT IS a shame that discussion of the Environmental Protection Bill will be dominated by the ill-judged decision to dismember the Nature Conservancy Council.
The clauses on pollution and on genetically manipulated organisms deserve more attention than they are now likely to get.
Although overdue, two elements of the bill can properly claim to be breaking new ground.
The first is what is known as ‘Integrated Pollution Control’(IPC).
This was first proposed in 1974 but when the Environmental Protection Bill becomes law, the UK will be the first European country to put in place a national system of integrated control The importance of IPC is that it aims to treat the environment as it is: an inter-related system where pollutants can be exchanged between air, water and land.
Traditional pollution control in the UK has been fragmented with air, water and wastes regulated by diffrent agencies operating different pollution control approaches.
This can mean that factories prevented by one inspector from discharging pollutants into the air are allowed to divert them to, say, water.
Now, for the most polluting substances, control over their impact on the environment as a whole will be consolidated in the hands of one agency, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP).
IPC is a good principle.
The argument is likely to be less over the substance of the legislation than over whether the system can be implemented.
The problems faced by HMIP are considerable.
Inspectors previously specialised in particular areas of pollution control will be expected to regulate industrial processes presently outside their experience.
They will also have to decide what IPC means in practice for the 3500-odd industrial processes under their control and as yet have set no timetable for doing so.
The division of responsibilities between HMIP and other polution agencies, particularly the National Rivers Authority is still in dispute.
Low pay has made it difficult for HMIP to recruit and keep adequately qualified staff.
They need far more people and morale has been low.
Chris Patten acknowledged on Wednesday that HMIP needs more staff but there is, as yet, no firm commitment to extra cash.
The Government reckons it will cost about £4 million to implement, 75 per cent of which it is hoped will be clawed back from industry.
But the costs could be greatly under-estimated and considerable extra resources may well be required to solve HMIP's problems.
The bill contains a host of other pollution measures including long-awaited improvements to waste regulation, increased powers for local authorities to control air pollution, updating of radioactive waste regulatuions, new measures on recycling, litter and dog mess.
But of all of these, Integrated Pollution Control is the only significant measure aimed at preventing pollution at source rather than dealing with it once it has reached the environment.
Unfortunately, IPC as proposed is applicable to only a relatively small number of pollutants.
The other measure of the bill that deserves extensive scrutiny is the part dealing with genetically modified organisms (GMOs) Genetic modification, or engineering, is the precise manipulation of the genetic code that governs the characteristics of any organism.
It enables adaptation of plants and animals to human purposes that would be beyond the reach of traditional breeding techniques; an example is the insertion of toxin genes from bacteria into plants to give them an in-built system for poisoning pests.
The next decade is likely to see a new industrial revolution based on the new biotechnologies.
Genetic modification will bring benefits, but no technology is risk-free.
The provisions on GMOs in the bill are to take account of the possible impacts of altered organisms on the environment — potential impacts on human health are deemed to be covered under existing health and safety regulations.
The clauses in the bill and the Government's proposals for the regualtions that will follow from them, raise some fundamental issues.
It is not clear that producers of genetically modified organisms will be fully liable for any damage they may cause.
It may not be possible to adequately define ‘damage’ to the environment, or even to detect it, when the environmental impact of a genetically engineered bacterium may be as undramatic as replacing a naturally occurring species of bacterium.
Most important, given that a rogue GMO in the environment might continue to reproduce and spread, it cannot be assumed that any system of regulation can adequately guard against an environmental catastrophe.
This legislation on GMOs has come forward in advance of public debate on the environmental risks of genetic engineering, and indeed before widespread debate on on the broader social, economic and ethical implications of the new biotechnologies.
It is essential that there is some form of public participation in the regulatory mechanism.
There should also be a Public Biotechnology Commission with representation from a broad range of public interest groups.
Such a body would have to consider all the implications of bio-technologies.
IPC and GMOs have an important element in common— both sets of measures in the bill contain provisions for public access to information.
The arguments will be over how much inmformation, and in what form, will become available.
A reversal of the current presumption for secrecy in many areas of environmental control is essential for restoring battered public confidence in the regulatory system.
If the Government argues against full disclosure of information, it will be undermining the credibility of its environment policy almost as much as by splitting up the NCC.
Julie Hill is Parliamentary Officer for the Green Alliance.
THE Government is not backing down on re-organisation of the Nature Conservancy Council and Countryside Commissions, despite the drubbing that its proposals have received from virtually every conversation organisation in Britain.
Wednedsay's announcement still implies that the crucial science base of the NCC is to be split between Scotland, Wales and England, and the Chief Scientist's post abolished.
The Joint Co-ordinating Committee to be set up to maintain standards countrywide is now to have an independent chairman.
This is only a marginal improvement, for even if a government stooge is avoided, the separate agency chairmen and members may still win control on important issues.
In any case, standards in conservation science cannot be managed by a committee which will become a bureaucratic talking shop, needing endless feeding with papers and briefings, and will doubtless spawn sub-committees.
There needs above all to be a consistency in the whole chain linking nature conservation policy with action on the ground.
Practice needs to be as strong as possible, not levelled down to a lowest common denominator.
Moreover, any watchdog needs teeth.
Despite the mauling that Chris Patten and Co. are going to receive, they can force through this ill-considered legislation.
With this government any issues soon take second place to being seen to win.
The monumentally crass decision to include this item in the Environment Bill reflects badly on the judgement of ministers and the competence of their advisers.
The Government has failed to add any convincing arguments to its feeble justifications for the changes, and dares not come clean about the real reasons.
When the full story is eventually told, it will be one of treachery, careerism, power, privilege and political ambition.
For example, the battle over Duich Moss on Islay was not really about conservation versus jobs — as subsequent events have proved — but about saving embarrassment in high places.
Why, otherwise would the EC investigating lawyer be bombarded with phone calls all trying to dissuade him from a site visit?
The anger over the Flow Country is not so much about employment as about the ending of a scandalous rip-off of public funds which fuelled private forestry and the associated inflation of land values.
The carve-up of the NCC is the price of challenging the control of those who run rural Scotland.
Nature conservation action stands to become seriously weakened in all three countries, but especially in Scotland, which has one of the worst records of any westernised country in nature conservation.
It is one of two European countries without a single national park.
These have been kept at bay for 40 years by the power and special pleading of the vested interests who are right now busily working out how to control the new Heritage Agency.
We shall, indeed, know the score when we see the names appointed to run all three new agencies.
For the concerned public to have any confidence that they can succeed, these bodies will need both governing councils and senior management who know what they are talking about, and show genuine commitment to conservation goals.
The danger is that there will be a careful selection both of members with primary allegiance to different and even hostile interests, and of officials preoccupied with their careers.
All will swear devotion to conservation, but some will be temporisers and compromisers, if not actual fifth columnists.
Ministers will urge upon them the favourite concept of ‘balance,’ and good marks will be earned by not playing the game too hard.
Any tinkering with conservation measures will be a bad sign, and backsliding on established gains a cause for real alarm.
Nature conservation runs against the grain of current political doctrine.
In a new age of philistinism, when everything has to wear a price tag, the beauty and wonder of the world of nature have low value in the market place.
The State is allowed to continue subsidising unprofitable farming and forestry, because that keeps old pals and supporters happy; but too many conservationists have an unfortunate leaning towards the radical.
Free enterprise has been the curse of conservation, feeding the feckless exploitation of the world's natural resources in a rat-race pursuit of material wealth.
The arguments used to justify destruction of the tropical rain forests and the flow country are, at bottom, the same.
It therefore seems that the way will be eased to the continuing destruction of what is left of wild nature in Britain, to serve the open-ended demands of development and growth.
This will happen, although a tithe of the funds poured into farm surpluses and defence white elephants would solve most problems of both conservation and rural society.
Conservation will fail if it does not embrace a view of social justice, but both need careful planning — and that is a dirty word nowadays.
Derek Ratcliffe was Chief Scientist of the NCC until July.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE
CORRECTED VERSION Eco Soundings.
By John Vidal
IT'S killer bee time in the States and smart federal scientists have spent $100,000 working on the problem of how to track the swarms that ravage farming and kill anything in their way.
They've come up with a solar-powered, infrared-pulsating, microchip bee backpack.
Cripes.
Just catch some unsuspecting psychopathic bee, strap it on and watch it go.
Hang on…the transmitter weighs 65 milligrams and even a sherpa bee can only lift 50 milligrams.
‘But I think we've proved the concept’, says the inventor.
ON January 13 the Turks will stop the flow of the mighty Euphrates river for a month to build up the water level in their new Ataturk dam; fine, except that the Euphrates flows into Iraq which needs the water for irrigation and electricity.
So Iraq has now formally asked the Turks to shorten the cut-off period but the Turks reply that they have been releasing more water down the river and the Iraquis should have been able to build up stocks.
A compromise will be reached but the implications are clear; international eco politics are with us.
Pearce, goodwill.
THE Economist next week runs, as an advertisement, a 1500 word piece —‘The Profit in Survival’— by Professor David Pearce, economics adviser to Christopher Patten.
Nothing new in it, but an interesting departure for the professor because it was commissioned — at enormous cost — by Ermenegildo Zegna.
Who's he?
Oh, yes, the Milan-based menswear group which charges about £700 for a regular suit and wants to be seen as a deeply serious friend of the earth.
Boughing out.
THE Forestry Commission this week began felling 120 fine old beech trees in the Crown-owned Savernake Forest in Wiltshire, saying they had to protect the public from dangerous boughs.
Savernake is famed for its lichens and the Forestry Commission is noted for its love of lichens on old trees.
In June they published a handbook about how valuable they were.
Quote: ‘Conservation of lichens oftens means site preservation, identification of old trees and saving them from felling’.
PAGE en2
Another day.
December 22, 1845: People used to say to me, ‘You expect too much — you are too romantic’.
And my answer always was that I could not expect too much when I expected nothing at all for I never thought that anyone whom I could love, would stoop to love ME.
And now when it comes in a miracle, you wonder at me for looking twice, thrice, four times, to see if it comes through ivory or horn.
You wonder that it should seem to me at first all illusion But how natural — It is true of me…very true…that I have not a high appreciation of what passes in the world under the name of love; & that a distrust of the thing had grown to be a habit of mind with me when I knew you first.
It has appeared to me, through all the seclusion of my life & the narrow experience it admitted of, that in nothing, men — & women too!— were so apt to mistake their own feelings, as in this one thing.
Putting falseness quite on one side, an honest mistaking of feeling appears wonderfully common — & no mistake has such frightful results — none can.
Robert Browning and Elizabeth Barrett, The Courtship Correspondence 1845-1846, edited by Daniel Karlin, Clarendon Press, £17.50)
33.
Obituary:Rev Dr Herbert Hartwell.
From Prussia with peace:.
HERBERT Hartwell was appointed a judge of the Berlin Kammergericht, the Prussian Supreme Court, at the age of 33, in spite of interrupted legal studies during war service in 1914-18 (including the Iron Cross).
A different kind of courage, coupled with staunch Christianity, marked his opposition to the Nazi regime during the 1930s.
In 1934 he joined the Confessing Church, the wing of the national (Lutheran) Church which disowned the ‘German Christians’ and refused to compromise with the Hitler government.
The next year he was dismissed under the Nuremberg Regulations.
A friend of Probst, H. Gruber and Pastor Martin Niemoller, Hartwell worked with the Confessing Church to aid the escape of Jews from Germany.
This brought him into touch with George Bell, then Bishop of Chichester, and with John Marsh, the Congregational theologian, who invited him to Oxford.
In August 1939 he escaped with his family on the last but one ship to leave Hamburg.
He took up the invitation, only to be promptly interned on the outbreak of war.
George Bell secured his early release.
Within months he determined to be ordained, believing that the Congregationalists most closely represented the standpoint and theology of the Confessing Church.
Dr Nathaniel Micklem, who himself had been deeply involved with the Christian opposition in Germany, accepted him for training at Mansfield College, Oxford, for the ministry.
He and his children were always grateful to ‘Nat’(whose successor as Principal was Dr Marsh) for many kindnesses over the years.
At Oxford he took a D.Phil. on Barth, to set alongside his Erlangen law doctorate.
After ordination he worked as a chaplain with German prisoners of war for the YMCA and from 1948 as secretary for German affairs with the British Council of Churches Inter Church Aid and Refugee Service, the forerunner of Christian Aid.
In the next years he translated Weiss on the Psalms, published an introduction to Barth's Church Dogmatics and continued to write.
The West German Government honoured him for his notable work in promoting friendship between the two countries.
Robert Courtney Edwin Robertson writes: Whenever I answered the telephone in the fifties and sixties and heard the anxious voice at the other end saying ‘Here is Hartvell’(he never quite managed that English ‘W’), I knew that either my deadline for an article was passed or he had some exciting new book for me to review.
Hartwell devoted his brilliant mind and untiring energy in those years after the second world war to forging links between Christians in his adopted country and that of his birth.
He did this at an intellectual level, and one of his chief instruments was the German-British Christian Fellowship.
The Fellowship had George Bell as president and I was its chairman, but the work was done by Hartwell as honorary secretary and joint editor for the movement's journal, The Bridge.
There I had him as a charming, affectionate colleague of mature judgment.
I saw, too, his gentle persuasion to make British Christians take modern German theology seriously.
It was he who introduced me to Dietrich Bonhoeffer.
When Eberhard Bethge produced Bonhoeffer's volumes of papers, lectures and letters in a series of Collected Works in German, Hartwell saw to it that I reviewed each volume in The Bridge as soon as it arrived.
Long before John Robinson's Honest to God made Bonhoeffer known to a mass public, Hartwell persistently made us see that this theologian-martyr really mattered for post-war theology.
The development of such a good relationship between Christian leaders and theologians in the two countries owed everything to Hartwell's knowledge of both communities and his sensitivity to the changing climate of opinion and thought.
Herbert Hartwell born April 20, 1894; died December 11, 1989.
Assessment: Gerry Healy.
Entryism and exits:.
ONE had assumed that Gerry Healy (Obituary, December 18) would be always with us.
Now that he is not, we can say, with luck we shall not see his like again.
This year was the fiftieth anniversary of his joining the British Trotskyist movement.
According to Jock Haston, his mode of entry was eccentric.
Haston was selling papers at Hyde Park Corner when he was accosted by Healy, then a member of the Communist Party.
Harsh words led to action, and Haston despatched him down the public lavatory stairs.
Whether it was the power of Haston's argument or of his boot, the result was that Healy joined the Workers' International League.
He was a good public speaker and organiser and endowed with extraordinary energy.
In an organisation with such talented people as Heaton Lee, Jock Haston and Ted Grant, however, he occupied inevitably a secondary role in the leadership — not to his taste.
In 1944, under the impetus of a wave of strikes in the mines, the British Trotskyist movement was united for the first time as the Revolutionary Communist Party, anticipating the imminent collapse of capitalism in the West and Stalinism in Russia.
From four hundred members they expected to rise to hundreds of thousands in the coming ‘death agony of capitalism’.
History records that it did not happen; the RCP was marginalised by the post-war economic revival.
It was in the decline of the movement that Healy came into his own.
Flying in the face of the facts, he prophesied that the economic crisis was so close that there was no time to build the party: the RCP must join the Labour Party, whose working class members, given Trotskyist leadership, would become revolutionary under the pressure of events.
In 1947 he was given permission by the Fourth International to form an independent Labour Party entry group.
His cadre was small — some fifty people — but they were his.
He had arrived at last.
When the RCP was founded in 1949, he received a ‘bonus’ increase in membership of ‘The Club’, as his group was known.
The internal structure was draconian, dissent of the mildest form was crushed with all possible force.
He got rid of oppositionists by proposing some impossible task, and when they failed or refused would move their expulsion, anyone who voted against automatically expelling themselves.
In this way, Ted Grant and his comrades were got rid of, likewise Tony Cliff and his comrades.
After the crisis in the Communist Party following Khrushchev's speech to the Twentieth Party Congress, CPGB was in turmoil.
Some seven thousand members left, among them Brian Behan, Peter Fryer and John Daniels.
Healy was ideally placed to take advantage of this.
He had a printing press and, through his connection with the American Socialist Workers' Party, the plates for a number of Trotsky's books and pamphlets.
For disillusioned communists reared on Stalin's grim prose, Trotsky was a revelation.
The Club recruited some of the most talented militants.
British Trotskyism's new lease of life did not last for long.
In 1959, the imminent collapse of the system once more predicted, the Socialist Labour League was formed to draw in industrial workers, and immediately proscribed by the Labour Party.
The sharpness of the turn led to a bitter faction fight, at the end of which most of the recent recruits had either left or been ejected on the toe of Healy's boot.
This process of finding a likely area of recruitment (by turns the Young Socialists, the unemployed, mods and rockers and blacks), building up the group and then destroying the gains in a destructive faction fight was to be repeated ad nauseam.
As soon as the group became too large to be controlled by a hyper-active Healy rushing around the country to quell the first signs of dissidence it had to be smashed.
Gerry Healy made more ex-Trotskyists than anyone else except Stalin.
Fortunately he did not have the GPU at his beck and call.
He was powerfully addicted to conspiracy theory, according to which the group was continually under surveillance by the Special Branch and MI5, while concentration camps were being prepared to incarcerate the militants as the capitalist crisis deepend.
(At one conference delegates were told to talk at the floor because Special Branch had hi-tech microphones trained on the windows to catch the sound-waves.)
Healy's last years were blighted by the humiliation of expulsion from the WRP for using his position to seduce young female members.
This occasioned some surprise.
Healy was over 70, short, fat and neckless, his massive head growing straight out of his shoulders.
As someone said at the time, ‘I could believe him guilty of grievous bodily harm, but not grievous bodily charm.’
In his 50 years of Trotskyism he made not one small dent in the capitalist system, but he mortally wounded the movement he claimed to lead.
Jim Higgins.
ATrotskyist ‘dur’ of the old school, Healy's finest hour was the Socialist Labour League, into which he recruited some of the best British communists disillusioned with the Soviet Union after Hungary.
It was a significant influence in the wave of strikes of the late Fifties, until Healy's authoritarian methods drove away the best people.
In 1969, he achieved his lifelong ambition of a daily Trotskyist newspaper, The Workers Press, and transformed his group into the Workers Revolutionary Party.
Although publicly scathing about the student left and the anti-Vietnam movement, Healy none the less cultivated a discussion circle of London writers, actors and television producers, it is said with some charm and intellectual force, which was to presage his fixation with Equity, the actors' Union which increasingly provided personnel and finance for the ERP.
This salon is encapsulated in Trevor Griffith's play The Party, in which a Glaswegian version of Healy is seen overawing a motley of trendies, including an inebriated David Mercer-like figure.
Olivier's performance in this role is generally regarded as somewhat flattering.
David Widgery.
Defending the indefensible As the crisis in Romania deepens the role of the armed forces is crucial.
Because one of President Nicolae Ceausescu's many titles is that of chairman of the National Defence Council, and his brother, General Ilie Ceausescu, is head of political administration for the forces, the loyalty of the high command may not be in doubt, but morale in the ranks is low.
Henry Dodds assesses the situation.
SOVIET military influence in Romania is non-existent.
The last Soviet troops left the country in 1958 and Romania has not taken part in any Warsaw Pact exercises since 1968.
This has left the armed forces short of modern equipment.
Romania has the worst equipped army in the Warsaw Pact.
A third of its 1,800 main battle tanks are of Second World War vintage, and most of the remainder date from the 1950s.
The 1989 defence budget called for 1.7 per cent growth in spending to 11.75 billion lei (approximately £500 million — Britain's defence budget in the same period was £19.2 billion), but this is insufficient for the armed forces' perceived needs.
Many mechanised units which should be riding around in armoured personnel carriers are still mounted in trucks — some are even reduced to walking.
Because of Ceausescu's insistence that the entire population is responsible for national defence, there is seen to be no need to maintain professional and well-trained armed soldiers.
Instead, the armed forces (especially the army, which could pose a potential threat to his rule) is regularly employed as a massive source of cheap labour.
Many conscripts — they make up 65 per cent of the armed forces — receive only the most basic training.
When this is over, they are sent straight to work building roads and bridges, digging canals or collecting the harvest.
‘Working battalions’ have their own command structure and run incentive competitions.
The lucky winner has the privilege of sending their leader the first congratulatory telegram, announcing the success of the latest project.
Morale in the army is generally low.
The air force and the diminutive navy do not usually participate in these acts of manual labour, but are severely hampered by financial constraints.
Half of all aircraft are said to be inoperable and two thirds of all vessels are in port at any given time.
This is usually due to fuel shortages brought about by excessive exports of Romania's home-produced oil.
Despite the lack of anything other than basic equipment for its armed forces, according to Nato estimates Romania topped the league of non-Soviet Warsaw Pact arms exporters to the Third World by the mid 1980s.
In the last year, Romania is believed to have made offers to sell arms to Nigeria, Iran, Iraq, Ethiopia, Mozambique and Egypt.
Ceausescu's visit this week to Iran may well have been in connection with a possible sale of arms.
This determination to sell arms on the international market has a more sinister note, since Romania's large chemical industry is in close contact with a number of Arab states, whose positions on chemical weapons Ceausescu supports.
In January, the day before a conference on chemical weapons opened in Paris, the Romanian leader announced publicly that he would not accept a ban on chemical weapons unless a universal ban on nuclear weapons was agreed at the same time.
This is consistent with the position of Arab states such as Iraq and Libya.
Soviet chemical weapon stocks still exist in Romania and West German intelligence sources have suggested in the past that there are also production and testing facilities.
The Soviet Army newspaper, Krasnaya Zvezda, has also recently mentioned special Romanian chemical troops.
The thought of a beleaguered Ceausescu in possession of chemical weapons is a chilling one.
Romania has had disputes with both the Soviet Union and Hungary.
In the east, the ethnic Romanian area of Bessarbia, which forms part of the Soviet Socialist Republic of Moldavia, has been a source of tension since its ‘misappropriation’ by the Soviet Union in May 1940.
Today, as then, it forms part of the vital defence barrier guarding the southern strategic approaches to the USSR.
It also affords the Soviet Army swift access into central and southern Europe.
The dispute with Hungary is more serious and centres around the region of Transylvania.
The area is predominantly ethnic Hungarian and Hungary has therefore always maintained a close interest in the treatment of Hungarians there.
Tension existed even before Ceausescu came to power in 1965, but relations between the two states have degenerated in a flurry of mutual recrimination, slander and public protest.
Hungary received support in its argument against Romania in 1987 and 1988, in the form of an influx of Romanian refugees.
In one case in 1988 a Romanian border guard pursued a Romanian citizen into Hungarian territory and shot him.
A significant factor in the dispute is the close interest which Ceausescu and several members of his family have taken in directing the Romanian case.
The Romanian leader's brother, Lieutenant General Ilie Ceausescu, a deputy defence minister and head of political administration for the armed forces, has been closely concerned with the presentation of the historical case and has unhesitatingly attacked the Hungarians in several articles published in the Romanian press.
In the summer, the two sides took the unprecedented step in the Warsaw Pact of recalling their two ambassadors.
At a meeting between the Hungarian and Romanian leaders in August 1988, ostensibly called to ease tension between the two countries, Ceausescu is reputed to have threated Karoly Grosz with the words: ‘We do not, and do not wish, to manufacture nuclear weapons; however, we do possess the capability to do so.’
The alarmed Hungarians initially kept this threat to themselves, but have since raised the issue in private both within the Warsaw Pact and with certain Western governments.
That Romania could build a nuclear weapon at the moment is unlikely.
In the late 1970s a contract was signed with Canada for the creation of three nuclear power stations.
The first, a 660MW reactor of the Candu type has yet to enter service, but is being built with no outside supervision and under military control.
Ceausescu's aim in issuing such a threat was probably to frighten Hungary, but Romania already has the delivery system in the form of Soviet built Scud missiles and is believed to be developing its own missile with the help of Egypt and Iraq.
The picture emerging from Romania this week is of a country barely under control.
In his television broadcasts since returning from Iran, Ceausescu has looked under severe pressure.
When he visited Moscow in October 1988, Gorbachev asssured him that ‘the Romanian people can be confident that it will always find in the Soviet people a reliable ally, a useful partner, and a true friend.’
Whether that offer of friendship extends to Ceausescu and his family remains to be seen.
In a country where one in four is said to be an informer or member of the secret police, if the present order breaks down there will be a lot of old scores to be settled.
Whether the Soviet Union and Hungary will be able to resist intervention in such circumstances is open to question.
Henry Dodds is editor of Jane's Soviet Intelligence Review.
Off-duty members of the Romanian armed forces at last month's Party CongressPHOTOGRAPH: MARTIN ARGLES.
World washes its hands of the horror Commentary.
By Hella Pick
WHEN President Ceausescu of Romania ordains his forces to shoot on his own people after they call for democracy and bread, and causes mass deaths whose numbers can only be guessed, Nato and Warsaw Pact countries cry shame and horror.
But they also throw up their arms, and say there is nothing they can do except hope that people power will prevail and the self-styled ‘great redeemer’ self-destruct.
How different when dictators in Panama misbehave.
President Bush explained on Wednesday that he decided to send in thousands of marines to capture General Noriega and restore democracy in Panama, after forces under Noriega's command killed one unarmed US serviceman, wounded another, arrested and assaulted a third and brutally interrogated his wife, threatening her with sexual abuse.
It is certainly not a very edifying tale, but it is small fry compared with the massacre in Romania last weekend at Timisoara, and the further shootings reported to have taken place in Bucharest yesterday.
Is it really beyond the realms of the possible for the international community to put any tangible pressure on Ceausescu?
Do thousands more have to be massacred before he is toppled?
In the days when Romanians were still in a mood to tell jokes, they used to ask a rhetorical question: how long would it take for a Soviet expeditionary force to reach Bucharest from the Soviet border?
The answer was 24 hours or 48 hours, depending on whether the Russians met opposition.
If they were opposed, it would take only 24 hours, but if there was no opposition it would take twice that time, because the cheering Romanian population would hold them up with their welcome.
This story did the rounds some years ago, when Romanians already had the measure of their leader, but while the West was still honouring President Ceausescu for what was considered to be his independent stand on foreign policy issues.
Today, it is easy to imagine that Romanians would indeed welcome Soviet forces with open arms as liberators.
But is it also realistic to assume that the West might tolerate it if Mr Gorbachev decided that the Romanian people, not unlike the people of Panama, deserve to enjoy democracy, and that the Soviet Union should send some of its military across the border to dispose of the Ceausescu family and their killer Securitas forces?
Or would the West cry foul, and declare that Mr Gorbachev cannot, after all, be trusted to keep his word that the Brezhnev doctrine is dead, and that he will not interfere in the Warsaw Pact countries?
During their pre-Christmas cocktail rounds, Western diplomats have bantered to their Soviet colleagues that Romania was the one country where the Soviet Union deserved to have a free hand.
They would be doing everybody a favour.
Or perhaps Romania could be the testing ground for co-operation between Nato and the Warsaw Pact and they should mount a joint expeditionary force.
Even if any of this were serious, there is no evidence that Mr Gorbachev has felt any pressing need, at least until now, to intervene militarily in Romania.
Even if the West were to applaud, the Soviet Union had nothing to gain from such a move.
Mr Ceausescu is certainly detested in Moscow as much as in London or Washington.
And as a Warsaw Pact leader they know him more intimately in the Kremlin than in the West.
But since Mr Brezhnev's death the Romanian leader has lost his ability to act as an irritant.
Mr Gorbachev could not care less whether Romania endorses perestroika and glasnost or the Soviet Union's foreign policies.
He might even allow himself a wry laugh when he considers how the West has come to excoriate Ceausescu today, after all those years when they applauded his ‘daring’ dissent from Warsaw Pact orthodoxy, and acting as a thorn in the Kremlin's body politic.
Mr Brezhnev was infuriated when Ceausescu used to call for lower Warsaw Pact defence budgets, or established diplomatic relations with Israel, or restored party-to-party relations with China's Communist party.
When Ceausescu in 1968 refused to become involved in the Warsaw Pact intervention against Czechoslovakia, and publicly condemned it, the Kremlin was furious, and briefly threatened Romania that a similar fate awaited them.
Mr Gorbachev has not bothered to hide his disapproval of the way Mr Ceausescu and his family have ruled Romania.
But he has also discovered that the Gorbachev magic has not worked in Romania as it has elsewhere in Eastern Europe.
He only had to visit Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, even East Germany, and political earthquakes followed.
In Romania, however, there was not even a ripple when Mr Gorbachev went to Bucharest to preside over a Warsaw Pact summit in July.
Mr Ceausescu had encased himself in such an impeneterable fortress that Gorbachev spared the Romanian leader from the warning he was to deliver later to Erich Honecker, that ageing leaders who failed to reform in time would pay dearly.
The Soviet Union has no great security interests in Romania.
Mr Ceausescu has not allowed any Soviet forces to be stationed there, and long ago ordered all Soviet military advisers to leave.
This means that there are no Soviet officers to prevent excesses by the Romanian army or to help the demonstrators.
In the economy Mr Ceausescu has also created a fortress.
His foreign debt has been repaid and he has even amassed enough hard currency reserves to buy, if necessary, oil from Iran and Libya.
The Soviet Union is reluctant to cut back on its oil supplies to Romania, since it still needs Romanian meat and consumer goods more than Ceausescu needs Soviet imports.
He has stashed up reserves of arms, and can probably get more.
Romania's other neighbours, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Hungary, also detest the Ceausescu regime.
But Bulgaria and Yugoslavia are more than preoccupied with their internal affairs, and certainly cannot contemplate military expeditions to rescue the Romanians.
Hungary, of course, is much more directly involved in Romania's agony.
But between political reform and economic crisis, even Hungary will think hard before giving way to emotion and sending its forces in to help the beleaguered Hungarian Romanians.
Pulling together against the tide.
VENICE, Dacca, Leningrad, Osaka…cities of history and romance, but perhaps also cities in danger.
Last week Venice hosted an international meeting of Cities On Water, to consider the impacts of possible sea-level rise.
While the Conference met, high spring tides were oozing through the paving of the Piazza San Marco.
In November, the island republic of Maldives held a similar conference of small states on sea-level rise.
Neither the Maldives nor Venice have land higher than two metres above today's mean sea level.
In the past 50 years, relative sea levels in Venice have increased by 23cm, largely because of sub-surface layer compaction and sinking as a result of groundwater pumping.
World-wide sea levels have increased only by about 15cm over the past century.
Melting of glaciers and the thermal expansion of the oceans have contributed, but the link with greenhouse warming is not yet clear.
Nor is it possible to say with confidence how much of the increase is due to melting glaciers and how much to thermal expansion.
Small wonder that the estimates of global sea-level rise for the next 100 years are very tentative.
Politicians are not impressed by scientific caution.
Mr Ruffolo, the Italian Environment Minister, told the Venice Conference that too much is at risk.
Scientific certainty is not an affordable luxury.
The citizens of Venice and the Maldives want action now.
Agreement on the actions needed is beginning to emerge from these recent meetings of politicians, administrators and scientists.
For many ‘Cities on Water’, pumping of groundwater for local supply must stop.
Venice has already engineered a water supply from more distant sources.
Some cities, including Venice, can also build defences across critical connections to the sea.
But artificial defences have a finite life.
Natural defences can adjust to gradual sea-level rise.
For example, coral islands such as the Maldives may keep ahead of a rise of 50-70m a century.
Coral growth and the accretion of sediments in coastal mangroves will compensate.
But the mining of coastal coral for building must stop or the protection which it gives against waves and flooding will be lost.
Planners need reliable measurements of sea-level change.
All impacts of future rises will be felt locally but the problem is one of global change which demands global monitoring systems.
Measurements at a single site cannot be used to calculate global changes.
There may be local vertical land movement as in Venice, added to the sea-level change.
Scandinavia is still rising, in places by one metre a century, after the removal of the ice at the end of the last glaciation some 10,000 years ago.
Most of Scotland is still rising but the south-east of England is sinking by 15cm a century.
Using recent developments in survey technology, it is possible to fix anywhere on Earth in geocentric coordinates to within one or two centimetres.
A selected set of sea-level gauges will be located at intervals, using this new satellite technology so that vertical land movements over decades can be identified.
Early identification of accelerated rise will be possible if the year-to-year variability can be understood and removed from the records.
There is a close parallel here with changes to atmospheric pressure; high and low sea-level systems exist in the oceans.
The ocean currents flow around these in the same way that winds blow around high and low centres of atmospheric pressure.
To understand the year-to-year changes of sea level, we need to understand the ocean circulation and how it is driven by winds and by the balance of tropical warming and polar cooling.
The World Ocean Circulation Experiment begins next year and extends to 1995.
During this period, scientists from many countries will be systematically surveying ocean temperatures, salinities and currents.
At the same time, scientists are building computer models of ocean circulation but full three-dimensional models must wait for the next generation of powerful computers.
Early warning of accelerating sea-level rise will allow effective planning.
Meanwhile many studies of potential local effects of rising sea level are under way.
If new coastal engineering works can be enhanced at small extra cost, to anticipate sea-level rise, the investment will be a worthwhile insurance.
If sea level rises, one response will be a gradual relocating to higher ground.
For Venice and the Maldives this is not an option: there is nowhere to go.
Instead, a careful balance of engineered defences and the protection of natural defences will be necessary.
Concern about sea-level rise must not be allowed to divert attention from other problems caused by the increase of coastal populations.
Male, the capital of the Maldives, has a serious shortage of fresh water; Venice reports problems of coastal pollution.
However, sea level rise is a global problem which captures global imagination.
Our immediate response must be the development of a global monitoring system, including coastal gauges and satellites; support for global ocean and atmosphere studies; and initial analyses of local vulnerability.
Whether these rational and progressive responses to the problem of sea-level rise will satisfy the coastal dwellers who are at risk is an open question.
The small boy at the Green demonstration in the Maldives has no doubt: his home-made banner read ‘Down with Sea Level Rise’.
The problem cannot be left for his generation to solve.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE sci
Melanie Phillips celebrates in carols the hopes and fears of a year which saw environmental issues high on the agenda.
WE THREE GREENS We three Greens of Politics are Patten and Porritt and Pearce, we'll go far Two of us preaching, One of us teaching, how to avoid the car.
Oh: car of menace, car of blight Cars the atmosphere ignite Greenhouse warming, Havoc forming Parkinson must see us right We're au fait with entropy Gaia, Ecosphere, synergy Words for greening But their meaning's A linguistic mystery Oh: politicians must invent Worship of environment Genuflecting by reflecting Words of verdant bafflement Now our water's unfit to drink Too much aluminium and zinc No solution To pollution No-one can stand the stink Oh: public filth and pestilence Highlights private opulence Does the glitter, clear the litter All it needs is pounds and pence GOD REST YE MERRY God rest ye merry, gentle Greens Let nothing you dismay The much foretold apocalypse Is now well under way Not even Mr Gorbachev Can stop the world's decay Oh, tidings of comfort and joy, Oh, tidings of comfort and joy We can't eat meat or hens or fish The farming is too cruel The only food we now permit Is foul organic gruel Irradiated food and veg Now double up as fuel Oh tidings of comfort and joy, Oh tidings of comfort and joy Now everybody wants a car Though noise and fumes are vile The Iron Curtain fractures and The jams stretch back for miles Mobility and liberty Cannot be reconciled Oh tidings of comfort and joy, Oh tidings of comfort and joy We think that greenhouse warming will Bring on the world's demise If forests burn it's not just trees but mankind too that fries But all this may be garbage Because scientists tell lies Oh tidings of comfort and joy, Oh tidings of comfort and joy Consumers must buy less to reach Sustainability For galloping consumption is More lethal than TB So much for Third World dreams of fleeing Grinding poverty Oh tidings of comfort and joy, Oh tidings of comfort and joy Unless we stop producing kids The planet will not cope No hope for birth controllers short of Kidnapping the Pope But since the Greens recycle people they May turn us into soap Oh tidings of comfort and joy, Oh tidings of comfort and joy In searching for clean energy The choice is pretty stark The floods that come when coal is burnt will keep us in the Ark But had Lord Marshall got his way We'd all glow in the dark Oh tidings of comfort and joy, Oh tidings of comfort and joy Dumb animals are much preferrred To flawed humanity Ill-treatment of old people may Provoke insanity But culling seals and whales is judged The worst profanity Oh tidings of comfort and joy, Oh tidings of comfort and joy Now Mrs Thatcher goes bright green A highly suspect hue Her policies have after all Kept filth and squalor blue It's just another way she's found To tell us what to do Oh, tidings of comfort and joy, Oh tidings of comfort and joy With greenhouse gases, PCBs Sulphuric acid rain This fragile globe's environment Is going down the drain It is a cosmic punishment That we can't start again Oh, tidings of comfort and joy, Oh tidings of comfort and joy Melanie Phillips OVERNIGHT FILE
PAGE en2