

Rugby Union No rest for Bath.
By Robert Armstrong
SWANSEA and Bath have chosen their strongest available sides for today's Anglo-Welsh clash at St Helen's even though key players from both clubs are involved in national squad sessions in Portugal and Lanzarote next week.
But Harlequins, who have seven players in the England squad, will put out a much weakened side against Cardiff, who are also weakened, at the Stoop Memorial Ground.
Mike Teague will miss Gloucester's match against Bridgend at the Brewery Field, but the Lions and England forward will turn out in the home game against Moseley on New Year's Day.
Teague, who joins England's 28-man squad for the trip to Lanzarote next Wednesday, is eager to gain as much competitive action as possible after a three-month lay-off with a shoulder injury.
Swansea include an 18-year-old full-back, Geraint Davies, from the Welsh junior club Bryncoch, in place of the injured Mark Wyatt.
Robin Jones keeps his place at open-side flanker where he has played in Swansea's last three matches in the absence of another injury victim Alan Reynolds.
Bath have selected Tim Reeman, a local schoolmaster, at fly-half in place of their captain Stuart Barnes who has a persistent calf injury.
Nick Maslen replaces the blind-side flanker John Hall who is unavailable, while the United lock Martin Haag wins his place on merit in preference to John Morrison.
Cardiff, who play host to Bath next Saturday, today face an improvised Harlequins team that lacks nine first-choice players, including six of the pack.
Paul Ackford, a police inspector, will be on duty at Clapham, Winterbottom is nursing a shoulder injury and Edwards, Olver, Mullins and Skinner are all taking a rest.
The half-backs Luxton (shoulder injury) and Pears are also missing.
‘We have important league and cup games coming up next month in addition to national squad weekends, so it's understandable that some of our players don't wish to take their chances in a club fixture,’ said the Quins' press officer Alex Saward yesterday.
Cardiff will be without their international hooker Ian Watkins, who was sent off in the game with Pontypridd on Boxing Day, and also the Lions three-quarter Mike Hall whose former club Bridgend have not yet granted him a transfer.
Hall put in his request last week, but the Bridgend secretary is away on holiday, and the club committee has yet to meet to discuss the issue.
However, the loose-head prop Mike Griffiths, another Lions and Wales player who has left Bridgend to join Cardiff, will play against Harlequins.
Coventry entertain Pontypridd in one of their last fixtures before the All Blacks' coach Alex Wyllie takes over the Midlands Second Division team for six weeks from Tony Hunt.
Wyllie will arrive early in the New Year.
Blunt instrument hits Oslo.
By Robert Pryce
MICAH BLUNT put in an early claim for the Player of the Tournament award at the World Invitation Club Championships last night.
The 6ft 9in American centre scored 31 points, gathered several fistfuls of rebounds, hit two one-handed slams and threw in a three-pointer to lead Kingston into the semi-finals of the men's competition with a 112-62 win over an underpowered team from Oslo.
Blunt established his playing qualifications with the Green Wave — the nickname of a university team in New Orleans rather than a synonym for nausea.
There is some kind of epidemic of withdrawals going around Crystal Palace this year, and the Norwegians are not the only side to have suffered.
The late non-appearance of Stroitel Kiev, the Soviet champions, from the men's tournament and BCN Sao Paulo, the holders and Brazilian champions, from the women's has left the line-up looking sicklier than ever.
Kingston are not immune either.
Martin Clark looked a little green, though he forced down 20 points, and they missed Joel Moore, whose ligament injury will take at least two more weeks to heal.
Last night, when the 5ft 9in Alton Byrd took a rest the 6ft 8in Alan Cunningham took over as their playmaking guard.
‘I mean,’ said Kevin Cadle, the Kingston coach, ‘we are in trouble.’
Richard Rellford, a monomaniac dunker with Maccabi Rishon, promises them more trouble in this evening's semi-final.
The 6ft 7in American slammed in 46 points as the Israelis beat Brixton Topcats in last night's other quarter-final 99-89.
Solent Stars, last in the Carlsberg League but unhappy with its organisation, have decided to withdraw at the end of the season.
Table Tennis Douglas aims to fizz past a flat champion.
DESMOND DOUGLAS, at the age of 34, is unofficial favourite to win back the National Top 12 title at Clacton-on-Sea today from Alan Cooke.
This reflects his enduring excellence as well as the titleholder's puzzling lack of recent form, having established himself top of the domestic pack last season, writes Richard Jago.
Cooke needs a return of the effervescence that earlier in the year made him England number one, English national champion and Commonwealth champion all in a short space of time.
Only nine days ago he lost the Macartney and Dowie Classic when Douglas defeated him in the semi-final, and the loss of another title today could be extremely damaging to morale.
Carl Prean, another former holder of the Top 12 who beat Douglas in the final of the Classic, is absent in Germany, which should give Cooke a better chance to revive his fortunes, although he does have two talented teenagers Matthew Syed and Michael O'Driscoll in his group.
Sailing Bond gets his reward for 20 years of trying.
By Bob Fisher
ALAN BOND has steered his 83ft maxi-rater Drumbeat to line honours in the Sydney-Hobart Race.
The huge yacht sailed up the Derwent accompanied by hundreds of spectator craft to take the winner's gun early yesterday evening.
It was evidently a popular win for the troubled businessman.
The crowds at Constitution Dock cheered the owner who has been trying for 20 years to score a major success in this race.
Bond was smiling, presumably at the thought that he had beaten his long-time rival Syd Fischer whose 79ft Ragamuffin finished next.
The outcome of the race, on handicap — and the NorTel Southern Cross Cup — was far from settled, although it is acknowledged that the New South Wales team will win after Britain's Juno IV retired with a broken boom.
The front-runners on corrected time change with every position report.
Harold Cudmore, skippering the chartered 50-footer Heaven Can Wait, is poised to claim a race win for Britain as some consolation for the team.
He is being pressed by the Hong Kong yacht Foo 2, the former Jamarella of Britain's winning Admiral's Cup team, and Cyclone from the New South Wales team.
The increasing wind was expected to help the smaller boats, and the leaders for most of the race may be deposed when the handicaps are computed.
True Blue (Western Australia) and Sagacious (Australia) were best placed among the one-tonners along with Eddie Warden Owen and Canon Express.
Cricket The Whale spouts some fighting talk as West Indies loom on the horizon.
Frank Keating finds Eddie Hemmings in optimistic mood
THE HONEST old hired hand who has seen it all looks you unwaveringly in the eye.
He is bushy-tailed and defiantly optimistic for the new decade — which in his case starts early when the still battered England cricket team leave for the West Indies in less than three weeks.
Eddie Hemmings, suddenly England's senior spin bowler, will celebrate his 41st birthday on the tour.
So you expect him at least to be coyly cagey about strong predictions.
Not a bit of it.
‘Our preparations have gone so well that none of us can wait to get there and begin in earnest.
We are determined to come back in the spring showing the country that we have some really talented and fighting cricketers in England.
Win or lose, I guarantee we will not return with our tails between our legs, but with a hell of a lot of dignity and applause from you blokes.
You see.’
In what seems a courageously wild effort to match fire with fire, England have packed their side with fast bowlers of unproven calibre, so Hemmings's wise-owl control and skill, patience, duty and courage promises to be crucially tested.
The sharp-fingered Cockney apprentice, Keith Medlycott, is the only other spinner in the party.
Caribbean cemeteries are littered, you might say, with tweaker's tombstones.
The place is a particular graveyard for off-spinners.
Just before a tyro Pat Pocock played his first Test there, over 21 years ago, Tom Graveney cruelly pointed to the Bridgetown sightscreen and said to the tremulous off-spinner: ‘Oh, look lad, it's still peppered with those little red dots from that time Clyde Walcott got after Jim Laker ten years ago.
Oh yes, boy, they really dine on off-spin over here.’
And after two painfully brave campaigns for the cause, John Emburey's decision this time to cash in the krugerrands is fairly understandable.
So step forward, Edward Ernest Hemmings.
He is thrilled to.
Hemmings has, in fact, played a first-class game in the West Indies.
And, incredibly, remains the only bowler in history to have taken all ten wickets in an innings in the Caribbean.
So he is already a celebrity in island cricket.
September 26-27, 1982: West Indies X1 v Rest of the World at Kingston, Jamaica: West Indies 419, EE Hemmings 49.3-14-175-10.
Who was in that side you bowled out?
‘Oh heck, I can't for the life of me remember.’
His first five wickets, for starters, were Greenidge, Haynes, Rowe, Lloyd and Dujon.
‘Oh, really,’ says Eddie, matter of fact, even slightly embarrassed.
‘Just one of those days.
I had one end, the seamers swapped around at the other.
The bats just decided to smash me around the island, and for every bag of boundaries they hit they then made a mistake.
All history now, and I'd swap those ten any day for five in an innings in a couple of proper Tests this winter.’
That feat, and just two single deliveries, one as a bowler, one as a bat, have already put Hemmings in the all-time, gold-leafed parchment scrolls.
Since he began first-class cricket way back in the mists of 1966 he has bowled some 80,000 balls and taken well over 1,200 wickets.
The world knows about just one, when, with nerveless panache, he cut down Viv Richards in most merciless swagger to win England the quarter-final of the last World Cup in India — with the daring of, it looked at the time, a schoolboy's lob.
‘He can be impossible to bowl against.
He'd just hit me for two huge sixes, then slapped me savagely through the covers.
The game could be lost inside five minutes with him like this.
I go back to my mark.
I've got to contain him somehow.
Just got to fire it in, haven't I?
Stands to reason.
So I give it even more air than my usual slower one.
And, blimey, it turns and bounces too and that was that.’
Richards b Hemmings 51.
England won by 34 runs.
As an improvising batsman, of course, his immortal shot was the joyous, off-carved, square, slaphappy thing by which Notts beat Essex in the Benson and Hedges final at Lord's last July.
Last ball, John Lever to bowl.
Two ageing champions, born within four days of each other in February 1949.
‘He knew and I knew, the obvious thing for him was a yorker.
But, because it was so obvious, would it be a yorker?
It was like a goalie guessing at a penalty.
I had to make up my mind before his arm came over.
I did.
Before he bowls it, my back leg moves away to get ready for the carve.
So I guessed right; sheer luck.
If it hadn't been a yorker I'd have looked an absolute idiot, I wouldn't have been in the same street, let alone cricket ground.
‘I looked for JK after.
I think he just slid off.
Obviously I felt for him, I wouldn't have been too delighted if our positions had been reversed; and they could so easily have been.
There's a hell of a lot of luck in cricket, you know.’
Like when Hemmings embarked on a second career.
He played, with increasing unhappiness, for Warwickshire until 1978.
‘I packed it in.
No drive, no ambition; the team was just turning up to go through the motions; and behind the scenes, lots of devious insider stuff.’
He prepared to work for his father in the building trade, or even go back to college.
‘Then out of the blue, Nottingham came for me.
It was a revelation.
Clive Rice threw me the ball and just said: ‘Right, get on with it’.
He basically just told me to be myself.
He does his 110 per cent utmost to win, but then enjoys a half of beer and a non-stop cricketing chinwag after the game.
Clive was a stupendous captain.’
Within three years, his 90 wickets helped bring Trent Bridge its first championship in over half a century.
It led to the first of his nine England caps, mostly on tour, where his tubby enthusiasm and — from behind the ropes anyway — his seemingly unathletic, but jauntily optimistic matelot's gait have endeared him to crowds.
His 5ft 10in and 13 stone are rather baggily proportioned and he has answered to ‘The Whale’.
In Australia six years ago they released a squealingly plump piglet onto the field, with the legend ‘Eddie’ daubed on its side.
At Edgbaston, in his early days, it is hard to recall him as the skinny lad in wire spectacles who tried too hard to bowl at medium pace, and when he became depressed at his form, came out in eczema rashes and asthma wheezes.
(The Sun, the other day, tried a typical scary smear: England Pick Asthmatic.
Eddie laughed: ‘The one place I won't remotely get asthma is in the Caribbean sun.’)
For the last month he has relished driving through the cold and the foggy damp from his Nottingham home to the Headingley indoor nets a few days a week for practice with the rest of the England team.
‘It's been absolutely fascinating, a revelation, to hear Geoff Boycott coaching the batsmen.
He's still very intense about the art, still loves his cricket with a passion.
Oh yes, just like him, we're going out there to win, to accept the challenge with a will.
I promise you, you just wait and see.
And remember, old Eddie told you first….’
Robert Pryce on soccer's quotes of the year Meat, Melchester and mistresses.
January 1989.
If we think they are easy meat we will end up with egg on our faces.
Bradford's manager Terry Dolan on Bristol C.
I don't get involved with team matters now that we've got a manager who can manage.
Ken Bates confesses.
Football is a harsh mistress.
Sutton's manager Barrie Williams after their 8-0 FA Cup fourth-round defeat at Norwich.
Looks like I won't be on Wogan on Monday.
Sutton's Lenny Dennis.
February He turns the six-yard box into a cartoon strip.
Malcolm Macdonald on West Ham's goalkeeper Allan McKnight.
He had such class he unsettled my stomach.
Torquay's manager Cyril Knowles on Manchester United's winger Lee Sharpe.
March.
We're now expecting an offer from Melchester Rovers.
Mo Johnston's agent Bill McMurdo after his client scored both goals in Scotland's 2-0 win over France.
I was grateful to be called anything at all.
‘Meatloaf’ would have been okay.
Vinny ‘Psycho’ Jones on his nickname.
April In footballing terms, two of them are not even on solids.
Wigan's manager Ray Mathias on his back four (average age 19).
May We tried to keep things tranquillo, as they say in Sheffield.
Wednesday's manager Ron Atkinson.
July.
Football is a capricious mistress.
Barrie Williams on retiring.
August I will not accept a team of gangsters directed by a mental retard.
Jose Eduardo Guinle, manager of the Copacabana Palace hotel, turning away the Chilean national team.
September.
They weren't just head and shoulders better but chest and waist too.
Palace's Ian Wright on losing 9-0 at Liverpool.
The last time we got a penalty away from home, Christ was a carpenter.
Lennie Lawrence.
November We have not attacked better all season.
In the first half it was a case of premature ejaculation.
Leeds' manager Howard Wilkinson after 2-1 win over Plymouth.
There is no crisis here.
Just panic.
Millwall's manager John Docherty after seven games without a win.
He was of the impression that his findings could overturn the Act.
Eminent and learned the judge may be, but he cannot set himself up as God over all football.
John Carlisle MP on Lord Justice Taylor, leading the Hillsborough inquiry.
December I want to be the longest-serving manager under Peter Swales.
Howard Kendall's ambition as the new manager of Manchester City.
Juventus?
The way Bully played on Wednesday night you must mean Fray Bentos.
Aston Villa's manager Graham Taylor on being told that a foreign club was interested in signing Steve Bull.
WEEKEND HIGHLIGHTS.
Aston Villa v Arsenal With Liverpool back at the top of the First Division a draw will do neither of their immediate pursuers much good.
Bould, out with a groin injury all season, is in their squad and, with Marwood doubtful, Davis may continue his resurgence.
Villa, who have won nine of their last 12 League games, hope to have Price fit after Achilles trouble.
Crystal Palace v Norwich City Palace continue to flirt with danger and Norwich, who remain one of the best footballing sides in the League, have Fleck in their squad after knee and back injuries.
Derby County v Coventry City Coventry have Regis back in their squad after ‘flu but are still missing Kilcline, Peake and the suspended Billing.
After their little November surge Derby are slipping again.
Even a point would be welcome now.
Liverpool v Charlton Athletic It would be typical of the way Charlton's luck is going at the moment were Barnes and Hansen to return to the Liverpool side after injury.
Charlton have Pates back in their defence but after seven League matches without a win cannot hold out much hope of getting off the bottom this afternoon.
Luton v Chelsea With Elstrup out of action following a cartilage operation, Harford is set to make his first appearance in Luton's attack for seven months.
Beasant's goalkeeping spared Chelsea another drubbing at Crystal Palace on Boxing Day and so long as their strikers remain on target they could get a decent result today.
Erland Johnsen, the Norwegian signed from Bayern Munich, is expected to help take the strain in Chelsea's defence.
Manchester City v Millwall There is quite a bustle at Maine Road in the wake of Howard Kendall's arrival as manager.
Ward, newly signed from West Ham, joins Allen in the City attack this afternoon, the pair replacing Morley and Bishop, who have gone to Upton Park.
Millwall did not sign Goddard in time to put him straight into their side.
So, with Sheringham still unfit, Cascarino will have to soldier on with inexperienced support.
QPR v Everton After a couple of wins QPR have found a familiar rut and Everton, who arrested their decline with a win at Derby, will be hoping for something similar at Shepherds Bush.
Then again, Everton's goal at the Baseball Ground was scored against the run of play and Falco can punish any lapses today.
Southampton v Sheff Wed Arsenal and Liverpool have lost at The Dell this season, so what price lowly Wednesday?
In fact Ron Atkinson's team are playing well and, with Ray Wallace out of the Southampton defence, will be confident of improving a wretched away record, especially if the other Atkinson starts hitting the target.
Tottenham v Nottm Forest Brian Clough's 1,000th League game as a manager and a fixture he will expect to win, seeing that Forest have beaten Spurs on three of their last four visits to White Hart Lane.
Tottenham have Van Den Hauwe back in defence.
Hodge, a former Spur, could be Forest's match winner, or match saver, this afternoon.
Wimbledon v Manchester U That hard-won point at Liverpool a week ago must seem awfully distant now as Alex Ferguson approaches the most critical period of his managerial career at Old Trafford.
Bryan Robson is still out with a groin strain and doubtful for Monday's game against QPR.
Danny Wallace is missing with a hamstring injury.
No doubt Ferguson wants his team to make a fight of it, though presumably on more civilised lines than the tunnel punch-up which followed their last match here.
David Lacey
THE EIGHTIES IN PERSPECTIVE.
David Davies treasures some memories from a decade when a Spanish genius inspired British and continental players to a period of unparalleled success
Europe's dynasty reigns in a golden age of golf
FROM time to time all games go through a golden era; a time when great players perform great deeds on the great stages of sport.
The trick is to recognise it while it is still happening — to relish it, embrace it and know that, in the nature of things, it cannot last.
The seaside photographer who promises ‘Memories to treasure’ with every happy snap might have been present at every major golfing occasion in the Eighties as the players of the age showed their capacity for repeating and exceeding the highwater marks of the very recent past.
Through the decade the glories of the game have been gloriously demonstrated.
They are not yet over, of course, these gilded moments.
The players who have strolled through our consciousness these past 10 years are mostly with us yet, but whatever they do in the Nineties will not resound in the way that their achievements of the Eighties did.
We cannot win the Ryder Cup, the Curtis Cup, the Walker Cup in the United States for the first time again.
We cannot have a Briton winning the US Masters for the first time again, nor a Briton putting the green jacket on yet another Briton for the first time again.
These are firsts, as was the winning of the US Women's Open in successive years by first a British professional, then a European.
Everywhere one looked there were unaccustomed trophies on display and, when the visiting Ryder Cup team arrived at The Belfry in the last few moments of the decade, they were greeted by the sight of the Ryder, Curtis and Walker Cups, knowing that the last name on them was not that of the United States of America.
There could have been a fourth cup there, for Great Britain and Ireland had also won the Eisenhower Trophy for the World Amateur Team Championships, providing also the winner of the individual section.
Golf, from nothing, has become in the Eighties the most successful sport, internationally, practised in these islands.
In that decade European men won almost a quarter of the 40 major championships played and for most of it dominated the top ten in the world rankings.
It would be too simple to suggest that all this was brought about by one man.
But the almost mesmeric brilliance of Severiano Ballesteros first of all broke down what had appeared to be insurmountable barriers and then allowed him to charge through the gaps, devastating anything in his path.
Ballesteros took world golf by the scruff of the neck and shook it until it reformed into patterns more nearly to his liking.
It was often not an attractive process but, in succeeding, he cleared the way for other Europeans to become the world-class players they are now.
Ballesteros is an extraordinary character.
At base there is an enormous arrogance and an overweening ambition.
The dates of the World Cup do not suit?
Change them.
The Ryder Cup will not come to Spain in 1993?
‘I won't play.’
The American Tour changed the qualification rule to one dictated by Ballesteros himself and then refused to change it again when Ballesteros realised he had got it wrong.
‘Stupido,’ said Ballesteros darkly, ‘they will pay.’
It is possible to harden the heart against a Ballesteros in these moods but then he goes and does something sublime on the course, hits a shot that no one else would conceive, let alone execute, and one realises here is genius in sport.
He has been European golf's generalissimo and it is appropriate that the decade opened to the sound of a Ballesteros devastation.
In April 1980, at Augusta, Georgia, he led the US Masters by 10 shots with nine holes to play.
He won, as do thoroughbreds, easing up.
American golf knew then that things would never be the same again.
Ballesteros was 23.
He was the first European to win a Masters title and the difference between him doing that and Tony Jacklin winning the US Open in 1970 is that by the Eighties there were other talents ready to be inspired by the Ballesteros achievement.
Sandy Lyle, Nick Faldo, Bernhard Langer, all looked up and took note.
Ballesteros won the Masters again in ‘83, the Open Championship in ‘84 and, while all this was hugely satisfactory, there was a longing for a winner from closer to home.
He appeared in July ‘85, ambling down the 18th fairway at Royal St George's.
He arrived at his drive, discussed the second shot, decided on a club and then, before taking it out of the bag, held out his hands in front of his caddie and said: ‘Look, not a tremor.’
Sandy Lyle was slightly unlucky that that second shot ran off the green into a depression called Duncan's Hollow, and definitely unlucky that his third shot, which he attempted to finesse, failed by a fraction and ran back to the edge of the green.
He fell to his knees, buried his head in the grass, feeling that he had lost his chance in that moment.
But he got down in two more, for a bogey five, and then the chasers, Langer and David Graham, found they had run out of puff.
Lyle's Open was the first by a Briton since Jacklin in 1969.
Lyle issued orders that a marquee be erected in his back garden and on Monday night there was a party, the food being funnelled in as on a conveyor belt from a nearby Chinese restaurant.
Faldo gritted his teeth and attended.
He was happy enough for Lyle to win; desperately disappointed that he had not yet won a major himself.
He was to have to wait until 1987 when, amid great grey curtains of mist and murk, he played one of the greatest of championship courses, Muirfield, by parring every hole in the last round.
He hit one of the great five irons, too, at the last hole, a shot that still gives him one of those lovely shivers of success whenever he thinks about it.
One each in one of the decade's continuing stories, the rivalry between Lyle and Faldo, but it was only a matter of months before Lyle made it 2-1.
The 1988 US Masters had looked, for most of its duration, to be Lyle's.
But to the sounds of utter silence from the European section of the Augusta press room, he hit his tee shot at the short 12th into the water, took five and by the 15th had given up his lead.
He arrived on the 18th tee needing a par to get into a play-off and, with an extraordinary demonstration of the tension involved, jumped up and down half a dozen times as his tee shot headed inexorably for the bunker on the left.
It landed in the sand, hopping on to the upslope and, when Lyle got there, he knew he could hit it the required 140 yards to the pin.
In fact he hit it 150 yards, the ball pitched, began to spin back and rolled towards the hole, finishing 10 feet away.
The American golf historian Herb Warren Wind has called it the greatest bunker shot in all championship play.
The putt for the win was, of course, holed.
By now Ballesteros had not won a major since St Andrews ‘84, but the ‘88 Open was at Royal Lytham St Annes, where he had won in ‘79.
He won again, with one of the most sustainedly brilliant final rounds in the history of the championship.
Nick Price, incredibly, started two shots ahead, went round in 69 and lost by two shots to a superb 65.
The drama of it was unmatched in the Open in the Eighties, although maybe second to the 1977 Turnberry confrontation between Jack Nicklaus and Tom Watson in the all-time list.
Europeans had now won two majors in ‘88 and Faldo had nearly won the US Open in between.
Only a magnificent sand shot at the 72nd got Curtis Strange into a play-off for his country's national title, although once in it he dominated.
Faldo had to wait until the ‘89 Masters before he could catch up with Lyle and maybe the picture of him on the 11th green, the second hole of a sudden-death play-off with Scott Hoch, encapsulates Europe's men in the majors in the Eighties.
Faldo, who had holed a motorway of putts in the final round, holed yet another on that green, up went his arms in a triumphant ‘V’ and an Augustan decade had ended as it had begun, with a European as Master.
Lyle, as defending champion, had to be-jacket Faldo, and coincidentally it signalled the end of perhaps the finest stretch of golf played by a British golfer.
For 133 days in 1988 Lyle had led the US Money List, he had won the Phoenix, Greensboro and Masters titles and in the first months of 1989 he twice came second.
It was an unsustainable pace and Lyle spent the rest of ‘89 in seclusion.
The decade saw the emergence of three European women professionals capable of playing with the world's best and, better yet, two of them proving it.
Laura Davies won the US Women's Open in 1987 and such is the power that she generates that any time she plays really well she wins.
But whether she plays well appears to be a matter of chance.
She is totally untaught, will not listen and makes so many basic errors in her set-up alone that consistency is obviously impossible.
She was succeeded as US champion by Liselotte Neumann, the Swede from a club in Finspang where people put their green fee into a milk churn and just go out and play.
The third woman of world class is Marie Laure de Lorenzi, who wins everything in Europe but has yet to be persuaded that America is worth a detour.
She will need to go if she is to take what would seem to be a deserved place in the record books.
Golf, the most individual of sports, is never more demanding than when played in its team format and, when Sam Torrance holed the winning birdie putt at The Belfry in ‘85, and very soon afterwards burst into tears, he began a sequence that would be rejected out of hand by any self-respecting editor of the Boys’ Own Paper.
Of the eight contests against America from then to the end of 1989, the United States won only two.
Two Ryder Cup matches were won outright, another halved; the Curtis Cup team went to Hutchinson, Kansas in 1986 and won, and defended successfully at Royal St George's, while in August of this year the Walker Cup team, quite improbably, went to Atlanta and won the Walker Cup.
The excitement in all of them was close to unbearable.
If Ballesteros was partially responsible for the all those individual successes, then Jacklin may deserve the credit not just for the Ryder Cup but for demonstrating that inspirational leadership, combined with an infinite capacity for detail, can produce a team better than the sum of its parts.
Diane Bailey, the Curtis Cup captain, seized on the Jacklin example and so did Geoff Marks and all around him at the Walker Cup in ‘89, and their teams responded magnificently.
In Kansas in ‘86 the American women were outplayed, the win no less thrilling for that.
But the following year the Ryder Cup men had to go to Muirfield Village — Jack's patch — the course and club he created, to play a team captained by the Golden Bear himself.
For British golf fanatics, there has perhaps never been a more nerve-wracking day than when, with only four points to get in the final singles, there was never a moment when it appeared likely that we could get them.
But let us glory in a statistic for once.
Of the 12 games that went to the 18th hole during the course of the match overall, only one was won by an American and, as matters got tighter and tighter, the home team got worse and worse.
Dan Pohl, Larry Mize and even Ben Crenshaw all made hopeless hashes of the last hole, Eamonn Darcy holed the putt of his life, Ballesteros was obsessively snuffing out Strange and shortly after that something nice took place in the woodshed.
It was, more accurately, a wood-built open-air refreshment centre and it was taken over by Europe's supporters.
They sang, they danced on the tables, they called for their heroes and their heroes went to them.
It was a wonderful hour or more and later Ian Woosnam called for a knighthood for Jacklin.
It was not, however, Sir Tony Jacklin who produced the halved match, and the retained Ryder Cup, at The Belfry this year, although two of his players were Sandy Lyle MBE and Nick Faldo MBE.
Nor, despite the merit of the achievement, did the Ryder Cup team get the vote when the Golf Writers’ Association announce their selection for their annual trophy this year.
That went to the Walker Cup team.
Given the strength of American college golf, with its state subsidies in the form of golf scholarships, the Walker Cup has always looked the least likely of the three team competitions to be won by Great Britain and Ireland.
But by the end of the decade they had absorbed the lessons learned by the other teams, and had accepted that, if they played as well as they could, they could win.
They picked a proper team, not having done so two years previously when they incomprehensibly left out their two best players, Peter McEvoy and Garth McGimpsey.
But even with a lead requiring only 1 ½ points from the final singles the match nearly got away.
The necessary points came in the shape of three halved games, with Andrew Hare recovering from two down with two to play and Jim Milligan, playing Jay Sigel in the anchor match, was two down and three to play.
Sports Editors fretted and printers fumed as the match went on and on into the British night, with Milligan winning the 17th by chipping in, to go to all square.
The 18th saw Sigel, who in his time has won 15 United States titles, miss the green, miss a little chip and miss a putt, allowing Milligan to halve the hole with a bogey five.
The GB and Ireland team went wild, rushing across the green to swamp their Scottish saviour and the celebrations went on long into the night, and the morning too.
Their win, in so many ways, epitomised the Eighties on this side of the Atlantic.
They had won, as they will always have to, against the odds, but they did it by capitalising on their best players, by utilising every ounce of available experience and by trying as hard as they knew how.
Those are good, sound formulas for success, and they worked, to the greater glory of golf, throughout the Eighties.
A Year to Remember When in doubt sonolidate: gems from our electronic waste-paper basket.
LET us make it clear from the outset, writes Jack Massarik, that the correspondents, copytakers and editorial staff who contribute to your sports pages are all doing an absolutely splendid job.
It is a complete mystery to everyone how the following gems came to light in 1989.
But at least none of them saw the light of print — until today's souvenir edition.
GLORIOUS FOR SOME High achievement Northamptonshire's all-rounder Richard Williams will launch his benefit year on Sunday by jumping out of an aeroplane over Bedfordshire.
Useful pedigree CHICAGO (AP)— The Queen of England will race a horse in the United States for the first time in 35 years at Arlington International Racecourse.
Cool customer This he will do from the scrum-half position in the now customary French fashion while the nominal scrum-half, Berbizier, froze the ball in from touch.
Branching out Jo Durie, the British No.2, gave a pleasantly fluent performance near to the rhododendron bushes on an outside court.
…DISAPPOINTING FOR OTHERS Drummed out Probyn was automatically ruled out when he was diagnosed by the Irish team doctor, Mick Molloy, as suffering from percussion.
Precious McKenzie?
A short lifter had accounted for Hardie on Saturday.
Patience rewarded Nowhere are Yorkshire's technical shortcomings more recognisable than with Sharp, recalled after three centuries in the second team.
Had a good innings It looks as though Ian Butcher may be forced to retire because of injury at the age of 226.
Rubbish Fadeev clung to the world championship lead despite falling on a tripe loop in yesterday's original programme.
Got a nasty kick ‘The concentration of the man is unbelievable.
If he was a bit deadlier in the balls he'd have been world champion.’
Galley slave During the Admiral's Cup he (Lawrie Smith) was released to be starving helmsman and tactician aboard the top-scoring Jamarella.
Beyond the fringe Nicky Mason, who has been on the fringes of England's best men's team for 30 years, showed during England's outstanding 5-1 victory that he can still…
DEEP THINKERS Forward planning O'Donovan also offers the simple but profound thought that it is women who will be giving birth to the next generation of Rugby League players.
I dunk, therefore I am The Chicago Bulls fired coach Doug Collins on Thursday, citing philosophical differences during the three years he headed the National Basketball Association club.
Pull the other one Chelsea captain Graham Roberts has a sceptic foot and is very doubtful.
What's up, doc?
The doctor also told of a four-hour meeting with a group of Irish throwers, who asked his advice on how to improve the efficiency of their drug programme.
Sure thing It seems that the only certain thing about the race is that it will be run at Doncaster.
(Harry Heymer on the St Leger).
UNSUITABLE FOR A FAMILY NEWSPAPER Veil of secrecy ‘You could see right through his trousers,’ said the British judge Vanessa Riley.
‘Fadeev was not a sight I would want my eight-year-old to see.
It does the sport no good.’
Orgy of violence AP — Rome police intervened and arrested three Lazio rooters.
Blazing Saddles Extel Pro cycling — RAYNER CATCHES AUSSIE BY BEHIND.
On the piste 1.
He looked up towards the Jungfrau, its golden breasts framed against cerulean blue, and blew it a kiss.
‘Beautiful,’ he said.
2.
The Rear entry is convenient and comfortable.
But it does not provide the immediate edge control a performer in the highest class demands.
Vastly experienced Judges decided in favour of Ritschel in recognition of her strong uchi-mata (inner thigh) attacks, and a couple of dangerous pick-ups made by the West German.
QUOTES OF ‘89 Yes, Minister ‘Mr Moynihan, I know, will join me in congratulating Frank Bruno on his gallant attempt to win the world heavyweight title.
The Sports Minister, more than most, knows what it's like to be in with a dangerous hooker.’
— Frankie Taylor to the guest of honour at the British Boxing Writers' Club annual dinner.
Cheep shot Of Parrott, Doyle said: ‘John's a great home bird.’
That shooting The London boxing promoter Mickey Duff said: ‘The only thing that worries me at the moment is his speedy recovery.’
Boomer Maclean's recovery stemmed from two thunderous winners late in the third game.
‘I thought I was out, but played to two shots from out of my backside, and then found that I was in,’ he said.
SONOLIDATING ON THE ORIGINAL Hard to improve upon In both of yesterday's games England displayed excellent control and built up 6-0 leads before sonolidating.
Jag at bay Sweden's Per Eklund ran out of time yesterday after gearbox and electrical problems in his Landseer.
Have it your own way 1.
As the fastest growing sport in the UK with some 450,000 active participants, it is important that the sport is called by its official title —‘WINDSUFRING’— RYA press release.
2.
Change nationality of Fram Knattspryrnufelagio and give its full name.
— AP.
Heavy going at Wigan The start was delayed for 25 minutes to enable the now inevitable lakecomers to find a vacant place.
Wing and leg it The security, with its metal detectors and baggage searches, would not have disgraced an El Al chicken counter.
Hockey England score 35 goals and win their group with ease.
By Pat Rowley
ENGLAND'S indoor team, even with Ian Jennings, their recognised goalscorer, being rested, amassed 35 goals in their three group games in the Buttermen indoor tournament held at Maidenhead yesterday.
England beat two Buttermen Indoor League Premier Division clubs, Hounslow (14-2) and Teddington (9-7), then won their group by routing Harborne, last season's national quarter-finalists, 12-3 in their last group match.
In Jennings's absence Neil Barker, one of this season's England newcomers, took on the chief goalscoring role, ably supported by his captain Andy Halliday.
Each scored eight goals, Barker getting five against Hounslow and Halliday four at Teddington's expense.
The opposition in England's group was nothing like as strong as they faced in winning the HDM tournament in Holland before Christmas.
Only Swansea looked likely to offer them a serious test.
Hounslow and Harborne were weakened by calls from Wales.
In fact Hounslow could find only eight players for the first match of the tournament and conceded 12 goals against England before the hard-working Hacker opened their account.
Teddington had to give up Laslett and Barker to England but put up a spirited performance against the national side.
Better finishing enabled England to lead 8-2 by early in the second half.
Teddington rallied well but too late to save the game.
The bustling Billson, Szwinto and Benzies each had the consolation of scoring twice against England.
England's junior team had much more of a struggle in the other group.
They were behind throughout the second half against Bromley, but the lethal shooting of Kulbir Takher saved them.
He scored his fourth high-quality goal to get them a 6-6 draw with just two seconds remaining.
Against Fareham the juniors trailed 2-1 at half-time, but a change of tactics brought them a 6-2 win.
The juniors' teamwork suffered from their lack of a genuine middleman.
Machin arrives at Barnsley full of promotion promise.
By David Hopps and Russell Thomas
MEL MACHIN, sacked as Manchester City manager five weeks ago amid accusations that he lacked rapport with the fans, chose his appointment at Barnsley yesterday to parade a new upbeat persona.
The man regarded by Peter Swales, at Manchester City, as a little dull, introduced himself at Oakwell by saying: ‘It may take a little time, but I can assure you that we will get promotion within three years.’
Machin's faith arises from promotion seasons with Norwich (1985-6) and City (1988-9).
Two visits to Oakwell, incognito, also persuaded him that a more immediate priority, to move away from the lower reaches of the Second Division, is realisable.
Barnsley have won only six League matches all season.
Machin has signed a 3 ½-year contract.
He intends to expand the coaching staff, although Eric Winstanley, caretaker since Allan Clarke's removal, will be retained.
Another South Yorkshire manager signing until the end of the 1992-3 season is Sheffield United's Dave Bassett.
He has accepted improved terms for himself and his training and physiotherapy staff.
But money remains scarce for team strengthening.
Reg Brealey, the club chairman, told shareholders at yesterday's annual meeting that the club still owes £2.3million.
Newcastle's attempts to bolster their midfield foundered yesterday when their manager, Jim Smith, failed to reach agreement with Chelsea's Micky Hazard.
Paul Goddard will make his Millwall debut — against his old club, Derby — on New Year's Day after completing his £800,000 move yesterday following a medical.
As Derby bade farewell to one striker, they missed out on another when an ambitious move to bring a Colombian World Cup winger to the Baseball Ground fell through.
Leonel Alvarez, rated at about £1 million and expected to play a major part in his country's World Cup campaign, had been lined up initially on loan, but Derby's manager Arthur Cox said: ‘We explored the situation, but it wasn't possible.’
Trevor Francis is still ‘thinking over’ an offer to join Luton and is set to make a decision on New Year's Day.
Sheffield Wednesday are among those pursuing the former QPR player-manager.
Bristol City are offering about £100,000 for Charlton's Welsh international striker Andy Jones.
Bristol Rovers are likely to abandon their interest in their former striker Steve White.
‘Swindon want to keep White and I'm in no real position to offer the kind of money to make them change their mind,’ says Rovers' Gerry Francis.
Steve Stoutt, Grimsby's defender, has joined Lincoln for £10,000 and plays today.
Hull moved out of the Second Division relegation zone for the first time since mid-September with a 2-1 win over Plymouth last night — their fourth win in their last six games and their third successive victory under the new manager Stan Ternant.
Swan put Hull ahead with a close-range shot, but Plymouth, who dropped their captain, Tommy Tynan, for only the second time in seven years, equalised throughCampbell before Terry hit Hull's winner.
Stockport's second victory in four days at Edgeley Park moved them into second position in the Fourth Division.
Two goals in eight minutes from their record signing, Keith Edwards, secured a 3-1 win.
Romania will go ahead with preparations for next summer's World Cup.
Their squad assembles on January 22 to prepare for a series of warm-up matches, including games in France on January 25 and 28.
Opponents due to be played in Bucharest include the United States on March 25, Holland on April 25, Brazil on May 12 and Egypt on May 20.
Oldham square up to Round.
OLDHAM have placed Paul Round, their second-row forward, on the transfer list for £95,000, claiming he is in breach of contract for refusing to train or play for the club, writes Paul Fitzpatrick.
Round was signed from St Helens for a club record of £65,000 in the summer of 1987 but he damaged a knee in his only game this season — at Carlisle in October — and needed a cartilage operation.
Jim Knox, an Oldham director, says that the club have fulfilled their financial obligations to Round and do not know why he is behaving in this way.
Oldham have also cut the transfer fees on three players.
Terry Flanagan's price has been reduced from £60,000 to £25,000, Kevin Meadows is now on offer at £8,000 and Ian Sanderson at £20,000.
The Leeds stand-off or loose forward, David Heron, has received the now customary eight-match ban after being sent off for a high tackle in the Regal Trophy quarter-final replay with Wigan.
Widnes, meanwhile, have decided not to appeal against the eight-match suspension imposed on Mike O'Neill.
Leeds will play the Australian forward, Cavill Heugh, signed from Barrow, in Monday's match with Hull.
To accommodate him on their overseas register Leeds have had to part with Craig Izzard.
Paul Loughlin seems likely to play for St Helens against Widnes on Monday, but he will then have an injection for a groin strain and could be out for two weeks.
Jonathan Griffiths, also suffering from groin trouble, sees a specialist on January 8.
Racing: Richard Baerlein summarises the best of today's betting prospects Smart Tar on course for Mandarin THE MANDARIN Handicap Chase, now sponsored by Save and Prosper, has many happy memories for some and not so happy for others.
Fulke Walwyn, who kept on winning it, has by far the best record but he does not have a runner this year.
For me, his victory last season with Ten Plus when there were only four runners, convinced me his chaser would win him another Gold Cup, a race he must have won had he not fallen at that fatal third fence from home.
This time, Reg Akehurst, who was taken by surprise when Solidasarock won the SGB Chase at Ascot, will be expecting his seven-year-old to improve on that performance in today's event at Newbury and there is no reason why this promising young chaser should not continue to progress.
In the Ascot race Brown Windsor was giving him a stone and finished 5 ¾ lengths behind.
The second, Panto Prince, has already enhanced the form, while Brown Windsor meets Solidasarock on 3lb better.
Brown Windsor was rated the top novice chaser of last season and began this season in handicap company in great style.
He was only just caught by Ghofar in the Hennessy, though the form in that race is not working out too well.
Smart Tar in his seasonal debut was sixth in the SGB and will improve on that performance.
There were many shrewd operators who backed him for last season's Grand National and they will be doing so again.
He has a 5lb advantage with Solidasarock.
The top weight, Golden Friend, made a promising seasonal debut when beating The Thinker at Haydock in November but was pulled up on a return visit to the course when Baies beat The Thinker narrowly.
Door Latch is unlikely to be ready yet in spite of the good form of his stable-companions.
The bottom weight, Polyfemus, has done well since joining Michael Robinson's stable during the summer and he made all the running when beating Charter Hardware 1 ½ lengths over three miles, three furlongs at Chepstow earlier in the month.
Charter Hardware was far from disgraced when running third to Bonanza Boy in the Coral Welsh National, only losing second place close home to Cool Enough.
However, Bonanza Boy won so easily that there really was no second.
Smart Tar has a 2lb advantage over Brown Windsor on the running in the SGB but as that was his first outing against three from Brown Windsor and four from Solidasarock, I prefer Smart Tar.
Likewise, there were only five runners in last season's L'Oreal Handicap Hurdle won by Afaristoun.
This has now gone up to 16 making it the hardest handicap hurdle of the season to date for any punter to try and solve.
Let's hope there is not a single dropout to preserve the quarter odds a place, one, two, three and four.
David Elsworth's Imperial Brush must be on the short list.
He won two handicap hurdles last season over this course and has had two races to tune him up again and he is not badly handicapped.
Toby Balding's Directly ran third to Imperial Brush last season and is 7lb better off but he was beaten over 14 lengths into fourth place behind Rusty Roc at Ludlow last time out.
He would have to make the same improvement as his stable-companion Forest Sun did from Chepstow to Ascot to be given a sporting chance here.
Nigel Tinkler sends down Bank View to carry top weight and this Yorkshire trainer has a good record with his southern.
In this very difficult handicap I shall stay with Imperial Brush.
In the Wantage Novice Chase Richard Green's smart hurdler, Decided, makes his first appearance over fences.
Last season he was trained by Oliver Sherwood, who turned him into one of the best novice hurdlers and now Henrietta Knight will be attempting to do the same over fences.
His introduction will be no walk-over but if he is half as good over fences as he was over hurdles, he should win.
In the Philip Cornes Novice Hurdle Minnehoma and Qannaas stand out.
Both have given every indication that they will stay this trip, so I must go for Martin Pipe's runner Minnehoma.
Clara Mountain, already a three times course winner, is most consistent and should score again in the Hungerford Handicap Chase, while Brabazon, who declined an earlier engagement in the Philip Cornes can make fitness tell against the seasonal debutante Young Pokey in the Ramsbury Hurdle.
Young Pokey won his only two races last season and will not be long in scoring again.
At Folkestone, Allen's Rock looks best in the opener, while John Edwards would not be sending Western Legend all the way from Hereford without a chance.
Favourites look as if they will have a good run at Catterick with Royal Greek, Black Spur, James Joy and Pyjamas in particular.
Rugby League Monie is on Wigan.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
SO impressive has been Wigan's play of late that it seems reasonable to conclude that the transitional period from the control of Graham Lowe to that of John Monie is complete.
The club have, inevitably, hit a few patches of turbulence along the way but, apart from their defeat at Oldham in the Lancashire Cup, nothing too damaging.
Even when they have not played particularly well they have still managed to win, and that has preserved confidence.
Now confidence has burgeoned, and they are looking the most complete side in the First Division, secure in defence and incisive in attack; and, with a squad gradually returning to strength, they could dominate the second half of the season.
Ellery Hanley is back at loose forward for the Regal Trophy semi-final with Castleford at Headingley today, while the New Zealand centre Kevin Iro also returns after recovering from an operation for cartilage trouble.
So, even with players of the class of Steve Hampson and Andy Goodway missing, Wigan look formidably strong, and Castleford will do well to repeat the victory they achieved in October at Central Park — the last time Wigan lost.
Castleford always were capable of springing surprises.
Their problem was to control the wild fluctuations of form to which they were prone.
Their Australian coach Darryl Van De Velde seemed to have found that elusive consistency last season, but such an assumption was shattered by Castleford's spectacular collapse over the final weeks.
The rebuilding is still taking place, but while they perhaps lack Wigan's all-round capability, some of the assurance that carried them so successfully through two-thirds of last season has looked to be returning, and they could possess the forward strength to disrupt Wigan's composure.
The winners meet Halifax, of the Second Division, on the same ground in two weeks.
Honours A new title for Bruno, Jacklin and Coe.
By John Rodda
BRITAIN's most popular loser, Frank Bruno, joins some distinguished sporting winners in the New Year's Honours list.
Bruno, twice beaten in world heavyweight title fights, against Tim Witherspoon in 1986, and this year by Mike Tyson, receives the MBE for his services to boxing.
A year ago he was in Arizona showing the strain of preparing to face Tyson in Las Vegas; yesterday he registered two more performances as the genie in Aladdin at The Dominion, Tottenham Court Road.
There is one sporting knight in today's list, John Smith, the chairman of Liverpool Football Club, whose is rewarded for his service as chairman of the Sports Council.
His vice-chairman, now also retired from the job, Sebastian Coe, receives the OBE for his work with the council.
Coe is now in Melbourne, preparing for his final track race, the 1500 metres in the Commonwealth Games.
As an Olympic gold medal winner he already holds the MBE.
Tony Jacklin, four times captain of the Ryder Cup team, who retired after this year's drawn contest with the United States, receives the CBE.
So too does Micky Steele-Bodger, who played for the England rugby team at flank forward in the 1947-48 season, and has since contributed enormously as an adminstrator, particularly in raising a team each season for the past 42 years to play Cambridge in their preparation fo the University match.
He has helped in revitalising the Oxford-Cambridge match which this year drew a capacity crowd to Twickenham.
Finlay Calder, the Scottish player who led the Lions to victory in Australia, and is now in his final season at the age of 32, receives the OBE.
Three other captains are recognised for their services.
Bryan Robson, who steered England's soccer team to the World Cup Finals, receives the OBE, Linford Christie, the Olympic silver medal winner and spearhead of the British team which won the European Cup and placed third in the World Cup, is awarded the MBE, as does Ellery Hanley, leader of the Great Britain rugby league side.
The women's world squash champion, Martine Le Moignan, and Jack Simmons, who has just retired from playing cricket for Lancashire at the age of 48, receive the MBE.
Among the overseas sporting awards is an OBE for Ewen Chatfield, the veteran New Zealand bowler, who was saved by the prompt action of Bernard Thomas, the MCC physiotherapist, when a ball from England's Peter Lever knocked him unconscious in his maiden Test match at Auckland in 1975.
Green light has resurgent North on red alert for deciding match.
By Janet Ruff
THE North, with two victories over the Midlands and West, remain the front runners in the Women's Territorial Championship at the Silksworth Leisure Complex, Sunderland, with maximum points from three games.
This is a complete reversal of fortunes.
In last year's championship they managed a single draw and finished last.
The destiny of the NatWest Cup now rests on today's match between North and South.
Having drawn their first game, against West on Thursday, South need a victory to win overall.
They took the honours yesterday for the most attractive play despite the loss of their captain Katie Dodd with the recurrence of a long-standing muscle injury.
A 2-1 win over a disappointing Midlands side was surpassed in the final game, when they defeated East, the holders, 3-1.
Anne Green, the Ealing striker, gained four of the South's five goals, bringing her total to five in three games.
The North opened with a hard-won 2-1 defeat of the East, scoring at two penalty corners in the last 25 minutes through Cate Cook and Kirsten Spencer.
Margaret Allan replied.
North overcame the West 2-0 rather more easily, West hardly mounting a worthwhile attack.
Mandy Sowerby and Spencer were the scorers.
Midlands have little form and against the South showed a defensive bias and no discernible pattern.
South, on the other hand, played with imagination and good teamwork, although the game deteriorated into a dull affair.
Green scored from a penalty stroke and a fine open-play goal before Yvonne Ayshford got Midlands' consolation goal almost on time.
The South game against the East was, in contrast, a lively battle, swung South's way by Green's two opportunist goals and one from Kathy White in a red-blooded second half.
Lynn Bollington replied for the East.
NZ rivals battle for home cheers.
THE leaders on the third leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race have cleared the southern tip of Tasmania and the outlying islands and begun their passage across the Tasman Sea to Cape Reinga at the north end of the North Island of New Zealand, writes Bob Fisher.
As they rounded Tasmania, there was a pause in their rapid progress, speeds of some of the boats dropping to four knots for a while.
Yesterday afternoon, however, saw them all back up to speed with Grant Dalton's Fisher & Paykel out in front by three miles from Steinlager 2, skippered by his fellow New Zealander Peter Blake.
There is a keen battle between these two to be first into their home port of Auckland.
Lawrie Smith in the 80ft sloop Rothmans was 12 miles behind the leader but still 10 miles clear of Markku Wiikeri's Martela OF.
Sport in brief Tennis.
Boris Becker has withdrawn from the Australian hard-court tournament in Adelaide, the first event on the new ATP tour, but is still expected to play in the New South Wales Open starting in Sydney on January 8.
The West German is hoping to replace Ivan Lendl as world No.1 by winning the Australian Open which starts on January 15.
Spain's brother-and-sister team of Emilio and Arantxa Sanchez beat Austria 2-1 in the quarter-finals of the Hopman Cup in Perth, while Yannick Noah lost to Petr Korda during Czechoslovakia's 3-0 defeat of France.
Ice Hockey.
Britain secured their second victory in two nights over Belgium yesterday with a lopsided 10-0 win in Durham, although the Belgians, ranked 25th in the world, did not use their full international side.
Stephen Johnson, Tony Hand and Paul Hand got two goals apiece and Iain Robertson scored on his senior debut.
Chess.
Michael Adams, at 18 Britain's youngest national champion, shares the lead with a win and a draw after two rounds of the Foreign and Colonial International at Hastings, writes Leonard Barden.
Adams, from Truro, beat Murray Chandler of London in 56 moves to stand level with Sergei Dolmatov of the USSR and Predrag Nikolic of Yugoslavia.
Bowls.
The world indoor champion, Richard Corsie from Edinburgh, dropped two counts of four and trailed 16-15 before recovering to beat David Lockhart of Cheshire 21-19 in the Mackeson Fylde Classic at Blackpool.
His Commonwealth Games team-mate Willie Wood scrambled to a 20-19 victory over David Holt while three of England's Auckland team, David Bryant, Tony Allcock and John Ottaway, all won their opening matches.
Darts.
Eric Bristow was knocked out of the British Darts Open in London last night by Charlie Holdaway, a 28-year-old furniture assembler from Isleworth, Middlesex.
Bristow, who has just regained the world No.1 ranking and was chasing a fifth title, lost 3-1.
The holder, Brian Cairns of Wales, and the England international Dave Whitcombe were other fourth-round casualties.
Ian Ridley.
ATTENDANCES on Boxing Day totalled some 556,000, an increase of about 82,000 on last year, and ITV also announced this week that viewing figures for live matches were up.
So everyone is basking in the increased popularity of the game.
Or are they?
ITV also announced this week that, with the agreement of the Football League, they had taken out the Arsenal v Liverpool match from the fixtures for February 24 and it would be played at a later date, invoking a clause in their contract with the League that allows them to use three matches a season in this way.
The League, therefore, had to agree.
Publicly they say that ITV have acted within their contract, which was agreed by all 92 clubs.
Privately, they are disturbed by the move, which follows the controversy last week when ITV delayed transmission of the Liverpool v Manchester United match.
Stung, the League said yesterday that they expect ITV to come up with a new date within the next fortnight and they will not tolerate one beyond the scheduled season's end of May 5.
The rest of us were as thrilled as ITV at last season's denouement between the two clubs.
It is also conceded that many viewers will want to see the match and that ITV were in a tricky position because on that weekend in February they are planning to screen a Littlewoods Cup semi-final.
But besides the inconvenience to the long-suffering paying customer — and Liverpool's have suffered more than any from TV whim — it begs the question of whether the tail is wagging the dog.
It does appear that ITV is indulging in some manipulation of the finale, instead of reflecting it as they should.
MILLWALL's efforts to get themselves on television succeeded earlier this season when their game against Liverpool made The Match.
In the coming week they will be featured twice.
The first they could probably do without, the second will probably fill the Lions with pride.
On Wednesday at 9.25pm BBC2 will show the play Arrivederci Millwall, which follows a ‘gang of hooligans’(Radio Times) fuelled by hatred after the invasion of the Falkland Islands on a trip to the World Cup in Spain in 1982.
Two nights later at 8pm Channel 4 presents a documentary entitled ‘No One Likes Us, We Don't Care’, taken from that defiant, whining chant of Millwall supporters (‘articulate, concerned’— TV Times).
It is said to show how the club has changed along with the community of South-east London.
You pays yer licence money…
THE first prediction for the new decade to fall before the new decade has begun comes from World Soccer's January edition.
The magazine, unfortunately with a deadline of well before Christmas, has this to say of Romania in its summary of how changes in Eastern Europe might affect the game there: ‘No visible signs of change and with the recent party congress having given the despotic president Nicolae Ceausescu another five years in office and dissident opposition ruthlessly crushed by the secret police, Romania will remain in the Dark Ages for the foreseeable future.’.
READERS with longer memories will recall that Crystal Palace were dubbed The Team Of The Eighties by some people who should have known better and promptly began the decade with a 0-0 draw against Norwich.
Today the two teams end the Eighties in opposition again and, to mark the occasion, fans of both teams have got together in a spirit of goodwill and charity.
The fanzines, Never Mind the Danger, of Norwich, and Eagle Eye, of Palace, will meet this morning in a light-hearted match at the National Sports Centre and later hold a collection at Selhurst Park, the proceeds of which will go towards children's charities in Norfolk and London.
NIGERIA seems likely to follow the English game in embracing the long-ball philosophy of Wing Commander Charles Reep and his Position Of Maximum Opportunity.
Their new General Secretary is a Mr Okpomo.
ENTRIES for footballer-artists have dribbled in, Bernie Winston of Waterloo, Liverpool citing the Reds' management team of Monet Moran and Kenny Degaslish, for example.
Dave Russell of Halifax invokes Rembrandt Moses, Franz Carravaggio, Salvador Daley and Mick Millais.
Interestingly, he adds: ‘We should also consider art from other cultures.
Recently dug up by archaeologists on Merseyside were a group of statues named the Terry Darracotta Army.’
Tennis Sanchez lives dangerously.
By Mike Dickson in Perth
ARANTXA SANCHEZ nearly saw her decision to enter the Hopman Cup backfire yesterday.
She had to save two match points before beating Austria's Barbara Paulus, and put Spain on their way to the semi-finals.
In the deciding set, her tall and athletic opponent had spectacularly converted a set and 4-0 deficit into a 5-3 and 40-15 lead.
The ensuing pressure had contrasting effects on the players.
Paulus proceeded to turn to jelly, while Sanchez, the French Open champion, steeled herself and emerged a 6-4, 6-7, 7-5 winner.
She then joined her brother, Emilio, in the mixed doubles, and they beat Paulus and Thomas Muster 7-6, 6-4 to put Spain into a semi-final against Czechoslovakia.
Today sees the first appearance of the American team, comprising John McEnroe and Pam Shriver, who face Australia.
This pits McEnroe against his doubles partner Mark Woodforde, while Shriver plays Hana Mandlikova.
Soccer Western agents rub hands over the prospect of an eastern defection Talking Point.
By David Lacey
THE monolithic facade which Eastern Europe once presented to the world never seemed the same after West Bromwich Albion visited Bucharest in 1968 to play a Cup Winners' Cup match against Dinamo in the August 23 Stadium, where it was rarely the 23rd and seldom felt like August.
After a bad-tempered encounter the soldiers who made up most of the small crowd threw stones at the West Bromwich players.
To deter them, the Dinamo side linked arms with their opponents as they left the pitch.
The soldiers then turned their attention to the police and a free fight broke out.
The most likely outcome of the upheavals in Romania, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, East Germany and Bulgaria will be to drive their better footballers into the arms of the West in ever-increasing numbers.
The outlook for their national teams is, to say the least, uncertain.
Yet a revolution in the way football is run in a number of these countries was already under way before the democratisation set in.
The old assumption that the best club sides were organised by the army and the secret police, who in turn provided the foundations of the national squads, had been overtaken by more commercial considerations.
The great Hungarian team of the early Fifties was based on Honved, the army side.
Ferenc Puskas was Major Puskas and during the 1956 uprising there were reports he had been killed.
Then he turned up playing for Real Madrid.
Hungarian football has since fallen victim to the corruption and match-fixing scandals.
Bulgaria has been similarly affected and four years ago wound up their two leading clubs, Levski Spartak and CSKA Sofia, the army side, after the players reduced the Cup final to a brawl.
CSKA have re-emerged as CFKA Sredets and continue to win the League regularly, but for several seasons the Bulgarians have allowed footballers to be paid for playing.
Professionalism and sponsorship have penetrated a number of countries in Eastern Europe, most notably the Soviet Union.
The immediate problem is that while soccer in these countries may acquire the trappings of the West, they are not in the same league for cash.
Their economies are failing and even if their players become wealthy by staying at home, there is not a lot for them to buy.
The situation is not dissimilar to that in England during the years of austerity in the Forties, when a number of First Division players were tempted to play in Bogota.
Restrictions on footballers in Eastern Europe playing abroad have gradually been eased as Poles, Soviets and others have come to regard the export of players as a useful means of acquiring hard currency.
Only last summer Sergei Aleinikov moved from Dynamo Minsk to join Alexander Zavarov at Juventus for £1.75 million.
Some countries have tried to slow down the exodus by insisting that players cannot leave before a certain age, usually 28, or until they have completed their national service.
But once all the barriers have been removed, Western Europe can expect a flood of footballers from the East which will make the present procession of Yugoslavs seem a mere trickle.
Talented East Germans will head for West Germany, inspired by the success of a defector, Norbert Nachtweih, Bayern Munich's central defender.
The Czechs, whose repressive system drove Lubos Kubik and Ivo Knoflicek into hiding in a remote fishing village in Spain, could also look to the Bundesliga, France is a natural destination for the Romanians and every footballer of true world class will end up in Italy.
This surely applies to the best Romanian talent, Gheorge Hagi, who has been the target of several Italian clubs.
Hagi plays for Steaua Bucharest, the army club who have recently won a sponsorship from Ford.
This appears to put him on the right side of the new rulers, even if Steaua were answerable to one of Ceausescu's brothers.
Had Hagi played for Dinamo Bucharest, whose future is now in doubt because of its links with the notorious security police, Securitate, it might have been a different matter.
According to a Yugoslav newspaper report yesterday, which quoted Uefa's vice-president Freddy Rumo, Dinamo are about to be disbanded.
In that case, their opponents in the Cup Winners' Cup quarter-finals, Partizan Belgrade, would receive a bye into the last four.
As it is, Hagi will go to the World Cup with a price on his head, always assuming he is not snapped up beforehand.
Romanians, Czechs and Soviets may still be playing for national honour next summer but they will also be in the shop window and the busiest men in Italy during June will be the agents.
From the Atlantic to the Urals, European football is about to become the biggest common market of all.