

MISERABLISM MORRISSEY
I think I've met them all now.
For me, there are no more heroes left.
And no new ones coming along, by the look of it.
It could be that this is a time marked by a dearth of characters, or that the smart people in rock aren't interested in self-projection but in obliterating themselves in noise.
But really, I think, it's the case that, in this job, you don't have time to develop obsessions, what with the insane turnover, and all the incentives to pluralism.
The heroes you have kind of linger on from a prior period when only a few records passed through your life, when you had the time to get fixated, spend weeks living inside a record.
It's a real effort to click back to that frame of mind, which is bad because fanaticism is the true experience of pop, not discrimination and broad-mindedness — I think of the splendid devotion of all those boys and girls, who as soon as they've got hold of the new Cure or New Order or Bunnymen record, immediately set to learning the lyrics by heart, then spend days exhaustively interpreting the Tablets From on High, struggling to establish some fit between their experience and what is actually some drunken doggerel cobbled together in a studio off-moment.
Seriously, I approve.
I approve the deadly seriousness, the piety, the need for something sacred in your life.
However ‘deluded’.
It's become a reflex for critics to castigate the readers for being partisan, for being sluggish and single-minded in their choices.
We exhort you to disconnect, discard and move on, acquire a certain agility as consumers.
But maybe this ideal state of inconstancy we advocate only makes for fitter participants in capitalism.
For the one thing that makes rock more than simply an industry, the one thing that transcends the commodity relation, is fidelity, the idea of a relationship.
There are voices you turn to as a friend, and you don't just turn your back on your friends if they go off the rails.
You hang around.
You give them the time of day.
So — in the year in which we've forced the text-centred discipline that is rock writing to incorporate everything that it has excluded for so long (the relationship between the star's body and the fan's, the voice, the materiality of music)— maybe it's time to make criticism grapple with what undoes it, ‘the uncritical’ itself.
When I meet Morrissey, at the Hyde park Hotel, he's dressed from head to foot in black.
So am I. The whole tableau is idol meets fan to an embarrassing tee.
Happily, my finally getting to meet him coincides with the release of one of Morrissey's great records (they seem to alternate quite evenly with duff ones), so there's no awkward rub between the fan's loyalty and the critic's ‘responsibility’ to the ‘truth’.
Viva Hate ! feels implausibly fresh: the music's breathing again, free of a certain stuffiness and laboriousness that had set in seemingly irreversibly in The Smiths' twilight period.
All due respect to Johnny Marr (though the haircuts never get better…) but, like most people ‘blessed’ with skill, there was a tendency to be used by one's versatility rather than use it.
Songs were getting written to accommodate guitar conceits, pointless feats and smotheringly unnecessary elaboration.
And I never much cared for the bumptious, muscular side of The Smiths, so I welcome the spaciness Vini Reilly brings as new guitarist, whether it's the lurid wig-out of ‘Alsatian Cousin' or the dew-and-moonbeam iridescence of ‘Late Night, Maudlin Street’.
In American teen slang, Vini is a ‘space’— a dreamer, someone not all there.
Hailed by Paul Oldfield as ‘the missing boy of pop’, someone whose resistance takes the form of an absenteeism from life, it strikes me that Reilly's mystical anorexia is unusually suited to Morrissey's neurasthenia, his supine delinquency.
Viva Hate !, unsurprisingly, returns again and again to the Englishness which obsesses Morrissey.
For instance, ‘Everyday Is Like Sunday’ pores over the drab details of some benighted seaside resort: ‘Hide on the promenade/How I dearly wish I was not here…trudging slowly over wet sand…win yourself a cheap tray…share some greased tea with me…
’ Typically, Morrissey seems to cherish the very constraints and despondency of a now disappearing England, fetishize the lost limits.
What is this love/hate relationship you have with Englishness?
‘There are very few aspects of Englishness I actually hate.
I can see the narrowness, and love to sing about it.
But I don't hate Englishness in any way.
All aspects of England, whether it be underclass, or extreme affluence, I find very  interesting and entertaining.
And it's still, I feel, cliché as it may seem, the sanest country in the world.’
But there is the echo of Betjeman-on-Slough in the line ‘come! come! come!— nuclear bomb!’
I mean, if it was such a rotten holiday, why hark back to it?
‘That never really occurred to me.
The pleasure is getting it out of your system, saying ‘never again' instead of‘same again next year’.
And the British holiday resort is just like a symbol of Britain's absurdity, really.
The idea of a resort in Britain doesn't seem natural.’
Again, on ‘Late Night, Maudlin Street’, you say: ‘I never stole a happy hour around here’— but the whole effect of the song, the way your murmured reveries drift in and out of Vini's entranced playing, just makes the whole time and place seem magical, otherworldly, and incredibly precious…
‘It is a trick of memory, looking back and thinking maybe things weren't that bad, but of course, if you concentrate, you realize they were.
But I don't want to sing about football results or importune people to dance.
There are too many other people doing that, and I feel sad there aren't people making serious statements.
I feel slightly let down.
I feel I should look about and see streams of groups being angry and hateful — but it's just not happening at all.’
For me, this song is the centrepiece of the album.
But you seem not so much angry, as succumbing to memories, drowning in them, leaving this world behind…
‘But, I think, finally exorcising the ghost of that past and those small times.’
It reminded me of the comparison the Stud Brothers made between you and
Sinead O'Connor: the ‘rigorous autobiography’, the way both of you seem to have stopped living in order to document more completely your adolescence.
‘But my life never really started at any stage — which I know you won't believe, but it's true — so it never really got stopped at any point.
But obviously the past is what makes any person.
It's because of your past that you're sitting there now, with your list on your knee.
I can't help thinking about the past.’
The line ‘women only like me for my mind’ is clever…
‘It's the final complaint, I suppose, in the long list of complaints about the past.’
It's still not widely appreciated that men can want to be objects, as much as agents, of desire.
‘But I think men are seen like that, actually — now.
Men are aware of their sexuality in a way they previously weren't, or weren't supposed to be.
I think women have become very open about their needs and desires, and this was entirely due to feminism.
By women being open about sex, it made life much  easier for men.
And this is why feminism helps everybody, to be slightly more relaxed about life.’
Mindful of Morrissey's Jean-Genet-like interest in ruffians, as evinced by ‘Suedehead’, I ask: have you always been drawn to people who are tough and streetwise and unlike yourself?
‘I'm enormously attracted to people who can look after themselves.
I'm obsessed by the physical, in the sense that it always works .
It's a great power to be very physical, to be able to storm through life with swaying shoulders, instead of creeping and just relying on your thesaurus.
That doesn't work!
I've had so many conversations with people trying to convince them of a particular point, and although I find words central to my life…‘
You'd like to be capable of violence…
‘Nothing shifts or stirs people like a slight underhand threat.
They jump.
But most of the friends I have are very very and cross-legged individuals and not very demonstrative in any way.
So I've never belonged to any physical set.
The song ‘Break up the Family’ is strongly linked with ‘Suedehead'’and ‘Maudlin Street'’, that whole period In 1972, when I was twelve, thirteen.
‘Break up…‘' is about a string of friends I had who were very intense people and at that age, when your friends talk about the slim separation between life and death — and you set that against the fact that this period of your youth is supposed to be the most playful and reckless — well, if you utilized that period in a very intense way, that feeling never really leaves you.’
Did you all consider the family a bad institution?
‘No, we didn't feel that at all.
The family in the song is the circle of friends, where it almost seemed, because we were so identical, that for anybody to make any progress in life, we'd have to split up.
Because there was no strength in our unity.
And that's what happened, we did all go our separate ways, and quite naturally came to no good’.
And your gang, were you outcasts, victimized by ‘The Ordinary Boys’?
‘Yes, but half of it, I have to confess, was the effect of deliberate choosing.
We chose to reject the normality of life, and be intense and individual.’
Do you think in ten or twenty years, your life will still be structured around these playground antagonisms?
‘Yes.
People don't really change, do they?
They don't change.
And the playground antagonisms are replaced by other…more adult antagonisms.,
Office antagonisms.
‘Yes.
Canteen antagonisms…getting heavily antagonized while you're  queuing up to purchase a doughnut.
But surely you have a happy question?’
The last track on Viva Hate ! is a rueful little ballad with the self-explanatory title ‘Margaret on the Guillotine’, which describes ‘the wonderful dream’(i.e. the gory and spectacular public execution of our PM) that all ‘the kind people’ harbour.
The chorus, repeated five times, is the plaintive, rhetorical question: ‘when will you die?’
You realize all this will cause you no end of trouble?
‘Anything that's very clearcut and very strong causes difficulty, doesn't it?
But why should it?
I'm not looking for attention.
In this case, attention is the last thing I really need.
I don't want to be in the Daily Mirror .
There is something in this above controversy and outrage and all these over-familiar words.
It's too easy to be controversial.,
So you mean it?
You'd like to see her dead?
In a cruel, bloody sort of way?
‘Yes.’
Would you carry out the execution?
‘I have got the uniform, ready.’
One line in the song seems to me to be very revealing: when you say you want to see her killed ‘because people like you/make me feel so tired…so old inside.’
If you compare The Smiths with the previous Great White Hopes of preceding eras, it's clear that the rebellion of the Stones, Who, Pistols, jam, was based in some kind of activism or at least action, an optimism about the potential of collective or individual agency.
But The Smiths' rebellion was always more like resistance through withdrawal, through subsiding into enervation.
The fantasy in ‘Margaret on the Guillotine’ is more like wishful thinking, than the resolve to do violence, or even personify violence theatrically.
Isn't the effect of ‘Margaret…’ just to encourage wistful resignation?
‘Maybe, but I do also firmly believe in action.
But also there's a great sense of doorstep rebellion, and stamping of feet.
I think, above all, that dealing with people's manipulations is very tiring.
You grow old very quickly when every day of your life you're trying to win arguments.
Politically, I do feel exhausted.
I do feel there are no more demonstrations, no more petitions to be signed.
I think those things, and group meetings and crêches, are completely boring and a waste of time.
I do feel a sense of apathy.’
I'm interested you talk about ‘stamping of feet’, because this fantasy of offing Mrs Thatcher, as though this would somehow solve everything, as if the ‘evil’ in  this country weren't a lot more structural and entrenched — well, there's something a bit childish and petulant about it.
‘Believe me, I'm totally aware of that.
But there's also something important about it.
The song is silly, it's also very heavy, and it's also very brave.
And I sit back and smile.
Surely you can see that the very serious element in it puts the straightforward demonstration ‘Maggie Maggie Maggie Out Out Out'’ protest song, in its place and makes it seem trite and a little bit cosy?’
The thing with protest songs is that pop's always been about the immediate, spontaneous and puerile, it hasn't the patience to slog through sub-committees and lobbying and making orderly demands through the proper channels.
Pop isn't programmatic, it won't negotiate, it wants the world and it wants it now, and it's much more satisfying to hear about your enemy being slaughtered.
Even if it's just a fantasy…
‘Is it?
You obviously haven't listened.
I think it's possible.
The times are quite ropy.
Things are touch-and-go.
You don't believe me?
There's a lot of organized suffering in England right now.’
Petulancy is Morrissey's forte: petulancy and POIGNANCY.
They're the reason why he's been vilified as regressive, maudlin, self-martyring.
Underneath the scorn, the subtext is that Morrissey's art lacks a vital virility.
Female artists are allowed to be vulnerable, frail, because this corresponds with the idea of woman as lack.
But in a man, such qualities merely indicate a repugnant limpness of being.
Poignancy spells NANCY.
Not that the accusations are inaccurate.
Morrissey is regressive.
He can't grow, as an artist or a person, because he's addicted to his own neurosis, addicted to poignancy — Which is, after all, the sublime taste of your own defeat, your own incompleteness.
Poignancy (and this is why its domain is the minor key) is the exquisite meshing of two contradictory feelings.
It's a piercing beauty, or a sweet sorrow.
Anyone who's ever treasured their pain, tried to prolong it, toyed with exacerbating it or been driven to dwell on inside it long after recovery was an option, preferring the company of ghosts to the dreamlessness of everyday sociability — that person understands poignancy.
Morrissey has always lived and breathed poignancy, always secretly treasured the gulf between himself and the loved one, the difference that makes love possible but makes possession illusory, a delusion, so that, in the end, we are all  unrequited lovers.
And poignancy is why he obsessively prizes and keeps open ancient wounds.
But poignancy isn't just retrospective, it's also the rapture that's the same as grief, a radiant apprehension of death.
In its own, gentle way, poignancy is as profound an intimation of the contradictions of being, as any of the mindfuck experiences or headlong plunges into the horror-of-it-all that the anti-Morrissey brutalists advocate.
A lot of people — including the singer himself — see the point and appeal of Morrissey as ‘authenticity’, There's a simplistic notion that his fans identify straightforwardly with the scenarios in the songs.
But how do they connect with such a statistically-remote calamity as ‘Girlfriend in a Coma?’
Isn't there something almost aspirational about their identification with such irregular forms of martyrdom?
A craving for the hardest hit of self-pity?
‘I don't feel they're extreme.
If anything, I feel they're understated.
I think people live very urgent lives.
I don't feel I'm in any sense vaudevillian or melodramatic.’
On ‘Rubber Ring’ you seemed aware that, for many of your fans, the relationship is going to be a temporary if intense, even lifesaving one.
Do you think that maybe most of your fans are going through a phase, and that most of them will emerge the other end and leave you behind?
‘Well, it probably is a phase.
But if people move on, it's understandable, in the event that everyone moves on, and I'm left dangling in the recording studio — then it would seem to confirm everything I've ever thought about the cruelties of life.’
It seems to me the only people who do persist in that phase and make something tenable out of an unsatisfied, unsettled life, are rock musicians, and rock critics.
But has satisfaction ever threatened to descend on your life?
‘It's never been something I've been immediately faced by.
It's definitely a possession of other people, I have a very long list of things I want to do.’
Artistic or personal?
‘Artistic.
Nothing else counts.’
Does a notion of ‘artistic growth’ have any place in your scheme?
‘Not really.
Can you give me an example of where that's happened?’
You're right — in rock and pop, it seems that people just have their thing.
‘And they hone it.
Or they start bad and merely get better.
Artistic growth?
I  don't really have any ambitions to change in any drastic ways.
I'm quite satisfied with how I am.’
You're satisfied with your dissatisfaction?
‘Totally.
I couldn't be happier.
I don't want anything to interfere with this state of dissatisfaction.’
And there'll be an endless-renewed harvest of dissatisfied young souls filling up this phase which is your constituency, a.k.a. adolescence.
‘But I don't consider it to be adolescent.
I am not adolescent.
I'm twenty-eight.
It's something quite beyond and more complicated than ‘adolescence’, something that hasn't been thought out yet, but shouldn't be dismissed as ‘adolescent'’.'
I'm just using ‘adolescent’ as a handy signifier for a life of restlessness, impatience and insatiability.
But would you prefer ‘a questioning life’, maybe…?
‘Yes, something like that…and that's something that can only aid and assist.’
And you'll grow old (but not up) gracefully…
‘Disgracefully.
I grow old disgracefully!’
Why were The Smiths ‘important’?
Because of their misery.
Never forget it.
Around Meat is Murder the critics suddenly discovered Morrissey's humour — George Formby was trundled out as a reference point.
If you ask me, The Smiths could have afforded to be more  humorless .
The Smiths' finest moments —‘Hand in Glove’, ‘How Soon is Now?’,
‘Still Ill’, ‘I Know It's Over’— were moments of reproachful, avenging misery, naked desperation, unbearable reverence — free of the ‘saving grace’ of quips and camp self-consciousness.
If there was laughter it was black, scornful, scathing.
If the Smiths had only produced sunny, cuddly stuff like ‘Heaven Knows’, ‘Ask’, ‘Vicar in a Tutu’, they would have merely presaged the perky negligibility of The Housemartins, the sound that grins itself to death.
The Smiths were heroic party-poopers at the Top of the Pops office do, glowering at the forced jollity; they were like those gauche youths Who turn up to house parties only to cling to the dark comers in chaste disdain, driven by the naïve, vaguely inhuman conviction that all merriment is a lie.
And The Smiths were important because of their extremism, their unbalanced view of the world, their partiality.
Morrissey is a character in a pop era of nonentities, and characters are always lopsided, contrary, incomplete, the sum of wounds and bigotries.
Morrissey is ‘half a person’, his very being constituted around lack, maladjustment — this is the vantage point from which he launches his impossible demands on life, his denial of the reality principle.
Satisfaction  and adjustment could never enter The Smiths' picture, for this would breach their identity.
This is why Morrissey can't ‘develop’ as an artist.
How could he grow when his very being is constructed around the petulant refusal —‘I won't grow up’?
The refusal to be responsible and motivated, to get a job, to take on the brutalization and disenchantment entailed in ‘gainful’ employment.
The refusal to collude in the state of dreamlessness that is adulthood, even to the Pyrrhic point of clinging stubbornly to the state of being unsatisfied, forever.
Having perfected this petulant stance, all he can do is reiterate it — with a self-deprecating acknowledgement of the onset of self-parody: ‘Stop Me if You Think You've Heard This One Before’, ‘Sweet and Tender Hooligan’, where the chorus is simply ‘et cetera, et cetera ’…
Not that Morrissey's misery is something we simply identify with.
What The Smiths were about was narcissism, damaged, exploding back with a defiant fantasy of martyrdom.
The Smiths seduce us into aspiring to the same heroic pitch of failure and exile.
The tragedy of The Smiths is that Morrissey could only become the victim of the perfection of his style.
Like Jagger, like Rotten, he is condemned to live out its pantomime forever.
When The Smiths first appeared they seemed to be a reaction against the opulence/corpulence of nouveau riche new pop.
Really, they were a return to a different vision of ‘new pop’, the Postcard ideal.
The Smiths were the second coming of Postcard — the whiter-than-white ‘pure pop’: the sexual ambiguity; the Luddite insistence on guitars: Edwyn Collins's avowed rating of romance over sex; the swoon instead of the earthy R&B rasp; the flustered undanceability.
What The Smiths returned to the charts was something that pop had seemingly left behind — adolescence.
New pop had rapidly lost its mischief and settled down into a post-rock, post-teenage maturity, peddling naff fantasies of sophistication to a new generation of moneyed teeny-boppers whose only desire was to grow up as soon as possible.
The Smiths, on the other hand, provided fantasies of innocence to those in the process of leaving behind their adolescence.
Their constituency was the silent majority of music paper readers that critics love to sneer at: students, ex-students, and those destined to be students (sixth formers and fifth formers).
The pale skinny boys identify with Morrissey because he lives out their quandaries.
Morrissey is a paradigm of a certain kind of ethereal, inhibited masculinity that would rather live in dreams than risk being disappointed by reality.
(Morrissey invests his emotion in pristine  idols, preferably dead, like James Dean, rather than deal with the mess and awkwardness of any real close encounter.)
Situated in the space between the constraints of childhood and having a career, these are people who dream for a while of wanting a vague something more from life, yet are saddened by these dreams because they know deep down they'll probably relinquish them, buckle down to a life of mediocrity.
When this happens, the records get harder to listen to, the music gets to be like a reproach, stirring up the taunting ghosts of prematurely foregone dreams.
Nagging ‘but…you've got everything now’, ‘please save your life/because you've only got one’…which is why people give up pop music, in the end.
New pop, far from being a bright new beginning, turned out to be merely the inauguration of global designer-soul, the soundtrack to the new yuppie culture of health and efficiency.
In the face of the benign totalitarianism of leisure capitalism and its off-the-peg self improvement, The Smiths glamourized debility and illness, advocated absenteeism, withdrawal, the failure to meet quotas of enjoyment.
The profound embarrassment of Morrissey's dancing turned the lack of oneness with your body into glamour.
All the self-squandering and deficiency of lifeskills that animated The Birthday Party and The Fall, The Smiths turned into brilliant, glamorous, consumable pop, two minute bursts of otherness in the heart of the charts.
They were meant to be The Rolling Stones of their time.
If The Stones' camp appropriation of black R&B sexuality was the supremely relevant response to straitlaced, petit bourgeois English suburbia, then The Smiths' refusal of the travesty of healthy sexuality that black pop degenerated into, was the appropriate response to eighties ‘liberated’ suburbia.
The Smiths deployed the imagery of provincial northern life, the residues of a lost Englishness, as a weapon against the cheap hedonism of an Americanized southern England.
The very parochial stuffiness that the Stones reacted against had somehow become an alluring and reproachful memory.
‘As grey and repressive as this lost world was, the inchoate colourific eighties is worse.
At least then you stood out, if only to be beaten up…
Morrissey is needed, not as an ombudsman, or a figure of the eighties, but as a horrified figure against the eighties, who has turned his back on the march of pop time as the last keeper of the sanctuary of self-pity, apartness, exile’(David Stubbs).
For the Stones, desire was obviously the enemy of materialism, work and a planned life.
But today desire has become incorporated as one element in a life's work.
Getting in touch with your body, getting in touch with your soul, has  become a humanist work-out.
‘Satisfaction’ has become feasible, something you can plan for.
The Smiths, hooked on the glamour of the misfit, could only occupy an IMPOSSIBLE position, attempt to create a rock music where aggression was replaced by vulnerability, hedonism by asceticism.
From the private pain, the furtive ‘minor language’ of unrequited obsession, that they began with, The Smiths went public, became the rock band, the pollwinners, ombudsmen for wider grievance.
Whether speaking out for the silent rock majority against the soulboy mediacrats, or representing The Smiths as media martyrs.
Morrissey ascended a paranoiac spiral of statesmanship (paranoia is inverted narcissism)— check the progression from ‘Panic’ through The World Won't Listen and Louder Than Bombs , to Strangeways Here We Come .
‘Did that swift eclipse torture you? /A star at eighteen and then — suddenly gone/ down to a few lines in the back page of a teenage annual/oh but I remember you/I looked up to you’—‘Little Man, What Now?’.
‘Fame, Fame, fatal Fame/It can play hideous tricks on the brain' —‘Frankly Mr Shankly’.
One of the best tracks on Viva Hate ! is ‘Little Man, What Now?’, an eerie, enchanted, rather chilling song, in which Morrissey ponders the fate of a young TV actor (‘a real person — but I don't want to name names’) he remembers from ‘Friday nights 1969’, briefly elevated to the level of minor celebrity before being abruptly dispatched back into obscurity, never to return — except for an afternoon TV nostalgia show, where the panel ‘couldn't name you’.
It's another example of Morrissey's unusual awareness of the trajectories of fame, and the ways in which fans use and are used by stars.
‘Fame is the most fascinating subject in the world and I'm keenly interested in speaking to certain people who've had fame and then lost it.’
Did you always crave fame?
‘I always had a religious obsession with fame.
I always thought being famous was the only thing worth doing in human life, and anything else was just perfunctory.
I thought anonymity was easy: it was easy to be a simple, nodding individual who got on the bus.
I wasn't terribly impressed with obscurity.’
Did you have a rich sense of destiny and difference?
‘I always knew something, shall we say,peculiar was going to happen.
I think real, true artists do have that instinct.’
From the age of what — nine, ten?
‘Much earlier.
In some form.
I saw a multitude of options and the dilemma was  just which one to concentrate on.
Obviously, I wrote.
At the age of six I compiled a personal magazine every week.
I was intensely interested in journalism, and all the things around it, whether it was performing or actually playing records.
I intensely envied DJs.
To simply sit on this cushion at the BBC day after day and flip on anything they thought was moving — well, I thought that was the most sacred and powerful position in the universe.
To me, it was more important than politics.’
You wanted to be a DJ?
‘At a tender age, I craved that power — to impose one's record collection on people in launderettes and on scaffolding.
But now I think it's such a terrible job that DJs deserve to be the highest paid people in the country.
To have to sit in an office all day playing the same records — all of which are awful — over and over and over again — well, it's not funny, is it?
We shouldn't pick on these people.
We should send them parcels!’
About this early magazine…
‘I was only six, so the art direction let it down a bit, really.
It was simply the Top Ten, then certain pin-ups of artists of my person choice…sketched, in fact, by the editor himself.’
What kind of circulation did it have?
‘There was just the one copy, which limited readership somewhat.’
You quickly became an avid reader and writer?
‘I very quickly became obsessed by music papers and pop journalism, and collected them ravenously.’
Did you turn to music as an avenue for writing, or were you driven by musical instincts?
‘By staunch instincts of very brittle criticism.
Developed through having had this magazine of my own since the age of six, and listening to the Top 30 every Tuesday only to run off instantly to the typewriter in order to compile my own personal Top 30 which totally conflicted with how the world really was.
But in my sense, my Top 30 was how the world should have been.
It was a Top 30 of contemporary records, but the new entries were very unlikely, and obviously I favoured certain musicians, like T. Rex.
‘I can remember writing an extravagant critique of ‘Cinderella Rockefeller'’.
I was always a totally dissatisfied consumer, aflood with complaints.
It seemed to me that the world of pop music, which I worshipped, was there to be altered and corrected.’
this other people's stuff — has been an abiding acrimony on the rock ‘left’ for some fifteen years or more.
(Punk had very little impact on the charts, on what sold.)
So Morrissey's infantile gainsaying of pop reality was the chrysalis for indiepop's current wistful, wishful fantasy of a ‘perfect pop’ returning to oust the impostors in the hit parade.
‘I think we have now reached an unthinkable state, where things are orchestrated entirely by unsympathetic and unmusical hands and ears.
The people in key positions are people who don't consider pop culture to have any serious importance whatsoever.’
You believe pop is or can be art, but that belief is sustained by only very rare instances.
You seem to have very specific ideas about what those are.
The other day it occurred to me that there are maybe two kinds of intelligence in the world: one that's very open, that tries to take on everything, and accordingly gets paralysed by choice: another kind that's narrow, that finds strength focusing on some things and excluding most everything else…
‘If I liked everything, I'd be very hard to understand.
I always found the idea of people who were very hard to please, including journalists who were very critical — I always found they were almost always right when they found something praiseworthy.
I find people who are unbudgeably fair quite time-consuming.
I find agreeable people immensely disagreeable.’
Is that the idea of Viva Hate ! that we need bigotries in order to make sense of the world, in order to act?
(The hankering for a punk-style commotion is precisely for such an illiberalism, a taking of sides, a new order.)
‘Sadly, a lot of people need to be told, rather than asked.
Also, I often feel I gain from venomously critical views of me as an artist, more than from dithery, sloppily fawning, supportive views.’
Going back to fame, to your intimate knowledge of the processes of identification and obsession…having been through various manic fixations, you have progressed to being a star, the subject of fixation yourself.
Most of your fans though, will remain condemned in a lonely monologue with their distant idol…
‘Condemned sounds a bit rough…
But, nonetheless, I can't help but agree.’
You encourage the obsessiveness, though, don't you?
I remember you once saying you were delighted people sent you underwear, or demands for underwear…
‘Yes, both!
I do gets lots of very fascinating and fascinated letters, and lots of fascinating gifts.
I can very clearly understand obsessiveness, and the people who write to me see that I understand obsession and preciousness.
And I  respond in the same way.
I still get very nervous when I meet people who I admire…‘
What does it feel like to see your image about, on hoardings, in magazines, to hear your voice on the radio?
‘It's very odd.
I was in a shop once, buying scented candles, and on the radio came Steve Wright with a collage of Smiths’ songs, and I got a distinct chill, almost as though the hand of death was tapping me on the shoulder, saying: ‘put yer candles down, it's time to go!’’
The Smiths were prime movers in what you could call the depoliticization of personal life, after punk's initial demystification.
Remember 1980: ‘personal politics’ was the phrase that tripped off every lip, groups like Gang of Four (‘Love like Anthrax’), Delta Five, and Au Pairs worked towards their notion of the equal relationship, liberated from the veils of romantic false consciousness.
A ‘radicalism’ that was barely distinguishable from the pragmatism and ‘common sense’of therapists' and counsellors' discourse, with their notion of love as contract.
Men 1982: attention shifted to the public language of love, to pop's sexual iconography — the buzzwords were the ‘language of love’, ‘the lexicon of love’, ‘the lover's discourse’; demystification was superseded by deconstruction and ambiguity.
Finally, with Nick Cave's misogynist agonies, the Jesus and Mary Chain's candyskin classicism, and The Smiths' eternally unrequited gaze, came the return of romanticism in all its purity and privacy.
Pop had returned to what it had always been about: the personal as the realm in which the meaning of your life is resolved.
Romanticism — the dream of the redemptive love that will bring heaven-on-earth, resolve all difference, end alienation — has in the twentieth century replaced religion as the opium of the people.
But it's the dream that continues to speak most deeply to us.
Maybe the superstition of love is our last reservoir of spirituality in the face of those ‘specialists of the soul’ who would seek to reform relationships in accordance with their ghastly notions of ‘negotiation’, ‘support’, ‘partnership’.
I always come back to the Stones when I think of The Smiths, because of the camp, but mainly because of the way each band illuminates their era for us.
For the Stones, satisfaction was the goal: everything would be all ALL RIGHT if we shed the inhibitions that held us back and down.
Revolution meant good sex on the ‘morrow.
But the Stones were the product of expansive times.
The Smiths the product of contracted and beleaguered times.
With The Smiths it was a question not of desire but of longing — the yearning to belong to or with someone, to belong somewhere.
The dream that two ‘half-a-persons’ can make a whole, fit ‘hand in glove’.
The Stones and their time were all about leaving home; The Smiths and our time are about pining for a home.
Morrissey is the first major teen icon whose aesthetic is based around the conviction that rock'n'roll's best years are (in the) past, that the premises of youth culture have been outflanked (‘I Know It's Over’).
The first major teen icon whose work is grounded not in anticipation and impatience, but vacillation, resignation and looking back.
These feelings — homesickness for a place you couldn't wait to leave (Manchester), nostalgia for a time that was never any good in the first place (adolescence)— were why the music of the Smiths refracted the quandaries of the eighties like no other.
It's a sign of the times that pop-as-reinvention-of-the-self is something that resonates for fewer and fewer people in the world that is the music press readership.
That the pollwinner, the figure most identified with is Morrissey: victim of his past, chained to his memories, only able to imagine being eternally unrequited by life.
And as he says, artists don't really ‘develop’, they have their act, gift, whatever, and stick with it.
That peal of exile first heard in Hand in Glove still rings true in moments on Viva Hate ! and no doubt always will, no matter what follows, in the same way that traces of wantonness persist in Jagger's voice, beneath all the mannered overlay of time.
As I neurotically double-check if the tape is running, I mutter by way of apology, ‘I've had some bad experiences with tape recorders.’
‘Oh, I've had some bad experiences with people actually…you're very lucky.’
(1988)
throwing muses
The last thing I want to do is break the spell.
The last thing I want is to impale this dancing, living creature upon the stake of meaning.
Is it possible to write about Throwing Muses without confining their strange and terrible beauty, taming it, making it easier to live with?
The music of Throwing Muses has inhabited my flesh like a cold flame these past six months.
A kind of traumatized folk-punk, shifting fitfully between grace and frenzy, extremes of heat and cold, their debut album is the choreography of a body possessed and scattered by dread: as The Stud Brothers put it, music like ‘a punch, accentuating and projecting every hiss, mutter and scream…so exact and punctual it's simply sublime.’
This is an exceptional band — David Narcizo on drums, Leslie Langston on bass, Tanya Donelly a talented singer-songwriter in her own right — but the star here is Kristin Hersh.
She writes the words: arresting images (lives that go in circles ‘like a pigeon on a tyre’), moments of disturbing lucidity amid inscrutable dream-imagery (‘give me what I want/ And all I can think about is losing it’; ‘why can't you do to my insights/What you do to my insides?’;
‘I'm in a deep hole I dug by being deep’).
But what pierces and transfixes is the rendition; the rending of the text, by Kristin's voice, its violence and daring.
A voice that moves somewhere midway between Stevie Nicks and Diamanda Galas, that goes places there aren't words for.
On ‘Finish’, mid-syllable, a hiccup of desolation that'll turn you inside out.
Kristin's voice is gratuitous — so much more happens than is needed to get across the ‘meaning’: an endless haemorrhage of semiotic material, released in sobs, moans, sudden gales of rage, a luxury of grief.
What is conjured is the  apparition of someone falling apart before your eyes.
But more than anything she ‘does’ with her voice, it's something clotted, intractable, something inconsolable within its fabric, that holds and entrances.
Kristin is blessed or cursed with the voice of a body congested with tears, tom inside.
Shivers down the spine?
Glaciers.
‘The first time I heard my own voice?
We were recording in a mobile unit in this street, because I'd broken my leg.
The song was pretty and harsh.
Then they played it over these big speakers, and the doors of the van were open, so my song was booming out into the neighbourhood.
And I realized that when you record a song it's not yours anymore, it has a life of its own.
And suddenly hearing something that is part of your body, out there, beyond your control, entering other people's lives — it was too much for me, I just collapsed, crying, everyone had to hold me up…‘
Strange talking to Kristin Hersh, trying to connect this sweet, funny girl and her rich, throaty laugh, with the haunted and haunting vinyl presence.
Drinking blackcurrant juice from a plastic beaker, her hair in a bob that looks as though she did it herself with kitchen scissors, she looks like a child.
At other times, she looks spinsterish, in cinder-coloured skid, tatty shoes and (most mindblowing), a kind of denim tanktop.
Actually, she's twenty, and a mother.
‘When I discovered I was pregnant, it was at a time when I was very manic about the group, I felt it was my mission.
And I also felt about twelve years old.
But I came to feel it would be a step backwards for me to abort the pregnancy, that it wouldn't be moving my life forward.
And, anyway, doing the band had become less of a time thing, more a psychological matter of getting down to writing.
Having a child is an enriching thing as regards that.
It's given me an incredible new perspective on what life is, and what it's worth.
I had been very anti-body before.
I couldn't figure out why our spirits were supposed to have bodies and exist in the physical world of cars and houses.
And then Dylan came along, and he didn't have to do anything, he just was.
‘And all the incredible holes he puts in me, all the fear he creates in me, has given me such an awesome respect for life.
He's just a raw nerve.
If something happened to him, my whole life would be crushed.’
Wandering around the Muses' hometown, Newport, Rhode Island, I begin to believe this could be heaven — beautiful colonial architecture, quaint, toytown  paint-schemes, big gardens, porches, wide, empty streets.
So how has this suburban paradise spawned something like Throwing Muses?
The mystery deepens when I learn that the band's background isn't even affluent-but-screwed-up middle class, but liberal and permissive and caring.
Their parents are philosophy professors and learning-disabilities therapists and guidance counsellors and physical therapists.
Tanya and Kristin spent their early childhood in communes.
‘But there's also been a lot of divorces, remarriages…there's certainly been turmoil.
and remember — when you're adolescent you can make a lot of trouble for yourself.’
Adolescence.
Adolescence is what pop has forgotten or betrayed.
Throwing Muses are one of a handful of groups who write about adolescence as a period of maladjustment and withdrawal, who resist the now-pop version of youth as healthy, extrovert, unproblematic hedonism.
Compare The Smiths with Throwing Muses.
Both Morrissey and Kristin Hersh work with and within the flux of adolescence — the vacillation between agoraphobia and claustrophobia, possibility and constraint; the feeling that one's body, and the cultural meanings attributed to it, are a cage.
Morrissey represents that flux, turns it into couplets, quips, aphorisms, insights, a wisdom we can draw comfort from.
Hersh reproduces that flux, her voice is flux.
The Smiths are a synopsis of pain, a resolution — awkwardness and alienation ennobled, given poise.
Hersh is the presence of pain; her voice, the intolerable stress it inflicts on the words, is the sound of the inconsolable wrestling with the insoluble.
The difference is between commentary and embodying.
It's the reason why The Smiths are more powerful as a pop as art.
‘The songs on the first album stem from a period a year and a half ago that was the emotional and physical hole of my life.
It was as dark as the record suggests.
I was very unhappy, physically and psychologically ill.
If I was to describe the symptoms that would limit the songs too specifically for the listener.’
I tell Kristin about how, a while back, somebody invented the term ‘miserabilism’.
The people who used this vile slander seemed to believe that any kind of troubled, troubling music, anything introspective or tragic, was self-indulgent wallowing.
Pop music, it was argued ought to address itself to the ‘real’ problems — unemployment, racism, etc etc.
‘That's strange, because I think of our music as very political.
Politics has to start from the insides.
If you just deal with politics at a surface, organizational level, you never understand how things have got to be this way.
I tend to see people as walking garbage cans, fill of all this mess they don't know how to deal with.’
Or, as she said in an interview with Paul Oldfield: ‘Throwing Muses go so far into people's inner dreams, their family lives, that you find what appear as outside problems.’
Kristin continues: ‘A lot of the songs deal with the agoraphobia versus claustrophobia dilemma: the problem of what a home is, when do you leave it, how are you going to make yourself a home.
The problem is that where there's security, there's also entrapment.’
Whereas adolescents' problem is that they're between homes, they don't have that shell, so they're free but also vulnerable.
‘Teenagers are very open to the world.
They're trying to figure out what's going on, what they're going to grow into.
They take on the whole world, but they've got no patterns with which to deal with all that experience.,
Because growing up involves making your mind up, making up an identity for yourself.
And identity really means limits, a refusal of choices and possibilities, a kind of protective blindness.
‘Exactly.
Adolescents have no defence like that to cut off experience, they have wide-open eyes, and they take it all on.
It's obvious from the record that I was weighted down by an incredible burden I didn't know was mine or not.,
But, as you say, a fixed identity, a shell, is also a trap, is no solution.
I'm reminded here of the ideas of Julia Kristeva.
She believes the mistake psychoanalysis has made hitherto is aiming to shore up a kind of finished and defined ego.
Instead, she imagines a kind of lifelong therapy, a continuous flow of repressed material, liberated through art and fantasy, pushing back the borders of the self.
‘That sounds wonderful.
That's my whole argument with the self-actualization movement, this idea of a fixed and tidy self.
It's like when I finished those songs, I felt an incredible sense of boredom, ‘Oh, now I'm done.'’
I actually wanted to be upset again.’
One of the things I feel about Throwing Muses music is that it's visceral, sexual, but not sexy.
The sexuality in the record is troubled, mind and body are not at one with each other.
‘It's the same with 90 per cent of adolescents, I guess.
But especially right now.
They're not sure what they're supposed to want or be.
David (Narcizo) always says that we trust this music more than we trust our own bodies.
The thing is that, when you're not in touch with your body, you're not in touch with the earth, with  our reasons for being here.
A lot of that album is about feeling that your body is a cage, that your physicality boxes you in, could betray you.’
Why women especially?
‘Women today are presented with too many choices, not enough choices.
We're still limited by sexism, but at the same time we're bombarded with images telling us that we have to achieve a lot.
Women are still judged so much by their appearances, so we feel we have to get that perfect first, before achieving anything.’
I think we're talking about anorexia here, aren't we?
Something you've been through?
‘Yes.
‘America (She Can't Say No) '’ was from that period.
It's about how America is a land of excess.
Obesity is a huge problem here, but so is anorexia.
People don't appreciate the material belongings that surround them, they just buy things and then chuck them away, they consume and consume and get more and more lost.
And when I was fifteen I had to take all this craziness on my shoulders, there was so much imbalance out there, so much excess.
I had to go to
Another thought — love in Throwing Muses is not the vision of mutual support, of exchange and negotiation, that pervades yuppie consciousness, but love as being devoured and possessed and controlled…
The mood of the music is sometimes murderous, homicidal: its subtext could almost be ‘men! can't live with'em, can't live without'em!’.
‘Well, that's because love and fear are really inseparable.
Being in love leaves this huge hole in your self, and if you're adolescent, and don't have a clear concept of yourself, then you are just a hole, an outline.
And if anything happens to the person you depend on, your whole being is just this lack.
That's real scary when you're struggling to create yourself.’
I've read that you feel that the music comes from outside of you.
‘What happens is that maybe I'll just see the shape of some chords, or where my fingers should be on the frets.
Or songs will come about because of the sound of the words.
It really does sometimes feel like someone's playing a trick on my head.
For instance, I was writing a new song and it was making sense and suddenly these words came into my head: Once there was two Mexican women/ran over the hill/ripped off their skin/and ate it up.
And I was going: ‘C'mon!
Don't make me say that!
They're going to hate me!'’
But…when I sat in the middle of the song, it worked.’
Women in rock are forced to speak as women.
Men are allowed to assume a neutrality, to wield truth on behalf of everybody.
But maybe Kristin Hersh will be one of the first female artists whose alienation transcends gender.
She'd hate to be thought of as a seer, but maybe she is destined to be a figure like Morrissey or Ian Curtis, someone whose vision of adolescence comes to represent all our experience.
And with this would come a second liberation for women, the freedom to transcend the roles set up by figures like Annie Lennox and Janet Jackson, and to recover the right not to be strong, independent, immaculately in control.
The right to be as fucked up as men.
‘Or even not to be fucked up, just to be regular.
That would be an incredible relief.’
But what if motherhood, fulfilment, her committed relationship, turned out to be an abrupt end to the productive misery of adolescence?
‘I've been worrying about this.
When I didn't have any way out, I felt like songs were a tunnel and if there was any mess I could just funnel it out and it would become a beautiful picture at the end of the tunnel.
But now I'm more together, I've a whole lot of other areas in which I can express my feelings, I just hope the songs won't lose anything.
What I've found is that there's a lot more complexity and problems in happiness, many more layers, than I'd imagined.
I doubt I'll ever be fulfilled, but I'm less manic.
The darkness hasn't necessarily gone, but now I can live with it, instead of inside it.’
(1987)
LESS…
LESS regressive rock
At the end of 1986, John Peel described that year's Festive 50 — his audience's annual poll of favourite records — as the most staid and conservative since 1975, the nadir of progressive rock.
For more than a decade, the spectre of the return of the hippy, of progressive rock, has haunted music-making.
But it's clear that it's hardly plausible to account for the current indie mire in those terms, as a problem of indulgence, pretentiousness, over-inflated ambition and gross-out.
Fact is, it's precisely the too-thorough internalization of punk's dread of the hippy and the resulting strategy of self-limitation that has led to a wholly different kind of dire stasis.
REGRESSIVE ROCK: the enemy is not a new breed of post-punk dinosaurs, but of post-punk mice, or voles.
1967
And what better time to consider this dead end than the twentieth anniversary of 1967, that pivotal point at which sixties beat music leapt into the beyond, and the very notion of ‘the progressive’ was born.
1967; minds were blown; dance was left behind as beats stretched out into timelessness; rock acquired a whole new chromatic and spatial vocabulary, as new kinds of instrumentation were added and the studio itself became an instrument; the first dabblings with stage effects and multi-media experience were made.
Current indie music refuses this leap into the beyond.
Burdened by hindsight, by a chronic fear of becoming bloated and self-indulgent, this indie generation tries to freeze-flame development at the point just before ‘it all went wrong’, and so turns its back on the few things that went right.
Time and time again, indie music chooses The Byrds of ‘All I Really Want to Do’ over ‘Eight Miles High’or  ‘Younger Than Yesterday’, chooses the Velvet Underground of ‘There She Goes Again, over Venus in Furs’, the Pink Floyd of ‘See Emily Play’over ‘Interstellar Overdrive’.
1979
To 1967, I'd add another year, an equivalent point of take-off — 1979 (punk energy making its first altercations with black dance production, dub and funk, its first trysts with electronics, its first stabs at multi-media performance).
Current indie pop refuses the dizzying possibilities of 1967 and 1979, attempts a deliberate retardation of development.
1966 and 1978, Byrds and Buzzcocks, are merged into a ‘pure pop’ limbo.
The desire to be sixteen forever has caused the sound of being sixteen — noisy guitar primitivism with no added knobs or frills — to become fetishized, petrified.
But this ‘perfect pop’ is regressive rock because it is a rock idea of pop, a fantasy dreamed up within music paper discourse.
The real ‘perfect pop’ of 1987 is most likely Mel and Kim, Jam and Lewis productions like Janet Jackson, Stock Aitken Waterman, etc.
Paralysed by fear of ‘the progressive’, this stunted generation have chosen to take as their inspiration the sprightly, cramped insistence of The Monochrome Set, The Undertones, Girls at Our Best, rather than the stealth and reach of Can, Tim Buckley, Hendrix, Talking Head's Remain in Light , PIL's Metal Box , chosen to explore an emotional climate of suave nonchalance or at best pensive mawkishness, rather than denser and more elusive feelings; chosen to prefer the banal clarity of ‘communication’ over the glare of revelation and the clouded vision of horror.
INVERSIONS
Regressive rock is an exact inversion of progressive rock: both started with a commotion (punk, psychedelia) and slavishly followed through its principles and logic, ending up a remote travesty of the original.
Look at the parallels-in-negative.
Progressive rock followed through psychedelia's cosmic ambitions and became BLOATED and meandering.
Regressive rock is ANOREXIC, reduced and confined by its anxious deference to punk's creed of minimalism and under-production.
Progressive rock was GLOBAL, selling hugely, gawped at in stadia (the ‘ant-like figures onstage’), disseminated so broadly as to be rootless and meaningless.
Regressive rock's meaning is diminished because hardly anyone at all is into it; the scene is claustrophobically LOCAL a parochial huddle — its problem is not one of dehumanized distance but of an overdose of intimacy.
That's because psychedelia privileged the ‘far out’, punk privileged the grass roots.
Progressive rock believed in FUSION, the grafting on of new musics.
Regressive rock is obsessed with PURISM: there's a steadily more depleted and over-stretched gene pool of approved ‘pure pop’ traces, resulting in ever more grotesque and gormless breeds.
(Like pedigree dogs.)
Can you imagine what the offspring of the BMX Bandits will be like?!
Progressive rock fetishized the VIRTUOSO.
Regressive rock fears accomplishment, privileges INCOMPETENCE, or at least demands the active concealment of skill.
Progressive rock was OVER-CONCEPTUAL made risible attempts to sum up all the riddles of existence on a single (or triple) LP, extended these pompous didactic ambitions on to the stage with all manner of theatrical set pieces.
Regressive rock's sin is its lack of conceit, its cultivation of EMPTYHEADEDNESS and naïveté, its refusal to stretch beyond a shallow delving into the slight pangs of mundane love and small sadness.
Progressive rock was over-dressed, the music of a leisured rock aristocracy, who possessed the money to lavishly construct a LUXURIOUS palace of sound, and the time to squander in excessively fastidious attention to detail.
Regressive rock groups, on the other hand, are stingy with sound; their music is governed by a PURITAN aesthetic of austerity.
Records get knocked out in the studio hastily, emerge knock-kneed, spindly, pallid and monochrome.
STUNTED REMNANT
Regressive rock is the attenuated remnant of punk, the substance of punk shorn of its spirit (ambition, anger, artifice).
Punk reduced, through shortsighted, dogged adherence, to an anti-hippy tradition: instead of long tracks, pseudo-virtuosity, mystique, complex instrumentation — a self-conscious absence of these things.
These are the anti-hippy hippies…
Close Lobsters, Wedding Present, Miaou, Pooh Sticks, Railway Children, Soup Dragons, Flatmates, Shop Assistants, Mighty Mighty, The Chesterfields, Primal Scream, The Housemartins…the list is endless.
and if you define ‘regressive rock’ as deliberately induced arrested development, then you can add the whole Grebo Rock boom to the list (Crazyhead, Zodiac Mindwarp, Gaye Bykers, Batfish, The Cult, Bomb Party etc).
You can include a lot of the trad-rock bands in America (Camper Van Beethoven, anything produced by Don Dixon or Mitch Easter, anything influenced by Big  Star, The Feelies or The dB's).
Even the cults of Real Soul, Third World Music and Go Go are forms of regressive rock, in so far as they're fantasies generated within rock press discourse, and represent a retreat from the studio and technology in search of roots and ‘raw truth’.
Of course, limits can channel brilliance productively, make it blaze all the more fiercely.
But instances like the Primitives get rarer and already one feels ashamed for indulging such backward passions.
Exactly a year ago, I celebrated the ‘new innocence’ of ‘anorak’groups like The Pastels, James, and The Bodines.
But the problem with these groups is not that they're wimps, but that they're runts; not that they're vulnerable or soppy, but that they're flimsy, What's happened is that the perfectly valiant and appropriate refusal to grow up has become a refusal to grow, musically — to take on space, drift, experiment.
This petrification of the sound of adolescence has meant a loss of the essential dynamism, fluidity and reach of adolescence, its true pretentiousness.
TRAD JAZZ
Clearly the enemy in 1987 is not some new generation of rock dinosaurs (Banshees, Cure, Cocteaus, Bunnymen) but the puny underachievement and Luddite anorexia of REGRESSIVE ROCK.
The choices ahead are as drastic and clearcut as the choice between trad jazz and new jazz.
I suggest a total overhaul of values.
Instead of sparseness or spareness, a corsetted sound, look for opulence, sprawl, vulgarity even — the ruinous vanity of Prince, the indecently sumptuous Act.
Abandon the obsessive search for grassroots, and value music for its distance from them, its floating free and outlandishness.
Look for music that takes the plunge into the infinities of outer or inner space, rather than music which paddles through the shallows of everyday feeling.
Reject the exhausted creed of naturalism and prize the far-fetched, the super- or un-natural.
Rescue the word ‘pretentious’(all it means, after all, is aspiring to something) and turn ‘unpretentious’ into a pejorative.
Rehabilitate the notion of ‘art-rock’, and raze the self-limiting horizons of ‘power pop’.
THE MOON
The spaces of pop (the disco, venue, pub, party) are social spaces — packed, hustling, sweaty, normative.
The only escape is to be found in the anti-social (the alien within, the heart of darkness) or the extra-terrestrial (the alien expanse without).
It seems to me that there are a number of satellites (labels like 4AD, Mute, Factory, Play it Again Sam, Product Inc, Blast First, plus various hip hop, house and electro producers whose work has very little to do with the human), satellites bound to Planet Pop by some kind of gravitational attraction, yet estranged by the nature of their practices (the lost spirit of ‘67 and ‘79).
From time to time they shed meteorites and the odd one will make a small, exotic dent on the surface of pop.
For the most part, it's up to us to follow David Stubbs's advice: leave and let loose this place, ad drift to the moon.
(1987)
indecency (written with David Stubbs)
There's a consoling belief, one that has always held dull sway over critical and receptive minds, that both rock and pop are fundamentally about Good Songs.
‘He may be ugly, but at least he writes good songs.’
‘They may not be the future, but they do craft good songs.’
It's an easy platitude, a constant appeal: ‘excellent grasp of the song structure’, ‘well-crafted’, ‘wry’, ‘observant lyrics’.
Amazingly, 1986 has seen a reappearance of the singer-songwriter, with Peter Case, Stan Ridgway and Andy White receiving more than a smattering of applause.
That this should be the case is as much a curiosity as the pop success of Chris de Burgh.
Evidently, there are some very decent people out there.
Moreover, a hip consensus of veneration has settled around a canon of lost rock visionaries: Tim Buckley, Alex Chilton, Scott Walker, Dylan, Patti Smith, Nick Drake, Lou Reed, Gram Parsons, the luminaries and seers who shaped truths and made sense.
The current mood of retrospection, coupled with reissues and reassessments (another Dylan biography!) all indicate that a sense of lineage and legacy has been established.
This is rendered quite conscious not just in the touching veneration of Andy White (‘it's in my blood!’) but even in the work of Sonic Youth, who apply a sense of legacy to their history of rock extremity.
They make references to the Stooges' ‘1969’, to Manson, to Presley's ‘Mystery Train' (also the title of Greil Marcus's famous book on the mythology of rock).
Far from slaughtering their ancestors (‘Kill  Yr Idols’) Sonic Youth reaffirm their heroic, historic significance.
This inordinate attention to the past arises from both shame and pride.
The dust has settled on rock, there are no cloud bursts of white blindness as such, nor  any prospects of any.
So, a sort of ignominious continuation — Elvis Costello's thirty-third album!
There isn't much of a future, but one hell of a past.
In this more temperate climate, we can see that rock's estate is a grand one, and it's tempting to tramp its grounds — necessary, perhaps, if only so as to have somewhere to ‘go’.
It's been a quiet sort of year.
A steady year.
Not unlike last year.
Or the year before that.
Legacy, estate — today's principal activities are alchemy and archaeology.
The idea is that, if you pick out the best bits from the past, combine them, mix and match them, dust them down and restore them fondly, then the result will be something better.
Take a little Can, pluck out the eyes of Grace Jones, warmed-up Kraftwerk, siphon off the froth of Aretha Franklin's ‘passion’, snatch a little Glitter leather and smear off a fingerful of Bowie mascara, ignite with the spark of a torch song, and you've got — Eurythmics!
Take the Bunnymen, overlay every cartoon watchword in pop over the past twenty years, and you've got — The Mighty Lemon Drops!
Scrape the residual platinum off every major jazz, soul and classical efflorescence knowable to pop, melt it down and redisperse it in silver phials and you've got — ZTT!
These people construct their own hierarchies of taste, quite often in the hope of intoxicating us or invading our sensibilities with a violent shock of colour.
But the indecency is borrowed — at heart they're workers, tinkers.
This is ‘perfect pop’, pop perfected, finished off.
If it's not Perfect, then it is LEARNED pop, necessarily referential, secretly wistful.
Weller, of course, with his stem blackboard of Philly, Stax, Motown and Mod.
Of course, pop learnedness can be genuinely clever, helpfully perverse.
Nick Cave finds a sort of superfatted theatre of tragedy in the later Dylan, the later Presley, makes sense of Gene Pitney and the New Seekers, reinvests the Singer and the Blues with a novel, unbearably ironic significance.
Or Psychic TV's ‘Godstar’, their knowingly morbid celebration of the Stones in their most colourful, outlawed years of lurid decay, the angel Brian Jones about to snuff out.
Behind Psychic TV exists an occult, disparate breed of hipsters heavily into Gary Glitter, early Sabbath, Arthur Brown, Grateful Dead just because they know it would scandalize the prevailing arbiters of taste.
If we must have a past, then let's be sure it's molested with this kind of amusement!
Alas, the more orthodox cherish a notion of pop as historical progress.
Pete Astor of The Weather Prophets defines his project as ‘reactivating and redefining  old musical forms’, claiming that this was what T. Rex was all about: ‘revitalizing Chuck Berry and Howlin' Wolf,’ reapplying these ancients in a pop context and embalming their legacy.
Revitalizing!
T. Rex!
The rash combustion, the pyrotechnic spree of the Electric Warrior reduced by the fond stroke of a pen to mere running-boy torch bearer in pop's endlessly unfurling tapestry!
The whole Creation aesthetic seems based in the sad conviction that rock is over, it's been and gone, and all that's left is to uphold the legacy through the Dark Ages of Plastic Pop.
The result is bands like Primal Scream: a living, breathing archive of rock gesture.
A mere footnote.
As one settles down, then, to a quieter pop life, grows a little older, the more it seems that the ‘correct’, the ‘valid’ response to music is the appreciative, the considered and discerning response, the thinking cap doffed to the craftsman.
It is hard to think of any British rock, for instance, that's sufficiently ignorant to consist of nothing but screamworthiness alone.
An influence here may well be English Literature, with bands and critics adopting the tools of the stuffier sort of literary criticism, the kind that sees the priority of art as being the reaffirmation of human values, art as the search for a stable base, art as something that orders the confusion of experience.
Hence, a music that demands to be considered at the level of what the words mean, the coherence of the narrative, the intentions of the artist, biographical input.
Hence Costello, The Triffids, The Go-Betweens…well, we're thoroughly partial to all of them, but strongly suspect that they have nothing to do with the rupture, the indecency of pop.
At the moment when conscientiousness sets in, when a conscience is acquired, when you start casting conspicuous glances over your shoulder, this is the moment at which POP becomes ROCK.
The difference has nothing to do with the presence or absence of powerchords.
Rock is evocative; pop provocative.
Pop provokes a restless, alluring, mass response: compulsion as opposed to appreciation.
The difference is analogous to that between breakaway Protestantism and Catholicism, as rock was a breakaway from pop.
Protestantism concerned itself with the inscription of dogma, attention to the text, was more emphatically scriptural.
Catholicism, however gripped the masses by virtue of its incense, its ritual, all quite arbitrary, compulsion without purpose.
In the same way, it's the heathen elements of Pop that trouble the sober-minded rock fan, keen to see through the superficial, engage with the depth of an artist,
STARLUST
Pop attracts an abnormal fixation of the gaze, fetishism, voyeurism.
Pop, in a word, is fascination versus meaning.
The power of pop is situated in so many other places than the good song, or good intention — in the strange, the intolerable, the unattainable, the curiously sexual.
While the beaverish construction of good songs continues apace, you'll find the pop kid skiving off, caressing the cornerstone, transfixed by its coarseness.
Rock is about Essences and Ideas.
Pop is about the thing-in-itself.
Take the voice.
Good songwriters often have unremarkable voices: a weather-beaten bleat that denotes experience, maybe, or a finished shine in which meaning can glisten.
More often than not, they're no more than a glass through which the all-important text is transmitted.
Diction is paramount.
With pop, the voice becomes material, in itself, with a voluptuous quality above and beyond its expressive function.
Michael Jackson singing about anything — fish, or socks…
Need either he, or we, ‘say’ more?
One didn't measure Bolan by his doggerel, but by his pucker.
Moreover, Morrissey's falsetto wail soars above and beyond the bad music criticism languishing in his lyrics.
Then there was the strangeness of Siouxsie, leading us in circles, nowhere in particular.
This composition of pop suggests occasional rupture and random fun-quake, rather than a benign process of amelioration, or accumulating body of good work.
There is a history to be written of the VOICE in pop, the voice that makes present the physicality of the body.
Which has its own story: Jagger's lips, Hendrix's cock, Bolan's gin, Prince's tongue, Morrissey's nipple (one of the few options of indecency left, to revel, to splay oneself-as-object, play thing).
Even the pop consumer's body has a history.
In Starlust , Fred and Judy Vermoral suggest a life of pop as a flood of tears, semen, saliva, love-juice, breath, sweat, fantasies of licking whipped cream out of Clem Burke of Blondie's bum.
There's a ‘truth’ of pop music to be found in the wet seats at Beatles or Stones concerts — as much as in the pantheon of Lennon's songwriting, or the vicissitudes of the counter culture.
And do many fans, we wonder, fantasize about being given an enema by Van Morrison?
This lascivious hankering for the impossible, this lusty speculation and mystification, what the Vermorels call ‘consumer mysticism’, all of this was written off by Punk, which left us with a shame about worship, made it a pad of its task to negotiate equal terms between audience and artist.
Finally, pop consists in its own surfaces, as sound-in-itself, rather than instrument of discourse.
That's what (once) made The Jesus and Mary Chain pop and Nik Kershaw rock.
On ‘Never Understand’ the song is lost in an aggravated, black hole of noise.
Bolan, too, was a buzz and a blur, not a series of compositions.
What this ideal and proven pop amounts to is spectacle, a near-touchable presence from afar.
The rock artisans, the good songwriters, are mere messengers, with a modest and inadequate sense of their selves.
Poor old Peter Case in his suit!
It's as if his actual presence were some kind of inconvenience, like going to the toilet, as if his body were a mere nuisance.
In good songs, the thinking is: ‘you reap as you sow!’
There's an ecological balance at work.
You draw from life and you give back to live.
Wisdom!
As with folk, it's a natural process, simply reflective.
But pop sets itself against nature and abandons wisdom for folly, moments of dissipation.
Pop is un-natural, larger than life and insistent enough to make of itself an inevitable pad of the landscape, like a motorway, or pollution.
(Fantasy has its own reality-effect on behaviour and appetite.)
Pop can be sufficient intoxication to induce a different state of being, other than the one in which you exist.
is this extensive egotism preferable to the scheme of collective improvement drawn up by good songs?
Pop is not about schemes but about SELF!
SELF!
SELF as cartoon, heightened sense of self, self as superman.
This striding, Nietzschean self, ‘bigger’ as opposed to‘better’, couldn't be accommodated in any kind of social order, would never really be happy.
Morrissey's wounded narcissism is both intolerable and intolerant: driven by an instinctive disgust, he makes a meal out of himself in protest against the mealy-mouthed, constructs a grandeur out of swollen self-pity.
‘I'm HERE!’
Compare this to the strenuously managed, balanced sense of self arrived at by the likes of The Eurythmics and Howard Jones.
Take note, when we say ‘pop’ it's to the exclusion of such rock-minded types who happen to occupy prominent positions in the pop charts.
This pegged and tapered generation have learned from punk, will never repeat the glaring abuses of an earlier rock aristocracy.
They will succumb to neither self-abuse or abuse at the hands of others.
Unlike earlier pop stars, they have been careful not to be ripped off — they have a hand in the business side, share production, invest their earnings wisely.
They aren't puppets.
They know when to just say ‘No’.
These artists aspire to self-sufficiency, complete control, self-exploitation.
Perhaps it was better in the days when the stars were ripped off, fucked about, had no grip on their affairs.
They were exploited, for sure, but their exploits were myth incarnate.
These foolish spendthrifts hurtled, flashed and exploded on a clear black sky, crashed their limos into trees, were sensationally naïve.
They made martyrs of themselves occasionally — a sorely missed commodity.
Not for them, the index-linked pension.
Not for them, the twilight appearance on Pebble Mill 
The pop hero is uneconomical.
He spends his money and himself too quickly, runs up massive bills, gives, gives, gives, takes, takes, takes, fast forwards himself to extremes of bliss, extremes of abjection, invests unwisely in the single love-object, the addiction or the fetish.
The results are often catastrophic.
Pop creates more problems than it solves.
In love, the sensitive, reflective songwriter will treat the issue as a matter for negotiation, a question of exchange, the construction of a partnership.
This vision of love as healing or therapeutic, scours desire of its irrational elements, ravenous appetite, inequality, worship, degradation and devouring.
To essences and opposites: decency-rock is conscience, consideration, assessment, education.
Pop is vandalism, hysteria, oblivion, truancy…
LOVE JUICE TOPSOIL?
The demand for good songs occurs when people who have grown up with pop are forced to accommodate their love of pop within their new sense of themselves as responsible adults.
Since the sixties, rock and pop have been considered a stamping and breeding ground for burgeoning leftist/liberal sensibilities, a place where dissent is felt and upsurges occur.
Rock is pop energy commandeered for protest…but pop is protest-in-itself .
Morrissey's dissatisfaction may not arise from political constrictions, but from a more profound restlessness at the limits of life.
If Bolan is in heaven, he's probably miserable.
If he'd been in Eden, he would have probably left apple cores strewn all around the garden.
For sure, The Beastie Boys would have!
What's startling about 1986 is the manner in which the pop obsessions of self, want, luxury and aggression, have found their way to the surface of hip hop, with all the softer elements not germane to this violent push ruthlessly edited out.
The rupture of hip hop is a quite logical, unsettling upshot.
Unsettling, because it cannot be tamed.
Run DMC loathe ‘fuckin' faggots’, The Beastie Boys say all girls are fit for is menial work and occasional abuse.
Schoolly D reckons it's funny the way people squirm when they lie dying of gunshot wounds.
This is what happens when the  bedrock of decency, the liberal sensibilities and assumptions which we all share, are all that's left to be scandalized.
They're out for us — we sucker-ass liberals are the target.
And yet, awkwardly, schizophrenically, these twisted sickos are taken up by the right-on, their cause espoused in the same breath as calls for a better world the assumption being that the better things in life — hip hop imports, clothes, socialism — would undoubtedly cohabit in utopia.
Well, to embrace both decency and pop in this context, to be a socialist by day and a hip hopper by night after a hard day's campaigning, are quite feasible options, but only in a rotten, free-market society such as our own.
It's a privilege, not a proof that a better world would be enriched, or its advent hastened, by pop.
Oh sure, it can be a tonic, and it's useful as glucose if you just want to kick things over, but, come the advent of a newer and more just social order, the one for which we all cry out, there would be no place for the scandal and achievement of pop, for Prince and any foul Beasties.
Plato wrote that the potentially subversive qualities of music were such that it would not be permitted in the perfect state.
And so our pop, with its incitement to insatiability, its spiralling creation of new appetites, would have to be, regretfully, abolished.
Rap, with its frequent assertions of power, would have to be put down, like some troublesome insurrection, or would no longer be necessary, in the new, egalitarian, ego-supportive state of play.
The truth is that pop is of much greater danger to social democracy than it is to capitalism.
Ecologically, too, pop is highly unsuitable.
Its courting of chaos, its materialism, its abuse of, and disrespect for, its resources, its spendthrift gluttony would be intolerable in any delicately-balanced and naturally-harmonious social order, the kind of world we need to seek out!
(Acid rain is ruining our forests!
Our layer of topsoil is diminishing dangerously!
Mother Earth is not being respected but raped!)
Pop's power, its danger and its crime, consist in its over-stimulation of desires for pleasure and for self-aggrandizement: desires constructed by capitalism.
Pop is hysteria, a neurotic symptom of what may well be the last days of Western capitalism.
For each of us, as the apocalypse looms, there's a power struggle within the self, between decency and dissipation.
Pop's role in this struggle is to lure us into truancy from our better selves.
Pop or a better world.
The choice is yours!(1986)
prince
Prince wants to be everything to everyone.
He wants to be all you could ever need.
Musically, he's a pop polymath, flitting between funkadelia, acid rock, deep soul, schmaltz — often within the same song.
And his love songs return over and over to the fervent wish to satisfy each and every need, live out all the fantasies of his beloved.
But if Prince pleases, in music, in bed, it's because nothing is ever done just to please.
Prince never caters, never serv(ic)es; he's always pleasuring himself first and foremost, following his own wayward impulses.
Even the pinnacle of his success to date was free of any taint of pandering: compare ‘Purple Rain' with Michael Jackson's ‘Beat It’, where Eddie Van Halen was dropped plum in the middle as a calculated bid for MTV exposure and the Middle American AOR heartland.
But when Prince rocks out it's because that's as much a part of him as the funk strut.
He contains within himself all the pop factions (and the racial and social divisions that lie behind them) that record companies try to straddle with strategies of hybridization as maximum market penetration.
As Barney Hoskyns put it in his Prince: Imp of the Perverse —‘he is where all the desires of pop meet and tangle — their camp cupidon, their locus of signification.’
The undeniable ‘something for everyone’ crossover effect of Purple Rain won a huge, variegated audience.
But subsequent albums, especially Sign of the Times have seen Prince's cultural schizophrenia implode within individual songs.
And so sales and profile have dwindled to a fraction of their enormity circa Purple Rain .
Prince is now demanding listeners as mixed up and variegated inside as himself, and is finding that there aren't that many around.
Prince has a near-pathological desire to escape the confining fixity of an  identity.
‘Prince’ is not so much a person as a persona, a space, in which he can become anything he or we want him to be.
His being, his desire, is stretched and broken over sexual/racial divides.
So Prince's impulse is always to dissolve differences and borders.
The desire to be everything for somebody, the yearning for ultimate closeness, reached its lunatic peak in the sublime schizophrenia of ‘If I Was Your Girlfriend’; ‘if I was your one and only friend would U run to me if somebody hurt U even if that somebody was me?’
The song's agony is that of the spirit chafing against the straitjacket of sexual identity.
Sex for Prince isn't ‘communication’ or ‘exchange’but something altogether more mystical: the dissolution of the very differences and identities that make communication and sex possible.
Like Morrissey, Prince feels trapped by his sex, or rather by the cultural assumptions/expectations vested in it.
Prince confounds all this.
He will pursue like a panther and be coy prey, present himself as rapacious subject of desire and fey object of bliss (‘Anna Stesia’ pleads ‘praise me, ravish me’).
With ‘If I Was Your Girlfriend’ he created another identity for himself (‘Camille’) by subjecting his vocal to studio wizardry that tweaked it up to an androgynous 55 rpm.
But maybe that isn't such a departure when you consider that falsetto has always been ‘a sexual mask…the sound of a woman coming from a man…a way to demonstrate to his intended lover that he understands her fears and desires as if he were female himself (Michael Freedburg).
But there's at least one fantasy Prince can't or won't live out, one role he can't slip into with ease: the black pop statesman.
Throughout his career there have been calls on Prince by both the US and UK critical establishment to be a better role model, to make himself accountable to some kind of community, to address himself explicitly to the problems of the day.
Even now, there are those churlish souls who mourn the fact that Lovesexy is not a There's a Riot Goin' On for the eighties.
But Prince is either too frivolous or too religious for his flighty fancies to be pinned down to this discourse of responsibility and constructive intervention.
His responses to the troubled present are either retreat ever deeper into the infantile security of reclusive hedonism, or especially on Lovesexy , a wishy-washy, semi-mystical affirmation of the power of ‘positivity’.
Sign of the Times was like ‘What's Goin' On’, in that it's a pandemonium of anguish and compassion in the face of the impending apocalypse, devoid of any real critique let alone programmatic approach to change.
Protest as a groan of anguish, as the sound of something buckling under pressure, rather than protest as a policy document.
Fantastic records both, but like There's a Riot Goin' On , they don't fit the erroneous model of ‘political soul’ that's been constructed by white ‘soulcialists’.
It's the songs' incoherence — for who can keep themselves together in a world that's falling apart — that gives them their power: to hurt, if not to motivate.
Along with the bleatings about ‘responsibility’ and ‘growing up’come other carping reservations.
A certain schoolmasterly tone enters the prose: ‘there is an…undeniable talent here, I grant you…but it's frittered away in self indulgence and conceit.
If only Prince would acquire a bit of self-discipline, he could channel that talent and produce consistently first-rate soul records.’
Pah!
as if a steady stream of uncut, top-notch, straightforward soul is what Prince should be striving for!
Prince overflows and perforates the category of R&B at so many points, it's barely relevant.
Miles Davis has already described Prince's music as jazz; his use of electronics can be a as minimal and futurist as Front 242 or DAF; at other times his intentions are patently psychedelic.
Prince doesn't so much build bridges between categories as create music that exceeds each category simultaneously.
But perhaps the best tag for him is ‘hippy’, in so far as that term has become, for post-punk critic and consumer alike, a cipher for pretension, over-inflation and over-reach.
Prince is a hippy!
This covers both his penchant for fusion, and his dippy mystic positivism and cosmology of love.
Indeed, in his formative years he was influenced as much by Santana, Joni Mitchell, Todd Rundgren and Hendrix, as he was by Sly Stone, George Clinton or Earth, Wind and Fire.
(And these black musicians were themselves all shaped by the counter culture and acid rock.)
You can hear it in the jazz metal fills in ‘Glam Slam’ and ‘U Got the Look’, in the way the West Coast power pop of ‘I Could Never Take the Place of Your Man’subsides brilliantly into a brooding meander of acid guitar, in the raga anthem ‘The Cross,…
Most pop is created in factory conditions, as product made to satisfy specific consumer needs.
Prince has been elevated by success to a level beyond that of a musician working for a living.
He's often slammed for being a ‘spoilt child’, which seems to stem from a distrust of the fact that his music is play rather than(good) work.
Post-punk criticism is still uneasy about music that isn't tied to a good intention or specific function, that isn't answerable to a community.
But Prince has floated free of grassroots or use value, and ascended to an aristocratic, aerial domain of licence and luxury — where he's instigated a promiscuous chaos of stylistic miscegenation.
While his superstar peers make records with one ear cocked in anxious deference to pop currency, Prince alone behaves like an aristocrat, squandering the success he's earned rather than consolidating the estate with cautious  measures.
(In early 1989 it was revealed that the aristocrat was close to bankruptcy, the Purple Rain fortune dissipated in over-lavish stageshows and in supporting the stillborn careers of a seemingly endless series of protégés.)
And he demands an aristocratic listener, one prepared to laze and gorge.
Prince's adolescence was spent, by his own account, in daydreams (of sex, of fame) in the basement lair where he also learned his multi-instrumental virtuoso skills.
This little bubble of unreality has since expanded until it enfolds the entire Paisley Park complex in Minneapolis, with all the technology and all his minions at Prince's beck and call.
This reminds me of two things.
The Jesus and Mary Chain's perpetual twilight adolescence, cooped in their bedrooms, steeping themselves in pop and producing, years later, pop of their own, veined (like Prince's) with references and allusions.
And Des Esseintes, the aristocrat recluse in Huysmans Against Nature , who dedicates himself to the diligent pursuit of ever more rarefied and unnatural means of stimulating the senses.
Prince's music makes me think of Des Esseintes's symphony of perfumes: exquisite, heady, overpowering, slightly nauseous.
Prince does to black music what the Butthole Surfers do to rock — survey its whole length and breadth, take whatever seems like a good idea, regardless of its proper place in the narrative of pop, gather then let loose with a supreme incontinence and disregard for modesty.
And of course Prince also casts his eye over rock too.
What a spree!
Prince and the Buttholes both play with sound in the most wanton fashion, disfigure, aggravate and dismember it.
There's a gratuitousness of form over content: so much more is done than is ‘required’ for the purposes of communication, so much flaunting and adornment.
It's not the getting from A to B of the song, that counts, but the swagger, the way of walking.
Unlike the singer-songwriter creed, attention is always drawn away from the song to the figure of the person working at it: there's a flagrant exhibitionism that forces us into the role of voyeur.
Sometimes, with Prince, it's like watching someone else watching himself masturbate in a mirror.
The two criticisms commonly levelled at Prince are that a particular song is ‘overdone’ or that it's ‘unrealized’.
These privileged pejoratives show how firmly entrenched most rockcrit is within the tradition of Anglo-American literary criticism, with its values of proportion, symmetry, restraint, economy.
What's all important is the narrative, the sequence of utterances, rather than the voluptuousness of utterance itself.
For me, ‘overdone’ and ‘unrealized’are just the opposite poles of a hyperactive musical intelligence.
I like it when a Prince  song is overwrought, has been worked at neurotically (Prince's music teeters on the brink of being addled by perfectionism, but never is stifled by attention, because every superfluous squiggle or quiver in the sound is a carnal appendage of the man's polyrhythmic perversity).
And I like his doodles, follies and ideas toyed with and abandoned in impatience, the debris of a restless desire.
It's all part of the generous gush of expenditure without return.
There's another set of poles around which Prince's music is organized, and these are tied to two figures of supreme influence.
On the one hand, James Brown, whose shows made such a profound impression on the young Prince and after whose fashion Prince drills his musicians with dictatorial discipline.
On the other, Hendrix, the noble savage in dandy's finery, the freeranging kaleidoscopic improviser.
For all its Hendrix-derived elements of bravura free expression, dextrous embellishment and luxury, Prince's music rarely loses touch with James Brown's locked groove of desire, mesmerizing monotony and crude assertion of repetition.
Discipline and dilettantism coexist.
Another angle to this contradiction is the way Prince is torn between the urge to be naked and the desire to dress up, between porn explicitness and the veils of flamboyance.
Both James Brown (sex machine with a bouffant hairdo) and Hendrix (the wild man swathed in foppish elegance) were prototypes for this collision of primitivism and decadence.
If Lovesexy is Prince's strongest record to date, it's because its strength lies in coherence.
There's none of the dazzling leaps or appalling lapses that gave previous albums a dynamic range.
There's nothing on Lovesexy as supersaturated as ‘Adore’, as out of kilter as ‘Ballad of Dorothy Parker’ or as vacant and cretinizingly compulsive as ‘Hot Thing’.
The songs on Lovesexy are fullbodied, throbbing, for sure, but the unnatural excitation of tissue, the swelling and the morbid flush that characterize Prince's peaks, are nowhere to be seen.
The dominant tone is of jubilation, not the hysteria that makes me swoon in Prince.
Compared with anyone else in the world of the pop that sells, Prince's Lovesexy is choc-a-bloc with risk and dare.
But by his own lights, the album has definitely been shaped by a measure of temperance.
It seems likely that Prince, chastened by the relative fall-off in his popularity after the caprices and wilful erraticism that followed Purple Rain has opted for consolidation.
Nearly half the songs on Lovesexy explicitly expound Prince's nebulous ideas about salvation, and the rest of the album is limned with references to a ‘new power’, a positivism that is our answer to the problems of a world that's going to hell in a handbasket.
In the glow of this new power, erotic love and spiritual love  are somehow conflated (in a way that seems finally to overcome for Prince the apparent mutual antagonism between sensuality and righteousness that has hitherto perplexed him).
But it's not really surprising that this accommodation should come to pass.
Prince has always sacramentalized erotic love, and eroticized religion; made God munchy, made raunch his God.
The two were always interdependent for Prince anyway: pleasure only exists where there's a taboo, a limit to be crossed — as ‘It’ goes, ‘feels so good/it must be a crime’.
I was thinking hard about why Prince pleasured me.
It wasn't just the vertiginous span between his moments of exquisite taste and subtlety, and his lapses into the crassest vulgarity and corn.
It wasn't just the sumptuous disproportion of form over content, or the ultra-vivid hypersexual bliss induced by his refinement and exaggeration of the mannerisms of passion.
There was something else.
Then I remembered what Ian Penman said, a long time ago, in reference to Prince and Michael Jackson: ‘the greatest singers die into their music.’
There's something in Prince's voice, an itch that gets right into my pants, a dead centre, a Numan drone.
It's there all of the time, but it comes out the clearest when all the ‘dramatic inflections, subtle stresses and sympathetic accents’(Barthes), all the art of the singer, are abandoned, fall away, when Prince swoons, sounds like he's on the brink of insensibility.
You can hear it on ‘It’, particularly in the final, protracted, delirious ‘doin' it's’.
Then there's nothing but the implacable, soul-less beat, and a subdued babble of shudders and metallic gasps.
Prince sounds stricken, evacuated, annulled.
Or ‘Hot Thing’, where his descending drone-chant of the title makes him sound like a machine, subjugated to the moronic sex-beat.
Again the track trails off into languishing shivers and cadaverous moans.
If, as Bataille argued, eroticism is about destroying ‘the self-contained character of the participants as they are in their normal lives’, then this loss of separateness is a kind of momentary death.
This violently-wrenched escape from ‘me’ shakes our ‘ordered, parsimonious and shuttered reality’to the core.
I think it's the loss of this sense of the singer (and listener) expiring, in the music, that me about Lovesexy , for all its many splendours.
This scream from a shattered soul is what really links Prince with Little Richard and James Brown, and why we link Prince to a lost golden era of pop when that pandemonium and hysteria was the norm, not a freak occurrence.
When Prince is the master of all he sees, when everything he touches turns to  gold when he's the supreme seducer — that's when my admiration knows no bounds, that cool is why he TOWERS in our imagination way, way above those meagre souls who statistically and fiscally dwarf him.
But what sends me, ends me, is not when Prince is captivating, but when he's captured, enslaved by desire, a thing, even.
That, paradoxically, is when Prince is truly God.
(1988)
THE POWERS OF HORROR
noise
Noise is the casual currency of eighties rock, practically all there's left to believe in.
Such a satisfying idea — noise annoys — at once simple-to-grasp kernel and yet capable of inflation into the most grandiose theories of subversion.
But…who is there to be annoyed, and in what ways?
What is noise anyway?
NOISE/HORROR
If music is like a language, if it communicates some kind of emotional or spiritual message, then noise is best defined as interference, something which blocks transmission, jams the code, prevents sense being made.
The subliminal message of most music is that the universe is essentially benign, that if there is sadness or tragedy, this is resolved at the level of some higher harmony.
Noise troubles this worldview.
This is why noise groups invariably deal with subject matter that is anti-humanist — extremes of abjection, obsession, trauma, atrocity, possession — all of which undermine humanism's confidence that through individual consciousness and will, we can become the subjects of our lives, and work together for the general progress of the commonwealth.
This dark, unmanageable matter of horror and sickness is a kind of cultural noise, causing a blockage and destabilization of the codes by which we make sense of the world, make life habitable.
Noise then, occurs when language breaks down.
Noise is a wordless state in which the very constitution of our selves is in jeopardy.
The pleasure of noise lies in the fact that the obliteration of meaning and identity is ecstasy (literally, being out-of-oneself).
Historically, what has happened is that the rock vanguard has shifted its focus from eroticism to the psychedelic powers of horror.
When sex was a scarce, invisible, unattainable quantity, to sing about it was publicly transgressive and personally mindblowing (because unthinkable).
But after the permission of the seventies, when sex was banalized by becoming available, it could no longer be the instigator of desperation (it's that state of mind that is indispensable to rock, not physical fin).
The site, the cue, for jouissance, shifted to the unspeakable.
STOP MAKING SENSE
The problem is that, to speak of noise, to give it attributes, to claim things for it, is immediately to shackle it with meaning again, to make it part of culture.
If noise is where language ceases, then to describe it is to imprison it again with adjectives.
To confer the status of value upon excess and extremism is to bring these things back within the pale of decency.
So the rhetoricians of noise actually destroy the power they strive to celebrate; they are the very start of the process by which subversion is turned into contribution, which is absorbed as a renewal for the system.
As rhetoric enfolds a group or initiative, so fibres of meaning interpenetrate every strand of sound, ensuring that the experience reaches us already placed in a general scheme of significance, validated and rendered ripe for the ICA We are constantly made conscious.
However sick, vile and depraved the material may be, nothing can prevent an aura of moral and spiritual superiority from entwining the latest noise/horror collision, like a halo.
Here are some examples of noise overdetermined by meaning.
Noise as reality effect:
There is a widely held view that beauty and harmony are a lie, presenting a bourgeois vision of nature and society as fundamentally balanced and ordered.
And that we have an obligation to listen to noise because it shows us the grim truth of reality.
In this vein, Swans are astonishing, the ruthlessly dehumanized mechanism of their rock functioning as a perfect analogue of their argument — that social life is enslavement.
Theirs is a sado-masochistic vision of the universe to rival Samuel Beckett's or Schoolly D's.
But any vertiginous feelings are stabilized almost immediately by the rhetoric that enfolds the band (which they severely resent), which recruits their private obsessions into a grand scheme of subterranean resistance.
Noise as anti-pop gesture:
With the death of the parochial, the media now constitutes our new environment.
Pop looms as the largest thing in our lives, but as something we've  lost control of.
Rock'n'roll was originally a revolt against straitlaced stuffy mores (encountered in the family, at school, in the small town), but now it's ‘brainwashing media images and fantasies’, the very institution of pop itself, that we define ourselves against, Indiepop is fast becoming nothing but commentary on pop — The Membranes' ‘Death To Trad Rock’, Sonic/Ciccone Youth's obsession with Madonna, Age of Chance's ‘Kiss’, Oblivion is forestalled because we are constantly made conscious that this is a reaction against .
Age of Chance are the most sophisticated development of this process.
‘Kiss’ is anti-anti-pop, a gesture against indie stasis.
AOC's noise is practically inaudible beneath the din of intertextual meanings.
Still, they have a good point.
Anti-pop doesn't challenge its listeners, as it purports to, it flatters them.
THE SUBVERSIVE FALLACY
Both the above viewpoints represent noise as subversive.
There seems to be a need to maintain the belief that ‘straights’, grown-ups would be shocked, damaged, altered, if they were around to hear the music.
But the blindingly obvious fad is that no one is around to be disturbed.
The fiction that ‘the enemy’ occupies the same space as our noisemaking seems integral to the pleasure people derive from noise, the significance they confer.
Noise, in Britain, is always being read , furiously.
But the whole discourse of noise-as-threat is bankrupt, positively inimical to the remnants of power that still cling to noise.
Forget subversion.
The point is self-subversion, overthrowing the power structure in your own head.
The enemy is the mind's tendency to systematize, sew up experience, place a distance between itself and immediacy.
The American bands understand this, instinctively.
The goal is OBLIVION (a.k.a. jouissance, the sublime, the ineffable).
What could be more UN-NOISE than the slickly-planned career move, and tailored  manifestos of the Age of Chance?
For them I reserve my highest pejorative — journalist.
They are the inbred offspring of ten years of music press ingestion.
Theories do not make for liberating music.
Give us poetry.
OUT-OF-YOUR-HEADS-IS-THE-PLACE-TO-BE
You can see a widespread hunger for oblivion, and a refusal to talk, throughout pop.
The indie shamblers, the Goths, the B-boys, the noise bands, the new psychedelics, all are reluctant or unable to justify their thirst for noise.
Opposed to this discrete tendency, steadily more redundant and isolated, we have two contingents — the soulboy soul-cialists and the decent singer-songwriters.
Both  are still committed to meaning, both want to promote pride and dignity, give us clear vision, a sense of sanity, encourage people to take control of their lives.
The others want to lose control, lose their selves, in noise.
Noise is about fascination, the antithesis of meaning.
If music is a language, communicating moods and feelings, then noise is like an eruption within the material out of which language is shaped.
We are arrested, fascinated, by a convulsion of sound to which we are unable to assign a meaning.
We are mesmerized by the materiality of music.
This is why noise and horror go hand in hand — because madness and violence are senseless and arbitrary (violence is the refusal to argue), and the only response is wordless — to scream.
A DEAD END
The problem is that, as with any drug or intoxicant, tolerance builds up rapidly.
The result is an exponential curve of increased dosages of noise/horror, an upward spiral that will one day, sooner than later, culminate in SEIZURE.
As the barriers in the head get broken down, the noise buff becomes a kind of hip vegetable, by a process that paradoxically combines both brutalization and weakening.
To be shocked (i.e. get your hit) requires that the individual be immersed to some degree in a culture or value system.
But noise hipsters have uprooted themselves so successfully from their parent culture, they can cope with absurd levels of outrage/dissonance, and therefore require extreme after extreme in order to feel stimulated/mindblown, Burnout approaches.
The noise/horror aesthetic has driven itself into a dead(ening) end.
A sublime, monumental dead end, that has produced some brilliant sado-masochist poetry from band and critic alike.
But a dead end nonetheless.
Here are some clues to THE WAY OUT.
INCONSISTENCY
Too often, noise has meant a level plane of abraded texture, which can merely add up to a different kind of blandness, a sense-dulling consistency.
There needs to be more dips, swerves, lapses, use of space and architecture.
Hip hop is something the noise bands can learn from.
The current hip hop aesthetic, as displayed by the music of Salt-N-Pepa.
Frick and Frapp, Beastie Boys, is based around the forcing-into-friction of antagonistic ambiences and idioms, sampled from random points in pop history.
The effect is psychedelic, dispersing consciousness as effectively as any pure din.
TEXTURAL LUXURY
The guitar is still privileged as the source of noise.
There needs to be renewed awareness of the capacity of the synthesizer and sampling to produce filthy, noxious tones.
There needs to be a realization of how far rock noise trails behind the avant garde and new jazz.
People have to attend to the possibilities for the human voice opened up by Diamanda Galas and Tim Buckley; listen again to Faust, Can, Hendrix, Sun Ra, Cabaret Voltaire, Suicide…
THE VOICE
All this depends still on the assumption that noise is a state with defined boundaries.
But if noise is the point at which language buckles and culture fails, then you could argue that noise occurs in moments, tiny breakages and stresses dispersed all over the surface of music, all kinds of music.
Maybe we should listen out for the noise in the voices of Kristin Hersh, Tim Buckley, Prince, Michael Jackson — the way they chew and twist language not for any decipherable, expressive reason,(that's to say, not to accentuate more deeply the conventional mannerisms of ‘passion’), but for the gratuitous voluptuousness of utterance itself.
In their voices, you can hear a surplus of form over content, of genotext over phenotext, semiotic over symbolic, Barthes's ‘grain' (the resistance of the body to the voice) over technique.
Of ‘telling’ over ‘story’,.
DIRTDISH V. UNEARTH
There seem to be two choices in noise right now, two routes to oblivion.
One is the noise/horror interface, in which violent imagery and musical dissonance are applied concussively, inducing a shell-shocked state of catatonia.
Big Black and Swans take this aesthetic about as far as is conceivable or desirable.
The alternative?
The Blue Orchids' creed: ‘the only way out is LJP’.
Here consciousness is not mangled but dissipated, the borders of the self expanded to the point of dissolution.
Noise/horror undoes the self by confronting it with the other that dwells within it, the monstrous potential latent in us all, waiting to be catalysed by an extreme predicament; what I've called the new psychedelia undoes the self by letting it drift off and disappear into the otherwordly.
Noise/horror strikes me as a limited form of self-destruction, that can only yield diminishing returns.
Compare its claustrophobic confines and concealed machismo with the open spaces and fragility of the new psychedelia, as signposted by A.R.
Kane's ‘When You're Sad’, Husker Du's ‘Up in the Air’, Meat Puppets' ‘Two Rivers’, Saqqara Dogs' ‘Greenwich Mean Time’…
FROST IN MUSIC
Both ‘strategies’ are alike in one thing — they demand from the listener an immobility — one stunned, the other spellbound.
Unlike the soulboys or decent songwriters, resistance does not take the form of becoming a subject, but through becoming an object.
Refusing (at least in the domain of leisure) to deploy power over the self; to escape, for a few blissful moments, the network of meaning and concern.
(1987)
wasted youth
As punk faded into distant memory, the grip of its vetoes and taboos began to weaken.
By the late eighties, it was not just permissible but de rigueur for bands to grow their hair long, drop acid, use wah wah and other quaint effects, play solos…
Led Zeppelin, Grateful Dead, Hendrix, Iron Butterfly, Blue Oyster Cult, Quicksilver Messenger Service etc etc, all became legitimate reference points For new bands.
Above all, the goal was to GET WASTED.
Sixties acid rock's quest for the mindblowing was given a ruinous, apocalyptic, eighties inflection: psychedelia's pristine bliss-out was polluted by hardcore punk nihilism.
Out of this strange interface between post-punk and post-hippy (what punk once aimed to bury), the key groups to emerge were Dinosaur Jr and Butthole Surfers, in the USA; Spacemen 3 and Loop, in the UK.
Of these, Butthole Surfers were the most exemplary.
This was a band inspired into existence by The Sex Pistols, but who had more in common with Sabbath, Hawkwind, Hendrix, Pink Floyd…
The Buttholes brought back to rock the expanded WAISTLINE, a conspicuously WASTEFUL attitude to sound.
The Butthole Surfers burst the girdle of punk ideology, and let huge spare tyres of sound flop free.
What they resurrected was the idea of orgiastic music, a feast of sound — something that contravened both punk's parsimonious and anorexic tenets of economy and tightness, and pop soul's belief that The Song is best served by understated, deferential ‘backing’.
Butthole Surfers led the way in erecting a new charter of values: overload, disproportion, over-emphasis, surfeit, gross out, turgidity…
1987's Locust Abortion Technician saw them dredging for the very dregs of sound.
Using samplers, slowed-down tapes, echo-box, fuzz, wah wah, bullhorns, saws, car doors (from which they got slowed-down squeaking sounds), and tapes of cattle lowing, they plumbed new depths of the bass-spectrum, new limits in the degradation and deterioration of sound.
Locust Abortion Technician was a glorious mire, a glistening palace of ordure, a cataract of dysentery.
Hardcore groups like Big Black and Butthole Surfers have two zones of impact.
Total white-out in the HEAD — a rush of interference blanching the screen of consciousness.
And seismic intervention in the ANUS.
The importance of the rectum in pop is something rarely acknowledged, although it's been a constant; from George Clinton to the Beastie Boys (with their crapped-in-pants waddledance), a record's crucial when it has a lot of bottom .
Butthole Surfers take their cue from Black Sabbath's dis-inhibitive combination of bowel-quaking ‘low end’ bass frequencies and booze'n'barbiturates.
But the scatomanic orgy of Locust Abortion Technician remains a work of real accomplishment.
Guitarist Paul Leary Walthall is a virtuoso of abjection just as Hendrix was of free flight, his domain the sewer rather than the firmament which Jimi traversed like a comet.
Where Hendrix transformed R&B into abstract, dragonfly arabesques, the Butthole Surfers reduce R&B to an invertebrate, protoblues agony, an infantile squall.
After Locust…came 1988's Hairway to Steven .
The Buttholes were hailed, by the farsighted, as the most masturbatory musicians around and the opening track ‘Jimmy’ was a delirious frottage of surfaces and inflammation of tissue, a paradigm of ruination.
But having got that out of their systems, on ‘X-Ray of a Girl’ and ‘Johnny Smoke’they went into interstellar overdrive, in search of cosmic WASTE.
Going nowhere, vast…
For 1988 was a year in which the goal was to get TOTALLY WASTED.
The Butthole Surfers and Sonic Youth's version of the acid experience is not a transcendental access to the benign spiritual principles that underlie and order the universe, but more like schizophrenia: succumbing to the chaos of both your own drives and of external reality.
In particular the chaos of the media; where Front 242's use of TV images of terrorism and catastrophe was as a backdrop to their own survivalist strength, with Butthole Surfers it's more the case, as David Stubbs said, that they've fallen foul of the media overload, are carried by a momentum that is not their own.
What Butthole Surfers have done, what made and makes them so crucial, is that they've taken on the sonic possibilities bequeathed still unexplored and underdeveloped by acid rock but have jettisoned many of the disabling attitudes that originally trammelled that music — sophistication, expertise, the counter-cultural impulse to edify.
They reclaim the access to VASTNESS those musics offer but redirect it towards primitive and puerile ends.
They expand the consciousness to the point of bursting, but feel no obligation to raise the consciousness, elevate it to lofty concerns.
Few bands sink so low, few soar this high.
Nobody else can do both within the same song.
WASTE your life, lay WASTE to yourself.
US hardcore has always been about self-squandering and auto-mutilation.
There's a link here with hip hop's ‘radical Politics of the slob’.
Both share a policy of ostentatious self-neglect, that's an unarticulated, instinctive reaction against contemporary yuppie culture's ideals of health and self-realization.
There's a stubborn clinging to bad habits that benign social planners and therapists would like to ‘liberate’ us from, an obstinate refusal to ‘move on up’and make something of oneself.
Naff plebeian drugs, junk food, hoary sexism, a love of trash culture…hip hop and hardcore share all these, but where hip hop still has a guiding notion of cool (both music and style are minimal) neo-hardcore is prepared to LET IT ALL HANG OUT horribly; the corset of cool has been ruptured and all manner of banished and forbidden rock memories have sprawled free…grotesquerie embraced as a defiant gesture against the sound track of yuppie culture — sleek, chic, designer pop-soul.
The conflict between yuppie designer pop-soul and hardcore is between two very different kinds of politics: the politics of self-realization versus the politics of dissipation, of debility.
For those excluded from status and opportunity (blacks, women, gays etc) being strong, becoming the subject of your life, these are crucial goals.
For white middleclass males, however, pride and dignity has little resonance, when all your life you've been trained to be aspirational and competitive.
‘Pride and dignity’ appears to be barely different from conventional ambition/self-presentation/self-nurture, ultimately amounting to little more than the uncritical desire to participate in society on its own terms.
What does resonate is the fantasy of being unemployable, of being an unmotivated object rather than a purposeful subject.
Where designer pop-soul seeks to bolster narcissism (‘learning to love yourself/is the greatest love of all,’ as Whitney Houston puts it) and amplify one's sense of human capability to manage life, hardcore finds perverse pleasure in damaging narcissism, destabilizing one's sense of human mastery, by a morbid preoccupation with…psychic breakdown, arbitrary violence, random calamity, irrational impulses, the Whole gamut of ‘unemployable negativity’(Bataille).
What is the fascination of horror?
Is it psychedelic, a fall of the self, crushed by a  ‘weight of meaninglessness’?
Or is it that When the vile or appalling ‘lies quite close, but cannot be assimilated…at the border of my condition as a living being’(Julia Kristeva), what is produced is a momentarily heightened sense of one's own aliveness, teetering on the brink of extinction?
Or is it, as Leslie Dick suggests, that contemplating one's own self-destruction or mutilation is actually a way of perceiving and relishing one's wholeness — self-destructive fantasies as a kind of warped feast of narcissism?
Or is it that the sudden perception of one's own constant vulnerability provides, in its black, clouded way, a dazzling, near-religious feeling of revelation — this is how things really are; that to be born is, by definition, to be a victim?
To be prey…
Butthole Surfers are perhaps the ultimate expression of hardcore's predilections.
They remind me a little of Georges Bataille's pre-war secret cult, Acephale, whose goal was to get rid of the head — starting with the moral guardian in one's own head, the super-ego, then moving on to all the other ‘heads’(the father, the State, the Law, God).
This was to be achieved through fascination with base material (excrement, big toes, freaks, anything that highminded principles and good taste decreed lowly); through an obsessional interest in ritual and religiosity, a pagan celebration of the moment rather than investment in a scheme of forward planning and providence, a pagan worship of the icon-in-all-its-materiality rather than of the Essence.
(A worship of signifier rather than signified: the definition of fetishism?)
Bataille's key notion was that of expenditure without return, an orgiastic squandering of time and self.
Either in the profane — polymorphous perversity that threatens the law and order of the Phallus/Father/adult genital sex; a decentred sexuality without goals (neither reproductive nor relationship-bonding).
Or in the sacred — ritual and sacrifice.
‘Plunging in at the anus and tunnelling a giant point of exit at the sockets…one part giant surge of flesh, one part holy revelation.’
David Stubbs's metaphor for the Butthole sound pleases me immensely, for he has unwittingly and uncannily arrived at the image that haunts Bataille's writing.
From the fetid depths of his mind, Bataille dredged up a fantasy of human evolution one part pseudo-science, one part myth; as the apeman became homo erectus, all the erotic energy vested and mind.
The point of this myth is that the base and the elevated, the profane and the sacred are intimately related, depend on excluding each other for their self-definition.
For Bataille, the ultimate destination of rational thought is the revelation that we know and can know nothing, beyond the realization that all the  towering projections of the human spirit are based on a primary denial of the abyss out of which we were formed.
The realization that ‘elevation is the fall; humanity is animality; insight is blindness; health is terminal pathology; God, when he knows, is a pig’(Allan Stoekl).
It's this fall, this unseating of our lofty conception of ourselves (as conscious, self-determining spirits) that Butthole Surfers love to induce: hence the fascination with surgery (exposing the meat and muck out of which we're made), with lapses into the unreason of psychosis or perversion.
Against the US mainstream culture of rose-tinted kitsch (which Milan Kundera defines as ‘the refusal to accept that shit exists’), bands like Big Black, Flipper and the Buttholes react by devising a near-catastrophic conception of ‘authenticity’.
It's as though only the worst in human beings is what's real, the hard core of reality.
This is anti-kitsch — the idea that only shit exists.
Hardcore is obsessed with WASTE — both physiological and psychological.
On I Crush Bozo and My Skin Covers My Body , Happy Flowers take hardcore back to its primal matrix of unrequited desire and disproportionate rage: infancy's uncontrolled appetites for oral and anal gratification, its delusions of omnipotence, its terror of the breakdown of the borderline between identity and the primal abjection out of which it's formed.
The Buttholes are driven by an almost mystical nihilism.
They're obsessed by the shit out of which we're shaped (surgery), the shit that could befall us (horrible accidents), the shit in our souls (the drives and impulses we suppress and expel in order to constitute ourselves as normal, but which sometimes break free in perversion or psychosis).
‘X-Ray Of A Girl (Passing Gas)’, is a love song of sorts, an excremental vision worthy of Swift (recalling his ‘O!
Caelia, Caelia, Caelia…shits ’ ode).
The strength of Butthole Surfers is their heterogeneity; they don't turn ‘filth’, ‘the dark side’ into a religion-in-negative like so much hardcore, heavy metal etc.
Their nihilism is jumbled up with a mystical affirmation of experience (horror for the Buttholes is awe-full) but also with humour (they've advanced through parodying successive rock idioms, exaggeration improving each one by making it more extreme).
As their fascination for the appalling, arbitrary and marred has got more religious, so their sound has begun its ascent into the cosmos.
-1987/88, then: the reign of WASTED YOUTH — of devastated vastness, sublime vacancy, vertigo, virulence and ‘the gift of the void.
(1988)
Nick cave
DISCIPLINE AND PUNISH
Nick Cave looks the part.
Deep gashes of black under the eyes, skin the colour of ashes, a slight wobbliness to his movements, His speech is fastidious, precise in a way that would seem pompous if he were at all ebullient; but with his small, gave voice — sometimes withering, always withered — the impression is of a wary distrust of words and the ways they can be misconstrued.
But he's much more forthcoming than in an earlier, abortive encounter.
Almost affable.
Pardon the ignorance, but what exactly is ‘The Mercy Seat’?
‘It's the throne of God, in the Bible, where he sits and throws his lightning bolts and so forth.
But it's also about this guy sitting on Death Row, waiting to be electrocuted or whatever.
It's juxtaposing those two things.
A person in his final days, thinking about good and evil and all the usual fare.’
So the fallibility and the arrogance of human justice is something that obsesses you?
‘It's something that interests me a lot.
My social conscience is fairly limited in a lot of ways, there's not much I'm angry about that doesn't affect me quite directly.
But the prison system — not particularly capital punishment — but the penal system as it is, and the whole apparatus of judgement, people deciding on other people's fates…that does irritate, and upset me quite a lot.’
Is that why you got involved in the film about prison life,Ghosts of the Civil Dead ?
‘It's a two-way thing: I had those feelings long before I wrote drafts for the script, but the process of writing and research inflamed them.
It should be clear to anybody that the basic idea behind the prison system is corrupt and unjust, but  the more I worked on the film, the more I understood how extreme the injustice was.
This particular film has quite a strong political statement to make, which is something that I'm not really known for.
I was involved in writing the first two drafts of the film, but by the sixth draft there weren't that many of my ideas left.
I also have a small part: I play a kind of known provocateur, who is brought into the prison — one of the new hi-tech ones — in order to disrupt the equilibrium.
He's a psychotic with some kind of death wish…spends his entire time screaming abuse.
‘What angers me about the system goes beyond the unreliability of ‘proof’…it's that the way criminals are dealt with has nothing to do with rehabilitation and readjusting people who've stepped outside society's norms.
The same goes for mental institutions and so forth.
But it's also the very idea of someone being judged ‘criminal'’ or ‘insane'’because they're unable to fit into what a basically corrupt society considers ‘social'’or ‘‘sociable'’.'
So you take issue both with the very idea of ‘the normal’ and ‘normalization’, and with the fact that the authorities don't even bother to fulfil their professed
‘Yeah, something like that.
I did a lot of homework when I started working on the script.
The initial plan was to use the prison world to create a certain kind of readymade atmosphere.
But over the eight drafts, what emerged was a particular vision of the whole penal system as almost a plot by the higher powers to perpetuate the whole system of crime, keep it rolling, keep criminals on the streets…‘
In order to terrify the population into accepting the existence of the police.
All this reminds me of the ideas of Michel Foucault.
He looked back to the era (pre-industrialism) before the things we consider ‘natural’— prisons, asylums, hospitals — had been devised, in order to trace the ‘genealogy’ of pseudosciences like penology, criminology, psychiatry and sexology.
What he discovered is that these ‘disciplines’ were not really about uncovering truth for its own sake; the ‘knowledge’they generated was inseparable from and instrumental in ‘techniques of domination’.
Later, he shifted his focus from social hygiene (segregation/surveillance/normalization) to study mental hygiene; the ways in which each individual is involved in self-policing.
We define ourselves as ‘normal’ by repressing our own capacity for violence or the visionary — just as we suppress and marginalize those people in the body politic who've gone over limits.
Looking back, it's clear that Cave has always been obsessed with this latent  other within each individual, that can be catalysed by an extreme predicament.
See how he describes his novel And the Ass Saw the Angel :
‘It's set in a small valley in a remote region somewhere in the world.
A sugarcane-growing valley.
It's the story of the people who live there.
The fascination of these closed communities and hemmed-in lives, that recur in my work, is that they breed a certain ignorance, can be the breeding ground for very extreme, absurd emotional releases.’
In Cave's work, most of the characters are in a sense prisoners — of an obsession, or a claustrophobic environment.
But maybe this sounds glib when set against the specific and extreme misery of imprisonment.
‘I've been writing songs about prison ever since I started writing songs.
But I have a less romantic conception than when I started.
The film is in two sections — the population section and the maximum security section.
When the film-makers were in America, going from penitentiary to penitentiary, looking in libraries, interviewing people, they stumbled on this amazing story about Marin.
Over six months, the inmates were subjected to these totally unfair changes of routine, from small things like not getting coffee one day, to next day having their cells raided and all their possessions confiscated.
The whole balance between guards and inmates was totally disrupted.
The convicts became more and more upset, the guards were afraid, but they kept getting orders from above telling them to maintain these random violations of the equilibrium.
Until eventually it broke — and a prisoner stabbed two guards to death.
This was leaked to the media, who began to clamour for stricter control.
Marin was put onto immediate lockdown — which is where no one is allowed out of his cell and all privileges are removed.
Twenty-one months later it was still in lockdown.
The point is that two guards were sacrificed by the authorities in order to achieve this control situation.
That's the kind of system you're dealing with.
‘The Mercy Seat is about this person in solitary confinement, becoming more sensitive to inanimate objects, and as he sits thinking about human and Divine Justice, finding himself judging these things as Good or Evil.’
Some say that The Mercy Seat is the best thing Cave has done for five years, since Mutiny in Heaven .
I wouldn't go so far (that would be to devalue all the peaks in the interim)— but the single is stupendous.
It's a gigantic, near-illegible swirl-surge, a horizontal, disciplined avalanche.
With its maddened strings, echo-chamber vocal and the odd filigree of lonesome country whistling, it is vaguely suggestive of the sixties pop-melodrama of ‘Wichita Lineman’ or ‘Something's  Gotten Hold of My Heart’.
But a sense of the epic driven to such histrionic pitch that it verges on Velvet's White noise and viola hysteria.
‘Dignity’ is not a word that figures in my lexicon of praise (too redolent of the prattle of soulboys) but with Cave's work since Kicking Against the Pricks , it's appropriate and unavoidable.
A ruined dignity, the courage of someone staring into the abyss with ‘nothing left to lose’.
Here it's the condemned man waiting to ‘go shuffling out of life/just to hide in death a while’.
Eventually, the song becomes a real-time simulation of a locked groove, an out-of-control roller-coaster of dread but also of resilience: ‘And the Mercy Seat is waiting/And I think my head is burning/And in a way I'm yearning/To be done with all this measuring of proof/An eye for an eye/And a tooth for a tooth/And anyway I told the truth/And I'm not afraid to die.’
Over and over and over, 'til you think your cranium is set to bust.
MADNESS AND CIVILIZATION
Nick Cave is afflicted and empowered by a certain, crucial deficiency of humanity.
Or rather, more accurately, he's estranged, wilfully, from the confining notion of ‘full’ humanity that's been installed by the positive Aid popular culture — extroversion, civic engagement, the benign totalitarianism of caring/sharing/ opening up, the cult of health and efficiency.
Morbidly inward, unforgiving, Cave goes against the grain of the times by being sick but refusing to be healed and integrated.
His obsessions are wounds he deliberately keeps open.
Looking back over his oeuvre, you see not development, but fixation.
‘Lyrically, thematically, my work is still changed to the same bowl of vomit.’
In fact, Cave and his ilk (Michael Gira of the Swans, Blixa Bargeld of Binsturzende Neubauten) are ‘agitating’ for a broader definition of ‘the human’, one that incorporates lapses into the inhuman, incompleteness, a dilapidation and destitution of the soul.
They hark back to an older, more religious notion, where it's not a question of wholeness of being, but of holes.
Would you agree that your sense of the world isn't secular and humanist, but religious?
‘I have no cut and dry philosophy, but I can't believe that we just die and become dust.
It just doesn't seem particularly logical or rational to me, that you live and strive for a while, then die.
Without sounding too clichéd about it, there should be more to it than that.
But what, I don't know.’
Do you think these vague presentiments of a beyond or after could ever draw you into organized religion?
‘That has a lot to do with my state of mind at the time.
I almost became a born-again Christian on the flight over from Australia.
Two days sitting in the plane and fifty bourbons later I had this young born-again advocate holding my hand and praying for me at the top of his voice.
He was actually asking God to show me some sign.
In fact later on during the flight, when I'd unravelled myself from this guy and was playing poker with some French people, I asked God to give me the sign then, in the hand I was about to get.
And I had three kings and two queens, which sobered me a little bit.
But I guess it was just a lucky hand.’
Was this Christian especially voracious or were you just unusually vulnerable?
‘Well, whereas the rest of the passengers were basically gearing up to tear my girlfriend and me to bits if we continued to go the way we were going — you get a kind of cabin fever on these flights between Australia and England — this Christian and his wife decided to adopt us, I guess as a kind of test for themselves.
There's something about that flight…every time you do it, you just get off the plane shaking your head and thinking how incredibly tolerant the staff are.
They must be trained in channelling animal behaviour.’
Were you brought up religiously?
Did this missionary have anything to work on?
‘As it turned out, I knew the Bible better than he did.
He started quoting things from his Modern translation, which I find really irritating.
I find the King James version in its original translation to be incredibly inspiring.
To find it so utterly demystified by these modern religions keen to allow people of today to understand…it really appals me.
And the translations are so incredibly liberal, there may as well be no original text at all.
‘It was basically the novel that made it necessary for me to look into the Bible.
I started by looking up quotes for characters to say, and found myself reading four or five pages, until I found myself reading the Bible and only the Bible for quite a long time.
And then the Bible and Christianity became more and more central to the novel.,
Another sense in which you're anti-humanist is that you have no truck with ideas of personal (or social) progress — people achieving self-sufficiency and fullness of being by becoming more ‘conscious’.
‘No, I don't have that view of the world.
i see everyone as very much alone.
To see yourself as part of some greater humanist scheme…
I can't really abide by that myself.
I'm someone who has very little concern with any kind of social problems, someone who's very much concerned with their own particular plight.
.. I don't know what this is founded in, but I believe that there must be some kind  of basic system of balance, where everything's weighed up and when all the pain we've created in the world gets salved because we live again.
I have some kind of feelings towards that idea.’
FROM HER TO ETERNITY
Nick Cave surfaced at a time when post-punk's handle on the workings of desire was diagrammatic and programmatic.
Punk had bequeathed the idea that demystification was the route to enlightenment.
‘Personal politics’ was the buzzword: the acknowledgement of the ‘dark side’was always grounded in progressive humanism, the belief that what was twisted could be straightened out, that the shadows could be banished by the spotlight of analysis.
The idea was that through deconditioning, unblocking, a ventilation of the soul (‘airing your problems’), it was possible to achieve some kind of frank and freeflowing exchange.
Against this view of love as contract, Cave, in The Birthday Party, was almost alone in reinvoking love as malady, monologue, abject dependence, whose ultimate expression could only be violence: the recurrent theme of girl-murder, or at the opposite pole the paroxysm of desire in ‘Zoo Music Girl’, ‘Oh!
God! please let me die beneath her fists!’
Cave was the first writer, in a post-punk climate of positivism, to start using Biblical imagery (sin, retribution, curses, bad seed, revenge)…
‘Perhaps I'm kind of emotionally retarded…but basically I've just written about things how I've felt about them, myself, emotionally.
Things like revenge, which you talk about as almost an Old Testament feeling, I see as completely now.
It's just one of those things this society has suppressed, along with any other strong or extreme outburst of emotion.
I think there's a certain numbness in the world today…that accepts certain kinds of violence, but is against other kinds of violence.,
So you have a kind of ethics of violence?
Certain kinds of violence — the crime of passion — have a kind of aesthetic integrity?
‘That's one way of putting it…
There's something more noble in revenge, than in…sadism, or violence through greed.
Maybe there's something more aesthetically pleasing about it, I don't know…
I just find those subject the easiest to deal with: on the one hand, they're the most tangible feelings I have to pull out of myself; on the other, they make me want to make a stronger statement when I ultimately do that.
I don't deny feelings of happiness just because I don't write about them.
For me, there's just something more powerful in Man's ultimate punishments — whether they're on a humanist level or a more mystical level — than in his ultimate rewards.
The rewards of happiness and contentment and security, I see as mostly drawn out of a routine of things.
And they have no aesthetic interest for me, or much lasting value.
‘But then again, my favourite song in the world is ‘Wonderful World'’ by Louis Armstrong.
If any song really chokes me up, it's that one.
If there's any song that I would like to do, but would never attempt because I wouldn't know how to begin, that's the one.
If I could produce the same effect on other people as Louis Armstrong does with that song, then I'd be really happy.
But there's something so unintentionally tragic about that song.
Although I'm sure that has a lot to do with the way I listen, Louis Armstrong being this all-time winner and happy guy.’
Do you resent the arbitrary power that beautiful people have?
Something shallow, unearned, but capable of putting you in thrall.
Revenge would seem to originate in this feeling of powerlessness.
‘You're asking me if I'm some sort of embittered, wounded animal, who only wants to reach out and break things because he can't be happy or possess them?’
No, more generally than that: the idea of beauty as terrorism.
Of possession as the delusion we all run aground on.
It seems like there's a negativity at the heart of romantic love, because love is nothing if not the always already doomed fantasy of possession.
Doomed because of the flux (growth or decay) that is the loved one.
You were talking about life's punishments just now, and maybe the fact that love is doomed from the off is one of them.
‘There's lots of different angles you can look at things from.
I accept all that.
Although I don't think it's impossible that it can't be the other way, that two people can't grow toward each other.
I don't particularly believe all love is doomed.
But I guess, one is usually kinda suffering from some aborted love affair or association, rather than being at the peak of one.
I think it's fairly obvious that a lot more suffering goes on in the name of love than the little happiness you can squeeze out of it.
But I wouldn't like to dwell on it.
Perhaps you could lighten up a little bit.’
Condescendingly, like an agony aunt or something, he adds: ‘There are plenty more fish in the sea.’
THE SINGER
Since the death of the Birthday Party, Nick Cave has steadily made a transition from exhibitionist, incendiary live performer to something more stately and, yes, dignified.
The fireball has become an ember.
Kicking Against the Pricks , an album of cover versions, marked the key shift from poet visionary of sex-and-death to interpretive balladeer, from torched singer to a croon the colour of  cinders, from Dionysiac excess to a ruined classicism.
And on Your Funeral …
My Trial , Cave and the Bad Seeds were staging their own dilapidated equivalents to ‘By the Time I Get to Phoenix’ and ‘Something's Gotten Hold of My Heart’, in the gently obliterating, slowly gathering, morose grandeur of ‘Sad Waters’and ‘Stranger Than Kindness’.
Cave has influenced other kindred spirits to leave behind self-immolation in favour of The Song.
When did he start getting into what he calls ‘entertainment music, although some might call it corn’?
‘I've just found myself usually more affected by the clichés in pop, in art, in life, than I have by the…‘
Wilful difference?
‘Yeah.
I find that wilfulness in itself is enough to make me turn away from something.
When people are attempting to be different for the sake of it, I find it incredibly irritating.’
Do you have different influences now than when you started?
‘I think I've been through being influenced by people.
I don't think that could happen to me now, in the way that it did in my formative years.
My ideas are self-generating now, they spring from what I've done before.
It's all very inwardlooking, and a lot of the time I find myself — it may sound unforgivable — ignorant of what's going on outside me and the influences that are going around.
I don't think I'm fully formed or ever will be, but my basic creative journey is now self-perpetuating.’
But musically at least, you've moved from Stooges-meets-Beefheart conflagration to something more classically structured: the songs are like the charred and gutted husks of magnificent pop architecture.
And figures like Dylan and Leonard Cohen and Tim Rose have become important to you…
‘But not as a matter of influence as such.
I only look towards someone like Dylan because I see the things that have happened in his career and the conclusions he's come to and the way he's responded to outside forces, the audience, the press…and I recognize a similarity to how I feel in my career.
I have a vague inkling of why Dylan has progressed the way he has, which I don't have about other people.
The particular songs of his which affect me have helped me to understand what I ultimately want to make of my music, and what I'm failing to make of my music.
What I've found to be the most inspiring of his work have been the songs which are ultimately almost meaningless in their simplicity.
‘Take Nashville Skyline .
I found the fact that he made that record much more affecting than, say,Highway 67 Revisited .
Nashville Skyline was one of the albums he put out after his motorcycle accident, from which the critics concluded that he  must have somehow injured his brain…
All the complexities of his lyrics were ironed out…
He made some very basic country records.
It's these songs, or albums like Slow Train Coming , Which affect me more than Blonde On Blonde .
The simplicity of the statement, and the bravery…in a way, it requires more courage than making something more ‘experimental’.’
So you feel the same enlightenment that happened to Dylan has also befallen you?
You no longer want to be marginal or difficult?
‘I am still waiting for what happened to Dylan to happen to me.
I'd be a lot happier if I could disentangle myself from What I've already done and create songs from a completely fresh perspective.’
THE BAD SEED
When did you first feel different or destined?
At school?
Later?
‘I assumed everybody felt they were different from everybody else…it would be a pretty sad individual who didn't feel that they were unique.’
But such an individual usually defines him or herself against a body of people who are meant to be homogeneous and standard-issue.
‘I didn't have any great coming out.
Perhaps my basic thoughts were externalized by reading Crime and Punishment by Dostoievsky, and realizing that I had a basic Napoleonic complex.
That was quite a revelation in those years of juvenilia.
That book is all about the idea that the world is divided into the ordinary and the extraordinary, and that the extraordinary shouldn't have to live by the dictates of the mediocre majority.
As an adolescent, this made sense to me.’
Do you think every body has the potential to be extraordinary, if pushed over a limit?
‘No, I don't, actually.
I think everybody probably does feel they do.
But I think they're probably deluded.
I don't believe that we're all born equal, as lumps of dough that are later shaped by our peers and parents and so forth…
I believe in innate inequality.’
Did you have an unusual childhood?
Was there something to colour your worldview with its tragic perspective?
‘I'm sure there was…but I'm not about to start psychoanalysing myself…‘
You see it as a bogus science?
‘Yeah.
Anyway, rather than attributing it to my childhood, I prefer to believe that I was born into the world with greater or lesser faculties than other people and that I can take full responsibility for them.
I wouldn't put it down to the way I was manipulated as a child.’
Doesn't that mean you have even less responsibility?
Wouldn't that make you even angrier with the world?
‘I think people get even angrier if they think about this precise thing that was done in their so-called formative years that made them the way they are.
I just feel that I can take credit, or blame, for what I do and have done.
That it came from within me, not from without.
I'd rather see what makes me different as something almost congenital.
And I have these inklings that what you commit or endure in this world, relates to some kind of system of justice or balance.
Maybe if you get a bad deal in this world, it is because of something you did, or were, in a previous life.
Which is why I don't feel sorry for the poor.’
Cave's departure from progressive humanism, with Its belief in individual and social transformation, is so extreme that his worldview verges on the Mediaeval: the language of curses, bad seed, the worm in the bud.
The world is a vale of tears, a giant ball of dung.
Even more than Morrissey and his bad memories, Cave's vision is the antithesis of the idea of pop as a remaking of yourself.
For Cave, the sole possibility for heroism is in fatalism, a stoic dignity in the face of your plight, the blight that is your negative birthright.
(1988)
THE DEATH OF SOUL all souled out (written with David Stubbs)
THE QUEEN IS DEAD AND HER NAME WAS ARETHA FRANKLIN
What is strangling pop?
What has turned its face that grey colour?
Passion.
Passion is blushing furiously across pop, rapidly turning it to ashes in its shame.
The blight of ‘87 is not media cowardice, record companies asleep at the wheel, callous insipidness, the return of rock, incoherence, a lack of great songs, but rather, a surfeit of PASSION.
In 1987, the consensus is that everything must be stamped with soul and franked with passion.
We're thinking Terence Trent d'Arby, but also U2; Tina Turner, but also Chuck Brown; Mick Hucknall, and all soul music.
But Passion is spent!
Soul is dead, like God is dead.
The battles are over.
The hour is late, but the likes of View From a Hill and Hothouse Flowers won't admit it.
In the age of sampling, they're still using a Hammond organ.
What is the thinking behind this small insistence?
Our culture is clearly a riotous heap of fragments and Erasure are asking us why we can't live together.
Who are they trying to kid?
We could tolerate these sentimental Luddites but then hot-foot comes the final straw on the broken back of a donkey: a ferry sinks, claims the lives of dozens, questions are raised about profits gained at the expense of passenger safety, and a bunch of pop stars gather together, whimper, implore, shed buckets for us to throw money in, unite in the passionate cry ‘Let IT BE!’
Sorry, we believe that should read: ‘Pursue the Matter to the Highest Court’!
Is this what Womack has come to?
A stick to beat us with?
Cajole, shame, bully, push away?
For too long, we have stared from the moon in reproachful silence at this spectacle.
Better that Aretha Franklin had not been born than that we should  endure a drop more of this acid rain of spittle!
Soul?
My arse — the Queen is dead and her name was Aretha Franklin!
VINTAGE STUFF
In 1987, soul is no more than a packed vehicle beating a hasty retreat from what are perceived as the excesses of white modernism.
This reaction owes its first impulse to the early days of punk, when groups like Marine, The Pop Group and A Certain Ratio first dabbled, intrigued, in funk.
What began as an exotic flirtation with the Other, a pop foray into a perceived Heart of Darkness, soon turned into a full-blown dance initiative in those irony-clad years of 1980–81, with everyone from Japan to ABC to Cabaret Voltaire to Spandau Ballet to Heaven 17 conspiring to venture a white funk whose snappiness was a jeer at the indies, a white funk that would saunter easily into the charts and every other public place and, with their  manifestos , make them better places to be.
While that particular strain of thinking was busy degenerating into New Pop, scholars, as they will, peeled back this pop cartoon to find the real thing feeding it from beneath…torch singers.
Lost Soul.
Billie Holiday.
Aretha.
There swiftly followed a post-modern embarrassment of Charly re-issues, soulboy standards, and a wave of remorse swept over Face readers the world over (well, London over).
‘My God.
We can never be this good again.’
Thousands took the pledge and joined the anti-rock wagon.
There are people now in the Wag Club whose musical digestive systems would probably collapse if they were to be inadvertently fed a powerchord.
New pop was born, concurrently, with Yazoo.
Alison Moyet's voice was a wholesome barrage of body, a humanist apology for the perceived thin-ness of Depeche Mode (her partner Vince Clarke's first group), a fiery torch brought to bear on a cold, metallic sound (synthpop, modernism at its coolest).
The upshot, you know — death, as it were, warmed up.
Today's pop, be it Moyet, Curiosity, even Phil Collins or Tina turner, reads as a continued act of contrition for past pop mischief — how could Clare Grogan eat ice cream when, as we all know, Billie Holiday spent nine months in a state asylum?
It's a music that boasts some kind of spiritual superiority to the allegedly ubiquitous synthetic rubbish' that is elsewhere smothering our lives like nylon.
But where is this ‘white trash’?
It's been marginalized, become a myth.
The truth is that today's pop — Whitney, Simply Red, Tina turner, George Michael, Anita Baker, Fine Young Cannibals, Percy Sledge, Ben E. King, The  Communards, Gabriel, Erasure, The Christians — are about shame about pop.
They're right to be ashamed, but of themselves, not of pop.
There is a tedious pounding at the heart of this music, a sincerity that allows for only one angle of delivery, a passion that has created a pop atmosphere in which it's impossible to be clever, cool or cynical, a soul whose impulse is NOT to embrace the avant-garde, like Faustus, and be cut into a thousand pieces by a sampling machine.
This pop will never trivialize itself, and so can never be lauded as cheap tack.
Nor, conversely, does it aspire to art-pop status, because its aim is to be truthful to its mediocre soul.
It is therefore neither fascinating, nor ‘literate’— just warm.
If you want to know why the charts are no good these days, therefore, don't blame Radio One: blame Billie Holiday, Stax, Sam Cooke, Blind Lemon Jefferson even.
Or rather, the people who decided that they were ‘relevant’.
THE PUTRID EMOTION
In what ways are ‘passion’ or ‘soul’appropriate signifiers for these times?
Is Mick Hucknall really how emotion sounds?
A regular, freeflowing effusion of passion?
This soulful thrust, this loud inundation?
What information does it really carry, apart from telling you about the therapeutic inclinations of the caterwauler himself?
For us, there is more emotion in the undemonstrative numbness, the ironically incomplete account given of self by New Order or the Mekons, than in the silky signals emanating from your Anita Bakers.
Can you find dejection, prostration, the sticking in the craw of the intolerable, in the passionate grit of a Terence Trent D'Arby?
Sometimes, the dis-passionate vocal can express more grief — the wounded, bloodlet voice of a Kristin Hersh, or the muezzin prayer wail of a John Lydon or a David Thomas — an upwardly spiralling peal that emanates from exile, a gaping chasm where SOUL once plumply resided.
In the drowsy drawl of Arthur Russell or A.R.
Kane, the emotional content hangs as beautifully as bromide, approaches oblivion, unconsciousness or drifting consciousness, as opposed to the rigid wide-awake club that comprises the Totalitarians of Passion.
THE EXAMPLE THAT HOWLINGLY TOPS THEM ALL: The Fine Young Cannibals' cover of The Buzzcocks' ‘Ever Fallen In Love’.
THE ORIGINAL: a sullen, inexpressive wail, a fallible voice as small and sorely limited as a back bedroom, a fey, frustrated frailty.
THE COVER: Roland Gift's overdressed, over-stressed surfeit of overtures  glows with an odious, and utterly irrelevant magnificence!
Gift's bombast is quite at odds with the gnawing sense of LACK at the heart of the lyric.
The problem here is, of course, one of stylization.
The Totalitarians of Passion have reduced their technique to the state of James Brown's knees — a splintered mess, tattered through over-use.
Although the passion-merchant, the soul man, is in pursuit of some sort of authenticity, a confirmation of his depth of feeling, his is not his own voice, is rather the convention, a tear-jerk reaction.
When someone uses the conventional cues and triggers of emotion in this way, all they end up communicating is the desire to cue an acquired reflex.
Insofar as soul is about sex, one result can be a musical hypersexuality, where the signs of passion are learnt, exaggerated, Inflated and unmoored from the ‘real thing’.
With Prince or Zapp, this is most fine, as they achieve the other, an ultra-vivid (Prince), more super-human sound (Zapp's vocoder).
Prince is the Hendrix, in terms of achieving this emotional swell: Mick Hucknall the Gary Moore.
THE FETID BLIGHT OF HUMANISM
SOUL was once — a very long time ago — the sound of a psyche breaking up, shattered by desire or loss — a wracked catharsis, an ailing, dejected, broken sound, essentially tragic.
Today, soul has become a token of strength of feeling, strength of being.
Beige popsters take a vicarious pride in the slow baptism of fire that their chosen genre and its protagonists underwent.
They imagine that they can bask in the reflected glory of their martyr, Sam Cooke, of legions of underpaid, socially alienated, forgotten black vocalists.
Beige vocalists admire and envy the ‘blacks’ for being more in touch with their emotions, their bodies, the unfettered ignorance of their self-expression.
Faintly irked by the ‘crisis’ of white music — that its body has been ‘forgotten’, its attention allowed to meander across the debris of a vast information explosion, away from the folk fire, to be easily bored, jaded, distracted — beige vocalists attempt to construct an ersatz black body to signify…what?
Health!
The vocal dexterity, vigour and power of the soul man amount to…passion as workout!
In our culture, which sets such a high premium on self-enrichment (in every sense), the robust, emotive and expressive aspects of soul act as a sort of therapy, helping us to ‘liberate’ ourselves by getting back in touch with ourselves, opening up, unblocking, becoming more functional and therefore (it runs) more ‘free’.
The musclebound exhibition of soul works as a boast — see the depth of my feeling, hear the wealth of my emotion! see how I am moved!
Yes, it is quite as sinister as it seems.
‘Totalitarianism’ is not too strong a word.
This humanistic vision of vigour and common purpose quite simply writes out deviancy, strange pain, breakdown of communication, the incapacity to be ‘moved’.
Even when the soul man is ‘hurt’, it is only a celebration of his ability to be ‘touched’.
Today, every voice in pop must be a Voice, must measure up, because today, anything less than a raucous tear-blob sounds simply feeble on Planet Pop, must die like the runt.
We all heard about the Consensus Terrorism at work in Band/Live/Ferry Aid.
It could not have found a more appropriate, more common voice than the soulful.
The sub-text of ‘Feed the World’ was anxious self-congratulation, an insidious demonstration of feeling.
‘Look at the strength of our concern!’
The bluster of the tear-stained pop stars simply buffeted, pushed away the possibility that the lyric ought to have contained certain small truths such as‘WE ARE THE SICK ONES, WE IN THE WEST’.
The all-prevailing, extended blubber of Passion has become incapable of expressing sickness.
What we got was the jelly-like wobbling of Western pop's fulsome, milky tit in the face of the starving.
More recent, more passionate, more obscene still: The Ferry Aid single.
To say nothing of the fact that ‘charity’ should not have been invoked in this issue, the fact was that the excruciating passion levels broke all records on this outing, bust all guts.
And, once again, the incontinent hysteria of the massed popsters was an utterly inappropriate treatment for the hushed resignation of ‘Let It Be’(itself an inappropriate song!!).
It's quite clear that the influence of soul music in pop has become poisonous, repressive, grey and total.
It's time to haul away from the centre of pop, the humanist body (Terence Trent, U2, Simply Red) and leave in its place a ghostly un-body (Public Enemy, Throwing Muses, A.R.
Kane).
To move from the FULFILMENT, SELF-ASSURANCE, STRENGTH, and SELF-POSSESSION implied in passion to a pale sense of LACK, VULNERABILITY, of being POSSESSED.
To snuff out the FIRE OF PASSION and shiver again to the CHILL OF AWE, of magic, trance, falling, yearning.
It's time to put a bullet through the head of SOUL HUMANISM and find liberation in the inhumanity of the mechanical, bestial, angelic, demonic, ghostly.
To leave the crowded, tear-stained, blackened spaces of Planet Pop and drift to the MOON.
To share there the cold, quietly admonishing gaze of He Said, The Stars of Heaven, Happy Mondays, Meat Puppets.
To go UNDERWATER and SWIM with Arthur Russell and A.R.
Kane.
Or UNDERGROUND, to join Big BLACK, BUTTHOLE Surfers, World Domination, Skinny Puppy…
Blast Passion, which has blasted all doubt, mischief and intrigue onto the peripheries, drowned pop in shame.
A CONCERNED SOULBOY DOUBTS OUR WORD
CONCERNED SOULBOY: ‘Very provocative, I'm sure, but none of this seems all that radical to me.
When it comes down to it, all you're saying is that the likes of Tina Turner and Mick Hucknall have created a bloated travesty of soul.
Well, I'd go along with that — but you seem to forget that Tina turner is fake soul, not real soul at all.’
Ah, but it's this very desire for a ‘real soul’ that is the malaise.
A yearning for a ‘new Marvin Gaye’ to throb miraculously at the centre of pop to resolve its own, fabulous identity crisis.
Do you imagine that any single figure in pop can tell us precisely What's Goin' On?
And would such a figure — an auteur with a carrying voice to bring us all within earshot — be helpful, or even possible?
(Terence Trent D'Arby, ha ha ha!)
Why do we need more and better soul — why should it not swiftly become a fat, sweaty, obscenity, like the last lot did?
Ultimately, the Campaign for Real Soul amounts only to an ostrich-head-in-sand retreat from the future: a future pop based in soul-less, ground-less dis-corporation.
CS: ‘You can say all you like, but it's clear that soul music is more popular than it has ever been, worldwide.’
You do not seem to appreciate that the point at which Soul is stretched the furthest, globally, is the point at which it is weakest.
Spread thin, ubiquitous, where once it was rare, exotic, precious, a sob in private.
A little too much of anything suffocates pop.
CS: ‘And I suppose you think there's been a bit too much soul.
So, after all this, what do you foresee as the consequences for hip hop, Chuck Brown, Tashan, Alexander O'Neal?
I know you like them all.’
Black people are quite as capable of evading the totalitarianism of passion as whites are of perpetrating it.
This is not an issue of race, but of creed.
Take hip hop and house.
Twelve-inch culture kills soul!
Hip hop is anti-soul, disperses consciousness, quite literally CUTS UP ITS BODY.
From here on, the likes of Tashan must be discussed not in terms of‘spirit’, passion, emotional commitment, but ether, wire, the ocean, the paintings of Chirico, peculiar grace.
We have no quarrel with the delicious plastic that Tony Blackburn plays on his daytime show.
CS: ‘You bastards!
There's more of worth, more that uplifts in a single chorus of ‘We Need Money'’ than in a dozen of your picky, pedantic articles!’
A dozen or more examples of the soulboy's discourse have made it impossible for us to listen to virtually any ‘black’ record with any real pleasure, without  ghastly phrases like ‘pride and dignity’popping into our heads.
This is nothing personal, you understand — your voice is not your own, you are the product of a discourse.
CS: ‘You bandy about the word ‘totalitarian'’— you're scarcely immune from that yourself!
No soulboy would propose a five-year boycott of Velvet Underground LPs — yet that is precisely what you propose for Marvin Gaye, Aretha and Billie Holiday!’
We realize that it is hard.
To you, it doubtless seems as ‘unnatural’ as ripping out your own heart with a mechanical claw.
But there is no longer a ‘natural’ role for soul.
With the death of God and the death of the Ground, all that is left is — the Air.
Try to understand that Pop should be up in the air, supernatural, alive to all angles and shades of emotion, plastic and twice-cooked.
Bless Marvin Gaye — but we don't need him at the moment!
This is the age of the Aerial!(1987)
from ‘young soul rebels’ to designer soul-cialism
Dexy's Midnight Runners were perhaps the prototype for the new soul militancy of the eighties.
Soul for them was a form of exertion; performance that Barney Hoskyns called (in reference to The Jam, as it happens)‘a gymnasium of exhortation’.
Tenderness and languor did not fit into the ‘Young Soul Rebels’ scheme.
Dexy's songs were a series of  manifestos and clarion calls for a new, pure music, always about to be born.
This was meta-music, its subject an alleged degeneration of pop culture, its mission to bring back a sense of a mission to music.
All Kevin Rowland seemed to be saying was that he had something to say.
He was a zealot for zeal in itself.
Dexy's used to workout together, they abstained from alcohol and drugs.
Developing your body and your soul, exercise and suffering, were both facets of a supremely masculine fortification of the spirit.
Lamming on Dexy's-clones Big Sound Authority: ‘wait till you see this man sweat’— sweat as the tangible proof of authenticity, commitment.)
Kevin Rowland's first group — a punk band — were called The Killjoys.
Rowland — with his paranoiac hatred of the music press, his fervent work ethic, his privileging of ‘projected passion’ over intellect — turned soul into a kind of micro-fascism.
All that was needed was for someone to take Rowland's ascetic vision/version of soul fanaticism and commandeer it for political ends.
SOCIALIST REALIST POP
The Redskins are ‘Young Soul Rebels’with a cause.
An ultimate agit pop group, sat painfully pat at the confluence of three socialist realist orthodoxies: that there is a necessary and simple fit between pop culture and radical politics: that youth culture is a working-class phenomenon; that black music alone is the only  unembarrassing and legitimate basis for protest.
They take the intensity of soul and clench it into a fist rather than using it as a form of release.
The euphoria of R&B is made the vehicle for constructive ends.
Scrape past the Soul Man postures and you find…
The Clash, or worse, The Tom Robinson Band.
The Redskins' link-up with the Socialist Workers' Party is the most stringent and emphatic attempt to thrust pop into some sort of relation to the ‘real’ world.
This is the most deluded fantasy of all — the idea that, by buying certain pieces of vinyl and by going to certain gigs, instead of consuming a commodity, you are participating and making a contribution to ‘the struggle’.
In the agit-pop scheme of things, pleasure-in-itself has no value.
Expenditure without return, the sheer waste of energy, is forbidden.
The guilt of consumption, of being consumed, has to be expunged, validated by a second, ulterior use (drinking Nicaraguan coffee annoys Reagan, going to a rock benefit is fun with a purpose).
Agit-poppers constantly castigate pop for its dereliction of duty and its straying from being aligned.
For instance, witness Steven Wells fulminating in the NME : ‘Pop can be treated as the vile pus that drips from sores of a cancerous body politic.’
Its only value is as ‘a platform for propaganda’.
Of course, the left has traditionally had a purely instrumental attitude to culture, leisure, fin.
Art for art's sake has been dismissed as ‘apolitical’, ‘solipsistic’, ‘bourgeois’.
(But isn't the terror of expenditure without return the very epitome of bourgeois economic continence?)
In the fifties, socialists railed against the decadence of youth consumption, youth's hankering for Americana, like zoot suits, comic books, quiffs and the ‘meaningless gibberish’ of rock'n'roll.
What was detested was an excess of form over content, the gratuitous flamboyance of tail-fins on cars, extravagant use of cloth in clothing.
Paul Weller's Style Council and Red Wedge are the latest incarnations of this tendency.
Weller is trying to make political idealism glamorous by linking it with being a stylist, and validate being a stylist by aligning it with political ideals.
There's an idea here of consumption with integrity, the notion that certain consumer choices have a natural fit with certain political choices — hence the cover of Our Favourite Shop .
What is fantasized here is a perfect life — a smoothly running, perfectly functional, utilitarian consumer aesthetic that has a natural congruence with socialist politics.
Weller's shopping list of socialist good taste includes Bass Weejuns, Burberry raincoats, Motown and Stax 45s, Italian design, Blue Note LPs, etc.
But what is included is less revealing than what is excluded: all the excessive elements of working-class consumption that refuse to fit neatly into this socialist continence — Stanley knives, lurid cocktails,Blind Date , trash videos, tabloids, bingo, heavy metal, Club 18–30…
DESIGNER SOUL-CIALISM
You can find a similar idea of consumption with integrity in The Face , where the Disinformation column snuggles next to photographs of exorbitant clothes and furniture, the implication being that avant-garde design is part of some grand progressive thrust that also includes socialism.
This is designer socialism: the belief that buying tassled loafers rather than winklepickers, is somehow as much a PR of the struggle as being on the picket line at Wapping.
The semiotic approach to subcultural style pioneered by Dick Hebdige and his cohorts at Birmingham's Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies — reading into working-class consumption for evidence of myriad micro-resistances to the status quo— has been turned arse about tit.
‘Pride and dignity’ is the soulboy soul-cialist's supreme tenet.
This too has its origins in subcultural theory: Hebdige's hypothesis that the ‘classy’ look of Mod style was a challenge to the class structure in sixties Britain, an expression of resilient self-belief.
But this begs the question: does ‘pride and dignity’ amount to anything more than the aspiration to participate in society on its own terms?
What use is the Staples Singers' exhortation ‘respect yourself’, if the notion of self-respect is still bound to conventional notions of respectability?
ROOTS RHYTHM RADICALISM
In the early eighties there was a massive defection of Social Realist Pop to the cause of black music.
Weller led the way, dropping The WHO as his model for political protest in favour of funk and early seventies disco.
Agit-poppers convinced themselves that rock was archaic and debased, no longer capable of functioning as a medium for radical comment.
The energy of punk, of the whole Rock Against Racism initiative, had faded.
At similar moments of entropy, black music has functioned as an alluring outside for white youth — the old notion of the Black as other, incarnation of sexuality and the forbidden.
But whereas previously identification with geographically-proximate black subcultures was the influence (punk felt an affinity with Rastafarian dub, for instance), this time round there was a dissemination of certain ideas of blackness through the media, a borrowing from the files of history.
ROOTS RHYTHM RADICALISM — this cluster's perceived identity was what lay behind the drive for an infusion of blackness.
The assumption behind this shift was that an ideal black music would naturally link up with socialist politics.
And so a sanitized canon of soul and funk was drawn up: James Brown's ‘Say it Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud’, Curtis Mayfield's ‘Move On Up’ and ‘We've got to Have Peace’, Timmy Thomas's ‘Why Can't We Live  Together’, Gil Scott Heron's ‘The Bottle’, Grandmaster Flash's ‘The Message’, Brother D and the Collective Effort's ‘How We Gonna Make the Black Nation Rise’, James Brown and Afrika Bambatta's ‘Unity’.
What's brought to the fore is the political content of the music, but what's written out is the ‘unsoundness’— the anti-social, anti-egalitarian narcissism of black pop, the brutality of hip hop, the show excess and upward aspirations of mainstream soul.
In its insistence on the Message and on street-cred, the new soul is very much cramped and shadowed by the dowdy spirit of new wave, with its emphasis on lyrical ‘relevance’.
New soul carries on the side of punk that was least interesting (slogans, youth rhetoric, documentary realism) rather than the more artistically provocative element (punk's theatre of rage and disgust).
If The Redskins are the Clash of the new soul, what we need is soul's Sex Pistols, a group that can work from soul's unrealism, its dangerous ecstasy, to make unreasonable demands.
All that's happened is that, in switching from rock to soul, agit-pop has shifted emphasis from denunciation to affirmation, or what has been called offensive optimism.
‘Shout it to the Top’, as The Style Council have it.
THE COST OF LOVING
It's a strange journey Paul Weller's made, but stranger still is that he's managed to take the greater part of his audience along with him.
Somehow he's managed to lead one of the most entrenched examples of playsafe rock consensus ‘forward’ into apparently digging music that sounds just like Con Funk Shun, Rah Band, Loose Ends.
The problem is that Weller, ever earnest, has internalized too thoroughly the edict Rock is Dead.
For every past powerchord and epic gesture he now endeavours to atone, publicly, by the slavish imitation of the most slick and redundant aspects of contemporary black music.
Once he believed The Jam was the true sound of When you're young'; now he's wised up, got hip to the fact that where the ‘real kids’ are at is…
Robbie Vincent, LWR, all the loathsome details of fake sophistication (‘light those candles…open the freezer door’).
Embarrassed by the rash declamatory urgency of his past with The Jam, Weller wants to leave behind adolescence, and ‘progress’ from gauche to smooth.
The Style Council sound is a condensation of the whole gamut of naff provincial fantasies of sophistication — vibes, Hammond organ, strings, jazzfunk, drummers who use a brush; easy listening that appeals to spivs of either political denomination.
No longer a rock band, where a certain stiffness in the limbs is a virtue, but not yet virtuoso jazzers, The Style Council are stuck at that most useless of levels — semi-fluency.
Who needs spineless pastiche of ‘My Guy’ perkiness  and Modem Jazz Quartet cool jazz?
Five years on, anti-rockism is the new hippiedom.
Weller has simply transposed one ‘reality’ of English suburbia for another, the smalltown smallness of ‘English Rose’, ‘That's Entertainment’, ‘Smithers-Jones’(derived from mod) updated to a world of winebars and nightclubs.
But is deference to ‘reality’ such a good thing anyway?
What exactly is of value in this nouveau-riche southern heartland of Thatcherism?
The Cost of Loving sees Weller severing, finally, from the sixties.
The music is a surprisingly accurate imitation of that most toothless, spineless idiom, Britfunk..
Philly pastiches, jazz-funk ballads,Streetsounds stuff…none of which approaches the real mind-lessening ecstasy of disco.
It's irretrievable naffness can be conveyed in only two words — Junior Giscombe.
Songcraft, good intentions, an anxiety to avoid love clichés — all these are the very death of disco.
Worse still is when Weller attempts to remotivate the sound of Saturday Nite, make it bear the burden of his meaning well.
I liked them more when The Style Council played with pop history, assembled their own fantasy of ‘perfect pop’ out of Philly, Blue Note, Left Bank, Holland-Dozier-Holland.
Dear old Paul Weller.
We're all on the same side.
No doubt I'll be voting Labour with exactly the same mixture of dutiful resignation and frustration there's no more incandescent alternative, as he will.
I even have a sneaking affection for the man.
But the sad fact is that even if it is possible to achieve a co-incidence between desire and responsibility, ecstasy and concern, Weller is incapable of such a balance.
The problem is the fundamental modesty of his aspiration, of his person — those unvoluptuous good looks.
Within The Redskins' drastically curtailed emotional range, they worked, because there's a potential for romance in streetfighting and revolution.
But…how can you make the Labour Party seem exciting?
That's the flaw in Red Wedge — their chiding logic of pragmatism (‘as good as we'll get…let's face facts’) is in fundamental antagonism to pop's intolerant utopianism.
On The Cost of Loving there's a track called ‘Right To Go’, recorded with ‘homegrown’ rappers The Dynamic Three.
It's dated flailing and useless, hardly crucial or fresh, but the real problem is: how can you conceivably make trudging through the wet leaves and puddles to your local primary school, in order to tick a piece of paper in a polling booth, seem like a glamorous and dynamic act of self-realization, or even solidarity?
THE CHRISTIANS
Nothing makes me more downcast than the ‘uplifting’, nothing elevates me more than the de-jected.
Only music that stems from spiritual impoverishment  enriches my life, Oh, like everybody else I had my summer of soul, like a lot of white boys, thought I'd found my truest voice.
But what was once a breakthrough, a crucial realignment of taste among white rock fans, has subsequently congealed into orthodoxy.
In the process, soul has been installed as something that bolsters your life, rather than knocks the ground from under your feet.
The extremism I once heard in soul has been evened out.
Britpop always lags far behind black American pop.
In the sixties and seventies the blues boom and heavy metal were vulgarizing the blues years after the fact.
Now it's early seventies black pop that's being bastardized, the exquisite anguish of your Timmy Thomases reduced to a blunt compassion.
What groups like The Christians do to soul is both coarsen and mute it, at the same time.
But that's as maybe — even if The Chieftains were this decade's Temptations, Mayfield or Gaye, they still wouldn't be needed.
Speaking purely politically, in the current climate, cultural representations of failure have more resonance than fortitude-in-adversity.
Pop's prime mover is narcissism, always will be, and so self-pity is more crucial a pop response than altruism.
Pop was never meant to be this vicarish.
‘How Long Can This Go On’, ‘Save A Soul In Every Town’, ‘Ideal World’,— even the CRASSEST agit-pop militancy is preferable to this cooing and billowing Radox bath of sententious platitudes.
Give me rage and hate anyday.
Sure the world needs more love in it; sure, the brutal and uncaring hold the reins; sure, some people have no choice about having their lives wasted — but I celebrate the brutal and wasteful in music because I know what fascinates me, and it's not this ghastly New Wave soul with-the-one-saxophone-tacked-on.
I also know that nothing ‘political’ happens at Christians gigs, not with words this literal, emotions this plain and simplistic.
People may be moved, but no one is moving .
(1985–7)
smooth operators
What is it with today's teenyboppers?
Why is it that they bestow their ardour upon the well-adjusted, wholesome architects of pop's fatal new maturity?
In the old days, there used to be crazes, Adam and the Ants, Gary Numan, absurd figures who nonetheless possessed a certain mesmeric force, managed to induct us into ludicrousness, like the Pied Piper.
Maladjusted, inadequate characters with a grudge against the world and a lot to prove (both Adam and Numan had mammoth chips on the shoulder about the music press).
These fanatics used fame as a chance to impose their own loopy private fantasy world on pop kids' imagination.
Today, the level-headed hold sway, pop planners with sufficient self confidence to want to use pop to do more than celebrate themselves.
Unlike the damaged narcissists, with their compensations of spurious glory or morbidly melodramatized misery, the new pop workers want attention not for themselves, not for their make-believe world, but for what they have to say about the outside world.
I allude, of course, to the wave of middlebrow mature pop for whom the Song is more important than the Star — Wet Wet Wet, Deacon Blue, Hue and Cry, Blow Monkeys, Danny Wilson, Microdisney, etc.
Fame is not the spur, it's a liability, or a ‘necessary part of the process, y'know’…
This decade has seen the old bogey of progressive rock gradually replaced by progressive pop: the site for left-liberal well-meaning and pensiveness has shifted from concept albums and pomp rock, to the three-minute song and pop soul.
Prog pop (like prog rock before it) is an embarrassed attempt to leave behind adolescence — that unsettled interim state so fruitfully prey to traumas, visionary  states, loosemindedness, impossible aspirations.
To move ‘forward’ from self-absorbed narcissism/doubt to adult altruism/commitment.
And so the sound of pop is no longer adolescent — urgent, frustrated, awkward, rampant — it's ‘assured’ and ‘classy’.
Ricky Ross from Deacon Blue talks about not wanting to seduce the audience: ‘I don't like the idea of people throwing themselves over to our music…abandonment is a great idea but it worries me because it's all so power-orientated.’
All that's left is ‘communication’, pop as vehicle.
The desire to ingratiate a way into the listener's consciousness and thus inveigle an all-important content is the reason all these groups draw inspiration from Sinatra, Bacharach and David, Sondheim, Steely Dan, early seventies' soul, to produce slick, crafted, sophisticated pop.
Unfortunately, the decision to opt for smoothness rather than scruffiness, composure rather than gaucheness, is not an innocent choice.
Sounds have political resonance.
The lyrics may be concerned and caring, but the music sounds nouveau riche, ostentatiously flashy, costly.
The invariably suave vocals bring to mind the phrase ‘smooth operator’, and the only people who want to be smoothies are Thatcherite southern spivs.
To aggravate all this further, the records all sound as though they were designed to be played on compact disc.
For these groups, ‘classy’ and ‘classic’have become elided, identical.
They've scoured their record collections for their favourite chic embellishments so as to enhance the luxury commodity aura of their product.
Danny Wilson use Lester Bowie's Brass Fantasia.
Hue and Cry jet off to Sigma Sound, NYC, to work with Jimmy Biondolillo (Sinatra's strings arranger) and the horn section James Brown used for Living in America .
Wet Wet Wet mosey down to Memphis to work with Willie Mitchell in the studio he used to record Al Green; Dr Robert duets with Curtis Mayfield.
With the entire wealth of pop history on hand, the temptation is to indulge in the kind of free-for-all pick'n'mix that has been called retro-nuevo.
The result is that any notion of musical futurism has fallen into abeyance.
The idea of the New has always been a crucial part of pop's rhetoric: the idea that the future is going to be a improvement on the past (that sixties' feeling of being on the brink of a whole new order, the beginning of an endless breaking down of barriers and limits).
In the eighties, though, everything from pop to advertising is telling us that all the golden ages are located in the past.
And on the other side of the Atlantic too.
All the mature pop groups come from Scotland or the northernmost parts of England, but all their musical reference points seem bound up with American ideas of sophistication and glamour.
It's curious how someone like Pat Kane  mixes being staunch SNP and singing in an American croon.
It's also curious how most of these groups have written at least one song about the meretricious lure of the capital.
Wet Wet Wet's ‘Wishing I Was Lucky’ is about going to London, then returning disillusioned to Clydebank; Danny Wilson's ‘Davey’is another anti-metropolis warning; Hue and Cry's ‘Goodbye to Me’is about the disorientation and displacement of the jetset life, while Deacon Blue's ‘Town to Blame’and ‘Dignity’and Kane Gang's ‘Looking for Gold’are about escaping smalltown constraints.
There seems to be a common thread here — a desire to rise above northern grim limits into a world of sleek, cosmopolitan opportunity, and at the same time an anxiety to retain one's roots.
The result — a strange (but not particularly compelling) mismatch between form and content — American finery meets northern realism.
These groups have made strenuous efforts to get it right — to get the sound they always wanted, with none of the cheapskate shoddiness that British soul/jazz groups often settle for: to counterbalance that lush, affluent sound with concerned lyrics, nods to their roots and tons of soul-blaring compassion.
And they're dead keen to suppress any burgeoning, ego-trip tendencies.
You can almost hear them thinking, ‘Who could hold anything against us?
What have we done wrong?’
But I can think of several reasons to resent their existence.
Because they strive, but can never counterfeit the ease or inevitability of great soul; are smart but never opulent, well-turned but never flamboyant.
Because they choose their words too carefully, jealously control their meanings, and if they're sussed enough to believe in ambiguities and contradictions you can be sure each one is carefully mounted in position for you, the listener.
Because they're almost there — unlike previous white soul or funk aspirants like Kevin Rowland or A Certain Ratio who fell so far shod of their ambitions they inadvertently created something different, these groups have, through graft and expense, come close, and so clog the second division of pop-soul.
In the process, they participate in the global installation of a kind of universal grade of emotive competence, a standardization of the voice which is marginalizing deficient or regional voices.
Because they denigrate the guitar.
And — despite the cosmopolitan sheen of the music — precisely because their feet are still firmly on the ground.
SEDUCED BUT NOT ABANDONED
Hue and Cry are the most interesting of the new pop sophisticates, not so much because of the music, but because singer and lyricist Patrick Kane is an  intellectual firebrand who's more sussed than most about the contradictions and complexities of trying to infiltrate intelligence into the world of teenpop.
Recently he penned probably the most abrasively intelligent letter ever to appear in Melody Maker , in which he laid out with admirable succinctness the differences between his pop aesthetic (making sense of the world, pop as motivator) and what he identified as the MM aesthetic of pop as dissipation.
Why the obsession with American culture?
‘I don't think I need to tell us how saturated we as a people are by American culture.
You cannot evade the fact that we are cultural Americans, dreaming American dreams.’
But there are so many different Americas that fascinate and shape us.
In Scotland there are two in particular— there's the pop scene that draws its inspiration from American bohemians like Lou Reed, Arthur Lee, Tom Verlaine, and there's your scene, which takes its cue from Bowie's Young Americans , Average White Band, Steely Dan, Chic…
‘People have attributed that vision of America to an upwardly mobile Glasgow scene of bands addicted to dancefloor culture.
Glasgow 1982–83 was a lot like New Romantic era London.
A lot of the pop soul, nouveau muso thing came about as a reaction to Postcard, or the post-Postcard janglepop.
The wilful amateurism and naïveté started to grate on everybody's nerves.
The Postcard vision of America is a late sixties’ America…‘
A kind of anti-American America…
‘It's an anti-lush America.
Which is the America I love — the America of classic showbiz, a wee utopia of lovely surfaces and lush expensiveness…‘
But I thought you were political…
‘Political in the sense that if I threw this glass of water over you in an interview, that would be a political act.
C'mon, life is political.
Rick Astley is political…’
But whereas Astley, like anything else in the world, is full of inadvertent political resonance, Hue and Cry are trying to control their political meanings.
Smuggle ‘improper’ ones in.
Isn't the danger with using an expensive sound the probability that people will take it straight, as un-ironic luxury?
‘Yeah, but a song like ‘Strength to Strength'’ is a joke we're playing on the English working class after the election.
If they want a kitsch little anthem they can sing while aspiring to the next set of double glazing or automated garden gnomes, that's okay by me, because that song is a BOMB delivered from Scotland.’
It occurs to me that Kane is overly optimistic here on three counts.
He over-estimates the importance of the text in pop.
He assumes that ‘ordinary’ pop  fans are attuned to reading off ‘subversion’or ‘importance’in the same way music press readers are — it's an approach in which you have to be initiated.
Most people may not be primed to be ‘subverted’ because they think of pop as light entertainment.
Finally, he underestimates the ability of pop fans to live with hidden or even oven meanings in pop that ought to affront them.
I've encountered Arena -reading Young Conservatives who get off on The Smiths and Sex Pistols: I knew a girl whose favourite group is The Jam but who claims to be apolitical and whose one great desire in life is a Mercedes.
There's no accounting for how people (mis) use pop.
Being aware of the mechanics of fan idolatory, do you feel a responsibility?
‘Aye, but you respond in a funny way.
I'd rather be seen as a big brother than a juicy sex symbol.
Someone who gives you advice that you don't want to hear, but it sinks in anyway.
A sententious older brother.
But a lot of people are looking for pseudo-satisfaction through lusting after this complete stranger, and you have to accept that, fight on that terrain.,
So you're confident that intelligence can withstand the spotlights unwithered, untrivialized?
‘Course it can.
Everybody's intelligent, everyone's trying to make sense of the world, even if they're not plugged into larger systems of thought like some of us.
Everyone's making choices everyday.’
Having taken on all these images and elements of pop mythology, do you want people to be aware there's an element of irony involved?
‘It's got to be a sugared pill, always.
On the subject of using the past, making references, it's just that it's impossible to evade the past, it's here, it's being thrown at you, and you have to deal with it.
Sure, it gets to be like a supermarket of history, pick'n'mix, and yeah, I don't know what happened to labour history, working class dignity…‘
‘Springsteen bought it all,’ pipes up Greg, Pat's engagingly sullen brother.
Pat: ‘Well, there you are — Springsteen's authenticity is as much constructed out of signs as anyone.’
Discussing how Hue and Cry have left behind notions like ‘modernism’, ‘rock’ and ‘youth’, we somehow get round to what is the point of pop.
Pat — an avid reader of the music press and an ex- NME crit himself — explains my approach…
‘His theory, Greg, is…how long you got?…his theory is that the best music is the stuff which makes you go doolally, lose yourself.
I love the consistency of the theory, but I hate the actual theory.’
Because it doesn't equip people to do anything with their lives?
‘Because it doesn't look at the object of music.
If everybody was just gonna get off on weird sounds, there'd be no words.
And there are lyrics and it makes sense, and that's what pop music is — popular poetry.
Even the most banal song makes sense.
People like thinking, like making sense of things.’
But there's no single, proper use of music, no correct hit that we should all be getting.
I certainly wouldn't claim that the loss-of-self aesthetic was valid outside of a probably quite limited, class- and gender-specific group of people who need their over-orderly thought patterns disrupted good'n'proper.
But Kane was right when he identified in his letter a broad-and-loose Melody Maker aesthetic that prefers transports to truths, rapture to appreciation, magic to meaning, the letting loose of ecstasy to the clench of commitment.
So if you hate the theory so much, how come you're so boned up on it?
What's this huge stack of post-modern journals you've got here?
(One of them,Seduced and Abandoned , a collection of Baudrillard-influenced essays, supplies the title of the Hue and Cry debut LP).
‘Because it's the only thing that's happening, intellectually.
I read it to know the enemy.
I think all that stuff is just lying down in the face of the mass media.
Certainly, people are seduced and abandoned by the media, by its lush images — but you have to deal with that, infiltrate ideas in, give people back their vertebrae.’
Baudrillard would argue that radical initiatives only end in re-energizing the pop machine, are more grist to commerce's mill.
‘But that guy's a pessimist, a fuckin' nihilist.’
THE COLLABORATORS
What Kane proposes is the strategy of ENTRYISM — which in its original connotation was a strategy of entering mainstream political parties undertaken by revolutionary groups so as to subvert from within.
The idea (rather than the term) first had rock currency in the punk aftermath.
After the initial night to the margins, there was speculation on how to build on the energy of punk.
It was around then the following formulation took hold: radical meanings required radical forms of musical expression.
After some time, when people began to chafe against the impotence, isolationism and élitism of the post-punk avant-garde, this notion, indeed the very idea of the ‘alternative,’ was gradually dismantled.
Entryism — the idea of concealing radical meanings within a conventional pop format — was born.
A syndrome — which was to recur again and again, from ABC to Age of Chance — of indie bands lashing other indie bands for their defeatism in not taking on the mainstream, was inaugurated.
ABC extolled irony, detachment, and doffed tuxedos as a gesture against post-punk stasis.
As Martin Fry said later: ‘I am a punk.
I always will be,’ claiming that taking on the pop funk sound of the moment was a perfect fulfilment of punk's evangelist logic.
Scritti Politti also moved out of the shadowy margins and proposed a schizoid project — the making of perfect pop that contains its own internal deconstruction.
Pop that seduces as it unravels the very iconography/mythology (absolute love, the perfect girl) which drives it.
Between the two of them, ABC and Scritti, with their widely disseminated interviews and much-parroted rhetoric, made rock an embarrassing relic, pensioned off the guitar, discredited the indie ethos, and made soul and funk de rigueur.
1987 and the influence of ABC and Scritti is everywhere, still, albeit filtered and degraded by intermediaries like the Kitchenware stable (Kane Gang, Friends Again, Prefab Sprout, Bourgie Bourgie) and The Style Council.
ABC are everywhere suits and irony hold sway (Pet Shop Boys) while Wet Wet Wet took their name from a lyric in Scritti's ‘Gettin', Havin' and Holdin'.
Generally ABC and Scritti's ideas — that rock music is finished, and only black music is a viable vehicle for intelligence; that if you believe in what you do you owe it to yourself to dive headfirst into the mainstream — still exert something verging on hegemony.
Me, I find myself steadily drifting back to the unfashionable conviction that radical meanings are betrayed by conventional forms; that if melodies, key changes, and vocal cadences follow expected paths they can only reinforce commonsense perceptions.
I am drawn more and more to a resurrected belief in the marginal and its value-in-itself, beyond any consideration of its power to infect pop's arterial thoroughfares.
A belief in the ‘alternative’— not so much in terms of an independent business infrastructure — but in the sense of otherness: music that explores the otherwordly, or the other within yourself.
Instead of‘subversion’, the cunning interpolation of irregular meanings into pop's circuitry, I'm interested in a more literal up-turning — topsy-turviness, the vaporization of meaning itself.
It's the difference between putting across a point of view, and sharing a vision.
Between Hue and Cry and The Sugarcubes.
Groups like Microdisney and Danny Wilson, who try to use MOR in order to get their messages over to as many people as possible, are doubly misguided.
How can words stir anyone to action or even reflection if the accompanying music fails to quicken the pulse?
And isn't it the case that real MOR — the stuff that sells, boys — has words that are anodyne too, that reinforce commonsense views of normality and (human) nature?
More than any other group I can think of, Microdisney are victims of rock's over-privileging of the text.
The words, and the need to get those words within earshot of the maximum number of people, have subordinated the music to the level of glossy paper — designed to interfere with clear transmission and reception of the message as little as possible.
Maybe they genuinely like their kind of aural semolina.
Give me un-easy listening.
All that wasted intellect.
Four years ago, we would have said of blokes like Cathal Coughlan and Patrick Kane: pop needs more figures like them, spiky, striving, sussed.
Now I just think their struggles sustain the fiction that intelligence can work within pop, can avoid being misread, misappropriated, or plain ignored.
The only hope we have for intervention in pop is as a visitation, a bolt of strangeness, something whose point is to be undecodable.
Like M.A.R.R.S. or The Sugarcubes.
Music that could never be taken as light entertainment.
But why bother anyway?
Let pop die.
And let those who contribute to extending its life's breath be called — COLLABORATOR.
(1987)
SCHEMERS VERSUS DREAMERS schemers versus dreamers (written with David Stubbs)
In ‘Smooth Operators’ I took to task the brace of pop collaborators — Hue and Cry, Wet Wet Wet and so forth— whose reading of white funk has implicated them as collaborators in pop's current fixation with sincerity, soulfulness, positivism.
Groups who have drifted from our ranks in a misguided attempt to make decent pop's terrain, render it a worthy environment for Ben E. King.
These bands are juniors in a hegemony established by Live Aid, that unprecedented feat of anxiety, in which the likes of Quo, Dire Straits, U2, Phil Collins, even Boy George, closed ranks, created, as well as a spectacle of pop unity, an unbeatable mediocracy.
Since the failure of ZTT and Sputnik particularly, it has never really seemed likely that our own spiky tarts could share the limelight with the outright MOR.
Today, pop is a closed circuit, a self-sufficiency.
A chasm has reopened between a galvanized, airborne rock, the rock celebrated in the pages of Melody Maker , and the sealed, well-rounded, well-grounded entity that is pop.
Once more, it's Us and Them.
So what happened to the infiltrators, the double agents, the
POP STRATEGISTS
Pop strategy began and ended with ABC, Heaven 17, Scritti Politti and Malcolm McLaren.
These were the days when rock was being shooed out in disgrace, a lumpen confusion of scratched armpits and muddled motives.
New pop was a shiny parody of efficiency, of ‘wanting in’.
Heaven 17 appropriated the jargon and paraphernalia of industry, presented themselves as a well-heeled corporation, offering ‘Music Of Quality and Distinction’ which suavely played pop at its own game.
Scritti Politti appropriated the labels of luxury commodities on their record sleeves, a gesture against their early DN sleeves (photos of squats, photocopies of litter).
Both were provoking a spectacular confusion of signs —‘quality’, the ‘finer things in life’ restored to the avant-garde hipsters who, like ABC, ‘know what trash is’.
Malcolm McLaren disseminated Situationist ideas through Bow Wow Wow, naked and primal jumbles of desire —‘I Want Candy’.
Later came Sputnik, with their third-generation pastiche of ambition, masterplan, world domination; their relentless colourquest for the ultimate pleasure product, for hyperstimulus.
There was ZTT's Frankie Goes To Hollywood, and Propaganda; Paul Morley promoted them on the assumption that pop was run by flabby-faced cowards who didn't even know how to do their own job — in other words, it took an aesthete to know and score a hit.
But he fell victim of the dawning disenchantment when he declared in an interview: ‘TWO Tribes'’ can be number one for nine weeks and then it's toppled by George Michael's ‘‘Careless Whisper'’.
You see, nothing happens.’
Of course, ‘something happened’.
It's possible to trace George Michael back to the colourmotion, the white funk irony that more or less began with ABC and spawned a straight, bleached-out generation of Howard Jones and (eventually) the Hues, Wets, Styles and Curiositys ad nauseam.
Nothing else though.
Yet there are still a smattering of pop ironists trickling sporadically, lip-first into the fray.
There's Win, still carrying the cheeky pennants and slogans of ‘81, boasting of chewing gum for the ears, expressing admiration for advertising jingles.
Or Age of Chance, grunting urgently about ‘go for it’ assertiveness training, positive power, hi-impact multi-sensory overload, cartoon Ballard litanies of ‘crush collision’.
And there's Transvision Vamp, a chink in that chimera ‘the new glam’, who offer us the usual tenth-hand situationism, trash reappropriation of spectacular signs (guns, stars and stripes, peroxide, Warhol), proposing ‘cinepop’(that old ‘81 line about multi-media infiltration) and posturing as corporate buccaneers.
And there's Act with their amoral fascination for the artifice and decadence of showbiz.
All of these bands explicitly lambast indie parochialism and neurotic fear of major label compromise; all peddle an obsolete notion that the brash and the colourful represent a victory over the hegemony of a vague grey, with the naïve optimism of nineteenth-century dandies.
But modern bourgeois suburbia is colourful, tacky, vulgar, and these groups only mimic this different kind of  banality.
All talk of plunder, piracy and plagiarism in a shopworn discourse of ‘irreverence’ and boisterousness, as if Westworld kick up some kind of a rumpus on pop's trash-heap of efflorescences, as if there are still grandmothers to be shocked and purists to be cheeked.
What these bands have most in common, however, is that they FAIL ABJECTLY.
Win lost!
The Age of Chance's number never came up.
As.
for Transvision Vamp — well, what about them?
You'll find them next year all commingling ignominiously in the bargain bins with the indie ‘underachievers’, the Motorcycle Boys and Shrubs, all malingering in the same space.
The Pop Tarts are the apotheosis of this disparity between rhetoric and achievement.
They talked a good interview.
They had ‘attitude’— boy, they had attitude.
With a cleverly effete waft they dismissed ‘anti-pop’(The Smiths, REM), were ‘pro-product, anti-celebrity’, namechecked Hermes, Giorgia, Ralph Lauren, wanted to proliferate in every medium from cinema to truffles.
They didn't even get a record deal.
Even Stockport indie gerbils A Witness could boast more than that,
Even when the music's good,(Act's first single was superb, the Age of Chance LP was surprisingly listenable) the problem is that the pop schemers have made MASS POPULAR SUCCESS such an integral part of the product.
As with Frankie, so much of the pleasure is bound up with the sense of something breaking out all over the surfaces of everyday life, and you being in on it from the start.
Without that sense of reverberation or sensation, the brash colours and sharp slogans flail in ignominious and redundant isolation.
Exhibitionism ignored is a pitiful sight.
So why is pop impervious to these bright entryists, these studied simulators?
You'd have thought anybody with two brain cells to rub together and a spark of wit could find a way past Mike Read and Phil Collins.
There are several reasons:
1)
‘Simulation pop’ is generally couched in brazen, nakedly aggressive terms, conceives of pop as openly cut-throat, ruthless, plastic, self-adoring, cynical (as Age of Chance put it, ‘Don't Get Mad, Get Even’).
In fact this vision of pop is as fictional and irrelevant today as the indie notion of ‘perfect pop’(an airy idyll of sixties' byrdsong), Today's pop is soulful, concerned with banishing inhuman traces, yearning for a lost passion and integrity.
Which is why a ‘real’ popster like Mark Knopfler would shake his head in genuine dismay at Jamie Reid's manifesto for Transvision Vamp, why your Climie Fishers make it and your Sputniks burn up in orbit.
2)
Pop as Pure Pleasure Product, pop as blipvert, does actually enjoy a routine, marginal existence — house, Hi-NRG, Stock Aiken Waterman — functioning  blankly, without recourse to discourse, with no need of a statement of intent, UNMEDIATED.
3)
Everything is sewn up.
The biz is no longer in the state of confusion of seven years ago, when Altered Images could giggle and tumble their way onto TOTP.
Today, the industry has no need to feed off the margins, needs no lessons from Sigue Sigue Sputnik about the Global Leisure Industry, movie tie-ins or the killings to be made in the future collusion of pop and advertising to create new needs.
With pie diagrams indicating that the major pop consumers are the staid, over-25s, the development in the ad industry of ‘psychogeographics’(the science of using pop to home in on specific taste publics — i.e. Springsteen fans are likely to desire different products from Whitney Houston fans), and the construction of bands in the studio, pop has never required less urgently a rush of theory from the ‘left’.
4
By exposing the workings of pop (the way myth is stagemanaged, the way glamour is constructed) the new pop entryists actually deny the listener the chance to lose themselves in the ‘commodity fetishism’ they purport to celebrate.
They force the listener to be aware it's not for real.
Their foregrounding of this unreality, their knowing winks, are actually an abstention from immersing themselves fully in the ‘pop process’ in all its madness, carnality and glamour.
A cowardly vacillation, this hesitation to commit themselves to being myth.
In fact, at this point it's worth taking a pitchfork to that grossly over-rated entity — CAMP.
It's a terrible mistake to believe that you can consciously create camp, at this late hour, Camp is an aesthetic of consumption, not production.
Camp is a response to pop performances that are artificial, ludicrously stylized (Liberace, Tom Jones, Shirley Bassey), but whose stars enter into it all with a seriousness, a passion that affects with its holy, innocent imbecility.
(Precisely the immersion-in-myth, the plunge, that our knowing pop double agents refuse to make.)
Camp is a schizoid pleasure; you're amused by the absurdity and touched by the sincerity, at the same time.
Manifest inauthenticity on the suffice, inner authenticity soul-deep.
All this means we can forget about The Communards' cover version of ‘Never Can Say Goodbye’, and we can forget about the wretched Pet Shop Boys, the only successful contemporary pop ironists.
This group's only sin is their wry self-consciousness which falls smugly short of arrant narcissism; the fey, running commentary implicit in their song-titles (‘Rent’, ‘Shopping’, ‘Suburbia’, ‘Opportunities [Let's Make Lots of Money]’) signifies detachment, and finally alienation From the allure, the lush materiality of pop.
This isn't even pop about pop, this is  fop about pop.
It shows that camp is a defensive attitude, a flight from real involvement.
Rather than simply consuming pop (which makes clever little references to its commodity status) we should look to music that consumes US.
That exceeds the commodity relation and its in-built alienation, and allows us to worship.
DEMYSTIFICATION
The ‘Simulation Pop’ of the Pet Shop Boys, Pop Tarts, et al, is the end product of a discourse of demystification that began with punk, its DIY ethos, its ‘anyone can do it’clarion call.
The original notion was to demystify the means of production, in order to liberate creativity, marginal voices.
But the logic of punk's evangelistic drive to change things led to a attempt to take demystification to the people: the pop deconstruction of ABC (exposing pop's stage managing, as on the sleeve of The Lexicon of Love ) and Scritti Politti (affirming and unravelling, simultaneously, the lover's non-sensical discourse).
DMs original idea was that anyone could find something brilliant to create within the limits of their (in) competence.
But the false legacy of demystification is the belief that anyone can be pop stars — a flagrant falsehood!
Aided by cheap drum machines and synthesizers, these canny aspirants endeavour to construct a spectacular pop by distilling the pop essence from all past efflorescences, using the hindsight sophistication of the present day.
But all the ambition, striving, graft, pop-learning in the world can't earn you pop divinity.
Attitude is never going to count for as much as the Gift — the untranscribable charisma, the arbitrary aura, the unequally-bestowed vocal magic that no amount of homework or calculation can procure.
It makes sense that the ineffable languor of Prince is infinitely more fruitious than a thousand sinewy Age of Chance slogans.
Pop should be a scarce resource, rather than something ‘deserved’(like free milk).
The pop entryists — whose creed is that anyone with attitude, a masterplan, a nice line in self-salesmanship, can break on through — disqualify themselves From becoming objects of worship.
Pop that unravels its own workings, undoes itself.
Pop, by definition, must mystify.
Marc Bolan, who knew about these things, said it best: ‘pop should be a spell.’
Now of course it hasn't needed a lambast from the likes of us to prompt the breakdown of pop entry.
It has pretty much happened, we're chasing its last desperate apologists down a hole of their own making.
A chasm has undoubtedly developed, but the sporadic re-emergency of the blasted simulators — they keep  crawling up time and time again with bedraggled, sanguine hollers of intent -and the beady eyes cast by all manner of unlikely contenders on pop's centre stage (‘We see no reason why this band shouldn't be huge’)— suggests that our new proposition of an overground and underground sticks in the craw.
What it means for ‘us’ is not so much the resurrection of ‘anti-pop’, but a culture of margins; a disdainful gaze upon the terrain we once occupied, a satellite relationship to a pop centre now barred to us.
It means UNKNOWINGNESS as opposed to IRONY — the afflicted voice (Pixies, Throwing Muses, et al), the white blindness of the new guitar air (Dinosaur Jr, Husker Du), or the unblinking fervour of The Young Gods.
The music of the ever-receding margins, the music over which we have a claim, should be not just anti-soul (against intimations of health, the centrality of the body, straighttalking, wholesomeness) but anti-irony (the raised eyebrow, the quotation marks).
Our music should be set in an outward discovery of difference and space.
Detachment, self-consciousness must be flooded out by the stream of consciousness — music caught in its own flux, a white water of dream language (REM, Muses).
To hell with the GOOD TALKERS, those pugnacious interviewees all set to give ‘sleepy’ pop the kick in the pants it deserves — pop beauty should be the subject of dumbfoundedness, the breakdown of schematics.
As for the New Boisterous, the cheery spree of custard colours and polemical beiges that are the persistently ‘new’ colourmotion, let's get it straight — the State of Pop is not Grey, but over-determined by a stifling, cloning rainbow coalition of mediocrity.
RE-MYSTIFICATION
The return to rock means the supercession of demystification by re-mystification, giving people back their sense of worship, rather than forcibly opening their eyes to the nuts and bolts of how ‘myth’ is constructed.
Entryist pop implied the filling of every space, a tight, breathless glut of good ideas, an endless process of signification.
The return to rock means a re-awakening of dub, remoteness, loss of self in a recession of space, a search for unlit rather than overlit regions.
A.R.
Kane and Arthur Russell skid the peripheries, imply a distance from the centred subject of pop that is hauntingly suggested by their Plutonic, echoing surfaces of sounds.
Their beauty is arbitrary, beyond grasp, gazing and gazed upon.
MY LITTLE UNDERGROUND
New pop is extrovert, forever shaping up to splash down in supposedly ‘unstirred’ regions, forever dramatizing itself against a torpid and shockable  opposition — the grown-ups, straights, squares, ‘the dullards’.
The return to rock represents an abstention or introversion, a retreat (the Jesus and Many Chain's ‘My Little Underground’), a local culture rather than any doomed attempt at a global overhauling.
Rebellion has imploded; the enemy is the finger-wagging parent inside your head — your own inhibitions, regular thought patterns, inflexible mental grids and perceptual blinkers.
The rebirth of an underground implies induction, being drawn into shared exile, being both insider and outsider; rather than trying to break down the doors to edify the unconverted.
To ‘forget’ pop is to renege fundamentally upon the (over-determining) intentions of punk.
No more ‘resistance through rituals’(revolt into style, sartorial bricolage that confounds expectations, all of which are read, interpreted, mediatized and accommodated in a trice, these days).
No more implanting the virus from within, no more attempting to gatecrash a terrain that no longer really belongs to us (whatever it may once have been, simple demographic change has turned pop into global light entertainment).
No more agoraphobia (mistrust of anything longer than the classic three minutes, the squitBrit aversion to the cumulus wail).
No more going public and imagining that by the gesture alone you'll be ‘improving’ matters.
With the music we like, it doesn't matter if it doesn't ‘breakthrough’, if it doesn't ‘happen’— because, by being created, it's happening.
It's there as a choice, a reproach, and its remoteness from the secular pop world is a sign of its success.
The further out, the more FAR OUT.
The return of rock means not so much a crashdown as a return towards rock, a departure from planet pop to a self-sufficiency that matches pop.
A parallel universe, mutually incompatible, like matter and anti-matter.
No more Tube , no more of your favourite bands on the telly, another dark age as regards the media.
No more breaking in but breaking away, leaving and letting loose into the impending night.
Goodbye, The Style Council.
Goodbye, bleached pop-funk.
Goodbye, the classic three-minute single.
Goodbye, Janice Long.
Goodbye ‘wanting in’— hello THE WAY OUT.
Let the fatuous sun shine by itself and let's head for the moon.
Let's snuff out the shod people and welcome the long shadows.
(1987)