

INTRO
In Other Words — David Bowie, is the story of David Bowie, documented in a diverse range of perspectives from actors, musicians, producers, directors and friends, connected with his life and work.
The object of the book is not to analyse but to report, which is why it is predominantly the words of others taken from the radio series that I produced, In Other Words — David Bowie, a series that was narrated by Angie, David's former wife.
The project began back in 1976 when I was working for Capital Radio, London's independent local radio station.
It was at that time that I interviewed David's mother,Margaret Jones , who recalled a three-year-old David discovering a bag of make-up in an upstairs room and plastering himself with it, and how at one point she thought he would become a ballet dancer.
For various reasons I am unable to publish a transcript of everything that was said, although some salient points are to be found in the book.
David was sacked from his very first job at Vic Furlongs Music Shop in Bromley; he was working there whilst still at school but, as Vic describes, ‘He was a day-dreamer and had to be gotten rid of.’
The early years are documented by Ronnie Ross , his saxaphone tutor,Brian Lane , his music teacher and George Underwood , who first met David in Bromley Cubs when both were nine years old.
He recalls that when other boys of David's age listened to Radio Luxemburg, David was tuned in to American football on the American Forces Network, and was fascinated not only by American music, but by the whole culture of America.
His first record was released in June 1964 when he was managed by Les Conn , who remembers how David and Marc Bohan would redecorate his office between gigs, and David's first television appearance when he refused to cut his hair.
Back in the early 60's, David and a group called The Lower Third would travel to gigs in an old ambulance, and Dana Gillespie recalls the story she heard of them ‘scoring’ one night when the van was parked in Piccadilly Circus.
Ken Pitt , David's third manager, recalls his first flirtation with Buddhism and David's involvement with Lindsay Kemp , a relationship that Lindsay recalls himself.
Not only was David having an affair with Kemp, but also with Natasha Kornilof at the same time.
At the time ‘Space Oddity’ was written, David had moved in with Mary Finnigan and they launched the Beckenham Folk Club (in order to raise some money) which later became an Arts Lab.
Mary recalls how they were flat broke and almost living hand to mouth.
She describes how drugs were used, and how they organised a free open-air festival in Beckenham Park.
It was at this time that ‘Space Oddity’ was released, a period in David's life that brought both triumph and tragedy.
Tony Visconti explains why, although he was making an album with David at the time, he refused to produce the ‘Space Oddity’ single as he thought it was passè because the moon shot was about to take place, and the lyrics ‘sounded like a nick from Simon and Garfunkel’.
Gus Dudgeon , who produced ‘Space Oddity’ in the end, picks up the story.
With the Arts Lab in full swing and the free festival about to take place, David flew to Italy to take part in a song contest, the story of which is related by Angie Bowie and Ken Pitt .
On his return from the song contest his father died, and David's mother remembers how David rushed back in time to show his father the trophy he had won.
Angie recalls how she moved in with David's mother to comfort her and how they eventually found Haddon Hall, a large Victorian folly in Beckenham, where ultimately she and David lived along with Tony Visconti and his girlfriend Liz.
When David revealed to the Melody Maker that he was gay,Mick Ronson remembers his parents' house being daubed with paint and his car being damaged — the reaction was not all good.
He also tells the story of the preparations for the launch of Ziggy Stardust, with Angie describing how David's new manager,Tony DeFries , took over organising the business side of things.
For Pitt, it was a sad parting of the ways, and he describes his final meeting with David and Tony DeFries.
Tony Zanetta , former President of MainMan, the company set up by Tony DeFries to handle David's career, takes us behind the scenes and describes the setting up of MainMan.
‘Tony wanted an empire, he wanted an international entertainment conglomerate which was MainMan.
He was very taken with organization in the corporate world, and MainMan was fashioned after a large corporation although, at least in its beginning, it was anything but that.’
The rise of MainMan is also documented by  Leee  Black Childers who describes his horrendous journey with David across Russia on the Trans-Siberian Express.
In later years both Tony DeFries and Ken Pitt ended up in litigation with Bowie.
As Dana Gillespie recalls, ‘I'm sure everyone's got a different version of it, and I really didn't witness any rows, but I would often hear from my assistant who would tell me he'd just come back from MainMan offices and the door was closed into DeFries's inner sanctum, and there were raised voices between David and him in there.
I think he did say to me once that he was very disturbed at how much coke David was doing, and it got to the point where he didn't hide it in front of DeFries, whereas he did, for quite a while, at first.
Angie recalls how, in the high-flying days of MainMan, David turned to using drugs and how their marriage started to crumble.
Sadly they were to part with Angie attempting suicide and David snatching their son Zowie back from Angie while she was away from home in Switzerland.
Tony Visconti tells the story of how he testified against Angie in the struggle for custody of Zowie, and how David was frequenting transvestite clubs of Berlin while making an album with Iggy Pop and Brian Eno.
Eno describes David's first adventure into the world of cybernetics and the making of their trilogy of albums.
The story takes us through his films, shows, tours, from The Man Who Fell To Earth (about which Nicholas Roeg recalls, ‘I was asked by the company — can he act?— to which I replied — what do you mean can he act?
Anyone who holds 60,000 people on their own in a hall, is an act; they don't do that at home.
Their act is acting’), to Absolute Beginners and Labyrinth .
In order to make the radio series, over 30 interviews were recorded exclusively, although only 5% could be used in the finished production, which is why I decided to produce this book, which will prove to be an excellent documentation on the life of David Bowie — an insight into this enigma of the rock world — told by those who really know.
Kerry Juby, 1986.
Just a Gigolo, Berlin 1978
About to board the Isle of Wight ferry, Davie Jones 1965
Elvis pout '78
On stage at Live Aid, Wembley 1985
Bowie's portrayal of the Elephant Man in 1980
CONTENTS
INTRO
ONE
HIGH SCHOOL HIGHS
TWO
THE ARTS ODDITY
THREE
THE AMERICAN DREAM
FOUR
THE ACTOR'S TALE
FIVE
A NEW CAREER IN A NEW TOWN
SIX
THE BEAT GOES ON
HIGH SCHOOL HIGHS
In 1946 Howard Stenton Jones set up home with Margaret Burns in Stanstead Road, Brixton, along with Terry, Margaret's son from her previous marriage.
‘We had a tough time in those days,’ recalled Mrs Jones, ‘the post war years were no party for anyone, and we were no exception.
David was born on 8th January (1947).
The midwife said to me,‘This child has been on this earth before’and I thought that was rather an odd thing to say, but the midwife seemed quite adamant.
When he was about 3 years old, he put on make-up for the first time.
We had tenants in the house and one day he went missing upstairs and found a bag of lipstick, eye-liner and face powder, and decided it would be a good idea to plaster his face with it.
When I finally found him he looked for all the world like a clown.
I told him that he shouldn't use make-up, but he said, ‘You do, Mummy’.
I agreed, but pointed out that it wasn't for little boys.’
David was 4½ when he first went to school and not unlike most mothers Mrs Jones was upset at not having him around the house.
He proved to be independent, even at this early age.
When his mother took him to school on the first day, he decided from then onwards he could make his own way to school and didn't hesitate in telling his mother just that.
At his first school, Stockwell Junior School, David dressed up for the first time in a school nativity play.
Mrs Jones recalls, ‘I made him a robe and head-dress and his father made him a crook.
He was mad about it — he absolutely loved it — it was then that we began to realise there was something in David.’
In those days there was no television, but David, according to his mother, made the most of radio.
‘If there was anything that caught his ear, he would tell everyone to be quiet and listen, and then fling himself about to the music.
In those days we thought he might be a ballet dancer’.
From Stockwell Junior School, Davis attended Burnt Ash Primary School.
By now the Jones' had moved to Plaistow Grove, Sundridge Park, Bromley, a small leafy dormitory area on the outskirts of London.
It was around this time that he met George Underwood who was to become a lifelong friend.
George Underwood: ‘I don't know what year it was — I think it was the year when Tom Hark was No.1 (1958 Ed.)— but we went to the Isle of Wight with the 18th Bromley Scouts (we were in the Cubs then).
It was a skiffle group basically.
We had a double bass, tea chest/broom handle/gut and a ukelele, and we did ‘Gambling Man’ and ‘Cumberland Gao’and a few of the old Lonnie Donegan things, and that was David's first public appearance, on the Isle of Wight.
From what I remember, we went down quite well and it was the beginning of quite an interesting career for the young Mr Jones.’
In those days most kids listened to Buddy Holly and followed football or cricket, but David was different, even then.
He used to listen to American Football on the American Forces Network and was so enthused with it that he wrote to the American Embassy, who invited him to visit them for the day.
George Underwood: ‘It was all instigated by David really, because he had been listening to the World Service on the radio and suddenly got the bug to get involved in American Football, and he wrote to the American Embassy asking for more information.
They got the impression that he was well into it but, in fact, it was only about a week before that he'd started to get interested.
I think it was the glamour or the aesthetics of the American football player.
They made our football players look a bit weak because of all the big shoulder pads and everything.
Anyway, the Embassy wrote back to him asking whether he'd like to visit — I went along with him.
At the end of the day, they presented David with a complete baseball outfit, padded shoulders, football helmet, which he proudly brought to school the following day.
It was quite amazing really because we'd never seen any of these things before.
You can just imagine this little boy in the playground, when everyone else is kicking a soccer ball, dressed with big padded shoulders and a helmet and an American football — it was quite bizarre really.
I think he was very much into the magic of America.
The certain mystique it had was much more than just Cowboys and Indians on television.
He had a period that he went through just reading books on America.
Even at that age, he was listening to Charlie Mingus and people like that.
Not that I thought he understood the music that much, but it was the image of he people behind the music, because people like Charlie Mingus are quite characters.
It's quite well known that Little Richard was one of David's idols, but there's a lot of other American people who interested David, as much from the image point of view as the music.’
David's step-brother, Terry, was also a great influence on David in the early years.
When David was 8, Terry was 16, frequenting jazz cellars and introducing David to writers like Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg.
At the age of 11, David tansferred to Bromley Technical High School.
Although he passed his 11-plus he chose to go to a technical school as it would be more art orientated.
George Underwood: ‘I remember when we were at Bromley Tech, we would experiment with telepathy.
We would arrange to be something at a particular time in the evening and then the following day we would compare our thoughts.
It was uncanny how, on so many occasions, our thoughts were similar.’
Brian Lane (schoolteacher): ‘One thing I remember about David was something that he didn't take part in, which was a concert held at the school in aid of a pavilion that was being put up by the parents and teachers, and being paid for by them.
So popular was this concert that there was no admission charge, only a collection, as it went on for two evenings, but strangely enough, David didn't offer to take part, although George Underwood did and he had a very popular group called George and the Dragons at the time.
However, later David did come and see me to ask if his group could play on the school steps at the PTA fête which was to be held in the summer, so I suppose that was one of his first public engagements with his group.
He was delighted to have the opportunity to do it.
I also recall that at least on one or two occasions, he'd dyed his hair which was almost unheard of in the early 60's.
However, some way or other, it was always washed out the next day and back to normal.’
In common with most teenagers, David took a couple of part-time jobs, one riding around on a pushbike with a basket on the front for a butcher, and another working for a record shop owned by Vic Furlong.
George Underwood: ‘I remember how we used to hang around on Saturday listening to records.
We'd never buy anything.
In fact it was from Vic Furlong's shop that David bought his first saxaphone.
He couldn't play it at the time, but it made some really great noises.
When he saw the saxaphone he told his father about it and his father said that if he could save half the money, he would make up the other half.’
Vic Furlong: ‘He was always a bit of a dreamer in that I'd give him a job to do, come back in about an hour and he was still chatting, the job unfinished, so he had to go.
He was a nice enough lad.
In fact, at the time I was involved with Bromley Theatre, and as some of his interest lay in this field, he wanted me to arrange an introduction.
But he was a bit of a dreamer — so he had to go.’
Having acquired his first saxaphone, David got in touch with jazz saxophonist,Ronnie Ross , after finding his telephone number in the ‘phone book.
Ronnie Ross: ‘At the time he came to see me for lessons, groups like The Rolling Stones were just beginning to come into vogue although he was more interested in jazz, and we'd sit and talk about jazz and jazz musicians quite often.
He didn't talk about groups he was involved with but I did know that he was playing with a group.
He was quite an average sort of pupil, nothing out of the ordinary, and I certainly didn't expect him to become what he is today.’
George Underwood: ‘We had periods when we would bring a guitar into school, particularly when it was raining.
It was what you called a ‘wet break’ and you weren't allowed to go outside.
There was a stairway leading from our form room which had good acoustics and we'd sit there on the steps, and I'd be playing guitar and David would be singing.
We did Buddy Holly stuff and Everly Brothers.
He was a good harmonizer and still is.
He was studying to be a commercial artist and when he was in Mr Frampton's art class (this was Peter Frampton's father) in his later tears at Bromley tech, Frampton lectured the form on how he would not tolerate tapered trousers.’
Margaret Jones: ‘I remember David asked me to get my dressmaker to taper his trousers and before long other members of his form were also getting me to taper their trousers, so I suppose in a way I was almost helping them to rebel against Mr Frampton.’
George Underwood: ‘When you leave school, you have to queue up and see a career's officer and I remember I was standing right behind David in the queue and asked him what sort of job he was going to say he was looking for.
‘A saxophonist in a modern jazz quartet’ came the reply.
The careers officer offered him a job in a harp factory in Bromley!’
David left school with 2 GCE ‘O’ level passes, in Art and Woodwork, and the school found him a job as a junior with a commercial art company, The Design Group Ltd., and although some early press releases said that David was expelled from school, the record shows that he left two or three days early to start the job.
Margaret Jones: ‘He only took the job for his father's sake because his father thought that all this business with groups and music could well be a passing fad and that at least if he spent a year or two at work, it would give him some stable grounding to fall back on.
So David did go to work there, though not without protest.
I can remember him coming home and moaning about his ‘blooming job’ and travelling up and down on the train.’
It was 1963 and as David started his new job, ‘Mersey Mania’ was taking its stranglehold on the charts with The Beatles, Gerry and the Pacemakers, Freddie and The Dreamers; everything with a Liverpudlian accent tasted success.
Soon David left his job and, along with George Underwood, formed a band called The King Bees .
George Underwood: David was always a bit over the top and he decided to write to John Bloom, a millionaire business, saying something to the effect ‘Brian Epstein has got The Beatles but you can have us’, but Bloom wasn't that interested and passed his letter to Les Conn, an agent.’
Les Conn: The problem was John (Bloom) didn't know anybody in the music business except myself because I was quite well-known at that time in Tin Pan Alley.
Bloom got on to me and said he had received a letter from this young.
cheeky so-and-so and to give him an audition and see what he was like — which I did — and was quite impressed.
I got in touch with Bloom and said that I thought the guy had talent and Bloom told me that he was having a wedding anniversary party in Soho, which is in the centre of London, and to give the group £20 and see what he was like.
‘You cheap-skate,’ I said, what sort of millionaire are you?
You could at least give them about £100 to pay for their expense.
Anyway, at the party, there was the aristocracy of the land and quite a lot of celebrities and of course, David and his group turned up in scruffy jeans.’
George Underwood: ‘When we arrived, everyone was rather dressed up and we wore jeans, we were rather shabby looking and got some funny looks.
The first number we did was ‘I've Got My Mojo Working’ and the people in there weren't quite sure what was going on.
We didn't exactly get the bird but they just couldn't handle it — they didn't know what sort of music we were playing.
We were pretty much trying to emulate a lot of the early black blues sound.
With my guitar, I was trying to sound like Lightning Hopkins and John Lee Hooker and people like this, and we just thought…‘this sounds OK’, and it didn't sound too bad at the time.
So we were doing this music which was away from the pop stuff that was around.
Now ‘I've Got My Mojo Working’ doesn't go down with everyone, but at that time there were a few people around who did like that kind of stuff, and we were hopefully appealing to them.’
Les Conn: ‘Well, of course, the people weren't prepared for that kind of entertainment and they all put their hands over their ears, and Bloom started screaming, ‘Get them off, they're ruining my wedding party’.
So, when they'd finished performing I've Got My Mojo Working, I pointed out to David that these people didn't really appreciate their music and David, being the sensitive soul that he is, burst into tears.
I told him not to worry and that I was quite impressed and would be interested in managing the band.
That's how it began.
I used to get them various gigs at the Marquee Club in Wardour Street and the Roundhouse, and some dates at universities throughout the country, but there wasn't an awful lot coming in although I did succeed in getting him a TV appearance and the producer, who was a good friend of mine, said, ‘I'll not have this guy on my programme with long hair’.’
Dana Gillespie: ‘This was about the time The Beatles were just starting and they were considered to have long hair, but if you look at the pictures of them in those days, they had almost crew-cuts compared to David's which was honestly long, bright yellow, bleached blonde from a bottle.
He was an extraordinary sight.
In fact, I remember when I first introduced him to my father and before he'd said a word, I said, ‘This is my father’ who told me afterwards that he hadn't realized that it was a boy because I mean…long hair — his hair was really long.
Les Conn: ‘So anyway’, I said to David, ‘I think you'll have to have your hair cut, otherwise you won't get this programme on television’, to which he replied that he wouldn't cut his hair for the Prime Minister.
It was then that I conceived the idea of getting a few fans that he had in those days to walk around the television company with placards saying Lets Be Fair To The Long Hairs, which did get press publicity, and in the end, the producer relented and he did his first TV show.’
Daily Mirror: ‘Davie, who comes from Bromley in Kent, said, ‘I have no intention of having my hair cut.
Mr Langford has left the matter open until Friday in case I change my mind, but I won't.
Mr Langford, 39, said, ‘Kids today just don't want this long hair business any more.’
Les Conn: ‘By this time, I had arranged a recording test with Decca and David had his first single released called Liza Jane which was on Vocalion.’
Dana Gillespie: ‘Actually, before the first single came out, he was doing a support act at The Marquee.
I can't remember who he was supporting, but I was a regular visitor because being a big blues fan, it meant I could go and see Sonny Boy Williamson, and all the people who would be at the Richmond Jazz/American Blues Folk Festival that came every year.
So I was down there watching The Yardbirds and the English bands that were starting, and one time there was this band — for some reason I was there early and watching the sound check — with this blond guy who had very long blond hair, and knee-length sort of sued, fringed, Sherwood Forest, Robin Hood-looking boots, playing a bit of sax on stage.
In the break before he actually started, I was standing at the mirror brushing my hair and he came up, took the brush out of my hand — I had very long, waist-length, peroxide blonde hair in those days — and he said,‘What are you doing after the show?'
He just chatted me up.
In fact, I used to see him quite regularly as a boy friend.
He'd walk me home from school and it's often said that he carried my ballet shoes, which sounds kind of romantic, but he actually did sometimes, if I was carrying a whole load of things.
He'd meet me from school — I was at drama school then.
In those days I used to hang out at the Giaconda Cafe in Denmark Street where all broke musicians hang out, and I remember his first single came out and he dragged me into the record store next door, Francis Day & Hunter, and he said, ‘Have a listen to this’.
And then we bought a copy of the New Musical Express and saw a little ad that went with it.
They were quite good days because I knew absolutely nothing about the music business, being at school, and he was my first boy friend who wasn't upper class.
I had no idea there was a class distinction, having lived in a sort of world of my own, and when I went to meet his parents in his house in Bromley, I'd never been to such a small, little house where all the chairs had those things on the back where you catch the Brylcreem and you sat down and had high tea.
It was a kind of lifestyle I knew nothing about, having always lived in South Kensington.
People that I have known through the years in the music business always knew where to find me and I never moved address.
My parents lived in the big house and I built a studio and had a whole little place where I could live in the basement and it was very convenient, so David would come round there.’
Les Conn: Anyway.
at the time, I thought, ‘This is ridiculous, I'm holding these boys back’ because I was also managing a singer called Marc Bolan, and in the quieter moments, he and David would decorate my office to fill in the time, but I said to them that I had just run out of money and couldn't afford to carry on — I'd taken no commission from either of them at the time — so I went off to Spain to think about my next move and released them both from their contracts.’
By this time, The King Bees had released a second single but this time without David Jones, although George Underwood was still with the band.
David had moved from The King Bees to The Manish Boys and released a single, ‘I Pity The Fool’, and having supported Gerry and the Pacemakers, The Kinks and Gene Pitney on tour, joined up with a group called The Lower Third, consisting of Graham Rivens, Phil Lancaster and Denis Taylor.
Denis Taylor: ‘We decided we were going to have a new singer and hold auditions, the idea being that we would go to the old club we used to play in called La Discothéque, which was in Wardour Street, not far from the Whiskey-a-GoGo.
The manager let us have it because he knew us.
Anyway, Davy came along and Steve Marriot also came along on that day, because quite a few people heard about it, as we put the word out at the Giaconda Cafe in Denmark Street.
Anyway, David was terrific, and we all made our decision in the Giaconda, and that's how it all really started.
We liked the stuff he was doing and he really started to develop an image for us as well.
We were quite long-haired — sort of early Rolling Stones type.
I think he was coming to the end of his management with Les Conn at the time.
He was a nice person and I think he was genuinely interested in how David was getting on, although he couldn't get him any bookings.
David was ambitious for all of us — he was honestly ambitious for all of us and we loved it.
He became a driving force.
He'd come to us with numbers he wanted to get off and I'd just play a chord on the guitar and he'd write a number round it.
He was the one that did all the pushing because he knew the business.
He wrote this little publicity thing under the name Truth Shows and sent it to various places.
One of the places he sent it to was Happy Towers in Edgbaston in Birmingham, which was a Mecca ballroom, and that was the first gig we did, complete with a revolving stage and everything.
We barely knew any numbers at all at that time, but we got away with noise and after that we fast became the second loudest group in London playing gigs at Brighton, Hastings, Birmingham, Newcastle Tadcaster.
In fact, it was coming back from the Tadcaster job that the old Atlas van that we had, blew up — the big ends just blew out of it and we had to dump it there and go.
‘Liza Jane’ and ‘Pity the Fool’were released at the time we joined him because he brought this record along and said, ‘What do you think of this?’
We were obviously impressed because he'd got a record released.
Anyway, it didn't get anywhere and the first record we released with David was ‘You've Got a Habit of Leaving’, which we did at IBM Studios in Portland Street.
Just as the record was going to be released, Dave came round and told us he'd got another manager for us and it turned out to be Ralph Horton who we'd auditioned for at The Roebuck Pub in Tottenham Court Road.
We were up on the top floor and Ralph Horton came up to listen to us and was impressed, although I think he was more impressed with David than us.
He was a queen, incidentally.
He had a boyfriend called Neil Andersen, who was German, I think, really blonde hair.
He was quite tall and very handsome, and I guess he was his assistant.
Anyway, he took a liking to David definitely, and from that point it was no longer a singer and a group, it had become a singer with a group, which is a different thing altogether.
When we went to gigs David used to travel in Ralph Horton's car and we used to have to go in the old ambulance which replaced the old Atlas van.
It was Graham who bought the old ambulance, not David.
Graham's father actually gave him the money to buy it from Brixton, after we'd been there to see it.
Anyway, David used to travel in Ralph's Mark 10 Jag to any gigs and never used to put any of the gear away when we'd done our work, whereas before he used to.
It was becoming obvious to us that Ralph was looking after David and we got hardly any money from the gigs.
Poor Graham and myself were really starving and not paying the rent, and David really started looking after himself.
I think he thought he was going to get somewhere with Ralph.
Mind you, Ralph did go the whole hog with it: he got Gaby Sturmer as PR doing photographs and write-ups and turned out some lovely leaflets.
I remember one particular night, the ambulance was parked in Warwick Square where Ralph lived — it was only about 50 yards from his flat and I was really cold.
It was horrible.
I was trying to get myself comfortable on these padded seat things and had a blanket over me.
I thought, ‘What the hell am I doing here when Ralph's flat is over there?
I'll go and sleep on his sofa in the lounge.’
So I went over to knock on the door.
There was another fellow living at Ralph's at the time called Kenny Bell, who said, ‘I'm sorry, you can't come in’.
I was amazes.
I then realizes what David was doing.
To me he was battering his career, because, before that we all worked as a team.
At every gig we went to, there was a woman there — that's what we wanted, we liked to see women hanging around the star attraction of the group because he was good-looking and he did stand out and look good on stage.
That's the quickest way to get a name, isn't it?
Have groupies around.
Davie always seemed to have the best girls, and none of them seemed to complain.
By this time my whole opinion of him changed.
Instead of him being a mate, I loathed him after that until I got used to the idea.
You do, eventually, get used to the idea.
I know Graham wasn't too happy.
I remember I went back to the ambulance feeling quite horrified.
I thought ‘Good God — it's the end of the group’— which it wasn't until a few months later.
All this publicity we were getting was not getting us work.
It only got us the £15 at The Marquee for doing a show for Radio London, the old pirate radio station.
We used to do the live show that was never broadcast — it was just the bit after all the other stars have been on stage and mimed to their records for the audience.
Anyway, that particular gig we did every Saturday morning.
It was for £15 between four of us.
Of course, Ralph would want his bit out of that as well , so obviously we weren't getting enough to pay for the rent and food, which Graham and myself desperately needed.
We had three gigs on the trot, including The Marquee.
We had Stevenage Town Hall on the Friday, The Marquee on the Saturday morning and Saturday evening we had the Brummel Club in Bromley which was David's home town at that time — we'd received a hell of a lot of publicity for that one.
Anyway, at Stevenage Town Hall we told Ralph that we expected some money for these.
He said ‘No way — it's got to go into publicity’.
I told him that we weren't eating and that we weren't paying the rent — almost destitute.
He said ‘No, sorry’, to which we replied that we couldn't continue to play or back David if we weren't going to get any money.
He just said, ‘It's up to you’.
We went down to The Marquee the following morning and I think Ralph came up to us and said that we could have the money for all the gigs, including the Brummel Club, but after that we were finished.
At the Marquee, Phil's father said that Ralph was using us — he just wanted us to play tonight and then it was all over, we're finished, so why didn't we finish now?
At the Brummel Club that evening, Ralph hadn't changed his mind — he said exactly the same thing — after tonight's gig you're finished.
So we told him that we weren't interested in tonight's gig and that we'd take the money and go now.
So we took the money for the two gigs and left them there.
I remember David started crying but Ralph would not back down and say we deserved the money, or to have some of it, so we just left them at the Brummel Club before doing their thing.
I don't know what happened at this particular gig, but I know it was his home town — it was the most important gig to David because it was in front of a home crowd.
But during the whole thing David never stuck up for us — that's what really got me.
The last I heard of Ralph Horton was when Dave chucked him and went with Ken Pitt.’
Ken Pitt: I have a very clear memory of first meeting David.
It was in 1966 at The Marquee.
I went down there one Sunday afternoon to see him working.
He had a series of Sunday shows down there called the Bowie Show Boat and this was the second one.
I remember standing at the back of the club and just leaning against the wall and watching him.
It's very difficult to put a finger on what it was that attracted me about him.
I think, first of all, it was his amazing confidence and great personality.
He had a tight hold on the audience, totally in command of his band.
I liked the material he was doing — not all of it was his own, incidentally — but particularly.
I liked the way he used his entire body.
There was an eloquence about his hand movements and I realized also that he could be a dancer if he wanted to be.
I think these things were not common in those days and I was looking for someone who had great potential, and decided I'd found it in David Bowie.
He'd been making some records but they weren't successful and for the first few weeks after I'd met him and decided to work with him, I was listening to songs that he'd written, and was in the process of writing, and came to the conclusion that he was not essentially a singles artist.
The sort of material he was writing and playing, to me, was album stuff.
Now in those days you never got an album deal from a record company unless you had a hit single, but I made up my mind that the sort of stuff he had would make a very good album, so I went to Decca with that view in mind, trying to get an album deal, and did get a deal for him.
That's how we did our first album which was on the Decca label called ‘David Bowie' .
One of my old friends at Decca was Hugh Mendl and he was in charge of the singles department.
I played a couple of tracks to Hugh and he liked them very much and wanted to hear some more, so I took some more up to him.
It so happened that Hugh was the man who had been producing Tony Newley and he said to me after listening to those tracks that this was the most exciting thing to come into his room since Tony Newley which I thought was quite amazing since, some time later, David was quite infatuated with the work of Newley.
I think if you saw what David did afterwards, he was obviously attracted to the one-man show that Tony Newley was doing at the time like, ‘Stop The World’ and things like that, and the lyrics appealed to him.
he was so carried away with Newley that I believe quite unconsciously, Newley crept into Bowie's voice and, as you know, he's been accused of copying Tony Newley, but I don't think he was really aware of what he was doing at that time.
The album was produced by Mike Vernon and the engineer was Gus Dudgeon.’
Gus Dudgeon: I hadn't heard of the guy before.
The thing I remember about him as an engineer was that we used to get these forms that told you each week who you were going to be working on, what the line-up was, and I saw this thing and it said David Bowie, Studio Two.
producer Mike Vernon, Gus Dudgeon, blah, blah, and this weird list of instruments like bass flute, contra bassoon, bass drum, etc and I thought this was very peculiar, but it was the early days of the Deram label and we used to do some pretty odd sessions.
So this guy came in, and he was just extraordinary.
He was obviously way ahead of his time.
he had a completely different way of doing anything from anybody else.
Whatever the rules were, they were not necessarily made to be broken, but they weren't necessarily there to be obeyed either.
he had a great attitude about him.
he was right at the height of his Anthony Newley hang-up, so one problem was constantly reminding him that he sounded like Anthony Newley and trying to ‘de-Newleyfy’ him if you could.
I remember people coming in from funny countries — you know, Turkish people and Indian people, and Americans coming in to play oboe.
I don't know where he got them all from but it was always very interesting, and we worked our way through an album that was subsequently released.
I must admit I really enjoyed working with him, and we did tracks like ‘The Laughing Gnome’ and I have to say, I am one of the gnomes on that record and am responsible for some of the terrible jokes on it as well.
So we ‘gnomed’ it for a while.
Then we did things like ‘Love You Till Tuesday’ which we did with a huge orchestra, as I recall, which was done in another studio.
After the album, we did two or three scattered tracks and various things, but as none of it really sold, we suddenly didn't see him around any more.
That was my first experience with him, basically.’
Ken Pitt: ‘But the big value of that album was that it brought David's work to the attention of a lot of important people.
I remember I bought about 100 copies of it and sent it to various agents, bookers, and media.
One of them, in actual fact, got into the hands of Lindsay Kemp and Lindsay used to use the album as background for his mime work at his concerts.
David heard about that, went along to see it one day, and that's how the partnership with Lindsay started.’
Lindsay Kemp: ‘It had been arranged through NEMS’ office that we should meet.
I'd heard the voice of an angel — and when a meeting was eventually arranged between David and myself, through NEMS' who were handling both of us at the time, I expected a very pimply youth to be standing there.
However, when I opened the blue painted door at Bateman's building, there in fact was an angel.
Love at first sight.
It had already been love at first hearing.
Bowie and I immediately, from that moment standing in the doorway, hit it off.
We began work immediately.
He chose me as his master, which appealed to me enormously, as it's one of my functions in life to be a teacher, so I was very happy at being this kind of pedagogue.
We began to prepare a show which became Pierrot In Turquoise — turquoise because it's the British symbol of everlastingness and David claims that I saved him — not from Buddhism, not from everlastingness, but from becoming a Tibetan monk.
I do remember saying, ‘Look, you can give yourself to God but to me as well, and the public.
You don't have to leave any of us out.
You can be a marvellous entertainer.
You know the entertainer first gives himself to God and then the public.’
I just gave him something on the side.
I didn't really teach him to be a mime artiste but to be more of himself, physically, on the outside.
My endeavour as a teacher really is to make people more of what I believe they are inside.
I enabled him to free the angel and the demon that he is on the inside.
It helped him to dance, but for me, to dance is a way of allowing and encouraging ourselves to escape through our fingertips, eyelids, lungs and tips of our tongues.
He already did it with his tongue, but up till that period his fingers were a bit stiff.
Mine had been a decade earlier when Marcel Marceau removed my hands from behind my back; hands, which at that period didn't resemble hands at all, but strawberry coloured boxing gloves.
Marcel gave me my hands and a generation later, I gave David Bowie his wings.
When we first met, there was a great deal of affection — there was a great deal of love and a great deal of admiration and respect as well you know.
I think that when love, and emotion, and passion, and sexual passion are mixed with respect, then that's the most ideal kind of relationship for me.
We weren't lovers from the beginning — it took about 30 seconds.
As a pupil he was marvellous, immediately responsive, especially when he was there.
Of course he wasn't always there because frequently there were notes from his mother to say that he had earache or something, but later on I realized, of course, that those notes had been faked, the same as the notes that I had sent to school from my mother several generations before that.
But I was fooled, like we always are when we're in love — blinded you know.
Then, of course, he'd send his friends similar notes — can't stay tonight, got terrible earache, or my mother's not very well — because for something like a year or more, he was having a double affair with,— dare I mention her name —Natasha Kornilof , who was a great friend of mine.
Of course, she had no idea.’
Natasha Kornilof: ‘I have to say David never gave me any notes.
I don't question people very hard about where they've been.
I always take at face value what they say to me.
I'm fairly naïve about it.
I never had any notes.
If Lindsay had notes — well tough — it's because he doesn't believe as readily as I do what people say to me.
If they don't over-elaborate the story I don't question it.
It's when they tell you more and more of a story — that's when you disbelieve.
Yes, this now celebrated affair, which I've not spoken about before, did actually happen.
He did give everybody the run-around, but was wonderfully attractive and, indeed, still is.
It's not surprising, is it?
He's very beautiful and very loving and a very great pleasure to be with.
What more can one say?
Lindsay always gave him hell.
Said he was as stiff as a ramrod and would get nowhere, but he's pretty hard on people anyway.
But, Lindsay is also a very good teacher.
He's taught an awful lot of people, including myself, an awful lot of things.
Before Lindsay, I made costumes — after Lindsay, I made magic.
That's what I owe to him.
I benefitted amazingly from the experience and I think almost anybody who has ever worked with Lindsay has benefitted from the experience.
It really is something, though he is hard on you and he is difficult.
David had a couple of records out at the time and he sang all his songs in the show that we did.
We toured the show — I was designer/driver.
We got a dreadful van from a man called Nick the Maltese, down the East End.
I'd never driven a van in my life but I managed to drive it from the East End to the West End, which I found a feat, and then I finally drove it up to Cumberland in the snow which was even more of a feat.
We were like a terrible gypsy encampment.
We arrived and stayed at a farm house with these people in Cumberland.
It was all extraordinarily unreal.
this tour we did.
Lindsay was Pierrot, basically, and the show revolved around him as Pierrot.
He did his various pieces of mime which were set pieces.
Some he'd learnt off the Frenchman — whose name is such a household name it escapes me — Marcel Marceau — and Jack Birkett (now known as The Great Orlando) was Harlequin, who could also be Columbine.
It was quite wonderful.
I made Jack shave his head — because he had the remnants of his hair hanging on — wonderful shape of ahead — shaved that off.
I put him in drag with a bare head.
It was quite amazing.
David was a character known as Cloud I think.
I dressed him in this huge pink shirt with maroon spots on, with a big maroon and pink ruff and little knee britches in grey with red velvet stripes on them.
Wonderful!
Absolutely beautiful!
He sang the songs that related quite indirectly to the next mime that took place and there was a slight story linking the whole thing — very slight harlequinade story — but it hardly mattered at all.
Basically it was the songs and a sort of mime play with Jack, Lindsay and David leading into a set piece with Lindsay as the old woman feeding the birds, which is a wonderful one, where the bird grows and grows to a monstrous size and finally devours the old lady.
I can't remember which of David's songs led into that — I shudder to think — but there was another lovely one about a little coat — sell me a coat because I feel cold.
There was Lindsay like this little tremulous Pierrot (because Lindsay was very little at the time — much thinner) in these little white tights, and the coat which was like a little 18th century golden coat came down from the flies, if we were lucky enough to have any up there.
Some of the places were extraordinary that we played.
Then he put this on and he instantly transformed into another character who did a mime to a piece of Baroque music.
He was doing a little minuet and he starts finding out things about his body.
He ends up doing surgery on himself and takes his heart out, listens to it like a clock and throws it to the audience.
It was a wonderful piece.
Very bizarre.
It was amazingly successful.
Everybody said it was magic.
I even did the scenery for that one.
I painted this wonderful front cloth for it — God knows where it's gone to since — I painted it on my sitting room floor with David's help.
He came and helped me lay it all in which was very nice.
The show went into penury, I think.
There were more and more debtors calling at Lindsay's door.
It was like something from a restoration comedy as he crouched in his flat in Bateman Street and they began beating down the door.
All these bills and demands.
I can remember sitting there one whole afternoon with him while he had flu or something, and these people beating down the door.
I was trying to make a list of what he owed and how we might get out of this state, which I don't think he ever got out of.
I think he got out of the flat first and not out of debt.
He was hard on David but David certainly was talented.
It was not until a few years later that I think his talent really started to manifest itself because you couldn't quite think where it was going.
They were very fey little songs and they were very pleasant, but they were not earth-shaking.
It was only when he began having fantasies about space men that he was really in there with the hit.
At that time, nobody wanted o sing about space men, did they?
But, as we can now see, it was like being a science fiction writer really.
That's been his main stock in trade I suppose — he's always just ahead with what he says.’
Lindsay Kemp: ‘David Bowie struck me from the very beginning as being very versatile and very ‘up-front’ and not in the least bit naîve.
He already seemed to know a hell of a lot and taught me a lot about living, philosophy and music.
It was an exchange — for me it has to be.
There's no such thing as a love affair unless there is an exchange.
When I talk about love affairs, I also include platonic love affairs.
I also include the love affair I have with the public each and every night.
For me, as a lover, as a person, as a man, it's not enough for me only to give — I want it back as well.
In other words, I want to be loved.
It's this marvellous giving and taking and sharing which provides these marvellous explosions which we call inspired moments which sometimes result in a work of art.
Pierrot In Turquoise — our first child — came.
Whilst David was continuing his studies with me, I was teaching at the Dance Centre in Covent Garden, which is an agency.
Every day, I always used to stick my head around the office door and say, ‘Anything for me today?’— and one day they said, ‘Well, we're looking for dancers for the BBC's production of Pistol Shot (which was a play by Chekhov)— maybe you'd like to do it and choreograph it and use some of your students?’
I took David Bowie and one or two of the other students to the BBC and we did it.
Hermione Farthingale was one of the girls who had already been chosen and foolishly, I realized later, or maybe wisely, I partnered David and Hermione together because Hermione was extremely beautiful.
That wasn't the reason I gave her to David, but because she was a trained dancer and I thought she could help David get the simple steps of the minuet together, because he had difficulty in putting two steps together.
Anyway, afterwards they chatted over tea in the BBC canteen, and then he escorted her towards Shepherd Bush tube station, just turning his head over his shoulder towards me.
I was, of course, trailing behind about 10 paces, sulking.
‘I'll give you a ring later’, he said, and with Hermione Farthingale, David Bowie just walked out of my life.
She was an English rose and extremely beautiful.
I liked her immensely.
She was tall, and pale with ravishingly red hair.
I couldn't believe that anyone could love me and a lady equally, although I've had a lot of experiences since and I've known a lot of men and a lot of women since who have loved both sexes.
I only wish I could do that.
It would probably add to the complications in my life but it would probably lessen the hours that I have on my own, though God knows, I don't do too badly.
She and I were always friends, and David and I remain friends.
He'd already stabbed me in the heart several times before that with other ladies, but at least this time, there was a lady that I liked immensely.
I mean, if he'd gone off with a humped-back, three legged dwarf I would have felt pretty unattractive.
I tried to interest both David and Hermione in coming up to Scotland where I lived and to play, would you believe, in ‘Puss in Boots’.
It was terribly naïve of me.
By the time I'd asked him to come and play, he was already becoming a name in the pop music field.
‘I can't’, he said, ‘but how much are you offering?’
‘It's gone up since last time,’ I replied.
When we performed at The Intimate in Palmers Green, he was paid £7.10 and at the Mercury Theatre in Notting Hill Gate, I think he was paid about £4.
But anyway, I said we could pay something like £25 a week, but by then Ken Pitt was finally getting him things.
I remember the periods that he went through, dish washing and doing house work and those kind of things.
But anyway, he and Hermione turned it down.’
Having met Hermione Farthingale, David lived with her for a year.
It was during this period that he formed a mixed media trio called Feathers comprising himself, Hermione and John Hutchinson who came from Hull.
The mixed media trio did not prove successful but during that period of David's life he found work as an extra on the film The Virgin Soldiers and appeared in a pilot television commercial for Lyons Maid, advertising their new ice-cream.
It wasn't long before Hermione left Feathers, leaving just David and John Hutchinson.
Angie Bowie: I actually met David for the first time when he was with feathers at the Roundhouse and I was with the European head of Mercury Records, a gentleman called Lou Reisner.
I met Hermione and David and John Hutchinson, who was the guitarist, at a show which was with the Scaffold and The Who.
During that period, I spent a lot of time with Calvin Mark Lee, basically because he was Lou Reisner's assistant, and he and I got on really well.
We used to like to go to clubs and I didn't like going by myself and Calvin was a great escort.
He was great fun and loved Chinese food, which I adored, so we knew all the Chinatown speciality restaurants.
It was him that arranged for David and I to meet.
This was after David had split up with Hermione and was nursing a broken heart.
Anyway, we went out to dinner and then went to a speakeasy.
King Crimson was being partied by a signing label and they got up and played with Donovan.
It was fabulous because King Crimson had such a tremendous sound and such a tremendous image that for them to suddenly stand up and do a lot of Buddy Holly hits with Donovan singing vocals was really cute.
It was a fabulous night.
David asked if I could jive and at this particular time I always dressed as a man, which was probably another reason Calvin and I got along very well because Calvin wore velvet suits and I wore velvet suits — so that was one area we got on very well.
But anyway, we jumped to it and started to jive and I decided that we were quite sympathetic and we got along quite well — a similar sense of humour, and  lewd attitude towards women — we just basically got along well.
At the time I couldn't work legally in England and I had about two or three months to deliver my thesis for my degree.
I was going out with this guy called John Colley whose relations were sort of minor gangsters in London and I went to work for them because they didn't mind my not being English.
David and I went to the travel agency where I was working a couple of times and kept saying, ‘What are you doing here?’
There was a travel agency in the foyer as you came in and a girl called Dinxie and I ran this travel agency that was open during licensing hours.
So, of course, what happened was that you had all these wonderful posters about you as you walked in the foyer and as the punters came out drunk, you sold them weekends in Ibiza.
It was all quite sensible but a little nefarious.
It was quite rough at times — and on one occasion, I found a body outside.
I called the police and was then told I was not required to work there any longer.
By this time David had started up the Arts Lab and asked me if I would teach street theatre and improvisation there, so I was destined to go to Beckenham.’
Recording for ‘Ready Steady Go’, David Bowie and the Buzz
The Ace Face in ‘66
David on the consumer trail, London ‘66
The famous Lower Third ambulance.
David's mime teacher, Lindsay Kemp
Mime shot by David's old manager, Kenneth Pitt
Plaistow Grove, Bromley (with white wall)
On the Isle of Wight ferry, 1965
On stage at The Marquee for ‘Inecto’ radio shows
Phil Lancaster, Davie Jones and friends, 1966
The original ‘Lower Third Mobile’, 1965
Davie Jones, 1965
The Kon-Rads rock it up in South London
George Underwood, David's school friend
Bromley Tech, David's secondary school
No. 40 Stansfield Road, Brixton.
David's birthplace
Stockwell Junior School — David's Brixton Junior School as it is today
THE ARTS ODDITY
It was 1968.
David was now with his third manager, Ken Pitt.
Nine singles and one album had been released, but success still eluded him.
He had been involved with Buddhism to the point of almost becoming a monk, and had formed the mixed media troupe called Feathers, after studying mime under Lindsay Kemp.
But Feathers was to split when Hermione Farthingale decided she did not wish to continue with the group.
It was at this point that David met Mary Finnigan, a journalist living in Beckenham, for the first time.
Mary Finnigan: ‘I first met David in the summer of 1968 when I was living with my two children in a ground floor flat in an old house in Beckenham.
My top-floor neighbours were a couple called Christina and Barry Jackson, and Barry had been to school with David and George Underwood in Bromley, and being a neighbour, I was quite friendly with these two.
We used to socialize together and they used my garden as their flat didn't have one.
It was a generally free sort of relationship.
It was a warm, spring morning and I was lying in the garden, reflecting on life in general and taking it easy, when I heard this music coming from the top-floor flat where the windows were all open — and there was somebody singing.
The thing that attracted me was that it wasn't your average plonk, plonk, three cord amateur musician.
It sounded extremely good, so I, lying on my back in the sunshine, shouted up to the open windows, ‘Hello, who's playing that?’
At this point a rather anaemic looking face with a halo of rather greasy looking blonde curls, poked his head out of the window, looking down at me lying flat on my back and said, ‘It's me, who are you?’
I said, ‘I'm Mary, come down and have a cup of coffee.’
So, Barry, Christina and David came down and we had coffee in the sunshine, and that was the start of it basically.
It was a couple of days later that I was alone in my flat in the evening and there was a knock on the door, I went to the door and opened it and there were about 10 people with an assortment of musical instruments — quite merry on this and that.
They asked to come in, announcing themselves as an instant party.
David was amongst them, and George Underwood as well.
At that stage, I think David was just crashing around.
He would spend an odd night here and an odd night there, ostensibly living with his parents.
He had recently split up with Hermione and was suffering from bruised emotions and in a way, was very much alone in the world, not to mention totally penniless — he didn't have two beans to rub together.
He was doing a bit of odd work here and there on an ad hoc basis, not musical work.
He was working in Legastat which was a photocopying office in London and when he needed the money, he'd go and do odd bits and pieces for them, but was not very happy with his circumstances.
Anyway, they all came in and we had this instant party which was very pleasant.
A couple of days later on, he came to visit me again, this time by himself.
He sat on a stool in my kitchen while I was cooking lunch and said, ‘Do you like this song? and proceeded to play ‘Space Oddity’.
He had this little stylophone with him and played both parts, because ‘Space Oddity’ was originally written as a duet for him and Hutch who was his partner in Feathers, the mixed media group, and when David split with Hermione, he and Hutch were working as a duet.
‘Space Oddity’ was written as a two-part song, and I recall he played this song in my tiny little kitchen in Beckenham and it sounded absolutely wonderful to me.’
Ken Pitt: ‘It was 1968 and David and I were going across to Germany quite often to do television shows and on one occasion, the producer whose name was Gunther Schneider, asked us if David would be interested in doing a half-hour programme with him.
Of course, it was a very nice idea, but I had seen what the Germans were doing with colour television.
It was in its infancy in those days and I noticed that whenever David did a show for them, they dressed the set with every conceivable brightly coloured object, with the result you could hardly see him.
I thought no way were we going to have half an hour of this and thought why not make our own?
I suggested it to Gunther and he agreed, wanting to have first viewing.
We went home and made a half-hour colour television programme which was marvellous.
It played a very, very important part in David's career, because it was for that film that he wrote ‘Space Oddity'/ Most of the stuff on the film came from the Deram label but I thought we ought to have a very special piece of material — some new material — and something that would show how very fine and inventive a writer David was.
So, off he went and came back one day saying that he thought he had the song I'd been looking for.
He sat down and strummed it — it was ‘Space Oddity’.
It was obviously a very clever song but it wasn't until we were recording it and filming it down at Greenwich Studios, that we realised its potential because.
during the break, after we had done this segment of the film and had gone into the canteen for lunch, all the people who had been working on the film were whistling the song.
As David walked into the canteen one of them said, ‘Here comes Major Tom’.
At that point we knew we probably had the makings of a hit.
David had originally made a demo with John Hutchinson, a demo which had been taken to Philips who were releasing in this country for Mercury Records in America, and they all agreed that this would be the first single under that contract.’
Mary Finnigan: ‘It emerged that David was looking for somewhere to live.
I had a spare bedroom and eventually, we agreed that he would come and live in my flat as a lodger — which is what happened.
I thought I was getting David and maybe a few personal possessions, but when he actually turned up, he was with a friend in a very large van, and this rather ethereal, thin, slightly spotty figure that was David in those days, dressed in extremely scruffy clothes, emerged from this van carrying a twelve string guitar, which it transpired was a present from Pete Townshend.
To my amazement, piece by piece, huge speakers, enormous amplifiers, old tape recorders and bits and pieces of audio equipment, along with mike stands and miles of wiring, was towed out of the back of this van.
As I looked at this mounting pile of equipment I thought that there was no way this was going to fit into the spare bedroom.
Of course, it never did.
As soon as David moved into my flat, what used to be the dining room was no longer the dining room — it was now full of audio equipment, stylophones, keyboards, amplifiers and huge speakers.
The whole flat, and the garden, within a very short space of time, was wired for sound and you would come in, perhaps in the middle of the night, and fall flat on your face over and leads and God knows what.
There would be blue sparks flying.
It was really what one would describe as almost a complete takeover.
After David had been there a couple of weeks, I used to go off doing odd bits of work in London, working as a journalist, although I wasn't very keen on that side of my life at the time — there were other things that interested me more.
It was a time when the whole underground culture was at its height and I was very much involved in that and had been since early ‘67.
I was going through what could only be described a ‘drop-out’ period.
There were quite a lot of drugs around at the time and somehow or other, I didn't quite know how, I managed to scrape enough together to feed my children and keep my flat going and just keep my life ticking over.
Being a divorced lady and living on your own with two children, poverty can be a real problem when you lead that sort of life style.
It was also a problem for David as well because he wasn't getting any gigs and he wasn't doing any recording work.
One evening, David, Barry, Christina and John Hutchinson were all sitting in my front room and talking about what we could actually do to earn some money It was suggested that we might go down to one of the local pubs which held regular jazz nights, to see if they had an evening free and perhaps we could run a folk club just one evening a week and maybe charge people to come in and make a few pennies for ourselves.
Having agreed that this was a good idea, David and I went down to a pub called The Three Tuns, which is in Beckenham High Street.
The landlord said that we could have the hall on Sunday evenings to run the club, and we could have it for nothing as he would make his money on increased bar sales.
Events having turned out better than we expected, we returned to make our plans for the following Sunday when we intended to open.
David designed the first poster for our first Sunday evening and stuck it up outside the pub.
I had a friend who had one of those ancient slide machines which was used to give light shows, and you could make the slides out of coloured oils and inks and put them together between two sheets of glass and when they're heated up inside the machine, they went, splat, splat, and made these rather beautiful moving colours.
The only problem was that by the time you had finished the slide show at the end of the evening you were covered from fingertips to armpits in coloured ink and oil and all the gunge associated with it.
It may have been revolting but the effect was wonderful.
But anyway we had this one projector which I had winkled out of this friend of mine, and we stuck it up on a couple of stools and hung some sheets up behind the corner of the room which served as a stage, and with some incense burning in the corner an atmosphere was created.
The idea was that Davis would be the anchor man, the resident musician, and every week we would have one paid performer who would be highlighted as performer of the week, a tradition that was kept up throughout the history of the folk club and the Arts Lab.
On the opening night, David did the major part of the entertainment himself, singing and playing tapes when he wasn't performing live.
We used his PA system which was a bit ramshackle, but it worked — that was the main thing — and about 25 people turned up in the little mock Tudor, oak panelled dining room that was part of The Three Tuns pub in Beckenham.
But, it was a start.
By the second week, it looked as if it was going to catch on.
George Underwood designed the poster and 50 people turned up.
We had doubled our audience.
It appeared that we had fulfilled a need among people.
We just hit at the right moment and from that week onwards, at least 90 people turned up every week.
In fact, we were beginning to pack the place to the point where the landlord was extremely worried because there were far more people in than should have been.
The club, by now had spilled out into a sort of annexe conservatory at the back of the room and by the time the summer arrived, people were spilling out into the garden and, in fact, used to come into the club by this route illegally.
It wasn't long before we realised there were many other talents around who wanted to be part of it.
It was becoming something more than just a folk club.
People came to read their poetry, they distributed their art work, they hung paintings and pictures on the walls, and they came along with things they had made, joke jewellery and candles and posters, selling them in the conservatory.
All sorts of little sub-businesses grew after the first month or two and it was at this point that we thought it would be nice to turn it into something more than just a folk club.
So, one night, it was decided to ask the audience if they wanted an Arts Lab, and during one of his talks to the audience, as David also acted as compère, he asked whether they would like an Arts Lab in Beckenham, with the folk club being the start of it.
The response was tremendous; the reaction incredibly enthusiastic, and so from that point, it became a little more than a folk club.
It became the local community creative scene encompassing not only music, but mime, drama, poetry reading and in fact, an outlet for local cottage industry.
And that's how it all happened.
All sorts of people since then have speculated on how the Arts Lab started, and various different books and publications about Bowie's career have put it in all sorts of different context, but that is how it happened.
It was a thing that was created by popular demand.
People wanted it and it seemed to be the right thing to do — and we did it.
I remember on opening night, a group of musicians arrived led by Roger Wooton, calling themselves Comus.
They were to become, more or less, the Arts Lab resident band.’
Roger Wooton: ‘David Bowie was the resident singer/ song writer — a sort of folk-pop singer/ song writer and we were a sort of rock/acoustic band — flute, violin, acoustic guitars and female vocalist, doing sets each week at the club which was the start of our career.
David Bowie used to play material like ‘Space Oddity’, ‘Janine’, ‘Port of Amsterdam’— in fact, the early material which appears on the ‘Space Oddity’ album which, at that time, hadn't been recorded.
He used to just sit there with a 12 string guitar and often used a tape recorder with backing tracks, and then put on a harmony live or used a stylophone.
He was a rather fey, quiet, intelligent, but not particularly giving of himself.
To me, he seemed like an average folk/pop singer/ song writer.
No more, no less.
He wasn't particularly impressive live and in fact, the audience weren't particularly impressed with him.
The only reason he was there every week was because it was his gig and he had arranged the Beckenham Arts Lab.
He was sort of evasive and fey and appeared relatively shy and my impression of him at the time was that he had little charisma, no star quality and not a lot of talent, and it came as a big surprise when he became as successful as he was.
The club itself was mainly hippies — art students and hippies — there were a lot of drugs around and the Three Tuns used to stink of dope every week.
There were lots of dealers there and lots of dope going around and David, to some extent anyway, seemed slightly an outsider, being very quiet and just arranging the gigs, but he was never really a part of what was going on.
When I first met him he was just an averagely quiet spoken, fairly intelligent hippie and gradually, the perversity and debauchery crept in.
He started wearing women's clothes, he started putting on make-up and on the last couple of times that I saw him he was pretty strange.
By this time Angie had entered his life and she was going off with the ladies and he was going off with the boys — and that's the way it was.’
Mary Finnigan: ‘Angie was very young and very wild in those days — real madcap.
I got the impression very quickly that she was going through a period where she was experimenting a lot with what she could get away with as an individual.
She used to engineer situations by throwing freak-outs and being very of-the-wall on more than one occasion.
It was a time before I began to understand her a little better and realise that a lot of this was actually a sort of ‘attention-getting’— a bit of theatre just to see how people would react — to manipulate situations a little.
It wasn't that serious.
She was very young, 18 or 19, and relatively immature although much more worldly wise than I was because she had lived a much more international sort of life, and having been around the music scene a lot more than I had, she was streetwise at her age to a greater degree than I — there was no question of that.
It was quite interesting how she first materialized.
I had been away for the weekend and David Bowie is not the most domesticated person in the world.
In fact, I would go as far as to say he's a slob.
He always expected other people to clean up after him.
He was totally oblivious of mess and basically needed an army of servants keeping things organised around him.
If I had gone away for a couple of days, I returned expecting almost to have to push the door open but to my amazement, the place was immaculate.
I walked through one room after another.
There was no dirt, no dust, no dirty dishes — it was tidy, neat as a pin, clean.
sparkling and looked like it hadn't been touched, and I couldn't believe it.
So, being a nosey bugger, which I am, I went into David's room and looked around for some evidence of what actually might have happened that weekend because I was completely stunned.
Eventually, I found a song on a scrap of paper by his bed.
It was a song or a poem — I don't know which but to my knowledge it has never been published — which was called ‘Beautiful Angie’, and I clicked immediately and realised there had been another woman about the house.
Gradually, it became apparent that this lady was definitely part of David's life.
Now my relationship with David did actually include sex, but it was never initiated on that basis as he'd come to my flat only as a lodger and during the course of the time he was there, we slept together.
At the time, the idea of a strong exclusive relationship was something that I did not actually want and I don't think that even consciously at that time, I would have sought to have had that kind of relationship with David who was considerably younger than me and also, even though I was deeply into the whole scene and everything it represented, I don't think I actually wanted to settle down with somebody who was a musician and was leading that sort of life style.
But even so, when Angie first materialised I suppose I was a bit put out for two or three days.
I was quite open to her presence and accepted her as part of the household and she charmed me very nicely — she was good at that.
She was a very nice person; I liked her very much.
She made a very positive effort to be the right kind of person to be around — in other words, she was not a liability, she was an asset, an extremely good cook and a very good organiser, and having discovered that we both went to the same school in Switzerland where French was the main language taught, we would enjoy talking to each other in French, much to the annoyance of David who couldn't understand the language.’
Angie Bowie: ‘Mary an I got on really well — we had a hoot and always enjoyed each other 's company, and although the Arts Lab was still running, it was beginning to get out of hand.
It was changing into an enormous project with tentacle-like bureaucratic things.
It was now called Growth and to get a decision on anything, you had to have a committee meeting, and as I pointed out, if it was going to continue this way, David would lose interest totally.
I could feel that the problem with David was very much a tremendous lack of application.
A tremendous talent, but unless things were made very easy for him to get on and do things that he wanted to do, he would lose interest very quickly.
Mary was aware of this too and tried very hard to explain this to all those other people who were involved.
There were so many people that had become involved in this now enormous creature that resided in Beckenham called Growth.
It got to the point where you could have one musical act, then you'd have a puppeteering act, all on a Sunday night under the guise of the Beckenham folk club.
It was the psychedelic 60s and drugs were beginning to their part in the Arts Lab, and I recall at one point David lecturing the audience on the dangers of taking drugs.’
Mary Finnigan: ‘We were extremely righteous about our drugs in those days.
Alcohol was considered bad news.
Few people drank amongst our circle of friends.
We smoked dope and people who wanted to would take sillacybin, mescalin or LSD, and that was literally it.
There was nothing else considered to be OK.
They were the drugs of awareness.
They were not anaesthetics.
They were things that you took to blot out your life.
They were things that you took to enhance your experience and to make it more intense — to make your personal development became part of your life, It was a very high-minded approach and when one looks at what has happened to the drug scene today and one looks back to the prevailing attitudes at the time, one can see the absolute, total abhorrence among drug takers that I knew in those days of amphetamines, heroin, barbiturates, mandrax — all those things that had an adverse physical effect which were considered to by highly dangerous to one's personal development and to one's daily living.
David used to get drunk and on many occasions I had to pick him up and carry him home from London, absolutely pissed out of his brain.
He drank barley wine which is quite strong stuff and he'd smoke a few joints as well, but to the best of my knowledge, he wouldn't touch any hard drugs at all .
During the time I knew him, he never took acid as he was very much afraid of it, and counselled other people against it in the sense that he felt it might disturb them psychologically, and felt that's what might happen to him
He didn't want to exacerbate what he saw as an existing weakness of his own in that respect, and although he was not censorious of other people, I think he was genuinely quite frightened of it, and at one point in the Arts Lab, when there was quite a lot of speed pills, amphetamines, going around amongst the young people there, he did speak out very strongly one evening against it, saying that he personally did not want anything like that around anything he was closely involved with because he felt that it was not a good thing for people to be speeding and it created the sort of vibes that might end up causing problems.
He was absolutely right in that respect and I remember him delivering this homily at The Three Tuns and the people receiving it in a rather stony silence because they were not used to being lectured.
In fact, I think quite a lot of them took it to heart.
He did see himself very much as a responsible figure as far as other people's well being was concerned when it came to this, and this was probably based on the fact that his step-brother, Terry, by his mother's previous marriage, was classified as schizophrenic, a problem which David felt could be hereditary.’
Angie Bowie: ‘With the Arts Lab in full swing, Ken Pitt was ironing out the finer points of a new record deal with Mercury Records and in his own way was very lucid about David because he never actually saw him rooted in England or rooted only in rock and roll.
He had arranged for him to fly to an Italian song festival which wasn't just Italian, it was an international song festival, of the lesser variety, but one which paid money.
The first half was in Malta and the second half in Monsummano-Terme and arrangements had been made for David to fly out there with Ken Pitt and perform ‘When I Live My Dream’, one of the songs on David's first album.
The plan was that I was to remain in England and organise the Arts Lab with Mary Finnigan and see it didn't fall apart.’
Mary Finnigan: It was at this time, when David flew out to Malta, then not only were we organising the Arts Lab but a free open air festival in Beckenham, David, having flown out to the Maltese song festival had sent Angie a postcard saying something to the effect that he was going to be in Italy and why didn't Angie come and join him, which she did, leaving me to sort out both the folk club and the free festival organised for Beckenham Park the following Sunday.’
Angie Bowie: ‘Anyway, I went out there and it was very romantic.
It was not as I had expected at all because living in the kind of commune that Mary Finnigan's house was, there wasn't a lot of time for romance.
It was a lot of sort of hippies pulling together to pull something off — hardly your Daily Mirror love nest, if you get my drift.
Being quite intuitive, I did notice there was a funny tension between Ken Pitt and David and I thought that probably what had happened was that David had not been satisfied performing ‘When I Live My Dream’ with the old backing tracks, as he had been working with Tony Visconti and had all these new tunes and productions and ways of doing things in his head.
I don't actually know — I'm surmising — but one tends to be fairly observant and that is what I felt.
There had obviously been a couple of heated arguments, probably to do with the artistic…you know, you get bored with something that you've done before and you're working on a new project, and I think he thought that having to wear a suit as opposed to his choice of stage gear can be very nerve-racking.
The suit he wore was fabulous — a sort of electric blue braiding, a nice little cabaret job.
I don't mean to sound unkind, because it isn't.
He looked very nice in it and he did win the contest, so Ken did know what he was doing.
The problem was that I think David was moving so much away and into this trip of actually doing music with a message — of actually delivering something on stage which meant something to other people of his age.
By now he had become aware that he had powers to lead people because of the Beckenham Arts Lab and Growth.
He realized that he was somebody who could control people.
If he actually put his foot down and said, ‘No, I think that's ridiculous’, everyone shut up and listened, and I feel that this was the first time that he realised that he did have the powers of leadership, not only on stage but also off stage.’
Mary Finnigan: ‘While David and Angie were away with Ken Pitt at the song contest I received a telephone call from David's father asking when David would be back.
I said I didn't know, and thought no more of it and it wasn't until David returned and was performing at the Arts Lab on the Sunday night that I remembered and said to David, ‘Oh, by the way, while you were away I had a message — your father is not very well’.
He went ashen and screamed at me, ‘Why didn't you tell me earlier?’
He finished his set and was gone.’
Mrs Margaret Jones: ‘David arrived home carrying the statuette that he'd won at the song contest that he'd been to with Ken Pitt and dashed straight upstairs to see his father who hadn't been well for a number of days.
David handed the statuette to his father telling him he'd won the contest and his father told him he knew he would succeed in the end.
He died not long afterwards.’
Angie Bowie: ‘I was still in Cyprus when David called me.
It was the most horrific thing.
His father had died of pneumonia.
My dad said he'd buy me a ticket to fly back to England and David said that he'd pay him back because he'd be very happy if I could come back and help him as he didn't really know how to deal with his mother's grief.
I arrived to a house stricken with grief in Plaistow Grove, Bromley, and it wasn't easy.
There were only two bedrooms and I had to share a bedroom with David's mother, a living arrangement that I just wasn't used to.
I felt David's mother didn't really like me, and having to share a bed with her really drove me nuts.
I tried to be as patient as I could and I think David's mother has realised for quite a long time that I was quite a good daughter-in-law to her (although I wasn't a daughter-in-law at that time) but as a girl friend, I could understand her finding it obnoxious that her son brought some strange person into the house.
She wasn't mean about it, she was very grateful to have someone to talk to and I used to try to spend a lot of time with her just to cheer her up — you know, walk the dog with her and go shopping — just do all the things that would help.
But it was very trying and I don't know if it was like a part of me that was being grabbing or trying to weasel my way into David's affections.
I don't think so because I'm not really like that and people who know me know that I'm not like that.
I think I just put up with it because he behaved in such extraordinary ways to me in the time I had known him, of showing affection at all?
Which he didn't show anyone else, and I felt privileged.
I really thought I was not only his girlfriend but someone that he really trusted because he knew I was energetic and dynamic and could get things done.’
Tony Visconti: ‘I remember when David's father died he was very solemn, as anybody would be when their father dies, and he took the responsibility of looking after his mother very seriously.
I think his mother was a very low-key housewife who depended very heavily on her husband to do everything — to write the bills and all that — a very dependent housewife, and David automatically assumed the role of his father in matters of domestic finance.
He appeared to grow up instantly and became very serious.
I think his father's death had a very profound effect on him because his Dad was the only one who was level-headed.
Even David could be flippant and bizarre and go off and do his own thing, and Dad was the one person in the family who was the anchor.’
Mary Finnigan: ‘A few days after the death of David's father, the free festival went ahead as planned and the day was fabulous; the sun shone and everybody but everybody had a wonderful time.
There was music, puppet shows, street theatre, side shows, stalls.
Angie was running the hamburger stall — I don't think she has ever cooked so many hamburgers in her life.
The day was fabulous and David performed extremely well although he was in the blackest of moods.
He was extremely rude to a lot of people, some of whom vowed they would never speak to him again.
Calvin Mark Lee, from his new record company, donated posters for us to sell at the festival and he was extremely rude to Calvin, which is very strange when you think of the lyrics to ‘Memory Of A Free Festival’ which he wrote after the event: ‘I kissed a lot of people that day’.
He certainly captured the feeling of that gorgeous sunny day in Beckenham Park, but it was not his own feeling.
I think that he'd reached a stage in his life where he was to become less community minded and more geared toward the fulfilment of his own career.’
Tony Visconti: ‘Space Oddity’ had been recorded and released at this time although it was not selling.
In fact, I remember first hearing the song.
We were putting an album together based on his light rock/folk style that he was developing — songs like ‘Janine’, ‘Unwashed And Slightly Dazed’— all that country rock flavour that he was developing and then, out of the blue, he wrote ‘Space Oddity’.
Now I know David — he is very original.
All his chord changes are very original and his melodies are.
And here came ‘Space Oddity’ which was coinciding with men landing on the moon, which is what I think inspired him to write it, there is no question about it.
David had come up with something that was extremely unoriginal.
What I'm saying is, ‘Here am I sitting in a tin can’ sounded exactly like a Simon and Garfunkel record, and the rest of the song was lifts from everything else.
Nowadays, I would probably have a complete reverse opinion and say, ‘Well done, David’, but in those days I honestly didn't care.
I wasn't going for his agreement or anyone else's agreement — I was going for what I felt was right at the time, and as he'd set me up as this person in his life, I advised him not to do it.
However, everyone else advised him to do it and it was probably the most catalystic thing he could have done at that period, although I had the feeling even if he did get a hit, it was something he couldn't follow up because I knew the style of his writing.
He wasn't writing anything remotely like it and he didn't afterwards.
He just continued writing more of the same stuff that was going on his album.
‘Space Oddity’ was just 0ne-off and it wasn't until ‘Ziggy Stardust’that he did anything even remotely like it.
Having told me that everyone was advising him to record it, I told him to go ahead and do it, but not with me.
Gus Dudgeon, who I used on some earlier Deram sessions, said he'd like to work with David, so here was his chance and I put the two of them together.’
Gus Dudgeon: ‘I was sitting back in my office and the internal phone rang and it was Tony Visconti, whose office was literally just down the hall.
‘I've got an old pal of yours in here — David Bowie’, he said, ‘we're talking about making an album but he's got this song which I don't like at all, but you might care for it.
Do you want to have a quick listen?’
‘Sure’, I said.
So, he popped down to my office, stuck this demo on the turntable and it just blew my socks off.
I couldn't believe it.
I rang Tony and said, ‘You really can't be serious about not wanting to record this song.’
‘I just don't like it’, he replied.
I think he had a thing about it particularly because he knew the record company really was going for that song because the first American space shot was coming up.
But actually, I don't think the record company realized just how good the song was.
It was just that their minds went —‘Space Oddity’— guys are going into space — sounds like a commercial idea — go for it.
So, the underlying part of the contract, as I understand it with Bowie, was that he was going to make an album with Tony Visconti and that song had to be done as a single.
But, of course, Tony didn't like the song, so he asked whether I'd do it, and that's how I came to do the record.’
I can remember the session very well.
The players were Tony Cox on drums, Rick Wakeman on mellotron and Herbie Flowers on bass, who I learned recently, was paid £7.10 for that session, which was his first professional session.
I recall I think we possibly planned to use strings right from the word go and David, without my knowledge, went to Paul Buckmaster and asked whether he was interested in writing the string parts.
When Paul called me back to ask whether he was serious about this, I replied, yes, although I must admit I didn't hear strings and flutes on ‘Space Oddity’ at the beginning but once the track was done, it was obvious that it was going to work really well.
The other thing that I remember was that this session was very quick.
As we were mixing the B side, this guy called Calvin Mark Lee, who worked for the record company, was actually off at Philips cutting the A side.
Literally as we were mixing the B side he was over here cutting the A side.
It was really high pressure sort of stuff followed by this terrible waiting period, because no sooner did the record come out, and the space shot take off, the BBC banned every record that had anything to do with the moon.
They even banned an instrumental called ‘Footsteps on the Moon’ by Johnnie Harris.
I think they were so nervous to play anything that would imply for the space shot or against the space shot — whether the guys were going to come back or not.
It was pathetic really.
So, no sooner did the record go into the charts and we were going ‘yeah, this is it — hooray — we're taking off’, they dropped the record and we had to wait for the guys to come back to earth.
Luckily they came back without any harm and the record was then re-released, re-promoted and interestingly enough, as far as I can recall, it's one of the very early stereo singles.
I seem to remember they put it in mono and did a limited edition in stereo which, for those days, was a fairly advanced piece of thinking.
As a producer ‘Space Oddity’ was very important to me as it was only my second or third record and I was looking forward to seeing David play it live.
The gig was at the Purcell Rooms and he was playing with a band called Junior's Eyes.
Obviously he built up to‘Space Oddity’ being somewhere in the middle of the set and about half way through the set, he dismissed the band.
I thought he was just going to do a couple of acoustic numbers.
He went on and played ‘Space Oddity’.
Just an acoustic guitar and a backdrop of the sun shining.
I couldn't believe it — what a weird thing to do.
Like, here was his first big song and everybody had come to see it, and he's not going to do it with a rhythm section — just acoustic guitar.
The whole audience was astounded and it didn't go down very well.
It would have been far better if he'd done it the other way around — the rest of the set acoustic and then brought them on to play.
It was just so bizarre.
Another amusing incident to come out of‘Space Oddity’ was when I got a phone call from David one day, who said he had to record an Italian version of the song because two kids in Italy had apparently done a cover version of it and as it looked as if it was going to do quite well, the Italian record company wanted a version by the original artist and said they would send someone along to teach Bowie phonetically how to sing the song.
Anyway, we went down to Morgan Studios in Willesden High Road and this Italian guy showed up at the studio.
He was basically directing the session because I didn't know Italian, neither did David.
He wrote out all the lyrics phonetically, so when he had to sing an Italian word, it was written down exactly as it should be pronounced.
It was an hilarious session.
At the end of it when the whole vocal had been recorded, David said to this guy, ‘Just out of interest, is this my original lyric’ The guy said, ‘Oh no, it's a beautiful ballad about a boy and girl and they go out in the mist on the mountain’.
‘Good God’, we said, ‘are you serious?
This is about people in space.’
‘No’, he said, ‘it's about a love story.'’
Tony Visconti: ‘I heard the finished version of ‘Space Oddity that David had recorded with Gus Dudgeon a few days later and it was great.
I figured out that if this is what David wants and I'm not going to give it to him.
then I'm perfectly happy to let Gus take over the responsibility since he did such a great job.
But David surprised me by saying, ‘OK, now we've got that out of the way, let's go and do the rest of the album’.
He didn't believe in it himself.
He said that he did it because everybody wanted him to do it, and he even agreed with me that bits were like Simon and Garfunkel and it sounded like a hundred songs written before, and admitted that he was cashing in on the moon landing but thought he could make some money doing it.
Looking back, I said it would hurt his career.
It didn't hurt it, but it didn't exactly help it.
It was about two and a half years before he wrote anything like it again.
But anyway, we finished the ‘Space Oddity’ album and promoted it a bit.
I do remember we did a few gigs.
I was on bass, David was on acoustic guitar and we got this guy called Tex, he was a black conga player and came around with us doing a few gigs, although nothing really happened.
I remember we did a live version of ‘Space Oddity’ with acoustic guitar, bass and congas and it didn't go down so well.’
Angie Bowie: ‘During this period we were still living with David's mother which certainly moved my rear end out into finding somewhere to sleep because having to sleep with someone really freaked me out.
So I was looking around the Beckenham and Bromley area when I found this place called Haddon Hall which was an amazing property.
It was the three main reception rooms of an old Victorian folly built for the Crystal Palace Exhibition, backing on to Beckenham golf course which, I suppose became a very desirable place to be out of London in Victorian times.
They built these houses onto the back of the park which became the golf course.
It was an enormous red folly with balconies all around the back and to the gardens at the sides, and had been divided into apartments.
There were seven flats in the building but the three main reception rooms and the hallway and gallery which went round and then, of course, up to the upstairs room, had been blocked off.
The hall and the gallery and the enormous stained glass windows which faced the door as you came in, and the three reception rooms were ours, and as I suffer from terrible claustrophobia, I thought it was a wonderful place to live although David, who I am sure doesn't suffer from claustrophobia as badly as I do, being British and like most British people, would be content to live in smaller environments.
He thought it was fabulous because I guess he just wasn't used to living in all that space and the idea of living in this enormous rambling series of rooms appealed to him very much.
Unfortunately, prior to our moving in, 27 cats had lived there with a professor of history and his wife who were a little eccentric.
There were a lot of plants and the cats felt they were in a jungle of their own in the hall.
You can imagine the smell!
But at 20 years of age I had no scruples about rubber gloves and bleach, and dealt with the problem straight away.
It was rather grubby so we just painted it all white and, as I suspected, David's imagination, after it was painted, came into heavy play.
It took six months for us to talk the owner into agreeing to let us rent the place.
I think this was due to the fact that we didn't have 9-to-5 jobs and we were entertainers and couldn't possibly manage the £7 a week rent.
In the end I remember I said to him that I was just a spoilt Yank and my father sent me money so he needn't worry about a thing.
Anyway, we moved in.
It was the coldest time of the year and the first thing I insisted on was having a telephone.
David didn't think it was a good idea but I said we couldn't keep going out and using the phone box down the road.
‘I'm telling you’, he said, ‘it's not a good idea’.
Little did I know how right he was because the first thing that happened when David's mother had a bad day, she would call me everything under the sun.
Basically that David had moved out of Plaistow Grove to leave her on her own to die, to live with the fancy whore from America, and yet on other days, of course, I was perfectly lovely and would come and shop with her and do everything.
Being as it was David's mother, an older person, it never occurred to me to get mad or upset.
I would get mad when I put the phone down and cry a lot, but certainly I wouldn't get mad with her.’
Tony Visconti: ‘When David and Angela found the enormous Victorian house, Haddon Hall, in Beckenham, my girlfriend and I went along to see it and we loved it.
It was the most incredible place we had ever seen.
It was like a mansion.
We decided to share the place together and pool our resources.
It was very strange.
I thought we could get on with him but I think within a week of moving in there we became entangled in David and Angela's personal lives.
It was a very bizarre one — always turbulent and very strange.
My girlfriend and I were a conventional hand-holding couple and David and Angela were going to gay clubs at midnight and bringing home people at four in the morning which made things very tense, I would say.’
Angie Bowie: ‘As Christmas drew near, ‘Space Oddity’ became a hit single in England, going on to win an Ivor Novello Award.
Strangely enough, Ken Pitt wouldn't let me go with him, or his mother for that matter, to receive the award.
Ken wanted to rake David to this thing on his own and David, being very, very cold — he hates demonstrations of emotion — and me being very Mediterranean, I told him that as far as I was concerned, I didn't give a fuck about his award or seeing him receive it, but I thought it was a bit much that his mother couldn't be there because it was a public occasion and it was a time when, without having to speak to her, he could be nice to her, as every mother loves to be there for that kind of thing.
David wasn't very happy about me being so blunt, but I think in a way it made him realise that I was really straightforward and that I really did care.
It wasn't long after the conversation about the Ivor Novello Award that he became much more resolved that he didn't need Ken Pitt as manager, so I said to him that the only thing he could do in that case was to get an attorney who would break the contract.
He replied that he had tried to get an attorney to break the contract and that he had spoken to this lawyer and that lawyer.
At the time I was involved in various things at Philips Records and I asked someone if they knew of anyone who could get David out of his contract, and was told that he knew a man called Tony DeFries who was actually not allowed to practise at the bar — he was a consultant, a trouble-shooter, divorce cases.
He suggested we go and talk to him, so I said to David, ‘Well, here's this guy — I don't know what he's going to do, but let's go and see him.’
Which we did.
DeFries was interested.
He wanted to look at the contract and check it out and really, with no trouble at all— I think he wrote a couple of letters and said that Pitt was not acting in the capacity as manager that David required and that was that.’
Ken Pitt: ‘I think the great problem was David was always very insecure and because he wasn't achieving the renown he wanted, like most artists he began to worry, bearing in mind that David was now living at Haddon Hall with a few of his friends, all of whom were unaware of what was going on in the office and how we were planning David's career, what progress we were really making.
I think they just sucked up to David, and began to put the boot in really, quite unnecessarily and unfairly.
As far as I understand it, it was Angela who pursued the interest in Tony DeFries.
In fact, I didn't know until recent years that it was a person at Philips Records who in fact mentioned DeFries to David, and when he did meet DeFries, Angela was very much in favour of David moving from me to him.
I think events proved that she had come to know me a little better, and talked to me, and tried to find out what I was planning and what I was doing, and how David's career was going, and co-operated with me to assist David, I think he would have had a much happier period ahead of him.’
Angie Bowie: ‘I never realized and had never been involved in who did what, but I suppose that amounts to, if one wants to look at it from Ken's point of view, being the fly in the ointment, or of one wants to look at it from a real point of view as, in terms of property settlement and management, that I was being David's manager at that particular time, because it was possible for me to advise him to do something about the things that really troubled him artistically.
I never really thought of it like that.
I thought of it as just being a friend.
I thought when someone gets miserable you just sort them out.’
Ken Pitt: ‘However, I finished with him in April 1970.
There was no animosity.
It was a very friendly thing.
We had a meting in my flat.
David said absolutely nothing — not a word.
He said ‘Hell’ to me when he walked in and ‘Thank you’when it was all over and he walked out.
He just sat on the chaise-longue.
Tony DeFries was rather diffident — a little restrained I thought.
He wasn't the Tony DeFries that he became.
We discussed the whole thing and i said there was absolutely no point at all.
I think he was rather taken aback because my understanding is that he told David that he could get him out of the contract.
From this point of view David asked DeFries if he would become his manager.
Well, of course, DeFries didn't get him out of the contract.
He just came to me and said that he was unhappy and I said OK.
That's really all there was to it and Tony DeFries became his manager.
David and I were very close friends and if he wasn't happy with what we were doing and wanted to change, I wasn't going to argue.
A number of myths have grown up about David's relationship with me — one of them being that I wanted him to be another Tommy Steele or another cabaret star, but this was not true.
At the time David was going through, what I suppose you could call an apprenticeship and he really didn't know what he wanted to do.
We were trying to find out where his particular niches lay and the constant worry at that time was lack of money.
His father would now and again telephone me saying that David was down to his last few pounds and that he worried about money.
Not that it mattered very much because he was living in my flat and wasn't going to starve, but I said to him, there is only one way that you can make quick, ready money and that is going out in cabaret.
I didn't recommend it because I had seen what it had done to sensitive artists like Scott Walker.
I said we could select the venues, he could write his own cabaret show; he could go out and do 20 minutes and pull £100 a week, which was a lot of money in the 60's.
I don't blame him — he didn't like the idea at all.
So he continued trying to make a living the way he wanted to.
Of course, he wasn't making a living at all and there was no way he possibly could.
However, it got so bad one day — I think he had been discussing this with his father because he used to go home sometimes at the weekends and come back to the flat on Monday — and he came in one day and said, ‘OK, it's going to be cabaret’.
I thought that was a decision he and his father had come to over the weekend.
I remember we set about putting together a cabaret show.
It was a very progressive performance, far too uncommercial.
However, it was a very good one.
He wanted to do a Beatle medley and for that we made four cut-out caricatures of The Beatles in hardboard and painted them and then fitted them on frames and easels so that they could be stood up and moved around.
We decided eventually that the time had come to rehearse this seriously and he was very happy about it.
We decided to show it to a booking agent who books cabaret, so I spoke to Harry Dawson who did a lot of, cabaret work and we auditioned it for him.
David was absolutely marvellous, a tremendous show, and when it was over Dawson said to me, ‘Ken, it's a marvellous act but it's too good — when can I book it?’.
Of course, he was absolutely right.
It was the end of cabaret as far as we were concerned.
The message got round and it got round Haddon Hall like wildfire that I wanted David Bowie to be a cabaret star.
No way.’
Tony Visconti: ‘The fact is that David Bowie was becoming more and more disenchanted with Pitt.
He was only getting him little gigs here and there and you wouldn't call him a dynamic person.
David has always, for a time, hitched his rocket on somebody who is powerful — no question about it — he's powerful himself, but he needed an injection of ruthlessness which Ken Pitt, being a very sweet, nice man, wasn't giving him at the time.
And then Tony DeFries just materialised.
There is always a guy that says, ‘I can get you out of this contract’.
David was in a state at that time saying that he had signed these things years ago and wanted to get out.
DeFries said he could get him out of anything.
So that's how it happened, quite honestly.
The way Tony DeFries went at it made me very suspicious.
He said, ‘What can I do for you?’ and I said ‘I didn't really want to get out of anything; I'm OK.’
So his angle with me was that he'd get me work and get the money owed to me.
He wrote a few letters on my behalf and I just didn't think he was for me because of what I saw at the time.
So, David went with DeFries and I didn't.
I wasn't by any means in love with the man.
I thought he was all right, but I didn't think he was all that powerful, although I do believe in chemistry and obviously the chemistry between him and Bowie was magic — undeniably magic.
At the time my feeling was that David was making a conscious decision to become big..
He always did it for a while and then just let it ride to see what happened, but all of a sudden(it's amazing — I've seen it happen several times) he gets out of bed one morning and says, ‘Right, I'm going to do something about it — it's not moving fast enough for me’.
Usually, David at the time would surround himself with friends who did things for him, thinking he would get things done out of loyalty.
Then he would change people quite often when it didn't suit him to be with them any more.’
Angie Bowie: ‘The Christmas before recording ‘The Man Who Sold The World’, I had flown back home to see my parents.
At the time there was a postal strike and I didn't hear from David for about 3 or 4 weeks.
Then eventually, the strike was over, and the phone rang — it was David.
He said that there had been a postal strike and that he had been trying to write to me and as the mail was getting through, I should get the letters.
He wanted me to come back as, obviously, it was very helpful for him to have someone who would control things when he had to go out and work.
When the mail eventually did arrive, I received this very strange Christmas card which said, ‘This year we will marry’.
I nearly had a heart attack.
With my father agreeing to give me £2,000, and adding, ‘This is the third plane ticket I've bought for that man’, I flew back to England and finished painting the house white, thanking God that I liked the art nouveau and Edwardian furniture David had been buying, because otherwise it could have been tricky, having received the letter and realising that it might actually be love, it might actually be something serious going on.
My father sent me the cheque, needless to say, so David and I thought we'd better get married because that was the reason he sent the cheque.
So, off we went to Kensington market.
It was so neat and we had a good time.
David said, ‘Let's go do it — let's get wedding duds’ and I said, ‘Absolutely.’
So off we went.
Now it sounds like my father paid for it, but that's not true because David took care of all the stuff for the wedding.
It was very cute.
We got outrageous clothes — total outfits.
David said, I hope nobody's going to be there’ and I agreed, particularly the way we were going to look.
On that evening, the day before the wedding, we went to visit our friend Clare Shenstone and her brother, friends of ours that we had met through Calvin Mark Lee.
We went to her house and had dinner and stayed there all night.
In the morning, we suddenly woke up and said, ‘Oh no,— we're supposed to be getting married at 11 o'clock.
We raced down to Bromley and got to the registry office and there was David's Mum saying,‘You'll be late for your own wedding.
There you are.
I told you so.’
I couldn't help laughing — it was so true.
We were together.
It's hardly as if one of us turned up and the other didn't.
It was just one of those comedy of errors.
‘It's all right.
Don't worry’, she said, ‘I've called the press.’
‘What?’, said David, dressed in black satin, looking absolutely outrageous, like a Lithuanian Dracula rock and roller about to get married and me in this sort of Victorian gown.
It was too much.
It was wonderful purple and pink, and very bright.
All this and David's Mum having saved the day saying, ‘Don't worry, I've called the press.’
I thought, ‘Oh no.’
Needless to say, the press showed up.
Little known rock and roller and American decide to get married.
It was preserved for posterity with David's Mum smiling away — bless her heart.
I don't know how David's Mum got there because he decided not to tell her, even though I said he could call her because it's not really fair to get married without letting her know.’
Tony Visconti: ‘At that time, we had gone into the studio to record ‘The Man Who Sold The World’, and the horrible thing that was happening to me as a producer, the nightmare of my life, was that David and Angela were becoming totally entwined and enraptured with each other.
If they were in a good mood things would go well, but if they were in a bad mood, David wouldn't show up.
Sometimes when they were in a needy mood, which was most of the time, David would be out in the lobby at Advision Studios where we were recording, and they would be cuddling and cooing and wooing — it was disgusting.
I've got to tell you it was disgusting.
I suppose if you were either one of them it would be nice but I'd go out and say to them, ‘David, it's time for us to do a vocal now’ and Angie would say, ‘Oh, Davey Wavey, do you have to leave me now?’, to which he'd reply, ‘Oh, Angie Pangie, I suppose I do — old Uncle Tony wants me in the studio.’
It was absolutely nauseating to be involved with.
The album didn't go smoothly at all.
Mick Ronson, Woody Woodmansey and myself would be making backing tracks, having got the brief from David — it was E chord for 16 bars then an A chord for 4 bars and a B chord for 2 bars — and we were just banging out these backing tracks, and David would come into the studio, if we could tear him away from Angela for long enough and say whether he liked it or not.
He wasn't asleep; it was just a very difficult time for him.
He was juggling two different worlds.
The musicians on one side and the great love of his life on the other and I could see his conflict, but it was my nightmare.
It was my problem.
We had about six or seven weeks to finish the album and by the last week, I didn't have a vocal on two of the tracks and this is where it actually began — David writing on microphone.
He'd start singing spontaneously.
It was great.
It was really wonderful.
When he was hot, he was hot, but for me the whole thing was not so good.
My two realities were getting this thing done technically to technical excellence, which I was struggling with as I didn't know my stuff so well then, and also, managing to get a good performance out of David.
I had two big conflicts and would end the day a bag of nerves, not knowing whether I'd come home with anything.
I had a record company screaming for final mixes, not even sure that they wanted this album because ‘Space Oddity’ didn't do too well and as far as they were concerned this was going to be the last they had to do with David Bowie, and I wasn't delivering the goods.
A few thousand quid over budget.
It was a nightmare, a really horrible period.’
Angie Bowie: ‘By this time, David had left Ken Pitt and was with Tony DeFries.
I think the death of David's father was probably what took him a while to make the decision about leaving Ken, because to lose his father, who he really adored, who had always been a pillar of strength to him, changed his life, and I think David carried a bitterness about him dying for a long time.
I didn't want to get into soap opera conversation about it with him, but on the occasions that we did talk about it, both of us felt that someone, with perhaps a little more eye on reality, would have realised that he should have been in hospital and not at home unable to reach oxygen.
For him to die of pneumonia was really a terrible waste and I think David harboured a little…you can't blame someone for something like a person dying tragically with pneumonia, but I think he felt his mother should have watched over him more carefully, but I suppose that's like saying the cat got drowned, why was the puddle there?
It's a stupid thing, I used to try really hard not to get involved in those conversations.
His father was a public relations man for Dr Barnardo's Homes and would chat away and do all that kind of thing, whereas David was very much like his mother in terms of showing affection.
It was like every time I got a letter or an insinuation from him that he cared, or that he really loved me or wanted me to be with him, it shocked me because he wasn't good at showing that.
It was for this reason that I had Zowie because I could see how he was with children.
Certainly children drew him out.
He could get involved with children and be affectionate and spend time with them.
I get very bored with reading how difficult he is and how cold he is.
He's not like that.
He's a fabulous guy and very funny, but it took a long time, and I don't take credit for it, but it took a long time to put him in a situation where I felt that he was at maximum ‘comfortableness’, so that his shyness — and he was very shy — was overcome.
It was like all that ego-building which eventually turns into a monster.
It was very necessary because he was so unsure.
Not of his talent — he always knew he was good and he always knew what a great songwriter and performer he was — but for instance, he was nervous of audiences.
The idea of touching people in the crowd or letting people in the crowd touch him was something that had not occurred to him, but to be beautiful and that remote — you've got to get a crowd to touch him because that was what really got them wild.
That was what caused the hysteria and enthusiasm and so, I felt that if the band on stage was at least so close to his sense of humour that he felt comfortable with them, if the crew and all the support system was so strong that he could relax enough to enjoy the crowd, only then would it get magnetic and spontaneous.
He relied on me a great deal because he knew I always knew what to do.
It was only when we were very close that he would say he was shy.’
David had almost completed the album, ‘The Man Who Sold The World’, and it wasn't long afterwards that Tony Visconti moved out of Haddon Hall.
Tony Visconti: ‘When it was finished, on the last day of the last mix, I remember telling David, ‘I've had it.
I can't work like this anymore — I'm through.
I've got Marc Bolan who wants to record day and night and is keen to go, and I might as well put my energies into him because you really don't want to work very hard.’
David was very disappointed.
I remember the final time I saw him.
It was outside Tony DeFries's office on the corner of Regent Street and Great Castle Street.
I just said ‘Goodbye’ to him right there and then.
He looked at me very quizzically.
He was in pain.
‘But why?’ he said.
‘I told you, I can't deal with this anymore’, I replied, ‘and I don't like Tony DeFries.’
It's funny, I never really did like him and Ken Pitt thought I always wanted them to be together.
It was clearly David's choice and that was it.
That was the last time I saw David for about four years.’
David in his bedroom at Kenneth Pitt's Manchester Street home.
The night before his haircut for ‘The Virgin Soldiers’
Lower Third Days
Mary Finnigan
A Space Oddity — 1969
State of the Art, David advertises ‘Stylophone’, originally given to him by Marc Bolan
The Three Tuns pub in Beckenham High Street.
The home of the Arts Lab which was later to be re-named ‘Growth’
Angie and puppeteer Brian Moore, an Arts Lab regular, with some of his creations (Bowie is under the table
Angie Bowie pictured by Ray Stevenson
Mrs Jones, David's mother
Ziggy beams down to earth
Haddon Hall, rare shot of the house where David wrote ‘The Man Who Sold The World’, ‘Ziggy Stardust’ and ‘Hunky Dory’
David performing on his first American visit, late January 1971
Tony Visconti, David's friend and producer
Over page, the mod at work on Clapham Common
In New York in 1971
David at work in Haddon Hall on the design of Ziggy Stardust's next image
David on tour in America and Japan in1973
Kenneth Pitt, David's manager ‘66 to ‘70
Stage costume idea, later to be discarded, circa 1971
Wedding Day, 1970.
David and Mary Angela Barnet
Rocking with Mick Ronson
The first of many.
David interviewed in New York for his first promotional visit of 1971
Over page, travelling ‘Soft’ on the Trans Siberian Express, David still in dressing gown
David jams with Marc Bolan on his last TV show
Posing with Freddi Burretti, aka Rudi Valentino of Arnold Corns (one of Bowie's experimental bands
In happier days.
A rare shot with Tony DeFries and Angie Bowie, Chicago, October 1972.
Photo: Mick Rock
THE AMERICAN DREAM
The Arts Lab faded into the distance, ‘Space Oddity’ was a successful single but the album aroused little interest.
David, having parted from Ken Pitt, was now managed by Tony DeFries.
The follow-up album, ‘The Man Who Sold The World’ which caused a parting of the ways between Tony Visconti and David, was also released.
David called Mick Ronson and Woody Woodmansey (after making ‘The Man Who Sold The World’, they had returned to Hull where they lived) and invited them back to prepare for the next album, ‘Hunky Dory’.
He informed them of Visconti's departure and the need for a replacement bass guitarist, and they returned with a friend who played bass called Trevor Bolder.
Collectively, they moved into Haddon Hall with David and Angie.
Meanwhile Tony DeFries was negotiating a new record deal with RCA.
Peter Noone, formerly Herman of Herman's Hermits, recorded ‘Oh, You Pretty Things’, a song written by David, which entered the British charts and oiled the gears of the DeFries negotiating machine.
On May 28, 1971, Angie gave birth to Duncan Zowie Haywood Bowie , an event that David documented by writing ‘Kooks’ for the ‘Hunky Dory’LP.
In August Andy Warhol's production of Pork opened at The Roundhouse in London.
The cast of this production would play a major role in the MainMan organization set up by Tony DeFries to handle David's career:Cherry Vanilla would become Press Agent,Jamie Andrews an Administrator,Tony Zanetta David's Personal Assistant and  Leee  Black Childers the MainMan Staff Photographer.
 Leee Childers: ‘The production was made from Andy Warhol's personal tapes.
He used to tape everything — every conversation, every telephone call, everything — and we put it together into a play.
We first performed it in New York where a crazy art dealer decided to bring it to London, so to London we came.
None of us had ever been here before and we were all living together in one flat, which we called Pig Mansions, in Earls Court.
Cherry Vanilla and I used to take care of our time when we weren't rehearsing by pretending we were rock and roll journalists — which we weren't.
I pretended I was the photographer and she pretended she was the writer.
We called up all the record companies to see shows and they let us go and see all the shows because we had American accents and we were crazy.
Every week we got the New Musical Express and looked to see who was playing, and one week I saw a tiny ad for David Bowie at a place called The Country Club on Haverstock Hill which, as it turned out, was like a garage behind a row of shops.
I'd read an article by Jon Mendlesohn in Rolling Stone , which emanated from a trip he took to Los Angeles the year before, which must have been about 1970, that said that there was this guy who did weird songs and dressed up in dresses.
We thought anyone who dresses up in dresses we want to go and see.
So we called round but couldn't find a record company, although by this time he was with RCA.
He was just doing the ‘Hunky Dory’ album but we didn't know that, Anyway, we got in touch with The Country Club and they put us on the guest list and Cherry Vanilla, Wayne County and I, posing as journalists, went along to see him.
When we arrived there were only about 20 people in the audience and he wasn't dressed in a dress.
He was in yellow trousers and big hat.
Mick Ronson was with him and Rick Wakeman on piano.
Angie was there, too and Dana Gillespie .
Angie was very loud at the time and being really crazy, so we all got on famously.
We were a little disappointed — or at least I was — with David because he wasn't in a dress and he wasn't nearly as crazy as we thought he would be, but nevertheless, we liked his music a lot and he introduced us from the audience and Cherry Vanilla stood up and popped out a tit for the other 20 people, and David said that we were doing Pork .
David and Angie came to the opening night of Pork and to nearly every night thereafter and we became really good friends.
We went out with them to Yours and Mine and The Sombrero, and we danced and found them all very crazy.
Then the show ended and we had to return to America and I thought that was that — good friends, really talented, I'd grown to really like David's music.
It was at that time, in fact, that he met Andy Warhol.
Actually, I think it was at the opening of Pork because Andy came to the opening and David had that song on the ‘Hunky Dory’ album called ‘Andy Warhol’, so we made sure they met.’
Dana Gillespie: ‘I'd just come back from the States and was hanging around with a band called Ashton Gardner and Dyke.
In fact, it was about the time that David and I both auditioned for Hair and we were both turned down which I thought was quite funny because it seemed that just about everyone else in London got the part, but we were very much the kind of solo singers and perhaps the wrong type.
Anyway, I was doing Catch My Soul , which was a rock Othello, starring Jack Good who was playing Othello himself.
P J Proby and P P Arnold.
David and Angela came along to see it and David said, ‘I must introduce you to this guy Tony DeFries who is going to be my manager, and I think you should meet him too.’
So I went with him to meet DeFries.
They were in offices in Regent Street with Lawrence Myers and a lot of song writers like Tony McCauley and Mike Leanders pottering about.
I walked in with David and there was this guy with a mass of curly hair siting behind a desk, looking very Jewish, not like the Jewish businessman, though he is a wonderful businessman.
We got on very well and from there came the start of MainMan.
MainMan wasn't started right at that point but then DeFries had the idea that he could keep a better eye on David, myself and eventually Mick Ronson, as he was being treated as a solo artist.
One of Mick's first jobs concerning David was to organize the arrangements for my album which later became ‘Weren't Born A Man’.
We first did about five tracks which was pressed on a private white album, with me on one side and David on the other.
I can't actually recall all the numbers, but I remember I was in the States at one point and I took the album over and tried to sell it to a record company.
In fact, I went to a couple of record companies and said, ‘This is me and David Bowie’.
They said ‘Thanks, but no thanks.’
Then came the period when I used to hang out a lot just with DeFries and we'd drive down to David and Angie's place in Beckenham, Haddon Hall, on Sundays, and Angie would cook and we'd sit around.
I remember David would always watch television if the Alwin Nicholson Dance Company was performing, or there was a programme on Kobuki Theatre or something.
He never watched boring Coronation Street type programmes.
David had always been a great fashion person as well.
He was the first guy I ever saw in military clothes before the main craze for the mods dressing up in military uniforms went on.
I remember on one occasion the four of us went down to Glastonbury Fair where he sang, but due to a balls-up over the sound and the electricity, they didn't put him on until the next day and that was at about 5.00 in the morning when the sun came through.
He was standing on this big silver pyramid where the stage was.
People had been very cold and were sloshing about in the mud from the day before.
They were in their plastic bags on the outdoor grounds, and as the sun came up, it came up over the top of the hill and hit the silver pyramid and there was David on stage singing.
I think he was singing ‘The Sun Machine Is Coming Down’ or one of those.
It was a great number and they took notice of him even though he was just on his own.
His hands were so cold he could hardly play the guitar.
I was standing on the side of the stage watching him.
It wasn't long after that MainMan was completely formed.’
 Leee Childers: ‘After playing in Pork , I'd been back in America for about a year when the phone rang — it was Tony DeFries, David's manager, who I had apparently met before but didn't remember.
He said that David was getting ready to tour America, but he didn't want normal rock and roll people — he wanted weird, crazy people to be his staff and he asked whether we'd do it.
Would we become MainMan America?
Cherry Vanilla was doing nothing — she was eating fruit and breaking out all the time as a result, Jane was doing nothing too — she'd started a group called Queen Elizabeth which played little, low-life funky bars on the Lower Eastside, Tony Zanetta was working coding, which is a very ignominious job that out-of-work actors do in New York, and I was working at 16 Magazine as a tea boy.
None of us had anything to lose, so we said, ‘Sure, of course we will’.
Little did we know that it would result in one of the most amazing periods of any of our lives — including David's I'm sure.
It was quite bizarre.
So that's how I got involved.
‘Ziggy Stardust’ had just been released in England and David was doing well with it, or so I'm told, but no-one had heard of him at all in America, so Tony DeFries gave us each a box of 25 albums to just give to whoever we thought was cool, which actually turned out to be a pretty good idea.
We took them down to Max's Kansas City and gave one to Micky Ruskin the owner, we gave one to the DJ; and we gave one to Lisa Robinson, the reporter.
We just passed them out to crazy people and artistes and people who were always on the scene in New York.
Then Tony asked us to find him office facilities.
Money, apparently was no object, although there was no money.
He kept saying, ‘money is no object — find me what I need.’
And we kept saying, ‘You have to pay for these things’.
He'd say, ‘Don't worry, don't worry about that.
I'll deal with it.
There'll be money…sometime.’
All of us were working on no salary, just expenses, but we found nice facilities on 58th Street and were taught to charge everything.
We got charge accounts at Max's Kansas City, we got a charge account with a limousine service — we rode limousines instead of taxis because we didn't have to pay for limousines and we'd have to pay the taxis — so we were always in limousines.
We got charge accounts at Bloomingdales and stores like that, so we were always dressed fabulously and we were always sitting around in fabulous restaurants, charging for fabulous meals with all manner of people, which was all Tony's plan to make it look like the most successful rock and roll company going.
And it worked.’
Dana Gillespie: ‘DeFries always thought that in order for us to absorb musical culture as it should be from America, we should actually go and live in America, and it took quite a few months for it all to be organized.
I was at that time in Jesus Christ, Superstar .
It was 1973 and already we were preparing for the move to the States.
I'd started my album ‘Weren't Born A Man’ and Mick Ronson was the arranger and producer for a couple of tracks, and David produced a couple of tracks too, but during the making of the album, David became even bigger and bigger in America and the move to America was absolutely imminent so I had to finish my own album without the help of him because he wasn't around — which I did.
His interest in what was going on in America was always strong.
I remember when the Andy Warhol lot came with Pork to The Roundhouse — we all went off specially to see them and meet them afterwards.’
 Leee Childers: ‘In America, we'd go to the record companies and make outrageous demands at RCA because we didn't know any better.
We didn't know that we were asking for impossible things, because we had never worked in the record business before — and we'd get them.
We'd get our demands because anything was done to shut us up and get us out of their offices.
We just prowled around the halls at RCA at the time, going in any doors that were open and asking for things and demanding things.
We'll never know whether it was Tony's plan or David's plan.
We had this debate all the time amongst us — who was the actual person behind the grand design?
Was it Tony DeFries or was it David Bowie?
I guess we'll never know looking back on it, various things can be traced to David and other things to Tony.
We think, but we don't really know what they were saying to each other behind closed doors.
But anyway, we created that whole idea that no-one could photograph him, no-one could do do a story on him unless it was going to be a cover story, which was outrageous because he was virtually unknown in America.
To ask for things like that was totally beyond what an experienced person would ask for.
An experienced publicist would go for a colour piece somewhere instead of the cover, but we were instructed to only go for cover pieces, so we ended up getting them of course, and we ended up creating this whole myth around him which was fabulous.
I was the advance man.
I was the person who was supposed to go to every city before David got there to make sure that everything was in order, that the hall that was going to be performed in had all the facilities that were required — and the hotels — I had to check all of that.
I'd never done any of that before either.
I was given a list of 12 absolutes that if the promoter could not provide, I was to cancel the gig on the spot.
I remember the first gig I went to in Cleveland, the grand piano was two feet too short.
I was terrified so I called New York.
I told them that the grand piano was two feet too short and DeFries said, ‘Cancel the gig — no gig.’
Cleveland was the big David Bowie stronghold — he'd broken in Cleveland whereas he hadn't in New York and places like that.
I said, ‘The show's sold out — the place is really nice’.
Tony said, ‘Cancel the gig’.
So I cancelled the gig and they got the piano that was the right size and the gig was back on.
That's the way it went for the whole tour.
If one little thing wasn't on, the show was off.
By the same token, Tony DeFries had a clause in the contract that if the promoter lost money he would pay it to him, so it was impossible for a promoter to actually risk anything.
They would definitely, at least, break even, and it did come to bear a few times.
In St Louis, we were booked in a 11,000 seater hall and I think 180 or so people came.
From a financial point of view it was a disaster and I saw Tony DeFries actually pay the difference to the promoter.
That way, of course, the promoter would re-book.
You don't lose.
There's no risk.
From an artistic point of view, it was one of the best shows and the kids were scattered about this huge place based upon what price ticket they had bought.
David was absolutely unbothered.
He came out on stage and called them all down to the orchestra pit right in front of him.
All 180 kids gathered right at his feet and he did a completely different show from any show that he'd done in the sell-out places for five or six thousand.
He did a really intimate show where he sat on the edge of the stage with his ankles crossed and talked to them and sang them songs.
It was a whole different show.
Occasionally, he'd bounce back on stage and do the whole thing with the strobe lights and everything which sent one poor little girl who had epilepsy into a fit.
But apart from that incident, it was a great show and he did the same kind of thing in Seattle, Kansas City and the sort of cities in the Mid West where they hadn't heard of him — it was too early — but Tony DeFries was as good as his word.
He always paid the promoters if they lost money.
The tour was originally booked, I think, for about eight cities starting in Cleveland, then Memphis, then New York.
He wanted to do a bit before New York and it worked because before the tour started, there was very little interest in New York, but it sold out in Cleveland which we knew it would, and both shows were great, by which time word got back to New York instantly, as it does, and by the time the show at Carnegie Hall happened, it was sold out.
They audience was ready for a great star because they'd heard that he was.
It worked beautifully it was a fabulous sensation.
Then it was meant to be Detroit, Chicago, St Louis and work its way west and end in Los Angeles but word of mouth, the cover story in Rolling Stone which Tony coerced out of them, and various other things created such a sensation that they lengthened it.
That's why we went on to Seattle and Phoenix and worked our way back east again through the south, through Texas, Florida and Tennessee and it ended up going more than twice its length because of the success of the show.
I left before the tour was over because it was time for Mott The Hoople to come and tour and I'd been designated as the person to take care of them, so I went off before it was over.
But he did do three fabulous nights in Philadelphia and Boston again.
It went on and on and that was what solidified him in America.
He still hadn't had any chart hits at the time and in fact didn't until ‘Fame’.
David had always liked Mott The Hoople and admired them, and I think it was one of the few really unselfish acts he did when, when they were on the verge of breaking up, he wrote them a song —‘All The Young Dudes’.
As far as I could ever determine, he really did do that — he actually sat down and wrote a song for them because he liked them and didn't want them to go away.
Having written the song, he gave it to them.
He was not a big star at the time and it was just a good song.
He wasn't trading on his name; he didn't think that that would have any particular influence.
He wrote it purely because it was a song that was right for them.
And it was.
Having given them the song, it was a hit and that's when Tony DeFries picked up the management.
They were a difficult band to manage because they were always on the brink of breaking up.
They were all very highly strung and eventually, they did break up.
But David really liked them.
He used to go to their shows and just show up out of nowhere.’
Angie Bowie: ‘Prior to the American Tour, the ‘Ziggy Stardust’ album had been released and David had already completed a tour of England.
I think it was a great relief for him to think that Tony DeFries would deal with things and all he had to do was deal with his artistry.
I don't think he conceived ‘Ziggy Stardust’ as a concept album, but the songs slotted together in a way that it became a concept, and the way he presented it on stage, how he wanted to look, how the boy's costumes looked (facsimiles of his — though his were patterned and theirs were simple) meant that he'd breathe life into a concept hero.
I think he got confident.
I think he got confident of knowing what he could do.
I think Tony gave him confidence because Tony looked after the day-to-day worries of how one paid for what one was going to do.
Going into the studio — you have a record deal that says the record company pays for that — but has that contract been examined?
It took a lot of worry away from him.
The band were very supportive and they knew they didn't have to do anything untoward.
They just had to be there and play well and perform well.
And they enjoyed it.
They loved the fact that Tony and everyone was dedicated to making it happen.
It was an ideal situation for someone in that vernacular.
I think that it was probably the moment that his insecurity was surmounted.
He really became able to deal with whatever insecurities he had as an artiste or I hope that's what it was.’
Mick Ronson: ‘It was a really exciting period then because Tony DeFries got involved, which was about maybe a year and a half after I first played with David.
It seemed to be like, ‘Don't worry about the money and if you need the equipment, you get the equipment, if you need clothes, get clothes made’.
Everything seemed to be taken care of and everybody was on a real high because it left you free to do what you wanted to do without worrying about paying this week's rent or buying a pair of shoes, or whether a valve in the amplifier had gone and you had to replace it.
All those sort of things.
So all those things went out of the window which makes life easier.
It was really exciting just to carry on and get involved in making an album — get on the road.
I think it started before ‘Ziggy Stardust’— it started around the ‘Hunky Dory’ period with the clothes and I think we started off playing as a duo in the ‘Hunky Dory’period.
We'd get Rick Wakeman to play piano on a date and then we'd add someone just playing bongos.
I think Woody played bongos on a couple of gigs or something, but it was a very acoustic thing and that's why ‘Hunky Dory’ sounded like it did.
But then it seemed to snowball from ‘Hunky Dory’ into ‘Ziggy Stardust’because after playing one or two gigs as an acoustic outfit, it seemed to be natural to take it that step further — to add the bass and add the drums and make it bigger and better — more of a show of it — and so it evolved into ‘Ziggy Stardust’.
I think David had one or two of the songs off ‘Ziggy Stardust’ way before and so it became a natural progression to do that.
It all seemed to snowball very quickly.’
Angie Bowie: ‘I think basically ‘Ziggy Stardust’ was a good album and they played the parts really well.
I insisted they look great all the time.
I told them they couldn't expect people to get excited by four scruffy ragamuffins that came in the stage door and then go put on their party clothes, which were fantastic, and then again put on their horrible Levis and leave again.
I said, ‘You're going to get mobbed coming in and you're going to get mobbed going out, so you'd better look good coming in and going out’.
The street clothes had to look as good as the stage clothes.
Added to which, David had been interviewed by Melody Maker and said he was gay which gained a lot of publicity.’
Mick Ronson: ‘At the time when that story came out, my family in Hull took a lot of flak about it because they'd never even heard about it up there.
It came like throwing paint over the car and paint up the front door and stuff like that, which really annoyed me.
It's pretty sad.
Some people thought I was gay.
I wasn't gay, and when somebody asked me I'd say, ‘No, I'm not’, which was the truth.
That's what I had to say about it.
If somebody doesn't like the truth then it's too bad.
It was a bit of a pain for a couple of weeks.
It was very short-lived but at the time it was a bit of a shock.
It wasn't a shock amongst ourselves — it was more of a shock from other people's reactions.
For instance, throwing paint over the car and my mother going through it.
People were really annoyed up North.
That was something at the time that I felt I didn't really need myself.
I think the other thing was that I wanted to be known as a musician rather than some other phenomenon other than a musician and I think that also had an effect on me too.
Maybe people were seeing me as something other than what I wanted to be naturally.
Audiences like to see a bit of theatrics here and there.
They like to be able to go to a show and to be able to see something that they don't see in their everyday lives — you know, catching the bus to go work or coming home on the bus.
When people go out for the night they like to come away with being entertained.
Or if it's not being entertaining, coming away absolutely hating or loving it — as long as it's some sort of reaction.
I think people like that because people's lives are pretty dull on the whole.
Angie was great because she was always very enthusiastic.
Much more than I've ever seen anybody.
With me coming from the North of England, everybody is pretty reserved up there at the best of times, so coming down to London and meeting Angie with an American accent and flitting around the room and speaking in a loud voice all the time, it was amazing.
She actually did a lot of good things — she pulled a lot of things together and did a lot of things for David.
Just her enthusiasm alone.
If you had any doubts about doing anything, she would be the first to say, ‘Don't be silly, you can do it.’
It was very good to have someone like that — someone who keeps pushing you and telling you that you can do it and not to be shy.’
Angie Bowie: ‘That first American tour was interesting.
The boys were good.
The American audiences were kind of small at first and it was a major promotional coup to have survived it all because a lot of dates were pulled at the last minute — promoters couldn't get any interest.
We'd go and be about to play a town and that town pulled out.
Then we'd be sat for two or three days until another show was put in.
But David was fabulous — he was just great — and the boys were great.
Everything about it worked.
The only thing that didn't work was the understanding that we had to be big time very quickly.
The boys were big time, but we had to have the sound system, the lighting, the stage — everything had to move at the pace of David's imagination.
The shows in New York were incredible.
In fact, all the shows that played there were amazing although we did two or three shows in America where there weren't a lot of people.
They had large capacity halls — maybe three or four thousand people there, which was funny for the boys because they weren't used to that.
They were already getting used to the fact that they were very popular.
Even though they might be cult, they were very popular cult.
That first tour did a lot to make the rest of the tours tremendously successful because, with all things like that, if you do play to a small group of people and you still do a great show, then by word of mouth the word spreads how wonderful you were, even though it wasn't packed.
It stays with them — very omnipresent in their minds.
They remember that and they love you for it even more, so when you go back, you have this staunch hard core group of fans that really bring things like that to a head, that really make it happen for you.
They're the ones that call radio stations and demand more airtime, scream when the station is not playing the new album, and eventually cause it to happen for you.’
Tony Zanetta: ‘Prior to his tour of the States, David started doing dates in England and within three months he was becoming what seemed like the biggest thing in England.
Within another month or two he did The Rainbow which got enormous coverage, and within another month he was here getting ready for the first American tour.
It all happened really quickly.
The first tour in America was not really a tour.
It was random dates — it wasn't properly organised, it was just eight dates — and to bring thirty people over was kind of lunatic.
But it worked.
He came with his random dates and began touring.
We all learned very quickly and we learned how to do it fairly quickly.
Within a month or two we were getting pretty good at it.
There was a lot of waiting around — waiting for more dates.
There was no money.
That was the main thing, there was very little money, so we charged everything.
DeFries had an idea that to be a star you had to act like a star so everything was first class.
Everyone stayed at the Plaza Hotel.
There were limousines and flowers and champagne.
There was money for silly things.
DeFries gave everyone money to get winter coats when he decided it gets cold in the United States.
The money would pay for everything anybody needed, but no-one had more than five or ten dollars in their pockets.
We were all forced to stay in hotels and eat in hotels and sign for it.
RCA had agreed to certain kinds of support that got out of hand.
They were willing to charge the hotels against royalties.
The room service kind of crept in and since we didn't have any cash, we charged meals.
We charged everything.
We sat in the Beverley Hills hotel for two weeks and ran up about $20,000 worth of room service.
People didn't have money for taxis so we took limousines.
We could get a limousine at the Beverley Hills hotel but you couldn't get a taxi, so everyone learned how to call down from the front desk and order whatever they needed out of necessity.
It created this mushroom kind of thing that people stared at.
It was total insanity.
It looked like there were just fortunes being spent, which there were, but no-one could quite figure out where the money was coming from, or why this money was being spent in this way.
It was all a little ‘circussy’— a little P T Barnham.
I'm not saying it had such a positive effect on his career but it caused a lot of attention which he didn't buckle under, and I do feel a lot of people couldn't have lived through that experience, but he did.
He got a lot of attention.
By the end of that first tour he was on the cover of Rolling Stone .
He had started out in Cleveland, Ohio playing 3,000 people — he went back to Cleveland within two months and played to 20,000 people.
In Philadelphia, it was like The Beatles had arrived.
There were fans everywhere and people chasing after him in the streets.
It was all very exciting and again, because none of us had gone through it before, it was really wonderful to watch this happen and to be a part of it.
It also began to get weird.
Maybe not the first tour but by the second tour, I think it began to get decadent.
But first it wasn't.
It was very innocent and naïve, but it was corrupted.
You know, staying at the Plaza and ordering champagne whenever you wanted — it does something to you.
Also, you think you deserve it or you think you've earned it or you think you can afford it, and everyone began to act like that.
The arrogance began to creep in.
I think in a way we were all Ziggy Stardust and we were all living out this myth of Ziggy Stardust and treated him as if he was Ziggy Stardust.
We began to treat him like a strange alien person who need to be over-protected, who needed to be shielded from outsiders and the press.
Then we would read about it in the press and it was all self-perpetuating.
An incredible arrogance and corruption and decadence set in.
It didn't really happen overnight, I guess, but through the MainMan News, MainMan kind of mushroomed into this enormous spending machine that really got out of control and I think was a very destructive influence on everyone that was involved.’
Dana Gillespie: ‘In the high flourishing finance days of MainMan I had a secretary, a wonderful car, limousines everywhere, and bills paid for everything at places like Bloomingdales.
MainMan really looked after their artistes extremely well.
I would be flying over and staying with Angie for a couple of weeks at The Sherry Netherland, and Angie and I would go with Zowie in the daytime and then we'd stay up all night with David because he functioned at night.
Or Jagger would come over from the next hotel and we'd have late night ‘looning’ sessions, and then Angie and I would go off again with Zowie.
We actually got really tired.
In 1974 I was at the National Theatre doing Shakespeare with Sir John Gielgud and whenever there was a play it was in repertory form, so another play came on and I had five days off, so I'd fly to Toronto, have a three day ‘loon’ in Canada and then come back.
Or I'd go to LA where David did his week's show at the Universal Amphitheatre, which was the ‘Diamond Dogs’ show.
That was great and started a whole year of being in America for me, which was seeing David as a major star and also for myself, experiencing life as it should be as a major star, with your cars and people looking after you and the record company being polite to you rather than treating you like shit and not working.
DeFries gave me a fur coat.
He said, ‘If you're a singer, you've got to keep yourself warm.’
I was really comfortably looked after — it was great.
I always knew it probably couldn't last because nothing goes on forever, but in that time, I had a great time in New York, and it seemed at one point that everyone was there when David was doing the week at the Universal Amphitheatre.
I remember we were all in the Beverley Hills Wiltshire Hotel.
DeFries was in the Christian Dior suite, Marc Bolan was in the Marc Bolan suite, David was in the next one, Jagger was there and all the Stones, and every night was party night.
All of the MainMan people.
Most of the guys who worked for the company were gay — and Cherry Vanilla was the female press officer — she was outrageous.
We had a great image.
You only had to say MainMan or Bowie and all the doors opened.
I was the first woman ever into one of the famous gay bars.
I went in dressed as a man.
We had a very outrageous life-style — it was wonderful.’
 Leee Childers: ‘The rest of the world was handled by Tony DeFries pretty much the way America had been handled.
He just decided it was time before the country had decided it was time.
He certainly did that with Japan.
He knew that there was a big market in Japan and that you could tour there fairly economically because it was such a small cluster of islands, and he just decided he would.
I think Japan was taken by surprise — they didn't expect a tour at the time — but he just decided to do it.
And it paid off magnificently.
David had no hits of any description in Japan when Tony decided to tour.
He was very adventurous in that way.
It didn't bother him that David hadn't had any hits — so what?
Japan is there.
And, of course, he always got someone else to pay for everything anyway, so it wasn't any financial problem.
RCA records paid for transport, so off we went.
And it worked.
At the beginning of the tour it was very lukewarm.
By the end of the tour kids were throwing themselves at the stage like little ‘kamikazis’.
Sure it started out lukewarm, but once people saw him they went crazy, and by the end of the given tour, he had a totally devoted following because he's a brilliant performer.
That's what made all the craziness of Tony's orchestrations work.
It wouldn't have worked otherwise.
The other argument is, of course, would anyone ever have heard of David if it wasn't for Tony?
Who knows?
A that time David was going through a period when he wouldn't fly, which was a pretty smart ploy because it gained you a lot of time between gigs, as you have to travel by some sort of surface transportation.
That awful thing that so many groups get themselves involved in, when they're on a plane and they do a gig and they don't even know what city they're in, he'd manage to avoid.
Now, the next gig was weeks ahead at Earls Court in London and there was a choice of sailing round the Cape of Good Hope, going over the Khyber Pass or going on the Trans-Siberian Express.
The quickest and least expensive was the Trans-Siberian Express, although it was a bit of a hassle for me being an American, because Americans are not easily granted visas for Russia.
It's a little easier now but in 1973…
Anyway, I was told to accompany David on the Express if I could get a visa and off I went to Washington DC to apply for one and they told me absolutely not — I couldn't have one — go away.
Everyone else had gone to Japan and I was still in New York trying desperately to get a visa for Russia but I couldn't get one, so I convince Tony deFries that if I went to Japan and went to the Russian Embassy in Tokyo, they'd be so confused by an American applying for a visa in Tokyo's Embassy that i could fake it and get one, and he said I was welcome to try.
So, off I went to Tokyo and spent days in the Russian Embassy with the RCA Tokyo man, Mr Yamamoto, but still they wouldn't give me one.
The tour in Japan was over and David left — he sailed for Vladivostok — and finally, just to get rid of me as usual(if you keep making enough noise they'll get rid of you for a little peace and quiet) they gave me a visa.
At this point I had to fly and catch him up, so I flew to Khabarovsk in far east Siberia where I had to spend a night.
That's where I was first introduced to the Russian system of having a ‘guide’ who would take care of you.
She was a very nice girl named Eugena, I think, and there were guards at the end of the hotel corridors, I remember giving them the slip and wandering around Khabarovsk on my own in a snowstorm, only to be told the next day that there was quite a bit of excitement in the city during the night because a Siberian tiger had come into the city and was wandering the streets at the same time I was!
Anyway, I eventually caught up with him in Irkutsk which is central Siberia.
Now the Siberian Express is very strange.
It has two classes — hard class and soft class.
We were in soft class which meant you had a bed to sleep on — a sort of cot.
Hard class was for the poor people, they were just on benches, but we weren't allowed in there.
Much as I tried to break in several times, they always caught me and wouldn't let me in to see the poor people travelling.
It's a ten day journey with 92 stops across Siberia.
David had this little compartment and used to spend his whole time in a Japanese kimono with his guitar and a bottle of this horrible Reisling wine that was full of alkaline and gave you splitting headaches, but it was all there was.
So there was always a bottle of Reisling and a guitar, his Japanese kimono and him staying in bed, looking out of the window at the wolves chasing the train as we went through Siberia in the snow, whereas Geoffrey McCormack (or Warren Peace as he was known professionally) and I would get off at nearly every stop if we were awake, and run around on the platform.
David didn't get off.
He'd just look at us and wave and smile until we got to Khabarovsk which used to be named Katerinberg and was the city where, supposedly, the Czar and his family were murdered.
I told David that he had to get off and at least stand on the platform because it was the city where the Czar was murdered.
He agreed and got dressed and we got off.
Now on our car, as in every soft class car, we had two little girls who vacuumed the corridors and who made you tea and took care of you.
Well, they weren't little at all.
In fact, they were huge Russian girls.
David had made great friends with them because they would come into his apartment at night and he would sing them songs and things.
He'd take 60's songs like, ‘Donna, Donna The Prima Donna’ and substitute their names.
They couldn't understand it in English, but they'd hear their names to these kind of bouncy 60's tunes and loved David.
He can be very charming in that way.
So anyway, at Khabarovsk we were eating ice-cream — there were always ice-cream sellers on the platform — and I was taking pictures of David and sneaking pictures of the soldiers who were on the platform with us but, unfortunately, they caught us at it.
The soldiers came and tried to get my camera but I was fighting back and wouldn't give it to them.
David, who had a movie camera which he had bought in Japan, began to film it all.
Then they got really crazy and they were trying to get David's movie camera and to arrest us all.
At this point the two girls just marched off the train, one of them picked up David, the other one picked me up, screamed Russian things at the soldiers — I haven't a clue what they were saying — and marched us back on the train and barred the door, while the Russian soldiers were standing on the platform screaming horrible things at them.
The girls were screaming back as the train pulled out and we got away from Khabarovsk without being arrested.
Eventually we arrived in Moscow the day before the May Day Parade.
David and Geoffrey were perfectly welcome because they were English, but I was not welcome because I was American, so while they were staying on to see the May Day Parade, I was meant to leave and fly to Berlin where I would wait for David and Geoffrey who were going on by train through Poland.
I decided to give the authorities the slip and went through the bathroom window of the hotel and got myself lost in Moscow.
When they finally found me it was too late to get me out, because everything stops at 5.00pm the day before the Parade.
They were furious.
David was totally horrified.
He was sure I was going to be sent to Siberia but I'd given him all my film and all the pictures that I'd taken already.
He was sure he would never see me again.
The guards and police took me completely outside the town and put me into some weird hotel that looked like a Holiday Inn, but it was in the middle of the woods.
They told me to stay there until they came and got me the following day — which I didn't.
I got out at 5am and left.
I had with me only the name of David's hotel which was the Intourist, which was right in the middle of town, and my Russian phrase book, which was full of phrases like, ‘I think my leg is broken, can you stop the bleeding?’ which did not prove very helpful.
I began walking towards what I thought was the town.
I was in the middle of the wood, so I didn't know which way I was walking.
Dawn was just breaking and I began to see a little more civilisation and it looked sort of right.
Then I began to run into the guards, and every guard I saw, I didn't say anything, I just showed them the piece of paper which had written on it Hotel Intourist in Russian, and the phrase book.
I'd point to phrases like, ‘I can't see anything’ or ‘Has the sun come up?’and they'd look bewildered at me and point and on I'd go.
I made my way through all the guard checkpoints and got to the Hotel Intourist in the middle of town at about 11 o'clock when David and Geoffrey were just siting down to lunch.
I walked into the cafeteria and sat down with them.
David was horrified and was sure that I'd be arrested and sent back to Siberia.
He screamed at me and I screamed back.
I wasn't about to miss the parade, and went on to see the whole event, and photographed it — all the red flags, the guns, the cannons, the missiles, everything, including Black September Group marching.
After it was over, we went into the bar for a drink and the authorities came along.
Once again, I'd given my film to David.
The authorities grabbed me and took me away.
I thought that this was it…
Siberia for me, but all they did was put me on a plane heading for Berlin.
Deported.
Sickening.
I'm sure I'll never be allowed back into Russia — not that I'd ever want to go back.
David got out with all the film, so I have all the pictures of the whole thing.’
Mick Ronson: ‘We toured the States followed by Japan, and by the time we came back to England, it was beginning to really snowball.
I think the final Ziggy Stardust tour was in England — that was the big tour — and by the time we returned, everyone was talking about it because Ziggy Stardust was a really good show.
It wasn't any deeper than that — I'm not really sure what it was — but David was very creative.
When he was younger he'd write songs about a laughing gnome, or a song about a laughing policeman, and I think it was a great outlet for David because he could almost blow his character out of all proportion and be able to pretend whatever he wanted to pretend, which is what actors and pop stars do.
You know, it's a funny thing, when you get on stage in front of an audience — you become a different person and I think everybody experiences that.
You get somebody who is very outrageous on stage but who is maybe very shy off stage, and I think being on stage in front of an audience enables you to step outside of your own body and be somebody else totally different for that period of time.
Some people carry on and live it 24 hours a day because they have to be that person all the time and at that time, it wasn't like you played a gig, finished the gig and then had a very private life until the next gig.
David would always be seen in public, would always have to do interviews, do a video or go into a recording studio — so I think the whole time was taken up by feeling involved in the whole Ziggy period or Ziggy way of thinking.
You can't go into the recording studio and be Joe Bloggs.
You go in there and you do what you want to do.
It's an extension of what you do on stage and it became a full=time thing really, until after it stopped and he could change and get into the Diamond Dogs period and the other albums that he made.’
Angie Bowie: ‘There was a lot of garbage said about him feeling schizoid and it was all so crazy and easy to say that he felt schizoid because of Ziggy Stardust.
At the time he was perfectly rational — he didn't feel schizoid — he was playing a part.
A lot of actors have problems playing parts.
It's easy to feel like Ziggy — of course it is — you play it on stage half the time and then you come home and have to be David Jones and I don't have too much patience for that talk.
The band, for instance, they played ‘The Spiders From Mars’.
Did they feel like ‘The Spiders From Mars?’
I'm sure Mick Ronson lay awake at night and worried about being like a Spider from Mars.
It's ridiculous.
It was just a good album and they played the parts really well.
I suppose if one were to wonder about schizophrenia or playing the part too much, it's like an actor who does a film and the film is very successful and he plays Gatsby in the film, and then they never stop wearing 30's tennis whites.
Do you know what I mean?
Basically, it's all part of promotion for the period that you're filming and promoting.
You may well be wearing 30's clothes and I suppose you could start wandering around feeling like Gatsby, but for a man who is a very fine actor and mime artiste, and who learned from Lindsay Kemp way before I met him everything about it being a show off stage and on, I don't really think there's too much relevance.’
David Bowie: ‘I ran into a very strange type of paranoid person when I was doing ‘Aladdin Sane’ very mixed up people, and I got very upset.
This resulted in ‘Aladdin’ and I knew I didn't have much more to say about rock and roll.
I mean, Ziggy really said as much as I meant to say all along.
‘Aladdin’ was really Ziggy in America.
Again, it was just looking round, seeing what was in my head.’
After the successful tour of Japan and the trip on the Trans Siberian Express across Russia, stopping off in Moscow to see the May Day Parade, Bowie travelled overland to Paris and met up with Angie.
By this time ‘Aladdin Sane’ had been released to advance orders in the UK of 100,000, a figure comparable only to albums by The Beatles.
David arrived in London with Angie, having travelled more that 8,000 miles overland.
The following day they gave a home-coming party at Haddon Hall and invited many of their friends: Tony Visconti, Mary Hopkin, Lindsay Kemp, Mick Ronson, George Underwood, Freddie Barretti, Ken Scott and Mary Finnigan whom he kissed on the cheek and said, ‘I love you, Mary.’
That was the last time she was ever to see him.
A matter of days after his home-coming party, David was back on tour, this time in the UK.
The tour, opening in inglorious circumstances at London's Earls Court, marked the debut of David's new character, Aladdin Sane.
It would become known as the Aladdin Sane Retirement Tour of Great Britain, comprising over 40 appearances and culminating at Hammersmith Odeon for the famous final concert of June 3, 1973, when David announced his ‘retirement’ and that he wouldn't perform live concerts again for a long time — not for two or three years at least.
At the Cafe Royal the following night, David held a swish retirement party with guests like Mick and Bianca Jagger, Ringo Starr, Paul McCartney, Keith Moon, Britt Eckland, Tony Curtis, Cat Stevens, Lou Reed, Jeff Beck, Eliot Gould, Ryan O'Neal, Barbra Streisand, Sonny Bono, Peter Cook and Dudley Moore, with music supplied by Dr John.
By this time, nearly every newspaper had run ‘I quit’ stories emerging from the announcement at the Hammersmith show.
Mick Ronson: ‘After the tour, we recorded the album, ‘Pin-Ups’, an album which was just a collection of songs that David really liked from the 60's period, and shortly afterwards, we went to Italy for a holiday.
David wanted to write a play — that's what he fancied doing — although it never came about.
That's when he actually got into the ‘Diamond Dogs’ period and when the show extended a bit more into the theatrical — more props with street scenes, a huge lift chair that went over the audience, and things like that.
I think it was a cross between writing this play and doing another rock and roll show.
He really wanted to do a play on maybe Broadway at the time — something different.’
Tony Zanetta: ‘By this time, I'd become the President of MainMan and for a time was Ton's right hand man running errands for him.
MainMan was more about Tony than it was about David although David and Tony worked extremely well together as a team, but I think they each had individual goals they wanted to accomplish.
Tony wanted an empire.
He wanted to have an international entertainment conglomerate, which was MainMan.
He was very taken with organisation in the corporate world and MainMan was being fashioned after a large corporation although in its beginning, it was anything but that.
It was basically a group of people who happened to be around but very soon we all had titles and were constantly organising and re-organising the creating divisions and systems and methods.
Tony was always preparing for the future with David and with MainMan, so he was always two or three steps ahead of himself.
David had come to the United States as a headliner.
Tony didn't have time to waste booking him as a support act or doing a club circuit or anything like that.
What happened was that we began to do all kinds of things that are normally done to support a tour that you farm out, but we used to do it in-house, so we had our own publicity department, our own travel department — we booked our own flights and our own hotels, we didn't use a travel agency.
We had our own accountants in-house.
We had everything.
We even made our own television commercials and our own radio commercials.
We also had our own publishing department.
It was all fashioned after a record company.
I don't know what good it did David in the long run because what it did was cost a lot of money.
It was wonderful if you were going to service five or ten artists, but one artist didn't need all this.
What it did for David was have the same mushrooming effect, creating this balloon image of star power — all that staying at The Plaza and The Beverley Hills Hotel did.
It looked important.
Anyone who had this kind of machine behind them must be important, so it had the effect of presenting him to the public as this bigger than life pop star which, if you look at his record sales at the time, he wasn't, but he was becoming a media myth, some of this due to his own talent and some of it due to the MainMan hype machine.
He was talented enough and resourceful enough to survive it, although I think it almost devastated and destroyed him at a certain point.
I think we all became victims of it.
We acted as if we owned RCA, that we were RCA, that we had this corporation.
We were very grandiose.
It was really believing our own notices and becoming very arrogant.
Drugs and alcohol began to creep in.
There were none of this in the beginning, in the first two years, but at the time of ‘Diamond Dogs’, a lot of drugs began to come in, a lot of alcohol came in with different individuals, which helped fuel things.
It certainly didn't help.
It just added fuel to the fire.
The ‘Diamond Dogs’ tour that followed was an enormous amount of work for everybody involved and in some ways, it began to break down.
I really began to sense it when David did a Midnight Special show in 1973.
What happened was that he started doing his English Ziggy Stardust dates in early ‘72 and he worked without stopping until the summer of ‘73 when he did his Hammersmith Odeon concert and retired from the stage.
When he finally did stop working, it was the first time in a year and a half that everyone involved stopped and got a chance to take a break, and once everyone took a break, things began to change.
First of all, DeFries, by this time, had set up his headquarters in New York although David was still headquartered in London.
They began to spend less time together.
DeFries began to build his MainMan empire in New York and it became obvious it wasn't always in support of what David was doing.
They were not in fact the same thing — they were two separate things — and up until this point, it seemed like it was all one thing — that MainMan and David were the same — but it began to become apparent that they weren't.
We had a staff of 10 or 15 people in New York and there was a staff of three in London.
The staff of three had to service Bowie, Mick Ronson and Dana Gilespie.
All the artistes were in England, but the staff were in New York, and to get money and to get certain things that we needed to do took a long time.
This was the first experience where it was obvious that the machine was working against itself — something wasn't quite right.
It didn't really become apparent until the Spring of ‘74 when David returned to New York to do the ‘Diamond Dogs’ tour.
By that time DeFries had an office in Park Avenue which was very much like the old Gem offices in London.
He'd made major strides in establishing the kind of company he wanted, which wasn't the kind of company David wanted, and I think David saw that when he got to New York.
Also, it had become much more formal and much more structured in organization.
DeFries wouldn't drop anything any time of the day for David any more.
It wasn't exactly like he had to have an appointment, but it was that he didn't fit into the structure.
In the meantime, I think David had come to realize that he was responsible for an enormous amount of business at RCA in the United Kingdom — something like 4% of their total gross was David Bowie products — and he was making an enormous amount of money but he didn't have anything.
He didn't have any money because all the money was controlled by MainMan.
Any money that he wanted he had to ask for, or if he wanted to buy anything he had to ask for it.
Up to this point it had been fine because there had been no money.
The money was all in a pot.
It was petty cash.
MainMan was always in debt and Tony had always gone out and found money to do projects, so it was fine.
I was as much a part of this as anybody.
I'm not trying to be a saint in any of this at all.
I still believed implicitly in Tony DeFries and I'm not trying to put Tony down by this at all.
The only thing I saw wrong at the time was that David and Tony began not to communicate.
Money was being spent, but money could be accounted for.
It wasn't that money was being stolen or sneaked — everything was down on paper.
David and I did have conversations about it and I told David that I thought he should get an accountant, or that he should ask for an account from Tony if he had questions about where money was going.
I feel that David didn't want to face it and I don't think Tony wanted to face it.
They had really tired of each other and it had become a struggle between them that was slow to surface until the Diamond Dogs tour because a lot of things happened on that tour that they were both very unhappy about.
It started with the way the tour was organised.
It was farmed out to Broadway people to put together, and cost an enormous amount of money.
It was a wonderful show, ‘Diamond Dogs’, but it wasn't practical for a tour so we all thought that if we got the Broadway experts to put it together, it would be the best thing possible — but it wasn't.
They weren't used to doing this kind of thing — they weren't used to rock and roll or putting something up and taking it down every day, so really it was a white elephant from the beginning.
The whole thing created a lot of stress and tension, moving this humongous thing around the country.
Problems came up with the musicians.
DeFries was not on the road, I was not on the road and I think David began to feel very abandoned by this company MainMan.
He had no money and he was working very hard every day and there were lots of problems and nobody there to take care of them.
In the meantime, he'd discovered cocaine with a vengeance.
It was like his year to play drug addict.
He wasn't using his best judgement.
He was staying up for four or five days at a time and then crashing for four or five days.
He was really living the rock star legend to the ninth degree.
DeFries was very upset at this because DeFries hated drugs.
They more than pulled at this point — they just stopped communicating.
The real turning point was in the middle of the tour — the natural break in it — July and August.
First of all, David did some recording in July — he recorded most of the ‘Young Americans’ album — and then there was a break in California and we were going to restart the tour in Los Angeles.
By that time, David and I had some serious talks and I went on the road for the second part of the tour to try to salvage the relationship, which didn't really work.
In Los Angeles David decided that he didn't want to use the set any more, that he wanted to change the whole concept of the show, and that, I think, was the last straw for DeFries because, as difficult as it was as a set, it was an incredible show, quite wonderful to look at.
No-one had ever done anything like it in rock and roll and it was getting incredible press.
The thing about all this was that sales were beginning to meet his star image.
For the first time, he was beginning to sell records in the United States, but the relationship between DeFries and Bowie had disintegrated by this time.’
 Leee Childers: ‘It all grew too fast all of a sudden.
All of us had been promoted out of any efficiency that we might have had.
I had a huge office on Park Avenue with a tiger skin rug, mahogany walls, a personal assistant, two secretaries and nothing to do.
I used to pull the blinds, turn out the lights and sit in the dark in terror, thinking, ‘What am I going to do here?
There's nothing for me to do.
They're going to find out eventually that I'm doing nothing.’
I didn't have enough experience in the music industry to be able to create further usefulness.
I could do now, with the knowledge I have, but I couldn't do it then.
My personal assistant was my high school sweetheart, Mrs Simpson, who was a complete nutcase.
She'd taken it upon herself to be in charge of merchandising, so she was working and creating little David Bowie dolls and placemats and keychains and all that shit, but she was doing that all by herself.
Cherry Vanilla was the first to leave.
To her full credit, she left of her own accord saying, ‘I'm not doing anything, it's time I move on.’
And she went.
I didn't.
I just hung grimly on because the salary was magnificent.
I couldn't dream of what I was going to do because you become so dependent on money.
I talked to Tony Zanetta and he said, ‘You're not doing anything, are you?’
I said, ‘No, I think I'll go.’
And so I went.
I told Tony that he would be next and he was.
It was just six months later that he left.
Anyway, having left MainMan, I came back to England and lived in Oakley Street in David's house with Angela.
David wasn't there, so I was living with Angela and that's when I first got the inkling that all was not well between David and Tony.
During the time that I was at MainMan, David had become more and more removed from us, but I figured that that was because he was so busy and that was the way it was when you had become a big star.
It turns out, I think, that he was being purposely more and more removed from us in order to retain whatever Tony DeFries's idea was of keeping business separate from pleasure.
We weren't supposed to be friends with people with whom we were doing business, which was probably a good idea, but just the same, I didn't know that until I began to live on Oakley Street and found out that David was very distressed.
He though that we had grown apart from him and he became upset that none of us were around him any more, talking to him any more.
This is according to Angela, who was still married to him then, and still close to him.
About that time, Tony Zanetta came to London and visited us.
He was very restless so I knew it was a matter of moments before he was going to leave MainMan.
In fact, he left not long after, leaving all the secretaries and personal assistants in charge, except for my personal assistant — she got fired.
She told me that Tony spent a lot of time making passes at her, but she was horrible flirtatious and very beautiful.
But anyway, in the end she was fired and her last act was to send a memo to Tony DeFries, the contents of which I would rather not go into.
To finish off the story she married a millionaire in Tennessee, so she's OK.’
Tony Zanetta: ‘We did the last part of the tour which we called Tour Five.
Some people call it The Young Americans Tour, others call it the Black Show because it was David as an R&B singer.
At this point we began to work with Carlos Alomar .
In fact, Carlos’ wife, Robyn Clarke, was one of the back-up singers with Ava Cherry and Luther Vandross .
Most of the musicians were black and the music had changed and really had an R&B flavour.
The new stuff was very R&B .
The opening act was the back-up singers doing a kind of almost traditional Apollo show which didn't go over.
It wasn't English.
It wasn't Ziggy Stardust and the reviews became very mixed.
The tension increased on the road because David and DeFries had a very important relationship that was crumbling and one of the things about the relationship was the direction that DeFries did supply for him.
You could never tell whose idea was what, because they talked everything to death, but if nothing else, DeFries was a wonderful sounding board as he would talk for hours and hours and hours about every little detail of the show, the order of the set, the music, the albums.
But David didn't have that any more.
Angela wasn't around very much at this point either.
This whole experience had been so fast and furious for me I didn't know what I was doing any more.
My drinking picked up incredibly.
I was dabbling with drugs and doing plenty of drugs and also I'd become very arrogant.
I thought I had all the answers although I didn't know what was going on.
I was trying to communicate between David and Tony, trying to get them to talk to each other, and as a result was going back and forth between the two of them which was a very frustrating experience, added to which I was tired from being on the road and I was very unhappy.
I suppose in a way, I was living out my own part of the Ziggy decadence and the Ziggy demise.
We had three arrests on the tour, the third was mine.
The last show of the tour was in Atlanta and I decided to give a little party for the singers and musicians and the crew and I tried to rent a banquet room at the hotel, but because it was Thanksgiving Weekend, they said they could only give me a suite.
Anyway, the party was busted by the Vice Squad.
It was a joke, really, because the night detective of the hotel, this guy in his mid 20s with long blond hair who looked like a hippy with beads on, turned out to be a member of the Vice Squad.
They had this entire set-up.
It was incredible.
They had undercover agents everywhere in the hotel.
The party was the quietest you could imagine and they kept complaining that we were making too much noise.
There was very little noise as no-one had arrived — between twenty and thirty people were in the room — and we had this teeny stereo system about as big as a transistor radio for music.
It wasn't exactly an exciting party, but the vice squad knocked on the door.
Of course, David's bodyguards were guarding the door and I went to see what they wanted and this guy, who said he was the night detective, announced that unless we emptied the room in five minutes, he was going to close the party down.
He and I got into a bit of a squabble.
There didn't seem to be anything to do but to close the door, which I did.
Unfortunately his foot was in it at the time and I slammed it, at which point he pulled out a badge and said he was a cop.
Suddenly there were policemen everywhere who ran into the suite and made everyone get up against the wall with their hands above their heads.
It was hilarious.
Anyone who had drugs on them dropped them to the floor.
Now the suite was in my name, so I was charged with possession of all these drugs, and with assault, and with a lot of other charges like operating a dive, running a disorderly house and all silly charges which were dropped the following day.
But it was a fitting end to this tour.
It was symbolic of the whole thing.
When we returned to New York after the tour, David and DeFries had a couple of meetings and they were rather funny, too, because I would ask each of them what happened.
‘Did you resolve it?
Did you settle it?
Did you talk?’
They each had totally different stories, totally different perceptions of what had gone on in the meetings.
They each said everything was fine.
By ‘fine’ DeFries meant everything was fine and David meant that he'd left.
They were just not talking to each other at all.’
Dana Gillespie: ‘I've got to say, I think in a way cocaine can really freeze your emotions, and David took an awful lot.
I mean, everybody took loads of everything in those days but if you have an incredible tour schedule and you can find a way of having extra energy, which you can get with cocaine, you overdo it if you haven't ever had it before in such huge quantities, and you're that big, and girls come to the dressing room afterwards, and everybody gives you free packets, and suddenly you're everybody's pal.
Well David didn't sleep a lot and got thinner and thinner.
And it makes you very hard as a person.
I know because I've tried it as well, and I would say it was a large contributing factor to a breakdown of understanding, because at this point I was watching the deterioration of the relationship between Tony DeFries and David.
By this time David's show was taking on mammoth proportions — about 50 people as a road crew.
The lighting guy was Jules Fisher who was the top guy in New York and then doing straight Broadway musicals, and the crew was fantastic.
I remember there was a period when no-one was speaking to anyone and I recall going to the island of Mustique and being there a few weeks just before the final split.
There was Defries and his girlfriend and the guy I was and David called a couple of times.
It's terribly difficult to make a call to those sort of islands as they don't have many telephones.
It takes about three days to get a call out and I remember DeFries didn't answer any of David's calls because I think he knew what was going on.
I was blissfully ignorant of the whole collapse.
I used to go as little as possible to the MainMan offices.
I was aware of the fact that there had been what seemed like 20 people working in the office and then it was suddenly dwindling down to a skeleton staff.
I just assumed they were trying to cut back as they had been a bit too lavish.
Not that I complained because I was having a great time with it, but I noticed that there were a few changes and when I went back to England from Mustique, that was probably the last time MainMan existed.
That was in 1976.
I'm sure everybody's got a different version of it and I really didn't witness any rows.
I would often hear from my assistant who now looks after Cher, but at that time was delegated to looking after me, and she would say that she'd just come back from the MainMan offices and the main office door was closed into DeFries's inner sanctum and there were raised voices between him and David in there.
I think he once did say to me that he was very disturbed at how much ‘coke’ David was doing and that it had got to the point where he didn't hide it from deFries, whereas he did for quite a while at first.
deFries, being a straight guy, wouldn't have known what was going on.
Even when he saw it being done he still wouldn't have known what was going on but unless you try it yourself, you don't know what physical effect, or mental effect, it has on you and how speedy and intolerant it makes you of other people.
It's really a sort of personality freezer.
It's terrible if you take a lot of it because it's just bad for your personality — not for your health, except for the fact that you get thin.
I saw David shovelling more and more, he was getting more tired, more irritable, more run-down and less able to control the madness that was going on around him.
It was no longer just go out and do a gig with your equipment — there were lighting men, dancers, singers,— there was so much that I think no-one could handle it and he was wanting more and more to make the show very good.
At one point he said he wanted something and DeFries said ‘No, you can't have it—you don't have the money.’
I remember David had a look of amazement on his face because at this point he had quite a few gold albums, but he still didn't have the money because the rate that they made money went straight back into making the show even bigger and better, and everybody travelled in style.
When you went out on a tour with MainMan, you didn't eat in a Wimpey level of place, or stay in the Holiday Inn.
Everybody had personal assistants whether they needed them or not.
It was great.
I had a friend, she now manages the Eurythmics with her husband, but at that time, none of us needed to be in such luxury but none of us said no if it was offered and DeFries always observed the Noel Coward code and said, ‘You should travel through life first class.’
That was more or less his way of doing things and it cost a lot.
So suddenly, David had wanted something — I don't know what it was — it might have been something like a synthesizer or some extraordinary thing for the show, but the money wasn't there.
I think it was just the final end of a long line of demands that he'd been making.
He wanted more of DeFries' time as well and the more DeFries saw things going on that he didn't like, the less time he wanted to put in to both of them.
It was a complete breakdown of a friendship in a way.
I really can't answer for David because in all the years that I've known him, I always actually found him a rather cold person, even when I was 14 and he was 16, even as boy and girlfriend.
DeFries made a lot of career decisions for David that worked, but suddenly decisions, desires to do things, were coming between the two of them, so there was a clash on whose decision was going to win and whose idea was going to win.
I think David thought he was the artist and he knew what he wanted to do — which I think is actually true — the artist basically does know what he wants to do — but I think the manager should just be there to sort out the finance and try to keep you on a the straight and narrow.
But it was such an unusual rise to fame, a situation that, apart from Elvis and The Beatles, there really wasn't anyone else to make any reference to and say this is how they got through it all, because there had been nobody else of that size who had done it, and it's hard to say how much of the rise to fame was attributed to DeFries.
It certainly wouldn't have happened if David hadn't done the music, but it's not just as simple as that.
It wouldn't have happened if Angie hadn't been around as well, to keep his morale high and encourage him.
The great thing about Angie was that she was always for him.
always helping him.
She bought his clothes.
They had the same size shoes and they wore the same clothes quite often.
She was always there trying to be what he wanted and she wanted to make things great for him.
At the end, he wanted to be on his own, so he'd encourage her to go out on her own and go loony with me.
She became, for a short while, my personal manager — we did a radio promotion tour around England on the ‘Andy Warhol’ single — but I often had the feeling that they were things that were given to Angie to keep her out of David's way, to occupy her so that he could sort himself out.
But all it did was to create a bigger gap that just got bigger and bigger.
Who the rise was due to I don't know except that I think David probably wouldn't have had the idea to have opened such wonderful offices and created such a great mystique about it which MainMan had.
Everything looked great from the writing paper to the T-shirts and the stickers — just everything was done well.
Everyone had what they wanted.
It was so great to have your personal limousine.
It cost a fortune.
Angie and I would ride around in a scarlet limo with a television in the back and a bar and a huge 20 stone black guy as our bodyguard in the front.
It was outrageous.
We dressed accordingly.
Angie would continuously go and buy things for David and Zowie, but also for me.
All the things were designed by Natasha Kornilof or another woman called Anne Proctor, and maybe she'd make the introduction and David would meet them, but then she would follow it through and make sure the arrangements were done and the house was kept great when they lived in Oakley Street.
But already in Oakley Street he was beginning to discover…
The first time he ever asked me if I knew where he could get ‘coke’.
He said he'd just come back from Amsterdam and he had tried some and said it was great and did I know where he could get some.
I think it was around 1974.’
Angie Bowie: ‘It was all so depressing.
In fact I find it hard to talk about.
It was really horrific.
I don't know what started it because I wasn't with him.
I really didn't know.
I didn't understand it or share it and wasn't part of it.
I just had to tend to him when it got too much for someone who is not that involved in drugs.
Don't misunderstand me — this isn't the story about me, so it's not a whitewashing job.
I got very involved in drugs later because I was nursing a broken head and a broken heart, but at this particular time, 1974, I was not sophisticated about drugs.
I'd smoked a joint and taken tincture of cannabis, which is something I had done because I didn't smoke cigarettes and the hippies around me would say, ‘Give her a spoonful of tincture of cannabis so that she'll get stoned’ but I didn't know if cocaine was like that.
I didn't understand the paranoia it induced.
I was so concerned that I also really didn't trust other people or stupid books to explain to me whereas usually, in most things I do, if I don't understand them I'll go to the library and get books and read about it and find out.
With things like art nouveau and Edwardian furniture, when David started buying them, I went and got books to get my act together in order that I knew what he was into, but with drugs, I didn't know, added to which David was very secretive and for a long time I wasn't aware that he was having a problem, not necessarily from cocaine addiction, which everybody loves to tell you is not addictive, but it is in terms of the fact that you rely on feeling up to cope — you just become more and more paranoid.
Anyway, it was a lawyer named Michael Lipman who engineered David getting away from Tony DeFries.’
Tony Zanetta: ‘David had moved into a little house in Chelsea in New York and called Michael Lipman.
Lipman was a lawyer and an agent at CMA who were our booking agents, and we were all quite friendly.
He wasn't as well known as John Eastman or Alan Klein but he was a nice guy.’
Angie Bowie: ‘The Michael Lipman brought a management contract — this was when we were in L A and David was doing so much cocaine.
I'm so stupid that I started doing cocaine to try to understand him — to get close to him and understand where he was coming from.
Can you believe anyone can be that dumb?
But that's how much I loved him.
I really thought I couldn't bear not to at least understand what he was going through, but by that time my opinion was totally irrelevant — not wanted — added to which, I'm not easy to get along with anyway because I'm not a ‘yes-man’.
When David did things that I thought were stupid, or when he didn't turn up, or he'd turn up ‘high’, I told him I thought he was stupid.
But I thought I was on my way out of the door anyway.
It didn't take him long to realize that one less headache was getting rid of me.
Times change.
People don't always stay together.
You can't expect him to be grateful for things we did together when we were in love — when we were working happily together.
You can't expect a man to walk around thinking he's got to be grateful to them for the rest of his life — it's ludicrous.
I wasn't there trying to tell him that he was doing something wrong or that he shouldn't be doing it.
That wasn't the point.
The point was that it basically has to come from yourself and if you feel funny about yourself, then maybe you should go to the root of what's making you feel funny as opposed to just taking downers and then taking uppers.
At any time you can take too much or too little of something and die.
Then no-one would have been satisfied, let alone the person who is the victim in all this.
It only became a moot point because David was a meal ticket for so many people.
There was an industry built around David Bowie.
I do hope it's not the bitterness of someone who isn't logical, but sometimes it makes me emotional.
I really feel for him.
I feel how much he was at people's mercy, being manipulated, and it does upset me.
I hate talking about it because I hate making it sound as if someone is to blame but I just can't stand people who manipulate other people.
It really makes me angry.’
Tony Visconti: ‘Prior to the split with Tony deFries, our friendship developed once again.
I was involved with the show that was recorded at The Marquee and I think a few months after that he called me and said he was doing an album called ‘Diamond Dogs’ and didn't know where to get it mixed.
He'd been all over town and had a few vocals left, a few guitar bits, and was rather disenchanted with the studio he was using.
I had just finished building a 16-track studio in my house and asked him to come and have a go on that equipment that even the very big studios didn't have.
So he brought his tapes with him that night and he loved it.
It was like a little home studio but with all the big gear in it.
It was everyone's dream to mix their album in their front room and that's the kind of studio it was at the time.
We sat that first evening on two carpenter's benches — we didn't even have proper tables and chairs — and started mixing the album.
We did a few vocals and overdubs and eventually the album was mixed bar one track, which he did somewhere else.
We had all sorts of disasters that night.
I did his tape copy on the machine I was using for echo and it was switched to vari-speed, so the copy was played at almost half the speed and when he got it home and wanted to play it to his friends, it sounded rather strange.
But in spite of the bumps in the beginning he kept coming back to my little home studio and that's how the second half of our lives together began.
I then got a phone call in the middle of the night — I always get phone calls in the middle of the night from David.
He said, ‘I want you to mix my live album —‘David Live'’, so off I went to New York and we did very few overdubs, basically just the backing vocals, because the backing vocals were done by Warren Peace which is Geoffrey McCormack in disguise, and some other bloke, whose mane I can't remember, and as they were dancing all the time the backing vocals were rather breathless, so we had to dub them again in the recording studio.
But the rest of the album, unlike other live albums, was truly live.
All David's vocals were live.
I remember he had Earl Slick in the band then — it was a very large band, about 14 pieces on that tour.’
Tony Zanetta: ‘I think DeFries finally realized that it was it.
DeFries and David were very much alike, especially in their emotional complexion, both very cold — or maybe that's the wrong word — but neither was very expressive emotionally.
What DeFries said to David or what he felt I don't know, but what he said was, ‘Well, if that's what he wants, then he should leave’.
DeFries was never one to tell people what to do or badger anyone.
He always expected them to leave: he expected everyone to leave.
As far as he was concerned, that was where people are.
He didn't think this world would last for ever and if he wanted to leave he should leave.
But what it meant to both of them was that all the money was frozen because there was a dispute over whose money was what and how much money had been spent — that was a problem for David and for Tony.
I think it's hard to be honest with yourself about certain things and I wanted to think that I had no part in the grandiosity of MainMan and a lot of the bad things about MainMan.
There were a lot of wonderful things about the organisation and about Tony DeFries — he really is a wonderful man and gave a lot of people a lot of opportunities, but we all took it so much for granted.
It made David Bowie a star.
I'm not saying he wouldn't have become one without MainMan, but when you talk about MainMan, you have to be so definite — which part of MainMan and when.
The good part, the early part, the middle part, the later part.
I think it was Angie and Tony, going back to that incredible support that I told you about when I first met them, that they were also dreamers and had such faith and believed in David's future and his destiny.
That was contagious, you see.
We were all people that were looking for something to believe in.
We were all looking for some direction in our lives and they gave us that direction.
I think it came from David, but Angie and Tony certainly drummed it up and sold it to us and then went on and sold it to others.
It was an ever increasing thing that blew up because it got a little too big, but it did make David a star and he has dealt with it really well, and is a man who does wonderful work.
He can choose his own projects and lives a very private life.
When he wants to work he does, and his work is terrific, and that's a nice way to live one's life.’
Candy Clarke with the man who fell to earth.
Punch drunk and on tour
Performing a rare version of ‘You Need Hands’ for the Midnight Special at The Marquee club, London.
Under surveillance, three security police wonder whether to ask for autographs
Wayne County and Bowie in discussion
Arriving at the Cafe Royal for his farewell party
Final touches for a midnight special performance by make-up lady Barbara Daley — the lady who later went on to do the make-up for Lady Diana on her wedding day.
In Amsterdam in 1974
David and Geoffrey McCormack always travel ‘soft’ class, Siberia, 1973
On the Trans-Siberian Express ‘73
The smile of success ‘72 style
David filming the May Day Parade in Moscow, 1973.
Inset with Catherine Deneuve at Heaven night club in the film ‘The Hunger’
David photographed at the Grammy Awards of 1975 with John Lennon, Yoko Ono and Roberta Flack
Diamond Dogs and Soul tour shots from ‘74/ ‘75
 Leee Black Childers — MainMan 1
Cherry Vanilla — MainMan 2
The Thin White Duke, 1976
Dana Gillespie
Mick Ronson
David on the Rona Barrett Show in 1976