

LEADERS
Uneducated English
Why A levels must go
WHAT should Britain do about an examination attacked by the country's employers' organisation, by the heads of four-fifths of its secondary schools, by its university vice-chancellors and even by the Prince of Wales?
Probable sad answer: cling to it as part of Britain's eccentric genius.
This will be the way with the Advanced, or ‘A’ level, exam taken by a brainy minority of English 18-year-olds (the Scots have more rational arrangements).
Having resisted repeated attempts to kill it off, the A level looks set to survive the latest upheavals in British education almost unchanged.
The losers will be another generation of English schoolchildren.
To those who have watched the curious competition between Britain's prime minister and its leader of the opposition to talk down their achievements at school, the durability of the A level is not surprising.
The English think that sixth-form education is only for swots.
Most British youngsters feel it is a waste of time, and only 35% of 17-year-olds are still in full-time study.
Given that over 20% of A-level papers are failed, that is reasonable: why gamble two years of lost earnings on studies that may leave you with no certificate at all?
Knowledge on the cheap
The disadvantages of A levels are obvious.
Bright 16-year-olds abandon all but two or three academic subjects, thus ensuring that scientists remain unread, and arts students maths-blind.
Those who do not take A levels in foreign languages or in science drop those subjects after — at most— five years of study.
One deplorable result of this early specialisation is that university science and engineering departments choose their students from the minority of sixth formers who knew at 16 that they wanted to continue with maths and science.
All who were undecided are ruled out.
So why does this intellectual self-mutilation continue?
It suits some powerful people that A levels should survive.
The exam has economic advantages that endear it to Whitehall's purse-keepers.
Those high failure rates make it an efficient way of screening out teenagers who might later fail a university course.
The exam educates youngsters cheaply up to a level that is not reached in other countries until someone has been at university for a year.
Not only does teaching a teenager at school cost less than half as much as at university.
A levels reduce the length of most English university courses to three years.
Scotland, which has a broader exam taken after only one year in the sixth form, keeps a higher proportion of 16-year-olds on at school — and its university courses normally last four years.
The exam also has its academic defenders.
Lecturers, especially scientists, find it easier to teach students who have already specialised in their chosen subjects for two years.
And England's private schools, whose pupils account for a quarter of sixth-formers and of A-level passes, know that parents will pay for the prospect of a smooth path to university.
In fact, students who have taken a subject at A level do not, by the end of their courses, do better than those who have kept off it — as a recent study of economics graduates showed.
Many science and engineering departments already struggle to find enough students with good A levels.
Some run efficient remedial courses, which could surely be used for youngsters who had taken a broader sixth-form course.
How would such a broader system work?
Some want a revolution as thorough as the one that has changed the exams taken by British 16-year-olds.
They cite Germany's Abitur, where school-leavers are graded in eight subjects, and where their grading wins them entry into an apprenticeship if they do not go to university.
That might encourage more young Britons to stay on at school in their quest for a good job.
A more modest first step would be to scrap A levels and insist that university entrance should require five or six AS levels — a conventional exam with a smaller syllabus than A levels — topped up with a specialist paper in one chosen subject.
That might not greatly increase the number of youngsters who stayed on at school.
But it would at least ensure that Britain had a more broadly-educated elite — and more broadly-educated political leaders.
America's timid trustbusters
Restricting competition is not the way to make industry more competitive
A BRIGHT-EYED young lawyer comes to Washington from Yale, Harvard or Columbia.
He is hired as a federal trustbuster by the Justice Department or the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and is out to make a name for himself.
How does he do it?
Not any longer by taking on really big businesses involved in anti-competitive mergers or practices.
Actions against the biggest American firms are rare — so rare as to make the FTC's current investigation of the business practices of Microsoft in computer software a real surprise.
Nowadays the government's lawyers appear more interested in the publicity a case will win them than anything else.
Nintendo, a household name, is accused of fixing the prices of its home-video games.
It is big — but it also happens to be Japanese, and so presents a juicy target.
A college football association is charged with conspiring to limit the number of college games that football fans can see on television.
Kreepy Krauly USA Inc is alleged to set retail prices for its swimming-pool cleaning devices.
Such cases are not trivial.
They are nonetheless a big comedown from the 1960s, when federal trustbusters took on giants the size of AT&T and IBM and broke up a merger of Procter & Gamble and Clorox.
They also sit oddly with the vow of federal trustbusters to put an end to the years of neglect when President Reagan virtually suspended the nation's antitrust laws by cheerfully failing to enforce them.
And they sit uncomfortably next to the strident calls for antitrust laws and enforcement to be relaxed in order to help American firms take on Japanese and European rivals.
When they are accused of timidity, trustbusters bristle.
Antitrust policy in America, they say, is still stricter than in Europe and far stricter than in Japan.
American companies can and do bring private antitrust suits — a remedy denied to British companies.
Anyway, the American business scene has changed vastly since the main antitrust statutes were written: the Sherman act of 1890 and the Clayton act of 1914.
It is true that America's economy is more open today, exposing many big firms to foreign competition.
This does not make it impossible for a domestic market to be dominated and then abused, but it is far less likely to happen.
If General Motors, Ford and Chrysler were foolish enough to conspire to fix prices, they would quickly lose market share to Toyota, Volkswagen and Hyundai, at home as well as abroad.
The lack of balance
The trouble begins with the consequent changes in antitrust laws and policy.
Under the guise of making American industry more internationally competitive, Congress has become ever laxer in its attitude to collusion.
The Sherman act was amended in 1982 to exclude trade or commerce with foreign nations.
The National Co-operative Research Act of 1984 permits companies to do joint research without running the risk of treble damages from civil antitrust suits.
The courts have shown a similar bias, though usually for a different reason.
Most of the federal judges appointed by President Reagan are so convinced the market has its own fail-safe mechanisms for everything that it is hard to imagine them upholding a challenge to any merger.
This is to miss the point.
America is changing, and some laws and policies will have to become sterner to reflect the changes.
Grants of immunities to whole industries against antitrust laws no longer make any sense.
For example, consumers have long railed against the way insurance companies are permitted to fix prices, allocate territories and to tie the provision of one service to the purchase of another.
Even big insurers like Hartford and Cigna admit that these practices give the industry a bad name.
Now that much of American industry is exposed to international competition, barriers against foreigners in the transport business also look odd.
Yet foreign ships are still not permitted to ply American ports, and most foreign airlines are forbidden to compete with American airlines on domestic routes.
Formal and informal discrimination against foreigners in public-procurement contracts by American state and local governments serves only to fleece taxpayers.
Scores of other nonsenses would come to light if the Bush administration demanded a thorough overhaul of the country's anti-competitive laws and practices.
The principles are clear: competitiveness starts with stiff competition and low barriers to entry.
Thus armed, any young lawyer could serve the public good, not just his own.
World body seeks head
A more effective United Nations needs a new sort of leader to run it
THE secretary-general of the United Nations, Javier Perez de Cuellar, is a skilled and decent man.
But the limits of his approach to the job have become painfully apparent.
He was late joining the effort to talk Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait.
In the frightful aftermath of the war, he dithered about UN protection for fleeing Kurds and presided over the horrendous first muddle in UN relief work.
His term ends on December 31st and he does not want another one.
The Perez approach — backstage diplomacy when the big powers permit — did not start with him.
Previous UN bosses have had to tip-toe round the twin dangers of Soviet veto and American mistrust.
Within the limits set for him, Mr Perez de Cuellar did well.
As the freeze between America and the Soviet Union thawed, he helped ease or end a string of bloody little wars between their third-world friends.
That now must seem a distant, simpler time compared with the messy, open-ended tasks facing today's UN.
Nowadays it can more or less count on getting asked routinely to sanction, shape or run a new form of global riot-control that none of the big powers, not even America, is ready to do alone.
Iraq is a grim model of what kind of thing the next secretary-general should expect to have thrown at him.
The UN is being asked to police Iraq's border with Kuwait; to decide how much oil Iraq sells abroad and what it can buy in return; to make sure Iraq destroys any nuclear- or chemical-weapons plants; and to get ready to protect Kurdish enclaves when American, British and French soldiers leave.
Nor do the new orders pouring almost daily into the UN's kitchen end with Iraq.
Britain's prime minister, John Major, this week suggested that the UN should limit the world traffic in arms.
Many Russians vaguely hope the UN will help to make their dangerous nuclear-power plants safe.
To cope with even part of this (and to send back the more far-fetched requests), the UN needs a master chef, not a harassed waiter.
A new secretary-general must be in place by the end of the year.
The rulebook says the General Assembly elects him.
In reality, the choice is up to the five countries with permanent seats on the Security Council — America, Britain, China, France and the Soviet Union.
Usually they do this in a last-minute scramble, giving the new chief no time to prepare.
That method produced Kurt Waldheim, who forgot to put wartime service in the German army on his curriculum vitae.
This time the five have agreed to start looking now, and to have a candidate by October.
A last-minute appointment is not the only trap.
African delegates are arguing that, as past heads of the UN have come from Asia, Europe and Latin America, it is Africa's turn.
The idea of turns is wrong.
The secretary-general does not represent a continent.
There are indeed good candidates from Africa, but none has a continental right to the inside track.
The new secretary-general must also be firm enough to reform two dozen UN agencies.
Many are in a vicious circle of mismanagement and underfunding, as governments, fed up with incompetence, squeeze their cash.
The once effective High Commission for Refugees is a sad example.
Go for some class
Edward Shevardnadze, who resigned as Soviet foreign minister last December, might have been the right sort of UN leader.
He is a democrat with the skill, nerve and ingenuity to push the limits of the possible.
Choosing him would soften the third-world grumble that the UN was becoming an American puppet.
Mr Shevardnadze with an American as his deputy would make a formidable team.
Alas, Mr Shevardnadze speaks almost no English or French and may not want the job.
All the same, he is the sort of man that is needed.
Recommending a strong secretary-general can sound like touting safe airlines or honest stockbrokers.
Nobody wants the other sort.
Yet the big powers have tended to pick high-grade but unadventurous diplomats who give them a quiet life.
That suited them when there was little that they could agree the UN should do.
Now that they are giving it some serious work, they need a leader who can talk confidently to them and who can behave with authority on the world's television screens.
That sort of secretary-general may at times disagree with one or both of them.
But, in policing the world, the big powers, above all America, ought to want someone who will stand firm in tough times: a partner, not a patsy.
Prize fighter
America should spend more on improving the technology of its weapons, and less on actually making them
MILITARY technology advances by fits and starts.
One of its most notable starts took place this week, when the Americans selected the sleek and curvy YF-22 to be their next-generation air-combat fighter.
This remarkable aircraft, when it joins the air force in about ten years, will render all other fighters obsolete at a stroke.
It will be quiet, manoeuvrable, virtually invisible to radar and capable of supersonic flight without the use of afterburners.
Does America really need to leap a whole generation ahead in fighter technology, to build an aeroplane that can beat undreamed-of Russian fighters of the undreamed-of Russia of the next century?
The YF-22 was conceived in the days of the cold war, and many of its exotic features were developed to defeat predicted Soviet advances that may or may not now materialise.
The Gulf war showed up a big American lead over Soviet weaponry.
It laid to rest the charges of unreliability and less-than-advertised performance that have long dogged the Pentagon.
That technological lead was maintained — widened — for 40 years by diverting money and engineering talent into war machines and away from Walkmen.
Its results are weapons already far better than needed to defeat second-rate enemies, which may be the only ones to worry about once the Soviet Union has imploded.
So, goes an alluring argument, America can rest on its military laurels.
The thesis assumes that all enemies other than the Soviet Union will have second-rate weapons.
This is just not true.
Many American, Russian, British and French high-technology weapons will fall into other countries' hands.
The Brazils and the Chinas will gradually develop the capacity to build (and sell) potent weapons of their own.
One day America may find itself facing the last generation of its own weapons, which it had sold to its enemy in friendlier times.
If it had stopped innovating, the match would then be equal.
In electronics, the leading edge is being advanced by civil research, not military, and the products of this research are thus widely available on the open market.
Unexpected breakthroughs in unexpected lands will decide future wars, as arquebuses decided Pavia and Maxim guns Omdurman.
So though it is hard to imagine the stealthy fighter-bombers, map-reading cruise missiles and pinpoint bombs that won the Gulf war being beaten by Brazilian, Chinese or Russian weapons for decades, there is a good argument for what will now in effect be an arms race by America against itself.
It was, moreover, shown over Baghdad that dropping one clever bomb can cost less, kill fewer civilians and risk fewer airmen's lives than the indiscriminate use of cheap, dumb ones.
By these criteria, some high-tech weapons are cost-effective to develop, even if enemy weapons stagnate.
Research but do not build
The question is not whether to develop ever-better weapons, but how much to spend on doing it.
The Bush administration has proposed cutting the proportion of GNP spent on defence from 6.4% in 1985 to 3.6% in 1996.
If the threat of (big) wars is small, it will make sense to spend more of that money researching and developing weapons and less on putting them into full-scale production — or on training and feeding expensive troops.
For certain technologies, notably strategic defence against nuclear weapons, researching makes more sense than deploying a half-baked system.
Only 15% of America's defence budget goes on research and development.
Suppose that instead of paying Lockheed, Boeing and General Dynamics $65 billion to build 648 of the new fighters, and thus partly freezing the technology for 20 years, the Pentagon asked for just 72 operational aircraft, plus spares and trainers, and then kept the production line ticking over.
That would be more expensive per aircraft, certainly, but it would recognise two realities.
The F-15 is capable of dealing with all foreseeable large threats for some time; and if a new Russian regime started to develop a better fighter, America would still be able to beat it into large-scale production of an improved version of the YF-22.
Perhaps the best MIGs can already challenge the F-15; perhaps the best radars can detect it, which is why only stealth fighters bombed well-guarded Baghdad.
But, in the days of computer simulations, it surely makes little sense to crank the whole military-industrial complex up to producing a great fleet of YF-22s.
Stay ahead by deploying modest quantities of state-of-the-art aircraft, to dogfight over Arizona.
Lenin's curse
THE news from the Soviet Union has been bad, is now awful, and will get worse.
That depressing truth is, alas, one that Mikhail Gorbachev still refuses to accept, as he stumbles around in a trap set by Lenin two-thirds of a century ago.
The most obvious cause for alarm is the Soviet economy.
It has been in accelerating decline for more than a decade, but the crunch is fast approaching.
On figures that are probably far too kind, real GNP was a staggering 8% lower in the first three months of this year than in the same period last year; investment is dropping fast; foreign trade has shrunk by a third.
The miners' strikes that have paralysed about one-third of Soviet pits are slowly breaking backbone industries, such as steel, gas and chemicals.
Oil production, the chief earner of money to pay for grain and other imports, is falling sharply.
And this week the IMF made public what everyone has been saying in private: that there can be little foreign help on offer until the Soviet Union reforms its ‘rotten’ economy.
If the economy's future looks bleak, Mikhail Gorbachev's future looks no better.
Despite the piece of paper he was waving this week, committing nine of the 15 republics to keep on talking about the preservation of the union, he has lost the confidence of much of the Communist Party he leads and of the parliament that elected him president.
The Soviet people who once cheered him on now jeer at him.
He governs, so far as he is able to, on borrowed time because none of the groups contending for power yet feels strong enough to make a grab for it.
The good news is that this gives Mr Gorbachev one last chance to pull away from disaster.
It would mean taking up an idea first mooted last year, but abandoned as too risky: a full coalition between more cautious reformers like himself and the radicals led by Boris Yeltsin.
A deal would need two big concessions from Mr Gorbachev that he balked at last year.
First, those (mainly Baltic) republics that want their full freedom would have to be allowed to negotiate their way out fairly.
Mr Gorbachev began this week to inch in that direction.
Then most powers over the economy would have to be devolved from the centre to the republics that chose to remain.
Unless Mr Gorbachev, or whoever succeeds him, proposes to rule from a tank turret, both these points will eventually have to be conceded anyway.
Attempts to intimidate the Baltic republics have only stiffened their resolve.
The row between the republics and the centre has driven the economy ever more steeply into decline: foreign investors have been frightened off, republics have thrown up trade barriers against each other, and tax revenues owed to the centre are not being paid.
A coalition is now the only way to bring a truce in this damaging ‘war of laws’.
But if disaster is to be averted, time bought needs to be put to good economic use.
Last year Mr Gorbachev rejected a package of radical economic reforms in favour of quarter-measures, fearful that the centre would have to forfeit too much power and that social costs — higher prices, steeply rising unemployment — would be too great.
Since then his authority has ebbed alarmingly anyway.
His quarter-measures have brought higher prices, and also provoked massive strikes, but without any prospect of stabilising the economy.
The threat of hyperinflation is now all too real.
There is still a way out of this economic mess, if Mr Gorbachev can summon up the courage to take it.
It would mean reversing himself on three points: price reform, budget discipline and privatisation of land and property.
A government promise to liberalise prices next year is so far just that: a promise.
Letting markets, rather than bureaucrats, set prices is the only way factories will get both the signals they need about what people really want to buy and the incentive to economise on costs.
But the signals will get through only if there is budget discipline: if, in other words, the still massive indirect subsidies to factories — tax exemptions, soft credits, loans — are cut at the same time.
These muffle market signals and keep too many loss-making factories in business.
Sale of the century
The third big feat required of a reforming new government would be to force open the market to competition.
That means breaking up and selling off the state-owned monopolies.
It is an enormous task.
Category by category, more than a third of Soviet goods measured by value (from sewing machines and locomotive cranes to coking equipment) are produced in a single factory.
Prices fixed by private monopolies such as these would be no truer a reflection of the market than those fixed by the state.
Competition must therefore come from freer imports, too.
And hand-in-hand with the sale of factories should go not only the sale of shops and workshops to people who have goods to sell and services to offer, but also the sale of land and housing — both anathema to many in the land of Lenin — to soak up roubles and give people a personal stake in reform.
All this is what, slowly and still painfully, is happening in Eastern Europe.
Yes, Mr Gorbachev would say, but look at the capitalist misery it causes in places like Poland and eastern Germany.
That misses the point.
Times may be hard in those places, but note how few people are clamouring for a return to the let's-stay-poor-together socialism of the past.
What is more, painful remedies have been most readily accepted from those governments unburdened by past mistakes and old dogmas.
Hence the need for a coalition government in Moscow that would have the credibility which Mr Gorbachev's jaded administration now lacks.
But would — indeed could — Mr Gorbachev go for it?
It may be that by now his authority is too weak to hold up his end of a coalition bargain.
It may be that the gap between Mr Yeltsin's policies and Mr Gorbachev's is too great.
Mr Gorbachev still thinks the old system can be reformed.
Mr Yeltsin does not.
Mr Yeltsin's followers accept the need for a pluralistic, market economy.
Mr Gorbachev talks of the market, yet insists on preserving ‘our socialist choice’.
That is the nub of what really bothers Mr Gorbachev.
Proud of what his country could be, he set out six years ago with the aim of building a modern, more pluralist but still communist Soviet Union.
Yet if he has watched Eastern Europe closely he will have seen that, however the transition begins, be it by round table, coalition government or free election, once Communists give up part of their power they quickly end up losing it all.
Similarly, once state socialism is abandoned, there is no third way around the market that does not lead straight to economic disaster.
Mr Gorbachev's dilemma is not new.
Through more than 70 years of Soviet history, Leninist logic encouraged the belief that somehow the Soviet Union, however badly run, could ignore the laws of economic gravity.
It cannot.
With the ground rushing up to meet him, Mr Gorbachev must decide between the revolution he grew up believing in and the welfare of the people in whose name that revolution was made.
Put pay to the vote
Blushes and risk are the ways to deal with directors' pay
THERE is nothing more tempting than a rich, powerful scapegoat.
That is why Britain's Institute of Directors has this week been rudely attacking the government for allowing the business renaissance of the past decade to be ‘torpedoed by runaway inflation’.
Yet those who sail in fragile craft should hesitate before launching their own torpedoes.
The directors themselves offer a rich and powerful target to an audience that should matter more to them than politicians: their own workers.
On both sides of the Atlantic, boardroom pay has raced ahead, offering an inflationary example to workers being lectured about the need for restraint.
A recent survey by the British Institute of Management showed that directors of larger companies had an average pay rise of 22.7% in 1990.
This week shareholders in Tesco, the supermarket chain, learnt that their chairman had a juicy special offer last year: a rise of 328% in his income, to £1.48m ($2.6m).
Recently Chrysler shareholders studying the American car firm's losses were distracted by Lee Iacocca's pay for 1990: $4.6m.
Can this be justified?
In one way it can, for directors' pay-slips can be misleading now that many are rewarded with bonuses connected to their firm's performance.
Pay in 1990 will reflect the firm's profits in 1989, rather than its current losses.
Yet the bosses' bonanza has continued, albeit at a reduced rate, into the recession.
A survey by Hay Management Consultants estimates that boardroom pay in Britain was still rising at an annual rate of 10–14% in the last six months of 1990, although profits had long been tumbling.
Directors reply that their pay needs to reflect global norms.
It is true that the market for top managers is more international than that for bus-drivers; some of Britain's best companies are run by Americans (Glaxo's Ernest Mario, for example) and some of America's best have Britons at the top (J.P.
Morgan's Sir Dennis Weatherstone).
But it is only a tiny minority that is likely to move.
This explains some of the headline-grabbing individual pay, but not the rising averages.
Another argument for fatter bonuses is that pay tied to performance encourages managers to act in shareholders' interests.
And since high fliers can also start their own firms or do a management buy-out, boardroom pay has to offer some of the rewards of entrepreneurship.
But it has failed to match the risks.
For too few directors does pay fall by as much when performance sags as it rises in good times.
And the reward for dismissal is a golden handshake of several years' pay.
When an ordinary worker fails, he is sacked.
The embarrassment of riches
Contracts should be changed to introduce more risk, even if some directors then have to be paid more.
But it is not the level of pay that is the real problem.
It is how it is determined.
In most companies, top people's pay is set by a group of non-executive directors.
A report from Britain's Institutional Shareholders' Committee this month argues that this should be extended.
It confirms that directors should have no say in their ‘compensation package’, but adds that all the details, including how bonuses and share options are set, should be in the annual report.
This would be useful, but it does not go far enough.
Non-executive directors are not wholly independent.
They are usually recruited by the other directors; and most are executives in other firms, so they benefit from generous benchmarks for the ‘market price’ of directors.
The missing link is the shareholders.
At the annual general meeting (AGM) they vote on the annual report and on the appointment of all directors.
The law should be amended to say that a separate resolution to approve directors' pay must be passed by every company's AGM.
Few meetings would dare to vote down a pay rise, but the threat of such a vote — and the awkward, embarrassing questions that might accompany it — would be a valuable restraint.
Airbus's German cousin
Germany's newly regrouped aerospace industry wants to give birth to a new jet aircraft.
Guess who will pay?
A FUNNY thing happened to an Airbus wing on its way to the European consortium's assembly line in southern France.
The wing left Britain adorned with a giant sticker that said ‘First Airbus A340 wing from British Aerospace, Chester.’
It arrived with a new sticker: ‘Erster Airbus A340 flügel von Deutsche Airbus, Bremen.’
The wing had stopped off in Germany merely for some flaps to be fitted.
Germany's aerospace industry is ambitious.
As well as doodling plans for supersonic jets, it wants to build a new family of airliners.
The dispute between America and the European Community over subsidies for Airbus is already bitter enough.
If Germany goes ahead, it will grow even nastier.
Germany cannot afford to build a new airliner on its own, any more than Britain or France can.
That is why the three countries, along with Spain, got together 20 years ago to pool resources in the Airbus consortium and buy their way into a business dominated by Americans.
Airbus has captured 30% of the world market with an impressive family of airliners.
Last year the consortium made its first ‘operating profit’.
With a record order book, it now has a slim chance of starting to repay a bit of the $13.5 billion that it has received in government subsidies.
Some of those subsidies went into persuading Daimler-Benz to take over most of Germany's aerospace industry (see page 87), by guaranteeing it against some future losses risked in making Airbuses.
But Daimler's aerospace subsidiaries, now called Deutsche Aerospace (DASA), want to take a 50% stake in another European aircraft-making consortium.
France's Aerospatiale and Italy's Alenia, both state-owned aerospace groups, each plan to take 25%.
This consortium will jointly sell propeller-driven aeroplanes which the companies already make.
But it also wants to build a family of jets with 80–130 seats.
The first will cost $2.5 billion to develop.
As sure as Concorde's nose is pointed, the partners' governments will have to subsidise this by coughing up so-called ‘launch aid’.
Taxpayers at angels five
DASA thinks there is a gap in the market for small jets.
There may well be; but the rush for it is already on.
Both Boeing and McDonnell Douglas are making shorter versions of their small jets, and Holland's Fokker wants to make a bigger version of its 100-seater.
Even Airbus plans to shrink its 150-seat A320, but could be forbidden to do so by DASA and Aerospatiale, which between them control 75% of Airbus.
Making a bigger or smaller version of an existing aircraft would cost less (about $400m, reckons Airbus), but the new consortium says an all-new jet would be more efficient and so more attractive to airlines.
If so, it would make more sense and cost less in subsidy to build that new winner within Airbus.
Italy can always become a partner for this project.
DASA reckons Airbus is best suited to building large airliners, not small ones.
How then does Boeing manage to make aircraft of all shapes and sizes?
DASA's motives smack of industrial machismo and a desire to see its name on the nose of a jet.
It already supplies Fokker with fuselages for Fokker's small jet and could make that product its own by buying the Dutch company for less than $1 billion.
But, as Eric Jan Nederkoorn, Fokker's chairman-elect, observes, government money is not forthcoming to buy foreign companies, only to create German jobs.
The second point is that subsidised competition will mean more subsidy for Airbus — competition in subsidy.
DASA's challenge to Airbus's smaller aircraft threatens to drag Airbus back out of profit.
Airbus will anyway soon be passing the hat around again for an enormous 700-seat aeroplane, much bigger than the Boeing 747.
With runways congested, a jumbo-jumbo might make more sense than a small jet.
But why should taxpayers finance it?
America's trade  negotiators are losing patience.
They have already complained to GATT about Daimler's takeover subsidies and want state aid to be limited in future.
As he has done for years, Jean Pierson, Airbus's boss, replies that Boeing and McDonnell Douglas get billions of dollars of ‘indirect’ support from defence programmes and NASA contracts.
It is a row that may never be fully resolved.
But the whole affair of Airbus and its new cousin lies in the deepest shadow that menaces Europe's single-market project: the old-world urge to subsidise, to protect jobs and to create national champions remains depressingly intact.
LETTERS
Kurds in limbo
The emetic smugness of your comments on the Kurds (‘Want another war?’,
April 13th) is, I suppose, typical of the modish caricature of realpolitik now being applied to the Middle East.
The West's involvement in Iraq gave it responsibility for dealing actively with the situation there, despite the mealy-mouthed excuses for allowing Saddam Hussein to survive.
Our leaders funked that responsibility, and the Kurds and Shiites are paying for it.
Your implicit comparison of the ordeal of the Kurds with the Palestinians in Gaza is despicable.
The Kurds have been and are being massacred, and are dying of neglect — our neglect — by the tens of thousands because they tried to escape that massacre, which we did nothing to prevent.
Where is the parallel with Gaza in that?
Most grotesque of all is your complacent opening about ‘the tyrant suitably deflated’.
Suitably?
Saddam Hussein is still tyrant of Iraq, butchering human beings as usual.
What, pray, is suitable about that?
‘Conveniently’ would be a better word, and would refer, correctly, to the ugly cowardice that has led to this bloody mess.
The Economist, of all newspapers, ought to have the nerve, and the decency, to give it its proper name.
Instead, you follow the West's leaders in evoking an intellectually insulting parody of raisons d'état.
One understands, even expects, that from politicians.
But you?
Manchester HERB GREER
The Americans should not intervene militarily to help the Kurds.
When George Bush called for Saddam to be deposed, it was clear that: he did not want the Kurds to do it (that would displease Turkey, Syria, Iran and Russia, and therefore, everybody else); he did not want the Shiites to do it (that would please Iran and so displease everybody else); and he was not sure if he wanted the Sunnis to do it (because that might make the Kurds and the Shiites do it, too).
No, what was really wanted was a coup by a more acceptable Baathist general who would keep Iraq in shape without strutting around alarming everyone.
No doubt the now dispossessed Kurds and the Shiites have been surprised to learn that they did something they should not have done in the interests of geopolitical reality.
But, really, if they didn't understand what was meant by ‘depose’, they deserve all the trouble they got.
Melbourne C. O'MEARA
A case to be heard
If memory serves, Adam Smith once proposed that the independence of the Scottish judiciary might be guaranteed by setting aside a tract of the Highlands for their exclusive use.
The fruits of this estate would have provided the judges' stipends, insulating the judges from all risk that a government might reduce their pay if they offended it.
This, surely, is the answer to the problem of how to pay central bankers (April 20th).
There must be oodles of territory in Saxony and Thuringia that used to be owned by the East German government.
Should not Germany now make a grant of this land to the nascent Eurofed?
Apart from guaranteeing the independence of central bankers, the scheme would also usefully encourage them in those habits of prudence and careful husbandry which are so necessary to their calling.
Chevy Chase, Maryland BARCLAY ST DUNSTAN
Debt and democracy
You miss the point in your leader (April 13th) when you argue that the recent deal to cut Poland's official debt by half should be the exception rather than the rule.
Your comparison is to Latin America, when the most direct precedent is for the debtors of sub-Saharan Africa.
They, like Poland, are indebted mostly to governments.
Many African debtors are also struggling to implement economic-reform programmes.
And, while not denying the severity of Poland's problems, the scale of economic hardship and poverty facing Africa makes them stand out as candidates for debt relief.
Yet the amount of African debt relief — through the Group of Seven's 1988 Toronto agreement — has been pitiful (saving debtors only $100m a year in cash flow, according to the World Bank).
Current proposals for further action have yet to be implemented, including that made by John Major (as chancellor of the exchequer) at last September's Commonwealth meeting of finance ministers.
Does the famine now threatening 29m Africans have to dominate our television screens before African debt carries the same political weight?
London BEN JACKSON
You mention in your commentary on African democracy (March 2nd) that Botswana is the only democratic former British colony in Africa.
You overlook the Gambia and Mauritius.
Although the Gambian People's Progressive Party has dominated the scene since independence, the country has maintained a multiparty system since the 1960s.
Freedom House has listed the Gambia in the ‘free’ category of our annual survey since the break-up of the confederation with Senegal in 1989.
Mauritius, a former colony of both Britain and France, has had periods of emergency rule, but qualifies today as a multiparty, parliamentary democracy.
New York JOSEPH RYAN GEORGE ZARYCKY Freedom House
The borders of inanity
You suggest keeping an eye on Switzerland, New Zealand and Canada as potential enemies (March 16th).
Too late!
A few years ago, the Reaganites surveyed New Zealand's record: democratic since its foundation; relatively civilised in its treatment of indigenous people; no civil wars; no attacks on neighbours; support in both world wars, Korea and Vietnam.
All of this paled when compared with the crime of taking a position on ship-borne nuclear weapons, which displeased the administration.
New Zealand was declared unfit to be an American ally and share in defence intelligence.
Next time you come up with a hypothetical outer limit of inanity, better check with Washington before publishing; it may already be in effect.
New York BRIAN JONES
BOOKS AND ARTS
Arms and the man
LOVE of great cities and vainglorious public monuments comes naturally to despots, and Saddam Hussein is no exception.
Since the Baath Party came to power in 1968, it has filled the burgeoning city of Baghdad with new roads, monuments, redevelopment zones and 45 new shopping centres.
The boom went on through, and despite, the eight-year war with Iran, and that war then produced its own characteristic public monuments.
None was more famous or strange than the notorious Victory Arch; and in his latest book, THE MONUMENT*, Samir al-Khalil weaves round the arch a fascinating and thoughtful study of totalitarianism and art.
The arch consists of two sets of colossal forearms, each weighing 20 tons and higher than the Arc de Triomphe, which seem to burst from the ground at opposite ends of a 90-metre public space.
The forearms are Saddam's, reproduced exactly from life on a scale of 40:1, down to the very follicles.
At the base, broken nets spill out 5,000 Iranian helmets retrieved from the battlefield.
Each forearm extends a giant sword to form an arch 40 metres high.
A seven-metre flagpole at the point of intersection completes the grand design.
As Mr Khalil points out, the arch is both a literal image of Mr Hussein (those are his arms and no one else's), and a giant reflection of how he sees himself.
Above all, however, it is a testimonial to official myth.
Announced in 1985, more than three years before the end of the war with Iran, and publicly dedicated on August 8th 1989, the arch exists to commemorate a victory that never happened.
Mr Hussein appeared for the dedication on a white horse, a traditional symbol of virility and purity that is linked to Ali, the grandson of the Prophet.
It was Ali's martyrdom that led to the great schism in Islam between Sunni and Shia; but here the Victory Arch becomes confusing.
As all Iraqis know, Saddam himself is Sunni, despite his claim to descent from Ali; and the putative victory over Iran was presumably won by all Iraqis, Shia and Sunni alike.
Scarcely a year after the dedication, Saddam invaded predominantly Sunni Kuwait.
Shortly afterwards, he annulled the war with Shia Iran.
This leaves the meaning of the arch more ambiguous than ever.
That the monument is only the latest manifestation of a long and miserable tradition of big lies and big art should come as no surprise to readers of ‘Republic of Fear’, Mr Khalil's previous study of contemporary Iraqi politics.
But his new book is as comprehensively knowledgeable, caustically funny and subliminally alarming about western history and culture as it is about Iraq.
Mr Khalil ranges over pop art and Plato, Las Vegas and Nuremberg, dictatorship and kitsch, Hannah Arendt and Arab unity.
Is the arch, he wonders, the equivalent of Warhol's soup can, a sort of apotheosis of accepted public reality?
Is it a parody of the platonic republic, where politics, art and philosophy come together?
And what will Iraqis come to make of it, when they eventually speak their minds?
Saddam Hussein
Still in charge SADDAM HUSSEIN: A POLITICAL BIOGRAPHY.
By Efraim Karsh and Inari Rautsi.
Brassey's; 307 pages; £17.95.
The Free Press; $22.95
IF HE is really so crafty, how come he blundered into Kuwait and gave the Americans a reason to hammer him?
If he is a blunderer, how is he still in power?
Somewhere between these two questions lurks an answer to the puzzle of Saddam Hussein.
The authors of this excellent biography plump for the fox, not the blunderer.
But, as well as being shrewd, their Saddam is amoral, paranoid and utterly devoid of convictions.
That is both why he has survived and why he has led his country to disaster.
The conventional view of Mr Hussein is that his two invasions — of Iran in 1980 and Kuwait in 1990 — were vast and gratuitous mistakes.
Their devastating consequences, it is true, can hardly be overstated.
And yet Efraim Karsh and Inari Rautsi argue pretty persuasively that the first invasion was more reasonable than it seemed, and that the second was caused by the first.
Before he invaded Iran in 1980, Mr Hussein tried hard to get on with the Islamic zealots who had just seized power in Tehran.
Eager to export their revolution, they rebuffed him.
When they persisted in calling on Iraq's Shia majority to rise up and overthrow his Sunni-based regime, he was forced into war.
This was not, the authors argue, because of some grand design, but because he was anxious, with reason, about his own political survival.
He hoped a short campaign would teach Iran the benefits of non-interference in Iraqi affairs, but was sucked instead into an eight-year fight.
The sacrifices of war made Iraqis hungry for the fruits of victory.
Since these could not be tasted while Iraq's oil revenues were low, Mr Hussein sought to raise his revenues by stealing Kuwait's.
The authors argue that this too was an act of desperation, not part of a grand design; and that he construed his famous interview with the American ambassador, April Glaspie, as a ‘green light’.
As soon as he realised his mistake he tried to go into reverse, but once America sent troops to Saudi Arabia the dictator was trapped: only then did he make Kuwait the 19th province and drop all talk of withdrawing.
On the evidence of this biography, Mr Hussein's greatest aids to survival have been his amorality and lack of ideology.
Hitler was driven by a political vision, albeit a perverse one.
Mr Hussein is driven only by paranoia and a powerful lust to survive.
This makes him free to wear whatever ideological clothing suits the fashion of the moment.
He is, variously, a militant secularist or a pious Muslim; a socialist or a free-marketeer; a proud Iraqi or a proud pan-Arabist; the scourge of the West or the pragmatist on whom the West can safely rely.
Right now Mr Hussein finds it convenient to pose as a conciliator prepared to grant autonomy to the Kurds he has displaced and, in relations with the rest of the world, to let bygones be bygones.
How wretched it would be if, because it had no other solution to the problems of Iraq, the world pretended to believe him.
Anthologies
Xanthippe and rhubarb
THE OXFORD BOOK OF ESSAYS.
Edited by John Gross.
Oxford University Press; 680 pages; £17.95 and $30
’ HAPPY are they that go to bed with great music’, wrote Sir Thomas Browne, ‘like Pythagoras’.
The endearingly eclectic 17th-century doctor is represented in this book by his tour de force‘On Dreams’ which, as well as any other, fits Dr Johnson's definition of an essay as ‘a loose sally of the mind’.
Some are looser than others.
Trollope nearly loses control on the subject of The Plumber, a man ‘doubtless aware that he is odious…to be put down with the tax-gatherer as being as certain as fate and as inexorable.’
Trollope reaches the point of wondering whether a plumber could go to heaven, before sweet reason intervenes: ‘we do not see why he should be debarred if cabinet ministers be allowed to enter.’
This big book contains 140 essays by nearly as many authors.
Their subjects include insects (the wasp, the fly and the moth); places (Pennsylvania, Provence, La Paz); people (Bishop Creighton, Beau  Brummell , Botticelli); abstractions (Truth, Death, the Future of the Potato Crisp) and many more besides.
The usually-amusing, Belloc, Wilde and Betjeman, can be disappointing; others — Lamb, Forster and even Churchill — display an alarming taste for whimsy.
These cavils aside, most of the essays are very good indeed.
There is a particularly lucid and elegant celebration of the philosophy of Christianity by a neglected Victorian, J.A.
Froude; de Quincey's justly famous meditation On the Knocking at the Gate in ‘Macbeth’; and a typical piece of philogyny by Robert Graves.
He puts the case for Xanthippe (aka Mrs Socrates), whose husband's ‘homosexual leanings, his absent-minded behaviour, his idleness and his love of proving everyone wrong would have endeared him to no wife of mettle.’
There are definitions: ‘Anger is one of the sinews of the soul.’
There are useful similes: a degenerate aristocrat ‘is like rhubarb, a contemptible shrub that springs from a noble root’; and there are aphorisms galore.
‘It is a mistake to assume that people think.
They wobble with the brain, and sometimes the brain does not wobble.’
‘It is always necessary to be loved but not always necessary to be admired.’
‘We can only be pessimists before breakfast.’
Samuel Butler offers his readers a helpful hint: ‘to know whether you are enjoying a piece of music or not, you must see whether you find yourself looking at the advertisement of Pears soap at the end of the programme’.
Evelyn Waugh is also free with his advice, this time on how to move in well-informed circles: ‘introduce quite unknown names with such an air of authority that no one dares challenge you’, or ask frequent obscure linguistic questions, for instance, ‘Tell me, is much demotic Armenian spoken in Cairo now?’
When Thurber offers his ‘Ten Rules for a Happy Marriage’, he eschews, he says, such time-worn admonitions as ‘Don't keep a blonde in the guest room’, in favour of his own, eg, ‘The good wife allows the mosquito to bite her when her husband is reading aloud’.
There are many other gems.
Randall Jarrell is painfully funny on Bad Poets, and Joseph Addison on a trip with Sir Roger de Coverley to Vauxhall is pure delight.
G.K. Chesterton on the artifice of the simple life is enough to turn a Green purple, Orwell on Gandhi is subtle and sinewy and James Baldwin on being the first black man in a Swiss valley is dignified and sad.
Clive James should have stayed with book-reviewing: his destruction of ‘Princess Daisy’ must be the funniest thing he ever wrote, even though he admits that ‘to pour abuse on a book like this makes no more sense than to kick a powder-puff’.
To return to Dr Johnson, this book perfectly illustrates his sonorous maxim: ‘We are all prompted by the same motives, all deceived by the same fallacies, all animated by hope, obstructed by danger, entangled by desire and seduced by pleasure’.
It is a seductive anthology.
An abscess of complacency
THE TRUTH ABOUT CHERNOBYL.
By Gregori Medvedev.
I.B. Tauris; 252 pages; £14.95.
Basic Books; $22.95
‘I AM familiar with the feelings of operators at the beginning of an accident’, writes Gregori Medvedev, the chief engineer at Chernobyl in the 1970s.
‘In the first split second you experience a feeling of numbness, of complete collapse within your chest and a cold wave of fright…the needles of the automatic printer drums and the monitoring instruments are swinging in all directions.’
At 1.24am on April 26th 1986, the 14 men in the control room of reactor number four at Chernobyl witnessed the first stirrings of what was to become the worst nuclear accident in history.
Mr Medvedev describes forthrightly how incompetence in the Soviet nuclear industry led to the disaster, and how a lack of foresight and a desire to evade responsibility needlessly exacerbated its consequences.
This courageous book, written in Russia a year after the accident and now published in English, is a thorough and passionate condemnation of the Soviet way of doing things.
The accident began with an experiment, to see if power could be supplied to the reactors' cooling pumps using only the momentum of the stations' own turbines.
If external supplies of electricity to the pumps were lost for any reason, such an operation would be essential to stop heat accumulating in the core.
But the experiment was poorly designed: there were no special safety measures, and the reactor's emergency safety system was disconnected so that it would not spoil the experiment.
Many of the officials in Moscow who approved of the experiment were not qualified to weigh up its dangers.
Others had grown complacent, partly because previous Soviet accidents had been kept secret in order to persuade the public of the benefits of nuclear power.
The experiment was doubly dangerous because, under certain conditions, the RBMK reactors at Chernobyl are of a particularly unstable kind.
Operating rules are designed to overcome this inherent instability; but that night, in a hurry, the operators broke them.
A series of explosions shook the plant.
About 700 tons of graphite and 70 tons of uranium fuel from the core of the reactor, all lethally radioactive, spewed on to the tarmac and the roof of the turbine hall.
Another 50 tons of fuel evaporated, releasing ten times as much radioactivity into the atmosphere as was released at Hiroshima.
Yet so sure of themselves were they, that for 17.5 hours after the blast the power-station management insisted that the reactor remained intact and that it was only an emergency watertank that had exploded.
It should have been a simple matter to check, but the dosimeters for measuring radioactivity were locked in a safe and the panel in the control room was dead.
The managers refused to believe the word of a physicist who inspected the plant, and who was to die of radiation sickness a few weeks later.
Instead they relied on (and quoted) machines which had a maximum reading of one five-thousandth of the dose some were actually receiving.
Blinkered management cost many lives.
Operators received lethal doses of radiation while needlessly reconnecting the water supply to the devastated reactor.
Some workers received lethal doses because the rest of the site was not evacuated.
Night fishermen fished at the outflow to the power station until morning, by which time they were dizzy, vomiting constantly, and their skin had acquired a nut-brown nuclear tan.
There was no evacuation from the company town of Pripyat, where 50,000 people lived, for more than 36 hours.
A man in Pripyat sunbathed on his balcony throughout the next day.
Later that evening he was taken to hospital, vomiting uncontrollably.
Countless small examples show the authorities' lack of foresight.
The infirmaries at the plant were shut, Chernobyl's medical centre was not equipped to take nuclear cases, there were few iodine pills to distribute — although they are the only way of preventing radioactive iodine from accumulating in the thyroid.
Helicopter pilots dumping sand and boric acid onto the reactor to damp down the nuclear reaction were unprotected until they slipped lead plates under their seats.
These failures, however, were merely symptoms of a larger failing in Soviet society.
The deputy chairman of the council of ministers, Boris Shcherbina, forbade evacuation of the countryside around Chernobyl until a government commission had arrived from Moscow.
At a press conference on May 6th, after the scale of the disaster had become apparent, he understated the radioactivity near the reactor by a factor of a million.
At the same press conference, the head of the committee on the use of nuclear energy explained that ‘science requires victims.’
Against this, the conduct of the electricians, the nuclear operators and the firefighters seems both heroic and hopeless.
This book is not beautifully written and is not always easy to understand; technical details sometimes remain unexplained, and a bewildering cast of Russians bob in and out.
But it has the compelling authority that only intimate knowledge and great indignation can bring.
Mr Medvedev does not moralise; he does not need to; but he cannot resist commenting, and the reader can only, with sadness, agree.
‘An abscess, long hidden within our society, had just burst: the abscess of complacency and self-flattery, of corruption and protectionism, of narrow-mindedness and self-serving privilege.’
Sergei Prokofiev
Art and state
IN 1948, the Soviet Central Committee passed a notorious resolution aimed at Soviet composers.
It accused them of ‘contempt for melody’, ‘neuropathic discords’ and ‘formalist perversions.’
Sergei Prokofiev, whose centenary occurs this week, was among the most notable of its victims.
In his younger, more confident days he could quip that ‘formalism is the name given to music not understood on first hearing’; but by 1948 he was less resilient, and the situation more threatening.
In a public statement he agreed meekly that ‘the resolution has shown us the goals towards which we need to strive to serve the Soviet people better’.
For the next five years, until his death in 1953, he ground out anodyne pieces.
Prokofiev's fate was particularly poignant because of his long-standing reputation as an enfant terrible.
Entering St Petersburg Conservatory at 13, he shocked his professors with his angular harmonies, jagged rhythms and plangent colours.
Pronounced ‘an extreme leftist’, his energy enchanted Diaghilev, who commissioned a ballet from him.
In his autobiography Prokofiev admitted that he was ‘not used to denying himself anything’, and he was not about to see a promising career inconvenienced by the Russian Revolution.
Leaving Russia in 1918, he began building an international reputation for uncompromising modernism.
In America he seemed the embodiment of the new age, ‘the Bolshevik pianist’ who played as if he had ‘steel fingers, steel biceps, steel triceps’.
As a composer he proved himself adept at large dramatic forms laced with fantasy and irony, epitomised by his opera ‘The Love of Three Oranges’, which had its premiere in Chicago in 1921.
He was based by now in Paris, but Russia haunted him.
In 1927 he made a triumphant visit there, and convinced himself that the large-scale dramatic compositions he favoured would suit the Soviet vision.
His international reputation would do credit to Soviet music; state support would enable him to compose without having to earn his living on the concert platform.
In interviews, Prokofiev began to protest that he was no longer‘the enfant terrible of discord…
I have become simpler and more melodic.’
That being so, ‘I must immerse myself in the atmosphere of my homeland.’
He returned for good in 1936, but his timing was bad.
The great purges were about to begin, and his younger rival, Dimitri Shostakovich, had just been violently denounced for the supposed perversions of his opera ‘Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk’.
At first, the darkening official mood seems not to have troubled Prokofiev.
He supposed that he could painlessly adjust his style to the demands of Stalinism, and indeed his return produced three of his most enduring pieces, the ballet ‘Romeo and Juliet’, his music for the film ‘Lieutenant Kijé’ and his charming children's work, ‘Peter and the Wolf’.
Yet the state decreed, at first, that ‘Romeo and Juliet’ should have a happy ending; production of that and other pieces was inexplicably delayed or cancelled; and his favourite operatic director, Vsevelod Meyerhold, was arrested in June 1939 after publicly defying accusations of ‘artistic errors’.
He was executed shortly afterwards.
Such events must have undermined even Prokofiev's naive, self-centred confidence.
During the war, he revised his cherished operatic version of ‘War and Peace’ again and again, in line with requests to make it more ‘patriotic’.
It would still not be performed until after his death.
However, his dynamic Fifth Symphony was acclaimed in 1945.
So, at first, was the much darker Sixth.
But in the devastating Resolution of 1948, the Sixth was singled out for criticism and removed from the repertoire.
Ill, ageing and in despair at trying to reconcile artistic integrity with the official line, Prokofiev began turning out his feeble hymns to the state.
His characterless Seventh Symphony won a Lenin prize.
Six months after the work's premiere, he was dead.
Shostakovich summed up his colleague's fatal misconception: ‘He came to Moscow to teach them and they started teaching him.’
Cinema
Alas, poor Mel
AUSTRALIAN he-man Mel Gibson, best known for ‘Mad Max’ and ‘Lethal Weapon’, has picked up kinder notices for his ‘Hamlet’than perhaps he or anyone else expected.
Put it down to inverted snobbery.
He tries so hard that it seems churlish to deny him a few points for effort.
This film marks Franco Zeffirelli's third cinematic flirtation with Shakespeare.
In 1967 he made a gross, slap-and-tickle version of ‘The Taming of the Shrew’ with Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor.
In 1968 he shot a ‘Romeo and Juliet’ with virginal teenagers, a sort of Renaissance ‘Love Story’.
His ‘Hamlet’, except in the vigorous and exciting duel scene at the end, lacks elegance, poetry and even a point of view.
Other Hamlets have been as wrong-headed: Laurence Olivier's of 1948, perhaps, which charted ‘the tragedy of a man who could not make up his mind’, or Grigori Konzintsev's Marxist version of 1964.
But at least they were novel slants on the play.
Mr Zeffirelli's seems to be mere opportunism.
He wanted to see what would come of it if Mel Gibson played the prince, and he gets his answer.
The soliloquies have all the subtlety of a bullet train, and Mr Gibson is clearly intellectually out of his depth.
Inadequate acting has been the bane of all Mr Zeffirelli's Shakespeare films.
He is a skilled choreographer of action scenes; in his ‘Romeo and Juliet’, the street fighting between the Capulets and the Montagus feels as modern and relevant as ‘West Side Story’(which took the theme and modernised it).
In general, however, his contribution to the cinema has been disappointing compared with his work for the legitimate theatre and the opera house.
At Covent Garden he dominated opera production in the 1950s and early 1960s.
Several of his productions, including ‘Cavalleria Rusticana’ and ‘Tosca’, are still in the repertory — sweeping realist interpretations  with an abundance of arresting stage pictures.
By contrast, his films —‘Endless Love’, ‘The Champ’, ‘Brother Sun, Sister Moon’— have none of that striking visual quality and are cloyingly sentimental.
His failures underline the difference between theatre and film direction.
However gifted, a theatre director is no more than a metteur en scène.
His talents are at the service of the text.
A film director, however, is much more than this.
The way he frames a shot or moves his camera and the pace he establishes through editing amount, in the end, to his own view of the world.
Film can cruelly expose limitations, and nowhere more so than in the case of the gloomy Dane and the blue-eyed wonder.
Our European ancestors
Forests of gold
PEOPLE who think of themselves as ‘European’ may be fascinated, or at least enlightened, by ‘The Celts’a new exhibition that runs until December at the Palazzo Grassi in Venice.
Despite a bad press in the ancient world, the Celts are ancestors no one should be ashamed of.
They are now hailed as nothing less than the first Europeans.
An interlinked ethnic tribe, they founded settlements that stretched from the Isles of Arran to Asia Minor; and between 600BC and 600AD they virtually ran the show on the continent of Europe.
Like all foreigners who pestered the ancient Greeks and Romans, the Celts were dismissed by contemporary chroniclers as barbarians.
They did not speak Jove's language; they went to war clad only in shields and were, as Plato sternly put it, ‘given to excess in drink.’
In that state they became ‘sylvan demons’, ‘either falling into a deep slumber or looking around for a fight.’
Plus ça change.
The exhibition includes some delicately-worked gold jewellery, most of it found in Celtic tombs in the past 100 years: typically gold or silver torques, or saddle and bridle decorations of gold, silver, coral and enamel.
These were items buried with their princely owners, male and female; the Celts, in a touch worthy of Obelix, also provided a whole roasted boar and a sharp carving-knife.
Some Celtic gods are on view in the form of sculpture.
One of them has a handle-bar moustache; another wooden deity, dredged not long ago from Lake Geneva, has a formless face, like those that melt and distort in Francis Bacon's paintings.
The ‘Celtic belt’ was heavily forested in those days, as was Italy in pre-Roman times, and two large, rococo-ceilinged halls in the Palazzo Grassi have been turned into forests.
One is a realistic, pitch-dark forest of oaks — an ideal place for hide-and-seek in almost treeless Venice.
The other ‘forest’ consists of 36 black metal columns, each with two brightly-lit ‘portholes’for viewing, either through a magnifying-glass window or, on the other side of the tree-column, in its natural size, a display of brooches, rings, ankle bracelets and other stupendously crafted objects.
As a Celtic expert writes in the show's catalogue, ‘Theirs is the first, the oldest, the greatest and the most illuminating ornamental art that Europe has ever known.’
The 795-page catalogue is worth the journey to Venice by itself, and is likely to remain the layman's definitive Celtic history book for some time to come.
Celtic excavations began in earnest only in the last century, and much remains untouched.
In a rock-salt mine near Salzburg, for example, the salt has preserved (in shafts sometimes 350 metres deep) workers' tools, torches, swatches of finely woven cloth and a 2,600-year-old moccasin of calfskin.
Scalpels have been found, tools for working leather, moulds for glass beads and agricultural tools of the kind that were still being used until farming became mechanised.
With these objects, in their millennium of power, the Celts seem to have had a splendid time scraping and whipping Europe into shape.
AMERICAN SURVEY
Arthur Sulzberger's news that's fit to print
AS CHILDREN, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger and his sister Judith were so close that their father called them Punch and Judy.
Arthur's nickname has stuck — and is apt.
As publisher and chief executive of the New York Times, he is bashed about the ears by almost everybody he meets.
Mr Sulzberger reckons his newspaper ‘is slightly left of centre on social issues and slightly left of centre on economic issues but is rapidly becoming more conservative on everything.’
This sounds safely mainstream, yet readers seethe with complaints.
Jews complain that the Times betrays Israel, feminists that it is chauvinist, southerners that it is pro-Yankee, priests that it is anti-Catholic.
Liberals say it is too right-wing; conservatives that it is too left-wing.
The paper gave fuel to its detractors last week when it named the woman who has accused Edward Kennedy's nephew of raping her in Palm Beach at Easter.
Naming rape victims without their permission is thought to be a bad thing.
And the Times was not even mould-breaking.
It named the woman because NBC News had done so the day before.
Typical, say the critics, of a paper that pretends to lead, but actually follows.
Yet most of these critics admit that the Times is one of the world's great newspapers, perhaps the greatest.
This is often conceded only grudgingly.
The paper goes against the American grain in being an elitist institution in a country that extols the common man.
Even the motto that runs beside its masthead every day is sniffy: ‘All the news that's fit to print.’
Mr Sulzberger is unapologetic about the elitism.
He is pleased that the newspaper's ‘demographics’— ie, its readers' income and education levels — are high.
There will be ‘no comics, no horoscopes, no handicapping of horses’ so long as he is in charge.
Although he is now a few months past the usual retirement age of 65, Mr Sulzberger has not disclosed when he will go.
He will say only that he will probably stay on as chief executive after he steps down as publisher.
His son, Arthur Ochs junior, alias Pinch, is expected to succeed Punch as publisher.
This would give him control of editorial policy.
For it is as publisher, not as chief executive, that Mr Sulzberger decides whom the newspaper will endorse in an election.
The process is not democratic.
‘If it gets to a crunch and there is a vote, I win,’ is how he puts it.
Whether the Sulzberger family will ask Pinch to become chief executive as well is more doubtful.
Pinch's interests lie on the editorial side.
Not all his sisters and his cousins and his aunts are convinced that he is ready to run a business that takes in 32 regional newspapers, 17 magazines, five network-affiliated television stations and three newsprint mills.
Whatever happens, family control over a newspaper that Punch's grandfather, Adolph Ochs, bought in 1896 will be sustained.
The stock is divided into voting and non-voting shares, and the voting shares are concentrated in family hands.
Mr Sulzberger thinks this serves the public interest.
Most of the best newspapers in America, he contends, are family-owned.
As befits the owners of an elitist newspaper, the Sulzbergers are patricians.
Punch served a stint in the newsroom but failed to develop into a news-hungry reporter.
(Old hands recall how Punch, on a day off from the Paris bureau in 1955, saw a sports car plough into the crowd at Le Mans and kill 87 people; no other reporter from the newspaper was there, yet it never occurred to Punch to call his office.)
The other top editorial people have a better news sense but they are not immune to the old-money patina: all have centrist views with a pro-establishment tinge.
The editorial excellence of their newspaper is founded on its financial success — and this is not assured.
Its dowdy appearance is a handicap.
The restrictive practices of stubborn unions keep the new colour-printing presses idle.
The circulation continues to climb: in 1990 it was up to 1.1m on weekdays and 1.7m on Sundays.
But the amount of paper needed to produce the obese Sunday edition can cost three times its $1.50 cover price.
To prosper, the newspaper needs to attract lots of advertising.
As advertisers see it, the Times is neither one thing nor t'other.
It is not really a city newspaper.
It has won 63 Pulitzer prizes, more than any other newspaper, but only one of them for local reporting.
Though its national edition is available for breakfast on the west coast, the Times is not really a national newspaper either.
The breadth of its coverage of foreign news is unrivalled, but most of its readers are in greater New York.
Fair but no fun
Mr Sulzberger thinks he has the answer.
Across America, as in New York, the Times will continue to appeal to the rich and influential.
But to be required reading for top people, it will somehow have to become less inhibited without losing its fanaticism about accuracy and fairness.
In its business coverage, it lacks the muck-raking skills of the Wall Street Journal and the international thoroughness of the Financial Times.
On politics, it has none of the Washington Post's killer instincts.
The columnists on the op-ed pages are more bloody-minded than they used to be, but in its editorials the Times remains the voice of American public policy.
The best source for its reporters in a foreign land may well be the American ambassador.
Punch's newspaper has to think about being a little less boring.
Snowed under
ASPEN, COLORADO
JESUS RODRIGUEZ, a 26-year-old Mexican immigrant, lives in Aspen, Colorado — America's poshest ski resort.
Mr Rodriguez is not rich or famous.
He is one of 3,000 latino workers who have moved into Aspen's Roaring Fork Valley, replacing anglo ‘ski bums’ as caretakers of the rich.
The number of latinos has tripled in the past year.
Like most of Aspen's 12,000 workers, the latinos live ‘down valley’ from Aspen, crammed into mobile homes.
They work silently behind the scenes — washing dishes, lugging supplies, making beds and shovelling snow.
Toothy anglo teenagers still greet guests at the $300-a-night hotels.
Not everybody is pleased about the influx.
A letter in a local newspaper advocated sending latinos ‘back to Burritoville.’
There have been several arrests, following knife fights between drunk latinos.
Yet most people welcome them.
Employers like their diligence.
Old residents say they have more in common with the latinos than with the ultra-rich who have taken over their valley.
There is a valley-wide ‘cultural competency’ campaign to build bridges.
Schools and employers are teaching languages.
Role-playing seminars are intended to help people learn tolerance.
Health workers are offering bilingual pre-natal care classes at churches.
Several local agencies are planning to hire bilingual staff.
The city has established a latino-anglo task force.
Officials from the Department of Justice, charged with smoothing cultural relations, praise Aspen's response to latino workers as exemplary.
Mr Rodriguez and his wife have even tried skiing.
But they say $40 for a lift ticket would be better spent on books.
Mr Rodriguez's plan is to get a high-school diploma, then win a pilot's licence.
Women officer cadets
Lost cause
COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA
OF THE American troops in the Gulf war, 6% were women.
Twelve women died (five in action) and two were taken prisoner.
By all accounts, females acquitted themselves well.
Be that as it may, the last two state-supported military schools that refuse to admit women cadets are fighting a rearguard action for their cause.
Representatives of one, the Virginia Military Institute, argued in court earlier this month that admitting women would destroy the school's camaraderie, forged through rigorous physical and psychological training in an atmosphere totally without privacy.
The Citadel, in Charleston, South Carolina, also says that admitting women would destroy the experience of attending an all-male military academy.
If female cadets are admitted, the Citadel ‘would be required to change an educational philosophy which has been tested and proven sound for almost 150 years,’ declared William Risher, chairman of its board of visitors.
A federal judge is expected to rule soon on the constitutional issue at hand — whether a state-owned institution can bar half the state's citizens from applying for admission because of their sex.
Spokesmen for both schools say they will obey the law if they are ordered to admit women, but they will do so grudgingly, as they did with blacks in the 1970s.
Their opposition goes deep.
Both the Citadel and VMI consider themselves to be repositories of the southern chivalry and military prowess tested so harshly during the Civil War.
That lost cause was started in 1861 by Citadel cadets who fired the first shots at Fort Sumter, outside Charleston.
‘These institutions instil and cultivate in their cadets what were once commonly referred to as the virtues of southern manhood — honour, chivalry and devotion to God, state and family,’ wrote one alumnus in a letter to a newspaper.
Women have been enrolled at West Point, the United States Naval Academy and the Air Force Academy since the mid-1970s, when Congress passed a law that required women to be admitted to the federal military academies.
In 1990 a woman rose to the top at West Point, by becoming brigade commander and the first female captain of the corps of cadets.
But VMI's lawyers suggested at the court hearing that West Point has ‘gone soft’, that its discipline records show a pattern of sexual tension in the 15 years since women were admitted — and that these have led to ‘substantial, deep-seated problems.’
Skiing
Matures
VAIL, COLORADO
EXCEPT at the highest of America's ski resorts, the lifts have stopped and the instructors have moved on to Argentina or New Zealand.
In Colorado the season that ended on April 14th was probably the second-best ever: it attracted nearly 10m skiers.
But in the country as a whole, the number of skiers was down for the third year running, and was no higher than 12 years ago (see chart on next page).
The obvious conclusion is that skiing has become a mature industry, which will have to get used to little or no growth.
The financial problems at some ski resorts suggest that skiing — the quintessential 1980s yuppie holiday — is no place to put your 1990s money.
Charles Goeldner, of the University of Colorado, disagrees.
He says the variable pattern of snowfall does more to affect the figures than anything else.
The past few years have been poor snow years for frustrated skiers.
But increasingly the vagaries of the weather are mitigated by snow-blowers.
Mr Goeldner reckons that resorts in Colorado have invested more than $500m in snow-making machines and fast lifts in the past decade.
The true success of the American skiing industry has been to adapt to the ageing of its customers.
When skiing first became something akin to a mass-tourism business, it was a young person's holiday.
Throughout the 1980s, the number of young people skiing has declined.
The once-young are still keen.
Between 1977–78 and 1989–90, the proportion of skiers aged 18–24 fell from 28% to 12%; the proportion aged 35–44 increased from 19% to 30%.
This growth in what the tourism business winsomely calls the ‘silver generation’ would not have been possible without big changes in boots and bindings.
The ski resorts have done their bit too, grooming many of their slopes to a baby-bottom smoothness that is less fun for adolescent hot-doggers but easier on older legs.
However, after a number of fatal accidents this year, some people are questioning whether grooming is such a great idea.
It allows novice skiers to travel too fast and they then get out of control and hit a tree.
People are also more impatient.
A neophyte taking a skiing holiday used to spend the first week in excruciating, character-forming exercises.
The new breed of skier expects to be able to ski from day two.
The most important marketing device in the industry has nothing to do with skiing at all.
Wander round Colorado in the summer, from international conference to music festival, and it quickly becomes clear how much effort the resorts have put into making themselves year-round destinations.
Mr Goeldner thinks that one day the summer revenue of Colorado's ski towns will exceed the winter one.
A nation of boy scouts
WASHINGTON, DC
VOLUNTARY service has a long history in America.
In 1835 de Tocqueville admired ‘the extreme skill with which the inhabitants of the United States succeed in proposing a common object for the exertions of a great many men and inducing them voluntarily to pursue it.’
When he came into office George Bush set out to make this national characteristic a centrepiece of his domestic policy, referring to ‘a thousand points of light’.
Ever since November 1989, the White House has been doggedly nominating daily ‘points of light’ in an attempt to draw the nation's attention to outstanding examples of voluntary service.
One day it is a group of prison inmates in New Jersey who teach illiterate fellow-prisoners to read.
The next it is two sisters in Rhode Island who run a summer camp for mentally retarded children.
In the past two weeks the administration has stepped up its campaign to encourage voluntary service.
The 12 days between April 15th and April 26th were set aside for a ‘points of light celebration of service’.
A record called ‘Points of Light’ was released by Randy Travis, a country singer whom Mr Bush likes.
Daily events were arranged in cities around America and each day was given a theme.
On April 19th it was drug prevention in Kansas City.
The next day it was on to Kalamazoo, Michigan, and family and community.
The jamboree was set to culminate on April 26th with singing and dancing on the White House lawn.
Liberals are suspicious of the hoopla, and of the policy.
They fear that welfare is being privatised: if charities build shelters for the homeless and philanthropists feed the poor, the government saves money.
Poor Americans might be left at the mercy of luck and charity.
The glow from a thousand points of light seems less reliable than that from the lightbulbs of a well-financed bureaucracy.
Gregg Petersmeyer, director of the White House's Office for National Service, denies that Mr Bush's rhetoric is simply a ruse to allow the government to shed expensive responsibilities.
He argues that ‘points of light’ provide a middle way between reliance on the welfare state and the belief that economic growth alone can cure deep poverty.
No government programme, says Mr Petersmeyer, can persuade a teenager not to drop out of school, or not to try drugs.
That is the job of a family.
Where a family no longer exists, neighbourhood organisations can provide a web of family-like relationships.
Is it working?
A recent Gallup poll found that 98m adults are involved in voluntary service, a 23% increase in two years.
Perhaps sensibly, Mr Bush's campaign appeals more to enlightened self-interest than to self-sacrifice.
Barbara Lohman of the Points of Light Foundation (a non-profit organisation set up at the instigation of the White House) says that today's volunteers are ‘not turned on by the martyrdom thing.’
The slogan of the latest ‘points of light’ campaign reflects this.
‘Do something good.
Feel something real’, it urges.
Vietnamese-Americans
Their bonnie lies over the ocean
WESTMINSTER, CALIFORNIA
For many of its 1m Vietnamese citizens America is a temporary refuge, not a new home.
Violent though a few of them are, they are beginning to succeed.
The fourth in our occasional series on America's ethnic groups
THIS weekend is ‘Quoc Han’ for Vietnamese-Americans, or ‘black April’, on which they commemorate the anniversary of the fall of Saigon.
As on every other Saturday morning, the inhabitants of Little Saigon in Orange county will crowd around their televisions to watch an hour and a half of Vietnamese programmes.
There are the usual singers and some local news, but the main item is an often grisly tour of Vietnamese refugee camps around the world.
The highlight is ‘Nhan Tin’(or missing persons), which gives individual inmates a few moments to appeal to relatives living in America, Canada or Australia.
Little Saigon, a district of Westminster in Orange county, is the Vietnamese-American capital.
Around 400,000 Vietnamese live in California, part of the state's 3m Asian population.
When the first Vietnamese arrived in 1975 after the fall of Saigon, the federal government tried to spread them around the country.
A few stayed where they were sent — there are many fishermen in Louisiana and Texas — but many have filtered back to Orange county.
The first wave of refugees included many of the richest and best-qualified Vietnamese.
For instance, Nam Tran, who presents the Saturday television programme, used to work in the American embassy; her husband was a pilot in the Vietnamese air force.
But three in every four Vietnamese-Americans arrived or were born in the past decade.
The newcomers, mostly fishermen or peasant farmers who came as boat people, have been less successful than the first wave.
Mixed in with both groups are the Chinese who lived in Vietnam and ran many of its businesses.
Nevertheless the biggest division in the Vietnamese community is not racial or economic, but generational.
Older people still regard America as a refuge; younger people regard it as a new home.
Asked ‘would you go back and live in Vietnam if the government changed?’,
Nam Tran says she would, but her children would not.
Although Vietnamese children often finish first in Californian high schools, their parents and grandparents sometimes live miserable lives.
Many stay at home because they cannot drive.
If they venture out to Little Saigon's cafés, it is to bicker about (Vietnamese) politics or read one of the 20-odd Vietnamese newspapers.
The humiliation for some is that they cannot talk to their English-speaking grandchildren.
The ghost of Ho Chi Minh has followed the Vietnamese into Orange county.
Several of the South Vietnamese ministers his followers ousted now live in California.
In theory, any contact or hint of rapprochement with the communist regime is traitorous.
People who speak out in favour of negotiations receive death threats; businessmen who openly trade with Vietnam have received letter bombs.
Politically hyphenated
Such a stand might look principled, were it not a sham.
Many of the denouncers pop up in hotels in Hanoi.
Travel agents in Little Saigon advertise air tickets and tours to Bangkok, which, just coincidentally, link up with tours of Vietnam.
One of the biggest businesses in Little Saigon is sending money to Vietnam.
The average family sends back $100 a month and pays a $10 fee to send it, part of which goes to the Vietnamese government.
The latest ruse is to send a fax promising to pay dollars, which can be converted by relatives into cash in Vietnam.
Again, the faxes are technically routed through Bangkok.
Occasionally the FBI cracks down on attempts to smuggle money.
A much bigger criminal challenge comes from Vietnamese gangs.
A recent siege in Sacramento left three Vietnamese gang members and three hostages dead.
Before the gun battle started the Vietnamese youths issued extravagant demands, including one for a flight to Thailand so they could fight communists.
Most gang crimes are less political, more efficient and are not reported to the police.
The victims are usually other Vietnamese.
Gangs tend to pick on houses rather than businesses, torturing a family until it hands over its money (many Vietnamese keep all their cash at home).
Some gangs tour America, staying in motels and stalking the Vietnamese with a torn-out copy of the ‘Nguyen’ page in the local telephone book or with the help of local fixers who point out the rich pickings in each city.
There are even some all-girl gangs, including one called the Wally Girls.
Yet America's Vietnamese may well become another immigrant success story.
They already form America's third biggest Asian group after 1.3m Chinese and 1.5m Filipinos.
Though they have not so far emulated the economic success of other Asians, they share many of their qualities.
They work hard; they have a strong family sense and a keen appreciation of education.
So far most of the business successes are small family-owned ones: groceries, restaurants, garages.
Because language remains a problem, many Vietnamese have become technicians or engineers.
If a Toshiba computer breaks down in America, the chances are that it will be mended by a Vietnamese engineer in California.
Little Saigon has a host of new shops and offices.
In 1980 there were only two banks; now there are nine.
In one of Little Saigon's trendier shops a video screen shows footage of Vietnam shot amateurishly through the window of a moving car.
In a decade's time, it may well show rock videos — and perhaps ‘Miss Saigon’.
Boston harbour
The muck stops here
BOSTON
IN 1988 George Bush came to polluted Boston Harbour, held his nose and made the muck a metaphor for Michael Dukakis's political liabilities.
The harbour and the metaphor are now nagging Mr Dukakis's Republican successor, William Weld.
Unable to resolve the mess generated by the $6 billion, court-mandated harbour clean-up, Massachusetts has been hit with a ban on nearly all new sewer connections in the Boston area.
The ban applies to both new construction and renovations, and will cause havoc to the building industry in a state already in economic difficulty.
For the moment, it means that recently completed properties cannot be connected to the sewage system in 43 towns and suburbs.
They thus cannot be occupied.
From the offices of New England Telephone to a weight-training room beneath the baseball field at Fenway Park, doors to new facilities are shut tight.
The order threatens to stop construction projects worth hundreds of millions of dollars at Harvard University, the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and St Elizabeth's Hospital, among others.
The proposed site for the mud to be dredged out of the harbour is Walpole, chosen by the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority in 1989 after a five-year search.
Walpole got full environmental approval, but it already has a state prison, and local residents were successful twice last year in lobbying the legislature to reject bills that would have made the land available for the harbour clean-up.
Though the state hopes to convert much of the sludge into commercial fertiliser, a back-up dumping site must be found for work to begin.
Mr Weld, who inherited this confusion from the Dukakis administration, made it worse last year when, during the election campaign, he promised to find another place to dump.
But his plea for a four-month stay on the sewage ban while this search was completed was dismissed by David Mazzone, the federal judge overseeing the clean-up project, and rejected by a federal appeals court.
Mr Weld therefore submitted a bill this week to try once again to transfer the Walpole site — and satisfy the judge.
The legislature should say yes to this.
But although the hunt for a substitute will go on, it looks increasingly likely that judicial pressure will make Walpole swallow the slime and Mr Weld his promise.
Such a blow to the governor will be particularly ironic: while serving as federal prosecutor for Massachusetts in 1984, he was closely involved in preparing the suit that forced the clean-up of the harbour.
How to make anti-poverty policies popular
WASHINGTON, DC
THE thoughts of think-tanks usually arrive at wrong moments and sink into oblivion.
Academics can be heard ruefully regretting that their analysis of some pressing problem has not sold in Washington, only on campuses.
Occasionally, though, a think-tank is lucky and its latest thoughts land in the middle of a policy debate.
A new collection of 19 papers published by the Brookings Institution (‘The Urban Underclass’, edited by Christopher Jencks and Paul Peterson) has arrived when both the administration and Congress are discussing anti-poverty policy.
The book will provide a fact-lode that politicians can quarry for years.
Like any self-respecting academics, the Brookings authors do not agree on what the problem is, let alone how to cure it.
For a start, Mr Jencks, of Northwestern University, casts doubt on the idea that different kinds of social problems — unemployment, crime, teenage pregnancy, educational failure — move in lockstep.
Mr Jencks argues that while long-term male joblessness and unwed parenthood have got worse, school drop-out rates have improved; and the number of violent crimes (other than homicide) and the proportion of the population on welfare are at least not getting worse.
Mr Jencks concludes that to search for a comprehensive policy to tackle the underclass is a waste of time; different policies are needed for different problems that may be only loosely related.
The Brookings papers give politicians a choice.
They can decide that America's problem is the ‘ghetto poor’— the phrase that William Julius Wilson, of the University of Chicago, now prefers to ‘underclass’.
Or they can decide that the main problem is that relative poverty got no better during the prosperous 1980s.
If policy were to concentrate on the ghetto poor — those socially segregated in inner cities whose manufacturing jobs have fled to the suburbs — it could be aimed at very few places.
Successful efforts to rescue the ghettos in just four cities (Chicago, New York, Detroit and Newark) would have a dramatic effect on the numbers at the bottom of the heap.
But if the intention is to reduce relative poverty, policy would have to range over Appalachia and Mississippi as well as all the big cities.
The larger aim prevails in Washington.
The topic at the moment is what to do about the working poor, particularly those with children.
Even more than other industrial countries, America has seen a shift in the age distribution of poverty.
Between 1970 and 1986, says Mr Peterson of Harvard, the proportion of the elderly living in poverty fell by half; the proportion of children increased from 15% to 20%.
Concentrating on the working poor with children has obvious political charms.
Congress works by building coalitions; to aim at just the ghetto poor — wholly urban and overwhelmingly black — would attract too narrow a coalition.
According to the Urban Institute, 74% of the working poor were white in 1988.
The Progressive Policy Institute, a think-tank allied to the right wing of the Democratic Party, the Democratic Leadership Council, makes the point that ‘working-poor Americans are not vastly different from everyone else who works.’
Beating the tax
The working poor's main problem is the poverty trap — the tax penalty that poor families face when they move from welfare to work.
Until April 24th two options, not mutually exclusive, were under consideration.
The first was Daniel Patrick Moynihan's year-long effort to cut the payroll tax that pays for social security (old-age pensions).
For the working poor, social-security payments typically make up the largest part of their tax bill.
But on Wednesday the Senate voted overwhelmingly against a procedural motion that would have allowed the cut to be introduced later in the year.
Senator Moynihan now says that his plan is dead.
The second option is to concentrate resources on the earned-income tax credit (EITC).
The EITC is a credit to employed family heads with children.
The value of the credit tapers off above a certain earnings level, and disappears just above $20,000 a year.
After expansions in 1986 and 1990, it is now the prime instrument for alleviating poverty among those who work — perhaps 11m households now receive it.
When changes made to the scheme in 1990 are fully phased in, families may get more than $2,000 a year.
George Bush's budget for fiscal 1992 proposed a number of changes to the EITC, such as credit for health-insurance premiums.
The administration prefers changing the EITC to increasing the minimum wage, which it fears would increase unemployment and inflation.
The EITC, which puts cash rather than benefits (like food stamps) into the hands of the poor, fits with its general philosophy of ‘empowerment’.
So would the most intriguing proposal now doing the rounds in Congress.
This is to increase the personal tax exemption (the amount by which taxable income is reduced for each person in a household).
In 1948 the exemption was set at $600 a person; in 1990 it was $2,050.
According to recent evidence before the House of Representatives select committee on children and the family, had the exemption been indexed from 1948 it would now be worth $7,800.
A mix of Republicans and Democrats are looking at the exemption.
Pat Schroeder, the Democratic chairman of the select committee, favours increasing it.
Dan Coats, a Republican senator from Indiana, would like it doubled.
The problem, needless to say, is the cost, which nobody knows but would be huge.
Mr Coats awaits figures for his plan from the Treasury, which will collectively blanch when it sees them.
Eugene Steuerle of the Urban Institute, who also favours increasing the exemption, accepts that it might take many years to reverse the effects of its shrinkage.
Still, at least the interlocking issues of taxation, welfare and the family are now on the political map.
The most pressing of all the problems of family poverty, however, remains the least soluble.
This is the inexorable increase in the proportion of children born out of wedlock (see chart on previous page).
Mr Jencks, careful as ever, points out that the figures can mislead.
The proportion of out-of-wedlock births has increased so much mainly because the number of births to married couples has sharply declined.
He points out that in 1960, married black women could have expected to have 3.49 children; if they had continued to reproduce at this rate, the out-of-wedlock rate among black women would have increased from 23% in 1960 to just 29% in 1987, and gone almost unnoticed.
Instead, black married women stopped having so many children; black unmarried women continued to have them as before.
Births outside marriage are rising among whites as well as blacks.
Two-parent families in which the parents stay married have become anything but‘normal’(even though the divorce rate seems to be falling).
Changes to the tax and benefit structure, and expanded economic opportunity in the ghetto, may reduce the number of children born outside marriage.
But they may not.
The speeding ghost
IT IS the less curvaceous and futuristic of the two.
But the YF-22 has won a long, hard dogfight against its rival prototype, the YF-23, to become the air force's next fighter.
The winner was put together by Lockheed, Boeing and General Dynamics, and will be powered by Pratt & Whitney engines.
These companies, and the sub-contractors on their team, will now proceed with full-scale development.
On present plans, 648 aircraft will be produced, at a cost of $65 billion-95 billion, the first ones coming off the production line in early 1997.
Unless it can pull some rabbits from a hat, the losing consortium, led by Northrop and McDonnell Douglas, will see the YF-23 (which resembles its sleek and costly stablemate, the B-2 bomber) consigned to a museum.
The YF-22's most useful quality is its ability not to show up on radar, including radars of a sensitivity not yet invented.
Nothing is invisible to radar, but a stealthy aircraft shows up over the background noise only at so close a range that radar, which has dominated air and combat for two generations, is virtually useless against it.
There is more to the YF-22 than stealth.
It produces no smoke, and its heat output is so controlled that it is not much warmer than the surrounding air and therefore hard for infra-red devices to detect.
It can outmanoeuvre any fighter flying today.
And it can fly supersonically using only its normal engines; with no gas-guzzling afterburners to feed, it can go much farther at such speeds than any of today's machines.
Until now virtually any fighter could be modified to drop bombs, but the YF-22 may never do so.
The reason is that all the weapons must fit inside the radar-screening fuselage to prevent their unstealthy shapes from giving the aircraft away.
The weapons bay is too small to accommodate much of a bomb: it is designed to take the AMRAAM, a new air-to-air missile that uses its own radar to hunt down and destroy enemy aircraft.
The competition was close.
The YF-22 proved more manoeuvrable than its opponent, although marginally less stealthy.
It cannot have done the YF-23 any good that it was unable to kick the AMRAAMs out of its weapons bay on demand.
And cost was undoubtedly a factor: the winner was a little cheaper.
But some observers believe that what tipped the balance was a belief in the Pentagon that the management of the Lockheed-Boeing-General Dynamics team was stronger.
Whether or not this is true, the team can certainly muster more money among its members.
If the programme's costs spiral, the government would stand more chance of enforcing penalty clauses.
ASIA
Look, I can read
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN KERALA
THE state of Kerala is where history is often made in the Indian subcontinent.
Christianity came to Kerala in the first century.
More recently, the state has been run by the Communist Party of India and its allies; and, unlike communists elsewhere, they retain power through free elections.
Now Kerala is the first of India's 25 states to have achieved pretty well universal literacy.
A recent United Nations report says that 90% of the adult population are literate.
The rich countries reckon to have at least 95% of their adults literate.
In India as a whole the figure is about 40% (see chart).
Kerala is a fertile state laced with rivers and canals.
Most of its 26m people have enough to live on.
Life expectancy is reckoned to be 69 years, compared with an average of 57 for the whole of the country.
The princely state of Travancore-Cochin, which was absorbed into Kerala in 1956, promoted education, bringing in extra teachers from outside.
Back at the start of this century, more than a tenth of Travancore's adults were literate, twice the rate of the whole of the subcontinent.
By 1981 some 81% of Kerala's adults were literate.
A big effort was made in the late 1980s to try to get just about everyone over 15 to read and write, using more than 20,000 volunteer teachers, 14,000 of them women.
The opposition in the state legislature, Rajiv Gandhi's Congress Party, is rather sulky over the achievement.
It, too, wants people to be literate and complains that its offers to help have been ignored.
The main voluntary agency dealing with literacy is Marxist.
Most of the money for the campaign has come from the central government and the United Nations, but it seems to be Marxist enthusiasm that has put it to good use.
The chief minister, 70-year-old Krishnan Nayanar, claims that because people are literate, Kerala has less crime and alcoholism than elsewhere in India.
It is a compliment to Mr Nayanar that the central government wants to copy Kerala's methods of using volunteer teachers by the thousand.
One plan being talked of is to close all India's universities for a year, during which students and graduates would move into the impoverished rural areas to teach villagers to read and write.
Certainly, something drastic needs to be done to spread literacy.
Otherwise, by the turn of the century, India will surely be among the world's least literate countries.
Japan
In search of a job
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
JAPAN has, in effect, two prime ministers.
Toshiki Kaifu holds the title, but Noboru Takeshita is his master.
Both flew to foreign parts this week.
Both need to be seen on Japanese television hobnobbing with the good and the great around the world.
Each is eager to present himself as the most qualified man to head off protectionist measures and to restore Japan's good name, which lately has been looking a little tarnished.
At stake is the leadership of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, and thus the job of prime minister, which will be decided in October.
Mr Kaifu's destinations were five South-East Asian countries, Malaysia, Brunei, Thailand, Singapore and the Philippines.
He had planned to make this tour in January, but postponed it because of the Gulf war.
Mr Takeshita flew to Washington for a heart-to-heart chat with President Bush.
Each man must struggle to convince the party and the public that he is the right choice to guide Japan in the coming years.
Mr Kaifu was a stop-gap prime minister plucked from obscurity in 1989 after more prominent politicians were touched by the Recruit shares-for-favour scandal.
Mr Takeshita was damaged by the scandal and had to resign as prime minister.
He wants another chance.
The barons of the party have done their best to avoid public arguments during the local elections.
The last of the elections took place on April 21st, delivering, as it happened, a handsome victory across the country for candidates backed by the Liberal Democrats, and defeat for the socialists.
Perhaps this shows that the popular resentment against politicians' financial shenanigans — which lost the party control of the upper house of parliament — has at last abated.
If so, this is a good time to tackle tricky chores.
Mr Kaifu and his cabinet have steeled themselves to send four minesweepers, two support vessels and some 500 Japanese servicemen to the Gulf.
It is the first time since the end of the second world war that the Japanese navy has ventured overseas.
Although belated, the gesture will win Mr Kaifu kudos in Washington, and guarantee a warm welcome for him at the London summit of rich countries' leaders in July.
On his return from South-East Asia Mr Kaifu will face two unpleasant tasks.
One is getting through parliament changes to a law that protects small shopkeepers at the expense of big stores, the chief outlets for foreign goods.
Small shopkeepers tend to support the Liberal Democrats, but Mr Kaifu wants to please a more important supporter, Mr Bush.
The other tricky operation, opening up Japan's rice market, will also please the Americans.
A breakthrough could revive the Uruguay round of GATT talks, stalled since December.
Mr Kaifu might accumulate enough successes to impress his party when it decides who should lead the country for the next couple of years.
No one has seriously thought of Mr Kaifu as a two-term prime minister.
But, given the paucity of alternatives, a wiser and more experienced Mr Kaifu (supported by the Americans) could survive as the compromise candidate.
Such thoughts have not escaped so consummate a politician as Mr Takeshita.
He professes not to want the job of prime minister, saying he has had his turn and is proud of his achievements.
Few take such pronouncements seriously.
As leader of the Liberal Democrats' largest and wealthiest faction, Mr Takeshita wields enormous clout.
Mr Kaifu has no power base of his own and is prime minister only on Mr Takeshita's say-so.
That say-so is about to be withdrawn.
When the party's secretary-general, Ichiro Ozawa, resigned recently, Mr Takeshita placed in the job one of his most faithful lieutenants, Keizo Obuchi.
Mr Obuchi will do Mr Takeshita's bidding.
Mr Takeshita's immediate aim is to show the Americans that he is as adept in international affairs as in domestic politics, and that they are wasting their time on a boy like Mr Kaifu.
Dealing with international trade and security is a man's job.
After talking with Mr Bush, he plans to go to Beijing for some grown-up conversation with the Chinese prime minister, Li Peng.
If it is true that the Japanese have pardoned the politicians implicated in the Recruit affair, Mr Takeshita may indeed feel that the time is ripe for his return.
China
A matter of status
FROM OUR CHINA CORRESPONDENT
IF KUWAIT deserves liberation from an aggressor, why not Tibet?
The question enrages China, which gobbled up Tibet in 1951 (to few protests at the time).
Yet it is a question raised with increasing effect by Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama.
Earlier this month he was rapturously received by the American Congress; he was also briefly entertained by President Bush at the White House.
This ‘hurt the feelings of the Chinese people’; worse, it came from a man China considers ‘an old friend’.
But there was more to Mr Bush's move than meets the eye.
The president believes good relations with China matter a lot for American interests in Asia.
By reversing his previous stand and meeting the Dalai Lama, Mr Bush was perhaps taking the steam out of a growing congressional effort to do something that would injure a lot more than China's pride: the cancelling of China's most-favoured-nation (MFN) trading status.
MFN means giving a country the tariff treatment enjoyed by your least restricted trading partner.
It is a staple of the multilateral trading system, and is extended by the United States to all but a handful.
China has had the status since 1980, when America waived a law (originally intended to benefit Soviet Jews) that prohibits MFN for countries which restrict emigration.
Congress, incensed by the Tiananmen massacre of June 1989, last spring urged Mr Bush to revoke China's MFN status.
Instead, he renewed it for a year; by June 3rd he has to decide whether to do so again.
Never mind the inconsistencies of using the tools of free trade to secure human rights (nobody is trying to deprive Iraq, for instance, of its MFN status): Congress thinks China should have MFN only if it treats its people better.
Accepting this logic, President Bush last year argued that China had ended martial law, and so deserved a renewal.
This year he can point to…well, the trials of more than 700 dissidents, more political prisoners, repression in Tibet.
Anti-China congressmen have new allies this time around: protectionists.
China's austerity programme last year cut both domestic consumption and (partly through trade restrictions) imports.
America's bilateral deficit with China thus rose by two-thirds, to $10.4 billion, its biggest after the deficits with Japan and Taiwan.
By April 30th Carla Hills, the American trade boss, must decide whether to cite China as an ‘unfair’ trader.
If she does (probably over China's failure to respect copyrights and patents), the opponents of MFN for China will have another weapon in their armoury.
All this is worrying Hong Kong more than anyone.
The British colony, already fretting over whether China will give its nod to an expensive new airport in the territory, can ill afford the economic blow of a change in China's status.
Hong Kong manufacturers employ perhaps 2m workers in southern China, and last year nearly 58% of Hong Kong's total exports consisted of re-exports from China.
Take away China's MFN, and American tariffs on these goods would go up as much as tenfold.
The Hong Kong government guesses that what would follow is a fall of 5–7% in the colony's total trade, and of a third in its rate of GDP growth.
And China?
The Chinese have been inching back towards economic reform.
They have begun micro-devaluations, to help the yuan converge with economic reality.
And they have decided to issue part of their deficit-financing bonds to the market at attractive interest rates, instead of forcing them down the throats of reluctant workers (though the lack of a secondary market may still make them unappetising).
Such reforms would be unthinkable in the chaos after a revocation of MFN.
The Chinese, like most people in Hong Kong, do not believe it will happen.
But, for the first time, they have had their ambassador in Washington speak publicly about the issue.
Mr Bush, not before time, has shaken the complacency of China's leaders.
Ballots and bullets
FROM OUR INDIA CORRESPONDENT
INDIA has long had terrorists who kill and maim to secure secession for various of its 25 states.
They may soon be joined by elected sympathisers.
The prime minister, Chandra Shekhar, is insisting on holding elections to the state assemblies in Punjab and Assam, as well as next month's national parliamentary poll.
Both states are plagued by secessionist militants, and both are at present ruled — with the army's help — directly from Delhi.
Together, they threaten a tear in the fabric of the world's largest democracy.
But terrorism or not, the prime minister says that it is wrong to deprive any state of its elected legislature.
Others, including the Congress Party of Rajiv Gandhi (once, but no more, the ally of Mr Shekhar), disagree.
They say that fair elections in Punjab and Assam are impossible — and so the outcome will be decided by bullets, not ballots.
Moreover, those elected might then declare independence and seek foreign intervention to aid their cause.
Mr Gandhi concludes that there should be no elections in the two states until terrorism is controlled.
Mr Shekhar replies that a flawed election is better than no election.
Beneath this surface of high principle swirls an undercurrent of political opportunism.
Mr Shekhar came to power last November by leading 60-odd defectors out of the ruling Janata Dal, and forming a minority government with the support of Congress.
He is now in danger of political disappearance.
His band of defectors, called the Socialist Janata Dal, cannot hope to win more than a handful of seats in the coming general election.
However, if he can form an alliance with militants elected from Punjab and Assam, he might just hold the balance of power in a hung parliament.
So in wooing militants he is not seeking only to heal the wounds of Punjab and Assam — he is following the one strategy which might sustain him in power.
Mr Gandhi (who, admittedly, has long preached toughness against terrorism) is equally practical.
The coming general election is likely to be a close one — and Punjab and Assam may make the difference between a Congress victory and defeat.
The party is unlikely to win even one of the 13 seats from Punjab, and perhaps only three or four of Assam's 14 seats.
Since the rest of India will go to the polls between May 20th and 26th, Mr Shekhar had wanted Punjab and Assam to vote in that same week.
But local calls for special security will delay voting in the two states until June — after the swearing-in of the new federal government.
If that government is headed by Mr Gandhi, Mr Gandhi could conveniently decide to abort all elections in Punjab and Assam.
Not that that would stop the terrorists from acting pretty well as they pleased.
In large sections of Punjab they extort money (calling it taxation), hold courts, decree what local newspapers should print and even decide what dress schoolchildren should wear.
Hindus have long fled the rural parts of Punjab; now some Sikhs are joining the exodus, disgusted by terrorist excesses that led to 3,787 deaths last year and about 1,500 so far this year.
The militants are split between degrees of intransigence, which could make them vulnerable at the polls.
Some have called for a boycott of the elections, but most are likely to back the faction of the Akali Dal, the Sikh political party, led by a former police officer, Simranjit Singh Mann.
Mr Mann insists that Punjab must be a homeland for the Sikhs, brought into being by a UN-supervised plebiscite.
On some occasions, he suggests an autonomous Punjab loosely federated to India; on others he demands outright independence.
He wants to be friends with America because he thinks only American intervention will secure his aims (he offered in the Gulf war to send 200,000 Sikhs to fight on the American side).
Mr Mann's candidates will include some now in jail for terrorism.
They will almost certainly win.
If he comes to power, he will release most jailed Sikhs — so demoralising the police still further.
This may not seem the best way to promote democracy or the unity of India.
But there are cogent arguments for Mr Shekhar's ‘soft’ approach: negotiating with militants helps fragment their ranks; persuading them to take part in elections draws them into the constitutional process.
Indeed, Mr Mann fears being assassinated by extremist Sikhs who shelter across the border in Pakistan.
The most cynical argument, of course, for the soft approach is that if Mr Mann takes part in the election and triumphantly declares Punjab's independence, the federal government can sack him and resume rule from New Delhi.
But what of Assam, a state very different from Punjab?
The United Liberation Front of Assam is a Marxist outfit operating from the jungles of Myanmar (Burma), and wants an independent country for the Assamese people.
However, the Assamese are in a minority in several parts of the state, outnumbered by various tribes and by immigrants from Bangladesh (hence several bloody clashes between the ULFA and militant tribesmen).
So, however much terror it inspires, it is far from certain that the ULFA will control a majority of Assam's legislators.
Nonetheless, the ULFA has the support of a fair chunk of the population and, more important, is in cahoots with the Asom Gana Parishad, the regional Assamese party that ruled the state till it was sacked last year.
Indeed, information from sacked ministers and sympathisers in the police ensured that the ULFA's leaders all evaded the army crackdown that followed.
The ULFA may now simply oblige the Asom Gana Parishad to accept its nominees as candidates for election.
That may go against the grain for some AGP leaders, who entered politics as advocates of non-violence.
But their main aim is to rid Assam of ‘foreigners’, by which they mean virtually all Bengalis, whether from Bangladesh or not.
In power, they found it legally difficult to identify and expel illegal immigrants, so many now think the ULFA has the more effective solution.
There are no easy solutions, effective or otherwise.
In Assam and Punjab, neither Mr Gandhi nor other national leaders have clear ideas on how to combat electoral sympathy for the terrorists.
Cracking down on terrorists can be a first step, but not the last.
Vietnam and America
Toehold in Hanoi
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
THE Americans have agreed to open a temporary office in Hanoi.
When this was announced on April 20th they stressed that the office's sole purpose will be to investigate the fate of the 2,278 Americans still listed as missing in action in Indochina.
It will not be an embassy in disguise.
And yet the Vietnamese government is hoping.
Might this be the beginning of the end of America's trade embargo against Vietnam, a hint that diplomatic relations will be established between the two countries?
Not yet.
The important reason for the visit to Hanoi by a team under General John Vessey was to find out whether Vietnam will accept a number of conditions attached to normalisation of relations.
Vietnam's foreign minister, Nguyen Co Thach, hemmed and hawed and told reporters that he had ‘not yet accepted and not yet rejected’ the conditions.
To sceptical ears in Washington, this will sound like a diplomatic no.
The Vietnamese government says it is already meeting one condition: helping in the search for any American soldiers who may still be in the country.
It is American demands about Cambodia that it dislikes.
The Americans want Vietnam to press the regime in Cambodia to sign a peace treaty.
America's restrictions on its citizens visiting Vietnam would then be lifted.
America would start to ease its trade embargo when the UN arranges a Cambodian ceasefire; its veto on lending by the World Bank and the IMF would be relaxed once the ceasefire had lasted six months.
Diplomatic relations would have to await a freely elected government in Cambodia.
The American plan is designed to deflect criticism of the Bush administration's Indochina policy.
The American Congress is wary of helping the non-communist resistance in Cambodia, for fear of helping the fierce Khmers Rouges.
American companies are keen to scout out business opportunities in Vietnam.
European directors of the World Bank and IMF, some of whom want to help Vietnam make economic reforms, criticise the American veto.
Japan wants to get on with rebuilding Vietnam.
Vietnam, though, is unsure what to do.
It has declined to press its Cambodian friends to accept a UN peace plan that would involve disarming their army.
The resistance would have to be disarmed too, but documents said to have been captured from the Khmers Rouges give details of plans to hide their troops in the jungle.
However, pragmatists in Hanoi point out that the Vietnamese economy is near to collapse after the end of Soviet subsidies, and any step towards lifting the trade embargo must be taken, however humiliating.
Hanoi conservatives counter by pointing out that what the economy needs most — cash — will not come immediately, and not at all if the ceasefire breaks down.
The Vietnamese and their Cambodian friends say that any peace plan so far offered could easily be subverted by the Khmers Rouges.
Hun Sen, the prime minister of Cambodia, has withdrawn an earlier promise to allow the Khmers Rouges' leaders to stand in any election.
They must be punished before the peace process can begin, he now says.
This gives China an argument for continuing to supply the Khmers Rouges.
‘Khmers Rouges don't listen to anyone; how to persuade them is a very big problem,’ Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former king of Cambodia and one-time captive of the Khmers Rouges, told Taro Nakayama, Japan's foreign minister, this month.
Add this to the illness of Hun Sen, the only member of the Cambodian regime who appears willing to risk his future to give peace a chance, and Cambodian peace looks a long way off.
Normal relations between Vietnam and America must be just as far away.
Malaysia
PAS principles
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN KOTA BHARU
IS KELANTAN, the most conservative of Malaysia's 13 states, waking from its traditional torpor?
Last October the Kelantanese elected a state government dominated by the Parti Islam se-Malaysia (PAS), which opposes the country's ruling United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) and has promised to govern according to the principles of Islam.
In the following months Kelantan was swept by Gulf war fervour, of the anti-American variety.
New-born babies were named Saddam, as was a smart new restaurant in Kota Bharu, the state's capital.
The PAS government called for 17,000 volunteers to go to the aid of Iraq.
Poor organisation and a lack of cash ensured that none left before the war ended.
‘I would have been very happy if as many volunteers as possible had gone,’ says Annuar Musa, the federal government's minister for youth and sport.
Mr Annuar is from Kelantan, which helps explain why, at the tender age of 34, he has the tricky task of preventing PAS from achieving its goals.
Much more rests on Mr Annuar's success than just his career.
UMNO, which has ruled Malaysia continuously since independence, was humiliated in October's elections.
It lost all 39 state-assembly seats and 13 national ones to PAS and its allies, the most important of which is Semangat '46, a breakaway group from UMNO.
Malay unity, according to UMNO doctrine, is the only way for Malays to regain control of an economy unfairly usurped, most Malays believe, by Chinese immigrants and their descendants.
But what PAS is attempting in Kelantan — rule by Islam — threatens Malay unity.
If it succeeds, Malays in other states may want more Islam, strengthening the religious hardliners within UMNO.
In a country where only 52% of the 16m people are Muslim, UMNO moderates recognise that religious zealotry could lead to communal tension and economic decline.
The leader of this threat is Nik Aziz Nik Mat, a humble-mannered man who was elected chief minister of Kelantan after a working life spent teaching in the mosque next to his birthplace.
So far he has proved to be no stern ayatollah.
Gambling has been banned but proposals to ensure Muslims do not drink have been relaxed, and the 5% of the state's population who are Chinese have been reassured that they will get their Tiger beer.
Pre-election talk about cutting off thieves' hands and stoning adulterers is no longer heard.
The government still intends to introduce Islam's sharia law, but only once the people have been ‘educated’, a process expected to take at least three years.
UMNO's hope is that inexperience will be the chief minister's downfall.
‘He has no inkling of what administration is about,’ says an UMNO senator.
With one exception, nor do any of the other PAS members of the state's executive council.
Meanwhile, UMNO is using the tactics that come with experience: Malaysia's prime minister, Dr Mahathir Mohamad, is ostracising the Kelantan chief minister and putting the squeeze on the state's budget, two-fifths of which comes from the federal government.
The constitution guarantees federal payments, but that does not mean they have to be made on time.
Already some state civil servants are receiving their salaries late.
Supplies of heavily-subsidised fertiliser were stopped immediately after the election and a federal development office was opened in Kota Bharu on March 1st.
‘We want to make sure the people know where the money comes from,’ says Mr Annuar.
That does not mean that UMNO's tactics will work.
The Kelantanese are a perverse and parochial bunch —‘like Yorkshiremen’, says one foreign resident.
When they elected PAS, they knew that after 12 lavish years of UMNO rule, development spending might decrease.
But the Kelantanese put Allah and their sultan before cash.
It is Sultan Ismail Petra who probably holds the key to Kelantan's future.
He retains the influence, if not the constitutional power, of a feudal monarch, has little time for Dr Mahathir and is related by marriage to the leader of Semangat '46.
Keen to give the new government of his state a chance to work, he has politely rebuffed Mr Annuar.
Philippines
Danding's run
FROM OUR MANILA CORRESPONDENT
IN THE history of spectacular comebacks few people can rival Eduardo Cojuangco.
When Ferdinand Marcos fled to Hawaii in 1986 after being deposed as president of the Philippines, his close friend Mr Cojuangco went with him.
In November 1989 he decided it was safe to come home, arriving in a private aircraft on a remote airstrip.
Last week Mr Cojuangco came close to getting back on the board of San Miguel, the country's largest firm, which he once controlled.
Next year he may run for president.
Mr Cojuangco comes from one of the families that have long controlled business and political affairs in the Philippines, and to some extent still do.
The president, Corazon Aquino, is a cousin and no doubt would rather not be.
She regards the return of ‘Danding’, his family nickname, with some alarm — understandably so, since Mr Cojuangco is an accomplished and defiantly wealthy player of politics.
Her government sequestered shares in San Miguel held by Mr Cojuangco and his two brothers.
On April 16th the Philippine Supreme Court decided that the three Cojuangcos could vote at a shareholders' meeting on April 19th, although the shares themselves remain sequestered.
The meeting was adjourned to allow the government time to appeal against the Supreme Court decision.
If there is no appeal or if it is rejected, Mr Cojuangco is expected to be voted back to the board.
He has other litigation pending which, if successful, could give his supporters a majority of seats on the board.
It is assumed that Mr Cojuangco would then become chairman of San Miguel, as he was in the Marcos days.
Shares in some 30 other companies have been sequestered and put in the control of the Presidential Commission on Good Government, the body set up by Mrs Aquino to untangle the financial affairs of the Marcos era.
The Supreme Court decision, if it sticks, will be a severe setback to the commission's work.
It is assumed that holders of other sequestered shares will now try to regain their voting rights.
The intricacies of financial litigation are, however, of less interest to the man in the Manila street than the renaissance of Danding Cojuangco.
He is still barred from many corporate towers from which he ran his empire.
But he has told former executives to extract themselves from jobs they managed to find in the Aquino era and hold themselves ready.
He is probably rich enough, with or without San Miguel, to make a serious bid for the presidency.
He is the first of the so-called Marcos cronies to have stood up to the Presidential Commission on Good Government, and as a result is seen as a man of action.
However, he will not run for office if he thinks he could lose.
He will instead seek to be a kingmaker.
There are already about a dozen people with presidential ambitions.
The vice-president, Salvador Laurel, would love to take over from Mrs Aquino, with whom he fell out soon after taking office.
Fidel Ramos, a former army chief and now defence secretary, could point out to voters that he had loyally defended the president in the numerous coup attempts against her.
Juan Ponce Enrile believes he is in with a chance, despite being charged last year with rebellion in connection with an attempted coup.
Oscar Orbos has done well as Mrs Aquino's aide, but at 40 may be too young for the big job.
Ramon Mitra has proved to be a competent Speaker in the House of Representatives.
And so on.
There are no women contenders, unless Imelda Marcos is included: she would be eligible if the government allowed her to return from the United States, and if she survived any legal moves against her.
Mrs Aquino seems prohibited by the constitution from standing again.
But her endorsement should count for a lot.
Quite a few people want to be her friend.
INTERNATIONAL
Brazil's frontier justice
FROM OUR BRAZIL CORRESPONDENT
RIO DE JANEIRO
THERE were several witnesses to the drunken knife-fight in which a factory worker, Jose Vicente Anunciacao, murdered another worker in the north-eastern Brazilian city of Salvador.
That was in mid-April.
The witnesses did not get a chance to give evidence against the killer in court.
Some 40 of the victim's friends dragged Anunciacao from his bed the night after the crime and bludgeoned him to death with bricks and clubs.
That same evening, in a town not far from Salvador, police repelled an assault on the local jail by a mob of 300 people who were planning summary justice for a prisoner accused of raping and murdering an 11-year-old girl.
Police in Salvador noted that in their city, on average, there has been a mob lynching every three days for the last three years.
Brazil, with its 150m people, is a very large country with astonishingly few national institutions that work properly.
The inertia of the justice system (which in some places barely exists) is notorious.
In Rio de Janeiro, for example, a clerks' strike recently paralysed the courts for three months.
Justice in Rio is normally so slow that the effect on law enforcement is almost negligible.
The justice minister, Jarbas Passarinho, acknowledges the surge of bloody crime and popular vengeance in Brazil.
The minister says he feels humiliated by the lynchings, which he attributes to the ‘absence of government’ in many areas.
Sometimes aggrieved and frustrated citizens take matters into their own hands.
Sometimes there is more than that to a lynching, as the work of Lino Jose Durrewald showed.
He is an amateur photographer, living in a bare-knuckles gold-mining boom town called Matupa on the southern rim of the Amazon basin.
He had a video camera on his shoulder last November, when a mob doused three thieves with petrol and looked on as they burned.
‘Who has a revolver here?
He's suffered enough,’ says a voice on the tape.
The victim's voice pleads: ‘Let me die, please…’
Mr Durrewald was so terrified by what he had recorded that he did not circulate his tape until the federal authorities had agreed to protect him.
Federal investigators concluded that the thieves (they were caught in the act) had been shot with revolvers on the order of a local police captain who then, with the help of a town official, instigated the lynching to mask the shooting.
One suspect, having survived the shooting, was burned alive.
This kind of police misbehaviour encourages many Brazilians to believe that the only way they can deal with crime is to fight fire, so to speak, with fire.
Some criminals seem to share that conviction.
In early April two young farm labourers, Valdecir Ferreira and Altair Gomes, narrowly escaped death when a mob 1,500-strong stormed and set fire to the prison where they were being held for the gory knife murder of a taxi-driver, in the state of Parana.
The police managed on this occasion to whisk the two away to a more distant jail.
Next day a newspaper reporter asked the young men if they thought it would have been fair for the crowd to kill them.
‘In a way no, in a way yes,’ Mr Ferreira philosophised.
‘When I saw death coming towards me I began to think it had been a bad business for me to kill that guy.’
Canada
All change
FROM OUR CANADA CORRESPONDENT
OTTAWA
TEN months ago he suffered a heavy setback in constitutional reform.
He then watched separatist parties advance on him from both eastern and western Canada.
Now the prime minister, Brian Mulroney, has regrouped for a counter-attack.
The most significant move in his cabinet reshuffle on April 21st was to shift Joe Clark from external affairs, where he had been nimble and sensible, to be the minister responsible for constitutional affairs — that is, in charge of saving Canadian unity.
First, Mr Clark must roll back Preston Manning's Reform Party, which has spread rapidly through western Canada from its base in Mr Clark's native province of Alberta.
The job is to purge the good-riddance-to-Quebec attitude among Reform Party supporters, and to get backing in the western provinces for a further set of constitutional changes, incorporating Quebec's insistent claim to be recognised as a distinct society.
Then the government must offer the French-speaking Quebeckers an alternative to their demands for political sovereignty, which have grown in volume (if not in clarity) during the past winter.
In effect, Mr Mulroney is asking the man he supplanted as Conservative prime minister to complete the job which, after last year's fiasco about the Meech Lake constitutional reform package, he himself has no longer the credibility to perform.
Shifting Mr Clark prompted two dozen other moves.
Most observers expect Barbara McDougall to be impressive at External Affairs, after her apprenticeship with the immigration portfolio and as a junior finance minister.
The deputy prime minister, Don Mazankowski, will make a more jovial finance minister in the run-up to the next election than Michael Wilson, whose demotion — to a handful of trade and industry posts — has been covered with talk of the undoubted need for Canada to become more competitive in a free-trade area that may soon include Mexico.
Mr Mulroney has balanced Canada's regions in his cabinet, providing significant seats (defence, health and welfare, environment) for his colleagues from Quebec, while pushing forward the Albertans, Messrs Clark, Mazankowski and the leader of the House of Commons, Harvie Andre.
The prime minister's critics say all this is happening too late; that he should have regrouped last autumn, and that the Canadian Titanic may founder even while the ministers switch deckchairs.
But there are signs that the prime minister has got his timing right and is setting a shrewd course.
An opinion poll for the Globe and Mail and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation produced surprising results from Quebec: while most people there strongly demand change, only 10% want full independence and 52% wish their province to remain within Canada.
The winter of commissions that promoted or predicted a sovereign Quebec has faded.
Springtime has also brought the federal Liberal leader, Jean Chrétien, out with a nine-point plan that mixes the acceptable parts of the Meech Lake package with a promise of native self-government and other elements to attract western Canadians.
Mr Clark and Mr Chrétien may indeed contrive to rebuild national unity on a new set of compromises.
The West Indies
Getting together
FIVE million West Indians are proud to share a cricket team.
But when it comes to ruling themselves, they maintain 13 separate governments (while Britain still runs five tiny territories as colonies).
An English-speaking population half the size of Cuba's is scattered over 2,000 miles, from the Bahamas in the Atlantic to Guyana on the American mainland — more still, if you go by way of Belize — complete with more than a dozen governors-general, parliaments, prime ministers, judiciaries and bureaucracies.
West Indians belong to a single post-colonial culture; mainly black, emphatically multiracial, with politics that are on the whole admirably democratic (the big exception, Guyana, has the worst economy too).
Fragmentation makes no sense.
Miniature governments are expensive to run, and ineffective in promoting their people's interests in the face of an indifferent world.
The West Indians could sell tourism, or promote local interests (in sugar, bananas, bauxite and so on) far better together than apart.
The schemes of their economic alliance, Caricom, rarely come to much, because its members buy little from each other, and compete in selling to the outside world.
After a quarter of a century of divided independence, some West Indian rulers are tired of the insignificance to which miniaturisation condemns them.
From the rest of the Americas they hear talk of regional alliances and free trade.
Four microstates in the Eastern Caribbean — Dominica, Grenada, St Lucia and St Vincent — are summoning a constituent assembly to talk about merging their sovereignty.
Caricom is pointing cautiously the same way.
Its leaders have set up a West Indian Commission under the chairmanship of Sir Shridath Ramphal, a former secretary-general of the Commonwealth.
The commissioners are doing what West Indians are best at, and talking to everybody imaginable — including their exile communities in Britain, Canada and the United States — about whether, and if so how, to work more closely together.
They are old enough to remember the early days of independence, when the departing British pushed them towards a pan-Caribbean federation of English-speakers; but the people of Jamaica, the largest potential member (with 2.5m people now), killed that by voting against it in a referendum.
Things have moved on since then.
Even in the tiniest countries, distinctive political habits — not to mention distinct political dynasties — have evolved.
The English-speakers have noticed that five times as many people in the Caribbean share many of their preoccupations, but speak other languages.
The West Indian Commission's report (like practically everything in the Americas) should be ready for the Columbus quincentenary parties in 1992.
It is unlikely to recommend any dramatic merging of its members' sovereignty.
But there is a lot of useful co-operation to be done short of that.
Cuba checks out
THE Cubans have pulled out of what used to be the People's Republic of the Congo, and is now just the Congo Republic.
In July the last 17,000 Cuban soldiers will leave Angola.
That will be the end of Fidel Castro's military adventures in Africa.
A paralysed economy at home, and the substitution of pragmatism for ideology by most Africans, has left his international brigades without a role, having lost (by their own admission) more than 2,000 dead.
The graveside eulogy could be: they came, they suffered, and then they went home.
Soon after he took Havana, in 1960, Mr Castro began stressing Cuba's African cultural heritage, and packed off soldiers to fight there in the name of international socialism.
As early as 1963 Cubans were helping Algeria in a border conflict with Morocco.
Che Guevara, before his demise in a South American jungle, led an ineffectual campaign against the  secessionist Moise Tshombé, in what is now Zaire.
At the start of the 1970s, before the Russians sent fighting men to Africa and with the Americans stuck in Vietnam, Cuba was exporting revolution.
Soon its international pioneers mustered 50,000 troops, from Ethiopia to Guinea-Bissau, supporting such dubious revolutionaries as Idi Amin in Uganda.
Then came Angola's civil war, which began before the Portuguese colonists left in 1975.
The Americans backed one faction, the South Africans crept in behind another.
The new Marxist government was saved only by a Cuban expeditionary force of at least 20,000 men, with logistical back-up from the Soviet Union.
Now the South Africans have gone from Angola, and its government is reforming in ways that quite please the Americans.
Cuba's role is over.
It is not only Africa's Marxists who thank the Cubans.
Along the coast of Angola's Cabinda enclave, and of the Congo to the north of it, lies a rich oilfield.
Western oil companies exploit it: Cuban troops have defended their interests.
That was not what international socialism was for.
Nor did socialist theory predict the fate of Cuba's commander in Angola, General Arnaldo Ochoa Sanchez.
In 1989 he confessed at a show trial to trafficking in gold and ivory, and was shot.
He was probably not guilty.
West Africa
Drumroll
FROM OUR WEST AFRICA CORRESPONDENT
TIME, weariness and creditors are pushing out West Africa's old dictators.
As they go, one of their justifications for behaving dictatorially is starting to look strong.
They tried to build nations; as they depart, so does the idea of nationhood.
War, repression and increasing poverty have driven ethnic groups in upon themselves.
As pluralism creeps in, so does tribal tension.
This is especially dangerous in a region where political frontiers, arbitrarily drawn by old colonial powers, divide the tribes.
After days of fighting between the army and the people in Togo, where President Gnassingbé Eyadéma has ruled for 24 years, a truce was agreed in mid-April.
The president made the agreement with the traditional chiefs of the Bé district of the capital, Lomé, the leaders of the local Ewe people.
They had never liked Mr Eyadéma, who belongs to the Kabye people, because he filled the top army posts with his fellow-Kabyes.
So, when Kabye soldiers shot 26 anti-government Ewes, the Ewe chiefs of Lomé called their people to the sacred grove of Bé, to mourn the dead and plan revenge.
The president, knowing that this foretold more terrible violence, asked the chiefs to call off the protest, thereby depriving his army of a further excuse for slaughter.
The streets fell quiet.
Mr Eyadéma, on national radio, pleaded for an end to ‘the conflict of this tribal nature…’.
It sounded more like a truce than the end of the conflict.
When the Ewe of Bé called for guns, the Kabye said they would find guns too.
Most of the Kabye living in Lomé had been rounded up for protection by the army, saying their houses had been ransacked by the Ewes.
Mr Eyadéma cannot long hold on to power.
When he goes, the Ewes may want to redress the balance.
The consequences could spread across the border.
Back in 1986 the president accused the Ewes of mounting a failed coup against him, claiming that the plot involved Ghana's leader, Flight-Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings; Mr Rawlings is an Ewe on his mother's side (his father was Scottish).
The tribe was divided in 1957, after the British and French dismantled their empires in Africa.
The division has poisoned the neighbouring countries' relations — further complicated because the official language of Ghana is English, that of Togo French.
In Liberia, too, tribal rivalries envenom the bitter civil war.
Neighbouring countries' governments have intervened in favour of their own people.
The French-speaking governments of Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire have backed the rebels, while English-speaking West African governments have sent troops to prevent the rebels taking power.
Other ancient fears are emerging, as West Africa moves out of dictatorship towards something else.
In March Benin held its first multi-party presidential contest, amid north-south rivalries similar to those in neighbouring Togo.
The day after he took office, the newly elected president, Nicéphore Soglo, was rushed to hospital in Paris.
In Benin, many people thought they knew what had happened.
The defeated dictator, Mathieu Kérékou, with the power of a once-great chief, had willed his rival's sickness by sorcery.
Elderly scraps of paper
FROM OUR ISLAM CORRESPONDENT
TWICE before the Kurds have been offered generous deals by Iraq's Baathist government — only to find them snatched away.
It was not just the Iraqis' perfidy that did them down.
In March 1970 Saddam Hussein (the Iraqi regime's strong man, but not yet president) negotiated a deal with the late Mullah Mustafa Barzani that stated: ‘The people of Iraq are made up of two principal nationalities, the Arab nationality and the Kurdish nationality.’
The deal stipulated that Kurdish, along with Arabic, should be a national language.
A Kurdish autonomous area would be established after four years; a Kurd appointed vice-president of Iraq; only Kurdish-speaking officials should serve in the region.
Mutual suspicion killed this agreement.
Soon after signing it Barzani said, ‘It is all a ruse.
I knew it before I even signed.’
A year later a dramatic attempt to assassinate him left a smoke-trail leading back to Mr Hussein.
In 1973 Barzani repudiated his signature.
The Iraqis' suspicions of his links with Iran, Israel and America (he was on the CIA's payroll) were reinforced when, that year, he said: ‘If support were strong enough we could control the Kirkuk oilfield and give it to an American company to operate’.
In 1974 the Iraqis came up with a detailed law for the autonomous area that was far more restrictive than the 1970 agreement and in no way reflected its accommodating spirit.
It provided for Kurdish legislative and executive councils, but real power was retained by the central government in Baghdad.
Within weeks, fighting broke out.
Talks were resumed in 1984 between Saddam Hussein and one of the Kurdish factions, represented by Jalal Talabani.
Because of the pressures of the Iran-Iraq war, then in its fourth year, the Kurds won concessions that went beyond the 1970 agreement.
The autonomy of the Kurdish zone was to be strengthened, in an area expanded to include Kirkuk; there were to be new and free elections to Kurdish councils; the Kurds, having asked for a fair share of oil revenue, would be allotted 25–30% of the total Iraqi budget.
Whether this deal had a more serious chance than the 1970 one of being put into force cannot be known.
Both sides, but particularly the Iraqis, wanted to gain time.
The break came when Turkey's foreign minister arrived in Baghdad to assert that the Kurdish autonomous area with the proposed expanded powers was too autonomous for Turkey's liking, and that the agreement, at that point awaiting signature, should not be implemented.
Dependent on the pipeline through Turkey for its oil exports, Iraq complied with its big neighbour's wish and dropped the Kurdish deal.
It also, the same year, granted Turkey the right of hot pursuit of dissident Turkish Kurds across the frontier.
Fighting between Kurds and Iraqi troops was resumed until, in 1988–89, the insurrection was savagely put down.
Iraq's Shias
God helps, so does Iran
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
KHORRAMSHAHR
WHEN darkness falls, Kalashnikov-toting Iraqi Shia fighters slip home across the border from safe havens in Iran.
In groups of 10 to 30 men, on foot or in jeeps, they cross the barren plain between the frontier and the Tigris, to the Shia cities and the settlements around them.
At night, gunfire echoes across the Shatt al-Arab.
By day, plumes of black smoke rise from the Iraqi side.
Iraq's defeat in Kuwait inflamed the Shias of southern Iraq.
By mid-March, their uprising had been brutally put down by Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard.
But resistance continued.
Iraqi mujaheddin are fighting a guerrilla campaign that appears to be growing in scope and intensity.
From Iranian territory the rebels' radio station, ‘The Voice of Revolutionary Iraq’, claimed that the guerrillas had killed 400 Iraqi soldiers in Basra during the night of April 22nd.
The mujaheddin aim to weaken the Iraqi regime by attacking its defeated and demoralised forces.
Some seek revenge for atrocities committed in suppressing the Shia uprising.
Most of the fighters follow the Iraqi Shia leader, Ayatollah Mohammed Baqr al-Hakim, who heads the coalition called the Supreme Assembly for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq.
The Iraqi government has accused Iran of arming the mujaheddin and sending Iranian Revolutionary Guards, disguised as Iraqis, across the frontier to fight.
The Iranians deny that, but in practice provide safe havens and allow the mujaheddin to come and go.
A stone's throw from the Iraqi border post to the west of Khorramshahr, a senior officer of Iran's Revolutionary Guard vigorously denied that his men, who swarmed around the area, were involved in what he called Iraq's ‘Islamic revolution’— which, he said, would one day (‘God willing’) succeed.
As he spoke, a jeep sped past carrying boxes of ammunition and explosives, and ten Iraqi mujaheddin with Islamic slogans on their headbands.
In the fruit bazaar in Khorramshahr, an Iraqi Shia claimed that he had fought in Basra the previous night.
He said the Iranians were giving their fellow Shias plenty of support, including weapons and transport.
The flow of Shia refugees from Iraq into southern Iran, which peaked in mid-March, has slowed but not ceased.
Hundreds still cross the frontier each day, mainly well away from the main frontier posts controlled by Iraqi troops.
A Swedish Red Cross official, whose team is building a field hospital for refugees near Khorramshahr, reckoned that 30,000–40,000 Iraqis had passed through the town since early March.
He said similar numbers had crossed farther north at Bostan and Mehran, and thousands more at minor crossing points along the rugged frontier.
His estimate that 150,000 Iraqi Shias had sought refuge in Iran is exactly three times the figure given by the Iranian interior minister (although the Iranians have no obvious reason to underestimate the number of refugees).
The first arrivals came with cattle, chickens, cars and trucks.
Those who came later, more hurriedly, often arrived on foot with only their clothes.
But the refugees' horror stories have not changed.
They tell of women murdered by Iraqi soldiers, because husbands or sons had joined the rebellion; of heavy shelling of residential areas; of summary executions of anybody suspected of aiding the rebels; of bodies left lying in the streets.
Iranians, and the Iraqis whom they protect, make huge claims: 500,000 Iraqi Shias slaughtered, and 800,000 hiding in the marshes of southern Iraq — in addition to those who have sought safety in Iran, or in the buffer zone along the Kuwaiti border.
Be that as it may, terrible things clearly happened.
Those who have left their homes are short of food and at risk from foul water.
The summer heat is coming on.
Yet they are too fearful of reprisals to go home.
Even if they do, with water-pipes and power-lines destroyed, conditions there are almost as bad.
‘All the assistance will go to Baghdad and the Sunnis,’ said a Shia refugee.
‘It is another punishment for our rebellion.’
Those Shias who escaped into southern Iran are housed in transit camps around Khorramshahr and the other main points of entry (see map on previous page).
Between Khorramshahr and the Iraqi border, transit camps have been pitched by the Iranian Red Crescent near the battlefield of Shalamcheh, where tens of thousands of Iranians and Iraqis died in the eight-year war between their countries.
Iraqi children play beside the minefields, their deadly contents peeping from the khaki earth.
The hideous transit camps are emptying.
From one in Khorramshahr, 800 refugees have gone to a better, cooler site near Dezful, 200 km (120 miles) north.
But many Iraqis fend for themselves.
People in a bombed-out residential quarter by the Karun river say it is better than living under canvas, although the nearest tap is 500 metres away.
After two and a half months, very little outside aid has reached the refugees in southern Iran.
Most support comes from the Iranian Red Crescent, with donations of food and clothing from private individuals.
Aid officials agree that conditions are far better than for the wretched Kurds stuck on the freezing mountains.
But in July and August the temperature in the south will soar into the hundreds.
Disease is inevitable.
Ayatollah al-Hakim has criticised the Arab world for ignoring the ‘bloodbath’ in the Shia south.
His political group fears that, by making a deal with the Iraqis, the Kurdish leaders may be letting down their comrades.
The Shia movement stands by the agreement made last December in Damascus, when all Iraqi opposition groups made Mr Hussein's overthrow their aim.
‘We could never open talks with such a barbarous regime,’ its spokesmen say.
Liberated ways
THE Kuwaitis are probably still rich enough not to care too much what others think of them, even the Americans.
Yet on April 22nd James Baker, the secretary of state, broke his Arab-Israeli peace-seeking odyssey for a side-trip to Kuwait, where he had stern if diplomatic words with the emir and the crown prince.
He was apparently speaking for George Bush, who had been upset both by the tales of torture in an Amnesty report and by the inadequacy of the Kuwaiti government changes.
Sheikh Saad, the crown prince and prime minister, admitted that there had been abuse of human rights in the early days of the country's liberation but implied that, with the regime back in control, all was well.
This is not what Amnesty says.
Its report, published on April 19th, speaks of hundreds of people, most of them Palestinian, arbitrarily arrested, many tortured and ‘scores’ of people killed by the Kuwaiti armed forces and members of the resistance.
‘These violations are continuing and appear to be largely unchecked,’ it says.
War-crime trials are due to start soon.
The fear is that, even if the random atrocities stop, prisoners will be found guilty on the basis of torture-induced confessions, and executed.
The new government brought in to replace the one that resigned a month ago turns out to be little more than a royal-family reshuffle.
Only five members of the Sabah family are now in the cabinet, instead of seven, but the family (especially the crown prince's branch) retains the top jobs: prime minister, foreign affairs, defence and interior.
The opposition, a diverse and mostly respectable group of people who have been clamouring for a bit of say in the new Kuwait, did not get even a token position.
An election is promised some time next year, but critics are alarmed by the appointment of Sheikh Salem as deputy prime minister and foreign minister; in his old job as interior minister, Sheikh Salem had no time for the regime's opponents.
As a bad sign of liberated times, the opposition tried to call a press conference on the morning of Mr Baker's arrival, only to find it did not have official permission to do so.
Epidemics
The time of cholera
THE sickness will not go away.
Cholera, brewed in the foulness where sewage runs into the drinking water, is an ever-present menace to the poor of Africa and South Asia.
In refugee camps, and where sanitation has been smashed by war (as in Baghdad and Basra) it is the aid-workers' nightmare.
The disease has now reinvaded the American tropics, whence it had been absent since migration from Asia was cut off by the world upheavals of 1914–18.
Peru is the first victim.
Nobody yet knows who took the disease there.
How it spreads is all too obvious, in the filthy shanty-towns to which poor and ignorant countryfolk are driven by misgovernment and terrorism.
One of the few luxuries within their reach is ceviche, a delicious mess of chopped raw fish with onions and lemon; since fish feed near sewers, and are caught by people who wash (if at all) in sewer-water, they are perfect for spreading infection.
As the cholera panic spread, Peru's normally sensible president, Alberto Fujimori, sought to calm it by eating (with his cabinet ministers) a dish of ceviche, on television.
The panic died down, the fish-vendors' business picked up, the cabinet survived — but thousands whose fish was less fresh began to suffer the cholera pangs; explosive diarrhoea and rapid dehydration, which can lead to rapid death.
The result was disastrous for Peru's economy too.
Neighbouring countries closed their borders, both to travellers and to goods that might carry the infection — particularly fish, Peru's speciality.
But the cholera has spread into Ecuador, where tens of thousands of people live in shanty-towns without clean water.
Worse, it was carried across the Andes into Peru's provinces on the upper Amazon, whence it is inexorably moving downstream into Brazil — much richer than Peru, but with even worse social services.
Peru's hospitals and clinics, short of medicines and everything else, managed to defend the people against the worst ravages of the disease.
In past epidemics, the doctors reckoned that one in ten of those infected would die.
In Peru, some 140,000 people have been treated, and more than 1,000 have died.
It is very bad.
It could have been much worse.
Last December a similar outbreak of cholera struck Zambia — another nation crippled by misgovernment and low copper prices.
The number of cases is not recorded; the number of deaths is officially put at 855, and may have been much higher, since diarrhoea is so common there that it often goes unreported.
The authorities closed most schools and institutions, and ran a hygiene campaign on radio and television.
Overseas aid came in from many quarters (including South Africa); the landlocked Zambians brought in health officials from all their neighbours to try to limit the spread of the disease, which nevertheless struck Malawi.
The worst is over: of 130 nursing centres opened in Zambia at the height of the epidemic, the authorities have now closed 80.
Only about 100 patients remain in care.
Given reasonable precautions and a small amount of money, cholera can be effectively fought.
New and simple techniques of rehydration make most deaths — except of the very young and old — preventable.
The onset of infection should be preventable too.
All you need is a clean water-supply and an efficient way of getting rid of human excrement.
Investment is better than cure.
In Bangladesh, where cholera broke out a month ago and may already have infected 30,000 people, they know that perfectly well.
They just can't afford it.
When Saddam smiles, make sure you count his teeth
THAT self-preserver extraordinary, Saddam Hussein, has once again shown that he knows when and how to cut his losses.
This has made him a rather accommodating man for his ex-enemies to deal with.
The rub is the general conviction, based on the man's record, that the same pragmatism, unencumbered by ideology or ethics, that leads him to sign an agreement one day will lead him to renege or cheat on it the next.
Having survived the war, Mr Hussein is riding the post-war humiliations.
His wounded country needs time and international tolerance to recover and, accepting the inevitable, he is buying time with a series of compromises.
The main surprise is his agreement, in principle, that Iraq's 3–5m Kurds should have their own autonomous region.
But there are other signs, or apparent signs, of reasonableness.
Though he denounced the American-led initiative to establish protected enclaves in the north as an infringement of Iraq's sovereignty, he did not intervene as western soldiers got on with what is indeed a mighty infringement.
He has signed an agreement that allows the United Nations to set up and administer humanitarian centres all over his country.
He objected strenuously to the terms of the ceasefire resolution passed by the UN Security Council on April 3rd; but he accepted it (as indeed he had to) and is obeying its terms, more or less.
His regime met the deadline, imposed by the Security Council, to provide a list of its most dangerous arms, including its chemical weapons and ballistic missiles.
The next stage is for the UN secretary-general on May 18th to say how he proposes to set up a commission that will, in the 45 days after that, develop a plan for inspecting and destroying these weapons.
The inspection, when it comes about, could be a first test of Mr Hussein's new smiling face: he is already suspected of cheating, particularly when he denies that he has any biological weapons.
The big switch came on April 24th.
Meeting in Baghdad, Mr Hussein and the Kurdish leaders, all smiles and hugs, agreed on self-rule for the Kurds — and, less plausibly, on democracy for all Iraq.
The tragedy of the mass exodus of Kurds from their towns and villages was caused more by the panic-struck memory of not-long-ago horror than by fresh savagery.
Now Mr Hussein has offered the Kurds the autonomy they had been prepared to fight and die for.
This is vintage Saddam: over the past 21 years he has swung between killing Iraqi Kurds and offering them more self-rule than the Kurds in Turkey, Iran or Syria can dream of.
The history of earlier agreements, with some of the reasons why they collapsed, is summarised on the next page.
The precedents — dark deeds, distrust, broken faith — are not good.
But the negotiators, led by the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan's Jalal Talabani and including the nephew of Masoud Barzani, the leader of the Kurdish Democratic Party, claimed that this time it could all be different.
Their personal safety was guaranteed by an old-fashioned exchange of hostages: senior Iraqis travelled to Arbil to put themselves in Kurdish hands — taking a risk, given Mr Hussein's record in disposing of unwanted colleagues.
The new agreement's principles — there are no details yet — are based on old deals that came to nothing.
The negotiators say there should be an autonomous region for the Kurds in northern Iraq, based on an abortive plan made in 1970, but including the oil city of Kirkuk (oil revenues to be shared).
This is what most of Iraq's Kurds wanted, and until now have been denied.
For good measure, and to show the regime's non-Kurdish opponents that they are not trading democracy for autonomy, the Kurds asked for free elections throughout the country.
Mr Hussein seems ready, at this stage, to go along with the principle of democracy.
The talks will be resumed after Mr Hussein's birthday on April 28th.
The best hope of an autonomy deal surviving — forget about democracy — is the bleakness of the alternative facing Mr Hussein: an ambivalent slab of northern territory run for an indefinite period by foreign armies, and therefore largely outside Iraqi control.
A big American contingent, with growing help from British, French and other troops, is establishing a protected Kurdish enclave in the north-west corner of Iraq; the area, at present about 1,500 square miles (nearly 4,000 square km), may be extended.
The first ‘tent cities’ for a few thousand people have been set up in the plain near Zakho.
But the 700,000 refugees perched on either the Iraqi or the Turkish side of the mountain frontier are slow to be tempted down.
Dependent on relief helicoptered to them by the American armed forces, the mountain refugees are still losing their young and their old to malnutrition, cold and disease.
Before descending to a potential lowland trap they want their long-term safety to be assured.
The Americans talk optimistically of a 60–90 day stint before handing over to notional, yet-to-be-sponsored, UN peacekeepers.
Adding to the refugees' fears were hundreds of Iraqi special police, sauntering peacefully through Zakho with their automatic rifles.
The Americans had demanded that the Iraqi army be withdrawn from the area.
Mr Hussein quickly complied, but sent the police instead — no doubt to signify his continuing sovereignty, as Iraqi policemen do in the buffer strip along the Kuwait border.
The allies, though, insist that the Kurds must not only be safe but be made to feel safe, which means no armed police; British commandos were sent to see them off.
The Turks, no longer under pressure to take the refugees in, question why the Kurds are being coaxed into half-way camps, rather than taken directly all the way to their own abandoned front doors.
Some of their old fears of a Kurdish entity in Iraq faded when they were contemplating only a ‘protected’ enclave, taking in Kurdish towns and villages, and turning to Turkey for succour.
‘When I look I don't see a Kurdish state,’ said Turkey's ambassador to Iraq, ‘just 400,000 miserable people.’
Iraq's rulers hope that an autonomy deal will undercut all plans for enclaves, large or small, within their borders.
The agreement guarantees Kurds their safe return — but who is to be the guarantor of their long-term safety and freedom?
EUROPE
Unwanted guests
FROM OUR BONN CORRESPONDENT
FROM the way Soviet soldiers sometimes carry on, you would think they had not heard there had been a change in Germany.
In several incidents in the eastern part of Germany over the past two months the Russians have continued to act like occupiers — and drawn only mild reproof from the German government.
On April 19th a Soviet sentry shot and wounded a German major who was driving away after peeking through his binoculars at a Soviet ammunition depot.
A similar incident had occurred at the same spot ten days earlier, though nobody was hurt then.
The Germans reckon it wise to keep tabs on the 350,000 or so Russian troops still in the east — guests, as it were— until the end of 1994, when the last one is due to have gone home.
They also believe that they have the right to snoop and that the shootings violate the German-Soviet treaty signed last year.
Yet the German foreign ministry has merely tut-tutted and the defence minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg, has called off the peeking, at least for the moment.
A month earlier the government was startled to learn that the Soviet defence minister, Marshal Dmitri Yazov, had turned up to inspect his troops in the east without telling the Germans.
A protocol slip-up, muttered the men from the German foreign ministry.
They made a bit more fuss soon afterwards when Erich Honecker, the former East German leader, was whisked out of a Soviet military hospital in the east and flown to Moscow, beyond the reach of German prosecutors.
The Russians agreed they were legally at fault.
But they have not handed Mr Honecker back.
He is now at Krasnoyarsk, near Moscow, because officials in the capital told him to move on.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl evidently wants to avoid making still more trouble for Mr Gorbachev, whom many Soviet officers and Communist hard-liners blame for ‘losing’ East Germany.
But the main reason for Germany's mild reaction is that relations between Germans in the east and Russian troops there are already so tense.
Russen raus (‘Russians out!’) has been daubed on barrack walls, Russians have been barred from local shops, some even roughed up.
A public fuss about sovereignty, the government reckons, might inflame feelings even more and touch off really ugly incidents, maybe bloodshed, in an area already smarting from the harsher side of unity, collapsing firms and soaring unemployment.
Hence the resolve in Bonn, so far, to keep quiet and hope the last Soviet soldier goes home before the end of 1994.
France
Rocko and his bothers
FROM OUR PARIS CORRESPONDENT
MICHEL ROCARD, the French prime minister, is in trouble.
Until now he has managed to push bills through the National Assembly, even though his Socialists are in a minority there, by making little deals with the conservatives or with the Communists.
In the past three weeks, Mr Rocard has had to withdraw three bills, at least temporarily, for fear of defeat.
A fourth squeaked through on a single disputed vote.
The bills were no more controversial than usual (save perhaps one on electoral reform in the regions).
Both conservatives and Communists have simply toughened their attitude to the government.
There are several reasons for this.
As a rule, the politicians of the mainstream right fight each other with more zest than they do the Socialists.
Scenting weakness perhaps, they are, for the moment, firing in unison on the Socialists.
On April 10th, the two main conservative parties, the neo-Gaullist Rassemblement pour la République (RPR) and the Union pour la Démocratie Française (UDF), even signed an election pact.
This will almost certainly not erase the loathing Jacques Chirac and Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, the two parties' leaders, feel for each other.
Yet it makes the right more united, on paper, than at any time since it lost office three years ago.
A campaign scandal is threatening to tar several Socialist leaders, including more than one minister and perhaps even President Mitterrand himself.
Though all parties take laundered campaign money, the Socialists have had the ill-luck to get caught in several big recent scandals, and the stupidity to try to cover them up.
Last autumn, a zealous policeman from Marseilles wrote a best-selling exposé of Socialist involvement in a huge embezzlement of public money in south-east France.
Recently, an examining magistrate from Le Mans ordered the seizure of documents from the Paris headquarters of Urbatechnic, a consultancy which serviced the Socialist Party.
When a high-up official tried to take the magistrate in charge off the case, fellow judges said, ‘Enough’.
On April 19th, three local appeal judges ordered the investigation re-started.
Opposition leaders called on the two ministers at the ministry of justice to resign.
Mr Rocard's troubles do not stop there.
As growth in France's economy slows (to an expected 2% this year after two years near 4%), unemployment (currently 9.2% of the workforce) is rising and budget receipts dropping.
For a party whose left wing has long complained that French price stability was won on the backs of the poor, this is a tricky moment.
The finance minister, Pierre Bérégovoy, appeared this week to rule out an increase in either taxation or the budget deficit.
The prime minister, by contrast, is said to be against more spending cuts.
There is inevitable talk of a government reshuffle, but it is unclear what good removing Mr Rocard would do.
Though both his and the president's popularity have dipped, perhaps in a post-Gulf-war let-down, they remain France's most popular politicians.
Some Socialists want a more socialist prime minister, who might extend a hand to the Communists.
Even were a suitable one found, this would not obviously better the party's chances in the general election due two years from now.
Mr Mitterrand repeated last week that he sees no reason to change prime minister ‘for the moment’.
Opposition leaders say they want an early general election.
But they could not be sure of winning and they know perfectly well that Mr Mitterrand has no reason to dissolve parliament so long as there is even a small risk that his party might lose.
Contrary to what the right is claiming, France's government is not paralysed.
Five bills have been passed since the re-opening of parliament on April 2nd.
If Mr Rocard runs into new difficulties, he can always push important bills through with the swift and effective parliamentary guillotine — an arguably undemocratic device he has already used 11 times over the past three years.
Germany
Kohl has been here before
FROM OUR BONN CORRESPONDENT
EVEN his worst foes cannot accuse Helmut Kohl of making life easy for himself.
Two days after his party's thumping defeat on April 21st in the Rhineland-Palatinate state election, the chancellor publicly urged that the federal parliament and government be moved from Bonn to Berlin.
He hedged a bit, saying that the shift might take up to 15 years and that a ministry or two might stay behind.
Still, howls erupted from pro-Bonners, not least within Mr Kohl's Christian Democratic Union and its Bavarian sister party.
The finance minister, Theo Waigel, wailed that he has no money to pay for a move to Berlin, costed (depending on the interest of those doing the sums) at between DM6 billion ($3.4 billion) and DM125 billion.
Mr Waigel is a Bavarian born and bred who has little love for Bonn but none at all for the former Prussian capital.
Why has Mr Kohl spoken out now after keeping quiet ever since last year's German unity treaty, which named Berlin as capital but left open where the government and parliament should be?
The answer is partly that the vote in Rhineland-Palatinate, which lies just below Bonn, is now out of the way; partly that he may regain some of his lost esteem in eastern Germany, where voters are heavily for Berlin; but not least that Mr Kohl has almost always come back fighting after getting a slap in the face.
The result in Rhineland-Palatinate, Mr Kohl's home state, must have hurt.
The Christian Democrats got only 38.7% of the vote, against 45.1% four years ago, and are being booted out of the government for the first time since the state was founded 45 years ago.
The Social Democrats jumped to 44.8% from 38.8% and can choose to form a coalition with either the Greens or the Free Democrats, which is likelier.
There were some local reasons for the defeat.
The Christian Democrats had a colourless premier, who was at odds with a too pushy local party chairman.
The Social Democrats had a strong candidate in Rudolf Scharping, who was leftish enough to keep the backing of the party faithful, calmly reassuring on economic matters to middle-of-the-road voters.
But the clinching reasons were national: alarm at the soaring cost of German unity and fury at the government's recent decision to raise taxes, after it had said last year that it would not.
As a result the Social Democrats are now in government in 10 of Germany's 16 Länder, or states, and have a 37–31 majority in the Bundesrat, the second chamber of the federal parliament.
Small wonder there is now talk in Bonn that the Social Democrats in the Bundesrat may block legislation; that Mr Kohl, though chancellor, may be dumped by his party, as Ludwig Erhard once was; or that his centre-right coalition with the Free Democrats will split, as the centre-left one led by Helmut Schmidt did in 1982.
Dismal though things look for Mr Kohl, they are not as bad as that.
Losing the majority in the Bundesrat, which may veto tax legislation, is a nuisance but not a disaster.
Both Mr Schmidt and his predecessor, Willy Brandt, more than got by as government leaders without a majority in the upper house.
So, most probably and with a bit more wheeling and dealing, can Mr Kohl.
The line-up in the Bundesrat is less clear than it appears.
The Social Democrats are in coalition with the Free Democrats in Hamburg, which has three Bundesrat votes, and with the Christian Democrats in Berlin, which has four.
Blocking Mr Kohl's legislation may be hard to organise in practice.
Nor are the Free Democrats likely to pull out of Mr Kohl's government now, though some of them hope the chance will come to join the Social Democrats in government again after the next general election in 1994.
In 1982 they could desert Mr Schmidt for Mr Kohl because they and the Christian Democrats together had a majority in the Bundestag, the lower house.
By contrast, they and the Social Democrats, who both slumped in last December's general election, do not together have a majority there now.
As for possible Christian Democratic rivals to Mr Kohl, there is only one: Wolfgang Schäuble, the interior minister and a former head of the chancellery.
He is in a wheelchair after being shot last year.
Mr Kohl helps keep Mr Schäuble's stock high by referring to him as a future chancellor, but by ‘future’ he does not mean ‘soon’.
More bad news for Mr Kohl looks almost certain this year.
There are two more state elections to come, in Hamburg on June 2nd and in Bremen on September 29th.
Both are Social Democratic strongholds and Mr Kohl can hope for no respite in either.
Unemployment in eastern Germany is likely to go on rising this year.
Even on Berlin, Mr Kohl may not get his way.
It is not certain that a majority of the parliament will follow him when a free vote is held on the question of where Germany's government should be.
The Bundestag is due to vote on June 20th, the Bundesrat the next day, although the upper house cannot stop the lower one from leaving if it wants to.
All are tough challenges for a chancellor who seems nonetheless determined to battle on.
Kaliningrad
Inside Russia's western enclave
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN KALININGRAD
IT USED to be the east Prussian city of Königsberg, where the philosopher Immanuel Kant worked and died.
Since 1945, when it was annexed from Germany by the Soviet Union, it has been Kaliningrad.
After British wartime bombing and a Soviet programme of Russification, few traces of its 700 years of almost uninterrupted German history remain.
In the city centre the only German buildings still standing are the ruin of the Gothic cathedral and the former stock exchange, which is nowadays the Palace of Culture for Sailors.
Today over 90% of the 900,000 people living in the Kaliningrad region are Russian.
Native Germans were pushed out in 1947, their place taken by immigrants from the east.
Since then traces of the German past have been eradicated.
This westernmost part of the Soviet Union used to draw little attention, except from spies.
It was virtually a fief of the Soviet armed forces.
The navy, in particular, prizes its warm-water ports.
In the spa town of Svetlogorsk old German villas are kept for members of the Baltic Fleet; civilians make do with bleak concrete blocks.
Six weeks ago it was still a closed city.
Some areas, known locally as ‘the zone’, are still closed to civilians.
On country roads between Kaliningrad and Poland the traveller passes fields where MIG fighter aircraft graze.
Although Kaliningrad is part of the Russian Federation, it is set apart.
Hence the sudden doubts about its future.
If Lithuania succeeds in leaving the Soviet Union, Kaliningrad would become an enclave.
That would revive its forbidden or forgotten German history.
Among the people of Kaliningrad, fears about the future abound.
They have been exacerbated by rumours that ethnic Germans from Soviet Asia are to be moved into the Kaliningrad region and allowed to set up an autonomous republic there.
The government in Moscow persistently denies that any such plans exist, but the arrival over the past year of some 20,000 Germans from Kazakhstan has kept the rumours alive.
Attitudes to Germans, though, are mixed, the more so because of an influx of German visitors from the west.
They are the vanguard of an expected wave of Heimattouristen, former residents paying sentimental visits to their former homes.
Tourism is already changing the city in unexpected ways.
In the centre of the town, where the Prussian royal palace used to stand, looms a huge and still unfinished building known as the House of the Soviets.
Now it is to become a hotel, catering mainly for German tourists.
With German unification fresh in the memories of local people, some fear that the ‘eastern territories’ might one day revert to Germany as well.
Germany, all the same, represents a welcome source of foreign investment.
Some German companies have visited Kaliningrad to talk over joint ventures.
Much of their interest can be traced to the persistence of Friedrich Christians, the chairman of the supervisory board of the Deutsche Bank.
Mr Christians, whose own connections with the region go back to his days as a young soldier, believes that Kaliningrad could have a future as a free-trade zone linking east and west.
When he first raised the idea with Mikhail Gorbachev and Edward Shevardnadze in 1987, he got little response.
Since then the Russian Federation has taken the initiative.
Last year the Russian parliament named Kaliningrad one of six potential free-trade zones to be set up within the Federation.
A plan for the free-trade zone has been drawn up by Juri Matochkin, head of the Kaliningrad Technical Institute, and is awaiting approval from Russia's parliament.
It envisages the scrapping of customs duties for imports and exports which help the growth of the local economy.
Foreign investors would be allowed to take long leases on land, and the under-utilised port would be thrown open to foreign traders.
But Mr Matochkin is wary of excessive German influence.
He would like to see German investment ‘diluted by the involvement of other EC countries’.
Ordinary people seem less worried than officials about German influence.
Many pointedly refer to themselves as ‘Königsberger’ and few feel threatened by the influx of German tourists and money into the region.
They say they feel both Russian and central European.
The climate, the landscape and what remains of German architecture all set Kaliningrad somewhat apart from the government in Moscow 600 miles to the east.
A Russian newspaper, the Königsberger Kurier, carries long articles on the town's German culture.
Relations between government and people in Kaliningrad have improved as both sides have come to realise that the region's precarious geographical location calls for new ways of thinking.
One example was the decision not to destroy the ruins of the German cathedral, where Kant is buried.
He may even have the town named after him.
At the back of some people's minds lurk fears that their region may one day become an island universe again.
A glum joke is doing the rounds in Kaliningrad: ‘The pessimists here are learning Lithuanian.
The optimists are learning German.
And the realists are studying the operating instructions of the Kalashnikov machine gun.’
Gorbachev bends to survive
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
THE Soviet Union's quarrelling politicians may have come to a truce, perhaps something more.
Just what the agreement struck this week between Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet president, Boris Yeltsin, the Russian one, and eight other republican leaders will in the end amount to cannot be said.
But some sort of step back from the brink was essential.
Strikes are coming faster.
The economy is collapsing.
The government's response has been to impose an unpopular and inflationary emergency programme.
The Communist Party is splitting under the strain.
The elected parliament is more and more discredited.
Divided by national and political loyalties, the country is being torn apart.
Round-table talks, or a coalition government, or both, look the only way out.
In the first three months of this year, 1.2m man-days were lost to strikes.
That is a lot less than in the same period in 1990 (9m man-days), but this year those first three months also saw a startling 8% fall in GNP.
But, ominously, official trade unions, which formerly supported the government, are now throwing in with independent miners.
One such group, the miners' and steel workers' union, held a two-hour strike in Sverdlovsk, a heavy industrial centre earlier this month.
This was just a warning.
Other workers are copying them.
Russia's prime minister has managed to get two big coal mines back to work, but only after a promise that the Russian republic would get control over the mines.
Miners may now keep 20% of their output to sell at free-market prices.
That could encourage others to strike.
Workers in the oil industry want to sell oil for dollars.
Soon there could be wholesale transfers of industry to republican control.
That would wipe out one of the central government's most important sources of power: control over foreign-currency earnings.
Striking miners have also asked for the resignation of President Gorbachev, the transfer of power to the Council of the Federation (made up of the presidents of the different national republics), and new elections to the Soviet parliament.
Round-table talks, bringing together the heads of the republics and other big players, could lower the tension.
Several members of the Council think this a good idea.
Boris Yeltsin, Russia's president, wants talks between himself, Mr Gorbachev, republican leaders, Communist Party representatives and strike leaders.
The president of Kazakhstan has gone further and demanded the setting up of a coalition government.
Support for a round table is also building among Mr Gorbachev's men.
In June of last year Mr Gorbachev met secretly with leaders of the radical opposition.
This paved the way for the agreement with Mr Yeltsin on the so-called ‘Shatalin plan’ for a truly radical economic reform.
In the end the plan was repudiated by Mr Gorbachev and rejected by the Soviet parliament.
But the ideas in it still form the core of the Russian government's alternative economic plan.
Recently, two of Mr Gorbachev's advisers, Vadim Bakatin, a member of the new National Security Council, and Georgy Shakhnazarov, the president's personal political adviser, have said the president is reconsidering the idea of a coalition.
A round table might set an early date for new parliamentary elections.
It could also stop the central government from imposing half-baked measures in the guise of reform, which is largely what has been happening until now.
The government's anti-crisis programme, unveiled this week (see page 93), is brave in parts but fails to tackle the essential task of privatisation and cannot work without the agreement of republican governments.
The anti-crisis plan will mean further deep cuts in living standards which, if Eastern Europe's experience is anything to go by, will be tolerated only if people support their leaders.
Opinion polls suggest that no more than 10% of the population trusts the Soviet government.
Dissatisfaction will worsen as the full effects of recent massive price rises are felt.
But a round table, if it is to work, will also need the co-operation of conservatives in the Communist Party.
On April 24th, the party's Central Committee met to hang the blame on Mr Gorbachev for the economic mess.
Demands for his resignation as party leader were loud.
Many party officials oppose the ideas, such as privatisation and greater powers for the republics, that a round table would be likely to discuss.
Mr Gorbachev, all the same, managed to beat off this challenge to his leadership.
The party's importance may in any event be dwindling.
At the start of the year, it had seemed to be regaining influence.
According to the head of the party's Moscow branch, it was a late-night row in the party's Politburo that finally persuaded Mr Gorbachev last autumn to ditch the Shatalin plan.
Party people were behind the shadowy ‘committees for national salvation’, on whose behalf Soviet soldiers killed 19 people in the Baltic states early this year.
Now party influence looks as though it is again on the wane.
Last year, 1.8m members left, leaving some 16.5m behind.
In the Russian parliament, some conservative deputies led by Colonel Alexander Rutskoi have split from the main phalanx of the party to support Mr Yeltsin.
Round-table talks may in effect have already begun.
On April 23rd, the day that parliament endorsed the anti-crisis programme, Mr Gorbachev met leaders of nine republics (excluding the six refuseniks — the three Baltic states plus Georgia, Armenia and Moldavia).
What emerged was a declaration broadly supporting the anti-crisis programme, but altering it in several crucial respects.
Some of the price rises, for instance, are to be reconsidered.
The republics are to go ahead with economic-reform plans of their own on the basis of the now changing programme.
The declaration even hinted that the six might really be allowed to leave the Soviet Union.
This is the clearest evidence so far that Mr Gorbachev is willing to change his government's plans in order to share authority with the federation council — the first step towards wider talks.
The strain of Spain
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN MADRID
SPAIN'S five years in the European Community have seemed like a long honeymoon.
It is hard to find Spaniards who will say a word against the venture which symbolises their escape from Francoism and their re-entry into world affairs.
Spain's joining has coincided with a boom in foreign investment.
Economic growth in 1986–90 averaged 4.5% a year.
EC regional aid, worth 2.5 billion ecus ($3 billion) a year to Spain, buys roads, railways and dams.
El Dorado, it seems, has been found in the jungles of Brussels.
As the EC got ready last year for two inter-governmental conferences — on economic and monetary union (EMU) and on political union — Spain sounded like a firm believer in a federal Europe.
By the time the conferences actually began in December, it had realised that real interests were at stake.
Spanish officials from the prime minister, Felipe Gonzalez, on down, have since defended these with a pugnacity that has upset federalists.
The Spanish worry that moving too fast towards monetary union could leave Spain and others behind.
They want at least a five-year transition period before Europe's exchange rates are locked for good.
This is partly because Spain wants ‘economic union’, by which it understands more aid for poorer countries, to be in place to cushion the shock of the monetary sort.
On political union, too, Spain has begun to backslide.
The Spanish opposed the introduction of majority voting in the Council of Ministers on environmental laws unless a special fund was set up to help poorer countries meet EC standards.
One recent EC rule on air pollution would have cost Spain Ptas300 billion ($2.8 billion) to enforce, according to Spanish officials — if it had not used its veto to win a let-out for its factories to continue burning dirty brown coal.
Spain also opposes majority voting on pay-and-conditions laws that could raise payroll costs.
Spain likes those bits of political union that come free: more law-making power for the European Parliament and majority voting on some areas of foreign policy.
The Spanish think the Community should aim for a common defence policy.
Yet Spain's keenest interest is money.
It has taken a closer look at what it pays and what it gets out of its Brussels El Dorado, and it is not happy.
Largely because of Spain, talk about political union also means talk about money.
The EC duns members for a fixed share of their VAT receipts.
High-spending Spaniards pay a lot of VAT, so Spain pays a large whack to Brussels.
As for what it gets in return, Spain gets little farm money, as it has few rich farmers (who get most from Europe's upside-down farm policy) and little research and development money, as it lacks high-class laboratories.
To their surprise, the Spanish have found that they now get back from Brussels scarcely more than they put in.
To remedy this, the Spanish want the EC's regional funds to pay for its hospitals and schools.
More radically, they want automatic subsidies from rich members for poor ones.
Luxembourg, the conference chair, has ignored these ideas in its draft treaty.
Only Greece, Portugal and Ireland support them.
Carlos Westendorp, Spain's new minister for Europe, says that, unless the rich give ground, Spain may block political union.
Even if the two conferences end on schedule before the December 31st, a strain between Spain and its partners will still remain.
Next year the EC has to make a budget plan for the following five years.
Spain is almost certain to repeat its demand for automatic subsidies.
Rows are brewing over Spain's disregard for EC anti-pollution laws.
Tighter rules, many Spaniards think, will cramp economic growth.
Spain has no Green party as such and Spanish politicians are convinced green measures do not win votes.
Applying environmental laws is up to Spain's regional governments, most of whom still think of emission standards as how fast building permits are issued.
Spain's truculence is, in a sense, the proof of its maturity: no longer need it impress fellow members.
The result is by no means negative.
Spain has found one role as champion of the EC's poor countries, another as a bridge-builder between the Community and North Africa.
(It is pushing the idea of a Conference on Security and Cooperation in the Mediterranean.)
Despite the frictions, Spain's marks — European citizenship, which it proposed, and a long transition to EMU — look set to appear in the final treaties.
BRITAIN THIS WEEK
Taxes and tantrums
The government announced that it will replace the poll tax with a council tax.
The property-based tax will sort all 22.2m homes into seven bands according to their market values.
The top rate will be no more than 2.5 times the bottom rate.
The poor will be exempt.
Alas, the poll tax will linger on, in less expensive form, until April 1993.
In an impassioned attack on school standards, delivered on St George's day, the Prince of Wales said something to please almost everyone.
He lambasted self-styled educational experts for ignoring Shakespeare.
He sneered at over-specialised education.
And he lamented the endless squeeze on cash.
The threat of nationwide rail disruption moved nearer when union leaders rejected a ‘final’ 7% pay offer.
Tough times
The chancellor of the exchequer, Norman Lamont, told sceptical businessmen at the annual Institute of Directors' conference that the economy would recover in the second half of the year.
The businessmen accused the government of delivering too much inflation and too few tax cuts.
The sharpest rise in shop sales for almost 12 years encouraged hopes that the worst of the recession is over.
The CBI pointed out that the rush to beat the VAT increases might have encouraged a shopping spree.
The current-account deficit jumped from £227m in February to £432m ($789m) in March.
And a survey by the Association of British Chambers of Commerce argued that a deepening recession is hitting London hardest.
London's public transport is the most expensive in Europe, a survey revealed.
Large European cities charge an average of 71p ($1.22) a journey.
London Regional Transport charges £1.40.
A man who grew 1,659 cannabis plants said he was a ‘heavy smoker’ and claimed that they were all for his own use.
The Court smoked him out and convicted him of supplying the stuff.
Labour Party plans for a national minimum wage were criticised by the AEU engineering union, which fears an erosion of skilled workers' pay differentials.
In one of the bloodiest weeks in its history, the BBC announced that it intended to cut jobs by more than 1,000.
The corporation needs to save £25m ($43m) a year.
More job losses are in the pipeline.
Skoolgate
John Major, the prime minister, dithered before remembering how many O-levels he has (six).
Neil Kinnock, Labour's leader, claimed that everybody remembers that sort of thing and then got his own score wrong.
(He claimed seven, but has eight).
The nation looked on, bemused.
The number of parents sending their children to private schools has risen for the eighth year running, despite a downturn in the economy and an upturn in school fees, the Independent Schools Information Service revealed.
Fifty parents of seven-year-olds forced the head of a Cardiff primary school to suspend testing the national curriculum by threatening to take their custom elsewhere.
They said the children were suffering from exam nerves.
Too much decentralised buying by the National Health Service means the service squanders millions by failing to use bulk orders to get the cheapest prices, the National Audit Office claimed.
Good ideas
The ingenious products singled out by this year's Queen's Awards for Export Achievement included: pop-up greeting cards, a flushable colostomy bag, and a device for putting the froth on the top of canned Guinness.
The poll tax failed to get a mention.
Manchester will be Britain's bid for the Olympic Games in 2000.
John Major waxed philosophical on his career prospects.
‘I'm going to try as hard as I can.
But I'm very young, and if it goes wrong, I can always do something else.’
The £30,927 ($53,000) prize for winning the London Marathon went to a teacher from Siberia.
He earns £5 a month.
Gerald Ratner, chairman and managing director of Britain's biggest jeweller, said that his business success was founded on selling people what they wanted: ‘total crap.’
Detectives in Bristol said that they are having to catch buses to investigate burglaries because of a shortage of police cars.
BRITAIN
Lairds and adders
SHOW an adder to a Scotsman and he will reach for his dirk.
The hills, it seems, are a-slither with these serpents.
They are a menace to farm animals and a threat to children.
It is a rare Scotsman who does not have a tale or two about a favourite pet or a loved relative who has been felled by their fangs.
Show an adder to a southerner and — provided it is a safe distance away — he will deliver a lecture on endangered species.
Unlike rats, adders do not thrive among the motorway flyovers and take-away-kebab houses of metroland.
Tom Langton, a campaigner on behalf of adders, has managed to find only one adder colony in the whole of Greater London.
Novelists are unlikely to imitate Thomas Hardy and dispatch a character with an adder bite.
The House of Lords recently provided the scene for a tussle between Scottish common sense and southern sentimentality.
In January the government, bowing to pressure from the Nature Conservancy Council, amended the Wildlife Protection Act to extend the full protection of the law to the adder.
The Scottish lairds were furious.
They pointed out that adders might be endangered in some parts of the country but they are thriving north of the border.
A succession of warm winters has led to an explosion in the adder population, as the moles and voles they prey upon have got more plentiful.
On April 16th Lord Kimball asked for a clarification of the act.
Is it fair for a stockman or a shepherd to face a £2,000 ($3,390) fine if he harms an adder to protect a child or a farm animal?
Lord Kimball, who has a hill farm in Altnaharra Lairg, Sutherland, says adders are a particular menace to calves, dogs and sheep.
Horses are sensible enough to shy away at the sound of a hiss.
But calves are incurably curious, dogs are irrepressibly aggressive, and sheep are just plain stupid.
Over the past year he has had eight sheep, one suckle-calf and a ram bitten by adders: the ram died.
The spring, he says, is a particularly perilous time in adder-land: as they emerge from hibernation, adders are too groggy to slip away from potential threats but their fangs are filled with several months' worth of venom.
Only last week his daughter's terrier was bitten by one.
Lord Kimball got the clarification he wanted.
In dire emergencies Scotsmen can still reach for their dirks without risking their wallets.
Demography and public spending
Grizzled Albion
NE day, Britain may boast the lowest public spending as a percentage of GDP — and hence the lowest level of taxation — of the seven big economies.
The secret?
Britain became an elderly nation before others started to turn grey.
In the 1980s Britain's public spending fell by more as a percentage of GDP than that of any other big industrial economy: from 47% in 1982 to around 40% last year.
That still left it well ahead of America's 36% and Japan's 33%.
But Britain now has the lowest ratio of spending to GDP in the European Community.
The fall has now been halted by recession.
As Britain grows older, it may be partly reversed.
But other big industrial countries will be ageing even faster.
As they do, budgets for health care and pensions will rise.
In Britain that pressure will be weaker, partly because Britain already has the oldest population among the big OECD countries.
Almost alone among its peers, Britain will see over the next 20 years a small decline in its old-age dependency ratio (the number of people aged over 65 as a proportion of the working population).
Even though the decline will be succeeded by a modest rise, Britain's dependency ratio over the next 40 years should rise by only eight percentage points, to 31%.
Contrast that with the other big six industrial economies, where the ratio will rise by 16 percentage points, to 36%.
A study by the OECD tries to forecast what all these extra grey heads mean for public spending in different countries over the next 40 years, assuming that government policies remain unchanged.
The study assumes that spending on pensions as a proportion of GDP increases in line with countries' old-age dependency ratios.
This implies that average pensions rise in line with wages.
Spending on health services, which the old also use more than younger people, is forecast by multiplying the expected number of people in each age group by the average real spending for each group in 1980.
Assume, for the moment, no increase in the relative price of medical care: the ratio of public spending (excluding debt-interest payments) to GDP will rise by only 8% in Britain, from 33% to 36%.
In the other six big countries, the ratio will grow up to four times as fast.
As a result, by 2028 Britain could have the lowest ratio of public spending to GDP of any big economy.
Britain might do better still.
The OECD's figures assume that pensions rise in line with wages.
But in Britain, unlike some other countries, benefits are linked to prices; so as real wages rise, spending on pensions falls relative to GDP.
In reality, governments are unlikely to allow a gap between living standards of workers and pensioners to get wider for ever.
The quirks of demography have implications for future tax policy.
Make the more realistic assumption that the cost of medical care rises 2% a year faster than prices in general.
In that case, every big country apart from Britain will need to raise its taxes (or cut other spending) by an average of 3% of GDP by 2030 to pay for extra spending on old people and to prevent a rise in the ratio of public debt to GDP.
But Britain, with few more old folk to care for and a debt-to-GDP ratio already on a declining trend, will have room to cut its taxes by 2.2% of GDP.
That is enough to dock 6p off the basic rate of income tax and still keep the public-debt ratio stable.
Forty years may be a long time to wait for a 19p basic rate of tax.
But most of the gap between Britain and other countries opens up within the next 20 years.
The British already pay less tax, relative to GDP, than the citizens of the other main EC countries: 39% of GDP compared with an average of 44% in Germany, France and Italy.
Tim Congdon, chief economist at Gerrard and National, a discount house, believes that by the end of the century that 5% gap could have trebled.
Britain's tax burden could be 15% lower as a share of GDP than the rest of the EC's.
Other European countries will need to start raising taxes sooner to pay for their old people.
But once Britain's economy recovers, he thinks, spending should resume its downward trend, thanks to the Thatcher legacy of expenditure control, falling debt-interest payments and defence cuts.
That sounds too good to be true.
But Mr Congdon's figures and those of the OECD show that Britain has the opportunity to become one of the the lowest-taxed nations in the OECD.
The key word, of course, is ‘opportunity’.
To a Labour government it might provide the opportunity for much more spending on schools, hospitals and roads.
The Major gang
Earning an ism
WILL John Major ever earn an ism after his name, as Margaret Thatcher did?
Never, say the sceptics: the man does not stand for anything.
They ought to look again, for Mr Major is putting together a group of clear-minded, like-minded ministers and advisers, just as Mrs Thatcher did.
In time, the results may look coherent enough to be defined as Majorism.
Either way, they will be different from Thatcherism.
The Major gang is strong on economics.
For some, that means macroeconomics: hence the promotion of Sir Terence Burns to be permanent secretary at the Treasury, after 11 years as the government's chief economic adviser.
Others are much more interested in microeconomic questions, like tax reform, local-government finance and the role of subsidies and benefits.
The top micros are Bill Robinson, who has been brought into the Treasury as a special adviser; and Sarah Hogg, head of Mr Major's policy unit in Downing Street.
They make a powerful trio.
The Treasury's writ runs as wide as ever, so Sir Terence will be able to use its top job to steer the priorities and ideas of the whole of Whitehall.
Mr Robinson could have a wide brief as well, so long as he keeps the chancellor's confidence.
And Mrs Hogg has more of Mr Major's ear than almost anybody else in government.
What will they do with their power?
None of them is temperamentally inclined to be an activist on macroeconomic policy.
Unemployment is rising, but inflation is falling and interest rates with it, so the economy will pick up in due course.
With the pound locked into the European Monetary System, the most and the least the government can do is ensure that nominal demand does not collapse.
If ministers itch to do more, they will be told to calm down.
Sir Terence, in particular, is still furious that inflation bounced back into double figures, after all the pain of getting it below 5% in the mid-1980s, and ascribes it to the delay in joining the EMS.
He can count himself lucky not to have been blamed for the bounce by his political masters.
A hands-off approach to macroeconomic management has the great virtue of leaving both hands free for microeconomic tasks.
Mr Major's advisers share a broad preference for fiscal neutrality — ie, not using tax breaks to favour certain kinds of economic activity and to penalise others.
Top of their wish-list would be the scrapping of tax benefits for housing.
Company cars are another favourite target.
Mr Lamont and Mr Major listen to these arguments; Mrs Thatcher would not touch them.
The other big difference in the Major approach is at the bottom of the income scale.
Both Mrs Hogg and Mr Robinson are seriously interested in the way the cake is cut, not just in how fast it can expand.
They would like government to do more for the weakest and the poorest, by direct transfers of income (witness the rise in child benefit) as well as by boosting educational standards.
But they will be quick to point out to ministers that ‘helping the poorest’ can often lead to poverty and unemployment traps, as any state benefit aimed just at low-income households will discourage them from earning more or getting a job if it is withdrawn as soon as they do so.
Yet universal payments (like child benefit) are expensive, so the Treasury dislikes them.
That points to a possible cause of friction within the Major gang.
The prime minister and his advisers will sometimes want to do things that cost a lot of money; the Treasury will want to rein back.
The sense of harmony and purpose among Mr Major's advisers is bound to be tested before long.
Just as well they have something else in common: they have known each other a long time, and are all good friends.
With one bound, he was…
John Major has escaped the toils of the poll tax.
He may soon be caught in other local-government traps
THERE is something to be said for a government creating horrible problems for itself.
The roar of applause when it later rids itself of them may boost its popularity at a critical moment.
The announcement of a replacement for the poll tax on April 23rd improves the government's prospects in the council elections on May 2nd.
The proposed council tax, which offers something to each lobby, is a slick political trick.
But the proposals also create a host of future problems by promising to tinker with local government's structure.
By returning to a property tax, the government answered the principal objection to the poll tax: its unfairness.
The council tax is a sort-of-wealth-tax, with bills determined partly by the value of the biggest asset most people own and partly by how much each council spends.
Owners of second homes will pay half the full rate on them.
On the other hand, the council tax is also a bit-of-a-poll-tax.
Single people get a 25% discount under the council tax.
This answers Tory demands that the tax should be related to the amount that a household uses local services.
So widows in large houses (who always feature prominently in arguments about property taxes) will not do as badly as under the rates.
Some Tory MPs feel the discount is not large enough: after consultation, it may be increased.
Central to the tax are the bands into which homes of different value will be sorted.
These are also designed with an eye to reassuring those who did well out of the switch from rates to poll tax.
It ensures that the range of possible bills is limited.
The top bills will be only 2.5 times as much as the lowest bills, and the highest band is for houses worth over £160,000 ($274,000).
So the 46% of houses in Barnet that the government reckons will be in the top band will all pay the same amount, irrespective of their value.
Barnet is unusual: as the table shows, most households in the country will fall conveniently into the five lowest bands.
In general, the tax will shift the burden towards the south's richer homes and away from the north, because the government intends to tailor its central grants to equalise, roughly, the tax on like houses under like-spending councils.
In a place like Kingston-upon-Hull in Humberside, 68% of homes are in the lowest (£40,000 and under) band, and fewer than 1% are in either of the top two bands (more than £120,000).
This is politics, not mathematics: Tory marginal seats tend to be in poorer areas — particularly in the north-west — with cheaper houses.
There are uncomfortable exceptions, though.
In Bath (Chris Patten, party chairman, majority 1,412) the biggest chunk of homes is in the top band.
Those with two adults will pay £682, compared with a £489 poll tax.
Sceptics hunting for flaws in the tax have quickly spotted one potential problem.
The banding system looks neat and simple but could lead to a mess.
A taxpayer in Lambeth whose house was valued at £121,000, for instance, would save £111 if it were valued instead at £119,000; so councils could find themselves swamped with appeals.
The proposed reform leaves councils no more ‘accountable’ than before.
Those who are not responsible for raising taxes are not likely to be responsible about spending them.
Under the poll tax, councils raise 11% of the money they spend.
That proportion will not change under the new system, and council budgets will still be capped.
So these proposals continue the centralisation intensified in the 1980s.
The new snare
The government has learnt the foolishness of meddling with local taxation.
Now, with reckless abandon, it promises to meddle with local-government structure.
It wants to set up a local-government commission to review the structure of local government across England.
It believes that one-tier authorities would be better than the two-tier authorities that exist everywhere except the metropolitan areas.
This is a quiet coup for the Association of District Councils, which has been lobbying hard against the counties ever since the districts lost power to the counties in the 1974 reforms.
Although the ADC has a Tory majority, most of the work is done by the ‘Big 11’(cities like Swansea and Hull), of which six are Labour, two Tory and the rest hung.
The government consultation paper insists that it is not gunning specifically for county or for district councils.
But since the thrust of the argument is for grass-roots power and the paper refers implicitly to unpopular counties created by the 1974 reforms, the districts are less worried than the counties that contain them.
Already there are mutterings in the shires.
Councillors have their pride, their power and their perks, and do not like the idea of being abolished.
Most of those under threat are Tories, since the bulk of both county and district councils are Tory-run.
So the government risks a revolt by those rural stalwarts who do much of the legwork during general elections, as well as years of ill-mannered squabbles as the two sets of councillors argue their worth to the commission.
The government says that the introduction of single-tier authorities will save money.
It might; but a forthcoming study by the University of Birmingham's Institute for Local Government on the abolition of the West Midlands Metropolitan County Council in 1985 suggests that it will not necessarily prove cheaper.
The study found no savings resulted from the change, and some spending increased.
In some areas of council responsibility, there are clear economies of scale.
Take food hygiene: it is cheaper for a large council to set up a laboratory to service several districts than for each of the districts to have its own.
Other services — like the police and fire brigade — do not make administrative sense in smaller areas.
So ad hoc multi-council boards, run by officials accountable to nobody in particular, had to be set up in the metropolitan areas after 1985.
Since those officials are not under the thumb of councillors worried about rates increases, they are less likely to be frugal.
Critics fear that ad hoc boards, neither accountable nor thrifty, will proliferate.
The government believes that people will love it for abolishing counties like Humberside, which proud Yorkshiremen have always refused to acknowledge.
This is optimistic.
Before 1994, the suggested date for introducing reforms, it may decide that the change is not worth the political and administrative pain.
The new men at work
IT WAS Julian Critchley — genial man of letters, biographer of Michael Heseltine, wholesale supplier of parliamentary anecdotes (repeat orders a speciality) and also a Tory MP — who noted that ‘politicians are happiest when talking, at their most miserable when making up their minds.’
His biographee would dissent; Mr Heseltine believes in politicians as shirt-sleeved doers.
For the cabinet as a whole, though, talking about the need to replace or reform the poll tax proved easier than finally deciding on its replacement.
The story of how ministers did so provides the first substantial evidence about how John Major's government is functioning behind closed doors.
The first point is that both ministers and officials involved in the review stress the lack of drama, tantrum-throwing and brinkmanship.
Instead, it was ‘collegiate’ and ‘a classic example of old-fashioned cabinet government’.
It suits the powers-that-be to draw a distinction between the livid chiaroscuro of Mrs Thatcher's reign and the plain, cool daylight of the current regime.
And, though there is truth here, there is propaganda too.
Take the first ingredient, without which this week's announcement about a local property tax would have been impossible — the £4 billion ($7 billion) switch to value-added tax (VAT) in the Budget.
Mr Major had been taking private soundings about such a move before Christmas.
Some Ministers told him the switch should be to income tax; others, including Kenneth Baker, the home secretary, suggested VAT.
In February the switch — known to insiders as ‘Big Bertha’— was agreed upon by Norman Lamont, the chancellor and by Mr Major.
Just the two of them: nobody else was involved.
The cabinet was informed as late as possible; even ministers on the poll-tax review committee were not told what was coming.
So much for traditional cabinet government.
Before the budget, because of the problem of trying to find money to cut the local bills, little progress had been made.
Mr Major and Mr Heseltine had both agreed that the amount of money raised by local government had to be slashed; that capping of council spending should stay; and that some form of property tax was inevitable.
The government's much-vaunted desire to consult operated only within those limits.
A local income tax, for instance, was never considered.
After the budget, despite Mr Lamont's coup, potentially dangerous strains remained.
Mr Heseltine was working for a 50:50 hybrid tax, split between property and head-tax.
The Treasury, which other departments felt had been engaging in the review only half-heartedly until mid-March (and which was urged to take a greater role by Mr Major), was damned if it was going to see its VAT switch spent on anything that could be tagged ‘son of poll tax’.
By contrast, the Scottish Tories had been lobbying to keep the maximum personal element.
Mr Major used his new policy adviser, Sarah Hogg, to ensure that Downing Street was putting its own ideas in to the review.
More important, he made it his priority to ensure that the departments worked together, not against each other.
Ministers who might have resented a particular proposal were seen by Mr Major privately before the relevant meeting and ‘squared’.
Early on, he asked John Wakeham, his one-time boss as chief whip, but now energy secretary, to attend meetings of the review committee, acting as an independent source of party-wise political advice and, later, as a fixer.
One minister, asked to distinguish between the way Mr Major led the review and the way Mrs Thatcher might have behaved, says: ‘He interfered more — and more often — and earlier — than she would have done.’
But that interference may well have kept the review on course, as the clock ticked on and the derision from Labour grew louder.
One example is the way that Mr Heseltine ungrudgingly retreated from his 50:50 preference.
This was critical, since it took the new tax from being a hybrid to being a loosely-disguised property tax.
Although there is some ill-feeling in Whitehall about the way the environment team leaked some (nutty) ideas, Mr Heseltine's behaviour in committee is praised by other ministers.
Every one of many variations of the proposed tax went from the Treasury team — Mr Lamont; Sir Terence Burns, shortly to become permanent secretary there; and Andrew Edwards, its local-government guru — to be crunched through the environment department's computer.
This partly explains why the review took the time it did, since the computer can spend nearly four days running a full set of figures.
But it produced critical evidence about how different designs of tax would hit marginal seats and heartland Tory ones.
The result is a tax designed to raise cash from better-off voters in safe Tory areas and push it towards the marginals.
The final breakthroughs were over such devilish details as the spread of the banding system for valuing houses, and the extent of exemptions.
They came, not during committee meetings in Whitehall, but after informal chats at ministers' houses during the Easter holiday.
If the tax was to be announced before the May 2nd local elections, time was getting short.
Mr Major used Mr Wakeham and the chief whip, Richard Ryder, as go-betweens, shuffling between Mr Heseltine and Downing Street, to settle the details.
On April 5th the Treasury team started its final burst of work — the last details to be sorted out were on the exemptions from the tax, and the scrapping of the hated poll-tax register.
On April 10th the Scottish secretary, Ian Lang, returned to London believing he could sell a modified property tax to his suspicious party.
On April 15th the new tax was in shape.
This thumbnail sketch of a complicated web of negotiations says some unexpected things about Mr Major.
Far from being a natural cabinet chairman, he intervened and interfered repeatedly — mostly to speed up decision-making.
Just as under Mrs Thatcher, the crucial choices were decided in small committees: although there were open discussions at full cabinet meetings during March, there is no evidence that they changed a jot or tittle of the tax.
And Mr Major happily used freelance fixers like Mr Wakeham to defuse potentially difficult committee meetings.
The new style is becoming clearer.
It is different from  hers , but not quite so different as some suggest.
Regional policy
Uncollected Eurocash
THE government is now in the curious position of urging 30 local authorities to spend more.
If they do not, Britain will be unable to claim money waiting for it in Brussels.
The European Regional Development Fund gives money to depressed areas, with projects financed 50–50 by the ERDF and the local authority.
Britain has been allocated 1.2 billion ecus (£830m) of ERDF money for 1988–91.
About 700m ecus are still waiting to be collected, partly because spending tends to bunch at the end of a period and partly because Britain's system of local-authority finance means that some councils cannot use the money.
Unlike other countries, Britain does not allow the money to go straight to the local authorities to which it has been allocated.
Because the Treasury wants to have the final say on all public spending, however financed, each year's chunk of ERDF cash is merely regarded as one source of finance for the total that authorities are permitted to spend each year.
The accounting is one thing: getting hold of the money is another.
Britain can collect it from Brussels only when the local authorities to which the money was allocated send in bills to show it has been appropriately spent.
Because of those government controls on local-authority spending, however, some councils do not have enough money to stump up their 50% contribution.
So in West Cumbria none of the £5m ($8.5m) of ERDF money allocated over the three years has been spent.
In order that the cash can be claimed from Brussels before December 31st, the end of the EC's financial year, the Treasury will be giving local authorities in West Cumbria, and other councils in a similar fix, an extra capital-spending allocation.
Moreover, because of yet another Treasury safeguard to make sure that EC money does not sneak past its scrutiny of public spending, local authorities are not allowed to make up their own 50% by getting contributions from businesses or charities.
So the kind of joint ventures which the EC — and in theory the British government — has been encouraging are not allowed.
In Newcastle, for example, the government forbade the use of private-sector money with ERDF money to set up a training centre.
In 1989 Britain promised to reform its system of dealing with receipts from Brussels to lighten the Treasury's touch somewhat.
Nothing has been done.
The commissioner with responsibility for regional development, Bruce Millan, met Peter Lilley, the trade and industry secretary, Ian Lang, the secretary of state for Scotland, and David Hunt, the secretary of state for Wales on April 25th, partly in order to try to persuade them to sort things out.
How often does Brussels have to beg countries to take money from it?
Hail the Gaels
GAELIC is the ancient language of Northern Ireland's Catholics, the language the IRA likes to use to splatter its slogans around the province.
But Gaelic is also the ancient language of the many Northern Irish Protestants whose families came from Scotland.
A recent revival of enthusiasm for Gaelic among both lots of people is giving them a rare common interest.
In the 1911 census, the most recent complete record of Gaelic-speaking, only 2% of the population said they could speak the language.
In a 1987 survey, though, 17% of those under 25 claimed some knowledge of Gaelic.
The first sign of the boom in Gaelic came when a Gaelic-speaking school on Belfast's Falls Road — the Bunscoil — saw the number of applicants soar.
It now has 450 pupils.
Another three primary schools have sprung up, and there are 18 Gaelic-medium nurseries.
For adults, there are now around 60 Gaelic night-classes in West Belfast.
The BBC is encouraging the fashion by offering an annual prize for the best Gaelic radio play.
The spread of Gaelic among Protestants is slower but more significant, given that its nationalist associations have generally led Protestants to view the language with suspicion.
The Maze prison records several Protestants among its 122 enrolments for Gaelic classes.
Ballyhackamore, a Protestant enclave in east Belfast, has mustered enough enthusiasts for a class.
A class in County Down has a Presbyterian parson among its pupils.
Ian Adamson, one of the keenest Protestant Gaelic speakers, who inherited his interest from a Gaelic-speaking great-grandmother from western Scotland, claims that in the 19th century, when Catholics were turning from Gaelic to English, Protestants helped to keep the language alive.
The first books to be printed in Ireland were published by the Anglican Church of Ireland: a Catechism and a Book of Common Prayer in Gaelic.
BUSINESS
The flawed vision of Edzard Reuter
BONN
With a series of bold acquisitions in the 1980s, Edzard Reuter turned Daimler-Benz into one of the world's biggest industrial conglomerates.
His strategy is not working
THROUGHOUT the mid-1980s a fierce battle raged for control of Daimler-Benz, the luxury-car maker which seemed to epitomise the industrial prowess of a resurgent West Germany.
On one side was Werner Breitschwerdt, Daimler's chief executive, a plodding engineer committed to keeping the company focused on the manufacture of its superbly engineered cars.
On the other side were Alfred Herrhausen, the dynamic boss of Deutsche Bank, Germany's biggest bank and Daimler's leading shareholder, and Herrhausen's candidate for chief executive, the visionary Edzard Reuter, son of a famous German politician.
Herrhausen and Mr Reuter wanted to accelerate Daimler's hesitant steps towards diversification, turning it into a huge manufacturing conglomerate capable of leading German industry to a high-tech future and big enough to compete with the giants of American and Japanese industry.
In 1987 this exciting duo triumphed.
The dull Mr Breitschwerdt disappeared into early retirement and Mr Reuter took his place.
Now it looks as if the wrong side won.
Herrhausen is dead, killed by a terrorist bomb in 1989.
Mr Reuter struggles on without his support to weld a group of large, still separate companies into a coherent whole.
This is not proving easy.
Morale in many parts of the Daimler empire has plummeted.
Ever fond of the grand gesture, Mr Reuter began much-ballyhooed collaboration talks with Japan's Mitsubishi family of companies early last year, but these have so far yielded little.
Profits have stagnated.
On April 22nd Daimler announced a 5% rise in sales to DM85.5 billion ($53 billion) in 1990, though operating profits fell by 10%; the company had a 6% rise in net earnings, to DM1.8 billion, only because of a lower tax bill.
The new fields into which Mr Reuter has taken the group since the mid-1980s — aerospace, electricals and financial services — are either yielding little or are deep in the red.
Analysts estimate that 90% of the firm's profit still comes from the sale of Mercedes cars, its original business.
It is still too early to judge the strategy, say Mr Reuter's supporters within the company.
The fruits of diversification will be clear even to the most sceptical observers in another few years, they claim, when the company's new subsidiaries will help Mercedes build still better cars while the company's ability to throw resources into fast-growing high-tech areas will give it an edge in those markets.
Maybe.
But, thanks both to Daimler's bad luck and bad judgment, the odds against this ever happening are high — and getting higher.
Take the plight of Deutsche Aerospace, the company Daimler has cobbled together out of two aircraft makers, MBB and Dornier, and MTU, an engine maker.
For decades Bavaria-based MBB, with its odd mix of brilliant ‘ideas men’ and bureaucrats ferreting for state subsidies, was a notoriously hard company to run.
It is also an old rival of Dornier.
Thus, even in ideal circumstances, merging these two companies was bound to be tricky.
But reduced East-West tension has made this even more difficult, clobbering defence sales, which account for roughly half of Deutsche Aerospace's revenues.
The company's intake of new orders shrank by 43% last year.
There will be much worse to come if the German government decides, as it may, to pull out of the European Fighter Aircraft project on which Deutsche Aerospace was counting for future revenues.
That puts more pressure on Jürgen Schrempp, Deutsche Aerospace's tough boss, to expand and improve his civilian operations.
He has already signed joint-venture deals with France's Aerospatiale to make helicopters and with America's Pratt & Whitney to make aero-engines, and he thinks that his company is now big enough to strike more such international agreements.
But Mr Schrempp is also running into snags.
The German government, forced to cover currency losses on Deutsche Aerospace's work for Airbus, the pan-European aircraft consortium of which it is a member, is reluctant to put up yet more taxpayers' money to back Mr Schrempp's ambitious and controversial scheme to build a 130-seat regional airliner outside the Airbus consortium.
This plan has already alarmed the other Airbus partners.
The company is also squabbling with state governments about how it should distribute its work, and jobs, within Germany.
Not least, Mr Schrempp's empire-building has ruffled feathers inside Daimler itself.
Perhaps least enchanted with Mr Schrempp are managers at AEG, the electrical-equipment manufacturer which was Daimler's biggest acquisition.
AEG has had to hand over to Deutsche Aerospace its lucrative aerospace and defence division, its second-largest unit.
The company has also lost promising operations to other bits of Daimler.
Its research institutes in Ulm, Berlin and Frankfurt have been put under the centralised control of the Daimler holding company in Stuttgart.
Part of its data-processing and marketing activities have been gobbled up by DEBIS, Daimler's new division offering financial and information services.
Small wonder that Heinz Dürr, AEG's long-serving chief executive, left at the end of last year to take on the unglamorous job of running Germany's state-owned railway company.
His successor, Ernst Georg Stöckl, will have to do even more pruning because AEG lost DM205m last year.
First on the block may be the money-losing Olympia office-equipment division.
Daimler's inability to turn around AEG since buying it in 1985, after AEG had already itself failed to stem heavy losses, has damaged morale at the company.
Spirits are also low at Munich-based MBB, where many employees resent being directed from Stuttgart.
Conversely, managers in Stuttgart at Mercedes-Benz, Daimler's car-making heartland, are just as resentful of watching firms like MBB and AEG lose most of the profits they earn.
Mercedes-Benz's proud engineers also loathe being lumped in with companies making everything from washing machines to weapons.
Such resentments are beginning to take a visible toll on the company.
Mercedes's offices have recently been searched by state prosecutors, acting on anonymous tips that Daimler illegally exported weapons-carriers to Iraq and that a senior manager had evaded tax.
Daimler denies any wrongdoing.
But what bothers the company's bosses is that the tip-offs contained enough circumstantial detail to indicate the source was a fairly high-ranking employee, perhaps an indication that disaffection with Mr Reuter's strategy is spreading.
Whatever the truth, the unwelcome publicity could not come at a worse time for Mercedes — just as it is launching its new top-of-the-range ‘S’ model after 12 years of development.
With the latest ‘S’ series, and other new models either recently introduced or about to be, Mercedes aims to head off the challenge posed by a stream of new models from an arch-rival that has stuck to its last, BMW, and the looming threat posed by a fleet of new Japanese luxury models.
One of the few bright spots at Daimler is DEBIS, the financial-services operation which has turned in a modest profit on sales of DM3.8 billion since being set up last year.
Much of its business still comes from within Daimler itself.
But it may be the one part of Daimler that is able to do a deal with some of the Mitsubishi companies, which are eager for a way into trading, finance and other service businesses in Europe.
Daimler's recent decision to take a 10% stake in Metallgesellschaft, a leading German supplier of environmental technology including vehicle-parts recycling, also makes some sense.
This was the kind of diversification Daimler should have pursued all along, rather than chasing grandiose ‘synergies’ which probably do not exist.
Mr Reuter remains unrepentant, at least in public.
And Deutsche Bank continues to back him, despite Herrhausen's death.
But there are hints that the bank would like to surrender its high-profile seat at the top of the company's ruling supervisory board, probably when Mr Reuter steps down in two or three years.
By then Mr Reuter's pleas for more time will be history.
Daimler will either be a monument to his original vision, or just another lame duck.
Asia's airlines
Beautiful young things
BANGKOK
THIS weekend is the start of Golden Week, the traditional kick-off for Japan's holiday season.
But any residents of Tokyo who tried to make a last-minute airline booking were probably disappointed.
In Bangkok non-stop flights to Europe are also full up.
Asian airports are almost as congested as ever.
The airlines that fly between them were hit much less severely than American and European rivals by the slump in air travel during the Gulf war and they are bouncing back more quickly.
Though Asian airlines experienced some Gulf-war decline in traffic, they escaped the near-collapse suffered by many American and European carriers.
Australia's Qantas, hammered by a 50% drop in business on its vital long-haul routes, was the one exception.
But Japan Air Lines (JAL) experienced only a 3.5% drop in the number of passengers carried on international routes in the year to March 31st.
Analysts expect Singapore Airlines, the world's most profitable airline, to announce a healthy net profit of just over S$800m ($450m) for the same fiscal year, down from S$1.2 billion the previous year but still not bad.
Taiwan's China Airlines boasts that 80% of its seats are filled (many American carriers have to settle for 60%).
Asian airlines have two basic advantages over their western competitors.
First, air traffic in the Asia-Pacific region is growing at a faster rate than anywhere else in the world.
Before the Gulf war the International Civil Aviation Organisation forecast that international scheduled-passenger traffic in the region would grow by 10.5% a year to the end of the century, compared with global growth of only 6.7%.
The war and a slowdown in the global economy may trim this forecast, but only slightly.
The second factor is more important: Asian airlines remain untouched by the deregulation that has swept America and is beginning to inject new competition into Europe.
The Manila-based Orient Airlines Association is an informal but effective cartel that fixes fares and shares out business.
The main aim of the region's governments, which control or own many of the airlines, is to keep international fares high enough to subsidise low domestic fares.
The busiest routes are carved up by bilateral deals between the national airlines at either end.
Before the Gulf war, the cartel sanctioned two fare increases, which have yet to be reversed despite the subsequent fall in fuel prices.
Such coddling has made Asian airlines profitable, but inefficient.
Their least-profitable routes are those across the Pacific, where they are forced to compete with American airlines, for which these routes are the most lucrative.
The biggest threat to this cosy world comes from within.
Governments in the fastest-growing markets in East Asia are tentatively encouraging domestic competitors.
All Nippon Airways was first allowed to fly internationally five years ago and is now a serious rival to JAL on some routes.
Kumho, a thrusting South Korean conglomerate that is determined eventually to challenge Samsung and Daewoo, started a carrier called Asiana three years ago.
Despite losses of 46 billion won ($65m) last year, Asiana still aims to have a sizeable fleet of 68 aircraft by 1999.
In Taiwan, Eva Airlines is expected to start international flights in July.
Singapore Airlines and Hong Kong's Cathay Pacific, two of the biggest Asian carriers, cannot be forced to fly loss-making domestic routes.
Webs of bilateral deals protect them from the full brunt of competition.
From their secure bases — at least, in Cathay's case, until China takes over Hong Kong in 1997 — they are expanding aggressively, to prepare for the day when they will have to compete.
Despite the hiccup of the Gulf war, Cathay has not cancelled any of the 17 aircraft it has ordered or any of its options on another 29.
Singapore's plans to update and expand its fleet are even more ambitious.
It has 36 aircraft on order and 34 under option.
When these are delivered, it will sell most of the 43 aircraft it now owns to keep its fleet the youngest — and hence cheapest to maintain — in the world.
The average age of Singapore Airlines' aircraft is only four years and nine months.
Ah, youth.
The cost of the car
Road space is scarce and valuable.
Usually it is also free.
The results are smog and traffic jams, which proper pricing would discourage
THE past few decades have seen an astonishing growth in road traffic almost everywhere.
In Britain, for example, the average daily traffic per mile of road grew by 34% between 1978 and 1988, and by 52% on motorways.
Now governments and cities are starting to listen to economists, who have been telling them for years that the use of road space should not be a free gift to motorists.
Of course, motorists in most countries pay taxes: on the purchase price of a car, on a licence to use it, and on petrol.
But the first two taxes increase the cost of owning a car, not of driving it.
And they are often low compared with the true costs of using road space.
Even petrol taxes make no distinction between where a car is used, or when, which greatly affects the costs imposed on others.
Some of the costs of driving fall on the owner, who pays in cash for fuel and in time and irritation for sitting in traffic jams.
But the government pays for repairing roads; other road-users pay for the delays caused by congestion; society at large pays for air pollution, noise and road accidents.
Indeed David Newbery, of the department of applied economics at Cambridge University, argues* that the costs of accidents may be as large as all the other costs that vehicles inflict on society taken together.
If drivers had to pay all these costs, they would be discouraged from making journeys where the benefits of travelling are less than the costs.
There are few places in the world where the costs are higher than southern California.
In Los Angeles workers joke that the rush hour begins at 5.30am and goes on to 8.30pm.
Several studies reckon that sitting in traffic jams costs Angelenos around $9 billion a year in lost output.
According to the California Assembly Office of Research, the region's cars cause another $4.7 billion in environmental damage.
And worse is to come.
The Los Angeles basin may attract around 5m new residents by 2010.
On recent trends, state officials reckon that the region's current average speed of 35mph (56kph) will drop to 19mph.
The number of vehicle miles travelled will increase by 68%.
What can be done to persuade drivers to meet the true costs of their journeys?
A new study** throws up some interesting answers.
The study's author, Michael Cameron, thinks that roads should be treated like telephone lines or the electricity supply: if customers want to use them at peak times, they should pay more.
Congestion costs vary hugely with time.
As Mr Cameron puts it, ‘At the very time when most people want and need mobility — during the morning and evening peak periods — the system actually carries fewer of them than it does at various off-peak times.’
During rush hours, freeways may carry fewer than 1,300 cars per hour, per lane; at offpeak hours, 1,800.
Mr Newbery puts it rather differently for Britain: cars using city centres at rush hour, he calculates, incur marginal costs more than 100 times higher than cars on the average motorway or country road.
Without pricing, road-building provides no relief.
Underpriced trips simply increase until congestion is as bad as before, and smog worse.
In countries with good public transport, extra roads also suck people away from buses and trains; so more public spending on roads raises total travel costs.
Nor does cheaper public transport help much.
In southern California, where only 6% of travel to work is by public transport, most users would otherwise have been passengers in cars, not drivers.
In Europe, too, subsidising public transport mainly leads to new journeys rather than a switch from private cars (though additional travel may, in turn, generate economic benefits).
If drivers paid the true costs of road use, they might switch to less congested times, or make fewer journeys.
In southern California the average number of passengers per journey is 1.13.
If that rose even to 1.5, travel times would drop by nearly a quarter and pollution by around a fifth.
The bluntest way to encourage this would be to increase petrol tax.
To reflect the true cost of pollution and congestion in California, Mr Cameron estimates that petrol taxes would have to be raised from today's 28 cents per gallon to $3.25.
Even if this were politically possible, which it is not, petrol taxes punish the rural lunch-time driver at the same rate as the urban peak-time driver, when the latter causes far more harm.
Instead, Mr Cameron recommends the following measures (whose effects are set out in the chart):
Make people pay more for rush-hour trips, using electronic scanners.
Make employers offer workers a cash alternative to free parking.
If worker-parkers had to pay $35 a month, it would double the cost of most commuting trips.
Charge more for parking in shopping centres.
Introduce a smog tax which would rise with the number of miles travelled (and the dirtiness of the vehicle).
Deregulate private minivan services, which are currently prevented from serving many areas.
Mr Cameron thinks his scheme would produce cleaner air, fewer cars and a 7mph increase in average driving speeds.
But how to persuade drivers of its merits?
In Britain Mr Newbery's calculations suggest that, if road-use was correctly priced, the pattern of use would change but total revenues from motoring taxes might not.
California taxes on drivers are lower and congestion worse.
Proper road prices would raise the motoring tax burden.
Mr Cameron has an answer.
Instead of the state swallowing all the income, he suggests it should go to more efficient motorists.
Each driver would be given a free monthly allowance, which a meter would debit electronically every time a driver entered or left a freeway.
At the end of each month motorists would discover their balance and sell any remaining units.
American Telephone & Telegraph
The wrong choice?
AT&T should split itself into two separate companies, one to manufacture equipment, the other to provide telephone calls.
Its acquisition of NCR is moving the company in precisely the opposite direction
IT WAS in December last year that American Telephone & Telegraph (AT&T) put in its first takeover bid for NCR, an American computer-maker.
Five months later, the two firms are within a whisker of agreeing on a deal.
While NCR's shareholders are celebrating, Ma Bell's are likely to suffer the inevitable hangover.
Not only is AT&T probably paying too much, it should not have been trying to buy the firm in the first place.
That is because AT&T's best bet for maintaining growth is to divide its manufacturing businesses from its telephone arm, not to buy more of them.
AT&T's original offer valued NCR at $6.1 billion, or $90-a-share.
At 15 times NCR's falling earnings, the offer was already generous.
Now the deal looks likely to go through at a whopping $7.5 billion, about $110 a share.
Ma Bell is prepared to pay so much because the firm's chairman, Robert Allen, is convinced that the computer and telecommunications industries are converging.
In the technical sense he is correct.
Telephone switches are just big computers in disguise.
Companies that use computers have been connecting them to each other for a decade, often using AT&T's telephone lines.
Taking note, AT&T assumed that success in one business meant success in the other.
It set up its computer division in 1984, as soon as it was allowed to.
The assumption was wrong.
Computer-making essentially remains a manufacturing industry, telecoms a service business.
To succeed, telephone companies need marketing flair.
Once-stuffy AT&T has surprised everyone by displaying plenty of this.
The company has concocted new gimmicks such as cut-price Mothers' Day calls or new services such as call-blocking facilities for single women.
It has also been deftly successful with its new Universal credit card.
But making and marketing computers require a different set of skills: manufacturing efficiently, shipping products rapidly and then providing complicated technical support to finicky business customers.
Though the technology that telecoms and computer firms use is similar, success in telecoms services does not necessarily bring success in the computer, or telecoms-hardware, business.
Painfully, AT&T has already been forced to recognise that.
Analysts reckon AT&T has invested $2 billion in its computer division since its birth, and that it is still losing $200m a year.
Even when the purchase of NCR is complete, computers will still make up less than a fifth of AT&T's business.
More than 60% of AT&T's $36 billion of sales comes from telephone calls, the remainder from sales of telephone equipment — the big computer-like switches that work telephone exchanges, and the smaller ones, called PABXs, that offices use to route calls internally.
And here lies a contradiction at the heart of AT&T's original business, even before it tried to get into computers.
Since trustbusters broke up America's Bell system in 1983, AT&T's biggest switch-customers have been the seven regional ‘Baby Bells’ born of the break-up.
But they are also some of AT&T's toughest rivals in telecoms services.
AT&T and the Babies do not compete on the provision of basic telephone services, since under the terms of the break-up AT&T may carry only long-distance calls, the Baby Bells only local ones.
But they do compete in advanced services like electronic mail and computer-data networks.
These can either run off the public-telephone network, or off the smaller PABXs that control businesses' own in-house telephone systems.
While the Baby Bells try to sell corporate customers advanced services using their own networks, AT&T offers the same lot of customers PABXs which allow them to do exactly the same things.
Meanwhile, it sells big switches to the Baby Bells themselves.
It is hardly surprising, then, that AT&T's switch-sales to the Babies have suffered as a result.
Ten years ago AT&T supplied all of America's exchange-switches.
Now that share has fallen to 42%.
Most of the rest has gone to foreign-based switch suppliers such as Canada's Northern Telecom, Japan's NEC and Germany's Siemens.
Hamstrung at home, AT&T needs to do more business abroad.
Only 13% of the firm's sales come from outside America.
Mr Allen has said he wants to see that percentage double by the mid-1990s.
But that will make AT&T's service and equipment-manufacturing businesses step on each other 's toes again.
Over the past few years foreign telephone companies, and the Baby Bells, have been snapping up stakes in newly privatised telephone companies in New Zealand, Mexico and Argentina, and mobile-telephone franchises even in rich countries such as Britain and Germany.
Curiously, AT&T has stood aside from this scramble, apart from filing a joint offer to build Poland's mobile-telephone system.
Ma Bell's coyness is hard to fathom.
It may be afraid to annoy foreign network-operators with new local services and so jeopardise the chances of selling them equipment, which has accounted for much of AT&T's recent growth.
Staying friendly with foreign telephone firms also helps in other ways.
The customers AT&T is keenest to serve are global firms wanting global services.
Last September AT&T launched a ‘virtual private network’ covering Japan, Britain, France, Canada and Belgium, which gives firms luxuries like coded dialling over public networks.
Another service allows firms with offices in different countries to have centralised telephone bills.
Setting up such products needs the co-operation of foreign telephone-network operators.
AT&T could find such co-operation elusive if it was also competing with them.
The obvious way for AT&T to escape the conflicts of interest between its equipment and service businesses is to split them, perhaps doling out new shares in the two new firms to existing shareholders on a pro-rata basis.
At least that would give each half of the business a free run to compete with a growing horde of competitors.
Though that might benefit AT&T's shareholders, the idea is heresy to most employees of the firm.
AT&T fought hard to hang on to its equipment businesses through telephone deregulation — the Justice Department took the firm to court on the issue in 1949 and again in 1974.
And having just fought for NCR, Mr Allen is unlikely to propose such a break-up.
Soviet economic reforms
Plenty of shock, no therapy
MOSCOW
THE ‘anti-crisis programme’ of the Soviet prime minister, Valentin Pavlov, is the third tranche of an economic-reform plan that began in January with the confiscation of 50- and 100-rouble notes and continued in early April with huge price rises.
It is likely to be the last chance to rescue the economy from chaos.
Such is the speed of decline (GNP in the first three months of 1991 was 8% lower than it had been in the same period of 1990, imports were 45% lower) that, if this plan fails, the next one may be either an economic state of emergency imposed under martial law, or a kaleidoscope of programmes started by republics after the Soviet Union breaks up.
Unfortunately the good parts of Mr Pavlov's new plan are likely to be overwhelmed quickly by the bad.
To work, any Soviet economic plan must do two things.
First, stabilise the macroeconomy.
This means cutting the budget deficit, freeing prices and trade, and preventing accumulated savings from causing an inflationary expansion of demand.
Second, create the microeconomic conditions under which enterprises can thrive.
This requires privatisation.
But any plan must also meet a third, political, condition: it must settle arguments between centre and republics over who controls policy.
Judged as a plan for macroeconomic stability, the programme is less bad than its many critics claim.
It is based on the so-called ‘main guidelines’ adopted by the Soviet parliament last September after it had rejected the widely acclaimed Shatalin plan.
However, parts of the radical Shatalin plan reappear in the new programme.
All prices, it says, will be freed by October 1992.
If implemented, this would correct the main weakness of early April's price reforms, which left most prices fixed by government fiat.
It would also improve upon January's brutal monetary reform, which tried to deal with savings by confiscating some of them: the new plan would raise interest rates to encourage consumers to leave their money in the bank.
It would also open the economy to world trade by allowing easier conversion of roubles into hard currency and repatriation of hard-currency profits.
Hyperinflation will still be a threat unless government borrowing (financed by printing money) can be cut.
Here, too, the plan borrows from Mr Shatalin.
A moratorium is supposed to start next month on all new projects financed by central government.
Projects pencilled in for this year which have not yet started will also be postponed.
New plans to cut central — and republican — government spending are to be agreed upon for the second half of the year.
Worryingly, the plan contains few details on how spending on the army and the bureaucracy will be cut — and it is excessively vague on other points.
But it does suggest one reform which, if it went through, would deal with many such doubts.
It proposes setting up a sort of Federal Reserve system of central banks in which all 15 republics would be represented — and which would be told not to lend to the government.
This, in effect, would outlaw the inflationary creation of money — a drastic change, if it happens.
All this will benefit the economy only if enterprises respond.
That is why privatisation is essential.
Mr Pavlov's programme recognises this.
One-third of small enterprises — shops, restaurants and so on— are supposed to be privatised by the end of this year, two-thirds by the end of 1992.
The plan also says republics should continue their efforts to sell land to peasants.
But this is not nearly enough.
Dismayingly, the plan does not explicitly endorse the private ownership of land.
It rejects any idea of giving enterprises away (the only way to privatise in a hurry).
Instead, a central fund for state property will be set up to sell large and medium-sized companies.
The programme talks of selling a piffling 10% of them.
Where sales go ahead, workers are to get a stake.
Eastern Europe shows that worker-owned factories can be as inefficient as state-owned ones — and a lot harder to shut down.
The programme gives absurd powers to the central government.
It will have the authority, for example, to block sackings and changes in the pattern of production.
Unless privatisation is delegated to the republics, the microeconomic conditions necessary for reform are most unlikely to be met.
But if the republics are to undertake reform for themselves, agreement must be struck between the central and local governments both on the central-bank system and on who owns which factories.
Mr Pavlov said that the anti-crisis programme will work only if it is backed by all 15 republics.
That will not happen.
The six  refusenik republics — the Baltic three, Moldavia, Georgia and Armenia — want nothing to do with it.
For the rest, the plan contains two stumbling blocks.
The first is a proposal to outlaw ‘political strikes’, use force where the ban is flouted (as it will be) and arrest strike leaders.
This is the part of the plan that has attracted most criticism.
Though Mr Gorbachev and nine republican leaders signed a declaration broadly supporting the plan on the day the parliament approved it, few republican leaders are likely to agree to use force to break strikes.
Second, there is a problem over tax collecting.
Republics collect taxes but are refusing to pass them on to the central government.
They have contributed only 39% of what the central government requires them to hand over in the first three months of the year.
Rapid agreement on the anti-crisis programme — and bolder measures besides — might forestall disaster.
So might the decision to let the republics go it alone on economic reform.
Otherwise, it is too easy to imagine what might happen next.
If the republican governments pressed for full wage-indexation, the central bank would be unable to keep its promise not to finance budget deficits by printing money.
That would mean that the best part of the programme — its price reform — would only cause inflation (already in three digits) to spiral out of control.
Meanwhile, thanks to the bad parts, output would fail to recover.
In short, things would get worse, leaving a stark choice between civil war or martial law.
Another slip-up for Exxon
WASHINGTON, DC
AN INDEPENDENT judiciary is a glorious thing — in the abstract.
In practice, it can be a giant headache, as both the Justice Department in Washington and the Exxon oil company have just discovered.
A decision by Russel Holland, a federal district judge in Alaska, on April 24th has, in effect, wrecked a painstakingly worked-out settlement to the messy aftermath of the Exxon Valdez oil-spill of March 1989.
Exxon had pleaded guilty to four misdemeanour criminal-pollution charges in return for an agreement that more serious felony charges would be dropped.
The plea bargain agreed between Exxon, the Justice Department and the state of Alaska had set the company's total liability at $1 billion: $900m of this was a civil settlement to meet costs incurred by the government in cleaning up the 11m gallons of oil spilt into Prince William Sound; the other $100m was a fine, payable to the Treasury, to settle the four criminal charges.
It was this second part of the deal that Judge Holland rejected, stunning environmentalists as well as the company.
In his opinion the criminal fine was ‘simply not adequate.’
He feared that other oil companies might view the fine as an acceptable cost of doing business.
The judge's decision cannot be over-turned, and it leaves Exxon facing some unappealing choices.
It can withdraw its guilty pleas and go to trial.
It can let its guilty pleas stand and then take its chances in court.
Or it can negotiate a new deal with the Justice Department — with no guarantee that this will be any more acceptable to Judge Holland.
Exxon has 30 days to consider its next step.
Both Judge Holland and Charles Cole, Alaska's attorney-general, insist that rejection of the criminal fine need not affect the larger civil settlement.
But, according to the federal Justice Department, the whole package is now in peril.
The snag is that a clause in the civil settlement allows Exxon to withdraw from the entire agreement if part of the plea bargain is rejected by the courts.
This fresh blow came just as Exxon felt it was struggling free from the morass of the Alaskan spill.
The judge's decision was handed down on the same day that Exxon announced that first-quarter profits for 1991 had leapt 75% over the same period last year, to $2.24 billion.
And the final year of the company's three-year commitment to cleaning up the Alaskan coast is about to begin.
Ratnering about rubbish
RETAILERS have an old saying that you will never lose money by underestimating public taste.
But should you gloat about it?
In a speech to Britain's venerable Institute of Directors on April 23rd, Gerald Ratner, the eponymous boss of Britain's biggest jewellery chain, said the secret of his company's success was selling ‘total crap’.
To the delight of his audience, Mr Ratner went on to describe some of his favourite crap.
A pair of earrings sold by Ratners outlets for 99p ($1.70), he reckons, will probably fail to outlast a prawn sandwich (which is admittedly dearer).
An imitation book with curled up corners and antique dust ‘is in the worst possible taste,’ he confirms, ‘but we sold a quarter of a million last year.’
The previous day, Ratners announced that, despite the recession, pre-tax profits edged up by 1.7% last year, to £110m ($195m), on sales up by 24%, to £1.1 billion.
In 1984 Mr Ratner took over from his father a small loss-making chain of jewellers which now has more than 2,000 shops in Britain and America.
In the past seven years Mr Ratner has gobbled up rival retailers, including H. Samuel and Watches of Switzerland (which must be wincing at the boss's cheap-and-cheerfulness).
In America the company owns the Sterling chain and in October last year it bought Kay Jewellers for $425m.
Mr Ratner, who is 41, quickly got rid of the snobby atmosphere which prevails in most independent jewellery stores.
With posters screaming constant cut-price offers, the original Ratners chain is defiantly down-market.
Baked beans are sold with more decorum.
But Mr Ratner is clearly giving customers what they want.
His shops rake in more money per square foot than most other British retailers.
Though the flippant Mr Ratner has said similar things in private before, the strident headlines produced by his speech seem to have shaken him.
Customers will understand that his comments were made ‘tongue in cheek’, he now says.
Besides, they will not be put off because they know a bargain when they see one.
Some of his staff even suggest the boss's remarks might boost sales.
But Paul Deacon, a retailing analyst with Goldman Sachs, reckons that this last claim is a load of you-know-what.
The power of Power
AGOURA HILLS, CALIFORNIA
IN THIS rural suburb of Los Angeles, a 59-year-old from New England has become the car industry's most revered, and feared, oracle.
A good word from Dave Power can turn a car into an enormous hit; a bad word can wreck it.
Mr Power's company, J.D. Power and Associates, is the most influential market-research company in the car business.
A former financial analyst with Ford, Mr Power set up shop in 1968.
But he climbed to his current pre-eminence only after spotting that the competitive battleground in the car market was shifting from styling and speed to quality.
In 1981 he launched the first of a series of closely watched consumer surveys.
The best known of the Power surveys is the Customer Satisfaction Index, which asks 30,000 drivers to rate the quality of their vehicles and the standard of service provided by dealers a year after their purchase.
Other surveys in the Power stable measure the opinions of owners three months (the Initial Quality Survey) and five years (the Vehicle Dependability Index) after purchase.
Mr Power says that if the 1980s were the decade of quality, then the 1990s will be the decade in which car makers pay more attention to distribution.
By that Mr Power means everything from advertising to warranty repairs, which can together account for about 35% of the price of an average car in America.
In Europe and Japan such costs are an even greater proportion of the final price.
So what does the expert reckon is the best car to buy?
Mr Power gives his stock reply: ‘You should be dealing with a retailer you feel comfortable with.’
Some help.
Mr Power himself drives an 1987 Oldsmobile.
That never did very well in any of his surveys.
GM's Buick division
Making them like they used to
FLINT, MICHIGAN
ONCE a car to aspire to, Buick lost its lustre and was heading for the scrapheap.
Now in the middle of a recession which is shaking the rest of America's car industry, Buick is enjoying a remarkable rebound.
It has done it the old-fashioned way, with teamwork, better quality and new models that appeal to its customers.
But Buick faces another challenge: those satisfied customers are mostly old.
It has to find a way to appeal to younger drivers.
Buick's turnaround has given its parent, the ailing General Motors (GM), plenty to ponder.
For the first half of the 1991 model-year (which began on October 1st 1990), Buick's sales have risen by 6.6%, compared with an 8.8% fall in all American car sales.
Buick's share of the market has grown by about a percentage point, to 6.5%.
That is still well below the 9.2% share it had in 1984.
But Edward Mertz, the division's general manager, predicts an 8% share by the mid-1990s.
Given Mr Mertz's success since taking over in 1986, his prediction should be taken seriously.
Buick was one of the main victims of GM's disastrous attempt to automate its way out of trouble.
After spending hundreds of millions of dollars turning the division's manufacturing complex in Flint, Michigan, into a high-tech wonderland designed to beat the Japanese, GM's bosses considered closing it down.
Buick's robots either failed to deliver what was promised or they broke down.
So, frequently, did relations between management and labour.
Under threat of death, Buick at last achieved the changes the rest of GM is still struggling to make.
To keep their jobs, employees and managers began to pull together as a team.
Improving quality became the top priority.
The company even tore out some of its expensive robots.
The sales department refused to accept any cars from the factory which did not meet rigid quality guidelines.
These efforts paid off when J.D. Power and Associates, an influential market-research firm (see box), ranked the Buick LeSabre as the most trouble-free of all cars made in America.
Buick also sorted out its muddled product line and drew up a marketing plan that helped it sidestep the most intensely competitive part of the American market.
Though noted for conservative and traditional models, like the Buick LeSabre, the division was also selling high-performance cars like the Grand National.
That was a mistake, says Darwin Clark, Buick's marketing manager.
‘Image is very, very delicate.
We can't be a premium American car line this year and go after the boy racer the next,’ he explains.
With most car makers chasing after baby-boomers, Buick decided to concentrate on the generation of buyers longing for ‘traditional American elegance’, a euphemism for cars that appeal to upper-middle-income buyers in their 50s and 60s.
Many of these buyers are turned off by the sleek lines and road-sensitive ride of classy European marques such as BMW and Mercedes-Benz.
Buick decided to shed cars which did not fit its image, like the Grand National.
This was not easy.
A vast corporate reorganisation had stripped GM's car divisions of most of their individual design and engineering operations, resulting in scores of bland, look-alike models.
With some wheedling and needling, Buick won a little more freedom.
One impressive result is the $26,000-plus Park Avenue, which has received rave reviews.
Buick has even revived the Roadmaster, a name last used in Buick's heyday 30 years ago for massive, popular hunks of steel and chrome.
Because much of Buick's success is based on sales to the over-50s, its target customers will eventually be replaced by greying baby-boomers — the very customers it once steered away from.
Baby-boomers were weaned on imports.
‘They're in a group driving BMWs, Mercedes and Acura (the luxury brand of Honda),’ admits Mr Clark.
‘To show up in a new Buick is a risk not everyone wants to take.
We've got to find a way to make it OK to buy a Buick.’
Securing Buick's position as the marque of self-assurance may be the toughest job of all.
FINANCE
New England's Fleet/Norstar
A brilliant deal — for some
NEW YORK
FIFTEEN years ago few would have picked out the blue-collar Industrial National Bank of Rhode Island to emerge in the 1990s as the pre-eminent banking power in patrician New England.
Yet this is the position in which Fleet/Norstar Financial, as Industrial National has become, is about to find itself.
On April 22nd, it was named as the successful bidder in the government's auction of the failed Bank of New England.
That will increase Fleet/Norstar's assets by 40% to $47 billion, catapulting it into the top rank of American banks.
The bid, made in partnership with Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR), the group that made its name in the leveraged buy-out binge of the 1980s, enhances the deal-making reputation of Fleet/Norstar's chairman, Terrence Murray.
Fleet/Norstar and KKR will pay the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) $125m for the bank, 80% of that in stock, and will inject $500m of new capital.
For that the new owners will get $16 billion in deposits at 323 branches spread across Massachusetts, Connecticut and Maine, where Fleet/Norstar currently has 231 branches (plus 329 in New York).
They will also get a largely clean loan-book.
The FDIC will keep the worst $5.5 billion of Bank of New England's $20 billion of assets, and promises for the next three years to take back any more loans that go bad.
In sum: heads Fleet/Norstar wins, tails the taxpayer loses, on top of the $2.5 billion (10% up from the previous estimate) that is already down the drain.
Why?
The deal has precedents in the purchases in recent years of bust Texas financial institutions by BancOne and NCNB.
And the FDIC says the deal was at least better than those offered by the other bidders, Bank of America and Bank of Boston.
But there were other, unstated, reasons.
New England politicians lobbied hard for ownership of Bank of New England to stay in the region.
That offered a chance to merge away New England's banking overcapacity.
Fleet has already said it expects $350m a year of cost savings.
Bank of America would have brought extra competition that threatened to remove the surplus capacity the unpleasant way — by sending some other bank to the wall.
Fleet/Norstar got the nod over the larger Bank of Boston for two reasons.
First, it is stronger and better managed.
Though it also has been scarred by the decline of the region's economy and property markets — it lost $48.5m last year, mainly because of bad property loans — it has suffered less than Bank of Boston.
Second, the regulators were looking for an infusion of capital from outside the banking industry.
The $283m KKR was packing outgunned Bank of Boston's outside investor, Warren Buffett.
The regulators have made a big effort to prevent KKR's involvement openly breaching the famous walls between banking and commerce.
Twice in the past regulators have rebuffed attempts by KKR to invest in banking.
The Bank of New England sale was itself restructured three times so that the letter of the law was not broken.
For their $283m the 75 investors that KKR represents will get preferred stock, convertible after three years into Fleet/Norstar stock at $17.65 a share, plus 6.5m warrants for newly issued Fleet/Norstar stock exercisable immediately at the same price, the last closing price before the purchase was announced.
This could give them almost 16% of Fleet/Norstar.
The deal looks likely to be as sweet for KKR's investors as for Fleet/Norstar.
The bank says it expects its new purchase to break even in the first year and to be operating at a profit of $150m-200m a year over the following three years.
That should help keep Fleet/Norstar's share price rising.
It was already up $3 the day after the announcement, giving KKR investors an immediate paper gain of $70m.
Insider trading
The law and the bond-dealer
NEW YORK
AMERICA'S Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has set a sturdy hare running, one that has been lurking in the undergrowth for 15 years.
What securities should be traded in the central market, with publicly quoted prices and all the transparency of information, price discovery and fair-trading practice that go with it?
Just companies' equity, or their debt as well?
This hare has been aroused by an exchange of letters between Donald Riegle, chairman of the Senate banking committee, and the SEC's ambitious chairman, Richard Breeden.
Both are concerned about possible insider trading in the junk-bond market.
This is thought to be widespread, and is causing institutional investors, big holders of junk from the late 1980s, to complain that they are getting a raw deal.
The SEC's New York office is making informal inquiries into several instances when a share price moved up ahead of a favourable announcement about the restructuring of the company's debt.
The suspicion is that members of creditors' committees had used information gained in that role to deal in the equity market, or to trade the relevant junk bonds directly.
It is a fair bet that this suspicion is right.
Traders at securities houses have long argued to the SEC that they need access to information about the current credits of the companies whose debt they are trading.
The commission has been non-committal over whether there should be Chinese walls between the issuing and trading sides of Wall Street firms' junk-bond desks.
And when the bankruptcy trustee decided that the members of the creditors' committee in the Federated and Allied Stores chapter 11 proceedings could not trade the companies' shares, the SEC supported a (successful) challenge to the decision, launched by the Fidelity fund-management group.
It was afraid that institutional investors would be scared away from serving on committees of creditors.
Though there is clearly a potential conflict of interest, it is far from clear that the law against insider trading would be broken by a firm that took advantage of it.
This is a grey area.
A narrow interpretation of the law, favoured by the courts, requires a breach of fiduciary trust.
Such trust, say the courts, is inherent in an equity but not in a debt security, which is governed by contractual relationships, leaving no fiduciary trust to be broken.
This, to those interested in the purpose of the insider-trading law, is lawyers' hair-splitting.
But one main purpose, protecting the small investor, barely arises with debt securities.
A further potential conflict of interest arises when the investment funds of securities firms buy the junk bonds of companies to which the firm might wish to act as financial adviser in a takeover or restructuring.
The bondholding may help the firm get its foot in the door to win the business; and once it is inside, the firm will be tempted to propose a restructuring of the company's debt in ways that will benefit its own holdings.
Such questions have been raised over the investments of Goldman Sachs's Water Street Fund in the bonds of Tonka and of JCI.
Granted that the firm has not broken the law, is the law what it should be?
At the SEC, Mr Breeden argues that there is sufficient law to tackle insider-trading abuses in debt securities and other conflicts of interest if they occur.
He admits that there is little case-law to prove him right.
(Even the jailed junk-bondster Michael Milken was convicted for wrongdoings with equities, not junk bonds.)
Mr Breeden does not want Congress to give him new law — and subject his agency to the crossfire of vested interests that this would involve — until the courts have tested whether existing law is sufficient.
SEC staffers are looking for a suitable test case to take to court.
That will not be easy.
If there is one thing murkier than how insider-trading law applies to debt securities, it is the market for those securities.
Trading involves only a handful of traders who make the markets and a relatively closed universe of institutional investors.
It was in 1975 that Congress made the SEC set up a National Market System for securities, which required efficient execution of transactions, fair competition among broker-dealers and the availability of price quotes.
At that time, it was proposed that municipal and government debt be included along with equities, and the law was appropriately phrased.
However, it was applied mainly to equities.
The largest centralised bond market is the New York Stock Exchange's automated bond system, which allows subscribing member firms to enter and execute bond orders through computerised terminals in their offices.
Some 3,000 investment-grade bonds are listed there.
Debt markets, however, have expanded greatly since then, and debt instruments performing much like equities have proliferated.
It is time to consider adding to the central market for equities at least all debt securities that have become quasi-equities, such as junk bonds.
This would not please traders, who would lose opportunities to exploit the inefficiencies of the market as it is now constituted.
But their interests should surely give way to the greater public good in enhancing confidence in the integrity and fairness of the capital markets.
That will become especially important in the coming global battle between exchanges for international securities-trading business.
The screen-based systems of the exchanges now make it feasible to disseminate price quotations for debt securities and to report transactions.
The PORTAL system of the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD), developed for trading Rule 144A securities, has the capacity to handle both debt and equity securities.
From this NASD has developed, at the SEC's request, a prototype screen-based quotation and trading system for high-yield and other fixed-income securities.
Mr Breeden says it appears to offer a ‘very significant’ improvement to market information and transparency.
SEC staffers are busy working out whether and, if so, how to force the debt market out of the dark hidey-holes that its traders, for now at least, prefer.
Recommendations are due on Mr Breeden's desk by the end of May.
Under plain cover
Europe is slowly learning the American habit of private placement
IF YOU want to know what the future holds for Europe's financial markets, the best guess is usually to look at America's present.
American inventions like swaps, commercial paper and asset-backed securities have already reshaped Europe's financial terrain.
If the pattern holds, Europe will have thriving private-placement markets within a few years.
Behind private placements lies a simple premise: the fussier investors and issuers become about the design of their securities, the less they will want to deal in the standardised paper available on the public markets.
Instead, issuers place their paper privately with small groups of pension funds, insurance companies and other institutions.
That logic has created a giant market in America.
Europe already has private markets for securities — such as Germany's Schuldscheine — but they are mostly plain-vanilla.
As so often in finance, the next step is to make things more complicated.
Spreading the idea in Europe, however, will not be a simple matter of transplanting an American invention.
American firms issue paper privately mainly to skirt the burdensome disclosure rules set by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
European regulators are generally less particular, so companies have less reason to escape disclosure by issuing privately.
Private securities are also harder to sell in Europe because investors there are less adventurous than their American cousins.
Despite these handicaps, Europe's tiny private-placement market is growing fast, to judge from the prosperous glow emanating from banks in the business.
Goldman Sachs says its private-placement business in Europe has doubled every year for the past few years.
One of Goldman's private-placement specialists is moving from New York to London to take charge of the bank's European business.
The European capital-markets operation of J.P.
Morgan earns a ‘significant share’(Morgan coyly refuses to say how significant) of its income from ‘structured’— ie, complicated — private placements.
Several trends have boosted Europe's private-placement markets:
European institutions have grown warier of the public markets and less suspicious of private ones.
They used to believe that investing in big, publicly traded issues would keep their portfolios liquid even in a bear market.
That illusion was shattered by RJR Nabisco's leveraged buy-out, which turned the blue-chip company's paper into junk.
Now investors place less trust in liquidity and more in their own judgment about a security's risks and potential return.
And banks now provide almost as much liquidity for private securities as for public ones.
Regulators have undergone a similar conversion.
In several European countries they are allowing insurance companies and other institutions more scope to invest in custom-tailored private placements.
Europe's tax system, a hotch-potch of quirky national systems and criss-crossing treaties, inspires many a private placement.
Banks are busily designing privately placed securities that exploit the many available tax loopholes.
Custom tailoring
Most European private placements belong to one of two categories: securities designed to appeal to a small group of investors, and those tailored to suit a particular issuer.
Since buyers and sellers rarely want the same paper, the banker in the middle usually dips into his bag of swaps and options to transform one side of the deal into something more conventional.
Medium-term note (MTN) programmes are the vehicle for most investor-driven private placements.
These deals usually start when a banker persuades an investor to take a certain punt, a gamble on the oil market, for example.
The banker then designs a security to give the investor that exposure.
To find an issuer, he turns to his stable of MTNs, pre-arranged programmes under which a company can issue a variety of securities.
The bank sells the issue to the investor (booking a generous fee for the service).
Because the issuer has no desire to take an oil punt opposite to the investor's, the bank will swap the issuer's oil-related payments for conventional interest obligations.
After the Gulf war, Goldman Sachs arranged such a transaction between SEK, Sweden's export-credit agency, and investors seeking to make money by selling oil options, then commanding high prices because of the volatility in the oil market.
Goldman came up with a ‘bull oil-linked transaction’— a high-yield security with a redemption price linked to the price of oil.
SEK obligingly issued a security paying 10.4%, 2.4 percentage points above the market rate.
Goldman swapped that obligation back into a market rate of 8%.
The investors enjoy a high yield, but accept a diminishing pay-off on the security if oil prices fall below $15.
Other private placements are designed mainly for issuers, often to exploit tax loopholes.
Dozens of French companies, for example, discovered they could raise money that acts like capital but enjoys the tax break granted to debt through ‘instantly repackaged perpetual securities’.
Through J.P.
Morgan, which invented the technique, they issued perpetual debt, using part of the proceeds to buy a zero-coupon bond issued by a triple-A borrower.
When the zero-coupon bond matures, in, say, 15 years, the French debt-issuer uses the money to pay off the principal.
That is why tax authorities treat IRPs like debt.
The balance of debt left (after the cost of the zero-coupon), being irredeemable, counts as equity or near-equity on the issuer's balance sheet.
Twists like these, banks hope, will spur the creation of a private-placement market to rival America's.
It will not happen quickly.
Japanese institutions, once the biggest consumers of privately placed paper from Europe, have bought much less since the Tokyo stockmarket crashed last year.
Dutch insurers are reckoned to be the boldest European investors in private placements, but are now proceeding cautiously.
Aegon, a big Dutch insurer, says that less than 1% of its 55 billion guilder ($28 billion) portfolio is invested in structured private placements.
Investment bankers come calling, the insurer says, but ‘their ultimate goal is not the same as ours’.
They want to sell, but Aegon is not sure it wants to buy.
America's world tourists: the one-eyed lead the blind
NEW YORK
FOR all the talk of global markets, America's small investors have remained far more parochial than their counterparts in Europe.
They have a big stockmarket in their own backyard.
It works well.
They can understand the companies.
Settlement does not take a fortnight (whatever that may be).
And you can buy the shares in good ol' dollars.
Stay-at-home Americans missed out on the best of the world's bull market in the 1980s.
With American stocks this week again confronting the record books and confounding the experts, the S&P 500 index is 2.5 times as high as in 1980.
Whoopee.
Prices in the rest of the world, measured by Morgan Stanley's Europe, Australia and Far East (EAFE) index, have risen twice as far.
Playing foreign markets is not for the faint-hearted.
It would have taken a bold investor to put 40% of a stock portfolio in the Tokyo market in the mid-1980s, even though that was what Japan's share of global stockmarket capitalisation had become.
Bad timing is even more likely abroad than at home.
And the best calculations can be screwed up by currency movements.
Little wonder that, as American investors slowly discover the outside world, they are turning to mutual funds to handle its complexities.
There are now some 40 global equity funds (which invest around the world including America), and 60 international ones (which invest only outside America).
That is nearly treble the number five years ago.
At the end of last year they had $13 billion and $9 billion of net assets respectively, according to Lipper Analytical Services.
That is still only a combined 5% share of the total holdings of mutual funds.
But new funds are popping up by the day — from plain-vanilla stock funds, such as National Funds' National Global Allocation Fund, which boasts the guru-economist Henry Kaufman as its asset allocator, to exotica such as Scudder Stevens & Clark's Short Term Global Income Fund, which will invest in short-term debt securities.
The managers of such funds are on the stump, spreading the message that their day has come at last.
Apart from preaching diversification, they proclaim that the 1990s will see a flight to quality, meaning (often illogically) the world's biggest companies, wherever they may be.
The funds do not, in practice, restrict themselves to big companies.
Even so their search for quality evidently needs some sharpening.
Adding foreign stocks to an American portfolio, which is what a global equity fund basically does, seems to produce better performance than investing in American ones alone.
But how much better?
Purely foreign funds (the international ones) have trailed the EAFE index by miles.
To put it crudely, the experts may (perhaps) have done better than the widow in Boise, Idaho, would have done for herself, but still a lot worse than using a pin.
Japanese corporate liquidity and investment
Drying up
TOKYO
HOW much money do Japanese companies have?
The answer will decide whether Japanese capital investment will stay strong and whether companies will have to sell their shareholdings.
Most important of all, it could decide whether Japan's monetary policy will be eased or kept tight.
The Bank of Japan thinks the answer is: a lot, implying strong investment, few sales and tight money.
When the March figure for money-supply growth was released late last week, showing year-on-year growth in its favoured monetary measure, M2 plus CDs, at a record low of 4.9%, the central bank was quick to squash any hopes that it would lower interest rates.
Officials said the supply of money remained high relative to economic activity, and that companies that did not speculate excessively in land and shares in recent years had plenty of liquidity.
Those that did, however, continue to go bust in droves.
Bankruptcies, mostly property-related, totalled ¥1.76 trillion ($13.1 billion) in the first three months of this year, according to the Teikoku Data Bank.
On April 22nd Shizushin Lease, a leasing firm, filed for court protection against its creditors with debts of ¥256 billion.
One reason the central bank has been able to keep money tight is that the victims of bankruptcy have so far been mainly property- or finance-related companies with few employees.
Where a manufacturing company has had problems, a rescue has been mounted.
Thus Nissan, a car maker, said earlier this month it would guarantee ¥100 billion of loans for its affiliate Ikeda Bussan, a car-seat maker, which has lost lots of money in the stockmarket.
By one measure, corporate liquidity is indeed high.
The figure for companies' cash, deposits and marketable securities relative to their quarterly sales was 63% in 1990, well above the 45% or so that was normal between 1974 and 1986, before the liquidity boom.
Things are less comfortable measured against corporate investment: the ratio is well down from its 1988 peak, and heading for a level not seen since the 1974 recession.
Meanwhile, the gap between (non-financial) companies' reported profits and capital spending is rising: at ¥20.9 trillion, in calendar 1990 it reached 4.9% of GNP, a level not seen since the mid-1970s.
Profits have further to fall (17.5% in the current fiscal year, suggests S.G. Warburg).
So either investment will also fall or companies will have to raise lots of fresh cash.
How?
Last year's stockmarket crash has made it harder to issue equities.
In 1989 equity-related issues reached a record 6.5% of GNP.
Last year they totalled about 2.5% and this year are unlikely to exceed 2%.
Banks will not take up the slack.
Bank lending is weak, thanks to the Bank of Japan's controls on credit growth and the need to meet international capital-adequacy standards.
Banks are also carrying a number of weak companies, hoping that all will come right in the end.
For all these reasons, bank-loan growth will be as low as 6% this year, suggests another broker, W.I. Carr, compared with 20% in 1990.
When they do lend, banks will increasingly favour big companies.
That is already happening: lending to small firms rose only 5.5% last year.
Insurance companies aim to plug the gap.
Domestic loans a year ago accounted for only 35% of life-assurance companies' ¥116 trillion in assets; they expect to allocate up to 60% in the present financial year.
But they are no longer flush with cash.
For the first time in 42 years, the seven biggest companies reported a smaller rise in assets in the financial year to March 31st than in the year before, as uncompetitive savings policies matured and were not renewed.
Companies can always try selling the securities they hold, and are doing so: they were net sellers of more than ¥1.2 trillion of Japanese shares in the first quarter of this year.
Fortunately for the Tokyo stockmarket, this selling was absorbed by foreign investors, who were net buyers of more than ¥2 trillion.
There is no guarantee that this will last: the foreigners were selling again last week.
Mitsui OSK, Japan's second-largest shipping company, has just announced that it is to close its tokkin accounts (short-term stockmarket-punting money) to help pay for its capital spending.
How much can Japan's corporate punters sell before they set the market sliding under their feet?
Talking about the dollar, worrying about the economy
The world's eyes are on the soaring dollar.
The real battle, though, is not over exchange rates but interest rates.
The American government wants them lowered.
The Bundesbank wants them kept up.
It is right
THE finance ministers and central bankers of the seven main industrial economies (the G7) will be meeting in Washington, DC, on April 28th.
In drafting their communiqué, should there be one, they will spare no effort to appear united and quietly confident about the state of the world economy.
In fact, they are neither of these things.
As the currency markets know only too well, a potentially damaging row over interest-rate policy has broken out.
The Americans want lower rates; the Germans (with Britain cheering from the sidelines) do not.
This is not the first such row of recent times.
The previous one was much in the news shortly before the stockmarket crash of October 1987.
As then, America's government wants the Bundesbank to lift its eyes from narrow domestic objectives and adopt a more ‘global perspective’— that is, to cut interest rates.
This message has been carried around Europe in recent days by the normally reticent Nicholas Brady, America's Treasury secretary.
If the advice is not heeded, he warns, the current recession may spread and deepen.
Also as in 1987, the Bundesbank looks unwilling to go along.
Its president, Karl Otto Pöhl, has long believed that his first and only duty is to keep inflation low in Germany.
This has often led him to tighten monetary policy while everybody around was urging him to ease.
In other respects, however, the circumstances are oddly different from those of 1987.
In the summer before the crash, the dollar seemed ready to topple (as indeed it did after Black Monday); in the spring of 1991 it is soaring.
Why then does America make the same request?
The answer is that under any and all circumstances, America's Treasury believes that the Federal Reserve's monetary policy is strangling the economy.
Its advice to Mr Pöhl is therefore consistent, after all.
In 1987 lower interest rates in West Germany would have made it possible to prop up the dollar (as the G7 countries had earlier promised they would) without raising American interest rates.
In 1991 lower interest rates in Germany would virtually oblige the Federal Reserve to cut American rates, in order to brake the dollar's rise.
Mr Brady does not, in fact, give a fig for global perspective or, for that matter, the dollar's value on the foreign exchanges; he wants further cuts in American interest rates.
Thanks to the dollar's recent strength, the Treasury may be granted its wish even if Mr Pöhl continues to insist on doing his job.
From its trough in February the dollar has climbed 21% against the D-mark.
This is as much because the D-mark is weak as because the dollar is strong; the dollar has gained only 8% against the yen.
This rise against the D-mark is despite a dramatic widening of the interest-rate differential in Germany's favour over the past six months.
German short-term interest rates are now fully three percentage points higher than America's (see chart).
Since Germany's actual and expected rates of inflation are lower than America's, the gap is even wider in real terms.
Powerful forces must be at work to overcome a differential of this size.
Financial-market analysts cite three.
First, the dollar is still ‘fundamentally undervalued’, and by quite a margin — that is, a dollar buys much less abroad than it does at home.
According to this criterion of purchasing-power parity, the dollar should be roughly DM2.25, not DM1.74; ¥200, not ¥138; and $1.40 to the pound, not $1.71.
Second, post-Gulf confidence about the American economy is growing.
The main measures of consumer optimism have recently turned up, and spending seems to be reviving.
Orders for durable goods fell unexpectedly in March, somewhat damping the new enthusiasm, but the financial markets seem convinced that the recovery, albeit a slow one, is about to start.
Third, outsiders' confidence in the German economy has collapsed.
Helmut Kohl's electoral defeat in Rhineland-Palatinate and the increasingly fearsome economic slump in eastern Germany have prompted an unaccustomed flight from the D-mark.
In their communiqué, the finance ministers could usefully point out that the current despair over eastern Germany is overdone.
However, the three forces buoying the dollar could well drive it higher over the coming weeks, especially if the G7 meeting gives muffled signals.
Until recently officials had issued no public signals at all.
Then, on April 23rd, Europe's smaller central banks sold dollars in concert to check the currency's rise.
But that was timid stuff.
Without firm action to peg the dollar from either the Bundesbank or the Federal Reserve, such intervention is likely to have, at most, only a small and temporary effect.
Just now the intentions of the Bundesbank and the Fed are especially unclear, because of arguments at both institutions over who is in charge.
In recent weeks stories (strenuously denied) have circulated of disagreements between the Fed's chairman, Alan Greenspan, and the members of the committee that decides the Fed's interest-rate policy: Mr Greenspan, it is said, is in more of a hurry to push rates down than are his colleagues.
Mr Pöhl meanwhile is trying to ensure that, when the Bundesbank is restructured to accommodate new representatives from eastern Germany, his own power to insist on a rigorously anti-inflationary policy is not diluted.
Add to these uncertainties Mr Brady's new calls for global perspective, and the outlook for monetary policy could hardly be foggier.
Whatever becomes of the dollar, new economic forecasts from the IMF suggest that Mr Brady is wrong.
The Fund's economists reckon that recovery is about to start in America, and that output there will grow next year by a perfectly respectable 2.7%.
Easing American monetary policy now would affect the economy only after a delay of months.
It would not bring the recovery forward; instead it would add demand to an economy which, by that time, already had plenty.
The IMF's projections also show that America's recession has failed to curb its inflation decisively: according to the forecast, inflation will average 5% this year and 4% in 1992.
In other countries too, inflation will be a worry right at the start of the coming upswing.
It is a time for Germanically cautious central banking.
Mexican debt
To him that hath not
ASK any hard-headed financier, and he will tell you that debt relief never works: public money given to help struggling debtor nations will end up in the hands of the lenders — the banks whose over-readiness to lend helped to land the debtors in trouble in the first place.
So the ‘Brady plan’ for debt relief, since 1989 America's main way of cutting the commercial-debt burdens of poor countries, was widely expected to fail.
It has not.
A new study* shows that Mexico, the first country to do a Brady deal, did nicely; its creditors did not.
The Mexican deal, set up in 1989, continued a series of debt firsts for Mexico.
In 1982 it was Mexico that kicked off the international ‘debt crisis’ by refusing to meet its interest payments.
It went on to a leading role in the ‘Baker plan’, Brady's predecessor, based on debt rescheduling and new loans, not debt relief.
This did no good: Mexico's interest payments soared while the economy got worse.
By the end of 1988 it had foreign debts of $100.4 billion, of which $70.6 billion came from 600 commercial banks.
Though Mexico was putting its economy right — tight fiscal policy and structural reform cut inflation from 159% in 1987 to 20% in 1989 — huge financing needs blocked any real progress.
Over the period 1989–94, says the study, Mexico stood to need over $50 billion; despite direct foreign investment, official loans, and bilateral deals, it was $23 billion short.
The Brady plan tackled this need head on.
Baker-style rescheduling and new money might have cut short-term financing needs, but could make no difference in the medium term.
Total debt would stay the same, or grow.
Yet without medium-term stability, flight capital — Mexican citizens held an estimated $50 billion abroad — would not return.
The Brady plan's answer was to cut Mexico's debt burden outright.
This meant swapping old loans for new, with foreign public funds backing the new debt.
Some $48.9 billion of Mexican debt had been rescheduled under the Baker plan in 1983–84 and 1986–87.
Under the Brady deal, the banks that made these swaps were asked to tear up the old loans and choose among three new deals in their place.
They could cut the face value of their loans by 35%, but get the old interest rate on what was left; keep the original face value, but cut the interest rate to 6.25%; or swap old debt for new debt at the old rates and face value, but with a promise to lend up to 25% more money, and without any of the security (in the form of zero-coupon bonds held by America's Federal Reserve) that the two more generous options offered.
To help guarantee the new loans, the World Bank, the IMF and Japan's government stumped up $3.9 billion of new money.
The deal, says the study, was good news for Mexico.
It cut net payments to creditors by $4 billion a year between 1989 and 1994 — twice as much as rescheduling would have done.
The $23 billion financing gap was filled.
More important, it gave Mexico the breathing space it needed to tempt back flight capital and boost GDP growth.
It worked.
Mexico is now the star economy in Latin America.
The creditor banks, reckons the study, did less well.
Before the deal the debt covered by the relief package traded at $19 billion on the secondary market; after the deal it was worth $19.1 billion-$19.9 billion.
Most of the $3.9 billion debt-relief money went to Mexico, not the banks.
Usually, the study points out, the creditors expect to get the lion's share of any debt relief.
The reason is simple.
If a deal goes ahead, the debtor gets more money, or owes less debt; it can pay back more of every remaining unit of debt than before the deal.
But the deal will work only if enough creditors, in Mexico's case 90% of them, agree to new — that is, worse — loan terms.
The trouble is that each creditor wants all the other creditors to sign new loan deals, while he keeps his original loan agreement, so that there will be more money, and he gets a bigger slice of it.
This is the classic ‘free-rider’ problem.
Economists have taken it for granted that to get round it, creditors will in practice need to get most of the benefit from debt relief.
Mexico solved the problem by ensuring that any banks that tried to ride free would lose everything.
Mexico, in effect, refused to honour the old loans — creditors either signed up to one of the three new deals on offer, or lost all their money.
Normally, any government trying this sort of trick would soon be being ordered to pay out in the courts.
But Mexico had the support of the big western governments; legal action was likely to be futile.
Western support for tearing up existing loan deals, then, held the key to Mexico's success.
But Mexico got this support only because it had sorted out its economy.
The same will apply to future Brady deals.
Countries with large commercial-debt problems will get no help from the Brady plan unless, like Mexico, they take on the drastic economic reforms that western governments demand as the price of their support.
This is right: without reforms, Brady money would be wasted money.
But Mexico shows that, where there is the political courage, the Brady plan can really work.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd
Limey, go home
WHEN Britain's Barclays de Zoete Wedd (BZW), the investment-banking arm of Barclays Bank, snapped up 40 American share salesmen and analysts from a recently defunct Drexel Burnham Lambert, there was much waffle about ‘global’ equity strategies and the like.
By dumping the new arrivals less than a year later, BZW, chaired now as then by Sir Martin Jacomb, has shown up its American adventure for the opportunistic grab it was.
The episode is another reminder of just how shaky are the foundations upon which the international aspirations of many of the City of London's securities houses are built.
When Drexel's former equity head, Arthur Kirsch, let it be known last spring that Drexel's entire American-equity department might be had as a going concern, BZW did not pause to carry out market research on the venture.
At the very least it might have asked itself how it intended to make money selling American shares to Americans at a time when Wall Street's native giants were incapable of doing so.
Instead, BZW found itself in a race against County NatWest, rival offspring of another British clearing bank.
By dithering over a deal (for a matter of hours, says BZW; five days, says County), BZW missed getting the cream of the ex-Drexel staff.
Mr Kirsch now heads County's securities arm in America.
County's share of New York Stock Exchange trading has grown sixfold, to 1.6%.
The business has even made a bit of money this year.
Slicing off BZW's New York limb is a simple enough job; operating on the firm's Tokyo branch, a more deeply grafted part, will prove altogether harder.
Yet, mostly because of the collapse of the Japanese equity-warrant market, BZW's Tokyo business swung from a profit of £30m ($50m) in 1989 to a £30m loss in 1990, three-quarters of all BZW's equity losses last year.
While foreigners on Wall Street have largely failed to break into the domestic-equity business, the gaijin houses on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) have won Japanese institutional business at the expense of the big four Japanese securities houses, mostly because the foreigners offer better research.
Yet in terms of market share, BZW stumbles near the bottom of the league of 25 foreigners in Tokyo.
At the same time it has been lumbered by its parent bank with needlessly big headquarters in Tokyo's most expensive rented building.
BZW's cheapest option — pulling out of Tokyo — is barely feasible, given that it got its TSE membership only last November after much huffing and puffing from Margaret Thatcher when she was prime minister.
The price of BZW's ill-considered worldwide expansion in equities has already been paid by Howard Coates: in February he was sacked as head of the firm's equities division, though he remains with BZW.
Mr Coates appears to have carried the can for a strategy that had the enthusiasm of some of those at the top of Barclays Bank, as well as of David Band, BZW's chief executive, and of Sir Martin, who is also a deputy chairman of the parent bank.
Mr Coates's replacement, Jonathan Davie, thinks that, in Britain, the firm is well placed to benefit if share-trading volumes continue at the pace of the first quarter of this year.
Under Mr Coates, the British-equity business was put on a sounder basis — first by carefully working out the profitability of each of its institutional clients and, second, by then sacking a fifth of its British-equity team.
In Japan Mr Davie wants to boost its weak sales side; he also wants to get into the highly lucrative business of index arbitrage by next February.
The trouble is that many other firms want to do the same, so the profits of the business will probably be lower by then.
In the meantime the Japanese equity operation continues to be BZW's biggest money-loser.
Even if BZW now gets its core equity business on a sounder footing, it still has two potentially divisive problems.
The first is deciding what kind of investment bank it ought to be.
In London, the firm, created for London's 1986 Big Bang by the merger of a stockbroker and stockjobber, has a formidable team of bond and equity salesmen; it also has good contacts with company finance-directors and treasurers.
The combination wins BZW mandates for new issues of securities.
Rather than stick to these ‘origination’ strengths, however, BZW has tried to build the kind of corporate-finance department long boasted by old-established merchant banks that advise on mergers and acquisitions.
Sir Martin, like his head of corporate finance, Graham Pimlott, were both once at Kleinwort Benson, just such a merchant bank.
Creating a brand-new department at BZW has proved expensive (annual costs run at £20m-30m), which is raising internal questions about its viability.
The second problem concerns relations between Barclays and BZW.
These have understandably been strained by the collapse of BZW's profits to £5m last year, as well as by the £110m the bank had to pay last November to buy out most of the 200 former partners who together owned a fifth of the investment firm.
As a result, BZW must boast the highest number of millionaires of any City house.
Sir Martin has long fought BZW's corner at Barclays.
Many of those who run BZW are his men, including Mr Band.
Yet in November he retires as BZW's chairman, to be replaced by Sir Peter Middleton, currently permanent secretary to the Treasury.
Without Sir Martin, the men and policies he stood for will undoubtedly come under fresh scrutiny.
Which is never a bad thing.
WHAT CHERNOBYL DID
Not just a nuclear explosion
The effects of what happened at Chernobyl five years ago this Friday will earn a double place in the history books
FIVE years ago the fall-out from the world's worst nuclear accident began to show up on radiation-monitoring equipment in Scandinavia.
Within days satellite photographs had found the place where something had gone appallingly wrong, in the northern Ukraine, in the Soviet Union.
Only after two weeks did any serious Soviet account of the disaster — a tale of bungling bureaucratic incompetence, clouded by secrecy — begin to filter out.
The world was, and remains, shocked.
But in the Soviet Union itself, on this anniversary of the horror on April 26th, people are not just remembering a five-year-old bungle.
The bungling has never stopped.
The story of Chernobyl's medical and environmental aftermath is now emerging in the Soviet Union as confusedly as the story of the original accident.
It comes out in bits and pieces, usually unconfirmed.
Cover-ups are still attempted.
Some Soviet scientists have recently reported leaks in the vast, allegedly airtight, concrete sarcophagus that encases the smouldering remains of the infamous reactor number four.
Radioactive dust is said to be escaping from 800 pits in the area in which dangerously contaminated debris was buried soon after the accident.
Statistics are all over the place.
Vladimir Chernousenko, the scientific director of the 20-mile exclusion zone around the reactor, claims that the number of immediate Chernobyl deaths — still officially listed as 31 — could in fact total as many as 7,000.
All the men who worked to shovel radioactive waste off the roof of the reactor, he has told British viewers on Thames Television's ‘This Week’ programme, are probably dead or dying.
Other Soviet organisations have claimed that the accident may yet cause up to 300,000 deaths.
Reports measuring the effect of lower radiation dosages conflict with these scare stories, sometimes drastically.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna is close to finishing its report on the first systematic study of the Chernobyl region by outsiders.
Most scientists expect that it will show, as in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, that low doses of radiation have no detectable effect on humans or animals in the first years after an accident.
Real changes will show up only in the next ten or 20 years, and even then they may be hard to monitor against the confused background of deteriorating conditions in today's Soviet Union.
Whatever the scientists ultimately conclude, all of their data will immediately be disputed, dismissed, changed, and used to further the case of competing politicians in the Ukraine, in neighbouring Belorussia, and in the central government in Moscow.
The bitterness of the debate shows that not all of Chernobyl's damage was medical and environmental.
Equally important, if not equally quantifiable, were the psychological and political effects of the accident, which finally destroyed — both in the Soviet Union itself and for outsiders — the myth of Soviet technological infallibility, and any remaining belief in the honesty of Soviet officialdom.
Chernobyl is a big reason why the Ukraine and Belorussia, in 1986 docile republics dominated by Brezhnevite Communists, now have mass strikes and increasingly pugnacious independence movements.
A flicker of glasnost, which went out
Why, five years later, are respectable scientists still unable to agree on the extent of the damage?
Had it occurred in the West, competing teams of scientists from many different countries and institutions would have carried out a mass of surveys of the victims and of the environmental damage.
Scores of research projects and endowed chairs would have been set up.
Because it happened in the Soviet Union, the Chernobyl post-mortem began in secrecy.
Inhabitants of Pripyat, the town nearest to the reactor, were told nothing for 36 hours, and not tested for signs of radiation sickness until much later.
Even during the evacuation — more than 180,000 people were moved — most of them were not told what had happened.
Because the accident went unmonitored during the first few vital hours and days, certain statistics will never be available.
Nobody knows, precisely enough to be of scientific or medical use, how much radiation was released into the air, how far it spread, and what the original doses received by people underneath it might have been.
Western scientists were not allowed on the scene then, and for many months afterwards had only restricted access.
For early data it is necessary to rely on Soviet sources, and Soviet equipment, alone.
Yet Grigori Medvedev, the chief engineer at Chernobyl in the 1970s, says in his recent book (see page 125) that Soviet-made Geiger counters registered high levels of radiation on men who had not yet been into the zone, and nothing at all on those who had recently emerged from it.
Since then some of the most sensitive parts of the story have been deliberately kept secret.
The fate of most of the soldiers and volunteers who fought the fire at the plant, exposing themselves to vast doses of radiation, remains a mystery.
This is almost certainly because the decision to send them in during the later stages of the accident was political (western-made robots might have been used instead, had the new Soviet leader, one Mikhail Gorbachev, been willing to let the West learn the extent of the disaster).
The Soviet government is still nervous of letting the world know what happened to these people.
Many subsequently returned to their homes, all over the Soviet Union, where the local doctors may not know that they worked at Chernobyl and may therefore not recognise subsequent cancers or other problems as radiation-linked.
A Communist Party directive quickly classified all information about Chernobyl victims as secret.
Even where secrecy was not ordered from above, the squabbling Soviet bureaucracy worked against the efficient collection and distribution of data.
In the Ukraine alone at least five different institutions, each with different kinds of equipment of varying quality, are conducting Chernobyl-linked biological and environmental research, which they do not share with one another.
All of these institutions are in conflict with their counterparts in Belorussia and with the top Soviet nuclear institute, the Moscow-controlled All-Union Centre for Radiation Research.
The struggle is for both money and power.
The central authorities in Moscow know that, if they keep tight control over the information they possess, they will also keep their contacts with foreigners and their access to foreign money; Soviet scientists have been known to try to sell Chernobyl statistics to the West.
So, to get information about the effects of Chernobyl radiation on Ukrainians, the Ukrainian health ministry is reduced to begging Moscow for local medical statistics.
Even when they wanted to be helpful, badly trained Soviet doctors and under-equipped scientists were a hindrance.
Morris Rosen, of the IAEA, says that the outside study — the first to be conducted with the full co-operation of the Soviet government — ran immediately into technical problems.
It got, for instance, not too few statistics but too many, of dubious relevance.
Soviet doctors, uncertain what a radiation-related health problem might be, recorded many ailments.
To nobody's surprise, they discovered extremely high levels of anaemia, diabetes, bronchial disorder and child deaths — which might have been the result of poor diet, pollution and the general mess of the Soviet economy.
When western doctors went in to look for thyroid and other illnesses, they could not tell whether the apparent increase they discovered in these things was due to radiation or to the fact that no one had done such a thorough diagnosis before.
The IAEA scientists found that some medical equipment, and certain techniques of medical examination (such as those used to test for thyroid problems), were unfamiliar to Soviet doctors, and tended to produce different results depending on who used them.
This fatal triad — incompetence, secrecy and bureaucratic squabbling — added to the fears of those who lived within reach of the disaster's effects.
The Soviet people got no systematic reports.
Their newspapers provided odd bits of information, such as plutonium-poisoning maps that frightened readers rather than reassuring them because they did not know how to interpret them.
Figures purporting to show the amount of radiation in a given place failed to distinguish between natural, background radiation and radiation caused by the accident.
No one ever explained what the danger zone was, or that people living outside the no-go area might still be in danger of contamination.
Months after the accident, the town of Narodichi, well outside the no-go zone, was found to be polluted, when other towns within the zone were relatively free of radiation.
All this increased the natural confusion and suspicion.
In Kiev information collected from local hospitals by Greens, showing high rates of infant mortality, were not checked against statistics in similar cities elsewhere in the Soviet Union.
In one recent poll 399 out of 400 patients at the Centre for Radiation Studies in Kiev said they did not believe what their doctors told them.
Even among those not so badly affected, ignorance about radiation produces powerful if sometimes irrational fear.
At vegetable markets in Kiev old ladies argue over the relative radiation levels found in carrots and cabbage.
Women leave, afraid to bear children in a city so close to the reactor.
Even in the western Ukraine, far away from Chernobyl, headaches and sleeping troubles are put down to the disaster.
No figures can quantify this fear.
It was certainly magnified by the forced evacuation, the disruption of living habits, the loss of familiar homes and farms, the government's immediate lies.
And, as the Soviet Union deteriorates in other ways, the fear and cynicism grow stronger.
The political radiation
Mass anxiety is never without political consequences, and in a totalitarian society there is no more radical emotion than disbelief.
For millions of people in the Ukraine, Belorussia and the rest of the Soviet Union, Chernobyl was a huge new revelation of their government's untruthfulness.
If the newspapers lied to cover up such a disaster, they would lie about other things too.
That the falsehoods concerned a nuclear power plant sharpened the dismay.
For in the Soviet Union nuclear energy is a potent symbol of high technology and modernity.
When Soviet citizens began to question the merits of nuclear energy, they were questioning one of the most basic assumptions of their system: that communism would lead them into the high-tech future, and that the high-tech future would be greatly better than the present.
Because the Soviet government's promise to bring the modern world into even the most backward of the republics was a pillar of the union's legitimacy, the Chernobyl disaster also led the republics to question the need for the union.
If the centre could no longer deliver the goods, reasoned many Ukrainians and Belorussians, the union itself no longer had any purpose.
After such a blow to belief in the government's honesty and in its all-seeing ability to fix things, the leap to anti-communist opposition was all the easier to make.
This happened very quickly.
In the old days, local politicians fought one another to obtain the prestige, jobs and money which came with a nuclear power plant.
Today Ukrainians see their nuclear experience as an example of Moscow's environmental imperialism, on a par with dumping toxic waste in Africa.
The disaster was quickly followed by the birth of Rukh, the Ukrainian independence movement.
‘Chernobyl helped us to understand that we are a colony,’ says Sergei Odarich, the secretary-general of Rukh.
By April 1988, on the second anniversary of the Chernobyl eruption, fear had made the previously obedient people of Kiev brave enough to hold their first post-glasnost street demonstration.
The issue remains central to the actions of the Ukrainian opposition.
The miners now on strike have put the closing of the remaining Chernobyl reactors high on their list of demands.
Opposition politicians gain popularity by demanding a bigger exclusion zone (see map), lower levels of ‘acceptable’ radiation in food, air and water, and more compensations for Chernobyl's victims.
Now the political consequences have spilled over into Belorussia, and especially into the Gomel area, the part of Belorussia nearest Chernobyl.
The Belorussians believe that more than 70% of the fall-out landed on them.
They contrast this angrily with their Communist-dominated government's proud claim to be the only republic still handing over its budget dues to Moscow.
‘Look how little money we are getting to clean up Chernobyl’, was the complaint during last week's strikes in Minsk.
All over the rest of the Soviet Union, the Chernobyl explosion was a powerful force for making people think about the environment.
During the past two years work on seven nuclear power stations has been halted, two existing ones have been closed, and the planned construction of four more has been cancelled.
Elsewhere in the neighbourhood suspicions of nuclear power have grown just as strongly.
Poland has stopped building the only atomic plant it had in mind.
The Germans have shut down the remaining Chernobyl-style RBMK-1000 nuclear plants in the eastern part of their now united country.
Nuclear nervousness predates Chernobyl; but what happened there greatly strengthened it.
The effect on Gorbachev
Did the explosion reach even into Mr Gorbachev's foundations?
It is worth looking at the way the Soviet leader's behaviour changed in the course of the crisis.
His first reaction was the standard, old-style Soviet one: disappear, set the jaw, don't say anything in public.
The first comments on Soviet television, three days after the explosion, were curtly uninformative.
The Kremlin's first reaction to western reports was an attempt to say the West was trying to make a mountain out of a molehill.
Then, after 18 days of stonewalling, Mr Gorbachev at last came out and faced the issue.
Perhaps the disaster had reinforced the belief already taking shape in his mind, that something was deeply wrong with the Soviet system.
Perhaps the enormity of the facts and figures reaching his desk enabled him to overcome, for the first time, the old Marxists who were already resisting his attempts to change the way things were done.
Others certainly remember Chernobyl as a turning-point.
Marshal Sergei Akhromeev, now Mr Gorbachev's military adviser and, at the time, the man who organised the evacuation of Pripyat and entombed the stricken reactor, says that the two most memorable days in his life were the German invasion of his country in 1941 and the day of the Chernobyl explosion.
Seven hours after he learnt of the accident, ‘it was already clear to me how dreadful the consequences were.’
He was in regular telephone contact with Mr Gorbachev.
For whatever reason, tactics changed abruptly on day 18.
All would be revealed, Mr Gorbachev said on national television, for the Soviet people had a right to know.
Soviet television crews were taken to the site, telegenic Soviet doctors were produced to discuss the likely consequences.
Reports of the disaster, albeit strictly censored ones, were shown to the Soviet public for months afterwards.
This was Mr Gorbachev's first important act of international public relations and domestic damage-control.
It was also his first signal to the Soviet press that old habits were no longer good enough.
It led to unprecedented openness towards the IAEA.
It was the birth of glasnost.
The attempt at honesty about Chernobyl had strict limits, and was neither thorough nor consistent; but it was a break, never mind an incomplete one, with the Soviet past.
The cost is high, in two ways
Five years later, as glasnost and perestroika go sour together, the economic consequences of the Chernobyl disaster are still being calculated.
The building of the now leaking sarcophagus alone cost an astonishing amount of money, on the best estimate available.
As much again, or more, may be necessary to replace it.
Even if the political will were there, the money to put it all right again is not.
The governments of an independent Ukraine and Belorussia would find it almost as hard to raise the cash as the Soviet government has done.
Even higher costs come in the form of lost land and buildings.
Some 5m hectares of Ukrainian farmland and 1.5m hectares of forest are now contaminated.
In Belorussia 20% of the agricultural land can no longer be used.
The distribution of food, never well organised, has been badly disrupted.
Even more expensive for a nation with an acute housing shortage is the loss of whole towns.
Pripyat stands today like a ghost city, its abandoned ferris-wheel creaking in the wind, its expensive, paved streets empty of pedestrians.
Some members of the Ukraine's anti-communist opposition suspect that the cost of evacuating contaminated areas is the chief obstacle to the discovery of new danger zones.
‘Human beings are replaceable, land and buildings are not,’ says a local Green, Volodymir Tikhii.
Still, the demand grows for more compensation, for better-defined danger zones, for tougher restrictions on food grown in contaminated areas.
The subject continues to fuel Ukrainian and Belorussian demands for independence.
And yet it is as if the Gorbachev regime, having half-learnt its lesson in 1986, has forgotten it again.
Problems with the Chernobyl power station continue to be dealt with on a crisis-by-crisis basis.
Just a year ago one of the still-functioning reactors was closed down after another emergency released a small cloud of radioactive vapour into the air.
The Soviet government, which once seemed to have recognised the danger of secrecy, evasion and falsehood, may now be slipping back into old ways, in even bigger matters than nuclear power.
In the end the consequences of Chernobyl may be more than a horrifying collection of statistics about unleashed radiation, deformed lives, premature deaths.
Because the disaster revealed something about the basic nature of the Soviet system, at a moment when it had at last become possible to do something about that system, the political consequences may prove the most profound of all.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
Economical truths
As the D-mark weakened following a poor election result for Germany's ruling Christian Democrats, the dollar hit a 16-month high.
European central banks stepped in to stem its rise.
Amid dire warnings from Valentin Pavlov, the Soviet prime minister, that industrial production would plunge and millions of jobs would be lost, the Supreme Soviet endorsed his emergency plan to rescue the Soviet economy.
But the plan needs the co-operation of the republics.
With the federal government under increasing strain, Yugoslavia devalued the dinar for the second time in four months, this time by 31%.
Suzuki is to take a 40% stake in a joint venture to make cars in Hungary.
It will be the first Japanese car-maker to go into business in Eastern Europe.
Electronic soup
AT&T's hostile bid for NCR turned a lot friendlier when Ma Bell met the computer company's asking price of $110 a share, though none of the $7.5 billion will be in cash.
With an eye to cutting costs, AT&T Microelectronics and Japan's NEC are jointly to develop basic technologies to make new generations of chips.
Meanwhile, as Europe's electronics companies demand that the European Commission protect them from Japanese competition, NEC is thinking of taking a stake in Groupe Bull, France's loss-making state-owned computer maker.
Another setback for Japan's NHK.
A rocket explosion at Cape Canaveral destroyed a satellite being sent up by the public-broadcasting company, possibly wrecking its chances of starting to broadcast commercial high-definition television in November.
Keeping account
Guinness Mahon, a British merchant bank 65%-owned by Bank of Yokohama, gave warning that bad debts will plunge it into an after-tax loss of £35m ($67m) for the six months to March 31st.
This prompted the Japanese bank to cover the loss with a £50m rights issue.
Another British merchant bank, Kleinwort Benson, owned up to writing off loans totalling $23m which it had sunk into an American partnership controlled by one of its directors.
Even more embarrassingly for the struggling bank, it had to fork out a further $2.4m to end the agreement.
Results from American investment banks exceeded expectations, confirming the recovery in the securities business.
An increase in underwriting and trading volume produced sharp gains in the quarterly net incomes of Salomon, Morgan Stanley and Alex Brown.
Salomon more than doubled its first-quarter net income, to a record $273m.
Fleet/Norstar and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts beat Bank of Boston and Bank of America in the battle to buy Bank of New England.
Fleet, which with KKR will pay $625m, becomes the largest bank in New England.
American banks will have to write down by a further 10–20% their medium- and long-term loans to Brazil and Argentina, increasing pressure on the second-quarter earnings of some of the big banks.
Looking good
A consortium led by Lockheed and also involving Boeing and General Dynamics beat out a rival consortium of Northrup and McDonnell Douglas to win a $65-billion order to build the next generation of America's stealth fighter.
Over 20 years the Lockheed-led group will develop and produce 648 aircraft.
Pratt & Whitney is to build the engines.
The amount spent on European television advertising will double by 2000, to $27.5 billion in real terms, according to Zenith, a subsidiary of Saatchi & Saatchi.
And while more than $1 billion was spent on advertising on satellite television in 1990, that will quintuple by the end of the decade, taking a fifth of all advertising expenditure.
American oil companies did well in the first quarter, helped by fat profits on refining.
Mobil's net earnings rose to $710m, up by 78% on the same period of 1990.
Amoco, not far behind, rose 72% to $803m.
Strong gains came from other oil producers too, including Texaco, Chevron and Occidental.
Pay up
At Lloyd's of London insurance market, 3,000 names (investors) are being asked to come up with £100m ($170m).
The names, on marine syndicates 406 and 448, will have to cover 1988 underwriting losses relating to asbestosis and pollution claims in America.
A judge in Alaska rejected part of the $1 billion settlement of the Exxon Valdez oil spill, saying it was too lenient.
The ruling could mean years of further delay.
The Senate passed a bill to reform American futures markets that will tighten trading rules, increase market surveillance and transfer oversight of stock-index futures to the Fed.
And in London pit trading of equity options is to move to the small screen.
Germany's privatisation agency, the Treuhand, launched the largest D-mark commercial-paper programme so far, to raise DM2 billion for east German restructurings.
With more and more restaurants dropping the expensive charge card, American Express is to lower its fees, but only to those outlets that file charge records electronically.
In Japan Amex is joining with Sumitomo Bank to issue personal charge cards and make loans.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
The poor man's space-probe
APART from expensive moonshots, meteorites are man's only source of rocks from outer space.
Stones from the sky arrive infrequently, so there is a premium on discovering old falls to feed the voracious appetite of science.
One of the best places to rummage for these antiques is Antarctica.
Any rock lying around on the frozen continent stands a good chance of being a meteorite as — the occasional ice-piercing mountain aside — there is nowhere else to come from but the heavens.
And antarctic meteorites have two added bonuses: they are refrigerated and they are free from contamination by other rocks.
In an impure world, they retain the purity of their chemical message.
Americans and Japanese have been collecting in Antarctica for years.
European scientists have decided that they need to catch up.
The EUROMET project, with a budget of 400,000 ecus ($480,000), has been given the job of building an EC meteorite mountain, and teams of hardy Euro-researchers are already out scavenging.
Ian Franchi, of Britain's Open University, and his colleagues have just spent three weeks on crampons and skidoos, combing the ice sheet for these itinerant boulders.
The first haul of 264 specimens has now arrived at the Open University's base in Milton Keynes.
Europe's scientists are waiting to pounce.
What do they hope to discover?
Most meteorites are thought to come from the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter.
Since rocks of different composition absorb and reflect light differently, astronomers can usefully classify the asteroids into 16 groups on the basis (more or less) of their colours.
Meteorites fall into similar groups.
For example, Vesta, the fourth-largest asteroid, reflects light in a unique way: some 50 meteorites match it closely.
So by examining meteorites it is possible to discover what some of the asteroids are made of without ever having to visit the asteroid belt.
A few of the rarer sorts of meteorite have been chipped off much larger blocks: the Moon and Mars.
Presumably they were thrown clear of these planets by the impact of yet bigger meteorites.
In the case of lunar stones it is relatively easy to tell whether or not this has happened: there are the expensive Apollo samples to compare them with (most lunar rocks are chemically similar).
The Martian ones were harder to identify.
Sometimes they have gas trapped inside them.
Analysis of the light absorbed by the atmosphere of Mars reveals a picture of what it is made of; it matches the gas in the meteorites.
So the rock-scavengers know that they have got bits of the Martian surface without having to go there.
One Martian meteorite already recovered from Antarctica, which has been analysed at Milton Keynes, contained significant amounts of organic chemicals.
Collected elsewhere, these might have been written off as terrestrial contamination.
Since they come from Antarctica they are almost certainly genuine.
This does not mean that life has been found on Mars.
‘Organic’ does not, in chemical jargon, mean biological; it means of the type found in living creatures.
This is quite a find nonetheless.
The American Viking craft that landed on Mars reported that there was no organic material there — another victory for the poor man's space-probe.
Not all meteorites arrive with a whoosh and a bang.
Plenty of small ones just float down through the atmosphere like dust — which, at a tenth of a millimetre across, is pretty much what they are.
Two Frenchmen, Michel Maurette and Michel Pourchet, comprise a second EUROMET team.
They set themselves the difficult task of disentangling this cosmic dust from the earthly sort.
Once again Antarctica, pristine and pollution-free, beckoned.
Mr Maurette, who works at the CNRS Nuclear and Mass Spectrometry Centre near Paris, and Mr Pourchet, a glaciologist from the University of Grenoble, devised a scheme to prise micrometeorites from the continent's icy grip using hot water and careful filtration.
Fire and ice
Even that turned out to be no simple task.
The ice to be melted must be of the transparent blue variety, which is free from fine cracks through which the hot water can drain.
Such ice is rare and generally found near the coast.
Having taken such pains to avoid industrial contamination and natural dust, the team ran into a novel form of pollution that repeatedly clogged their filters: penguin feathers.
However, perseverance paid off and, after melting and filtering 256 tonnes of ice, the team came up with 10,000 micrometeorites.
Some, they believe, are truly ancient.
The meteorites that are fragments of asteroids are sprightly youngsters of a mere 4.6 billion years or so.
But micrometeorites often have a loose texture, which suggests that they have never been part of anything big, heavy and hot.
Many probably pre-date the solar system, having perhaps been protected inside comets.
Some, more recently arrived, may have been captured directly from interstellar space.
A few of the more peculiar large meteorites also seem to contain cosmic dust.
Edward Anders at the University of Chicago, and Ernst Zinner of Washington University in St Louis, Missouri, have identified crystals of diamond, graphite and silicon carbide.
The last two appear to come from several different red giants — stars nearing the end of their lives — that shed their atmospheres into space as they died.
These red giants were probably close neighbours of the infant sun and the ejected matter fell into the solar nebula.
The diamonds carry evidence of the explosion of a supernova.
Since some astronomers believe that the shock wave from a supernova would be needed to trigger the formation of a solar system, direct evidence of such an explosion would be illuminating, to say the least.
The new pages of the meteoritic book waiting to be read in Paris and Milton Keynes may provide such evidence.
Or they may yield a piece from another planet, such as Mercury.
This is one Euro-mountain that can never grow too big.
Superconducting ships
Unpropelled to stardom
KOBE
A BOAT that can run swiftly and silently without a churning propeller has been the dream of naval commanders ever since the first submarine slid gurgling beneath the waves.
The American navy has been tinkering for decades with ‘silent drives’ to out-fox the sonars on enemy ships.
The Soviet navy has been doing so as well.
Both have experimented with ways to propel a vessel using giant superconducting magnets and powerful electric currents instead of conventional screws.
A Japanese shipbuilder, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, has now joined the race.
Its silent prototype — a 30-metre-long surface craft called Yamato-1 — is to be launched in the next month or two.
It, too, uses a superconducting electro-magnetic propulsion (SEMP) system to slide silently through the water.
But, unlike the American or Soviet prototypes, the Yamato-1 is no warship in the making.
It is the basis for a range of ocean-going ferries and cargo vessels that Japanese shipbuilders hope to sell in a decade's time.
The Japanese work on SEMP drives began in 1985 under the auspices of the Ship and Ocean Foundation.
By 1987 trials had begun using a 2.6-metre model in the foundation's test tanks in Tsukuba, the ‘technopolis’ north-east of Tokyo.
From the Tsukuba results, a design for a 30-metre hull was developed by a team led by Seizo Motora of Tokyo University.
Refinements for the propulsion system came from a group working with Kensaku Imaichi at Osaka University.
Ships using SEMP drives rely on the ‘Lorentz force’ for propulsion.
This is the thrust that is generated when a magnetic field is applied vertically downwards into the water and an electric current discharged horizontally across its path.
The result (which can be deduced from Fleming's left-hand rule — the only two-fingered gesture in the school syllabus) is a force at right angles to both the current and the magnetic field — ie, along the main axis of the boat.
The trick is to pack as much magnetic punch into as small an amount of seawater as possible.
That means using magnets made of a superconducting material such as niobium-titanium alloy.
Operating at temperatures close to absolute zero (-273C), super-magnets deliver the most powerful fields available and consume practically no electricity while operating in their superconducting (ie, loss-free) state.
The Mitsubishi boat has two main SEMP drives, each with six superconducting magnets wrapped around its own duct through which seawater is drawn.
Electrodes inside each duct pass a current across the seawater as it flows through the duct.
The resulting Lorentz force causes the water to be squirted energetically through the exit nozzle.
Together the Yamato-1's two SEMP drives provide enough punch to push the 185-ton (525-cubic metre) experimental craft through the water at eight knots.
So far, the Ship and Ocean Foundation has spent some ¥5 billion ($36m) on the Yamato-1 and its SEMP drives.
The private foundation fostered wide support for the project by sprinkling money over lots of Japanese manufacturers.
One set of thrusters was made by Toshiba, the other by Mitsubishi.
Kobe Steel supplied the liquid-helium refrigerator for super-chilling the magnets close to absolute zero.
Sumitomo Electric developed the superconducting coils for one set of thrusters, while Furukawa Electric provided the other set of coils.
The vessel itself was built by Mitsubishi in its Kobe shipyard.
More money has been promised to cover the coming sea trials.
The purpose of the Yamato-1 is to demonstrate the principles embodied in the SEMP drives.
With a top speed of only eight knots, it will not win any blue ribands.
It will not even compete with ordinary propeller-driven ships — let alone hydrofoils or hovercraft that skim the surface at 40 knots or more.
Ultimately, though, a ship with no rotating parts in its engine room should be not only quieter, smoother and more efficient than a conventional vessel, but a good deal more reliable as well.
Because the thrust propelling the ship is directly proportional to the current applied to its seawater electrodes, it should be easy to control.
Reversing the polarity of both thrusters would bring the vessel to a rapid halt; swapping the polarity of just one of them would let it turn on a sixpence.
Japanese engineers reckon that ships with SEMP drives ought to fill a niche between conventional bulk-carriers and speedy surface-skimming craft — providing a means of carrying, say, 300–400 passengers at 25–30 knots.
To become commercial, though, the magnets will have to be made at least two-three times more powerful and a good deal lighter than they are today.
Not an insurmountable problem, say the designers.
Since it is the world leader at fashioning new-fangled superconductors made from thallium and bismuth (which work at higher and more convenient temperatures), Sumitomo Electric sees no reason why it should not be supplying coils for sea-going SEMP vessels before the decade is out.
Aluminium and heart disease
Troubled waters
IMAGINE a line drawn across Britain from the Severn estuary to the Wash.
North of the line there is a significantly higher risk of sudden death from heart disease than there is south of it.
Above the line, broadly speaking, colder, wetter regions of well-weathered rocks produce soft drinking-water; south of the line, younger rocks lead to harder water.
Could these facts by any chance be related?
Derek Birchall, a senior scientist at ICI, based in Runcorn, argues that a vital something possessed by the harder waters of the south can help to explain its lower rate of sudden heart attacks.
He thinks that the magic ingredient is silicon: a relative deficiency of silicon in soft water lets aluminium concentrations build up, especially under the conditions produced by acid rain.
It is this increased amount of aluminium that may damage the heart by interfering with its electrical activities.
Aluminium is the third most abundant element on earth.
Too much of it in the body causes anaemia, heart disease, bone disorders and fatal dementia.
Yet most people never suffer the consequences of aluminium poisoning.
Why not?
According to Mr Birchall, the answer could be that they are protected by silicon and that the main biological job of silicon is simply to help living things keep aluminium out.
Silicon is one of several elements that biochemistry textbooks like to describe as a ‘required trace element whose precise biochemical role is still unknown.’
True, silicon is involved in the formation of bones and connective tissue — tendons, ligaments and cartilage — but nobody quite knows how.
Without silicon, plant growth is retarded and animals do not grow properly (they also suffer damage to their bones and cartilage).
Everything returns to normal when silicon is reintroduced into the diet.
What Mr Birchall noticed was that a diet lacking in silicon seems to have the same effect as one rich in aluminium.
Most of what is known about acute aluminium poisoning comes from studying patients treated for kidney failure by dialysis.
This treatment concentrates aluminium in the blood, and the anaemia, bone disorders and dementia that result from aluminium poisoning all respond to a reduction in aluminium levels in the dialysis water.
Mr Birchall also knew that acid waters, which contain higher levels of aluminium, are lethal to fish.
But when he kept salmon in water with lethal levels of aluminium and much higher silicon concentrations, not only did the fish survive, they absorbed less aluminium than other fish kept in normal water.
Aluminium likes silicon: it has a greater affinity for inorganic silicate than for anything else.
In water it forms aluminosilicates, which are inert as far as living organisms are concerned, so long as the level of acidity stays low — the silicon will make the aluminium separate out harmlessly.
But if the acidity rises (for example, because of acid rain), it dissolves and can enter organisms.
The reason why aluminium is so toxic is that living things mistake it for iron.
The atoms of the two metals have similar sizes and carry the same electrical charge.
But whereas organisms can prevent a lethal build-up of iron by wrapping it in a protein called ferritin, no such defence exists against aluminium.
To make matters worse, the protein that transports iron inside organisms, called transferrin, also carries aluminium.
Unless there is some way to block it early on, aluminium has virtually free access into cells — which is where it does most of its damage.
In cells, aluminium interferes with the release of calcium (among other things).
This disrupts the message system that cells use to communicate with one another, in which electrical impulses are carried across membranes by charged atoms of calcium and chloride.
If cells do not communicate efficiently, the organs they are a part of — be they hearts, brains or bones — cease to work properly.
Some work needs to be done before the connection between aluminium and heart disease is proved to everyone's satisfaction.
But Mr Birchall has started a hare that many researchers will be watching.
Not a goat to goad
THANATOSIS sounds a nasty thing to have; in fact it can be a clever thing to do.
Some insects, snakes and other preyed-upon creatures — most famously the opossum — have perfected the useful trick of feigning death if captured in order to escape when a predator relaxes his grip.
But that is not what the myotonic, or ‘fainting’, goat is up to.
Frighten or surprise one and it will stiffen and keel over in what appears to be a dead faint.
Less than a minute later it will be on its feet again as if nothing had happened.
The whole performance seems utterly pointless.
And dangerous for the goat: a myotonic goat picking himself up from his umpteenth collapse of the day might wonder why natural selection had not taken its course long ago and dispensed with his unhappy breed.
That it did not do so may in part be due to the late H.H. Mayberry, from Marshall County, Tennessee, who in the early 1880s paid a stranger from Nova Scotia $36 (about $800 in today's money) for four of the goats on the strength of their ‘strange fits or fainting spells, the like of which had never been seen before’.
Many of the goats described in the 30 or so scientific studies that have since been published on the phenomenon (the earliest in 1904) can be traced to those bred and cared for by Mayberry.
Whether his fainting goats were a new mutation or part of an older breed remains unclear.
In his prize-winning paper, ‘The Myotonic Goat: A Historical Perspective and Description of Hereditary Myotonia in an Animal Model’, James Atkinson of Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee, notes that the goats' condition closely resembles Thomsen's disease, a hereditary disorder in people that causes spasms and rigidity in certain muscles when any attempt is made to move.
The sudden movement of a frightened myotonic goat trying to flee triggers a rapid stiffening of limbs, back and neck that either leaves the creature unable to move or causes it to topple over, legs rigid and outstretched.
The goat remains conscious throughout, no doubt cursing its parentage.
Transforming a herd of myotonic goats into a passing-out parade is not as easy as it sounds.
Warm goats are less prone to fainting, as are pregnant or (oddly) dehydrated ones.
Old, cold goats tend to be easiest to topple.
Repeated attempts to provoke an attack may cause the symptoms to disappear altogether.
The garish shirt that caused a myotonic goat to faint at first sight may have little effect once the animal has grown used to its owner's poor taste.
Fainting goats have come a long way since the days when farmers used them as decoys to protect herds of sheep from coyotes (coyote arrives; goat faints and is devoured; sheep escape).
Like pot-bellied Vietnamese pigs, the goats are fast becoming trendy pets, changing hands at up to $1,000 a time and catered for by groups like the International Fainting Goat Association (newsletter: Fall in Love With Fainters) and the Tennessee Fainting Goat Association.
Fainting derbies are planned, with owners competing to see whose goat can faint fastest — premium fainters spend most of their lives horizontal.
Perhaps Mayberry should have let evolution take its course after all.
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE
Gamblers, masters and slaves
Corporate finance is being blamed for a mass of political, social and economic ills.
But, argues Bill Emmott, that is to confuse cause and effect
WHEN the capital development of a country’, warned Maynard Keynes, ‘becomes the by-product of the activities of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-done.’
As with many of the epigrams to which England's most famous economist was prone (when he wasn't prone in his Cambridge bed placing his college's stockmarket bets), it would be hard for a reasonable man to disagree.
Casinos sound such arbitrary and decadent places; nobody would want their economy's fate to be determined in one.
Yet a casino is exactly what many bosses, politicians and pundits believe to have been the home of Anglo-American corporate finance in the past five years or more: a den of greed and chance in which the only way to win is to fix the roulette wheel.
That is a harsh judgment to make of the freest-flowing and most sophisticated (that is, complicated) financial markets the world has ever known.
Yet it is fast becoming conventional wisdom about the liberal markets of America, Britain, Canada and Australia, both at home and abroad in their less financially liberal rivals, such as Germany, Japan and France.
The financial booms of takeovers, junk bonds, bundling and unbundling have come and gone, leaving behind successes and failures but also — and most importantly — some powerful lobbies among the losers.
Main Street is pitted against Wall Street, industry against the City of London.
More broadly even than that, for the first time since the 1930s finance is taking centre stage in debates about economic policy, industrial competitiveness and even relative political power.
Apart from the casino, another favoured metaphor is that of master and slave.
In Anglo-American finance, it is held, the proper order of things has been reversed: finance should be the slave of industry, but has instead become its master.
Companies have shouldered too much debt, to play their own financial games or to avoid being taken over; the balance of risk and reward has become skewed; the ethics of advisers and intermediaries have come into question; the market has departed from good sense and sound financial principles, and has passed, with Alice, into a looking-glass world in which words, prices and obligations mean only what people claim they mean, nothing more.
Little has altered to make finance in America and Britain suddenly different from the way it was 10, 20 or even 30 years ago.
Both countries have, however, moved sharply into recession at a time when economic growth in Japan, Germany and France has remained strong.
The coincidence of free financial markets with relatively poor economic performance therefore seems more potent than during the 1970s, when inflation and dear oil slowed the whole industrial world.
And while free markets have become even freer, relative economic performance has seemed to get even worse.
At the same time the creatures on either side of the divide between finance and industry — banks, investment banks and companies — are all squealing.
Freed from restrictions about who to lend to or how much to pay to depositors, and freed from the responsibility of supporting their corporate clients through thin times, American and British commercial banks are weaker than at any time in the past 50 years.
They have more dud loans and narrower profit margins than before — and certainly more than their German, French or even Japanese rivals.
Investment banks made hay while takeovers shone, but now find themselves with too many overheads, too few profits and no friends at all.
Corporate customers have been freed to borrow wherever they like, to raise money in new ways, even to compete with their banks.
Yet they, too, complain of aches and pains, of being squeezed by a ‘credit crunch’ under which borrowing has become harder even while interest rates have been falling.
Having survived the spate of hostile bids from rivals and raiders, they now feel under attack from a different direction.
Thanks to all this, finance has moved out of the spreadsheet and into the political arena, the courtroom and even into trade negotiations.
American congressmen will soon be debating the most radical financial reform that country has contemplated since the 1930s, one that could change the links between finance and industry by ending the old separation between commercial and investment banks, and by allowing industrial firms to own banks.
At the same time, finance is becoming inextricable from questions of industrial policy: do differences in the cost of capital, or in how it is provided, or in the way in which firms are owned, affect firms' competitiveness in America, Europe and Japan?
An ugly new phrase is anguished over in America and in Britain: corporate governance.
Is this now in servitude to the financial markets?
Europeans are edging towards setting up a single capital market with consistent rules about takeovers and the rights of shareholders.
But many are alarmed by what they have seen in Britain and America.
And Japan, many people's paradigm of how finance should serve industry, has recently had markets that did the best impersonation of a casino anywhere.
Regulators are busily clearing up the mess.
Yet European and American rivals believe that Japan's casino helped its industry become more competitive rather than harming it.
In this storm about finance, one phenomenon attracts more of the thunder and lightning than any other: the takeover bid, especially the sort that is ‘hostile’ to incumbent managers.
The frequency of such bids has made it seem that stockmarket valuations are arbitrary, that bidders are stealing money from somebody else rather than creating wealth, and that American and British managers spend too much time shuffling assets and too little investing (that is, building factories) for the future.
Many recent takeovers involved debt: the move of companies out of equity and into debt sounds like a deliberate move away from health and towards sickness.
Since no one would willingly make such a choice, there must be coercion involved.
All that, at least, is the conventional wisdom.
Yet when a wisdom becomes as conventional as this one, it is time to question it and even to think the opposite.
It is also time to worry, for such a strong consensus generally has an over-reaction on its coat-tails, one that could do more damage than the action to which it is a response.
There may well be problems in the freeish markets of Britain and America.
But the difficulty with finance is that the more fluent a market becomes, the harder it can be to trace the original cause of an outcome.
Money is like a body of water; a pebble dropped in here, a sluice gate opened there, can send ripples or waves that erode coastlines or flood cities far away.
Junk bonds and hostile takeovers are mechanisms and outcomes rather than causes in themselves; building sea walls against them will not deal with their origins.
The water will find other ways to transmit the forces which it is carrying.
The aim of this survey is to separate effects from causes, which are sometimes financial, often political.
It will begin with puzzles rather than solutions, for the growing disillusion with free financial markets comes laden with paradox.
Tempting as it is, the idea of free markets as casinos or slave-masters sits uncomfortably with many of the other big changes that have swept over international finance.
If the criticisms are fair, a great deal else needs to be reconciled with them.
Backward, and yet forward
A principled, worldwide massage parlour owned by everybody: doesn't that sound better?
FOUR puzzles stand as bouncers against the idea that corporate finance has descended into the gambling den.
All are ways in which modern finance has appeared to progress and to become more helpful to corporate treasurers and to underlying economies, not less.
The first is a puzzle that will not surprise those who put economists alongside journalists and car dealers in their not-to-be-trusted rankings.
It is that, during the time when Anglo-America's takeover frenzy was at its peak, financial economics at last got the recognition it deserved.
In 1990 three American financial economists — Harry Markowitz, William Sharpe and Merton Miller — shared the Nobel prize for economics.
Five years earlier another American finance theorist, Franco Modigliani, had also been given the prize.
There is a famously long time-lag between when work is done and when the Nobel committee doles out accolades for it.
Yet there had also been a long lag before financial markets began to apply many of the points these academics made.
Yes, apply: for although theoretical, their prize-winning work was relevant to the real world.
And it was in the 1980s that it was finally applied, in particular the ideas contained in two articles by Mr Modigliani and Mr Miller in 1958 and 1963.
These established the three principles — known as the Modigliani-Miller propositions, or MM — that have fathered much of the thinking about corporate finance ever since.
Briefly (for MM will reappear later), their point was that whether a firm raised its money through debt or equity did not, itself, affect the firm's value.
Nor did its dividend policy.
Other things mattered to value, especially tax and the incentives given to managers, and would determine whether a firm had borrowed ‘too little’ or ‘too much’.
Sounds familiar?
In large measure, America's spate of takeovers, leveraged buy-outs, recapitalisations and so on came straight out of Modigliani and Miller.
The ideas may not always have been understood, or properly applied.
Or you might argue that they were misleading after all.
But the puzzle remains: far from departing from ‘sound principles’ of finance, the frenzy was moving towards them.
Puzzle number two is that other changes in financial markets were meanwhile making it easier for such principles to apply.
All around the world, markets have become less arbitrary, not more so, as barriers to the flow of capital across borders have been lifted.
Since Japan and Britain scrapped their exchange controls in 1979 and remaining European controls disappeared during the late 1980s, investors have been far freer to seek out the best returns and to diversify their risks.
Markets that were kept apart by government barriers, by blockages to information or by differing perceptions of a borrower's creditworthiness have been bridged by free flows, by computers and by a vast new trade in the swapping of debt.
In more and more instruments, the law of one price is free to apply: close financial substitutes are allowed to be swapped for one another, so trading (arbitrage, in the argot) can ensure that they fetch the same price.
Currencies, commodities, government and corporate bonds: all are now issued and traded around the clock and around the world.
Cross-border flows in and out of stockmarkets have also grown rapidly, though equities are still not easily substitutable for one another across borders.
They retain their national character thanks to differences in accounting, disclosure and tax, and to restraints — some official, some from inertia — on institutional investment in foreign shares.
Those and other imperfections do raise questions about differences in the cost of capital between companies and countries.
But they do not alter the basic fact: markets now operate more fluently, reliably and consistently.
Treasurers in the massage parlour
Free, cross-border flows at the touch of a computer key: this suggests unreliable ‘hot’ money rather than the loyal cold sort.
Perhaps, but at the same time the means to cope with market movements have developed enormously, bettering the lot of corporate treasurers all around the world.
Twenty years ago the treasurer's job was simple and none too arduous.
His basic task was ensuring that his company did not run out of money.
To finance any investment plans decided on by his board, he kept a pretty stable relationship with the firm's banks.
Now he has to work far harder.
But this is more out of opportunity than necessity.
Bit by bit, the treasurer's range of choice has widened beyond the basic questions of whether or not to borrow or to raise equity capital.
Should the debt be at a fixed or a floating rate?
In which currency?
When should these decisions be changed?
Should an instrument come with an option attached allowing investors to buy or sell at particular prices?
Is it worth paying a fee to have a cap or floor put on the interest rate?
Broad, liquid markets in securities ‘derivative’ from the basic shares and bonds have given treasurers the chance to make more choices about the financial structure and risks adopted by their companies.
Each decision involves a calculable opportunity cost of not having opted for something else.
In this sense, finance has become not the treasurer's master but a far more obedient slave.
Companies can massage and manipulate their finances better than ever before.
In principle, they can fix their financial risks and get on with the job of dealing with the commercial ones.
Or they can opt to take financial risks.
But it is their choice.
For the people, against the people
Perhaps the greatest puzzle of all, however, is essentially political.
It is that the view of Anglo-American finance as a casino full of rapacious capitalists has become popular at the same time as those countries' companies were being taken over by the people themselves.
Or, rather, by their pension funds.
In 1950 more than half the shares on the New York stockmarket and in London were owned by individuals.
By 1989 a survey showed that London's figure had fallen to 21.3%; there are no recent figures for New York, but the trend is similar.
Dominance has passed to institutional investors, which mainly means pension funds and life-insurance firms.
Company chairmen deplore this: they say they want ‘wider share ownership’, to get ordinary people back into the stockmarket.
Yet in fact that is the opposite of what they want.
Pension funds represent the wide ownership of shares.
Rightly or wrongly, what chairmen want is to narrow ownership back into the hands of rich individuals.
Pension funds have been around for a century or more, but their modern form was set in 1950 when Charles Wilson, then president of General Motors, set up a fund for his workers.
Unlike most of the other 2,000 pension funds then operating in America, the GM fund did not principally invest in the company's own shares nor limit itself to fixed-income securities.
It sought to provide for workers' retirement by broad, diversified investment in the American economy, that is, in equities.
In effect, it chose to pay for workers' deferred consumption by staking a claim on America's corporate profits.
Once GM's union agreed to the plan, a bandwagon rolled: within a year 8,000 new plans had been written, all along the same lines.
This idea of the diversified, fully funded scheme (that is, run to match assets with present and future pension liabilities) has been applied most widely in America and Britain, where its principles have been written into law; it has also spread into Japan but scarcely at all into Germany, where company pension reserves frequently remain invested in the firm's own shares.
The change has produced what Peter Drucker, in a 1976 book, ‘The Unseen Revolution’, called pension-fund socialism: the only successful form of socialism ever implemented.
The profits from capitalism are redistributed to millions of people, not through taxing and public spending but through collective investment trusts.
If industry is anyone's slave, it is these people's.
And they have a long-term interest in maintaining industry's prosperity, for that is what pays their pensions.
Hence the puzzle: the biggest and most immediate beneficiaries of the takeover boom of the 1980s — that is, those shareholders who sold to bidders — were retired Americans, present and future.
The people took most of the money, but decried it as a decade of greed.
Four questions for corporate finance
One man's efficient, interconnected global market is another man's arbitrary and nationally divisive casino.
One man's new tricks to manage cash flows and control risk are another's source of financial enslavement and greater risk-taking.
One man's benign, pension-fund socialism is another's source of short-term greed.
With that sort of divide, the task for policy-makers and treasurers alike of working out what problems exist — let alone what to do about them — becomes hazardous.
Yet the puzzles themselves provide a route-map.
The problem throughout is to identify what motivates financial participants to choose one option rather than another in pursuing the basic aims of any corporate system: to create wealth and to keep on doing so.
The issues boil down to four questions about corporate finance:
What sort of financial structure — rich in debt or rich in equity — is better at helping a firm create wealth?
What is a firm worth?
Does the cost of capital for firms vary between countries, and if so why?
Does the way in which a firm is owned affect the answers to the first three questions?
America is the closest thing to a financial laboratory for these sorts of questions, so it is there that most of the answers should be sought.
In the past century the institutions and the external stimuli affecting the relation between finance and industry have been chopped and changed.
Once, banks cuddled up close to industrial firms.
Now, they are further apart.
But one thing has been ever-present: the takeover.
From Morgan's nose to Milken's wig
In America takeovers never die.
They only change their form
‘HOSTILE takeovers do not happen here, because of our culture; they are against our way of doing business.’
Who might say that?
Currently, similar phrases can be heard in Japan, France and Germany, among others.
Until 1958, when Siegmund Warburg masterminded a hostile bid by an Anglo-Canadian consortium for British Aluminium, it would also have been said in both Britain and America.
Though it was not the first hostile bid — Charles Clore and Isaac Wolfson beat it by several years — the aluminium battle was a prototype for future bids in which a buyer made an offer to the shareholders of a listed firm against the wishes of its managers.
Yet, for another 15 years or so, people in Wall Street and the City of London still told visitors that hostile bids were taboo.
Now they are two a penny — or rather they were until 1990.
Soon enough, they will be again.
But are they really new?
It depends on how you define ‘hostile’ and how you answer the question: hostile to whom?
America's first hostile bids did not go over the heads of the managers, but that did not make them friendly.
In those days the owners were the managers.
One of America's earliest takeover battles was in 1868, when Cornelius Vanderbilt fought Jay Gould, Jim Fisk and Daniel Drew for the Erie Railroad.
This trio controlled it, but did not own most of the shares.
Their successful defence, apart from moving their headquarters to a New Jersey hotel protected by a gang and three cannons, was to issue themselves a mountain of new shares (which was illegal, but they bribed the judges).
The following year a battle between Erie and another railway, the Albany and Susquehanna, ended in a real fight between two armies of thugs.
The tactics have changed.
But there is nothing new about takeovers, as such.
Nor is there anything especially American or British about them.
What changes, or what differs between countries, is why they happen and how they take place.
And this is not determined by culture or the rapaciousness of financiers.
It is set by two main things: the economic circumstances of the day, and the way in which firms are owned.
Morganatic mergers
The rush of mergers and acquisitions in America in the 1980s was not the largest the country has ever known.
It was in nominal, dollar terms, and measured by the number of firms involved.
But, as the table shows, after adjustment for inflation some of the mergers that took place during this century's three previous spates of restructuring — 1897–1904, 1925–30 and the late 1960s — were as big as the top takeovers of the 1980s.
And measured in proportion to the size of America's economy (see chart 3), the consolidation around the turn of the century was far bigger.
The first and biggest wave of this century contained none of today's hostile offers.
Many of the mergers were designed to set up monopolies to raise prices in industries such as steel, electric power and railways.
The firms created include General Electric, Eastman Kodak, International Harvester and U.S. Steel.
The original shareholders were chiefly entrepreneurs who had set up their own firms during the previous half century, such as Cornelius Vanderbilt, John Rockefeller and Andrew Carnegie.
Most had by then gone public, but still controlled their firms.
There was no need to pit shareholders' interests against management.
The issues were simpler: what price to pay to the current proprietors?
Setting that price was not a friendly process.
The seller, if he is to receive cash or debt securities rather than shares, would want a price that reflected as fully as possible the value to the buyer of creating a monopoly (and thus the lost chance for the seller to do it himself).
The buyer would want the price to be well below the value of his monopoly, to maximise his profits.
According to Ron Chernow, in his recent book ‘The House of Morgan’, many negotiations took place in all-night sessions in the ‘black library’ of J. Pierpont Morgan, he of the bulbous, acne-ridden nose and the investment bank that then dominated American finance.
Essentially, the talks were hostile: Morgan used the threat of price war to force firms to sell out and merge.
The formation of U.S. Steel in 1901 was Morgan's biggest deal, forging together 11 firms that accounted for half America's steel industry.
In some ways the deal could have been done yesterday.
Morgan paid $480m (in bonds, not cash) for Carnegie Steel, a price Andrew Carnegie later felt was $100m too low.
U.S. Steel was floated at a market capitalisation of $1.4 billion (about $22 billion in today's money, well behind the 1989 takeover of RJR Nabisco, but many times larger as a proportion of stockmarket value or GNP).
The bond and share issues were handled by a syndicate of 300 underwriters (though dominated by a handful), whose fees totalled $57.5m (now around $1 billion).
Its share price began at $38, soared to $55 but then crashed to $9 during a market collapse in 1903.
By early 1904, according to Mr Chernow, its cash flow could not even cover its dividends.
A reckless deal driven by short-term greed?
Yes, but the firm, now called USX, is still America's biggest steelmaker.
The most notable thing about the whole period from 1894 until 1929, however, was the close relationship between banks and industry.
The shift from family ownership to full stockmarket-listings marked the first time when the owners of American firms ceased to manage them.
Instead banks, led by J.P.
Morgan, held big equity stakes in companies, had seats on the board and kept a close eye on management.
Banks had shareholdings in each other; so did industrial firms, even competing ones.
When firms were restructured, these links gave the various shareholders some community of interest in the outcome, and in rescuing one another during hard times.
This is essentially the keiretsu system now used by Japanese industrial groups.
It is also a model for what many would like to see after America's banking system is reformed this year.
But is it a good model?
The idea is stuffed with ironies.
Pierpont Morgan was attacked by populist Democrats — whose descendants now argue for closer links between banks and industry.
He was attacked for at least two good reasons.
One was that the most direct beneficiaries of this way of doing things were a handful of banks — J.P.
Morgan, Kuhn Loeb and four others.
Competition among them was a sham.
Their fees for issuing securities or handling reorganisations were huge.
For them, greed was good.
The other was that although most Morgan companies prospered, so they should have: they were monopolies, or implicit cartels thanks to the cross-shareholdings.
Morgan and others gave birth to the modern American corporation, but ensured that its mouth contained a silver spoon.
A recent study by Bradford De Long of Harvard University concluded that the presence of a Morgan partner on a company's board added up to 30% to a share's value.
But it is impossible to say whether this was because the partner's monitoring of management boosted efficiency or because the Morgan association generally indicated a monopoly.
The enduring point is that close links did not make finance the slave of industry.
In Morgan's time, it was the other way around.
Or, less charitably, the consumer became the slave of both.
Goaded to spread his efforts to Europe, Pierpont said ‘America is good enough for me.’
William Jennings Bryan, the Democrats' unsuccessful presidential candidate, replied: ‘Whenever he doesn't like it, he can give it back.’
Nor did close links between banks and industry prevent panics and crashes, booms and slumps, though there were fewer than in the late 19th century.
Into the 1980s
This does not mean the idea would never work, buttressed perhaps by better antitrust enforcement.
But it would come with costs.
Henry Kaufman, the Wall Street economist known as Dr Doom, fears precisely this sort of outcome from this year's banking reform: a corporatist structure whose benefits to insiders would come from concentrating ownership and limiting competition.
Lucky for some, unlucky for others.
Nothing could seem further from the days of J.P.
Morgan than the life and times of Michael Milken, evangelist of junk bonds, shy wearer of a toupee and now resident of a federal prison.
In the takeover boom of the 1980s which Mr Milken came to epitomise, banks and firms stood far apart.
Investment banking had been legally separated from commercial banking since the 1930s; and in the 1960s and 1970s firms ceased to want bankers of either sort on their boards, because of conflicts of interest.
Most bids were hostile, or were responses to actual or threatened hostile bids.
The only monitor for management was the market.
But was it really so different?
The similarities begin, perhaps, with symbols.
It is not long ago that Mr Milken was being lionised as the greatest revitaliser of American business since J. Pierpont Morgan.
Even his employer, the now bust Drexel Burnham Lambert, can trace its origins to Drexel and Company, a Philadelphia bank which in 1871 created a partnership called Drexel Morgan.
This was J.P.
Morgan's forerunner and whose junior partner was Pierpont.
The biggest similarity, however, is financial.
What Mr Milken did was to make huge pools of capital available to finance takeovers.
A range of investors — banks, savings and loan associations, insurance companies, rich individuals — stood ready to buy high-yield (‘junk’) bonds.
Mr Milken offered a stamp of approval to both sides: investors trusted that he offered only good deals, not bad ones; takeover bidders and bank lenders to the bids got a ‘comfort letter’ from Mr Milken assuring them that the finance would be there if the takeover went ahead.
As an intermediary he offered liquidity and unrivalled knowledge of both sides of the market.
In return he earned billions.
Pierpont Morgan did much the same.
He acted as syndicator for huge pools of capital.
His name served as a seal of approval that a deal would go ahead and that it would be profitable.
He was paid for that seal and for his unrivalled knowledge.
He too made billions.
This is not to condone what either did.
Mr Milken was able to offer good deals because he was often breaking the law.
The risks to investors in some deals turn out, with hindsight, to have been badly understated which, in turn, helped to create crazily high prices.
Morgan was creating monopolies.
He was more involved with the businesses and the actual mergers than Mr Milken ever was, but not necessarily to the good.
At the end of their eras, both men became the subject of investigations: Mr Milken's in court last year and Morgan's in front of Congress's Pujo committee in 1912–13.
Unlike Mr Milken, though, Morgan did not go to jail.
The real differences between the mergers of the 1980s and previous waves do not lie either in the hostility of the bids or the nature of the financing.
They lie in why the restructuring took place and in the forms of ownership and capital structure that were assumed to be superior to the old.
As an Irish prime minister once said after listening to a long debate between his cabinet colleagues: ‘I understand how it works in practice.
But how does it work in theory?’
Theories at the bottom of their jargon
Do markets know the price of everything but the value of nothing?
INVESTORS, traders, bankers and managers often operate with only a partial model in mind about why they are doing whatever it is they are doing, and what principles lie behind it.
Yet the past five-ten years have been remarkable for the amount of attention given in America to such principles.
Management consultancies, forever eyeing profitable fashions, have set up teams specialising in the valuation of firms, often staffed by former academics.
Current academics have become financial consultants themselves as well as highly-paid expert witnesses in court disputes.
Many of their theories have led corporate America hurtling towards debt.
Valuation lies at the heart of all takeovers, however they are financed.
A firm is worth whatever somebody else will pay for it.
That in turn is simply (but not uncontroversially) defined: the buyer is paying for the future flows of cash that the firm is expected to generate, over and above its costs.
The present value of those future flows should then be worked out by discounting them with an interest rate equivalent to the firm's cost of capital, the weighted average of its cost of borrowing and of equity.
Put another way, the cost of capital is the cost to lenders and investors of not having done something else with their money: the rate of return they could expect to earn on investments of equal risk.
To its lenders and investors, the firm has a value only if it is earning more than its cost of capital.
Otherwise, the financiers should have put their money elsewhere.
There is plenty of room for debate about this calculation — over how to guess at future cash flows, over what period to take, over how to work out the cost of capital, to name but three.
It can be made more complicated by trying to value the choices that managers could make to affect their future cash flows, such as closing a factory, and the choices that are contingent on other choices.
But the simple formula is enough to show what the variables are.
So why were so many firms — and bits of firms — bought and sold in the 1980s, and why did their values vary so much?
The basic answer lies in the guesses about future cash flow.
If someone thinks they could raise that future flow, they will pay more for the firm.
They might think they can do so by managing it better, by motivating the managers better, by putting the firm together with something else, or in other ways.
They might be wrong, but that does not affect the issue (not at the time of the bid, anyway).
In turn, they will be able to buy only if they can raise the money to bid, which depends on investors' assessment of the risk and likely return.
That assessment might also be wrong (clue to a later article: junk-bond default rates) or it might be distorted by some other influence (clue: federal deposit insurance).
Valuation is often misunderstood.
Theorists say that a stockmarket is ‘efficient’ if prices take account of all information that is available that might affect a firm's future cash flow.
Efficiency sounds like a strong claim, but actually it is pretty weak: all it means is that current information is available to everyone, either because they know about it or because enough people do, so that it is fully represented in the price.
But how, the misunderstanding goes, can a market be efficient when on October 19th 1987 the New York stockmarket was suddenly and inexplicably worth 23% less than it was on October 16th?
The answer is that valuation is based on guesses about the future.
‘Efficiency’ does not mean that the market is sufficiently clairvoyant to gauge the cash flow of General Motors for the next 30 years or more.
The market is a combination of thousands of guesses, affected by feelings as well as facts.
Guesses are fickle creatures.
It is the same for takeovers.
In the early 1900s buyers of firms guessed they could raise cash flows through economies of scale and by limiting competition.
They were mostly right.
In the 1960s buyers thought they could raise cash flows by forming conglomerates, applying their management skills and diversifying risk.
They were mostly wrong, but it took several years to find out.
So the merger boom went on for a while, still fuelled by this false belief.
In the 1980s buyers thought they could raise cash flows by breaking up these conglomerates, by giving managers different incentives and controls, and by exploiting more fully tax breaks for debt interest.
It is still too soon to say in how many cases this was right.
But it is well-grounded in theory.
And the theory helps show why sometimes the idea was taken too far.
Enter Modigliani and Miller
Apart from the hurt feelings of departing managers, the most common reason for worrying about America's spate of takeovers in the 1980s was that it pushed firms heavily into debt.
This sounds unsafe.
It need not be.
Which is also why many of the takeovers may have been healthy rather than reckless.
The reason is grounded in the most basic issue of corporate finance.
Should a firm raise its money from its shareholders or by borrowing?
On the face of it, the answer might well be debt.
Debt is cheaper than equity, since investors take on less risk when buying it.
So to lower the cost of capital and raise the firm's value, should you not fill your boots with it, at least until you get so close to bankruptcy that shareholders and creditors start to demand higher returns to balance the risk?
The first innovation by Franco Modigliani and Merton Miller was to show that this is wrong.
If, on its own, borrowing more created value, then an arbitrage opportunity would arise between the two sorts of security.
As the firm takes on more debt, so the cost of equity (the total return demanded by investors) must rise in proportion.
The debt-equity ratio has no effect on the firm's value (see chart 4).
That depends only on its future earning power (that is, how well it is run) and on how risky is the sort of business it is in.
Like most economic theories, this MM proposition is true only ‘on certain assumptions’.
Naturally, they are unrealistic.
But it is the assumptions that matter.
By showing in what circumstances a firm's value would not be affected, Messrs Modigliani and Miller provided clues for the circumstances in which it might be.
The most important one, pointed out by the duo in an article in 1963, concerned tax.
America is one of the few countries that, in effect, taxes corporate income twice: once as corporation tax, and a second time as personal-income tax, when the income is paid out as dividends.
But interest payments on debt are treated as a cost of doing business, and so are deductible from profits before tax.
This means that the value of a firm would indeed rise as it took on more debt because it was paying less of its earnings out to the taxman.
In other words, more of the earnings would be available to pay to the other claimants, that is, shareholders and creditors.
Rather than the flat line seen in chart 4, the value of a firm would in fact slope upwards as the debt-equity ratio rises (see chart 5).
The implication was startling.
It suggested that if a firm had low debts and was paying a lot of corporate tax its managers were actually being incompetent: while proudly keeping their credit ratings high, they were handing their shareholders' money to the taxman.
To do their shareholders a favour, they ought to borrow more.
The value they were handing unnecessarily to the taxman offered a fine incentive to bidders to come along and do this for them.
It is surprising that markets did not react sooner to this.
In 1963 the corporate-tax rate in America was around 50%, giving firms a powerful incentive to borrow more.
They did so gradually during the 1960s — raising the share of cash flow taken by net interest payments from 5% in 1960 to 15% in 1970 — but then cut back.
By the time they began to rush more eagerly towards debt, in the mid-1980s, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 seemed to reduce the incentive by lowering the corporate-tax rate to 34%, as well as aligning personal-income-tax rates with those for capital-gains tax, removing one bias for investors towards long-term gains rather than immediate dividends.
However, the act gave with one hand and took away with another: for it also removed a tax credit for investment and the possibility of accelerating the write-down against tax of depreciation.
This, Mr Miller has argued (in a 1990 article in the Journal of Applied Corporate Finance called ‘The MM Propositions After 30 Years’), left the incentive to borrow as high or even higher than it was in 1963.
The discipline of debt
What other things might have affected firms' decision about whether (and when) to respond to this incentive?
There are three main possibilities:
Bankruptcy costs.
Although a firm's value might rise as it borrows more, the closer it gets to bankruptcy the higher will be its cost of borrowing.
Lenders will want to be compensated more for the risk of default.
Some creditors will demand extra protection, such as restrictive covenants attached to their loans laying down what the firm must do if things go wrong.
Bankruptcy proceedings also involve lots of spending on lawyers and accountants, and they distract managers from running the business.
According to Edward Altman, a finance professor at New York University, there are also indirect costs: some customers choose not to deal with vulnerable firms, and suppliers demand better terms.
These affect firms in some industries (manufacturing) more than others (retailing).
He has adapted the MM diagrams accordingly (see chart 6).
Thanks to tax incentives, a firm's value will rise as its debt-equity ratio rises; but after some point (its optimal debt ratio) the costs of financial vulnerability outweigh the tax savings, and the value falls.
These costs are not constant, however.
In particular, the cost of bankruptcy depends on the legal and institutional framework for handling it.
The easier it is to use courts or, even better, private agreements to sort out disputes between creditors and shareholders while the firm continues to operate, the lower the costs will be, and the greater the incentive to skate closer to the edge.
That is exactly what happened.
In 1978 America's federal bankruptcy code was rewritten in order to make it easier to file for bankruptcy, to reorganise under the protection of chapter 11 of the code, and then to re-emerge as a going concern even under the same management.
That in effect reduced directors' worries about bankruptcy, pushing them to borrow more.
Prudence versus liquidity.
Managers might not borrow as much as they should, on paper, if they want to retain a large reserve of borrowing power in case of problems.
That will depend on their view of the liquidity of both debt and equity markets: the more liquid they think these are, the less likely they are to sit on cash or to refrain from borrowing, and the more likely they are to pay large dividends.
If it feels easy to raise fresh equity from shareholders then dividend pay-outs will be high, for managers can easily ask for the money back again.
In the 1980s free-flowing, borderless markets did indeed make borrowing and capital-raising appear easier.
So reserves of borrowing capacity became less vital.
Concentration of ownership and control.
One trouble with being owned by conventional shareholders — whether they are pension funds or a mass of individual investors — is that ownership is dispersed and the pressure on managers is eased.
In that case switching away from equity and into debt offers two potential advantages: it tends to concentrate ownership (both equity and debt) into fewer hands that may care more about how the firm is run; and it provides a clear discipline for managers.
The value of equity can dribble gradually away with hardly anyone noticing; the share price simply falls.
But the value of debt provides a clearer and earlier discipline: interest payments have to be made.
Quite rightly and rationally, many American takeovers in the 1980s were driven by these theories.
If a firm was not maximising its future cash flows, and hence its value, an opportunity opened up for a bid.
A main way in which many firms were failing to maximise their value was in not exploiting the tax incentive to borrow.
The incentive to borrow was raised still further by a reduction in the costs of bankruptcy and an increase in market liquidity.
And high levels of debt offered one possible solution to problems of how to discipline managers.
Theory, meet practice
Corporate America has plenty of problems.
But debt is not one of them
FROM 1984–90 guesses that cash flow could be higher if assets changed hands or if a firm's financial structure was changed were made in $1.7 trillion-worth of cases in America.
In the period after 1986, many of those guesses were in the form of leveraged buy-outs, the use of debt finance to buy a firm from its existing shareholders and to make it a private company.
Such LBOs accounted for $216 billion-worth of deals in 1984–90, peaking at a total of almost $54 billion in a single year, 1989, before halving in 1990.
At the same time, firms not taking part in takeovers took on more debt, either gradually or in so-called ‘leveraged recapitalisations’— in effect self-takeovers in which firms' existing shareholders swapped some of their equity into debt.
This habit also reached a peak in 1989.
It will take several more years before most of these guesses will be proved to have been right or wrong.
However, some judgments can already be made.
One is that corporate America has not, as a whole, burdened itself with an excessive amount of debt.
There are debt problems in America, but they lie elsewhere — with the federal government, with consumers and in weakened financial institutions.
Another is that some guesses were quickly proved to have been wrong and ended up in bankruptcy.
They did so mostly because the transactions depended on the new debt burden being temporary while bits of a firm were sold, but the burden turned out to be lasting.
A third is that many of the buy-outs and recapitalisations succeeded because the managers knew something the shareholders did not about future cash flows.
But the fourth is that some of the financing was priced too low — for revealing reasons.
Start with debt.
The state of corporate America
If a business takes on more debt, its calculations can be thrown out by two things: if the interest cost of servicing the debt rises by more than was expected; and if the cash flow earned by the business falls by more than had been planned for.
British firms have been struggling with the first of these for the past 18 months, and for the past six or so have also suffered from the second.
American firms have been luckier: their interest rates have been falling, so the state of their cash flow has been the main worry.
From 1982 to 1989 the debts of non-financial firms in America rose by nearly 12% a year, way ahead of the 8.3% average annual growth for the previous three decades.
The debt-service ratio (the proportion of cash flow taken by net interest costs) rose to 20%, an all-time record.
That ought, on paper, to have made corporate America worryingly more vulnerable to recession, and to a downturn in cash flow.
It hasn't.
According to Stephen Roach, a senior economist at Morgan Stanley in New York, these overall figures disguise a radical change in the distribution of debt between industries.
And that distribution has become more safe, not less.
When Mr Roach first made this point in late 1988, many economists thought he was being too sanguine.
But now that America's recession has arrived, testing his view, the consensus has moved towards him.
Cyclical industries — those in which cash flow bounces up and down in booms and slumps — lowered their debt-service ratio during the 1980s, from 20% in 1982 to around 13% by 1988.
As cash flow has suffered, so the ratio has risen again, as it always does during recessions for these industries, which include transport, construction, communication and the manufacturing of durable goods.
But the big rises in indebtedness came in industries where cash flow is more stable, such as public utilities, services and the manufacturing of non-durables such as food and tobacco.
These industries' debt ratio hit 25% in 1985 and again last year (see chart 9).
No industry's cash flow is entirely stable; some of the services included in Mr Roach's definition may be more cyclical than they once were, since many are now handling tasks subcontracted by manufacturing firms (such as cleaning, waste disposal or advertising) and thus shift with the fortunes of factories.
This recession is proving especially painful for firms in advertising, retailing, the media and financial services.
But the broad point still stands.
Driven by the tax incentive identified by Modigliani and Miller, firms in the industries most able to resist recession have taken on most of the debt.
Chart 10 further shows that these industries also enjoyed much stronger growth in pre-tax profits in 1982–89 than did cyclical ones.
That is as appropriate an outcome as any theorist could have hoped for.
Corporate America could have been damaged in other ways by the takeover spree.
It might have been induced to spend lots of money on dividend payments and on buying back shares, to boost share prices and keep shareholders sweet.
It might have invested too little in building its capital stock, thus perhaps enfeebling itself in future competition with foreign rivals.
All of this happened during the past ten years.
But it is not at all clear that high dividends have been damaging, in themselves.
Nor is it likely that the fashion for takeovers and debt was responsible for America's poor rate of investment.
During the 1980s corporate America did pay out a large share of net profits in dividends, and it did spend billions on share repurchases.
But, as chart 11 shows, in 1982–89 the growth in dividends slowed in the stabler industries where most of the takeovers and borrowing were taking place and where profits were rising, while it accelerated in cyclical industries.
In any case there is nothing wrong in principle with handing money to shareholders through dividends or share repurchases (as long as it is tax-efficient); the money is not lost to the economy since it will be invested elsewhere.
And in the liquid and buoyant capital markets of the 1980s, firms knew they could raise the money again quickly if they needed it.
Chart 12 suggests what was going on behind these financial flows.
Investment in new fixed-capital stock did slow worryingly in America.
But it did so most sharply in the cyclical industries, where little of the takeover fun was happening.
Reviving investment will be one of America's biggest challenges in the next few years.
But the blame for its weakness cannot be laid directly at the feet either of the takeover or of debt.
It must be laid elsewhere.
In the valley of debt
The problem of excessive debt is narrowly focused
THOSE figures of Mr Roach even fit most people's chosen method of analysis: the anecdote.
Think of the manufacturing industries fighting head to head with Japan — cars, semiconductors, computers, telecommunications.
None of these has been prone to takeover bids.
General Motors and Ford have not been dogged by raiders — more's the pity.
The tyre industry did attract bids (including that of Firestone by Bridgestone, a Japanese firm), but that is true the world over (note Pirelli's bid for Continental in Germany).
So did the airline industry.
But most of the frenzy was elsewhere.
It is in the more stable industries that LBOs hit the headlines, including the biggest of them all, the $25 billion purchase of RJR Nabisco, a tobacco and food firm, by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR), a buy-out specialist.
Accordingly, it is in these industries that the search for success and failure must be concentrated.
The record so far is mixed.
There is no evidence to suggest that buy-outs are associated with cuts in spending on research and development, nor on investment, nor in any drastic way even in overall employment.
But some buy-outs have ended in the bankruptcy court or in acute distress.
Some conclusions are apparent, however, that help to show why buy-outs take place and what separates the wheat from the chaff:
A study by Tom Copeland, a finance academic turned consultant at McKinsey, of six LBOs among its clients found that half of the value created in the buy-outs came as a result of unexpected falls in interest rates.
In other words, their timing was lucky.
Mr Copeland also worked out what would have happened if a competing firm in the same industry had merely taken on the same amount of debt as the LBO did, without being bought out.
He found that in half the cases it would have done better than the buy-out.
In other words, the managers at the LBO could have achieved similar results without a buy-out; what they were doing was seizing the gain for themselves.
In such cases the guesswork about future cash flow is well-informed and thus the risks lower.
Later in the 1980s, shareholders became wiser to this and sought ways to narrow the knowledge gap between themselves and the managers.
The profitability of LBOs fell and the premiums paid to shareholders rose.
The excesses of overpayment in 1987–89 were made worse by a simple point: companies, whether buying themselves out or releveraging themselves in competition with outside bidders, paid their investment-bank advisers fees linked to whether the transaction was completed or not.
The investment bank therefore had a powerful incentive to make sure its client won its bids, regardless of whether it was paying too much.
Some buyers in effect paid their advisers millions to send them bankrupt.
Overpayment in debt causes more problems than overpayment in equity.
When one firm buys another and pays too much equity, shareholders suffer.
But they typically do so in silence and the firm remains in business.
If you pay too much in debt, you risk defaulting on interest payments; when you do, it causes more public fuss and pits creditors against one another.
For this reason, mistakes in the LBO boom have caused more fuss than mistakes in the merger boom of the 1960s, even though— so far at least — there have been fewer of them.
A big reason for over-leveraging lay in the very nature of this buy-out boom.
Much of it was not simply about shifting equity into debt, though that played its part.
It was about unravelling the merger mistakes of the 1960s: splitting up conglomerates, or else buying a firm and selling off divisions that were remote from its main business.
Such a purchaser would, in effect, buy a firm that he did not want to own for long in its present shape.
This is where most of the problems lie — and where the gambles were made.
In those circumstances, according to Mr Altman of New York University, the calculation about what capital structure to adopt became rather different from the conventional sort.
A choice between debt and equity was made on the assumption that this choice did not have to stand the test of time.
Think back to Mr Altman's diagram (chart 6) showing how bankruptcy costs affect the value of a firm and its optimal debt capacity.
A buyer for the long haul would not skate far past the optimal point and towards bankruptcy costs.
But unbundlers did, for they were borrowing for a short haul before assets could be sold: in that time, they assumed their guesses about cash flow would be pretty safe and that asset prices would carry on rising.
Mr Altman's colleague, Harvin Moore, made a study of LBOs in November 1990 for the Comptroller of the Currency.
He compared 11 successful buy-outs with nine failures (defined by bankruptcy, bond defaults or a restructuring caused by financial distress).
All LBOs begin with mindboggling levels of debt, way beyond those that Messrs Modigliani and Miller thought feasible.
But that is because the debt is temporary.
Chart 13 shows Mr Moore's findings: in the successful sample the average ratio of long-term debt to assets was 62.4% after the LBO had been made but it fell to 37.6% by the third year as assets were sold and debt paid off.
In the unsuccessful sample the initial ratio was lower — 46.4% — but it then rose to 52.7% by the third year and 71.1% in the fourth (by which time only four of the nine buy-outs survived).
Much of the buy-out boom was based on this kind of bet.
A raider — either the existing management or a buy-out specialist such as KKR — in effect took a gamble rather like that taken every day by a stockmarket dealer or currency trader.
They took assets on to their books assuming they would sell them at a profit shortly afterwards.
They did so with huge amounts of debt, not because that was the ideal financial structure but because the debt market was more liquid than the equity market.
Mr Milken could rustle up debt investors with a handful of telephone calls.
But this sort of gamble, based on a short-term guess, could go badly wrong.
It could go wrong simply if asset prices began to fall or if cash flows ebbed.
That is what happened in 1989–90.
It could go even more wrong if the forces encouraging lending or determining the risk of bankruptcy were to change.
That is what is happening now.
When the goalposts move
Corporate finance that looked right under the old rules can look drastically wrong if the rules change
THE assumptions under which a firm dives into temporary debt can be changed in a number of ways.
Interest rates could soar, asset prices could fall or cash flows could dry up.
But there are two other ways in which things could change drastically, making what seemed like a good idea turn very bad indeed.
One is if the providers of finance suddenly change their behaviour.
Another is if the limiting factor for all debtors — the cost of bankruptcy or near-bankruptcy — suddenly changes for the worse.
Both of these are happening in America, as a result of government policy or judicial decisions.
Mention junk bonds to an American manager and you had better duck.
These high-yield debt securities are considered to be instruments of the devil.
Michael Milken, their chief advocate, is now behind bars.
Yet at least one member of America's financial establishment thinks they are still worth studying.
J.P.
Morgan, the epitome of prudent finance and standard-bearer for intimate relationships between banks and their corporate clients, has formed a junk-bond research group.
As so often, the Morgan bank's judgment is sound.
There is nothing wrong, in principle, with junk bonds.
They are an unsecured loan, generally to a borrower with a low credit rating.
Both of these aspects should mean that the loan's yield is higher than for secured lending and for loans to highly rated borrowers.
As long as that yield compensates lenders for the extra risk, these bonds should find a ready market.
The trouble is that in 1982–90 the yield was not high enough.
Now that lenders have realised that, they have departed, shocked, from the market.
But they will return.
The yield on junk bonds did not compensate for their risks, for two related reasons.
The first was that the market was too young to have built up a proper record of likely default rates, especially during a recession.
The second was that a large group of junk-bond investors — the savings and loan associations — had an extra leg-up into high-yield investment because of federal insurance of their source of cash, deposits.
Junk bonds have been around, in one form or another, ever since the 1800s.
From 1950 until 1970, however, most American firms borrowed chiefly from banks.
In 1970 there was only $7 billion-worth of high-yield bonds outstanding, most of them originally issued as top-notch debt but later downgraded by rating agencies and the market.
The junk-default rate in that year was high: 11.4%.
But for the next two decades, as the volume of junk outstanding rose to $15 billion in 1980 and then $201 billion in 1989, the default rate stayed low.
Hence the choice of dates in a 1989 study on the market by Drexel Burnham Lambert, chief publicist for the instrument:
Between 1971–88, annual high-yield-bond default rates have averaged 2%…
Higher spreads from high-yield bonds have historically overcompensated for the default rate…historical evidence indicates that general economic downturns are not closely correlated with peak high-yield default rates…
Well, they are now.
As chart 14 shows, the annual default rate on junk bonds edged up in 1989 to 4% and in 1990 doubled to 8.7%.
This year it could reach 12–15%.
Even during the good periods, quoting the annual rate was misleading: the proportion of all bonds outstanding that defaulted in any given year was kept low by the huge proportion of new issues in 1986–90.
The cumulative default rate — the proportion of bonds originally rated as junk that eventually defaulted — always looked more alarming, at around 30%.
That will also rise this year.
Until the past two years Drexel was right that the total return from investing in a diversified portfolio of junk bonds overcompensated for the default rate.
These bonds paid three-five percentage points above yields on Treasury bonds.
According to Edward Altman, that would have been enough to compensate for an annual default rate of 5–6% — around three times actual default rates — so the returns looked delicious.
With hindsight, they were not so tasty after all.
Mr Altman has worked out what yield spreads above those on Treasuries would be needed to compensate for default rates at current levels.
The sums are complicated by another factor: when a bond goes into default, an investor can expect to recover some of its value when assets are sold off.
In 1985 recovery rates for junk debt were as high as 40%.
Last year, as asset prices slumped, they fell below 20%.
If they stay that way and if the default rate were to rise as high as 15%, the spread over Treasuries would have to be 15 percentage points to make junk break even.
Currently, the spread is about ten points, suggesting that the market expects a default rate of about 10%.
Moral hazard meets the junk bond
In such a young, fast-growing market as that for junk, many investors were bound to be novices.
Most were big institutions; at the end of 1988 30% of junk outstanding was held by insurance companies, 30% by mutual funds and 15% by pension funds.
But this market was new to them and to their own investors and trustees.
When junk became a dirty word in 1989–90 and Drexel Burnham went bankrupt, these investors panicked.
One sizeable group pulled out as a direct result of government policy, however: the savings and loans, or thrifts.
They had invested in junk in the first place because of government policy, accounting for 7% of bonds outstanding at the end of 1988.
Thrifts were banned by law from investing in equities which were deemed to be too risky.
But they were encouraged to take other risks because their basic business (lending for house purchase) was getting unprofitable, because supervision by federal examiners was weak and because federal deposit insurance in effect underwrote any risks they cared to take.
This moral hazard sent them lending billions to property developers and investing billions in junk bonds.
With their own risk underwritten, any yield over Treasuries looked attractive.
The thrifts' eagerness to buy helped keep that spread down.
This made junk finance look cheap as well as liquid.
One of Mr Milken's readiest pools of capital was in the thrifts.
But when thrifts went bust in their hundreds in 1989, necessitating a federal rescue that could cost the taxpayer $500 billion or more over the next 30 years, the goalposts were abruptly moved for junk borrowers, too.
The thrifts-rescue act of August 1989 at first contained a clause banning thrifts from holding junk bonds, later weakened to require them to place them in special subsidiaries insulated from deposit insurance.
The effect was the same: junk was suddenly less attractive, and anyway much of it was now in the hands of federal rescue agencies keen to sell as quickly as possible.
Thrifts should never have been subsidised and led into junk in the first place.
But, knowingly or not, junk issuers borrowed on the assumption that the subsidy would stay.
When the rules changed, the junk market collapsed.
So did marginal issuers still owing their ‘temporary’ debts.
The price of distress
Changes in bankruptcy rules can cause more bankruptcies
METHODS of dealing with failure differ around the world.
But the cost to a firm — or, rather, its owners and creditors — of entering liquidation is similar.
The destruction of share values, the need to auction assets, the cost of paying accountants and lawyers: these vary, but not by a huge amount.
What does differ, however, is the probability of liquidation: in other words, whether owners, creditors and the law will send a firm to the wall or rescue it.
That probability can, in turn, affect a firm's cost of doing business.
In recent years, Americans have come to admire the Japanese and German ways of dealing with this.
Typically, Japanese and German firms have main banks that step in when their client is in financial difficulties, and reorganise its management and its debts.
By reducing the probability that a firm will fail and by reducing creditors' potential losses in the event of difficulty, this helps to reduce the costs a firm takes on as it takes bigger risks and nears bankruptcy.
From 1979 until 1990 America evolved its own version of this.
Fewer firms there have main banks, so that option scarcely exists.
But nevertheless two lines of defence stand before liquidation:
Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code.
This was rewritten in the bankruptcy-reform act of 1979, to make it easier for firms to use.
Under supervision by a bankruptcy court, a firm in chapter 11 draws up a reorganisation plan which it then negotiates with the creditors while a judge arbitrates.
Similar legal provisions exist in Germany and Japan but big firms rarely resort to them.
Private out-of-court negotiations.
These are closest to the Japanese and German ways, but without a main bank to act as kingpin.
Shareholders and creditors agree to restructure debts and payment schedules and, often, to swap debt for riskier equity.
This sort of method is typical for international firms: Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation recently completed a huge private renegotiation with its 150 banks.
For companies, the private work-out is better — as long as the claims that have to be reorganised are not too complicated.
The legal fees are lower, the firm's reputation is (more or less) preserved and it is quicker.
Sales and investments are likely to be less affected than in a chapter 11 filing.
A successful private deal also means that creditors and shareholders have reached a voluntary consensus, which binds them in to the firm's future health.
And, for a deal to be reached, not all creditors necessarily need to be involved.
Filing for chapter 11 can make sense in other circumstances.
If there are hundreds of trade creditors (as for a retailer) or a lot of liability suits (for example, for asbestos sufferers), then firms benefit by using the courts.
They can also carry on getting credit through a special ‘debtor-in-possession’ facility: when Campeau, a highly leveraged Canadian-owned retailer, filed for chapter 11 last year it quickly got $700m of credit, which kept its Federated and Allied stores open for business.
Watch those goalposts
Arrangements for reorganisation, in or out of court, sound like a formality; a fixed outside factor of doing business.
They are not.
The way they operate affects the calculations and sentiments of investors, which in turn affects the returns required to compensate for risk.
If they did so in a consistent way, that would be fine.
But when the rules and circumstances change, those calculations are thrown out.
In the past two years it has become much harder in America to use the private method of dealing with distress.
That method is exactly the one best suited to LBOs or recapitalised firms that have overpaid for themselves and cannot meet their debts.
Chart 15, from Karen Wruck at the Harvard Business School, shows part of the answer why: in a highly leveraged firm, default is triggered by the inability to meet payments to claimants accounting for a much larger proportion of the firm's value than in a firm with more equity; and the loss to creditors of failing to agree on new terms is thus potentially bigger.
In LBOs, creditors are often also shareholders, making them less likely to jostle for advantage when times get tough.
They will not always agree.
But they have strong incentives to try.
Three things have made this harder to do.
One could not have been avoided: the collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert.
Until its demise, Drexel had not only cornered the market in issuing junk, it had also built a reputation with investors for reorganising the debts if a borrower neared default.
It made hundreds of private ‘exchange offers’ of new paper for old.
In a way, its function was similar to that of a Japanese main bank or of Pierpont Morgan in his prime.
With its departure and the collapse of the junk market, no one else has taken over the role.
The other two were avoidable, however.
The first came from Judge Burton Lifland of the bankruptcy court.
In January 1990 he gave a ruling regarding LTV, a steel firm in chapter 11, that brought big private negotiations virtually to a halt.
He ruled that if bondholders agree to a private swap of new bonds for old then their claim in any future legal case (for example, a chapter 11 filing) will be based only on the market value of their new bonds.
It sounds technical.
But it abruptly changed the incentives for creditors.
Previously, a bondholder could swap his old paper for new bonds with the same face value but, say, different rights and terms, without closing his options if the firm later went to chapter 11.
Now if he makes the swap he risks reducing his ultimate claim from, say, a $1,000 face value to the $400 market value.
This makes creditors much less likely to agree to private work-outs.
The second came in the 1990 tax act.
This changed the rules about the tax treatment of out-of-court settlements.
The benefits to the firm of debt forgiveness are now taxable if it happens privately, but remain tax-free if it happens under chapter 11.
From bad to worse
Judge Lifland's decision may have been right.
So may the 1990 tax act.
So was the way in which the Treasury department, Congress and federal deposit insurers jumped on thrifts' investments in junk bonds.
All these and more were right to criticise the excessive prices paid in some bids and buy-outs, pushed by subsidised money and investment bankers' greed for fees.
The trouble is that, after the event, all of these make the situation worse rather than better.
Financial decisions — how much to borrow, how much to lend, at what price — made under one set of rules and incentives go wrong when the rules change.
Until the goalposts moved, roughly half of publicly listed firms in financial trouble opted for the private route.
Now, more companies will end up in chapter 11 bankruptcy.
Just when banks and pension funds are trying to get more involved in the management of firms they lend to and own, so their opportunity to do so has been narrowed.
Judges will be in charge, and lawyers and (again) investment bankers will pocket the fees.
The price of financial distress has been raised.
Rather than moving towards the much vaunted Japanese way of doing things, America is moving in the opposite direction.
That is a pity: the price of financial distress is just about the only way in which the cost of capital for firms plausibly differs between the two rivals over the longer term.
Capital in competition
The cost of capital is widely misunderstood.
So are the policies that affect it
IF ONLY America's economy were isolated from the rest of the world, there would be less worrying about takeover bids, junk bonds, debt and bankruptcy rules.
Admittedly, some of the policies that cause problems with these things — federally subsidised capital, double taxation of corporate profits, bankruptcy laws — are decided upon as if America was, indeed, an island unto itself.
But it is damage wrought on the international competitiveness of American firms that really gives pause for thought.
The worry takes two main forms: that American managers spend too much time thinking about short-term earnings rather than making long-term investments; and that American firms face a higher cost of capital than Japanese or German rivals and so reject investment projects that others eagerly accept.
In most managers' minds, these worries are linked.
The same complaint about the cost of capital can be heard in Britain, Canada and Australia.
One reason is that interest rates are affected by government policy, so the cost of capital can be blamed on government (ours).
Similarly, interest rates appear open to manipulation and hard-to-prove subsidy, so differences across borders can also be blamed on governments (theirs).
Either way, the complaint crops up again and again.
At the World Economic Forum in Switzerland in early February, a Canadian politician was heard to complain that his country's free-trade deal with America could not work because Canadian interest rates are five percentage points higher than American ones, unfairly hampering Canadian business.
In the same month America's National Advisory Committee on Semiconductors, a joint government-industry lobby, blamed its own industry's decline on America's high cost of capital.
Britons complain about it all the time: nominal interest rates at 15–20%, depending on the borrower, make most managers believe that their capital costs more than anybody's.
These complaints have one thing in common: they are wrong.
Or, at least, they are misleading, directing attention at the wrong things.
They are based on misconceptions about what the cost of capital is, and what affects it.
The fact that there are misconceptions is, however, important in itself.
For there is a vast gap between what businessmen think their cost of capital is and what most finance theorists say it is.
Like many theories, the verdict of the corporate-finance academics is not terribly helpful at first sight.
Their view is that the after-tax cost of capital in America, Britain and Japan is roughly the same for companies posing similar risks, after adjusting for inflation, government barriers to the flow of capital and currency risk.
The clues about how this can be helpful — and how even academics disagree about actual costs of capital — are in the ‘after adjusting for’ part of that statement.
The price of debt
Capital comes in two forms — debt and equity — so there are two areas in which costs could differ.
Debt is the most straightforward.
If most big countries still had exchange controls or other barriers to the free flow of money across borders, then costs of debt could differ widely.
The fact that Japanese people save more of their incomes, for instance, might lower borrowing costs for Japanese companies.
But the barriers no longer exist.
If Japan has lots of savings, in principle anyone can borrow them.
Despite that, interest rates do differ between countries, which is why borrowing costs appear so diverse.
In 1987–89 Japanese interest rates fell to record lows, with the central bank's discount rate at 2.5% and prime-borrowing costs for Japanese companies around 4–6%.
That compared with prime rates for American firms of 10% or so.
An albatross round the neck of American business?
First note that if you argue that, you must now logically think that the disadvantage has gone: prime-borrowing rates in Japan have risen to over 8%, roughly level with those in America.
It is misleading, however, to compare nominal interest rates.
If a firm is assessing an investment project and comparing costs with revenues, the earnings from that investment will be affected by inflation.
So the interest rate should also be adjusted for inflation.
In real terms borrowing is now cheaper in America, since real interest rates there are only 2–3% compared with 4–5% in Japan.
In Britain they are 3–4%.
Nominal interest rates do count: high rates hurt, for instance, if cash flows are falling in a recession and leaving less available to service debts.
But that is different from a decision about an investment project, in which future guesses about profits are compared with capital costs.
In open, borderless capital markets, it is hard for borrowing costs to diverge very far.
Otherwise, an American or British firm suffering from high domestic interest rates ought simply to borrow in a different currency, say yen.
Not all firms can do this, but most can.
It is harder to tap international markets for short-term capital (though not impossible: Eurocommercial paper provides a way), but it is the cost of long-term capital that ought to be compared with potential investment projects.
When firms borrow abroad, however, they need to switch the cash into whatever currency they are going to have to spend the money in.
If they just make a straight currency exchange, they will still be liable for the yen interest payments.
Instead, they could swap their yen debt for a dollar or sterling debt through the international swap markets.
Either way, there will remain a difference in borrowing costs.
But it is clear what causes it: the risk of currency movements.
When American or British real interest rates have exceeded Japanese or German ones, the main reason has been the risk that the dollar or pound will fall in value against the yen and D-mark.
That in turn reflects macroeconomic policy and the course of the economy: inflation, trade balances, productivity, fiscal and monetary policy.
The cost of debt capital is an outcome, not a cause in itself.
The other source of differences in borrowing costs is the risk of the borrower itself.
Apples must be compared with apples, not oranges.
If General Motors has a worse credit rating than Toyota, its borrowing costs ought to be higher.
They are, so there is no surprise there.
Again, borrowing costs are an outcome, not a cause: an unsuccessful company faces higher borrowing costs.
But that is not why it is unsuccessful.
The one qualification to this comes at the margin.
As outlined in the previous article, the probability of bankruptcy is partly determined by the institutional arrangements for dealing with financial distress; that in turn affects the costs incurred by a firm.
For marginal firms, Japan's way of dealing with financial distress lowers their costs in comparison with American firms in the same condition.
A later article will argue that this lowering of costs does not eliminate them altogether but rather transfers them.
In Japan, that ability to transfer and spread costs is increasingly under pressure.
It may not last more than another few years.
But for the time being it gives Japanese firms a small advantage.
Might their biggest advantage, however, lie in their most inscrutable institution of all, the Tokyo stockmarket?
Warrants on the wild side
Japanese equity warrants were like junk bonds: mispriced, misleading and, for some issuers, mistaken
MEASURING the cost of the other source of capital — equity — is far harder and so more controversial.
With that warning in mind, the outcome for Japan in the 1980s is nevertheless surprising: its only clear advantage in the cost of equity capital came while it had a wild, speculative market in shares, land and warrants in 1987–89.
And that has now gone.
The crudest approach to measuring the cost of equity — the equivalent of comparing nominal interest rates — is to compare price-earnings ratios for stockmarket indices in New York, London and Tokyo.
The reciprocal of the p/e ratio — the earnings yield — is thought to measure the claim by shareholders on a firm's cash flow, so the higher the p/e the lower the cost of capital.
Conveniently, since 1983 or so p/e ratios in Japan have been high, reaching a peak of 60–70% in late 1989 compared with 12–15% in America and Britain, suggesting a big gap in capital costs.
(Inconveniently, they have been low in Germany, but doubtless German firms' cheap capital comes from somewhere else.)
There are several problems with using p/e ratios.
One is that differences in accounting methods between countries mean that p/es are misleading, because earnings are measured in different ways.
If Japanese accounts are redrawn using American methods, the p/e ratios fall by 30–50%.
Another is that earnings yields do not necessarily measure investors' claim on a firm's cash flow.
Dividend pay-outs are much lower in Japan and Germany than in Britain and America, but this is not the only or even the main source of returns to shareholders: they receive capital gains (indeed they prefer them in Japan, where dividends are taxed much more heavily than capital gains) and, especially in Japan, gain business advantages through shareholdings in customers or suppliers, for instance.
The result is that if a Japanese firm was systematically making investments using its earnings yield as a measure of the cost of capital, it would soon be making a loss.
It would be paying out more than it was earning.
And if capital gains turned to losses, investors would stop providing capital.
Moreover, dividends are often low or non-existent, and p/es high, when a firm is enjoying or about to enjoy fast growth.
For that reason, high-tech firms often pay little or nothing in dividends, in America and Britain as well as Japan.
This does not mean their cost of capital is low.
Investors provide the cash expecting high returns; to get the money, a firm must be looking at pretty profitable investment opportunities.
Japanese firms have enjoyed faster growth than American ones, so, on this basis, you would expect dividends to be lower.
Might Japanese firms face a lower cost of capital because their investors are more patient?
Not really; the time period over which the returns are expected to arrive should not affect the investors' overall requirements.
Remember opportunity costs: in coughing up the money for one project, investors are still comparing it with other possible projects.
Regardless of what returns Japanese investors are thought to require, the returns they have received were spectacular in 1980–89.
Total returns (dividends plus capital gains) on investments in the Tokyo stockmarket were a compound 28% a year in dollar terms, compared with 17.5% in New York.
It is implausible that, having received a fat return yesterday, investors will meekly shovel tomorrow's cash into an unpromising project.
The fact is that projects in Japan are profitable, both for firms and investors.
Unsurprisingly, they attract capital.
Blowing bubbles
There remains one way in which the cost of equity might be low, albeit for a limited period.
This is if shares were overpriced — that is, if prices were unsustainably high.
In that case, it would be attractive for a firm to issue equity today knowing that its share price would fall tomorrow.
But if investors also believed share prices would fall, they would demand a higher price for their money.
So this opportunity depends on a difference of opinion: investors thinking that prices are going to carry on rising, while firms rush to exploit what they see as a temporary state of affairs.
This is a plausible description of what happened in Japan in 1987–89, admittedly a long ‘temporary’ period.
Share prices soared in Tokyo, pushed by a loose monetary policy, falling inflation and a simultaneous rapid rise in land prices (which offered both collateral for share investments and rising asset values for firms owning land).
As share prices rose, companies rushed to issue Eurobonds with warrants attached that were convertible into shares if the share reached a pre-fixed exercise price.
In effect, they were issuing equity; the bond yields were low (2–4%) because buyers bet that share prices would rise beyond the exercise levels, providing big capital gains and cheap switches into equity.
When the warrants are exercised, the issuer can use the proceeds to repay the bonds.
Was this cheap capital?
Most issuers thought so, because of the low yields.
Did it affect their investment projects?
Some firms' behaviour suggests that it did, but not simply by making them invest more in Japanese factories.
If a firm made an issue thinking that Japanese assets were overpriced, it would be more sensible to invest the proceeds in assets thought to be underpriced, such as American buildings or companies.
That is exactly what happened: Japan's net exports of long-term capital soared to $130 billion a year, much larger than the country's current-account surplus.
Into Japanese hands fell Rockefeller Centre in New York, Firestone in Ohio and Columbia Pictures in Hollywood.
Into American hands, therefore, fell some of the capital.
Alternatively, if a firm made its issue thinking share prices were indeed going to rocket (for that is what the low yields implied), then it could be worth its while to take the cash and invest it back into equities or other financial instruments.
That, again, is what many firms did, speculating on the capital markets rather than building factories.
Even if they did not speculate, many could raise warrant bonds at yields of 3–5% and put the money in bank deposits at higher rates.
The effect of apparently cheap capital was not as simple as it might appear.
Pop
Today the capital does not even look cheap.
The crash of the Tokyo stockmarket during 1990 left a mountain of these warrants far below their exercise prices.
If they stay below, the issuers will have to borrow at current higher interest rates to repay the bonds.
Taken as a whole, the cost of capital in Japan in 1988–93 will not have been as low as it seemed.
According to Baring Securities, a prominent trader of warrants in Tokyo and London, there were $120.2 billion-worth of Japanese warrant bonds outstanding as of mid-February.
At that time, when the Nikkei 225 index was trading at 26,230, more than half by value of the warrants outstanding were more than 20% ‘out of the money’: in other words (see table), they needed the issuers' share prices to rise by at least that amount to reach the exercise price.
Out of that $67.8 billion-worth, around $5.7 billion-worth were more than 50% out of the money.
Nissan, Japan's second-biggest car firm, has a $1.5 billion issue with an exercise price of ¥1,600.
Its share price is around half that.
In practice, however, share prices would have to rise by a bit more to convince holders to convert warrants into shares, since by switching from bonds into equities they would be taking an extra risk.
If, on the other hand, the Nikkei index were to fall by just 20% from its mid-February level, it would leave a total of $114 billion-worth out of the money.
The stockmarket's all-time low, remember, was a little over 20,000, reached at the end of October 1990.
There is plenty of time before most of these warrant issues expire.
Only $2.5 billion-worth expire this year and $20.4 billion in 1992.
The big bulge — 284 issues, worth $64 billion, including the Nissan issue cited earlier — comes in 1993.
So the Nikkei has two years or so to rise the 20–50% needed to bail the issuers out.
That would be moderate by past standards, though it would imply a return to high p/e ratios.
Even at 26,230, the average p/e ratio was still 45.
For the issuers, however, two effects are already clear.
One is that the equity market, whether for warrants issues or straight equity, is more or less closed.
In January there was just one public issue of equity.
Except in small quantities or special cases, money now has to be raised through debt.
The second is that even if the stockmarket does eventually rise by enough to persuade holders to exercise the warrants, issuers will have to plan and to some extent act as if it will not.
If they wait and see, they would risk joining a rush of borrowing when the bonds have to be repaid, forcing interest rates higher.
So many firms will try to raise the money earlier, to avoid the rush hour.
When they do so, the refinancing will cost far more than the warrant yields originally suggested — around 8–10%, at current interest rates, rather than the 3–5% or less on the warrants.
These equity-related issues are Japan's equivalent of America's junk bonds.
Not directly, for the instruments are different: one is equity, the other high-yield subordinated debt.
But like America's junk bonds, Japan's warrants were mispriced.
They appeared to offer a free lunch, complete with cigars and brandy.
As with junk, the offer appeared to be available even to pretty second-rate companies.
Japan seemed to have invented a new way to create ultra-cheap money.
It had not.
As with junk, the bill eventually arrived.
The new state of corporate Japan
Some Japanese companies are now more equal than others
IT IS a beguiling place, Japan: no sooner have westerners worked out how things work there than the country slips from their grasp.
In corporate finance, the conventional view in America and Britain still is that Japanese firms rely for most of their money on friendly banks that they have been wining and dining for years.
That high gearing lowers their cost of capital (Modigliani and Miller again, because of tax deductions), the friendly bank lowers the risk of bankruptcy and the firm is left able to take a jolly long-term approach to research and investment.
This was true once, but is now out of date— about seven years out of date , in fact.
The warrant boom of 1987–89 was the last phase of a long period of dramatic change for Japanese companies and their bankers.
When 1981 began, the average debt-equity ratio of firms listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) was 2.75.
Bank borrowing accounted for 64% of their external financing.
Banks also owned equity stakes in their clients, but their real influence came from debt: companies' big exposure to bank debt gave the lenders control rather as if they held equity.
Yet, beginning roughly in 1984–85, companies, especially the bigger ones, deserted the banks.
Money was cheaper elsewhere.
At first, they went to the bond markets, especially offshore ones, raising dollars or Swiss francs and swapping them for yen.
Firms raised more external finance than they needed, using the surplus to repay bank debts and build up excess cash.
The second phase began in 1986, when the Tokyo stockmarket began to soar: firms switched to equity, starting with ordinary issues and private placements, but then issuing convertible and warrant bonds (see chart 18, overleaf).
In the fiscal year ending in March 1990, the debt-equity ratio for TSE-listed firms was only 1.07.
Their ratio of debts to total assets had fallen below 30%, having ranged between 40% and 50% for most of the 1960s and 1970s.
They are still close to their banks, but the bankers kowtow to them, not the other way around.
Some of the biggest firms, in fact, have balance sheets far stronger than those of the banks: Toyota has cash and deposits worth ¥1.8 trillion ($850 billion).
It received net interest and dividends in the 1990 fiscal year that accounted for more than 20% of its operating profits.
Meanwhile, the banks are slowly slipping over a cliff.
After the party
The long trend of the 1980s has come to an end, along with the crash of the Tokyo stockmarket in 1990 and the collapse of warrants.
The crash has hurt banks far more than companies.
But the change will affect companies, too.
Their fortunes will become more divided than before: some are waking up from the party with happier memories than others.
The party was brought to an end deliberately, by the Bank of Japan.
It raised interest rates five times from mid-1989 to mid-1990, in the hope of squeezing the speculative bubbles in the stock and property markets before they burst on their own.
So far the policy has succeeded: the stockmarket fell by 48% from peak to trough, but has since recovered about a third of its losses.
Bank lending to the property market dried up, some property firms have gone bust and land prices have begun to slip.
But, so far, a cataclysmic crash has been avoided.
Those were the central bank's explicit aims.
But it also had implicit ones.
In effect, its tight-money policy is intended to bring about a shift in the domestic economy that might have happened in the early 1980s but which kept being postponed.
The aim is to shift bits of the economy out of low-tech, inefficient manufacturing and cartelised, inefficient services, such as wholesale and retail distribution.
It was postponed first by the weak yen in 1982–85 which boosted exports and protected domestic industries from imports, and then by low interest rates and the soaring stockmarket in 1985–89 which cut financial burdens, allowed weak firms to make speculative profits to cover ordinary losses and made capital seem temporarily cheap.
Now that those phases are over, the shift is beginning.
The Bank of Japan is trying to force inefficient firms to go out of business.
It is happening in two main ways.
One is that high interest rates have raised financial burdens directly for weaker firms that are still net debtors.
Economic growth is slowing — from 5.6% in 1990 probably to less than half that in 1991 — and with it corporate profits.
The other way is that commercial banks are themselves caught in a vicious squeeze.
Their capital, required by Bank for International Settlements' rules to exceed 8% of their assets, has been depleted by the stockmarket's fall.
BIS rules allow them to count 45% of unrealised gains on shareholdings as part of their capital, but those gains have now shrunk.
Their profits are weakening thanks to tougher competition, loan write-offs and a rising cost of funds.
There is no generalised credit crunch in Japan, but particular firms are being hurt.
Property developers have been the first to suffer, with credit lines cut off, interest costs rising and prices beginning to slip.
It is spreading to other firms too, as banks weed out their client lists in order to raise profits and cut asset growth.
The immediate result is simple: bankruptcies are on the rise.
The total liabilities of corporate failures in Japan fell in 1989 to ¥1.2 trillion, the lowest for a decade.
In 1990 the total rose to ¥2 trillion, but January 1991 alone brought ¥400 billion-worth.
Mikuni & Co, an independent credit-rating agency, reckons bankruptcy liabilities will double this year, to around ¥4 trillion.
But that will not be it: the firm predicts liabilities will peak at ¥12 trillion in 1993, before falling by half during the following year or two.
Mikuni bases its forecast on past relationships between bankruptcies, the ratio of bank lending to GNP, and interest rates.
The socialisation of credit risk
If it happens, this corporate death toll is unlikely to include famous names.
The gap between the financial state of Japan's biggest and strongest firms — generally those familiar in the West — and the smaller and weaker ones has widened.
In the past that gap was bridged by the commercial banks who, in effect, took from the strong (which included themselves) to give to the weak.
Credit risk was spread, or socialised; riskier firms did not suffer the full burden of their riskiness.
But now the banks are themselves too weak to offer a bridge.
Almost certainly, the bankruptcy wave of 1991–93 will bring an end to socialised credit.
The most striking thing about the boom in issues of convertible and warrant bonds in 1987–89 was how many firms were involved.
In the early 1980s only around 200–300 companies issued bonds abroad.
By the end of the decade more than 1,200 had their snouts in the trough.
On an American basis, their credit ratings ranged from triple A to junk.
But the yields on their bonds varied by far less than the ratings would suggest.
Similarly, the range of interest rates charged on bank loans was much narrower than it would be in America or Britain.
According to Ryuji Yasuda, a consultant in McKinsey's Tokyo office, this has started to change in the past six months.
As the bankruptcies roll in and loan write-offs grow, it will change even more.
Yields in the Swiss capital market for Japanese firms' bonds are already beginning to reflect the range of issuers' credit ratings.
There is scarcely any corporate-bond market in Japan, because issuing costs are too high; but if new rules bring those costs down and the market revives, it is likely to have a wider range of yields than before.
Banks cannot afford to allow socialisation to continue.
The top dozen, well-known Japanese banks remain strong.
Their capital ratios are close to the BIS target of 8%.
So are those of the best regional banks.
But even these cannot afford to act as nursemaids to more than a few sick clients.
Underneath them stand thousands of weaker regional banks, mutual banks and credit unions, as well as non-bank banks such as leasing firms.
These are the ones that will be hurt most directly by bankruptcies among property firms and smaller industrial companies, for those are their main clients.
Like America's thrifts, mutual banks and credit unions rushed to lend to property developers in the hope of finding new sources of profit.
As those developers go bust and along with them the credit unions, larger banks will be goaded to take their weaker brethren over.
In the end, the consolidation of Japan's banking industry will make it stronger.
But while it happens, the big banks will be taking the strain of the smaller ones.
They cannot at the same time absorb and spread the credit risks of their corporate clients as well.
Something has to give.
Top companies are changing, too.
Even among the biggest and best known firms, financial performance is becoming more important in separating sheep from goats.
Chart 20 shows McKinsey's demonstration of this for firms in cars and electronics.
The gap between the operating incomes of Toyota, Honda and Nissan is not all that wide.
But in 1990 Toyota's financial profit lengthened its lead over Honda and Nissan, both of which made financial losses.
In electronics, finance has narrowed the gap: Matsushita's financial profits brought it level with Hitachi and closer to Toshiba.
The ¥64 trillion question, however, is what all this will mean for relations between big banks and big companies.
Both are becoming more conscious of the cost of capital and the need to use finance profitably.
Big firms have long ago weaned themselves off their dependence on the banks who, in the 1960s and 1970s, supported them through thin times and thick.
Now that the banks are in thinner times, might rich companies come to their rescue instead?
Up to a point they will, but they cannot afford to let rescuing the banks sap their competitiveness, whether against other Japanese firms or against foreign ones.
The old tight links between banks and firms related to them in their industrial groups have gone.
This does not mean, however, that in the way they run themselves Japanese firms are going to become like American and British ones.
Communities of interest
The key to ownership and control in Japan is not the bank but the tangled web that shareholdings weave
IF JAPANESE companies no longer depend on banks for their finance, and if banks will soon no longer provide such a generous service in dealing with bankruptcy by socialising credit risks, might Japan soon have the symptoms of America and Britain: hostile takeovers and arms-length corporate governance?
It might, if close links between banks and firms were the be-all and end-all of the Japanese system.
But they are not even the heart of it.
Most largish Japanese firms are members of some kind of industrial group.
The closest sorts of group are called keiretsu, and have familiar names like Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Sumitomo and so on.
Some were based on the pre-war zaibatsu family-run conglomerates, others are centred on a big manufacturer such as Toyota, Nippon Steel or Matsushita.
Altogether, these groups account for about a quarter of all sales by Japanese firms.
Most other firms are also members of a looser group of some sort.
However close the group, the most important feature is the same: reciprocal, interlocking shareholdings between members.
In diagrams of the complicated networks of shareholdings that make up these groups, banks are usually placed in the centre.
This makes them look like the controlling force, the spider in the middle of the web.
Banks are important and often do take a leading role, but they are not the spider.
The bank is at the centre because it is usually the only firm that does business with every other member of the group and thus also owns a small (typically 3–5%) shareholding in all the other members.
Despite that, the bank is not essential.
Weaken its links to the other members and the group will not fall apart.
The reason is that Japanese groups are not centrally controlled.
Nor are they decentralised in the true meaning of the word: powers belonging to the centre are not devolved to peripheral firms.
They are more like a federal system.
The centre, if there is one, is in effect granted its limited powers and influence by the members of the group, the states.
The power lies with the members.
Even the federal analogy is too strong for most groups.
They are communities of interest, sharing opportunities and obligations.
Carl Kester of Harvard Business School usefully puts it another way in a recent book, ‘Japanese Takeovers: the global contest for corporate control.’
Western managers talk about the need for firms to pay attention not just to shareholders but also to other ‘stakeholders’ such as customers, suppliers, employees and neighbours.
Mr Kester points out that the difference in Japanese firms is that the stakeholders that matter most — customers and suppliers — are also shareholders.
Employees are sometimes shareholders through stock-ownership schemes, but are mainly taken care of through labour laws and guarantees of lifetime employment.
Neighbours are more or less ignored.
But those with whom the firm has a business relationship own shares in it.
And it owns shares in them.
These groups are simply federations of business relationships.
Firms within them see no conflict between the interests of shareholders and those of stakeholders, because they are one and the same.
These interlocking shareholders have an interest in each other 's prosperity, partly because they do business with one another, partly because they have invested in each other .
Unlike a pension fund in either Britain, America or even Japan, these interlocking shareholders have strong economic reasons to care about the performance of the firms in which they own shares.
Unlike the cross-shareholdings seen in America in the era of Pierpont Morgan, the links are not usually between competitors so do not necessarily indicate a cartel.
There are other economic advantages.
A manufacturer can work closely with its suppliers, co-operating on the development of new components, for instance.
It is like being part of the same company, but without the drawbacks.
Unlike in a firm that is a jack of all trades, the supplier is an independent business subject to market disciplines rather than another bit of a big bureaucracy.
From the supplier's point of view, the relationship is better than simply one based on contracts, price and open bidding.
Though the supplier has no guarantee of the business, it has an advantage and, once it has the business, the firm can be fairly sure it will keep it for a long time.
It can thus invest on the assumption that the contract will not last for merely a year.
The community dividend
An immediate result of this sort of mutual ownership has already been mentioned in the article on the cost of equity: dividend pay-outs are an incomplete measure of the commercial benefits obtained by shareholders.
As chart 21 shows, Japanese firms pay on average only 30% of their post-tax profits as dividends, higher than in Germany but lower than in Britain or America.
Nevertheless it is important to note that dividend pay-outs have not always been this low.
In the early 1970s pay-outs were 50–60%, similar to American levels.
Since then two things have changed.
The web of cross-shareholdings has extended much further into Japanese business.
Though it has long existed, it has spread wider as the Japanese economy has matured and become more open to competition, especially from overseas.
That has led firms to try to protect business relationships through buying shares.
The second change has been in share prices themselves: in the 1980s they soared.
This handed shareholders bumper capital gains, making virtually all investors — individuals, foreigners, pension funds, life insurers and interlocking holders — less worried about dividends.
Capital gains are a better proxy for the full benefits from interlocking holdings, since they ought in principle to absorb the value created in all the businesses involved.
In 1990, however, these capital gains went into reverse.
Although some of the share-price losses have now been regained, the crash has nevertheless destroyed investors' confidence that there will always be healthy gains.
As a result, most firms are talking about paying higher dividends.
The finance ministry has long acted to prevent dividends slipping any lower by setting a rule barring firms from issuing new equity if they pass or reduce their pay-outs.
Now it is twisting arms to get dividends raised.
Most of the interlocking holders do not care about dividends.
But the trouble is that they do not account for anything like all the shares of most firms.
Other holders, like individuals, pension funds and foreigners, do care about dividends but did not worry while share prices were booming.
And one hybrid of an interlocking holder and the ordinary sort — the life-insurance firm — cares deeply about dividends nowadays.
Life insurers sold policies with yields which could easily be paid in a rising stockmarket but not when it falls.
They are now suffering redemptions.
Unless share prices revive, their best hope of keeping up their yields and thus remaining competitive with other savings instruments comes from higher dividends.
The healthiest poison pill
This pressure for higher dividends will, if it is sustained, push firms towards more borrowing (to pay the dividend) and less dependence on equities.
Unless higher dividends are paid, the cement holding the groups together will weaken.
Rising share prices gave all shareholders a common interest; now their interests have, to an extent, diverged.
Life insurance firms are an important species of ‘safe’ shareholder.
But they are a hybrid because, although closely associated with particular groups, they are not part of the web of cross-shareholdings.
They cannot be: they are mutuals, owned by their policyholders.
Although this pressure for higher dividends is unsettling for the system of cross-shareholdings, it is unlikely to be fatal.
The basic motive for continuing with the groups — the cementing of business relationships — remains as strong as ever.
That is also why the weakening of links with banks and the pressure for higher dividends are unlikely to lead to a spate of hostile takeover bids in Japan.
Plenty of mergers take place, often under pressure even if not overtly hostile.
But the American or British sort of open tender over the heads of managers is unlikely to catch on.
The reason is not culture, nor because such bids are somehow taboo.
It is because a bid generally threatens too many entrenched interests.
Although it is possible in principle that a bidder might offer a high enough price to compensate suppliers and customers for the relationship benefits they derive from their shareholdings, it is unlikely.
And the target firm's value generally depends, in any case, on those relationships continuing.
Apart from arms-length shareholders such as foreigners, pension funds and individuals, investors typically stand to lose too much from a change of ownership.
They may not have monitored the firm's management terribly closely.
But if and when a bid comes they are likelier to use it as a stimulus to change or otherwise discipline the incumbent management rather than selling out.
The structure of corporate governance thus provides its own sort of poison-pill defence: if a bid were to succeed, all sorts of costs would be incurred because of harm to relationships.
The cross-shareholding system is protective, but the protection is provided by owners who care directly about the fate and performance of the firm.
It is not principally provided by banks, though these might supply a new director or two if things go wrong.
All this makes the Japanese system decidedly different from that with which it is often carelessly linked: continental Europe.
The European communities
Beware simple comparisons between Britain and continental Europe
IF CORPORATE governance and the virtues or vices of free financial markets had been agonised over as much in 1985 as they are now, continental Europe would have ruined many of the most popular and simplistic conclusions.
These days, it is widely assumed that monitoring of firms by close, caring banks is a better way to run things than the arms-length institutional ownership of America and Britain.
Yet in 1985 free-market Britain seemed to be outpacing the rest of bank-monitored Europe, which was in the throes of ‘Eurosclerosis’: slow growth thanks to closed markets, protected managers and workers, and backward technology.
In many eyes, control by Deutsche Bank and its fellows was responsible even for West German sloth.
This mainly goes to show the error, which is all too common, of seeing causes where there are only correlations.
Do free markets in finance and takeovers produce a healthier economy than those where regulation is tighter and shares are more closely held?
Look at chart 22 overleaf and draw your own conclusions.
Only one point stands irrespective of the period taken: Japan has shown all the other rich countries a clean pair of heels.
Since 1950 America and Britain have been the slowest.
But if you measure from 1960–90, America draws level in real GNP growth with West Germany, and then overtakes it both for 1970–90 and 1980–90.
Few American businessmen believe that their economy has fared as well as Germany's, but it has.
For the latest decade, even Britain moves up the field: it and America both outpaced France and West Germany.
France, under-rated by many, has outgrown Germany throughout the postwar period.
If the figures are for real GNP per head then West Germany would fare better, because of its slow growing (and latterly falling) population, than America which has had millions of new immigrants.
But even on real GNP per head, Britain outpaced West Germany in the 1980s.
French connections
On average, continental Europe does conform to the stereotypical comparison with Britain: more universal banks, closer links between banks and industry, more restrictive rules on shareholdings and voting rights, far fewer hostile takeovers.
Slowly, the European Community is edging towards laws that might make rules on shareholdings and takeovers more homogeneous and more liberal, though a deal is many years away.
But even now, the average conceals as much as it reveals.
From 1982 until 1988, French companies behaved rather as Japanese ones did: they ran free of their banks.
When the 1980s began, they relied on banks for 71% of their external financing and carried debts equal to 68% of their assets.
Suddenly this changed, prompted first by the Socialist government's nationalisation of the main banks and, later, by a bout of liberalisation and the revival of the Paris stockmarket.
Bank debts were paid back and replaced with equity in a spate of fund-raising that put French firms ahead of the British as equity issuers (see chart 23).
By 1988 bank borrowing accounted for only 53% of their external financing; debt equalled only 63% of their assets.
Since then, however, this has gone into reverse, in two different ways.
Companies have rushed back into debt, mainly to finance overseas acquisitions, especially in Britain and America.
French firms arrived late at the foreign-investment auction and paid high prices as a result.
For instance, Saint Gobain, a recently privatised glassmaker, outbid Britain's BTR to buy Norton, an American maker of abrasives, for FFr11 billion ($2 billion) just a few months before America's recession began.
Accor, a hotel group, took the Motel 6 chain off the hands of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (which had bought it a year earlier in an LBO) for FFr7 billion at around the same time.
Michelin, a tyre firm, bought Uniroyal Goodrich in America for $1.5 billion and is now staggering under the debts and a fall-off in its business.
Many in France assume the government will have to (or choose to) rescue it from bankruptcy.
The other reversal of the 1980s was that banks accelerated their purchases of equities.
French banks had always had broad powers, but a new banking act in 1984 broadened them still further.
They responded by pushing hard into corporate finance, seeking to use shareholdings as a door-opener.
Crédit Lyonnais, one of the two big banks that are still state-owned, isolated all its long-term holdings of shares in a new firm, Clinvest, and began to add to them.
It buys minority stakes, usually of less than 10%, and stresses that the stake is friendly — that is, it will not be sold to a hostile bidder.
Clinvest avoids firms in which other banks hold a stake: it wants to be on its own, so that it can be more influential.
All the main banks stress that they do not want to boss firms around in the German style, nor do they want to send in managers or directors.
Nor do they intend to underwrite other banks' loans if the firm goes under; they say they will take part in rescues, but not as guarantors.
What they want is business, not as an exclusive right but as a first option.
In that way, the French banks are trying to be Japanese, to set up a community of interest between themselves and their clients.
Despite the changes of the past ten years or so, there is little sign in France of an active takeover market.
There have been a few hostile bids, most notably that by Paribas for a conglomerate, Navigation Mixte.
But shareholding rules make hostile bids hard to win.
Firms have a panoply of shares with different levels of voting rights.
The bank stakes also stand in the way.
Mutual funds (unit trusts in Britain) have become big shareholders in France, but few are run by independent groups; most are subsidiaries of banks which in turn can influence decisions during bids.
The arrival of an American-style takeover market is not impossible, but it is extremely unlikely.
Nevertheless French firms have aped many of the practices of American bidders.
Notably, they have shuffled assets with just as much vigour.
American critics of the $25 billion buy-out of RJR Nabisco in 1988–89 lamented this treatment of a ‘fine old American company’, yet conveniently forgot that it had only been formed in 1985 when R.J. Reynolds merged with Nabisco Brands, which in turn had only been formed in 1981 when Nabisco merged with Standard Brands.
RJR Nabisco promptly sold bits of itself to pay back its buy-out debts, including Del Monte foods (to Britain's defunct Polly Peck) and its biscuit division to a French group, BSN.
That left BSN burdened with FFr14 billion of debt, which it reduced by FFr3.1 billion in December by selling its champagne businesses to Moët-Hennessy-Louis-Vuitton (LVMH), an ambitious French luxury-goods firm.
In mid-March LVMH reduced its debts by selling part of those businesses, the Lanson brand, only three months after it had bought it.
Remember Mr Altman's notion of ‘temporary debts’ incurred during takeovers?
That is just what both BSN and LVMH were up to.
Across the Rhine, there is less toing and froing.
And, despite Pirelli's well-publicised assault on the Continental tyre firm, there is little sign of an active takeover market developing.
In Germany there are too many obstacles:
Few firms have gone public, despite an increase in interest in the stockmarket in recent years.
Out of the 2,300 or so public limited companies (Aktiengesellchaften, or AG), only 619 have ordinary shares quoted or traded on the stockmarket (which is 80 more than at end-1989).
The amount of shares floating freely is tiny.
The total capital of all those AGs is smaller than that of the 360,000 so-called private limited companies (GmbH).
Voting rights of shares can be limited by firms' articles of association.
Asko, Mannesmann, Bayer and even Deutsche Bank itself limit any one shareholder to 5% of the votes; at Hoesch the figure is 15% and at Volkswagen 20%.
It often takes a 75% majority to change those rules: possible, but difficult.
Banks own small stakes of their own and can rally support against a bidder.
More to the point, they vote as proxies for private shareholders who typically deposit their shares in the bank's custody.
Those proxy votes must be used in support of incumbent management unless the shareholder specifically instructs the bank otherwise.
Admittedly, banks are obliged to send full offer-documents to such shareholder-depositors.
But apathy often works for the status quo.
German stability
This does not mean that restructuring and financial change cannot take place.
But it takes a different form, chiefly private transactions.
There has been some increase in equity finance, by listed firms as well as new entrants, but it is restrained by a system giving pre-emptive rights to existing shareholders (as in Britain, shareholders must be given first grabs at new issues), under ponderous rules that mean an issue takes three weeks.
That problem of delay and a tax incentive for investors lead most firms to rely on private placements (Schuldscheine) or on bank finance.
Exactly what role the banks play in monitoring management is hard to pin down.
They often have directors on firms' supervisory boards, the second tier of German boards which is required by law and includes elected representatives of the workforce.
But they are bankers, not industrialists; they are scarcely more qualified than any other director to tell managers what they should or should not be doing.
Most supervisory boards meet only twice a year.
For those reasons, banks' clearest role is at times of crisis; the firm needs their financial support, and they act to rally other supporters.
Julian Franks of London Business School and Colin Mayer of City University have studied the restructuring during the 1980s of three German firms: AEG, an electricals firm; MAN, a mechanical engineer and truck maker; and Bayer, a chemicals firm.
Formally, the process was similar to that in America.
Of the three, only AEG filed for court protection from its creditors (in 1982) under the Vergleich rules, which are similar to America's chapter 11.
Bayer and MAN both restructured privately.
There were two big differences, however.
The most important is that the restructurings took longer: eight years in AEG's case, four years in MAN's.
During that time dividends were cut or passed and there were plenty of closures and redundancies, but spending on R&D and on capital investment was maintained.
Neither Bayer nor MAN was in the same desperate straits as AEG; but even in the electricals firm's case capital spending fell sharply as a percentage of sales only in 1982.
It paid no dividend until 1988.
The second difference is that turnover on the management and supervisory boards was high: AEG had eight departures and 11 new arrivals on its management board in 1980–89; Bayer 11 departures and seven arrivals; MAN two departures and seven arrivals.
In America, whether in or out of court, the managers who led the firm into the ditch often remain at the controls while it is pulled out.
British balance
The British way is a bit of a compromise — as you might expect.
Britain had a big takeover boom in 1985–89, with plenty of bitterly fought hostile bids; but none was financed with junk bonds.
It was only the last and biggest headline-grabber — Sir James Goldsmith's failed bid in 1989 for B.A.T Industries — that threatened to bring junk to London.
And few bids have ended up in bankruptcy.
One or two leveraged buy-outs have failed, including the biggest, that for Magnet, which makes kitchen furniture.
But most failures — so far — have been firms that never went near the merger market.
Nevertheless, British firms did take on much more debt in 1988–90, after almost a decade of using record profits to slim debts.
Since most takeovers were financed in cash, some of those debts went to pay for them.
The burden of interest payments as a proportion of cash flow rose to a record 34% last year, as these bigger debts met high nominal interest rates and fading cash flows.
When debts become too large to bear, British firms also use debt-restructurings and the bankruptcy laws.
Compared with Germany, however, the banks are more distant from their clients, which can make restructuring deals harder to complete.
The saga at Saatchi & Saatchi is a case in point; the advertising group's ‘main bank’ is its investment bank, S.G. Warburg.
Warburg may have raised some of the finance that has now led Saatchi & Saatchi into trouble, but it is by no means an underwriter of the firm's financial future.
The big difference in Britain — which American opponents of takeovers look up to— is the country's voluntary but powerful Takeover Code.
This, together with laws that protect minority shareholders, makes takeovers both easier and harder.
Easier, in the sense that it bans Germanic tricks to limit the transfer of ownership; but more difficult by requiring an offer to be made to all shareholders at the same price, once a firm has accumulated 30% of the shares.
It prevents repeat bids within a year and bans bidders from acting in undisclosed concert with other people.
Most notably, it bans firms from frustrating a bidder by crippling themselves with debt or swallowing poison pills.
Even so, the chief British worry is similar to the American one: that ownership of shares by uncaring institutions, and provision of debt by distant banks and capital markets, mean that the takeover is the only means of managerial discipline.
Only when a firm is put into play or bid for is the management's performance given any scrutiny.
Messrs Franks and Mayer have found evidence to question this, though it does not disprove it.
They tracked all the involuntary departures reported in the press of chief executives and chairmen of British firms in the first six months of 1988.
They found 55.
Half of those were initiated inside the firm, but most of the others were initiated by shareholders.
Only 14 were due to takeovers.
Someone, somewhere, is exerting some discipline.
Your obedient servant
Give a financial market bad instructions and it will carry them out with ruthless efficiency
NO MAN is a hero to his valet: the close and obedient servant sees all the weaknesses and vulnerabilities of his master.
So it is with the financial servant and its industrial master.
Weaknesses in industry and in its political, legal and social surroundings are observed by the financial system in their finest detail.
Worst of all, finance is less discreet than the valet.
It passes on its master's frailties for all to see.
That has been the case most clearly in America in the past dozen turbulent years.
The financial system was given more freedom than before, but that made it an even more ruthless broadcaster of economic frailties.
The incentive given to savings and loan associations to invest as riskily as they could, the blind eye turned to supervision of thrifts and banks alike, the abolition of tax credits for investment: all were passed on almost without friction by the smooth wheels of finance.
Computer buffs have a different phrase for it: garbage in, garbage out.
Changes in macroeconomic policy, in taxes, in bankruptcy laws, in the opinions of judges — all have left their mark on finance, and on its users and abusers.
International differences in the cost of capital are determined in the same way, generally through the mechanism of currency risk.
But finance should not itself be blamed.
It is the incentives under which financial users and providers operate that should take the rap and which require attention.
For finance is more often an effect than a cause.
Users of finance, most notably companies, operate within the limits imposed from outside: taxes, the cost of money, the rules and institutions governing financial distress.
Addressing the effect solves nothing if the cause remains.
The financial pressure will simply find another way in which to express itself.
Most prominent among the effects singled out for blame is the hostile takeover, both in America and in Britain.
It is easy to understand why, for the hostile takeover brings with it a language and an atmosphere of conflict that sounds destructive and sometimes is.
It exposes capitalism in the raw: huge profits to be made from risking huge sums of money, often in a matter of weeks, while ordinary people wait, innocently and impotently, for a verdict that will affect their jobs and lives.
Often, both in America and in Britain, hostile takeovers have been shown to be reckless, mistaken and damaging.
The firms involved have ended up bankrupt or deep in debt, healthy companies turned into cripples.
Yet the hostility of takeovers is a distraction, a sort of white noise.
In a market in which mergers and takeovers are possible, they will take place in one form or another: which form is adopted will reflect the circumstances of the day.
Whether the incumbent managers like or dislike the offer made by a bidder is only one side of the story.
Much more important is whether the bid was sensible in the first place.
The most perplexing thing is that the evidence shows that many bids are not a good idea.
Yet managers continue to propose them.
Shareholders do well from selling but not from buying: many mergers and takeovers fail to generate the gains in efficiency and thus cash flow on which the bids were based.
The only difference with hostile takeovers may be that the prices are higher.
Even that is not clear: many of the break-up bids of the past decade made good economic sense.
The most disturbing fact is this: although it may be too soon to pass final judgment on the merger wave of the 1980s, on current evidence this wave was much more successful (or less unsuccessful) than the merger waves of the late 1960s and early 1970s that took place in both Britain and America.
Fewer of those mergers, designed to build diversified conglomerates, were ‘hostile’ in the sense that they went over the heads of incumbent managers.
But they were a disaster nonetheless.
The mergers of the 1960s were almost certainly the biggest collective error ever made by American business (and copied by British firms).
Synergies from diversification did not exist.
It was not possible merely to apply management skills and manuals across different sorts of business.
American and British firms built fat integrated bureaucracies at just the time when Japanese firms were arriving in international competition with their lean, mean communities of interest.
This was a colossal mistake, made by the managers, for the managers.
Problems of socialism
Today's obsession with preventing another round of hostile takeovers is like the habit of generals always to be fighting the last war.
Instead, attention should be turned to the universal problem that lies behind the takeover trend: the separation in capitalism of ownership and control.
The fact that shareholders are no longer also running the firms they own has been chewed over at least since the 1930s.
In that decade the owners were lots of individual investors; now they are pension funds acting on behalf of lots of savers.
The post-war switch to Peter Drucker's pension-fund socialism has altered the form in which ownership is separated from control — and made hostile bids likelier to succeed — but it has not changed the basic issue.
Anglo-American shareholders are investors holding a portfolio of betting slips, punters rather than proprietors.
They are not equipped to care much about the management of the individual firms they own, nor would it be sensible for them to do so: their benefits come from the market's general performance, not from the particular.
The benefits to managers, meanwhile, arise from the use and misuse of other people's money.
There are some signs that the market is itself seeking to bridge this gap between ownership and control.
The potential benefits from doing so lay behind some (but not all) of the takeovers and LBOs of the 1980s.
One common way was for managers themselves to take over ownership.
Another was for portfolios of firms to be owned not by a pension fund but by a specialist financial or management group: Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts or Hanson, which buy, break up and set strict financial controls for what remains; Clayton & Dubilier or Forstmann Little, which exert direct supervision over managers; Berkshire Hathaway, which is a more remote but patient investor.
In effect, these and other private boutiques are doing the caring and monitoring that investment institutions cannot do for themselves: the boutiques' finance comes from pension funds, insurers and big companies.
General Electric is Forstmann Little's biggest investor.
Clayton & Dubilier's latest deal is a buy-out of a chunk of IBM that makes typewriters and other lowish-tech bits and pieces.
The world's biggest computer maker still needs this division as a supplier, but was failing to run it profitably; so it is selling it to its managers and Clayton & Dubilier, leaving them to run it but still with a supply contract to IBM.
In a way, this is like the Japanese method: a community of firms tied to one another 's fortunes.
Pension funds and other institutional investors are also trying to change their ways.
The big funds realise that, in practice, they cannot sell out of most companies they own for they will always need them in their portfolios.
So they are looking for ways to use their voices rather than their feet to influence management.
As this develops it will be helpful; but it is not a complete solution, for institutions will never be sufficiently well-equipped to intervene in the thousands of firms they own.
Efforts to increase such caring should be given government help wherever possible.
Two prominent New York takeover lawyers, Martin Lipton (who invented the ‘poison pill’ defence) and Steven Rosenblum, have proposed a way to help institutions get involved: elect board directors for five-year terms during which they would be sackable only for criminal or scandalous behaviour.
Managers would prepare a five-year plan for the firm, a sort of election manifesto.
Their pay would be linked to the plan's success, and only to that.
The information gap between executives and shareholders would be bridged by employing an independent, outside consultant to study how the firm is being run and whether the strategy is correct — a five-yearly management audit.
Mergers and takeovers would be possible at any time, but only with the board's consent.
Hostile bids would be possible only at the five-yearly meetings.
This idea is almost certainly impractical, and would merely bunch hostile bids in the run-up to the scheme's implementation and to each five-yearly meeting.
Nevertheless it contains two clues for ways to improve things.
One is the role of the independent audit.
As long as shareholders are principally distant institutions, it will become ever more important to ensure that the annual auditing of accounts is done in as independent and thorough a way as possible; if shareholders wished, that audit could then be extended into more general strategic matters.
Independence requires, however, two things missing in Britain and America: the regular rotation of auditors; and the banning of conflicts of interest between work done for the shareholders (auditing) and the increasing amount the same firms do for the managers (consultancy).
The second clue comes from Messrs Lipton and Rosenblum's idea of tying managers' pay to long-term performance.
In recent years the idea of linking pay to performance has caught on, with stock options and with pay linked to measures such as earnings per share or profit margins.
But the links have commonly been flawed in two ways: they have involved little risk of penalty for poor performance; and they have been tied to short-term measures (generally year-by-year).
Too many top managers leave after a strategy has failed, clutching pay-offs big enough to guarantee their family's security for several generations.
This makes a nonsense of any incentive scheme.
The penalty for failure should be heavy; but, by the same token, the rewards for long-term success could be higher than they are today.
Michael Jensen and Kevin Murphy of Harvard Business School found, in a 1990 study, that the average pay of chief executives of big American firms had barely caught up, in real terms, with what similar bosses received in the 1930s.
But they also found that bosses' pay is often less variable than that of ordinary workers.
It should be high, but it should also vary a lot.
And it should give managers an incentive to invest — both in themselves and in their company's strategy — for the long term.
In the short term, we are all dead
As long as they are disinterested punters rather than caring proprietors, institutional shareholders will tend to take the money and run during takeover bids rather than backing incumbent management.
That is unavoidable.
The gap between ownership and control will persist, but will be bridged if people find bridge-building profitable or permissible.
For the most part, however, the solution will lie more on the managers' side than the shareholders': the managers need to be given incentives that make them less likely to make the colossal errors of the 1960s.
It may be some comfort to know that short-termism is not exactly a new concern.
Return to Maynard Keynes, writing in the 1930s:
The spectacle of modern investment markets has sometimes moved me towards the conclusion that to make the purchase of an investment permanent and indissoluble, like a marriage…might…force the investor to direct his mind to the long-term prospects, and to those only.
And in the long term, as Keynes might also have said, we will keep on worrying about the short term.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
OUTPUT, DEMAND AND JOBS
British unemployment reached more than 2m in March, recording the biggest monthly increase ever.
The rate increased to 7.4%, from 7.0% in February.
The jobless rate in Holland remained at 4.9% in February.
Britain's retail sales jumped 3.7% in March, the largest monthly increase in nearly 12 years, as shoppers rushed to beat April's deadline for higher value-added tax.
In the year to January, Japan's retail sales grew by 4.3%.
In the 12 months to February, Britain's industrial production fell 2.5% and French output rose 1.7%.
PRICES AND WAGES
The 12-month increase in German producer prices slowed to 1.8% in the year to March.
Over the same period Japanese wholesale prices rose by 1.0% and Swiss prices edged down 0.1%.
British workers received a 9.3% pay rise in the 12 months to February, equivalent to a real pay increase of just 0.3% after allowing for consumer-price inflation.
Over the same period Swedish workers received a 4.4% pay rise — a real cut of 7.3%.
BUSINESS CONFIDENCE
Dun & Bradstreet's worldwide survey of sales expectations shows signs of improvement in the second quarter of 1991.
German businessmen take a much more cheerful view of their economy than currency traders, who have lately driven the D-mark down: the balance of German companies expecting sales to rise over those expecting sales to fall is 69%, the widest margin in the chart.
The balance in Japan is also healthily positive, at 54%, only slightly down on the first quarter of the year.
The balance in America, though much lower at 36%, has flattened out.
Business confidence in Britain is still extremely weak, but improving: pessimists exceed optimists, with a negative balance of 4%, but that compares with a negative balance of 19% in the first quarter.
COMMODITY PRICE INDEX
A shortage of zinc caused by supply disruptions and, some say, manipulation of the market forced the cash price of zinc to more than $1,400 a tonne, and to a premium of $240 over the forward price on the London Metal Exchange last week.
This drew a flood of zinc to the LME; stocks rose by 34,300 tonnes to 102,800 tonnes — almost a seven-year high.
Those forced to borrow zinc overnight had to pay a premium of up to $100 a tonne.
In similar circumstances in December 1989, the LME imposed a limit of a premium of $20 a tonne.
This time it took no formal action.
Some fear this may have harmed the LME's reputation, and could drive prices, which have fallen by 50% in two years, still lower.
EXPORTS
In 1990 the value of world trade in merchandise was $3.5 trillion, according to the GATT.
That was a rise of 13% over 1989.
In volume terms trade expanded last year by 5%, slower than the 7% in 1989; the GATT expects growth to slow again this year.
The champion exporter of 1990 was Germany, with foreign sales of $421 billion, or 12.1% of the world total.
America, number one in 1989, came second in 1990, with exports of $394 billion (11.4%).
America yielded first place despite its exports rising 8.5% in volume terms, compared with a rise of only 1.5% for Germany; and it would still have done so even if unification, which added $22.5 billion to the exports of the former Federal Republic, had never happened.
The reason is last year's 16.5% rise in the D-mark against the dollar.
Between them, Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea now account for 6.2% of world trade.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
America's visible-trade deficit shrank to $5.3 billion in February, bringing the 12-month total to $95.6 billion.
In March Britain's current-account deficit widened to $789m, but its 12-month shortfall narrowed to $17.1 billion.
In the 12 months to February Canada's visible-trade surplus increased to $9.7 billion.
Holland's current-account surplus for 1990 grew to $9.6 billion.
WORLD BOURSES
Wall Street rose to an all-time high but ended the week 1.9% down as hopes of a cut in American interest rates faded.
Hong Kong fell 4.0%, Tokyo 1.2% and London 0.6%.
Singapore was the table's best performer, climbing 2.7%.
The world index fell 3.1%.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
The growth in Japan's broad money supply slowed to 4.9% in the year to March; its narrow-money growth quickened to 1.7%.
In the same period, Britain's broad-money growth fell to 9.9%, while M0 rose 2.7%.
Spain's broad money grew by 13.8%.