

Labour's Northern Ireland membership ban RUNNING OUT OF EXCUSES CAMPAIGN FOR LABOUR REPRESENTATION IN NORTHERN IRELAND
Running out of excuses
The Labour Party's boycott of Northern Ireland is fundamentally undemocratic.
It is undemocratic to govern an area without an electoral mandate.
It is undemocratic to rule over people without seeking their votes.
A Government which is not accountable through the ballot box is not a democratic Government.
And the next Labour administration will be an undemocratic charade in Northern Ireland if the party continues with its refusal to organise and contest elections in the province.
Each year, Labour Party Conference debates and votes on a whole range of policies; policies which will be implemented when Labour comes to power; policies which will have a massive impact on the day to day lives of every citizen of the state.
They cover such areas as taxation, health care, personal social services, social security, economic investment, education, housing, defence and the European Community.
The next Labour Government's policies in these areas will affect Northern Ireland just as much as anywhere else in the UK.
But no one from Northern Ireland can have any say in the formulation of Labour Party policy.
Everyone from the province is banned from the party's ranks.
No one from Northern Ireland can take part in conference debates or vote on conference resolutions.
Moreover, the Labour Party does not seek a mandate for its policies from the Northern Ireland electorate.
Key decisions are taken which will affect people's lives, but no one from the province has any say.
That is a fundamental denial of democracy.
And apologists for Labour's refusal to organise in Northern Ireland cannot in all conscience describe themselves as democrats.
TORIES
As well as flouting basic democratic principles in regard to Northern Ireland, Labour is now in the process of giving the Tories a free run in the province.
Leaving the Conservative Party unchallenged in 17 constituencies does not make political sense.
It also condemns Labour-minded people in the North to acute political frustration.
The next election will see a wave of Tory propaganda hit the province and, unless things change, there will be no one there to challenge it.
Conservative candidates with Saatchi style slogans and sober suits will tell the province's electorate about the ‘Thatcher economic miracle’ and will sing the praises of the Government's record on the NHS.
Leading Tories in Northern Ireland have already called for the extension of the poll tax to the province.
And all their propaganda goes unanswered because the Labour Party has thrown in the towel before the fight has even started.
Until recently, the Labour and Tory Parties had a cosy understanding about Northern Ireland.
Neither party involved themselves in the messy business of seeking votes in the province, democracy wasn't mentioned.
Neither party thought too much about the place at all.
Ritual statements were made after atrocities, with party spokesmen ironically condemning ‘evil men of violence’ for subverting the democratic process.
In November 1989, however, the Conservative Party, under pressure from its grassroots, decided to accept members and fight elections in Northern Ireland.
In May 1990, the party threw its weight into a Westminster by-election in the province in the Upper Bann constituency even though the area was certainly not natural Tory territory.
A message of support from Thatcher for the Conservative candidate was delivered through the voters' letter-boxes and several leading Tories, including Party Chairman Kenneth Baker, visited the constituency to support the election campaign.
Predictably, the Conservative candidate Colette Jones was well beaten and lost her deposit.
Nonetheless, the Conservatives are still pressing on with their plans to stand in all 17 constituencies in Northern Ireland and to give the electorate the chance to accept or reject their programme for governing the country.
But the Labour Party is still nowhere to be seen.
This unprincipled position was sharply attacked by the Irish News, the nationalist newspaper which has been standard reading for the Catholic community in the North for the best part of a century.
Commenting on the hiding the Tory candidate took in  the Upper Bann election, the Irish News stated:
‘It was a pitiful performance which clearly demonstrated that the people of Northern Ireland have very little time for Mrs Thatcher and her party.
The Tories, to their credit, submitted themselves to a democratic election in a part of the territory which they govern — and they were routed.
‘There was, however, an irritating smugness about the statements being issued from the British Labour Party yesterday.
‘One spokeswoman is credited  as saying: ‘The result demonstrates the realities of Northern Ireland politics.
No magic wand can resolve the problems.’
‘Such complacent nonsense really sticks in the craw.
It is a fact that for a time last year, there were no statements at all being issued about Northern Ireland by the Labour Party headquarters.
‘The reason was that in re-structuring the press office, party chiefs had simply forgotten to allocate any special responsibility for Northern Ireland to any of its press officers.
‘This has obviously now been rectified but it is symptomatic of Labour's reluctance to be drawn on the issue…
‘…
Not many Nationalists would applaud Mrs Thatcher to the echo: her intransigence and belligerence have been a source of conflict.
But at least she has been prepared for her party to stand in elections here.
‘The fact that the Labour Party is standing aloof looks ominous.’
(Irish News Editorial 19/5/90)
OVERSEAS MEMBERSHIP
The extension of the Tory Party to Northern Ireland starkly highlights Labour's unprincipled behaviour.
But there is another vivid illustration of the discrimination practised by the Labour Party against people who live  in the province.
Put simply, Northern Ireland is now the only place on the globe where people cannot vote for or join the Labour Party.
It is Labour's only no-go area in the entire world.
Party members can leave Britain, set up home on the other side of the world and retain their membership cards under Walworth Road's overseas membership arrangements.
But if they move to Northern Ireland they will be expelled from the party.
What is more, people who move to the other side of the world can continue to vote for the Labour Party in UK elections: recent Tory legislation allows people living abroad to vote in elections back home.
But if anyone moves to Belfast they will be unable to vote Labour because the party does not put up candidates there.
So you can vote for and join the Labour Party in Bangkok or Belgrade but not in Belfast.
In Detroit but not in Derry.
In Tokyo but not Toomebridge.
In Baghdad but not Ballymena.
As we said, Northern Ireland is the Labour Party's only no go area anywhere in the world.
Now we would humbly suggest that there is something slightly wrong here.
People resident in Northern Ireland will be governed by the Labour Party when it comes to power.
The party's policies and programme for power will affect them directly.
The next Labour Government will set their taxes, for example.
But they are  banned from party membership and cannot vote for the party at election time.
Conversely, people living outside the UK (and who have recently been resident in the UK) can continue to join and vote for the party even though the next Labour Government's policies will have little direct impact on their lives.
The Labour Party is currently establishing Labour groups overseas in order to mobilise support for the forthcoming general election.
But Northern Ireland remains a Labour free zone.
LABOUR'S CONSTITUTION
On top of this indefensible and increasingly absurd situation, it is also clear that the Labour Party is obliged by its own Constitution to organise in Northern Ireland.
That is the commonsense conclusion to be drawn from a reading of Clause IV and IX of the Labour Party Constitution.
The first party object expressed in Clause IV(1) of the Labour Party's Constitution is:
‘To organise and maintain in Parliament and in the country a Political Labour Party.’
The ‘Parliament’ referred to there is obviously the Westminster Parliament and by implication the ‘country’must be the whole territory legislated for by that Parliament, that is, the UK as a whole including Northern Ireland.
There is nothing in that Clause or in any other part of the Constitution to suggest otherwise.
Furthermore, Clause IX which is concerned with the constitution and responsibilities of the NEC lays down in Section 2 as one of the ‘duties’ of the NEC:
‘To ensure the establishment of, and to keep in active operation, a Constituency Labour Party in every Constituency,…’
There is no suggestion there that the NEC's ‘duty’ does not extend to the 17 constituencies in Northern Ireland.
A plain reading of these two clauses of the Constitution supports the view that the rules of the Labour Party do require it to organise in Northern Ireland.
But the Party continues to flout its own rules and the basic principles of parliamentary democracy.
LABOUR'S EXCUSES
Refreshingly, the party's current front bench spokesman on Northern Ireland, Kevin McNamara, has been disarmingly frank about Labour's behaviour.
Shortly after taking up his post, he addressed a Parliamentary Labour Party fringe meeting on Northern Ireland at the 1987 conference in Brighton.
When questioned about his support for Labour's membership ban, Mr. McNamara said: ‘I don't pretend to take a democratic position on this.’
Kevin McNamara is a passionate defender of his party's undemocratic stance and his blunt honesty is to be admired.
Not surprisingly, however, the more image-conscious members of Labour's front bench have not spoken in such candid terms.
But Neil Kinnock has endorsed the McNamara line on this issue and he has endorsed the main arguments used to justify it.
As things stand at present, the Labour Party uses three spurious reasons to justify its unprincipled boycott of Northern Ireland:
that there would be no support for the Labour Party in Northern Ireland
that the people of the province already have Labour's ‘sister party’, the SDLP, to vote for and join.
that party organisation in the North would be incompatible with Labour's ‘united Ireland by consent’ policy.
The ‘no support’ excuse was made most recently by junior party spokesman on Northern Ireland, Roger Stott, in an article for a trade union journal.
The other two excuses are regularly voiced by Kevin McNamara.
For instance, in September 1989, with the Tory Party set to extend its organisation into Northern Ireland, he was asked if Labour was also going to move into the 17 ‘missing constituencies’.
McNamara told the press bluntly: ‘It is Labour Party policy to achieve a united Ireland by consent and, therefore, it would be foolish to create a further obstacle.
In any event, the Labour Party has a sister party in the Socialist International in Northern Ireland — the SDLP.’
(Belfast Telegraph 26/9/90)
All three of these excuses are simply that — excuses.
They do not stand up to even the briefest of scrutinies.
We will deal with each of them in turn.
NO SUPPORT?
The argument that Labour should not organise in Northern Ireland because there would be little support for it is particularly unprincipled.
If Labour were to stand only in areas where it has a chance of doing well, it would have to withdraw from a swathe of constituencies in Tory heartlands.
CLPs in places like Sussex, Fareham, Folkestone and Hythe and Worthing would have to be wound up.
Labour members in those constituencies would have to be expelled from the party because they had little chance of ousting the sitting Tory MP.
There would quite rightly be an outcry if Labour took this course of action.
And there would be an outcry because it is now a basic principle of parliamentary democracy that parties of government stand in all constituencies across the state.
Parties seeking to rule a country should be accountable to all the people of the country.
They should present their policies to every member of the electorate.
And all the voters should have the opportunity to mark their approval or disapproval of these policies.
That is why Labour and the Tories stand in areas where they know they will lose their deposits.
That is why the Tory Party always contests the  Rhondda , for example.
And that is why the SDP was declared to be a spent force the instant David Owen said that it would not be contesting every seat at the next election.
It is by no means clear that the Labour Party would receive little support in Northern Ireland.
But even if this was the case, it would be no justification for the party's boycott of the province.
If the principle of contesting every seat holds good in England, Scotland and Wales it should hold good in Northern Ireland as well.
For the province will be affected by the next Labour government's policies just as much as the rest of the UK.
The ‘no support’ excuse has been coming more to the fore recently.
Party spokesman Roger Stott gave a fairly standard rendition of the excuse in the August/September 1990 issue of the NCU journal.
But it was a rather confused piece of reasoning as his article began by conceding that there is strong support for the development of labour policies in the North.
Stott stated:
‘I know from my visits to Northern Ireland and discussions with members of the trade union movement, that there is a real and genuine desire for the Labour Party to organise in Northern Ireland.’
But then Mr. Stott added patronisingly: ‘But as one of the Labour Party's Shadow Northern Ireland Team, I would like to put the opposite view.’
In other words: ‘As an important chap from England, I know better.’
Having admitted that substantial support existed, the party spokesman went on to argue that there was no support worth talking about!
In defence of his claim that  there was ‘no evidence to suggest that people are prepared to abandon their traditional party allegiances’, Stott pointed out that in two recent elections, candidates supported by the Campaign for Labour Representation polled badly:
‘Experience shows that electoral mould-breaking has been a vain exercise.
One indicator is the fact that a mere 3,660 votes were cast for the candidate of the Campaign for Labour Representation in the 1989 European elections out of a total of 560,026 votes cast (0.7 per cent) and out of an electorate of 1,120,517 (0.3 per cent ).
The Right to Vote Labour candidate in the recent Upper Bann by-election obtained 0.66 per cent.’
This is a nonsensical argument.
The CLR is not the Labour Party.
The CLR is not in a position to replace the Tory Government.
It cannot offer voters a policy programme which will be implemented when it comes to power.
Nor can it promise to spend more on health, improve education standards or increase pensions.
It is therefore ridiculous to draw any conclusions for Labour's potential level of support from the Upper Bann and European elections.
The CLR has no apologies to make for backing candidates in those elections.
And it is in no way ashamed of the number of votes received.
Those candidates stood to draw attention to the fact that Northern Ireland residents cannot vote for or join a party which will govern them when it comes to power.
That was successfully done and the Labour Party can rest assured that its undemocratic behaviour will continue to be exposed in a variety of ways.
But it was never expected that voters would forsake their loyalties in large numbers for an abstract principle.
There can be no way of knowing how Labour will fare in the province until it stands there.
It is simply the case that the party should be there while it intends to govern Northern Ireland and it should be exerting itself to offer the voters a real alternative to sectarian politics.
No one has ever argued that the Labour Party will be a panacea for Northern Ireland's problems.
But it would at least offer a chance of a positive political development.
With the Tories also there, attention could eventually be shifted away from the old disputes and onto the business of who governs the state and in whose interest.
No one believes that there will  be an overnight switch away from old voting habits.
Nevertheless, those people who want to develop Labour politics in the province and to change things for the better should at least be given the chance to try.
Moreover, if the Labour Party really threw its energies into the task of winning support in Northern Ireland there is no telling what might happen.
Certainly, it will need to work hard to make up for lost time; the party has neglected the cause of democratic socialism in the North for far too long and it has allowed would-be Labour activists to become demoralised.
This criminal neglect has been particularly indefensible over the past couple of decades.
In the 1960s the Northern Ireland Labour Party (NILP) was on the verge of becoming a significant political force, despite the fact that it had been left to fend for itself in very difficult circumstances.
(In the 1964 Westminster election, the NILP gained 103,000 votes in the province which, to put it into perspective, is more than Provisional Sinn Fein has ever received).
With the outbreak of the Troubles in the late 60s, the NILP came under increasing pressure from the rival sectarian political camps.
At this stage, the NILP sought to become incorporated within the wider Labour Party and to play a full role in the state-wide struggle against the Tories.
After  some initial encouraging noises from Jim Callaghan, the Labour Party turned this request down and the NILP was allowed to go to the wall in the near-war situation that the province had become by the early '70s.
Labour continues to neglect the cause of socialism to this day and it can justifiably be accused of undermining its natural supporters in the province.
Given the demoralisation caused by this neglect, it is somewhat galling to hear Labour spokesmen smugly declare that there is no support for socialism in Northern Ireland.
THE SDLP?
The ‘no support’ excuse may have grown in popularity recently, but the most common argument still concerns Labour's so-called sister-party, the SDLP (a nationalist party organised only in the six counties and invariably described by the media as a ‘mainly Catholic party’).
The SDLP-sister-party line is a particular favourite of Kevin McNamara's.
Within weeks of being handed the Northern Ireland portfolio by Neil Kinnock in the summer of 1987, McNamara was telling a radio interviewer:
‘We have over there a sister party in the Socialist International, the SDLP, which would welcome into its ranks great numbers of non-Catholic socialists.’
(Radio Solent 22/7/87)
The Labour Party leadership has stuck rigidly to this line ever since.
But what evidence has been produced to justify the claim that the SDLP is a socialist party?
None.
And evidence has not been produced because there simply is none.
The SDLP has no trade union affiliates in the North.
It has no connection at all with the labour movement in the society.
And the Labour Party has been remarkably silent about this lack of trade union affiliation.
If the Labour Party genuinely believe that the SDLP is the Labour Party in Northern Ireland, then it should be advising the major unions to affiliate to the SDLP in Northern Ireland.
And Neil Kinnock and Kevin McNamara should be making a special effort to affiliate their own union, the TGWU, to the SDLP.
They have not done this for one simple reason: the unions know the truth about the SDLP and they would quickly tell them where to put their advice.
During the last year, the GMB's Irish Advisory Committee held a special meeting to discuss the issue of Labour Representation in the North.
The local trade unionists were quick to give their verdict on the SDLP and the document drawn up after the meeting stated:
‘The IAC consider it damaging for the Labour Party to regard the SDLP as their equivalent in Northern Ireland and the IAC believe the Party should distance itself from the SDLP.’
Trade unionists in Northern Ireland know that the SDLP is not an adequate substitute for the Labour Party.
And even a quick glance at the SDLP's history shows that the Labour interest is not its number one priority.
Most damningly, it was the SDLP which brought down the last Labour Government.
The party's leader, Gerry Fitt (now Lord Fitt), abstained in the vital vote of confidence which finished off the Callaghan Government in March 1979.
Labour lost the vital division by one vote.
And not only did Gerry Fitt, the SDLP's only MP at the time, abstain in the vote, he persuaded Independent Nationalist MP, Frank Maguire to abstain as well.
Fitt's decision not to back Labour at the moment of crisis received the full backing of his SDLP colleagues.
And by allowing the Tories to win the vote of confidence, the SDLP opened the door for Thatcherism.
This can hardly be described as sisterly behaviour.
Fitt brought down the Labour Government because Labour had increased Northern Ireland's representation at Westminster from 12 to 17 seats.
Although this corrected a chronic under-representation, the SDLP were furious ,interpreting it as an integrationist measure in favour of Protestants.
And so, to punish Labour, Fitt refused to back them in the vote of confidence.
In other words, the ex-civil righters and so-called socialists of the SDLP ushered in Thatcherism because a Labour Government democratically reformed Northern Ireland's representation at Westminster.
It was irony indeed!
In fact, it was doubly ironic, as the SDLP now owe almost everything to Labour's democratic reform.
The SDLP currently holds three Westminster seats but if Northern Ireland still had only 12 seats, the SDLP would have no MPs at all.
The West Belfast constituency, once held by Gerry Fitt, now elects Sinn Fein President, Gerry Adams, as its MP.
Nevertheless, the decision was enough to make Labour's ‘sister party’ bring down the last Labour Government and the working class throughout the UK is still paying for the SDLP's pettiness.
Gerry Fitt with the full support of his party brought down the last Labour government over a decision which greatly enhanced the SDLP's standing.
That is the extent of its loyalty to the Labour cause.
Fitt was the closest thing to a socialist in the party.
But when it really mattered, other priorities came first.
Fitt left the SDLP soon afterwards claiming it had become too right-wing and middle class for him.
By 1987, the SDLP was making no secret of its desire to see Thatcher re-elected for a third term.
Austin Currie, one of the founders of the SDLP, wrote in the Belfast magazine ‘Fortnight’ of June 1987:
‘From the point of view of nationalist Ireland — a continuation of Maggie Thatcher in power, for a limited period of time, would be to our advantage…
I believe that, while we have a strong Conservative Government, that is reason for optimism for the immediate future.’
Currie was still very much a leading figure within the SDLP when he made those remarks.
In 1988, he was chosen by the SDLP leader, John Hume, to represent the Party in the high-level talks with Provisional Sinn Fein.
Nobody from the SDLP uttered a word of criticism over Currie's endorsement of a Thatcher victory in 1987.
Other leading figures of the party made it clear that they share his sentiments.
(The deputy leader, Seamus Mallon described the Labour Party as ‘Cromwellian’ which is certainly not a term of endearment.)
The SDLP's public support for the Tories in the 1987 General Election caused its former leader, Gerry Fitt to comment: ‘I would not vote for the SDLP because it is not a socialist party…
Both they and the Dublin government want to see Mrs. Thatcher re-elected…’
(Belfast News Letter, 2/6/87)
Later in the election campaign, he was driven to comment again: ‘I wish to point out that the SDLP were only admitted to the Socialist International by my credentials.
Now their support for a reactionary government brands them as class traitors.’
(Irish Times 10/6/87)
Despite these developments, the Labour Party leadership stuck to its public position that the SDLP is a ‘sister party’.
It is a strange sister party which wants to see Labour's sworn enemies back in power.
And it is a strange type of socialism which sees the prospect of five more years of Thatcherism as ‘reason for optimism for the immediate future’.
In May 1989, Austin Currie took his commitment to Thatcherism a stage further.
He joined the right-wing Fine Gael party in the Irish Republic and was elected to the Dail for the Dublin West constituency.
The move was, to say the least, bizarre.
One day, Currie was the SDLP's spokesman on the economy, the next he was a Parliamentary candidate for a Party whose economic policies are more Thatcherite than Thatcher herself.
Nobody in the SDLP criticised Currie for his espousal of Thatcherism or for the fact that he stood against and defeated a Labour candidate to get into the Dail.
Further proof of the SDLP's true nature (if it were needed) was provided in the Irish Times report of the Party's 1989 annual conference in Newcastle, Co.
Down.
Here's how the paper described the welcome given to Austin Currie who attended the conference as a fraternal delegate from Fine Gael:
‘A Familiar Name,’ the chairman said, and everyone laughed.
There had been applause for all the ‘fraternal delegates and distinguished visitors’ including Fianna Fail, Fine Gael and Labour.
‘But the smiles and the applause became prolonged when the familiar face stood up to acknowledge his reception like a conquering hero.
Arms and fists raised like a footballer who's just scored a goal, Austin Currie took his kudos, from the audience of 500 in the packed conference hall of the Slieve Donard Hotel.
‘Nice to see you back,’ said chairman, Alban Maginness to his former party colleague as Austin Currie went through his 18th or 19th conference, this time though, from the unfamiliar position of looking at the rostrum rather than being on it.’
(Irish Times 6/11/89)
This is very strange behaviour for a supposedly left-wing party.
Fine Gael is anything but left-wing: its roots can be traced back to General Duffy and the Blueshirts who sent a division of soldiers from Ireland to fight for Franco in the Spanish Civil War.
So what were SDLP delegates doing welcoming Currie to their conference?
Would a traitor to the socialist cause ever have received such a welcome at a Labour Party Conference?
Imagine the reaction if David Owen had appeared at Labour's 1989 conference.
Would he have  been cheered ‘like a conquering hero’?
Would the Conference chairman, Dennis Skinner, have said: ‘Nice to see you back’?
Or imagine the scene at a Labour Conference about fifty years ago if a certain Oswald Mosley had turned up to see his former party colleagues.
In September 1990, Austin Currie was selected as Fine Gael's candidate for the Irish Presidential election.
Needless to say, he is running against the Irish Labour Party candidate, Mary Robinson.
But the twists and turns of Currie's political career are simply a graphic illustration of the fact the SDLP cannot be regarded as the Labour Party in Northern Ireland.
Other leading figures in the party are also unlikely class warriors.
The socialist credentials of its present leader, John Hume, have been the subject of derision ever since the formation of the SDLP in 1970.
Hume, himself, recently admitted in an interview that he never wanted the word ‘Labour’ in the Party's name.
He ‘wanted to call the new party the Social Democratic Party’.
(Irish News, 12/9/88)
A slightly amended version of Labour's SDLP excuse concerns the rules of the Socialist International.
It has been suggested that sister parties within the Socialist International are not allowed to compete with one another.
Thus it is claimed that, under Socialist International rules, the Labour Party is forbidden to enter the SDLP's territory and engage in electoral competition with it in Northern Ireland.
This is simply nonsense but, nevertheless, it has been used within the Labour Party to block discussion of organisation in Northern Ireland.
The fact is that in some countries there is more than one party affiliated to the Socialist International.
In these countries, sister parties in the Socialist International already compete with each other electorally.
In short, there is no reason whatsoever under the rules of the Socialist International why the Labour Party shouldn't put up candidates against the SDLP in Northern Ireland.
For example, the Democratic Socialist Party of Italy and the Italian Socialist Party are both affiliated to the Socialist International.
This is confirmed by the Socialist International itself in its Council Circular No C1/88 (dated 20/1/88) where these two Italian parties appear in the list of ‘member parties’(pages 6–21).
In addition, two Israeli parties — the Israeli Labour Party and the United Worker's Party MAPAM — and two Japanese parties — the Japan Democratic Socialist Party DSP and the Socialist Party of Japan SPJ — are ‘member parties’ of the International and compete with one another electorally.
So whatever is stopping the Labour Party organising and contesting elections in Northern Ireland it is not the rules of the Socialist International.
Given the SDLP's track record, it is inconceivable that Labour-minded people in Northern Ireland would ever give it their support.
And most Labour MPs are well aware of this fact.
(Roger Stott, a junior Labour spokesman on Northern Ireland told a meeting in Bangor, County Down in June 1990 that the SDLP-sister-party line was ‘one big joke’.)
More importantly, as long ago as 1981 the Labour Party itself acknowledged in a major Policy Statement that the SDLP is ‘a moderate nationalist party with very little support outside of the catholic community, and no trade union affiliation’.
That remains the official Labour Party position on the SDLP.
The Policy Statement also concluded: ‘No working class party exists, which is capable of bringing Catholics and Protestants together inside a single political organisation to further their interests as workers.’
Perhaps Labour's leadership could explain what has happened to the SDLP since 1981 to make it capable of bringing Catholic and Protestant workers together.
Or is Labour just using the SDLP as an excuse to avoid facing up to its democratic responsibilities to the people of Northern Ireland?
IRISH UNITY?
The Labour Party's ‘Irish unity’ excuse is a logical nonsense and it is usually tagged on as an afterthought to the comradely talk about the SDLP.
But no one from the Labour Party has ever explained how the development of non-sectarian Labour politics in the North would be an ‘obstacle’ to Irish unity.
According to official Labour Party policy, any change in the status of Northern Ireland will require the consent of the majority of people in the province.
So how would the mere existence of Labour Party membership cards in the North prevent the electorate voting themselves into a United Ireland if they so desired?
The membership ban would make sense if it was Labour Party policy to expel Northern Ireland from the UK immediately after coming to power.
It would obviously be daft to organise in an area which is about to be kicked out of the state.
But that is not Labour Party policy.
Anyone who has any doubts on this matter should read the new policy document, ‘Looking to the Future’ which will form the basis of the party's election manifesto.
It clearly states:
‘For Northern Ireland, the long term solution lies in a united Ireland achieved by consensus and without violence.
The continued operation of the Anglo Irish Agreement is important — not only in the fight against terrorism, but also in maintaining consistently close links at every level between the UK and the Republic of Ireland.
We support the commitment in that Agreement that ‘any change in the status of Northern Ireland would only come about with the consent of the majority of the people of Northern Ireland.’
If, in the future, the majority in Northern Ireland formally consent to a united Ireland, we will introduce the necessary legislation.’
(Our emphasis)
Few would argue with the goal of achieving Irish unity by consent.
Every strand of political opinion in Ireland, North and South, with the exception of the Provisional IRA, accepts that any change in the present set-up will require majority support in both parts of the island.
But there can be little doubt that such change is not going to happen overnight.
After the Brighton bombing in 1984, Neil Kinnock predicted that it would be ‘many many decades’ before consent came about (Newsnight BBC2, 12/10/84).
The following year he went even further, saying on a visit to the North:
‘Modern economics, as well as the geography of the whole of Ireland means that ultimately — and ultimately can be a very long way away — our Labour Party policy on reunification is the one that will be endorsed.
‘But unless and until it is endorsed by consent by all the communities in Northern Ireland there can be no significant move forward in that direction.’
(Irish Times 1/2/85)
Mr. Kinnock is not alone in thinking that a united Ireland may be ‘a long way away’.
A recent opinion poll on the subject South of the border found that 49% of the people in the Irish Republic believed that there will never be a united Ireland.
Only 40% thought that there will be a united Ireland one day but few expected it in the short term — 16% expected it to come about in 25 years, 13% in 50 years and 11% in 100 years.
The poll, conducted by the Market Research Bureau of Ireland (MRBI) and published in the latter half of 1987, also found that 67% of the people in the Irish Republic saw Irish unity as ‘something to be hoped for’.
But only 39% said they would pay extra taxes in order to facilitate unification (Irish Times 1/9/87).
Opinion polls in the North also find little enthusiasm for Irish unity at the moment.
Successive opinion polls in recent years have found only around 10% overall in favour of a united Ireland under present circumstances.
And only around 25–30% of the Catholic community express support for this option.
(See, for example, the poll published in the Belfast Telegraph on October 4 and 5 1988.
It found 9% support for Irish unity within the Northern Ireland electorate while support among Catholics stood at just 22%).
Clearly then the Labour Party's goal of Irish unity by consent is not going to be achieved overnight.
So what are the voters in the North supposed to do in the meantime?
Remain in their rival sectarian ghettos?
If Labour's boycott of the province continues, the one certainty is that politics will remain a question of Protestants versus Catholics.
And sectarian politics will continue to breed sectarian violence.
Imagine what Liverpool would be like if the Labour Party had refused to organise there over the past century.
How would sectarian bitterness have been eroded if the workers had been excluded from the Labour movement?
And would politics based on religion have disappeared in Glasgow if not for the rise of the Labour Party?
And what about today's inner cities in Great Britain?
If Labour withdrew from Bradford or Birmingham, would a multitude of parties not spring up based on rival religious and racial identities?
Would the development of this sort of politics not heighten racial tension and conflict?
It is time the Labour Party explained how it sees non-sectarian politics developing in Northern Ireland.
The party leadership presumably wants working class unity in the North.
We believe that Labour is best placed to develop that unity by bringing Catholics and Protestants together in the struggle against the Tories.
But if Labour's leadership genuinely believe that their party is irrelevant to the task of developing non-sectarian politics, they should explain just how they see this task being accomplished.
And if they are serious about securing Irish unity, they should also explain how they envisage it coming about while the sectarian political blocs remain unchallenged.
It is our view that any political development will  only be possible once communal politics is broken down.
The supporters of the status quo within the Labour Party seem to think that a united Ireland will somehow develop by some inconceivable means out of the current sectarian stalemate.
But the status quo of Unionist versus Nationalist in the North leaves Unionism in a permanent position of superiority.
And while the stalemate continues, progressive political development is impossible.
CONCLUSION
The Labour Party has run out of excuses for its undemocratic treatment of Northern Ireland.
Its excuses concerning the SDLP and Irish unity have been exposed as totally spurious.
And they will continue to be exposed until they become too embarrassing to even mention.
The time has come for the party to choose and, in the final analysis, it has two coherent policies to choose from.
One is to accept Ken Livingstone's position and set about expelling the province from the UK, whatever the consequences.
The other is to open the way for the development of working-class unity in Northern Ireland by organising the Party there.
The latter option is the more likely to produce a stable, peaceful and united Ireland in the long-term.
For the only Irish unity worth having must begin with unity between the Catholic and Protestant working-class in Northern Ireland.
These two options should be the starting-point for any real debate about Northern Ireland, a debate that is long overdue.
Above all, the Labour Party should abandon its current stance on Northern Ireland if it wants to remain true to the principles of its founders.
The present stance involves banning the people of the province from its ranks yet drawing up policies for them which will radically affect their lives.
It means abandoning the working class to sectarian politics and violence and insulting their intelligence by telling them to join the SDLP.
And letting the Tories go unchallenged in all 17 constituencies.
It means keeping Northern Ireland in the UK state for the foreseeable future while banning its citizens from the politics of the state.
And it involves planning to rule over the people of the province without seeking their votes.
Such behaviour is not suited to a democratic socialist party of the 1990s.
OTHER PUBLICATIONS
McNamara's ban (75p): Kevin McNamara's ‘refreshingly frank’ reasons for the ban on Northern Ireland membership.
Is the SDLP Socialist?(50p): The truth about Labour's ‘sister-party’.
The Forgotten Conference (50p): Labour's first conference in Belfast in 1907.
Twenty years of criminal neglect (60p): How Labour has abdicated responsibility for Northern Ireland.
Published by CAMPAIGN FOR LABOUR REPRESENTATION IN NORTHERN IRELAND 