

Fifteen
Grindlewood, built in the Palladian style, turned its nose up at the rest of us with its columns and porticoes and pilasters.
We stepped into the cold marble hall and waited under a statue of George the Third masquerading as Alexander the Great.
‘Poor old soul, he was as mad as a hatter,’ Otley said.
Adam fireplaces and Jasper urns, ancestors ten feet square and chandeliers about to drop on your head.
‘I'm getting a migraine,’ I said looking in my handbag.
Chinese dragons and Chelsea whatnots, massive tables groaning with silver plate.
Big treasures and little treasures.
Something for everyone.
Open the box and take your pick.
‘Greedy sods,’ said Otley.
‘Come in and have some tea,’ a cut-glass voice invited.
‘Oh, thanks!’ said Otley.
‘Nice place you got here.’
The Hon. Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke was a bossy lady, as you would expect.
A cross between a vestal virgin and a bus conductress.
Fair-haired, fresh-faced and hazel-eyed, she strode through life as if through a newly ploughed field.
We followed the tweed skirt into a kitchen where its owner motioned us to sit, in the manner of someone training a dog.
‘Are you better now, Mrs Craven?’ she asked.
‘Yes, thank you, your honour,’ I bobbed.
‘Good Lord!
Have you been watching Upstairs, Downstairs ?’ she said.
We discussed our plans for the living museum and theme park and told her about the oak tree.
She was anxious that Swire Sugden should not be allowed to spread himself around like a malignant tumour.
‘This new money, these upstarts, they don't know their place — they think they can tell me what to do,’ she went on.
‘We don't want any more supermarkets and car-parks,’ I added.
‘They’ can go on the bus.’
‘If everybody plays their part we can keep him out’ Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke said.
‘I'm prepared to fund whatever we put on.’
‘Oh, thanks!’
‘It's our bicentenary here at Grindlewood and we want to make it a year to remember,’ she said, measuring the floor with her brogues.
‘We'll be starting rehearsals tomorrow,’ Otley announced.
‘And we think we've found a Roman villa.’
‘Good show!’
‘We wanted to put you in the picture,’ Otley said.
‘There's a lot going on and we don't want any crossed lines.’
‘I'll organize the ox-roasting,’ she said.
‘Eats are on me.’
‘And we're trying to find the Chatwin boy —’ I began.
‘He was stolen by the gypsies,’ she interrupted.
‘It's a wild-goose chase but you never know,’ I said hopefully.
‘And if you could meet Swire Sugden yourself he might listen to you being an honourable an' all that,’ said Otley to my amazement, I never knew he was a royalist.
Soon he'll be tugging his forelock.
‘I'll do that,’ she said, ‘bit of MI5 stuff behind the scenes, eh?’
‘While we dig away at the front,’ I said.
The Hon. Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke, ‘You can call me Mollie’, had been a widow since 1979 when her husband was lost in a blizzard.
‘In the Antarctic?’ inquired Otley.
‘In the Lake District,’ she said.
‘It was the year they made Dennis whatsisname minister for snow.’
There was only a daily who came in to dust and wash up, a cook and a gardener.
This must be him just coming in through the side door.
‘Excuse me, ma'am, but the dumper's gone.’
‘Have you reported it?’
‘Nay, I've got mildew — gotta see to that first.’
‘It must be a headache running this place,’ Otley said.
‘Well, we do open to the public now, as you know, but oh! the bills, and the staff want paying,’ she said as she showed us to the door.
‘What a shame,’ Otley muttered under his breath.
‘Same with us,’ I sympathized.
‘But on a much smaller scale, isn't it?’ came the cut-glass tone.
‘Well, we've got smaller money.’
‘And then there's the rates,’ she complained.
‘You'll be all right with the poll tax,’ I reminded her.
‘Then they want your blood and your kidneys as well,’ said Otley.
‘Keep in touch,’ she called as the huge door rattled to a close.
When I want a change of scenery I'll ask her if she wants any help.
I'll do it for nothing — just my food and a bed in the attic looking out over the chimney-pots.
‘Now I've gotta round up some more lads for the Ancient Britons,’ Otley said.
‘We want a few good skirmishers.’
‘Have you got your costume?’
‘I've got that fur loincloth and a dustbin lid.’
‘If it's nice I'll wear that silk gown,’ I said.
‘It's not The Teahouse of the August Moon you know!’
‘I told you Nero sent me it so I'm going to wear it.’
‘If you go round saying that they'll have you locked up in a padded cell.’
We walked down to the car-park, through the rhododendrons, round the lake and over the willow-pattern bridge.
Bought a pot of Grindlewood goosegog jam at the gift shop and went back to the car.
‘They put elderflowers in it,’ I said looking at the label.
‘Don't start screaming again,’ he said.
We thought we'd run over to Low Riding and make sure Mike was all right.
I had to water the plants and stock up the fridge as I don't want to be reported to the NSPCC.
‘He's got the vote now — he's out of our jurisdiction,’ Otley said eating a custard tart I'd Just bought.
‘Hello!
I thought you were at Claro.’
Mike was wearing a jester's outfit with bells on, one leg red and the other leg yellow.
A young man in an Acker Bilk ensemble lurked in the doorway and a girl in a red satin skirt and a chocolate soldier cap twirled a baton and stamped her feet.
This must be Jilly.
‘Where's the others?’
I inquired.
‘We practise in Hob Wood,’ Mike said.
‘Because of complaints about the noise.
This is just a dry run then we're off to join them.’
‘Have you emptied the bins and put the milk bottles out —’ I began.
‘Yes, we have,’ he butted in.
‘Keep the windows locked at night and unplug the telly —‘
‘Mum, why don't you give yourself a treat and go to Benidorm for a fortnight?
His folks have gone,’ he said, nodding at Acker Bilk.
‘We don't want you to be neglected,’ I told him for the umptieth time.
‘All the child psychologists say that mummy and daddy have to be there for children to grow up well balanced.’
‘I'm a big boy now,’ he said.
‘And the government are emphasizing the importance of the family.’
‘You know why, don't you?’ he said mysteriously.
‘Why?’
‘Because they want everybody to have a Big Daddy with his leather belt keeping 'em in order — less for them to do,’ he said.
‘Whippin' 'em into line,’ added Acker Bilk.
‘They're all right.
Let's go,’ Otley decided.
‘And Maggie's always on about Victorian values,’ I persisted, ‘the sanctity of the family group —‘
‘Mafia families as well?’ asked Mike.
‘Divorce — single parents — old folks in homes,’ I went on.
‘Families torn asunder,’ warned Otley.
‘Some families want tearing asunder,’ said Jilly, slashing at the air with her baton.
‘Ask the kids sleeping under the arches at Charing Cross about Victorian values.
It's the same as in Dickens.’
Somehow I didn't think my message was getting across but Mike seemed all right.
He'd washed his hair and piled all his plastic carrier bags into a corner instead of strewing them through the house like the clues of a treasure-hunt.
‘We shall want you to play for us in the pageant.’
‘When?’
‘A week on Saturday, all being well.’
‘What sort of stuff?’
‘Well, if you could practise ‘Viva Espana’ for us to march to that'll be nice,’I told them.
‘And ‘Any Old Iron’ for the Ancient Britons,’requested Otley.
‘Is it a proper jazz band with tommy talkers like we used to run after when we were kids?’
I asked him.
‘Sort of.’
‘Come on!’ said Otley, opening the door and propelling me through.
‘See you then, mate.’
‘Bye, luv,’ I called back, ‘and stop poking your ears out with your biro you'll get mastoids.’
‘Sometimes I wonder how he passed his 0-levels,’ Daddy said as we crawled over the cobbles and out of the village.
‘Well, he did, didn't he?’
I couldn't help feeling proud.
‘What good is it doing him, capering about with bells on?’
‘They can't get anywhere these days without exams,’ I said, ‘he'll be doing his degree now.’
‘Jesus never had a degree,’ said Otley.
We called for some fish and chips to take back for all of us, but I wasn't sure that I could eat them after seeing that documentary where they all had ulcers.
Memories of a childhood paradise came crowding in.
A bathe in a spanking-clean river, roly-poly down the grassy knolls, finish up your bottle of Spanish water and jostle at the chip shop on your way home.
A glass of milk and an apple when you got in and a smack if you were late.
‘D'you remember —’ I began when Otley came back to the car.
‘Yes, I do,’ he interrupted.
‘When you pinched my bicycle outside the chip shop and ran into the back of a lorry with it and buckled the wheels.’
‘You didn't worry about me all bandaged up, did you?’
‘It was a new bike and served you right, anyway,’ he said.
‘You were as mad as a March hare.’
‘Only when I wanted to be.’
‘But you were a little cracker all the same,’ he said holding my hand.
I hope he's not going to get too sentimental.
You can love somebody without going all gooey.
Then the next minute he's swearing.
That's why I stopped going to the Olde Tyme Dancing with him.
Bowing and scraping all night at the class, then effing and blinding all the way home.
‘And don't forget to bow to your partner, Mr Craven,’ our long-suffering instructor would call out.
‘I'll give 'im a bleedin' thick earole in a minute,’ Otley would mutter rolling up the sleeves of his frilly, dancing shirt.
Aunt Bedelia stayed to watch Brookside while we went over to the Jubilee Tower for the rest of the evening.
You could get seasick at the top watching the clouds scudding across a full moon in a vast ocean of space.
Elinor was wearing an Empire-line gown in the hope of seeing Napoleon.
We were in line with the Craven fault it seemed and in an electric storm the tower and all its domestic equipment spat and sizzled like a jumping cracker.
‘I heard the battle of Waterloo once,’ she said.
‘How d'you know?’
Otley inquired.
‘Shouting, trumpets, cries of men and horses,’ she explained.
‘It could have been Marston Moor, it's nearer than Waterloo.’
‘I'm not on that wavelength.’
‘Give over.’
‘Well, you can't pick anything up on your radio unless you're on the right wavelength, can you?’
‘No, you can't,’ I said, giving Otley a cross look.
‘Well then,’ she said.
‘You know he had piles,’ said Otley finally.
Before we went down to the kitchen Elinor patted all the Napoleana into place, violets and Redouté roses; a picture of him riding his horse, Marengo, and that one of him feeling for his wallet; matchstick models made by French prisoners of war and a tricolour flying at half-mast.
Nigel was in the kitchen looking at his diagrams and broken pots.
‘Have you ever seen anything like this before?’ he said, handing me a piece of a dish with feathers sticking to it.
‘Surely they plucked the chickens first before they ate them.’
As I held it in my hand it all came back to me.
It was the night Tony came over to tell me Nero wanted a British warm like his.
I was just dishing up the ravioli and he hadn't even had time to take his helmet off when Nutty stormed in, drunk as a fiddler.
‘Gotcha! yer prancin' pollywog,’ he raged pushing Tony head first in the dish of pulsating pasta.
They had a right set to while I went to look for my knitting.
Nutty ate everything in sight and went off to fetch his smelly Brits again.
‘I'll show ye, ye mollicking mollymawk,’ he shouted brandishing his fist at me.
‘I'll swingle yer scalp for a sporran.’
What a mess there was to clean up, and I had to hit the cooking pot with my chopper to get Tony's head out.
His helmet was a bit dented and it had lost its feathers but otherwise he was all right— just a bit dizzy that's all.
At the Villa Claro AD 55 Dear Nero,
Salute! lofty Caesar!
I hear you want a black British warm for prowling about the streets at night.
What a good idea!
Tony would like a new hat.
He's learning to row a coracle but he keeps going round in circles, it must be tiresome for him when he's used to going in straight lines.
If you could send some more troops up here I'd be very grateful, but not the ones who eat sheep's eyes and have ten women each as they are a strain on the economy and we've run out of rice pudding.
Thanks for the new road, I'm sorry Boudicca's churned it up.
She didn't do it on purpose, it's her new chariot.
And your Governor wasn't looking where he was going, it was very silly of him.
As soon as we have found him another set of legs he'll be out and about again, do you think he'll mind walking on his hands for now?
Well I'm off now luv.
Here's some calamine lotion for your spots.
It's all them orgies, but you're only young once.
Arrivederci!
Carrie Brigantum Regina
PS The poison mushrooms are the pretty red ones with white spots.
I do agree.
It's pleasanter than chopping him up in little pieces.
I came to sitting on the sofa still holding the broken pot in my hand.
‘It's the feathers off his hat,’ I said.
I promised to have a look at the dig and point out where the tessellated pavement should be.
It was looking good, Nigel thought.
‘And by the way,’ said Elinor as she handed round tea and biscuits, ‘I found out that the Chatwin kid was traced to a gypsy camp at the Appleby Horse Fair but before the police could pick him up he'd disappeared again.’
‘When was that?’ asked Otley.
‘In 1955 — he'd be about six years old then.’
The gypsies gathered at the horse fair came from all over the place so he could be anywhere after that.
Although the case was still open the police had no hope of finding him after all this time.
‘You know what?’ said Otley.
‘What?’
‘It's the Appleby Horse Fair next week.’
‘Let's go up there,’ said Elinor.
‘You never know.’
‘And we can stay out all night,’ I said hopefully.
Nigel couldn't leave his digging but wished us luck and we began to make our plans: go up on the Settle-Carlisle line for a day or two, split up to get round all the caravans quicker, then meet at dinner and tea to compare notes.
‘We can only try,’ Elinor said, giving Otley the best biscuits.
‘They've not found Lord Lucan either,’ he said.
Sixteen
As soon as we received the tree preservation order we rushed down to pi-n i-t on the tree.
A guard was to be put on it and the vicar arranged to ring the church bells if it was attacked.
‘And if they start digging,’ Elinor said.
‘Of course,’ he agreed.
‘We've got to keep our eyes open,’ said Otley.
‘And if they bring the chainsaw we'll make a ring round it,’ I said.
‘You've got to be prepared to die for what you believe in,’ Elinor said passionately with a toss of her wayward locks.
‘Well, er,’ said the vicar, ‘I'm not so sure about that but I'll certainly ring the church bells.’
‘There's no need to play anything fancy,’ Otley advised.
‘Just a plain ding-dong'll do.’
We had barely finished congratulating ourselves and going round with the good news when Mrs Maddock's little boy from the post office ran to tell us it had been torn down.
‘A chap got out of a big, black car and did it,’ he panted.
‘Not to worry,’ said the tree officer when we phoned him.
‘They'll tear everything down.
It's the same with the notices about dogs fouling the pavement.
We put them up one minute and the next minute they're gone.’
‘What can we do?’
‘Have you got any white paint?’ he asked.
‘We can get some.’
‘Well, just paint TPO on it.’
‘Won't it damage it?’
I asked thinking of the noxious fumes.
‘No,’ he laughed.
‘If they can stand dogs piddling on them they can stand a bit o' paint.’
We borrowed some paint from one of Otley's Ancient Britons, Gilbert Briggs, who was painting his windowsill, and the job was done.
‘Thanks, mate,’ said Otley giving him back his brush.
‘Don't forget the manoeuvres after tea.’
Aunt Bedelia tut-tutted at all the goings on as we ate our spinach soup made with dandelion leaves and wild garlic.
‘Won't make a bit of difference what you do,’ she sniffed.
‘They'd run over us with a steamroller if they felt like it.’
‘We'll go down fighting anyway,’ said Otley.
I keep forgetting he's a war hero.
With his paunch and his varicose veins and his rumbling tum it's hard to equate him with John Wayne and Errol Flynn.
‘Be careful now,’ I cautioned.
‘Don't do anything foolhardy.’
‘Don't tell me what to do,’ he snapped.
‘I only said —‘
‘Nobody tells Otley Craven what to do — I'm my own man.’
I remember him saying that once before.
He was celebrating a new job at Christmas and went out with the boys in his smart pin-stripes.
Knowing what they were like for drink I tried to tell him but he wouldn't listen.
‘Don't overdo it,’ I warned him.
‘Just have a little drink and then come back home.’
‘Don't tell me what to do,’ he said.
‘Who d'you think you're married to — Little Lord Fauntleroy?’
Well, I waited up until three o'clock in the morning and he crawled in with footmarks all over his nice new suit where he'd fallen on the floor and let everybody trample over him, blood pouring down his shirt from a head wound, a balloon tied round his neck and a paper hat on.
I struggled to get him into bed and he started to do deep breathing exercises, which he knows I can't stand when I'm trying to get to sleep.
‘It's stuffy in here,’ he said.
I went and got the pressure-cooker to brain him with and was just about to bring it crashing down on his bonce when I heard Mike calling from the next room.
‘Mummy, can I have a drink of water?’
Who would look after him when I was in gaol?
‘This woman,’ the judge would say, ‘is so depraved, so much the slave  of her own passions, that she had no hesitation in bludgeoning to death the father of her child on Christmas Eve.’
It would look bad.
There would be no recommendation to mercy.
I put the pressure-cooker back and went to bed on the sofa.
‘Merry Christmas!’
Otley said the next day when he surfaced.
‘We had a smashing time last night.’
He still doesn't know how much more smashing it might have been.
‘Sorry,’ he said when he saw Bedelia's open mouth, ‘it's my nerves.’
Sometimes I think we'd be better off if we did what the animals do.
Have our little bit of fun then throw daddy out to fend for himself when the kiddiewinks come along.
Have you seen how the king of the jungle behaves when the missus brings back a nice bit of venison?
He's been sat there all day like a stuffed dummy, then he suddenly comes to life, grabs the dinner and runs off with it trailing between his legs, tripping and stumbling over it in his anxiety to have it all to himself.
And birds are not much better.
Daddy sits there flapping his wings and squawking while mummy builds a new house.
‘Talking about steamrollers,’ Otley said, ‘it would be handy if we could get hold of one.’
‘Look in the Exchange & Mart ,’ I said.
‘Why do you want a steamroller?’
Nigel asked, no doubt concerned about his dig.
‘So that we can flatten that Swire Sugden and post him back through his letter-box,’ Otley said, crushing his bread roll into a poultice.
‘Now don't do anything silly,’ Bedelia cautioned.
‘It's against the law to squash people under steamrollers.’
‘Just run him down with your car,’ suggested Nigel.
‘You'll get away with a fine and Bob's your uncle.’
‘And if you can prove you need your car for work they won't take your licence away,’ Elinor added.
Well, that wouldn't apply to Otley but it is the safest way to murder somebody.
That and knitting needles.
After we had finished our toad-in-the-hole made with soya chunks and apple dappy, we cleared away and washed up while Bedelia did the ironing.
The steam rose from the cavernous sink and the furniture loomed at us like shapes in a jungle night.
Otley riffled through a pile of old sheet music releasing a musty smell of pipe tobacco and Evening in Paris.
‘This'll be all right for the Ancient Britons as well,’ he said brandishing ‘The Stein Song’, 'I'll give it to Mike when we go over.’
More songs with words, the sort that he likes best: ‘Mexicali Rose’, ‘When it's Springtime in the Rockies’, ‘It Happened in Monterey,.
‘You were a nice little girl then,’ he said accusingly.
Passionate, throbbing tangos, La Paloma and La Cumparsita were more in Elinor's line and Nigel was eager to continue his dancing lessons.
‘We'll tape them,’ Elinor said, ‘and take them to the church hall.’
Sid and Ethel Parkinson, retired dancers, were starting a class.
It was only a pound a time including tea and biscuits; fifty pence for OAPs, UB40s, students and disabled, which was most of us in Claro.
More steam, more dust stirred up until we ran for the door gasping.
The windows had not been opened for years and had forgotten how it went.
‘It's time for the practice,’ Nigel said, consulting his Timex.
‘No need to get dressed up for it.’
‘Oh!’ said a disappointed Otley, putting down his dustbin lid.
I picked up Dorothy Wordsworth's Journals hoping for a quiet hour or two by the river while they were manoeuvring.
As the Queen they wouldn't expect me to do much.
Elinor wanted to be Cleopatra.
‘She didn't live round here,’ Nigel informed her.
‘It doesn't matter, they won't know any different,’ she said.
‘Right then — Watling Street Guard fall in!’ he ordered.
‘Hey up!’
‘Quick march!’
‘Erewiggo, erewiggo, erewiggo!’
Jostling, thumping, grunting, slapping, guffawing, raspberrying as the lads from the nail factory got fell in.
Jack, Judd, Freddie, Bob, Mickey, Jimmy, Ted, Gordon, Chas and Harry.
‘I'll go in front as the standard bearer,’ said Nigel as he placed himself at the head of his patrol.
‘Of course, on the day I shall have an eagle on a stick.’
‘Oi oi how's yer father!’
Harry shouted.
‘Watling Street Guard, forward — wait for it — march!
Left, right, left, right!’
‘They didn't say that, did they?’
Otley objected as he waited under the trees with his bunch of Brits.
‘Patrol — wait for it — halt,’ called Nigel.
Some halted at the right time and others didn't, resulting in a bit of a rugger scrum.
‘Aye aye, put some water in it next time!’
Freddie advised Mickey who was lying flat on his face in a clump of nettles.
‘Clumsy sod,’ he said when he got up shaking his fist at Gordon with the big feet who was marching behind him.
‘Of course they didn't say that,’ said Nigel as if to an elderly sloth suffering from senile decay, ‘but it's no good me saying, ‘Sinister, dexter, sinister, dexter,’because they won't know what I'm talking about, will they?
They'll trip themselves up trying to keep time to that, won't they?’
‘I never thought,’ replied Otley.
‘You can carry verisimilitude too far, you know,’ Nigel went on.
‘It's no good if nobody knows what you're getting at.’
‘Oh no!
You're quite right, it isn't,’ agreed Otley.
‘Right then, let's go,’ said Nigel.
‘Watling Street Guard, forward — wait for it — march.
Left, right, left, right.’
‘Erewiggo, erewiggo, erewiggo,’ they chanted as they set off.
‘Up the 'Ammers!’ they roared as they charged headlong and then half stumbled and half marched to the far end of the meadow.
‘Come back here!
What d'you think you are, football hooligans?’
‘The Campbells are comin',’ they sang as they charged back.
‘Patrol — wait for it — dismiss,’ ordered Nigel.
The Ancient Britons surged forward and began forming themselves into lines, Elinor in front as Boudicca in a pretend chariot and Otley as Venutius, the belligerent Brit, consort of our Brigantian Queen Cartimandua.
‘The Celts didn't march,’ Nigel said, dismissing them back into the bushes.
‘They were brave fighters but undisciplined.’
‘What have we got to do then?’ inquired Otley.
‘Just mill about and attack in a rabble when you feel like it.’
‘Oh, that's easy!’ came a chorus of approval.
‘Where's Cartimandua?’
I heard Nigel calling urgently.
‘Never mind her,’ said Otley.
‘She was useless anyway.’
‘Traitor!’
‘Quisling Queen!’
‘Burn her alive!’
‘Bury her in quicklime!’
I crept along the riverside until I reached the culvert and hid myself  among the banks of sweet cicely to read my book.
The aroma evoked the sights and sounds of childhood — aniseed balls clicking against molars like billiard balls on the green baize cloth.
A group of whirligig beetles span round and round on the surface of the water putting me in a daze.
That's Tony going round in his coracle again.
He doesn't seem to be able to master the technique.
‘Mamma mia ! 'ow you stoppa thissa machina stupido?’
‘Ye'll stay there till yer radicles roll off and yer congles coagulate, ye pestilential pokeweed!’
Oh, no!
It's not him again.
I'll just ignore him.
‘Tonee — dinner's ready.’
‘I'm having it,’ said Nutty, barging his way in to the dining-room.
‘You won't like it, it's spaghetti,’ I told him as I put the pot on the table and went to fetch the tomato sauce.
‘I can go fishin' with it,’ he said, stuffing it in his pockets, ‘I've used all my maggots.’
‘Just look what a mess you're making — I've got to clean that up.’
‘Yer gettin' worse than them poncin' polecats, Carrie,’ he complained.
‘Yer never used to be like that till they came wi' their hot water and their olive oil — oil's fer boilin' people not for washin' in.’
‘I'm afraid I must ask you to leave,’ I said.
Tony came in then dripping wet and there was another punch-up.
I left them to it and went up into my tree-house.
I've got my accounts to do.
There should be some money over this month.
Every time Tony lost his army pay I picked it up.
If they can build aqueducts you'd think they could engineer a wallet to keep their money in.
They drop it all over the place.
At the Villa Claro AD 55 Dear Buddy,
I did warn you about doing the Barbarian Chop.
When you've taken the splints off your leg you can use them to strap your arm up.
What a good idea to go round collecting all the spare parts!
Sorry to hear you gave your husband the wrong leg though.
Would you like to borrow Nutty for a few weeks?
I'll donate one of his.
They're at it again.
I've got out of the way, I'm trying to do my accounts, I can't understand this new money can you?
You did right chopping the Governor down and setting fire to the forum — but don't tell them  I said so.
If you put his legs on backwards way he'll go home instead of coming up here.
Nero sends his luv.
He's invited us over to his place for the circus and if we like it we can have one here.
Seems like a nice boy.
Don't know about you but I shall be glad to get away from my lot.
Follow me round muttering and shaking their fists.
It's a thankless task.
I keep having hot flushes, know what I mean? but d'you think they care? they just follow me round saying ‘Miss we've dropped a stitch’.
That chief Druid was round here again.
Nasty, old man, blood all over his nightie, been doing sacrifices I expect.
Tony gets under the bed when he sees him coming.
May Jupiter forgive me for saying this Buddy -but I do think his head would go nice on your mantelpiece.
It's all clear now so I'm off.
Luv and kisses to all.
Carrie Brigantum
PS Sorry you got off on the wrong foot with the new commander.
A scutum is a shield, didn't you know?
I said to ‘Hold his scutum at the top’, not ‘Boil his scrotum in a pot’, silly goose!
No wonder he was miffed.
‘Watling Street Guard — wait for it — dismiss.’
Where am I?
How did I get up here into this tree?
‘Help, help!
I can't get down,’ I hollered.
Soon my rescuers arrived jostling, pushing, laughing, joking.
‘Oi oi, does your mother know yer out?’
‘Hey up, can anybody come?’
‘Me Tarzan, you Jane!’
‘Have a banana!’
The Ancient Britons had gone home tired of having to lurk in the bushes waiting to burst out in a rabble.
I picked my book out of the sweet cicely still unread and made my way back to Claro.
Nigel caught up with me and I was glad to have company as it can get spooky in the half-light.
An eerie, green glow in the sky behind the tower turned it into a ghostly galleon on a leaden sea; Claro itself, a crazy house, leaning this way and bulging that.
It looked ready to collapse like a house of cards if Swire Sugden huffed and puffed hard enough.
‘We've got down to the stone foundation,’ Nigel said.
‘It's against all the odds if it is a villa but I hope you're right.’
‘It's only a small one,’ I said, ‘three rooms and a bathhouse, with a verandah facing south.’
‘Really?’
‘I'll draw you a plan.
And I told you about the garden going down to the river, didn't I?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, there's a jetty, they brought stuff up the river.’
I could see Elinor and Otley, and Aunt Bedelia standing with her arms akimbo silhouetted against the lighted windows.
It looked as if they were waiting for somebody, could it be me?
Oh dear!
Seventeen
Otley seemed to be very cross about something the next day but I didn't bother to ask what.
I'm fed up of all this aggravation.
I want to go and make daisy chains and eat rhubarb pie like we did in that magic, far-away land of childhood…
A penny to spend on Saturdays.
Jelly babies, dolly mixtures, love hearts that said ‘Kiss me quick’, and if you saved up for two weeks you could buy a whipped cream walnut.
Garden parties in the summer at Miss Annie's who went round muttering to herself and poking everybody with her parasol.
But it was the scene of my first heartbreak.
We held hands going to school every morning, Jimmy and I, and three times I stood on my head for him at Miss Annie's to prove my love.
But Kathleen Mary Butterfield lured him away with a bounce of her fat orange curls, and I found them roly-polying down the hill together behind the shrubbery.
It was a bittersweet time but he still held my hand going to school.
‘Are you all right, May?’
Aunt Bedelia inquired after breakfast.
‘She's in her ‘Come into the garden, Maud’ mood,’said Otley.
‘Can we have rhubarb pie today?’
I asked absentmindedly.
‘I think all this is tipping you over the edge a bit,’ said Bedelia with an armful of dandelions.
‘She went doolally once before,’ Otley told her.
‘Haven't you got any tablets?’ she wanted to know.
‘No — I don't want any.’
‘We do deep breathing exercises instead,’ said Otley, throwing out his chest to expand his lungs, his paunch moving itself up a notch.
‘The dancing'll do you good.
It starts tonight, will you be going?’
‘As long as there's no bowing an' scraping,’ said Otley.
‘Not in a paso doble there isn't,’ I reminded him.
‘They stab each other with their banderillas.’
‘That sounds more like it.’
Bedelia never went out at night as she didn't want to get mugged.
‘You don't know who's hiding in that snicket by the church — it could be the vicar or it could be Dracula, they look the same when it's dark.
We were just wondering what to do next when Elinor came running in waving a letter.
‘It's from Mr Scrape,’ she shouted.
We could have another month he said, then they had no option but to sell to Swire Sugden.
The boilerhouse bridge needed repairing before it pitched us all into the river.
Estate cottages had to be modernized, and the school had to have all the lead and asbestos extracted so Portakabins would have to go up.
‘Another month,’ said Otley.
‘That takes us into July.’
Elinor was looking forward to the dancing class with Nigel, and to the horse fair with Otley.
How many men does she want?
It was all her different incarnations apparently.
One life is not enough for somebody with her hormones.
I realized with a shock the same thing could be said of me now and I've got no hormones.
Mustn't be too hard on her.
She did look fetching in her fuchsia velour jumpsuit that deepened her speedwell eyes to a pansy purple.
And I noticed Otley was admiring himself in the mirror a lot these days, the predatory gleam back in his hazel eyes, sometimes gold sometimes green, according to where the light was coming from.
I'm still in my army trousers and my one-hundred-per-cent cotton shirt made in Bombay.
I shall have to look in the dead box for something to wear tonight.
A bodystocking and a black wig — like on Come Dancing .
Otley won't recognize me.
We're trying to work up some passion for the pageant.
We don't want to be cardboard cut-outs, we want the museum to be a real, living one.
Bring history leaping from the pages of those boring, old textbooks — Battle of Hastings, 1066 — Magna Carta, 1215 — Great Fire of London, 1666.
Big deal.
And then when you're older, scutage, tallage, and how many old goats we've had for archbishops and popes.
Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke says we can do a Roman banquet so we got a book from the library about what sort of food they ate.
You'd never believe it!
Minced dormice, sautéed snails, calf's brain custard and pig's testicles in coriander sauce.
But to be fair that was just the gourmets.
The legions lived on cabbage and polenta and wine that turned to vinegar with the shaking up it got.
Anyway, we'll do what we can without going too far.
‘You'll be needing some more wine,’ Elinor said handing me another flagon.
I took it and refilled the iodine bottle for my handbag.
‘Did you lot say you were going up to Appleby?’ asked Bedelia.
‘On Monday, that'll be the sixth of June,’ Otley said, ‘and there'll be another two days of the horse fair left to go.’
‘It'll give me a chance to get on with my baking an' that then for the WI stall,’ she said with a nod of approval.
‘Can you make a rhubarb pie again?’
I asked.
Liquorice and rhubarb!
The stuff of my West Riding childhood!
The liquorice fields of Pontefract, exotic as a blaze of opium poppies, meant fresh, juicy roots to chew in springtime and little, round, black pancakes in the winter.
And the road to Great Aunt Martha's lay between avenues of waving rhubarb, enchanting as the Golden Road to Samarkand to a small child eager to see the big, wide world.
‘Snap out of it — you're grown up now,’ said Otley, passing his hands in front of my eyes in the manner of a hypnotist.
He turned and smirked at Elinor.
Who does he think he is?
Just because he's my husband.
‘You know what?’ he giggled, ‘when she was a kid she used to think that cockerels laid pot eggs.’
‘Shut up!’
I screamed.
‘That all black cows were bulls…’
‘I'm warning you!’
‘And you know that wavy, glass top on the weaving shed at Hubert Sampson's mill?’ he pressed on regardless.
‘Yes,’ said Elinor.
‘Well, she thought it was the seaside.’
Snigger, snigger, snigger.
I flew at him ripping all the buttons off his shirt in one go, tore it off his back in two pieces, grabbed hold of his string vest and dragged him round the kitchen like a sack of potatoes.
‘May —’ he started to say, but I crammed a cushion into his mouth before he could finish.
He struggled to his feet gasping for breath.
‘I'm only —’ he began.
The door was open and with the strength of ten I hurtled him through it and into the herb garden where he came to rest in a clump of sage.
With the fury that had accumulated over the  years I pulled up some onions and flung them at him.
Now he can get stuffed.
There was an embarrassed silence when I went back into the kitchen to tidy myself up.
I had a drink of water as my throat was hurting, picked up Dorothy Wordsworth's Journals and sat down thankfully in an easy chair.
I was feeling a bit dizzy now.
‘May,’ said Aunt Bedelia, ‘I don't think you should let yourself get worked up like that.
You'll burst a blood vessel if you're not careful.’
‘Well,’ I said, ‘he gets on my wick at times.’
Eventually Otley came in from the garden rubbing his head.
‘Are you all right?’ they asked, like people do when somebody's been knocked down by a bus and lying stretched out in the road.
‘I'm fine,’ he said.
‘Take no notice it's her age.
It's not often she loses her temper, but when she does you can look out!’
Three pairs of eyes focused on me and I felt like the family pet, the Old English sheepdog that's lost its marbles and joined up with the wolf pack to go worrying innocent lambs.
‘I don't know how you're going to go dancing tonight after that,’ Bedelia said, making some dandelion coffee and handing round a tin of gingerbread men she had baked for the jubilee.
‘I'll have a bath and then nip over home for my dancing shirt,’ said Otley, looking at me.
‘Are you coming?’
‘I'll go and have a lie down, I've got headache,’ I said.
‘Make sure they've not left the oven on and the back door unlocked like they did last time.’
Nice, quiet bed, with a cool, cotton pillow for my throbbing brow and a playful breeze puffing at the open window, lifting its frilly skirt like a peeping Tom.
I was still wide awake an hour later so took a gulp of wine to help me sleep.
The peonies on the wall faded and gave way to a thick, wooded hillside.
Somebody crashing through the undergrowth.
It's him on the white horse dropping his money all over the place, and those fellas with the funny bloomers following him.
‘Balearic slingers — halt,’ he shouted.
The men surged round him and jostled themselves to a standstill.
‘If I've told you once I've told you a thousand times,’ he said, ‘your catapults are for stoning the Brits — not for shooting sticky buds at me, right.
‘Yessir,’ they said.
‘Right then, come and get these bloody things out of my hair.’
They milled around and tidied him up to his satisfaction and went on their way singing:
We are the Bally slingers,
Watch your bum,
Cos we've got
Some stingers.
At the Villa Claro AD 56 Dear Nero,
Salutations 0 Mighty Apollo! glad your music tour went down well, playing the fiddle standing on your head while drinking a glass of water is very clever, none but a Nero could do it, but you really should not have set fire to the auditorium as an encore.
Looking forward to the circus, but could I ask you not to throw me to the lions until I've got my accounts in order?
I don't know if Buddy will be coming, she doesn't want to be parted from her chariot.
Yes, it is a shame about the Governor.
I can only apologize, we'll try and get his legs on the right way again when he comes back from Spain.
Did you say you sent him to Germany? oh dear!
How are you getting on with the plebs?
They can be a bit thick at the best of times,; you know that amphora you sent me? well my lot only went and peed in it — I have to go now, Tony's coming for his Osso Buco.
Luv to all and0 Arrivederci Roma!
Carrie Brigantum
PS What you asked me.
It was with a dab of lanolin.
Know what I mean?
Oh! if you don't get Nutty soon I'll gouge his eyes out with a swizzle stick, cut off his conjugals, marinate him in oil and vinegar and barbecue him in the forum.
And you know me — I don't like violence.
I felt the blood racing through my veins as I put my bodystocking on.
Was I getting hormones again?
A black lace top and red satin flounces, a sleek, black wig with a bun at the nape, a thick plastering of theatrical make-up and brass curtain rings in my ears.
I'll slay them!
‘Stone the crows!
You're not going out like that, are you?’ said Otley.
I tossed my head.
If I'd had some castanets I'd have clicked them in his face.
Had he forgotten this morning already?
I'm in a stamping mood.
‘What do you think you look like, then?’
I said.
‘How d'you mean?’
‘In your brogues and cavalry twill topped with mauve broderie anglaise frills.’
‘What's wrong with it?’
‘You look like a schizophrenic transvestite.’
Just then Elinor appeared in kingfisher-blue sequins, tight and glistening like a mermaid's tail.
‘How are you going to dance in that?’
Aunt Bedelia asked.
‘It's slit up each side,’ she said showing an expanse of thigh.
Don t go and get yourself raped,’ Bedelia cautioned, ‘and go in the car — you don't want all the dogs in Claro after you.’
Nigel had a bolero and cummerbund over a white, silk blouse and flared, velvet trousers.
His moustache seemed to stand out more than usual.
He must have put some Cherry Blossom boot polish on it.
When we made our entrance at the church hall everybody stared.
Most of them were wearing their twin sets and pearls, cotton frocks, jeans and tops, Sid and Ethel Parkinson in evening dress from the fifties.
They were doing a sort of Nordic cha cha cha with Dutch doll movements, hands and feet turned out at right angles and clockwork jerks of the head.
Then they pawed the ground like a circus pony, held their arms above their heads and twirled round like a gyroscope, and finally did a bumps-a-daisy only from the front instead of the back.
‘Now let's all do it.
Everybody on the floor, please.’
Dom-peromp — stamp — derompompompedom, derom — stamp — perom — stamp went the music as we clattered round the loose floorboards.
They all seemed to be watching us and waiting for something spectacular to take place.
A young blade in the corner eyed us closely every time we went past.
I thought I'd seen him before somewhere.
Now Sid and Ethel demonstrated a samba, doing scissor-cutting steps backwards and forwards, then with hands on hips somehow entwined, and heads looking behind them, they went round in a circle.
‘I'm not doing that,’ Otley said.
Then a rumba — seductive, swaying, sinuous rhythm.
Hips going in the opposite direction to the feet, ending in Ethel standing on one leg  like a stork the other leg wrapped round Sid's waist and he bending over backwards with his head touching the floor.
‘Now let's all try it,’ he said.
We did all right until we got to the last bit and I got my foot caught in Otley's pocket when he tried to bend down, he fell and flung me over his head knocking my wig skew-whiff.
‘Leave that bit out if you can't do it,’ Ethel advised.
Last came the paso doble.
Stamp — stamp — stamp — stamp — tarraa, rah —‘The other way, Vi’— stamp — stamp — thud — thump —‘Careful with your Doc Martens, Ted’— stamp — stamp — stamp.
This was more like it.
The march of the Watling Street Guard.
Olé !
Ethel knelt on one knee while Sid stuck his banderillas in her.
Next he jumped in the air with his feet together and his knees bent, then he knelt on one knee while she leapt into the air.
Now he pretended to be waving his cape at the bull and executed a neat veronica, then she kicked her leg up backwards and touched her heel with her fingers while he looked scornfully on with one hand behind his back palm facing outwards.
Finally she knelt again with her head down and he stood on his toes with arms stretched out and up like a condor going for the kill.
By this time nobody was paying any attention, just stamping round any old how.
The lights flickered on and off for the last dance.
‘Quieten down, ladies and gentlemen, please!’ implored Ethel.
‘And take your partners for a tango,’ Sid announced.
Elinor and Nigel were soon into their stride, two kinds of molten metal poured into the same mould.
Any minute now they would be kissing.
I felt quite embarrassed and excused myself to go to the cloakroom.
‘Don't be long,’ said Otley.
‘We can catch the chip shop if we hurry.’
Out into the spooky snicket and down a few yards towards the churchyard.
It was quicker than pushing through the front door and round to the side again.
It was a ramshackle arrangement like most things in Claro.
The inside door was chained, bolted and locked and had not been opened since old Mr Stott, the caretaker, had been buried with the key.
Picking my way over the cobbles, slimy and damp with centuries of hiding from the sun, I reached the musty room where I collected my raincoat from the attendant.
‘They're going to try and get that other door open,’ she told me.
I was just walking back past the big, black marble vault belonging to  the Chatwin family when somebody dodged out from behind it and grabbed me from the back.
I tried to scream but he put his hand over my mouth.
‘I knew it was you lot from up Claro,’ he said.
Eighteen
I was bundled into the back of a car with a scarf tied over my eyes.
It smelled of petrol and TCP.
Who would want to kidnap me?
KGB, CIA, PLO, IRA, MI6?
I wasn't doing anything, only Latin American dancing an' that.
Perhaps it's that bloke who locked the gates in Gibraltar so they couldn't get into Spain.
They get upset about anything these days.
I daren't wear that nice fur coat that cousin Freda gave me in case I get bombed by the Animal Liberation Front.
We use it for a bedside rug in cold weather.
‘Get out!’
Where had I heard that voice before?
He pushed me towards the light and through a door then took the scarf off my eyes.
I might have known.
It was the Rio Grande.
Swire Sugden and his three chins were waiting for me.
‘I recognized her when her wig fell off,’ my abductor said, holding it up with the scarf.
‘You were spying when you came up here the other day, weren't you?’ said Sugden looking through the contents of my handbag.
Tissues, aspirins, notebook and pencil came tumbling out.
He gave it another shaking.
Sticking plasters, safety-pins, lipstick, comb, bus pass, piece of string, rubber bands, Vick inhaler, dried rose-hips that I picked last autumn and forgot to plant, and a cracked, yellowing snap of Otley and me roller-skating at Margate.
‘You left a bottle o' poison last time, didn't you?’ he said, holding up the iodine bottle, his grey eyes shining like a puddle in the road.
‘That's not poison, that's Aunt Bedelia's dandelion wine.’
‘We'll see what the police 'ave to say about it,’ he said, putting it in his pocket.
‘I've seen 'em putting the notices up and goin' round knocking on  doors,’ my assailant told him.
Of course!
It was the red-faced Viking talking to him, the same chap who had been in the pub.
He must have been lurking in the church hall, though I couldn't see him properly in that dark corner.
Had he been following us all this time.
‘Mr Millington-Smythe informs us that you're trying to trace that Chatwin heir,’ said Sugden, pouring out a drink and handing it to me.
I expect it was drugged.
‘No, thanks,’ I said, handing it back, ‘but I wouldn't say no to a cup of tea.’
‘Millie!’ he called, knocking back the drink himself.
Mrs Tiggy-winkle put her grey curls round the door to see what he wanted and tittered when she saw me captive again.
‘How's your leg?’ she asked.
‘That Buster's a naughty boy at times, but he likes to watch All Creatures Great and Small on a Sunday, doesn't he, Swire?’
‘Can we 'ave some tea and bacon-flavoured crisps?’ he inquired.
I felt better now and decided to lie my way out of a tricky situation.
‘It's nothing to do with me,’ I said.
‘It's my husband and his cousin who's behind it all.
They're stark, raving mad.’
‘I can vouch for that,’ his henchman said, folding his arms and placing his legs astride like the Colossus of Rhodes.
‘You should 'ave seen 'em tonight — all done up like poncin' poll-parrots.
Talk about laugh!’
‘I've got the idea,’ said his boss, giving me the once-over.
I felt that he was beginning to soften towards me.
‘Just tell them lunatics o' yours to lay off or I shall 'ave to bring in the heavy mob.
I'm not 'aving my business ruined by a lot o' bleedin' idiots who couldn't run a chip shop.’
Chip shop !
My chips will be cold by now.
I bet Otley has scoffed them all, greedy pig.
How can I get away from here?
I put my cup down and got up out of my beplushed and bedizened chair.
‘Well, I think I'll be going now,’ I said, moving towards the door.
‘Just a minute,’ wobbled the blue chins as he came looming up to me like an ocean liner in a fog.
‘Yes?’
‘This bottle o' poison's goin' to the police station.’
He pushed my handbag at me.
‘You can 'ave all the other rubbish.’
‘Thanks,’ I said.
‘I nearly forgot it.’
‘And you're not goin' yet.’
He came nearer with his powerful shoulders bulging under his Mafia suit.
I could sense his enormous strength.
The sort that builds skyscrapers, bridges, motorways and chunnels.
The sort that never takes no for an answer.
How are we going to keep him away from our tree?
If I get out of here alive I shall write to Mr Gorbachev.
I'm sure he could use a man like Sugden.
Dear Gorby,
You know that tunnel you want to dig under Siberia from Murmansk to Vladivostok?
Well we've got just the man for the job.
He's even standing by with his spade right now.
He's a good all-rounder and when he's finished the tunnel he'd be pleased to join the Bolshoi ballet as a roustabout.
Well, tovarishch, I've got to get my boiler suit on as I'm in line for this year's Mother of Industry washing machine.
Dossvidanya!
Oh Lord of the Kremlin and may your onions never shrivel.
Maya Cravenova Britonski Ancientski PS Maggie sends her love.
‘What you staring at?’ the SS man was saying into my face.
‘Nothing,’ I lied.
‘I was just thinking how much like Rambo you looked — masterful like.’
‘Aye,’ he agreed.
‘He showed them Viet Cong a thing or two, I could do with a few like 'im round 'ere.’
The patio door stood open and a flurry of vanilla-scented air blew in from the laburnums.
The moon lay in the tree-tops like a squashed Gouda in a dish of broccoli.
With tomato sauce I could eat it.
‘I think I'll walk down, it's a lovely night,’ I said.
‘Jed'll run you down when he goes back,’ the boss ordered.
‘It'll be company for 'im.’
‘My husband will murder me,’ I said.
He lit a cheroot, opened the drawer of a walnut table, took out some plans and spread them out in front of me.
‘Nah look 'ere,’ he said.
‘When they get that Chunnel going we'll be on the mainline to Glasgow, right from Paris.
It's a good place to break the journey.’
‘I know — I told him, but he's ignorant, he won't listen,’ I said.
‘I've got plans for hotels, a leisure centre, holiday chalets, supermarket, a car-park; jobs for everybody, revitalize the whole area.’
‘Great, but they don't want that tree cutting down.
Stupid, isn't it?’
‘We could do with a night-club and a massage parlour an, all,, said the Viking, full of enthusiasm.
‘An' that bridge 'as got concrete cancer.’
I followed the direction of Swire Sugden's nicotine-stained finger as it prodded at the blueprint.
‘What, the boilerhouse bridge?’
I said in disbelief.
‘What do you mean?’
Computer viruses, concrete cancer, whatever next?
‘Chloride corrosion from the salt put on the roads in winter.
It's rotting away all the concrete edifices,’ he said through his cheroot.
‘Well, would you believe it!’
‘That bridge won't stand another flash flood, an' yer know what t'Wharfe's like when it rains, don't yer?’
‘It fills up fast,’ I agreed.
‘Yer can be paddlin' one minute and swimmin' the next.’
‘It's an ugly thing anyway, and it'll be no loss if it does get swept away,’ I said boldly.
‘Yes, but not when t'Mayor and Corporation's on it,’ he laughed.
‘Can't you just build a new bridge then?’
I asked, getting up to go.
‘No, it's all part of me plans, it's all or nothing,’ he said.
‘But nobody wants it do they?’
I pleaded.
‘Nobody except me that is,’ I added hastily in case he decided to throw me in the dungeons.
‘Yer don't think I'm goin' ter build a new bridge just for you lot in Claro to go and fetch yer dole money do yer?’ he said crossly.
‘Oh, no!’
‘Idle bloody sods — they want to get some work to do.
I didn't 'ave all this handed on a plate,’ he said as we walked out into the backyard.
‘I was dragged up down Monkey Park, went to school wi' me arse hanging out; I've worked for everything I've got.’
‘Some people work hard all their lives and still have nothing,’ I reminded him, thinking of the fifty pounds I've saved for the gas bill.
‘I know but that feckless lot up at Claro had that grand, old house given an' they've let it fall to pieces round 'em.’
‘They don't care,’ I lied.
‘Nah then,’ he said finally, ‘if yer can talk some sense into 'em there'll be summat in it fer yer, right?’
‘Oo, thanks!’
‘If not — this bottle o' poison goes to t'police.’
Mrs Tiggy-winkle came tripping out to wave us off and Buster's chains began to rattle inside his kennel.
‘Down boy!’ she said.
‘You got her last time, wait for somebody else.’
I caught a glimpse of JCBs grazing in the adjoining field like a group of hybrid giraffes; and was that a dumper truck with its shell tipped up like a rutting tortoise?
I'll tell Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke.
We flew down the moorland road like a bird, disturbing the sleeping ducks at the tarn.
Through the quarry and the conifer woods and out into the main road where the yellow lights make you look like something in a Hammer horror.
He pulled up at the bridge and got out to show me the concrete cancer.
Black cracks and gaps yawned in the pillars.
He gave me a sudden grin, purple mouth full of little, ivory bits like when you cut into a pomegranate and he was gone.
‘And where d'you think you've been to this time of night?’
Otley wanted to know when I got home.
‘We were just going to ring the police,’ Bedelia said.
‘Thought you'd been murdered,’ said Elinor, still in her fishtail.
‘Time is irrelevant unless you want to catch a bus —’ I began.
‘Don't be so flamin' cheeky,’ said Otley, ‘we've been all over the place looking for you.’
Needless to say they didn't believe my story.
They think I'm on the game.
Folks are always ready to believe the worst.
Particularly husbands.
‘Have you eaten my chips?’
I asked him, feeling hungry all at once.
‘Of course I have,’ he said.
‘No good keeping 'em for you when we thought you were dead.’
‘Here you are, luv,’ said Aunt Bedelia giving me a mug of cocoa and some bread and mousetrap cheese.
‘Hope you don't have nightmares.’
‘I swear it's true,’ I told them yet again.
‘May God strike me dead if I tell a lie.’
‘And if he doesn't, I will,’ said Otley.
‘Now now, none of that!’ said Bedelia.
In the films he'd sweep me into his arms and say, ‘Thank God you're safe, darling!’ and his uncle in the States would die and leave him a million dollars.
Wonder how much Swire Sugden's got?
‘He's not such a bad chap you know’ I yawned.
‘I've seen worse.’
‘He's got no soul,’ Elinor protested.
‘All he's got, besides his big mouth, is money,’ said Otley.
‘We could do with both, couldn't we?’
Bedelia said as she bustled us off to bed.
What a good idea!
With his money and our soul we could think up a scheme to please everybody.
I'll put it to him the next time he kidnaps me.
Rebuild the Roman villa and use it for a hydro and health farm.
We went carefully up the rickety stairs, wall bulges out here, and roof dips down there, torn matting and straying hooky rugs.
Round a dark corner with an irate husband behind you.
Mind you're not found lying at the bottom of the steps with a broken neck like Amy Robsart.
I expect Leicester told Queen Elizabeth she'd had one of her hot flushes.
We came to a stop outside my bedroom door and he made a lurching movement.
Was he going to strangle me with his tie?
No, he was still wearing it.
I stumbled into the bedroom and he followed me in.
‘You were a right come-on in that get-up,’ he said, patting my wig.
‘I fancied you all over again.’
‘Did you?’
I said astonished.
‘I saw you lasht night an'…’ he began to sing a romantic song from our courting days, but was cut off in mid warble as he tripped over my hiking boots and crashed into the wardrobe head first.
‘You're drunk,’ I said wafting the fumes away.
‘Think I'll shleep here tonight, it's been a long time,’ he hiccupped.
‘I've got headache,’ I said, kissing him goodnight.
‘See you.’
‘I saw —’ he struck up again with a mouth like a railway tunnel.
‘Be quiet!’
I said flinging a pillow at his gaping maw.
He flung it back, missed me and knocked a motto off the wall.
‘East, west, home's best,’’ Otley read.
‘Thatsh a bloody lie!’
Aunt Bedelia had the bedroom underneath and I didn't want her knocking on the ceiling with a broom handle so I decided for once to put up with his snoring and deep breathing exercises.
I pushed him on to the bed and started to take his shoes off.
‘You can sleep here, but be quiet now,’ I hushed.
He sprang up at once and made for the door as if he'd been propositioned by a dirty old man in a public convenience.
‘No fear,’ he said as he went out, ‘I don't want AIDS.’
What is he talking about?
I've been a virgin for the past ten years.
Never mind I'll go and see Tony A drink of wine sit by the window looking at the moon and watch the shadows of the trees dancing on the wallpaper.
Red, white and blue,
The queen's got the flu,
Caesar's in a dustbin,
The dirty kangaroo!
It's those urchins after the chap with the Beatle hairstyle again.
I know the big, fat one at the front.
Wait till his father gets home!
There's that nice family sitting round the table on the wallchart, they're smiling at each other while mother does the washing up.
‘Mummy, why are your hands so nice and soft?’ the children will ask.
‘Quick march — left, right!’
It's the legions coming this way.
‘Pick 'em up there, you 'orrible little men!’ says the centurion.
They've gone straight through my rose garden and flattened it.
I wish they'd learn how to march round corners for a change.
Now here's a gang of Brits following them and picking their money up.
‘Four sesterces make one denarius; how much is that in the old money?’ they're grumbling.
‘Is there enough for a pint o' stingo?’
Aquae Sulis AD 56 Dear Buddy,
Tony and me have come down here again.
It's the only place you can get a bit of hokey-pokey, sizzling by day and guzzling by night, talk about dolce vita! when you get your splints off come over for a week.
Has the Governor got back from Spain yet?
Do try and get his legs right he's supposed to be in Germany.
Did you say your husband's got one of his?
That nice, young centurion I sent over with the olive oil last week.
I said he was a primus pilus not ‘prime his piles’, you should make an effort to learn the language now we're in the common market dearest Buddy.
Pleased to hear you can ride bareback standing on your bad leg.
Nero wants you for the circus, he seems to have taken a fancy to you and was asking about the lanolin — say no more!
Tony's back now so we're off for some gnocchi.
Your luving pal and fellow monarch, Carrie Brigantum 
PS About that Druid.
If there's no room on your mantelpiece, could you not put him on a stick for a scarecrow?
He's taking all my money.
I try to be out when he comes begging but that stupid Nutty gives it all away.
Who's going to look after him when he's old? not the Druids, muggins that's who.
Just higher your chariot blades on a level with his neck and drive past when he's not looking? but don't tell anybody I said so.
‘Come on, lazybones, it's nearly dinner-time,’ Otley scolded when he brought me some tea up.
‘I'm not hungry, I've just had some gnocchi,’ I mumbled in a daze.
Oh dear!
I wish I'd stayed at home to clean the oven after all.
It's like having two husbands now I'm under pressure from Sugden as well.
What will he do if I fall into his hands again?
Where will it all end?
Nineteen
When the Lord made Sunday he meant it for a day of rest, a day of peace and quiet after the turmoil of the working week.
He didn't expect us to come rolling out of the pubs drunk, and the Yorkshire pudding to get flung at the ceiling with the gravy running down the walls like the tears of a black madonna.
‘Go and have a drink while the dinner's ready,’ Aunt Bedelia said.
I was going to go and sit by the river with Dorothy Wordsworth.
I haven't found out yet what they got up to in their opium den with Coleridge and de Quincey.
Making out they'd gone to see the daffodils.
‘Let's all go,’ said Elinor, hooking Nigel and Otley with her arms.
Reluctantly I put down my book and followed them down the garden.
‘An' don't have all the dogs barking,’ warned Bedelia.
Otley was presentable in his cords and silk shirt; Nigel in his best jeans and sneakers padded along like a puma; Elinor, as usual, ravishing in a cream, cotton two-piece, with a raspberry top, mouth to match and sky-blue earrings and chiffon scarf.
I trailed on behind, haggard and dishevelled in my army gear, still half asleep and cross at missing my day in the cow parsley.
‘Come on!’
Otley kept saying impatiently.
He's got no sympathy.
I was dragged out of bed half asleep after being kidnapped the night before.
All they did was sit watching Polish films on Channel 4 till I came in.
He seems to be in a bad mood about something.
It was noisy in The Bluebell.
Kylie Minogue dancing round the jukebox and Michael Jackson fighting to get out of his pushchair.
We went round the corner out of the way only to find the lads from the nailery there.
‘Hey up!
Look who's 'ere!’
‘Aye aye!
Watch yer pockets!’
‘Quick march!’
‘Oompah oompah!’
‘Stick it up yer joompah!’
Laughing, jeering, jostling, joking, shuffling, elbowing, singing, stamping.
Oh, my head!
I sat with a tomato juice in front of me for some time straining my ears to hear what Nigel was saying.
‘I'll deal with you later,’ Otley muttered at me.
What does he mean?
I'll ignore him.
I turned towards Nigel.
‘How's the villa going?’
‘Great,’ he said.
‘We're getting down to the real stuff — mosaics, some wall plaster, animal bones and there are signs of a hypocaust.’
‘There's a temple, and an altar to the Goddess of the Wharfe.
Tony had it made for me and —‘
‘She's mad!’
Otley interrupted.
‘What'll you have?’
Everybody was drinking too much and I felt like a Mother Superior at the bottle factory outing.
The lads were nudging each other and pointing at me.
‘Does yer mother know yer out!’
‘Oi oi!’
‘How's yer father!’
It was silly to draw attention to myself.
If you can't lick 'em, join 'em.
May as well go to bed in a drunken stupor after dinner, same as the rest of them.
They'll think I'm anti-social if I don't.
‘Take it easy,’ Otley said, getting alarmed.
‘Don't start asking for green chartreuse.’
‘I must say,’ said Elinor, sipping a gin and tonic, ‘you seem to be getting some good vibes.
You're right on the wavelength.’
‘I could write a book but nobody would believe it,’ I said.
‘She went off her trolley in Margate after drinking that stuff,’ Otley went on, ‘singing, dancing, roller-skating — turning cartwheels on top of the cliffs.
I just managed to catch her as she was going over the edge.’
‘It makes me feel good,’ I explained.
‘Well, we don't want you feeling that good again,’ he said.
‘Come on,’ said Nigel, ‘I'll buy you one.’
‘Oo, thanks!’
The potent blend of aromatic herbs and brandy slid down my throat  like a liquid flame.
Hot sun, bright flowers and green fields got into my blood.
The stuff of life.
Suddenly I wanted to sing and dance.
‘Roll out the barrel,’ I sang as I leapt into the middle of the floor.
‘Altogether now!’
I shouted as the lads got up to join in.
‘Sit down, May,’ said Otley.
‘Trossachs!’
I said, showing him a clean pair of heels.
Round and round the tables.
What a lark!
The jukebox ran itself out but we had a good, old knees-up.
The stained-glass knights and their ladies looked down their noses at us rollicking serfs.
Who cares if I've got boots on?
Clomp, clomp, stamp, stamp, kick, ouch! clomp, clomp.
‘May,’ Otley began as he groped his way towards me.
‘Leave 'er alone, she's enjoying 'erself,’ the lads told him.
‘All join up for a conga,’ I called over the racket, and soon we had a long snake winding its way in and out of the tables and finally through the door.
If the Common Market snake's like this I don't mind.
‘May — come back here!’
I could hear Otley's voice growing fainter.
‘Never on a Sunday, la la la, tara ra, ti dumpty dumpty dummm,’ we chanted as we conga'd our way round Claro.
Doors opened and shut and curtains were lifted and dropped.
Children and dogs joined in.
How blue the sky is!
How fresh and green the grass!
How musical the river and how charming the trees whispering sweet nothings as we pass!
Legs rose and fell as we made our undulatory way like a giant centipede.
‘Hey up!’ shouted the lads.
‘Erewiggo, erewiggo, erewiggo!’
‘We won't go over the bridge, it's got cancer,’ I said, pointing to the gungy concrete.
Gales of laughter at the very idea.
We turned back through the village again and up to Claro.
Children and dogs were snatched by anxious owners.
By the time we got to the pub stomachs were beginning to rumble.
‘I could eat old Hagen's hoss wi' two pennorth o' chips,’ said Bob as we went our merry ways.
It was a long pull up the hill, and I felt more like doing a roly-poly down it.
As I passed the bottom of Crag Woods a figure emerged from the undergrowth.
It was Tumbleweed.
Poor soul!
He wasn't going to sit in a bog to eat his Sunday dinner, was he?
‘Hi there!’
I called out.
‘Oh, it's you!’ he said.
‘I wondered what all the racket was down there.’
‘Have you had your dinner?’
‘I've got my sandwiches’ he said holding up a soggy parcel.
‘Throw them away and come back with me.’
‘I'll save them for later’ he said stuffing them into a soggy pocket as he squelched up the road alongside me.
I stopped to pick a rose as we made our way down the garden.
I'll give it to Otley, he will be pleased.
Tumbleweed hesitated and turned as if to go back and I put my arm round his shoulders.
‘Aunt Bedelia won't mind,’ I assured him.
What a delicious aroma coming from the kitchen — roast beef and Yorkshire pudding.
I don't eat meat myself but can appreciate the smell of a Sunday dinner.
At Christmas I give Otley my turkey and he gives me his Brussels sprouts.
I pushed open the door and bounded in.
‘Only a rose —’ I began as I held out my offering to my husband and I was just about to start on the second line when a Yorkshire pudding with onion gravy flew past my head and stuck with a plop on the ceiling.
I could have eaten that.
‘Don't start bringing your fancy man here with you,’ Otley said.
‘I knew I shouldn't have come,’ said Tumbleweed.
‘He's not my fancy man — it's Tumbleweed,’ I explained, leading him to a chair at the table.
‘You admit you've got a fancy man, then?’
‘No, I haven't.’
‘Well, who's that you were having nookey with last night?’
‘It was only a dream,’ I told him.
‘I was eating some gnocchi with this Italian — I didn't say nookey.’
‘I've no objection to dream lovers,’ Otley laughed.
‘I'm sorry about that,’ I apologized to the household as we ate our dinner in silence.
Roast potatoes, carrots and greens mixed with dandelion leaves went with the meat; then bread and butter pudding — Prince Charles's favourite recipe cut out of a magazine.
Bedelia was watching Eastenders so we cleared away and washed up ourselves.
Got the pudding off the ceiling with a fish slice and mopped up the trail of onions running down the wall like sheep streaming down the mountain side.
I didn't ask if Tumbleweed had enjoyed his dinner.
‘Don't forget we're going to Appleby tomorrow,’ Elinor said as we tidied up the kitchen.
‘We'll have to be up early.’
‘What a coincidence, I'm going up there too,’ Tumbleweed told us.
‘Might bump into you eh?’
‘Come with us,’ I invited.
‘I think you'd better stay at home,’ Otley cautioned.
‘No fear, I'm looking forward to it.’
‘Have you been before?’
Tumbleweed inquired.
‘It's a bit wild.’
‘No, but I'm dying to see the gypsies.’
‘I have met one or two on my travels,’ he went on.
‘You can show us round then,’ I suggested.
‘What made you want to go this time, then?’
‘We're trying to trace the Chatwin boy,’ said Elinor.
‘It would solve all our problems if we can find him.’
‘Stop 'em selling out to Swire Sugden,’ Otley said.
‘Best o' luck,’ said Tumbleweed.
We arranged to meet him on the early train at Skipton the next day and off he went to his bog.
‘If you've got your heads together over this I'll —’
‘You'll what?’
I said, squaring up to him with the fish slice in my hand like a machete.
‘I don't know what I'll do,’ he said recognizing the gleam in my eye.
‘Don't you love me any more?’
I asked, putting the fish slice down and quivering my bottom lip.
‘Of course I do, but you get out of control at times, May.
Have a bit of decorum as befits the mother of a college student,’ Otley said, softening his tone.
‘Imagine if Mike picked up the paper and read ‘Wife lops husband's head off with a fish slice on a Sunday afternoon’ and found out it was us.’
‘He'd never pass his exams,’ I said with a sob.
‘Drink this dandelion coffee and go and have a nice herb bath to clear your head,’ said Aunt Bedelia.
‘You never had any Yorkshire pudding to line your stomach after all that booze.’
All eyes turned to the ceiling and then fixed on Otley.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
‘I didn't know it was May's.’
I ran a fragrant bath through muslin bags of mint and lavender and flung my clothes onto a chair eager to get in.
I remembered a memorable dip in a mountain stream, astringent and awakening; but this was something else again, a luxurious wallow.
If there's one thing better than an icy plunge it's a decadent soak in a scented bath.
Peel me a grape!
Aquae Sulis AD 57 Dear Nero,
Hail again Mighty Caesar!
How I bless the day you came here with your hot baths.
My proles are a bit wary of them, when they see the steam they think they're going for a mess of pottage.
It's those nasty Druids, they'll eat anything.
You know when you've rubbed the olive oil on and licked it all off again? well what's that funny little stick for?
Tony's showing me how to play knuckle-bones, I don't know whose knuckles he's using, he gets them from Boudicca, if we come across the Governor's we'll send them back.
Did you say he was in North Africa? if we can't do anything about his legs we'll give him a new head when he gets back.
Have to go now, Tony's waiting in the steamer.
Tarra!
Your friend and ally, Carrie Brigantum, Regina.
PS What a good idea to have funeral games!
You want cheering up don't you?
I'm sure the gladiators will enjoy a spot of tiddlywinks with Uncle Nero before they die — but mind you don't end up on the funeral pyre yourself going leap-frogging over the mourners like that.
You're lucky it was only your toga got singed.
‘Left, right, left, right.’
It's the legions again making straight for my garden with their big feet.
‘Watch where you're going you clumsy clots!’
I shouted throwing a cabbage at them.
‘Oh, thanks!’ said the centurion.
‘We'll have this for our dinner.’
‘Neverra minda,’ said Tony.
‘We go and'ava some fagioli -justa like mamma uzzda to make.’
We were just sitting down to our dinner when the chief Druid came in sight with his begging bowl and Tony got under the bed.
‘Not today, thank you,’ I told him for the umptieth time.
‘It's for the starving multitudes,’ he whined through his matted beard, holding out the crock of gold in his blood-stained fingers.
‘You've got all my money and I've had no dinner meself for three days,’ I said.
‘Now be off, or I'll set the Romans on ye.’
‘Them pusillanimous popinjays, they couldn't find their way to  skinning a cat on their own,’ he sneered.
‘There's got to be eighty of 'em and another to tell 'em what to do.’
‘They know how to have a bath,’ I said looking at his grubby hands.
‘Any sacrifices today.
he wheedled, looking around for any likely victims.
‘Clear off, you dirty old man!’
I shouted, throwing a stone at him.
‘Wait till I tell your husband!’ he shouted back.
‘'Eeza not here aza well izzy?’
Tony inquired peeping out from under the bed.
‘No, you can come out now, luv, and finish your fagioli,’ I said.
Suddenly I was aware that my decadent bath had gone cold and the church bells were clanging the faithful to evensong.
There are so many tunes they could play.
Why do they just go ding-dong?
The first time I heard ‘Oranges and Lemons’ was when we stayed with Cousin Alice in London.
We went to a fancy-dress ball, Alice and Ted as Jack and Jill, Otley as Captain Bligh and myself as Dick Whittington.
Coming home at dawn, exploring Dickens's alleyways and squares, I somehow got separated from the others and went rushing round frantically trying to find them.
Pudding Lane, that's where the Great Fire started.
In a ghost town, silent and deserted as the Marie Celeste , I gave myself a history lesson.
Up and down the City Road,
In and out the Eagle,
That's the way the money goes,
Pop goes the weasel.
I went, until I sank exhausted on some steps opposite a church.
‘Oranges and Lemons’ the bells began to ring as the worshippers arrived in their hats and gloves and Liberty scarves.
Who did they think they were staring at?
They'd get a thick earole in a minute.
Of course, it's not every day they find Dick Whittington sitting on the steps outside.
I'd forgotten.
But I sat there and listened to the bells.
Perhaps they would play ‘Turn Again Whittington’ if I waited long enough.
‘Are you all right?’ inquired an anxious Christian with a bag of peppermint creams.
‘Yes, thanks,’ I said, taking one, ‘I'm waiting for my husband.’
‘Is this him?’ she asked pointing to a sober gentleman in a bowler hat and pin-stripes coming towards us.
‘No,, I said.
‘My husband's Captain Bligh, he's wearing a cocked hat and the bottom half of his pyjamas…’
She fled before I could finish.
‘Are you coming out of there?’
Otley called.
‘Other people want a bath, you know.’
I wrapped myself in a beach robe and spread my wet towels out on the winter hedge to dry.
I opened the conservatory door to slip out to my bedroom the back way and noticed a pair of eyes peering at me from behind the rubber plant in the far corner, distorted by the old glass.
‘Who's there?’
I called from the bottom of the steps.
‘It's only me,’ said Otley, ‘I was worried, I thought you'd fallen asleep and drowned yourself, been knocking but you never answered.’
‘I'm fine, had a nice, long soak.’
‘Thank goodness!’ he said.
‘Thought we might have to put Appleby off.’
Twenty
The next morning I borrowed some jeans and sandals from Elinor and wore one of Otley's tropical shirts with bananas and palm trees all over it.
He bought it in the Swinging Sixties and had never worn it.
‘Why don't you stay at home and help Aunt Bedelia with the dandelions?’ he suggested.
‘I want to go,’ I said, putting on my cardigan.
‘If you show me up I shall just go off and leave you,’ he warned.
‘All right,’ I said.
We packed some cheese rolls and sardine sandwiches, spring onions and tomatoes, buttered scones and apples and pots of yoghurt.
‘Don't forget your Thermos and plastic spoons,’ said Bedelia.
‘And we want some tissues,’ Elinor added.
‘Come on!’
Otley said irritably.
‘And stop fussing.’
A quick look in the mirror.
A puff of powder, a dab of lipstick and a squirt of ozone-friendly aerosol to keep my hair subdued.
I'm trying hard to look as if I've got decorum.
Otley wore his army-surplus gear and Elinor some natty breeks and a frilly blouse like Diana used to wear when she was Shy Di.
We arrived at the station in time but where was Tumbleweed?
‘Just made it,’ this strange young man said as he flopped down beside us.
Without the camouflage of pondweed and sphagnum moss he was unrecognizable.
Black curls and a peep of gold earring, moleskins and a velvet jacket, red kerchief knotted over a gleaming white shirt.
You would think he was a gypsy until you looked closer at his blue eyes and the dusting of freckles over his apple-blossom cheeks.
The train pulled out of Skipton and soon we were in the Yorkshire Dales.
Little grey towns and villages grazed among the hills like flocks  of sheep.
That's Pen-y-ghent, that's Ingleborough and this is Whernside coming up on the left, but first the viaduct at Ribblehead.
I'll close my eyes till we've crawled over here.
It's all done up in steel pins and scaffolding to hold it up, and I once saw a computer thing in a museum showing how it shudders when the trains go over.
Now it's the Blea Moor tunnel.
Oh dear!
Shut my eyes again.
Other viaducts and other tunnels.
It's as bad as the Big Dipper at Blackpool.
‘You're missing the views,’ Otley scolded as people ran from one side of the carriage to the other in order to catch everything.
‘I can see them from here,’ I explained.
‘It's when I look down I don't like it.’
Wild Boar Fell, the River Rawthey and the velvet-topped Howgills in the distance.
Now we're in the Vale of Eden and the line runs west of the river until it crosses the loop at Great Ormside and into Appleby by its eastern banks.
‘Right,’ said Otley as soon as we got off the train, ‘let's go and find this bloke.’
‘Let's look round first,’ I protested.
‘There's plenty of time.’
Through the ‘new’ town of Victorian terraces that came with the railway and over the river into the old town.
That's if you can get over the bridge.
Crowds coming and going and jammed on the bridge itself.
Leaning over the parapet to watch the young bloods in the river sprucing up their horses for the fair.
Bare chested and wet trousered, the job done, they swank before their audience then gallop off to Fair Hill.
The crowd begins to melt away and a bubbling froth is tossed along the river, dancing and swirling and disappearing from sight round the bend.
I hope that's ozone-friendly washing-up liquid they're using.
Gig racing, horse racing, buying and selling of Fell ponies, Dales ponies, piebalds and skewbalds and painted gypsy ponies, mongrels and workhorses of all shapes and sizes.
The clip-clop and slapping of hands echoes round the hills and valleys with the shouting, singing, laughing and quarrelling and slamming of car doors.
‘Well, I don't know where to start in this lot,’ Elinor said.
‘There's always a gypsy king and queen somewhere,’ I said, ‘if we can find them.’
‘This isn't fairyland, you know,’ chided Otley.
‘It's just a field full o' vagabonds trying to scratch a living.’
‘Excuse me,, I said to an elderly gentleman coming towards us, ‘can you direct us to the Gypsy Queen's caravan?’
‘I know nothing about them hedgerow heathens,’ he snapped as he went on his way, ‘an' if you take my advice you'll watch your pockets.’
Otley was looking the other way as if he didn't know me when I tried again with a pleasant, motherly woman with a shopping basket full of goodies.
She wore a cotton frock with little daisies and forget-me-knots sprinkled all over, and a fluffy, pink, angora cardigan.
I expect she was on her way with a box of liquorice allsorts and a pineapple upside-down cake for her grandchildren.
‘Excuse me,’ I asked, ‘do you by any chance know where the Gypsy Queen lives?’
‘No, I don't and I don't want to,’ she said crossly, ‘I'll be glad when they've gone.
They pee all over your garden though the Council provides toilets for them.’
‘You're making a right fool of yourself, aren't you?’
Otley said.
‘Well, you go and find her then,’ I told him.
‘I'm going to have a look round.’
‘I'm hungry — let's have something to eat,’ he said, delving into the sandwiches.
We jostled our way through the multitudes until we found a patch of grass to sit down on.
It was a warm, sunny day and my feet were starting to ache.
A paddle would be nice later on.
Didn't Tumbleweed say he'd been to the fair before?
And was it Appleby?
It was a long time ago and he was very small, he said, he could barely recall it.
I wonder if that's where he met the gypsies.
‘I had a book from the library,’ Elinor said.
‘About all the gypsy tribes — the Lees, the Smiths, the Boswells.
If we ask for them by name they'll think we know them from somewhere.’
‘Like when you write to the Inland Revenue,’ said Otley.
‘If you know their names they're not quite as nasty.’
‘Can we have a paddle and go on the swings as well?’
I asked.
‘No swings here,’ Elinor said.
‘It's not that sort of fair.’
‘We've got work to do first, playtime afterwards,’ said Otley, jumping to his feet.
‘We'll take the caravans nearest the town if you and Tumbleweed look for the strays further afield,’ Elinor suggested as she sorted us out into mixed doubles.
‘Hope Gypsy Rose Lee's out there somewhere,’ Otley grinned at me.
How am I expected to keep my decorum?
I turned to my partner, Tumbleweed.
‘This scene, does it jog your memory at all?’
I asked.
‘Vaguely, but it was all so long ago,’ he said.
‘Be at the station at quarter to seven.
It's the last train,’ Otley said as we went our separate ways.
‘Can't we stay out all night?’
I pleaded.
‘Such a lovely day.’
‘No, we can't, we've only got a cheap day return, haven't we?’ he said.
Trust him to do that when we've got such a magnificent choice.
Round Robins, Early Birds, North-West Rovers, North-East Rovers — you could have a week's holiday and never get off.
He's got no imagination.
We put our litter back into our rucksacks as all the bins were full to overflowing, and Elinor and Otley set off in the direction of Fair Hill where all the caravans were resting.
Some were traditional gypsy vardos but more were luxurious modern homes pulled by Range Rovers and Mercedes.
Not all have to go round selling clothes-pegs for a crust of bread.
‘Good luck, then,’ I called after them.
‘Mindowyergo,’ Otley called back.
‘I'm all right,’ I shouted.
‘Sure he doesn't mind?’ inquired Tumbleweed.
‘Just because you're married doesn't mean you've got to be Siamese twins,’ I said loftily.
‘We like to keep our individuality.’
‘I agree, I agree,’ he said, ‘but not everybody thinks that way.’
We wandered round the old town of Appleby, taking in the Moot Hall, the Almshouses and castle with its birds and wildlife.
Then, when I was feeling fit to drop, Tumbleweed said he'd show me Flakebridge Wood, which lay beneath a range of foothills under the Pennine Edge.
‘Oo, that'll be nice,’ I lied, I didn't want him to think I was a sissy.
We turned north-east out of Appleby and stopped on an old Roman road.
‘This is the Roman road between Carlisle and Catterick,’ he said.
I thought I felt funny.
Who's that going tramp, tramp, tramp?
It's them with their big feet again.
Better get out of the way.
‘Pick 'em up, you 'orrible little men!’ the centurion's shouting.
‘Permission to speak, sir?’ requested a bold one limping up.
‘Well?’
‘We've all got gangrene from marching through that rose garden.’
‘You've got two alternatives,’ the officer bellowed at them, 'either you stay up here and get gangrene — or you go down south and have your legs sliced off.’
‘We'll have gangrene, sir,’ they said in unison.
‘Right then, forward march!
Left, right, left, right.’
They all went limping past with their scutums sagging in disarray, and all the dogs and urchins in the neighbourhood chasing after them.
Julius Caesar is no good,
Chop him up for firewood,
When he's dead, boil his head,
Make him into gingerbread.
‘Gerrardavit — yer'll be old yerselves one day!’ one of the veterans wheezed throwing a stick at them.
‘Little buggers.’
At the Imperial Palace, Roma AD 57 Dear Buddy,
Nero sends his luv and wants to put you in for the chariot racing next time.
You'd slay them you would!
We had an orgy last night and I've got a bit of a headache today, I'm going to have a lie down in a minute.
We went steaming first to work up an appetite.
There was this girl in a bath of asses milk, yuk! and it had all turned to cheese, so they put her on the table with a dish of figs for afters.
They all lie on their bellies to eat, it saves them falling down.
Nero's gone native.
He thinks he's Apollo and goes ravishing all over the place, all the girls are after him, his wife's not very pleased.
They're not speaking now but he's very good to her, she has her favourite mushroom omelettes at every meal.
He's arranging a Greek tour presenting himself as the world's only singing, dancing, somersaulting potentate.
This boy is talented.
He's asked me to go along as wardrobe mistress, I said I'd think about it but I can't stand the heat.
Longing for a breath of fresh air round the old philibeg, know what I mean?
Got to go now and have a lie down before the next orgy.
Luv and kisses to all.
Oh!
Nero says will you send some more lanolin.
Your old friend, Carrie Brigantum.
PS Will call and see you on the way back if you've got no battles lined up.
I've knitted you a battleaxe warmer so you don't get frostbite when you go massacring in the winter time.
‘Where am I?’
I was lying in the middle of a green lane clutching a bunch of dandelions, my fingers gummy with the pungent milk oozing out of the squashed stems.
‘I thought you were dead,’ said Tumbleweed.
‘You dropped like a felled ox.’
‘I'm all right, just felt dizzy, that's all,’ I said as I got to my feet and collected my belongings.
‘Do you want to go back?’ he asked anxiously.
‘Pushing and shoving among that lot, no fear,’ I said as we struck out for the woods.
A myriad becks tumbled down from the hills into the valleys and dales below, cutting a gorge here or following the old meltwater channels there.
Time for a wash and a paddle and another sandwich.
‘That's the old bobbin mill down there.’
Tumbleweed pointed along the edge of the wood.
‘Made of birchwood they were — this wood's mostly oak and birch giving way to conifers as we come out, with a view of the foothills.’
I listened carefully as I want to learn all the green I can in case Maggie comes our way.
People are dead ignorant.
If you ask them what taraxacum officinale is they think it's a new mini-cab service.
‘You can see the line of the Pennine Fault running in a south-easterly direction,’ he went on.
‘Well, that's High Cup Nick, Murton Pike and Roman Fell.’
Roman Fell, he said, and on a geological fault.
No wonder I got dizzy!
The countryside had put on its summer dress, so many shades of green and everything fresh and clean.
Wasn't it a paradise?
‘That's what you think,’ said Tumbleweed.
‘How d'you mean?’
‘Those Cumbrian fells to the west,’ he pointed.
‘Oo, aren't they lovely?’
‘No good to man or beast since Chernobyl They're still radioactive, he explained ‘Still can't eat their mutton.’
‘I've stopped eating meat myself,’ I told him.
‘They poison the apples as well,’ he said.
‘Didn't you know?’
‘Everything's poisoned,’ I agreed.
‘That's why there's all this football hooliganism.’
‘Before the war it was only Argentina that had football hooligans,’ I said, ‘poor people like that who had nothing to eat.’
We came out of Flakebridge Wood, down the road and into Dufton Gill Wood, following the beck that flowed over chocolate-brown sandstone.
‘That's the Pennine Way,’ said Tumbleweed, pointing up into the hills.
‘Are you fit?’
‘My feet are killing me; I'll be making my way back,’ I said, sitting down suddenly.
That's the trouble with men — they're either all or nothing.
Men!
I'd forgotten I had a husband.
He'll be waiting at the station and we can't make it now.
It's half-past six already.
Oh dear!
He'll be very cross.
I remember when Mike was a baby and I went home with my shopping and left him at the check-out in Sainsbury's.
I never heard the last of it.
It was early evening when we wandered round to Fair Hill to see what was going on.
What a racket!
Shouting, arguing, laughing, stereos and ghetto-blasters, horses, dogs and children.
I bought some lucky white heather and a silver horseshoe from a little girl in jeans and a grubby tee shirt.
She looked at Tumbleweed and then ran off.
‘Come on,’ he said.
It was as if he wanted to see but not be seen.
The sky darkened and the moon came out, going from full into its last quarter, and bright as a chunk of Wensleydale cheese.
Somewhere a camp fire was lit and we were drawn towards it instinctively.
We stood back in the shadows hypnotized by the flames and a family group circled round them.
The shape of a vardo loomed in the twilight and the whinny of a horse came from the trees.
‘Mammy, Mammy, it's the Romany Rei!’
We were grabbed suddenly and hustled into the dancing light.
‘What you doin' round 'ere, mush?’ a wild-looking man in a torn shirt and ragged jeans wanted to know.
‘We thought you were going to sing,’ I lied, ‘when we saw you sitting round the fire.’
‘They's dukkered,’ an old crone cackled.
‘You come stealin' our mokes and we'll roast yer on the fire like an otchiwitchi,’ the wild man threatened.
‘We don't want your horses,’ said Tumbleweed.
‘It brought back memories — the fire an’ all.
I lived with you travellin' folk when I was a young 'un.’
‘Then yer should know the old tongue.’
‘If I've not forgotten.’
‘Who's the rawni?’ the old crone asked.
‘She's my friend.’
‘Country hantle? or one o' they didicoi besoms more like.’
‘She's from Low Riding.’
‘Kushti, kushti,’ she muttered as she lit a clay pipe from the fire.
‘Ask him the password,’ a young woman said, with coral and amber beads jangling round her neck and hair like the plaited mane of a black, Arab stallion, ‘the riddle-me-ree one only a Romany knows.’
‘Rosie,’ the wild man called and the little girl I bought the heather from came out of the caravan, ‘riddle me the Gorgios.’
‘What am I?’ she asked looking at Tumbleweed, and then began to recite in a sing-song voice, ‘with a stick in me hand and a stone in me throat, I walk through the land in me shiny, red coat.’
‘You're a cherry, of course,’ said Tumbleweed.
They all seemed to be pleased except the child, who was banished to bed disappointed, and we sat until the sky blackened, talking and sharing their hedgerow broth.
It was a magic night until the spell was broken.
‘Throw the slop-bucket on the fire,’ said the old girl.
‘It's bedtime.’
Suddenly there was an air of menace.
The goodwill died with the fire and black shapes loomed up out of the dark.
I began to feel drowsy and wondered about the hedgerow broth.
Had they poisoned us?
I stumbled away from the caravans and sat down by the hedge to wait for Tumbleweed.
But where was he?
Twenty-One
I opened my eyes to the sun riding high over Fair Hill.
A rough horseblanket rubbed against my chin and a lacy canopy of cow parsley shaded my eyes from the bright light.
I sat up and looked around.
The vardo was gone.
Had last night been a dream?
No, there was Tumbleweed asleep under an old army greatcoat, a ladybird ambling about on his twitching nose.
Good gracious!
Have I been asleep under a hedge with a strange man not my husband?
I don't know what Aunt Bedelia will say.
‘Wakey wakey!’
I called in a panic.
‘I'm a cherry, I'm a cherry,’ he declared in his half-sleep.
‘Wake up, they're all going!’
I pulled the coat off him and flung it onto the hawthorn bushes where it rested upside down, spilling the contents of the torn pockets.
‘Wait a minute,’ said Tumbleweed, ‘I recognize that coat.
It's old Jackdaw's — a thousand years old if it's a day.’
‘Is that a note pinned to it?’
I asked him, pointing to a grubby bit of brown paper.
‘Old Jackdaw lies under the sod,’’ he read out.
‘He left this for the little Romany Rei I reckon you be he so take it bor an plant no gorja curses on his grave.’’
‘I'm not touching it, it stinks,’ I said, looking at the mouldering debris in the hedge bottom.
Tumbleweed poked about with a stick and then picked up a small bundle wrapped in a piece of black plastic bin-liner.
‘The saints preserve us!’ he said as he struggled to open it.
‘It's like trying to break into the Kremlin strongbox.’
‘Or a packet of ginger biscuits,’ I added.
We tried tooth and nail and finally impaled it on a thorn tree, tugging at it until the branch flew off and hurtled us into a ditch.
‘It's only a handkerchief,’ Tumbleweed said, holding it up.
It was made of fine lawn and had an embroidered monogram in one corner.
It looked like ‘CSM’ with some kind of tiny flowers round it.
Then there was a tobacco tin with a little boy's treasures — marbles, a long-dead spider, gaudy stamps from Helvetia and Madagascar and a piece of blue glass with a letter to Santa Claus wrapped round it: ‘Dear Santa, Will you bring mi dadi back for crismas and a cowboi set.’
The signature looked like Spiggy Meu but it could have been Spiggy Lee.
Tumbleweed put them in his pocket and we picked our rucksacks up to make our way to the station.
‘The thieving old devil,’ he said.
‘He told me he'd posted that letter and sent my Christmas card home.’
‘It is you, isn't it?’
‘Who?’
‘Lord Chatwin of Spignel Meu.’
‘Good grief!
Do I have to wear one of them velvet caps with knobs on?’
‘And we've got Swire Sugden where we want him now,’ I said.
‘Wait till he finds out.’
‘Not so fast,’ he cautioned.
‘How d'you mean?’
‘We've got to prove it first, haven't we?’ he continued.
‘They're not going to take my word for it.’
Baldrics!
There's always something and if you have to go to law they'll take you for every penny you've got.
People have spent years trying to clear their names after some trifling misdemeanour or insult and ended up having to sell the roof over their heads.
And when you've done you can't stop folks thinking what they want to think.
‘Well, I've got no money, have you?’
I asked him.
‘No,’ he said, ‘and if I had I wouldn't spend it on that.’
We caught the half-past one train and settled down to enjoy the run.
High, bleak moors and rushing becks.
Lush, green valleys and wooded dells.
Then round, rolling drumlins circling wide water-meadows and we were home.
‘Did you say you sent a Christmas card?’
I called as Tumbleweed rushed off to his bog watch.
‘Yes,’ he said, slowing down somewhat.
‘Well, it wasn't there, was it?’
‘I didn't see it.’
‘It must have been posted then.’
‘Yes, but —’ he began.
‘Could be with your family papers if we can find them,’ I went on.
‘Wouldn't that be proof?’
‘It's worth a try,’ he agreed, ‘and if we can appeal to Sugden's better nature we can work out a compromise.’
‘He hasn't got a better nature,’ I said despondently.
‘We'll appeal to his worst then,’ he laughed as he went on his way.
Oh dear!
That's Aunt Bedelia with her arms akimbo again.
Elinor leaning over the crazy gate and Otley with his field glasses.
It's a long pull up this hill, I'm not going to run up and drop down dead.
‘Where d'you think you've been to?’
Otley demanded when I got in.
‘I've been to Appleby,’ I said, ‘to the gypsy horse fair.’
‘We know that, stupid, but where have you been all night?’
‘At the horse fair.’
‘With that fancy man?’
‘I've been with Tumbleweed.’
‘What doing?’ he said, blowing himself up like those funny birds.
‘Don't shout, I've got a migraine,’ I said.
‘You know I don't travel well.’
I fell down thankfully in the squidgy chair and drank some tea while he hovered round waiting to pounce again.
Bedelia gave me some aspirins and a cloth soaked in cold water and vinegar for my forehead.
I leaned back and closed my eyes.
‘And what —’ Otley began.
‘Leave her alone a minute,’ Bedelia counselled.
‘Let her get her breath back first.’
‘She's had all night to get her breath back,’ he complained.
Now it's suddenly quiet and Bedelia's gone in the kitchen to get the dinner ready.
Elinor's looking through the records for another tango to practise with Nigel.
They're both pale and passionate these days and she hasn't mentioned Napoleon for a long time.
Lights flashing on and off in my head.
I promised Swire Sugden we'd call it off.
Find the Christmas card.
Rehearse the pageant.
Make some gingerbread men.
Tell Otley.
Where's Tony?
What's Mike up to?
I've got to water the  busy Lizzies.
Clean the oven with Mr Muscle.
Don't leave it on again, you'll set the house on fire!
The bridge has fallen in with the Mayor and Corporation on it.
Forgot to tell them it had cancer!
Help!
Murder!
‘May, are you all right?’
Otley said, lifting the vinegary cloth from my eyes.
‘You're screaming the place down.’
‘It's that bridge, it's got cancer,’ I explained.
‘Oh yes!’ he said as if he didn't believe me, ‘and what were you doing all last night?’
‘Tell you about it at dinner-time, it's a long story,’ I said.
The late afternoon sun fell on the table as we ate our individual quiches and dandelion salad.
A dish of apples stewed with dates, a cold, sago pudding if you were desperate and wanted your ribs sticking together.
Plum cake and cheese and a mug of strong, black tea in case you were still falling apart.
Elinor fetched a pot of Greek yoghurt out of the fridge as she was weight watching.
I'm on the verge of it myself but can't decide whether to get fat and have a merry, unlined face, or be thin with a face like a fossilized Capuchin.
‘What's Greek yoghurt made of then?’
Bedelia wanted to know.
‘I'm not sure,’ said Elinor dipping her spoon in.
‘It doesn't look any different to me.’
‘It is different.’
‘In what way?’
Elinor thought for a minute or two and then made her decision.
‘It's slimier.’
‘So is sago pudding and you never eat that, do you?’
Bedelia tutted as she cleared it away.
‘I'll push her face in it if she doesn't shut up,’ Elinor threatened.
‘She gets on my wick.’
They were very pleased when I told them the outcome of my night on the tiles and Otley sat next to me on the sofa with his arm round my shoulders.
It was like a second honeymoon.
Any time now he's going to ask me to go roller-skating.
‘All is forgiven,’ he said like Jesus.
‘This is a nice record,’ Elinor said, blowing the dust off an old seventy-eight.
‘Anyone for a tango?’
Otley leapt to his feet eager to practise some passion as the strains of ‘La Paloma’ came throbbing out of the music box.
‘Praaaaam, perampam — dip — pamperampam, peram, perampam — dip.’
Elinor twisted and swayed and twirled, her blue eyes blazing, the wick having been set afire by Aunt Bedelia.
Full of hatred and Greek yoghurt she pushed and pulled at Otley sending him this way and that.
Dressed in an embroidered, peasant blouse from Oxfam and a frilly skirt, she stabbed at the Turkey carpet with her stiletto heels sending up little whorls of dust and leaving pockmarks in her wake.
Otley's cavalry twill and brogues were doing their best to keep up and he was breaking out in a sweat.
His green eyes were taking on a bluish tinge and hers were going green with so much exchanging of deep looks.
They stamped round the sofa and did that tricky bit of acrobatics that Sid and Ethel showed us the other night.
‘Look out!’
I yelled as Elinor's heel just missed my left eye.
I was trying hard to listen to the music and not look at them so I picked the local paper up and opened it.
Oh, they've started doing guided walks round the cemetery, and there's going to be an open day at the sewage works.
That'll be interesting.
They've even installed closed-circuit television and computers so that you can see it coming round corners.
Biff, bang, wallop and then heavy breathing from somewhere not too far away.
I don't like to stare at them.
‘Watch out!’
I warned as Otley's knee caught the back of my ear.
I'm going to be knocked out for not staring as well.
‘I'm used to Nigel now,’ Elinor explained to me, ‘but it's nice to have a change.’
‘That's all right,’ I lied.
‘You want to learn to tango properly, May,’ Otley advised.
‘Livens up the old hormones — better than monkey glands it is.’
The record ran itself out and they flopped down gasping and panting like an obscene phone call.
Otley on the sofa next to me and Elinor on the floor leaning against him.
‘Have you seen Napoleon lately?’
I asked conversationally.
‘I don't think he's on this wavelength,’ she said, ‘I had thought of having a holiday in one of the Martello towers if I don't see him soon.’
‘Is that where he hangs out, then?’
‘Shall we go, May?’
Otley inquired.
‘No, I don't particularly want to see Napoleon myself,’ I said.
‘It's  not my scene — them cocked hats and support tights leave me cold.’
‘It'll be a change,’ he persisted.
‘I don't want a holiday, I like it here,’ I said.
‘My place is here with Tony — I mean Mike.’
‘Who's Tony?’
‘He's my Roman friend.’
‘I think it's time you got away — you're stark raving bonkers.’
‘We found the silver, didn't we?
Just like I said we would.’
‘We want May for the villa,’ Elinor interrupted.
‘She knows all about it.
Wait till after the jubilee and then we'll go.’
‘All right,’ he agreed.
All right, Elinor.
Yes, sir, no, sir, three bags full, sir.
Oliver North's got nothing on Otley; he's going to salute any minute now.
He thinks I'm jealous when I get annoyed at his bad manners.
There was the time we were getting off a crowded coach on a day trip to Brighton and he pushed me back into my seat.
‘Just a minute,’ he said.
‘Let the lady go first.’
I was fuming.
When he went in the Dolphinarium I got the bus up to Devil's Dyke and had my sandwiches up there.
Then when we went on the train to Italy and all the way through France and Switzerland he chatted up one of the Marias, and when I tipped his minestrone soup over his head on Milan station he said: ‘You'll have to excuse my wife, she's just an ignorant peasant.’
‘Eet izza no wotta you theenk eet izza,’ said the Maria.
Well, I didn't think it was anything but rudeness and I can't stand bad manners so I got the next train back and left him there.
‘You know I love you,’ he said when he got home after a month in Rimini and San Marino.
‘I've been looking everywhere for you.’
Aunt Bedelia had charge of the television so we had to watch all the soaps in Christendom.
Talk about Pandora's Box.
I've got enough troubles of my own without watching other people's.
I felt my eyes closing and picked up the paper to hide behind.
‘You look worn out,’ said Bedelia as she bustled into the kitchen.
‘Have this hot toddy before you go to bed.’
I took the hot, spicy drink and it went down like a stream of molten lava.
Soon the world was upside down and the walls caved in to admit the rider on the white horse.
‘It's him again,’ I cried.
‘We'd better get her into bed,’ Otley urged, ‘before she goes sleepwalking down to the river and falls in.’
‘Make a note of everything you see,’ Elinor ordered.
‘We want ideas for the pageant.’
‘Scribble, scribble, scribble,’ I mumbled.
Like they said to Gibbon when he was writing The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire .
I wonder if he was drunk as well.
Who's that crashing through the undergrowth?
It's the ginger one in the tartan longjohns and his mate with the coconut matting on his chest.
They're looking for the womankind who have all gone off with the Romans.
‘Mollickin' in them scented baths all day long.
I want my dinner,’ said the ginger one.
‘Niminy-piminy, pasta-plonkers,’ roared the blond giant, ‘I'll curdle yer collops till they drop off.’
‘Comin' here stealin' our slave labour,’ bellowed the other shaking his fist at the sky.
‘Show 'em a bar o' soap and they're anybody's,’ said his mate.
‘Won't even look at 'er new battleaxe,’ grumbled Ginger as they went on their way looking for money.
At the Villa Claro AD 58 Dear Nero,
Salute O Lord of the Dance.
What a lyre!
I am quite under the spell of your instrument, and how I enjoyed that sideways dancing! but do be careful you don't fall in the sea, Italy is not very wide.
I look forward to your state visit to Brigantia.
Please bring your own elephants and bed-linen.
Your fan club went wild when you did your Apollo act didn't they?
I should give it a miss when you come up north, it's a bit chilly for that sort of thing, though I could knit you a winter fig leaf.
Sorry you've had to send a new Governor after all.
Haven't you got him back yet? did you say he was last heard of on the Silk Road and he should have been in Caledonia.? oh dear! and Boudicca's got his legs ready.
She's had to pull the IXth Legion out of a bog again.
One of these days they'll just vanish from the face of the earth and never be seen again.
Do have a word with them.
What a waste it would be, all those roads and nobody to tramp on them!
Well I have to go now or I shall be roped in for the sacrifice and I don't  like getting my hands dirty.
The sooner you get that old Druid the better.
I can show you where he hangs out — on the Isle of Mona — but don't let on I told you.
Luv to Octavia, Poppaea, Acte and not forgetting the goat-boy. know what I mean?
Your friend and ally, Carrie Brigantum, Regina.
PS I forgot.
Will you bring your own lions and Christians as well?
‘May!’
Otley called at the crack of dawn, ‘Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke wants us to give her a hand.’
Oh clogs!
I thought as I turned over.
Twenty-Two
My heart sank into my boots like Granny's lumpy porridge as we made our way to Grindlewood for a day's dusting and polishing.
Mrs Bracken's varicose veins were playing her up and the doctor had told her to rest for a week.
‘They've got no consideration,’ Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke stormed as she met us with a supply of dusters and aerosols and impregnated cloths.
‘Don't mind me asking, your honour,’ I bobbed, ‘but are they ozone friendly?’
‘You'll have to excuse my wife, she's gone green like Maggie,’ Otley explained.
‘She sees holes everywhere.’
‘Of course they're ozone friendly, never use anything else,’ she assured me, ‘and we've got wood-burning stoves.’
That's all very well if you've got a forest to keep it going like she has, I thought, but what if you live in a towerblock?
‘I'll go and get you some wood,’ Otley volunteered as he disappeared from view, leaving me with a duster in my hand and a country seat waiting to be polished.
‘Come on then!’ said Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke, tucking her skirt into her bloomers.
‘Charge of the Light Brigade!’
I followed her spindly legs issuing from the bunched-up clothing up and down and along, in and out and under; squirting, rubbing, shining; kneeling, crawling, climbing; gasping, panting, grunting.
‘I can do in a day what she does in a week,’ she said, shaking her duster out of the window on to the roses below.
‘If she's got bad legs —’ I began.
‘It's idlitis she's got.
Keep your circulation going and you don't get bad legs,’ she broke in.
‘She gives a quick squirt so I can smell it, then finds a nice, easy chair till she hears me coming.’
‘She must be getting past it,’ I panted.
‘You want somebody younger.’
‘They won't do it — they all want to be air hostesses these days.’
‘I know,’ I agreed as I shone a table she had just aerosolled.
‘But she makes nice chocolate cake and she's handy when the cook's on holiday,’ she admitted as she examined her face in the shine.
She wasn't lonely here on her own, she told me.
There was always too much to do and although she hated it when she came as a young bride, she had grown to love it and would defend it with her life.
There were house parties but a place like this needed a master to deal with things, like prowlers and gypsies camping in the woods.
‘Gypsies?’
‘They turn up every summer after Appleby Horse Fair — place is like a pigsty when they've gone.’
‘But where can they go to?’
I asked.
‘Everybody moves them on.’
‘They've claimed squatters’ rights anyway.
Been there since the house was built, generation after generation — never get rid of them.’
‘Councils are supposed to provide sites for them but they don't,’ I protested, feeling a sudden sympathy for an oppressed minority.
‘If it was dogs driven from pillar to post there'd be an uproar.’
‘I suppose you're right,’ she conceded.
‘But watch out if you go into those woods and don't take any valuables with you.’
‘I haven't got any.’
I pretended not to notice her look of astonishment and got on with my shining.
All the ancestors flicked over with a bunch of pink feathers on a stick.
What fun!
Was that my husband I caught a glimpse of through the open casement taking his ease on a sun lounger with a little pile of twigs by his side?
That will keep the wood-burning stove going for ten seconds at least.
By the time we had cossetted one floor Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke's legs were criss-crossed by lines resembling a noughts and crosses grid, and my jeans, saturated with a witch's brew of chemicals, were gathering dust and fluff like a thieving magpie.
‘Of course, we haven't time to give it more than a catlick,’ she came to realize as we staggered up the grand flight of stairs to the first floor.
I gave the pompous statuary a flick of the pink feathers as I went past.
What a lot of pontificating panjandrums!
For two pins I'd send them all crashing to the bottom.
If there's anything more ridiculous than a periwigged Pooh-Bah in his frills and furbelows I've yet to see it.
‘That's the Sir Mauger Grindlewood — East India Company,’ she said as we came across another old buffer in stone with a bad smell under his nose.
I expect he was like all the rest indoors, couldn't find his way out of a paper bag.
‘Abigail, my posset's gone cold, can you warm it up for me?’
‘Caroline, I can't undo my weskit buttons.’
‘Emma, pull my boots off, there's a good gel.’
And what's all that on the ceiling?
The Garden of Eden, The Creation, The Birth of Venus.
You name it and they've got it.
Big, fat Grindlewoods cavorting in their birthday suits, masquerading as gods and goddesses and Adams and Eves.
Didn't they do well?
‘This was Miss Delphine's room.’
A light, airy bower this, in spring green and primrose yellow with flower paintings and miniatures of rosy children on the walls.
How did Miss Delphine get on with that lot outside?
Confined to her room, no doubt, for refusing to marry the old humbug picked out for her.
Ran away with the blacksmith who beat her with his bellows if his dinner wasn't ready on time, and now she lies buried underneath the spreading chestnut tree.
Perhaps she would have been better off with the old humbug after all.
‘Can you stay overnight?’
Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke wanted to know.
‘We can do a bit more tomorrow, and Mr Sugden's coming to lunch.’
I had planned a day by the river with Dorothy Wordsworth but was curious to find out what Sugden was up to.
‘Of course.’
At last I'm coming out!
My first venture into high society.
Wait a minute, they do things different from us peasants, don't they?
Must remember to spoon up my soup away from me and not slurp it all down my chin.
Then again, they peel their apples with fancy, little knives instead of savaging them with their gnashers.
I don't know what they thought about Nell Gwyn spitting orange pips all over the place.
There must have been a veritable orchard flourishing in her wake, which could account for the sudden urge to build an orangery among the nobbery.
‘Perhaps you could help Cook to wash up,’ she suggested, bringing me down to earth with a bang.
‘Yes, Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke, I will,’ I said as if it was the one thing in the world I wanted to do.
‘Oh, do stop bobbing up and down like a yo-yo,’ she said.
‘I said you could call me Mollie.’
‘All right then — Mollie.’
‘Did you say you'd found Chatwin?’ she inquired as we caressed a rosewood cabinet.
‘Arthur Negus went mad over this.’
‘It's Tumbleweed.’
‘I should recognize him when I see him — we were playmates.’
‘Playmates?’
She had not thought it worth mentioning before as he was not likely to be found.
She had gone paddling in the beck with him while his nanny and her Uncle Edgar took off giggling into the woods.
Uncle Edgar even dammed a little pool so they could have a dip with their picnics.
‘And he's got a birthmark!’
‘Whereabouts?’
‘I'll give you three guesses.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘I remember pointing at it one day and he said, ‘Well you haven't got one at all, yours is broken.'’
It all comes back to me now.’
‘There must be some other way of identifying him,’ I said.
‘We'll have to forget about that.’
‘There's the photographs — and a card with no postmark.
It was just pushed through the letterbox.’
I followed her to the Georgian wing where the rooms were more human size.
A glimpse of rough woodland carpeted with bluebells and wild garlic could be seen beyond a daisy-sprinkled lawn; a wisp of smoke spiralled up from the trees; voices carried on the still air.
‘That'll be the gypsies,’ Mollie said, nodding her head towards it.
‘What a lovely room!’
I said, admiring its lightness and open aspect.
‘See that ceiling, there's thirty thousand pounds worth of dry rot waiting to be done.’
‘Oh dear!’
‘It's like painting the Forth Bridge.’
‘Bills must be a headache,’ I sympathized, ‘but worth it in the end.’
‘I sometimes wonder — no one to hand it on to.
Needs a man about, a son and heir before it's too late.’
‘How old are you then?’
I asked, forgetting my lowly status.
‘I'm thirty-nine so there's still time — but only just.’
‘Same as Tumbleweed.’
Suddenly she came alive and her hazel eyes lit up as she took out a large album from a walnut bureau.
‘That's right,’ she said, ‘same as Tumbleweed.’
Starched family groups posed self-consciously in front of parlour palms and porticoes.
Mollie was the only child of Thomas Arthur Gryke, manufacturer from Eaglesclough on the way to Huddersfield and don't let anybody forget it!
He had the best for himself and he wanted the best for his Mollie.
He got her the Hon. Charles Grindlewood, unfortunately.
‘Poor Daddy, it was all such a bore,’ she said, turning the pages over hurriedly.
‘Surely not,’ I protested.
‘All those house parties, clothes, and a finishing school in Switzerland —‘
‘I grew up in the Swinging Sixties,’ she broke in: ‘Beatlemania, flower children, magic mushrooms.
Daddy threatened to assassinate Bob Dylan unless I married Grindlewood.
I was frantic; he was my hero.’
‘They drive you mad,’ I said, thinking of the time I was about to murder my husband with the pressure-cooker, ‘did he do exercises in bed?’
‘He did, and with somebody else most of the time.
In the end I stopped sharing his bed altogether.
I regret that because there would have been the children after he'd gone.’
After he'd gone!
Otley's good at going.
He's supposed to be helping.
Still guarding his little pile of sticks no doubt, or even jumping over the broom with a Romany.
You can't trust anybody, least of all husbands.
A waterfall of yellowing snaps fell out onto the floor and Mollie picked one up.
‘That's him!’ she said, pointing to a dark-haired child with a scowling face about to be struck by a huge hand coming from the top right-hand corner.
‘He wanted to go on the dodgems and Nanny wouldn't let him.’
It did look like Tumbleweed.
Then there was the card.
A shiny view: ‘Deer Moly, Yestiday I went on the dojums with Jakdo I lik it heer.
Yore frend Spiggy Lee.’
‘If I can borrow these to show him —’ I said, picking them up.
‘By all means and I'm looking forward to meeting him again.’
Mollie put the album back and we made our way downstairs with our collection of chemicals.
Tired and hungry I gave the head Pooh-Bah a rap with the wrong end of the feather duster as I passed.
‘What's that?’ inquired Mollie, pausing on the stairs.
‘I caught it in the banisters as I turned the corner,’ I lied.
If only I had a crinoline to sweep down the grand staircase in!
I have always longed to be a great lady but it's not easy when you spend your time queuing for slug-pellets and flea-powder.
You tend to slink away in corners.
And, oh, those fearsome pictures on the containers!
I know what a flea and a slug look like, I don't want to be frightened to death every time I pick up the packet.
If I want a video nasty I'll buy one.
All they need to do is put a ‘before’ and ‘after’circle, one with dots and one with nothing, like they do with lavatory cleaners.
I was almost too tired to eat in the old, flagged kitchen hung with gleaming copper pans and jelly moulds, but the macaroni cheese was as good as Aunt Bedelia's.
Here's a crusty roll — mustn't show my ignorance and cut it with a knife, have to tear it to pieces as if it was my worst enemy.
That reminds me — where's Otley got to?
‘It's very obliging of Mr Craven to help out,’ observed Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke over the coffee and slab cake.
‘Think nothing of it,’ I replied grandly.
I don't know where he is, I'll smash his head in when we get home, taking care to use the rolling-pin, then I can tell the judge I was just rolling out the sausage plait when he took me unawares.
We chatted for a while about the trials and tribulations of being a stately home owner, and there are plenty of headaches I will admit, but I get headaches and nothing else — prices going up, wages going up, everybody wanting their ten per cent, she said.
No use trying to explain that all some people get is ten per cent of little or nothing.
‘Of course, I blame the Common Market,’ she went on.
‘Not like the Empire when we got everything cheap.’
‘It'll be different when we join the snake,’ I said.
‘Oh frabjous day!’ she giggled.
‘And you're on to a winner with the poll tax, paying the same as us.’
‘You keep saying that,’ she chided as we cleared the table, ‘I hope we're not going to have another Peasants’Revolt.’
‘So do I,’ I said, but I'm not bothered one way or the other.
Lovely bed with cool, white sheets and a voluminous gown beribboned like Queen Victoria's drawers.
If I cross my hands over my breast I can think I'm dead and in paradise, but it's true what they say, you can get  too tired to sleep.
Thank goodness I've brought my dandelion wine.
I'll go and see Tony now.
That looks like Julius Caesar again.
Addy, addy, onkey,
Caesar is a donkey,
Mother is a scrubbing brush,
Father is a monkey,
O — U — T spells out.
They won't leave him alone.
One of these days he'll crucify them.
Tramp, shuffle, the sound of marching feet — it's the legions.
I hope they've learned how to turn corners, they're making straight for me.
‘Lingones — wait for it, wait for it — halt!’ bawled the centurion.
‘Permission to speak, sir.’
‘Granted.’
‘It's the grub, sir — we're fed up of Yorkshire puddin'.’
‘You'll 'ave Yorkshire puddin' an' like it.
When in Albion do as Albion does.’
‘You can sole yer boots with it,’ said one protester.
‘Or else it's all squidgy inside like sick,’ said another.
‘Nah listen 'ere — any more o' this an' you'll all go back to Gaul an' eat bloody frogs' legs — all right?’
‘Right you are, sir,’ they chorused.
‘Right then!
Lingones quick — wait for it, you 'orrible lot — march!’
‘Left, left, I had a good job an' I left,’ they chanted as they went.
Jupiter be praised!
They've missed my rose garden and marched into the river.
At the Villa Claro AD 58 Dear Buddy,
It was luvly to see you again.
So sorry about your hubby's mishap though, it must be awkward having no arms and legs at all now, I did shout for you to stop but the wind was blowing the other way.
When he stood in the middle of the road waving his arms it was only because he was hungry and wanted his dinner, now you'll have to trundle him about in a wheelbarrow like a dead sheep, you'll have no time for skirmishing.
Do be careful.
Nutty raised an army of smelly Brits while I was away (present company  excepted) and I fear a civil war.
Hopefully the legions will fight it while I get on with my knitting.
Nero has ordered ten thousand hides as they get through a lot of shoe leather with all that clomping.
Can you help out? he's paying in gold and you can melt it down and make a new battleaxe that will never go rusty.
He's rolling in it, he's even going to build a house with it.
We could do with some of it over here so try and be a bit more friendly, dear Buddy, just think what it would buy!
New houses with bigger holes in the middle to let more smoke out!
Next time he sends you greetings do give him the right salute instead of the two-fingered one.
Tony's waiting for his Pot Noodles so I'd better be off.
Luv and kisses to all in Iceniland.
Your fellow monarch, Carrie Brigantum
PS Nutty's got a good pair of legs if they're any use to you, why don't you slice your way over here to see them? don't think he'd miss them as he's legless most of the time anyway.
know what I mean? don't tell him I said so.
Twenty-Three
It wasn't until I woke up at three o'clock that I remembered my husband.
Where is he and what is he doing?
Not that I care as I love my dandelion friend, Tony, more than I love Otley.
But he's not going to get away with it wherever he is.
I dressed and crept along the endless corridors until I found the staircase and slid silently down the banisters under the disapproving eye of Sir Mauger Grindlewood.
I'd just like to know what he got up to when he took his wig off, that's all!
All the doors were locked and bolted so I climbed out through the kitchen window and dropped into a bed of lavender.
I crushed some of the flowers and rubbed them on my forehead as I'm told it has an invigorating effect on cabbages and thought it might do the same for me.
Gardens are enchanting at night but you can only see the one little bit near you.
It was irksome being trapped in my body as I wanted to be on the roof, in the rose bower, by the lake, in the woods, on the hills and in the valley simultaneously.
It must save you a lot of time being a spirit and seeing everything at once.
God doesn't know how lucky he is.
I followed the sound of voices coming from the bluebell wood, there was the acrid smell of wood-smoke and an orange glow lit my way through the wild garlic.
Somebody was singing.
It sounded like Otley.
‘O play to me gypsy,’’ he warbled.
Had he gone mad?
He'd never had a good word to say for them before, a bunch o' thieving magpies, he always said, living off the fat of the land while he had to pay taxes to keep 'em.
What's he up to now?
The only knew how stupid he looked!
And who's that snuggling up to him?
It looks like the beaded beauty Tumbleweed and I met at Appleby.
Yes, there's the old woman and the wild man hacking at a haunch of venison.
Suddenly a dog flung itself at me snarling and  growling and they all stopped what they were doing to look in my direction.
‘It's only me’ I said, flinching away from the dog.
‘It's her with the Romany Rei,’ the girl exclaimed.
‘What are you doing here?
You're supposed to be in bed,’ Otley said.
‘You know her?’ inquired the wild one.
‘This is my wife, May,’ Otley replied with a hint of disappointment in his voice.
‘Your wife?’
‘Yes.’
‘You never told us you were married,’ complained the object of his serenade.
‘You never asked.’
The carcase of a stag lay nearby in the process of being dismembered.
It had to be done in the night, they explained, when there was nobody about and we could take some home with us providing we kept our mouths shut.
‘I won't tell.’
‘What were yer snoopin' about for then?’
‘I didn't know where my husband had got to, that's all.’
‘He was 'ere making up to an honest travellin' lass.’
‘Now look here,’ said Otley, ‘you asked me to have a bite with you and that venison does smell good.’
‘We didn't want yer singin' an' makin' moony eyes an' all that,’ said the old girl, spitting into the fire.
‘Nah,’ the wild man broke in, ‘any more o' that an' she'll put the eye on yer.’
‘It must be nice living here,’ I said, changing the subject, ‘but how d'you go on for shopping?’
‘Shoppin'?’ he guffawed.
‘We gets what we want and puts it in the freezer — got no use for shoppin' us.’
It seemed that what they wanted most was facilities.
A site with lavatories, launderette and rubbish collection.
‘You don't pay rates though,’ Otley said.
‘If they give us facilities we'll pay for 'em.’
‘Fair enough, they'll get you for Poll Tax I expect.’
‘Next time we see Mr Scrape we'll tell him,’ I promised, with a rush of blood to the head.
‘That silly old bugger,’ Zylpha the beauty said, jangling her coral and amber beads and flashing her eyes at Otley.
‘Comes round wavin' his byelaws at us’ her Cousin Jake took up the story.
‘He 'ad us up once for ‘swimmin' without the benefit of suitable drawers’ he called it.’
‘Festering dungweed,’ Grandma observed.
‘An’ then he prosecutes us for cuttin' animals up in a public place,’Jake went on.
‘He says it comes under the Fireworks and public Entertainments byelaw; an' there wasn't a soul for miles around.’
When we had finished laughing we sat round the embers drinking tea until the first green light of dawn showed in the eastern sky.
Otley then decided he had better take the venison back to Claro before the community constable went on his early morning rounds.
‘Don't forget we've got to see Cyril Gibbs at the council offices this afternoon,’ he called out as I made my way back towards Grindlewood.
‘If I can't make it, take Elinor.’
Maybe they'll elope to Gretna Green if they can't find a vacant Martello tower, then it will leave me with more time for my Roman friend and dear Boudicca not to mention Dorothy Wordsworth's Journals of which I have perused the first paragraph six times yet cannot seem to recall it to mind.
The kitchen window was still open and I climbed in after crushing another handful of lavender with the intention of taking it to bed with me for an invigorating sleep, if such a thing is possible.
The next morning Mollie and I resumed the polishing and dusting after eating our muesli and boiled eggs.
I would rather have been down at the villa making figgy hedgehogs for Tony but a promise is a promise.
‘Now if you'll give Cook a hand I'd be very grateful,’ Mollie said as we fell exhausted against the banisters at the bottom of the stairs.
Mrs Cartwright was getting on in years, shapeless as a stuffed pillow, hands and arms scarred with the shiny tissue of a myriad burns, and eyes seemingly closed against a lifetime of hissing steam.
‘Here you are, love, have a sit down and a cuppa.
They think they own you body and soul,’ she said, nodding towards where she last saw Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke.
‘She seems all right,’ I replied, ‘environmentally aware an' that.’
‘They're all right if they're getting the work out o' you but get sick an' it's another kettle o' fish.’
She grumbled on in this vein as she prepared the food and I ran about as the scullion.
It is at times like this that I regret not doing a scientific 0-level and becoming a brain surgeon so that no one would ask me to wash up or scrub floors.
But then I don't like blood so I wouldn't want to be either a cook or a surgeon.
There's not much to choose between them really; they both cut meat up but one eats it and the other pickles it.
‘She wants me to make a thousand currant buns, five hundred sausage rolls and fifty chocolate sponge sandwiches, if you please, in time for the jubilee,’ Mrs Cartwright exploded as she juggled with dishes and tins and bowls and ladles.
‘Then if there's time she wants a ‘Guess the Weight’ cake making as well— I've got to make it look as if it weighs five pounds when it really weighs ten.’
‘Makes you want to spit,’ I sympathized.
‘I'm not trying to work all that out for a start,’ she went on.
‘I shall do it by the dollop like I always do.’
‘How d'you mean?’
‘Just putting in what you think, like in the old days.
My old gran didn't bother with recipes and if anybody asked her for one she'd say ‘Oh, I don't bother wi' them things.
I cook by t'dollop’— and it were always nice.’
I caught a glimpse of the outside world through a gap in the piled-up tins and dishes.
The sun shone and the birds sang.
Why aren't I out there enjoying it?
I'm fed up, I don't make much dirt so why have I got to spend my life cleaning up other people's?
I don't belong here.
If it wasn't for Mike I'd be off but I'm afraid he might start snorting coke if I turn my back.
It would be in the- News of the World .
What would the neighbours think?
‘Teenager On Crack While Mother Gallivants With Dorothy Wordsworth’.
I am going to have to write a letter of explanation to the Prime Minister.
Dear Maggie,
I feel I owe you an apology for abandoning your esteemed Victorian values.
I cannot think what came over me as I was brought up chapel like you but unfortunately my father was a miner and not a grocer.
I happened to have with me the journal of Dorothy Wordsworth on my trip to the Dales as I had forgotten to return it to the public library, and you have my word that I dropped it the instant I was made aware that they were  harbouring a drug addict.
There is no connection between it and my son's fall from grace as I'm sure you will understand.
It wasn't your fault that Mark got lost in the Sahara was it.?
You can tell them till you're blue in the face and they still do what they want.
It's the same with men as well isn't it.?
I know you'll understand when I say my husband's a one for the usquebaugh, I was about to correct him with the pressure-cooker once but I remembered my Victorian values just in time.
I am not for one moment suggesting that you could do such a thing yourself because I think you would do it with more style and use a magnum of champagne.
I hope you will not think too harshly of me.
My son will be out in six months and Mrs Gillick will be taking us under her wing in the absence of your good self.
Your obedient servant, May Craven, Ancient Briton.
PS I am so grateful for the £48 a week you let me have.
It is riches beyond my wildest dreams and well worth fighting the Second World War for.
I hear that the Ancient Teutons get twice that but it can't be true because they lost.
Give my luv to Ronnie and Gorby.
‘Do you like rhubarb?’ asked Mrs Cartwright, depositing a number of baking tins in the sink.
‘Oo, yes.’
‘Good job you do,’ she went on, ‘because I cook it once a week to give the tins a good clean out.’
Swire Sugden had arrived and was taking an aperitif with Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke in the drawing-room.
I hate all this la-di-da stuff but I wanted to hear what he said so I volunteered to serve their lunch and planned to loiter in the dining-room on the slightest pretext.
‘Give 'em this carrot soup first,’ instructed Mrs Cartwright.
A lot of nonsense followed about etiquette and right sides and wrong sides.
Mustn't speak unless I'm spoken to.
Who does she think she is?
The Queen or somebody?
Swire Sugden seemed very impressed with Mollie but then he hadn't seen her with her skirt tucked in her bloomers showing her skinny legs.
I hovered over the sideboard pretending to be looking for cutlery and strained my ears to catch the conversation.
‘It's a very tempting offer,’ Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke was saying as she expertly took up her soup without slurping it.
‘All you have to do is drop your opposition to my development plans and I'll take you in as a partner,’ Sugden urged as he mopped the orange-coloured dribbles off his chin.
‘I could certainly use the extra money,’ she continued.
‘There's so much dry rot in this place…’
‘Put your own house in order first, that's what I say.’
‘But we don't want to see the meadow go.’
‘What's more important, this magnificent building or a bit of grass?’
‘It's not just a patch of grass, it's a principle at stake, thin end of the wedge.’
‘You can't eat principles.’
‘Unfortunately not.’
‘And principles won't cure dry rot.’
While they were thinking this one out I served them with a summer casserole which Swire Sugden demolished and Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke toyed with absentmindedly.
I made for the sideboard again to hover.
‘I shall need to think about it, of course,’ replied the honourable lady, ‘Things are too far advanced — the jubilee celebration.
To change direction now would let all those people down.’
‘They're still living in the Stone Age.’
‘This urban blight is spreading like the plague.
There'll soon be no green left.’
‘They block any kind of progress.’
‘Some things are worth more than money.’
Neither was listening to the other talk and I thought it would be a good moment to fetch the rhubarb tart.
‘Haven't they finished yet?’
Mrs Cartwright demanded irritably.
‘They're talking.’
‘They've got no consideration for anybody else.
They don't think I want a sit down.
That's how Mrs Bracken got her bad leg, standing about while they chit-chat.’
‘It's business.’
‘What business?’
‘He's trying to get her into partnership with him to go ahead with his holiday village.’
‘They can do what they like for me — blow the place up for all I care  — I'll be off to my mobile home in Lytham St Annes before long.’
‘Have you got relations there?’
‘No, I want to be near my Premium Bonds.
Ernie lives there.’
As I was hovering near the sideboard again, straightening the china, there was a sudden commotion outside and the gardener burst in with Mrs Cartwright hot on his heels.
‘I couldn't stop him, madam…’
‘Don't call me that, Elsie, I'm not a brothel-keeper.’
‘He's on about the gypsies.’
‘Watch where you put your muddy boots, Ramsons,’ Mollie scolded.
‘They've had one of the stags again.
I found the umbles chucked away in the bushes.
Stinks like a nest o' polecats down there,’ he said.
‘I'll deal with that riff-raff,’ Swire Sugden bellowed, abandoning his rhubarb tart in favour of a punch-up.
The gardener, Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke and I pursued him down the garden and into the bluebell wood.
‘Well!
That's all the thanks you get for slaving over a hot stove,’ Mrs Cartwright shouted after us.
We found the gypsies about their business: Zylpha washing clothes in the beck, old Katie mending a torn jacket, Jake dismantling two old bicycles and trying to make one good one out of the spare parts, and Rosie, the little riddle-me-ree girl, splashing naked in the water.
Oh dear!
Bathing without the benefit of suitable drawers again!
‘Come on, where is it?’
Sugden demanded.
‘Where's what?’ asked Jake.
‘The stag, that's what.’
‘What stag?’
‘You know what stag.’
I felt a migraine coming on as the old girl began to wail and Zylpha screamed a torrent of abuse.
It was something of a pantomime, any minute now they would be saying: ‘Oh no, I didn't!’ and ‘Oh yes, you did!’
I was afraid it might come out that we'd got a cut as well.
‘It was dead,’ I blurted but.
‘I found it on the barbed wire.
It had got its neck entangled struggling to free itself.’
‘Yeah,’ said Jake.
‘It belonged to me all the same,’ Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke pointed out with the authority of a monarch claiming a sturgeon.
‘I'll have you run in, you varmints,’ Sugden threatened.
‘It's time you scum were cleared out.
Get back to Egypt where you came from!’
‘We come from Rotherham.’
‘Well bloody well get back to Rotherham then!’
By this time I was thoroughly disgusted with these fat cats taking food from the mouths of the sansculottes.
‘Let them eat cake!’ the ghost of Marie Antoinette was calling.
And whatever happened to noblesse oblige ?
In the old days they would be feeding the poor at the castle gate.
Poor little Rosie stood dripping wet and shivering.
My blood boiled.
‘I told you, it's my fault and you can run me in if you like,’ I said, turning to go, ‘now if you'll excuse me, I've got a bus to catch.’
Twenty-Four
When the bus arrived it had ‘Yorkshire Coastliner’ emblazoned in foot-high letters on the sides with blue and white wavy lines depicting the sea.
It disgorged a crowd of bewildered passengers carrying buckets and spades and shrimping nets who pushed their way back on again.
‘This isn't Bridlington,’ a harassed mum with a screaming child complained.
‘Shut up, Diana, or I'll give you a backhander.’
‘You didn't say you wanted to go to Bridlington,’ said the driver.
‘It says Yorkshire Coastliner on it, doesn't it?’
‘That doesn't mean it's going there.’
‘Well, where does it go to?’
‘We turn round at Grindlewood Park and go back to the depot.’
‘We've paid for our tickets.’
‘What about getting a refund?’
A forest of hands clutching a variety of tickets waved about his head like the tentacles of a sea anemone and he began patiently to explain where they had gone wrong.
Metro Saverstrip — only for journeys in West Yorkshire; Metro DayRover — you can get as far as Manchester with this if you're elderly or disabled and are permitted to take a dog or other authorized companion.
Remember to rub the right date off with a copper coin of the realm or you can't go anywhere.
Schoolcard holders can go on the bus if accompanied by no more than four adults — if they want to go by train they must have an Adult DayRover; a Family DayRover is for two adults and three child permit holders or one adult and four child permit holders with dog.
‘We haven't got a dog,’ someone protested.
‘And where can we go with this?’ inquired an anxious young couple.
‘That's the Dalestour, Sundays only into North Yorkshire,’ the driver said as he passed hurriedly on to the next customer.
‘I thought this was for North Yorkshire,’ complained an old lady.
‘I'm going to see my sister in Kettlewell.’
‘That's North Yorkshire, luv.
It's a Dales Explorer, go as you please and get on and off when you want any day you like,’ he assured her.
‘Thank goodness for that!’ she exclaimed settling into her seat.
‘Only you're on the wrong bus,’ he continued, ‘you want the 800 Dalesbus — you'll have to pick it up at Ilkley.’
By the time he had sorted everybody out and told them how to get to Bridlington it was too late for me to use my free pass and I had to pay half fare.
Still good value so I paid without protesting.
‘It's these idiots,’ he confided.
‘They get on a bus and they don't know where they're going to.’
I closed my eyes for the rest of the journey as it had been a busy two days and I didn't feel lik& going to the council offices either, It would be too late anyway so I decided to take a stroll by the river and see how Nigel was getting on with the excavations.
Everything was cool and green and peaceful and the plashing of the water soothing after the noise and petrol fumes of the bus ride.
Nigel was on his knees brushing the soil away from what looked like a green glass bottle.
‘Have you found my ring yet?’
I inquired.
‘Cartimandua's ring, it's in the rose garden — I told you.’
‘Oh, that ring!
No personal objects yet, just keys, nails, basic pottery, a bit of Samian ware and some tesserae.’
‘How much time have you got left for digging?’
‘Very little.
The money's just about run out.
If we don't find something soon that's it!’
‘It was a lovely villa and masses of white roses growing wild.
That's why the Romans called this country Albion.’
He gave a wry grin and went on with his brushing.
‘Tony told me,’ I added.
‘There can't be a villa here,’ Nigel explained.
‘It's more likely to be part of the marching camp, latrines or a workshop.’
I helped the girls to wash some of the sherds and then wandered down to my favourite spot by the river.
Fishing into my green Marks & Spencer carrier bag I found some biscuits and an apple, some old sandwiches, which I threw into the water for the fish — and oh yes, there was still some dandelion wine left.
I could do with forty winks right now and  Otley would never miss me.
He would assume that I had been detained scrubbing the floors of the kitchens at Grindlewood Park.
He seems to think that's all I'm good for, though I've told him I'm the Queen.
‘Tramp, tramp, tramp the boys are marching.’
They're here again with their big feet.
I like them, they've brought us central heating an' that, but we don't want all these roads cutting into the green belt; and you can't sneak up on anybody now when they can hear you coming a mile off.
Oh, it's the elite this time, the IXth Legion lot in their natty mini-skirts and jangling horse brasses.
They look a bit soggy from all the bogs they've fallen into.
‘Ninth Legion into testudo formation — wait for it — march!’
‘Not bloody tortoises again,mamma mia !’ came a voice from the back.
‘Can't we do lions or something for a change?’
‘Or elephants?’
‘Or crocodiles?’
‘Tortoises is soul destroying.’
‘You know why we 'ave to do tortoises,’ the centurion bawled.
‘It's so that if somebody drops a bloody great boulder on yer nut it'll bounce off
‘Well, you said we could go on a picnic today.’
again.’
‘I didn't know you were goin' to go and walk into another bloody bog last night and get all the sandwiches wet, did I?’
‘No, sir.’
‘We've rescued them, sir.’
‘We don't want squidgy sandwiches, do we now?’
‘No, sir.’
‘Right then, get fell in and form another bloody tortoise!’
They went squelching on their way dropping their money and I was able to get enough for some new feathers for Tony's hat to replace those he lost when Nutty put his head in the scruncher.
At the Villa Claro AD 59 Dear Nero,
O mighty Caesar!
I am distraught to learn of the demise of your mother and shut my ears to the ugly rumour that you had her put to death so that you could take up ballet-dancing.
Never mind what they say, luv, if you want to dress up as a woman that's  your business.
I expect you get fed up of wearing that boring old toga with the purple stripe round it.
Thank you for the silk, glad you were able to wrest it from the Governor before he set off to Lepcis Magna with it.
We look forward to his arrival in Britannia again and Boudicca is saving some good legs for him,— in fact they belong to a soldier of the IXth Legion who didn't hear her shout ‘Get outta the way you stupid git’ when she was trying her chariot out on the new road.
It's not because he's Italian, she's not a racist, she slices our legs off as well if we're not careful.
Her husband has just got a head and a torso now but their devotion is very touching, she takes him everywhere in her saddle-bag.
By all means do your British tour in the winter if you wish.
I can incorporate a fig-leaf into your chunky-knit bodystocking but don't forget the cooling lotion as it'll be a bit itchy.
Your devoted friend, Carrie Brigantum
PS I don't think you should marry that young man in the back row of the chorus, it's too soon after going to bed with your horse dressed up as a Praetorian Guard.
People might not understand, you know how peculiar they can be.
Here's Tony coming for his gustatio, how handsome he is in his reconstructed hat.
He appears dazed and is going round in circles.
‘Have you been poisoned?’
I inquire.
‘I 'ave notta gotta the 'ang ovva da cocarel.’
He is quite determined to master the art of the coracle, though as Comptroller of the Queen's Household he need not concern himself with such trivialities.
‘Never mind, luv, come and get your marinated mushrooms.’
We were just sitting down when Nutty burst in with his smelly Brits and they stuck their fingers in the cooking pot.
‘What d'you call this poncin' pap then?’ he raged, ‘I can't eat this muck.’
‘It's not for you,’ I replied frostily.
‘I thought you were at Malham.’
‘Izza for me,’ Tony explained.
‘Then bloody well have it!’
Nutty bellowed pushing Tony head first into the cauldron.
I fled up to the tree-house for my knitting but a branch gave way as I grabbed it and I was pitched into the river.
It was not long before Tony joined me in an attempt to free himself of the sizzling mushrooms.
‘Ha ha!’
Nutty laughed ‘that'll teach yer to come sneakin' round 'ere ye mincin' mouldywarp.’
‘Go and have a bath you putrid polecat, I screamed
‘I don't know what's got into you, Carrie, he said, shaking his fist in the air.
‘Buzz off!’
Poor dear Tony stood there with mushrooms in his ears examining his hat for damage.
It's just not good enough, it's every time he gets some new feathers and as an officer of the Roman Imperial Army he must not be without feathers.
‘Never mind, luv, we can kill another chicken tomorrow.’
‘I no wanta chicken, I wanta peacock.’
‘We haven't got any peacocks.’
‘You izza queen, you find 'im.’
I floated on my back looking up at the puffs of white cloud dotted about the blue sky.
I was beginning to get fed up with men and their tantrums but I do need a strong arm about, I'm no good with a battleaxe like Boudicca.
Not that Tony is either but he's handy at sticking daggers in your back and that's better than nothing.
‘May, what are you doing in there?’
Otley's voice came from the trees on the river bank and suddenly he was in the water hauling me out.
He and Elinor had been to the council offices and I had still not come home when they got back.
Aunt Bedelia was worried sick.
‘I came to see what the Romans were doing,’ I explained.
‘You're mad,’ he said.
‘How is it I can't see them when I drink that wine, then?’
‘It's like Elinor says, you're not on the right wavelength.’
‘You might have drowned swimming when you're drunk,’ he scolded.
‘I'm not drunk and anyway you don't care.’
‘Of course I care, there'd be nobody to sew my buttons on if you were dead.’
We gathered my scattered things together and made our way up to Claro leaving dribbles of wet in our wake.
The Watling Street Guard were practising in the field and Otley looked on enviously.
He would have liked to join them as he was tired of being a lurking Briton but his sense of loyalty would not allow him to defect to the other side.
‘Aye aye, does yer mother know yer out?’
‘Can anybody come?’
‘Hey up, how's yer father?’
‘Don't do anything I wouldn't do!’
Off they went raspberrying, guffawing and swearing in between snatches of song, just like the IXth Legion but drier.
‘Any luck at the council offices?’
I asked when they'd gone.
‘Tell you about it after dinner,’ Otley said with a smug smile.
Aunt Bedelia waited anxiously by the garden gate half hidden in the riot of dog roses and bindweed.
The evening sun glowed from the west as brassy as a dinner-gong, throwing long purple shadows across the untidy lawn and into the bushes.
‘We were worried stiff,’ she chided as she bustled us into the kitchen.
‘Had to go and leave my dandelions to look for you, now they've all gone to sleep.’
‘Don't cry, I was coming back again —’ I began to explain.
‘Well, I wasn't to know that, was I?’
A quick bath and a change into one of Elinor's cotton caftans, a blue ribbon to tie up my hair and a dab of powder on my freckles rendered me presentable enough to be fed.
Pandora's Box was switched on and all the world's ills rushed out at us as we ate our cheese and dandelion flan and chips.
‘Where's Elinor?’
I asked as I spooned a gob of whipped cream over my gooseberry pie.
It seemed she was up at the Jubilee Tower practising the tango with Nigel and they would be down shortly with the papers.
‘The papers?’
‘We did a Watergate,’ Otley explained, ‘only in our case it was a Boilermakers Union Housegate, the old union headquarters.
Cyril Gibbs says the council dumped a lot of stuff there that they hadn't room for in the new building.’
‘What have they got in there?’
Bedelia inquired.
‘Don't know what it's like inside but it's as black as the ace of spades outside.’
‘Old drawers and boxes full of dusty papers going back years, anything Jeremiah Scrape wanted to keep hold of, and he's got the key.’
‘What's he keep all that stuff for?’
‘In case it comes in handy, you know, like you save bits of string and wrapping paper.’
They had got in through a cellar window at the back and made their way up to a small office on the third landing where, according to Cyril, the sole employee had been there man and boy until he became fossilized and had to be removed feet first from his station.
He had been dead a week before they realized he wasn't breathing.
We were just watching 4 What It's Worth about all those people who go on holiday to the sunny Mediterranean, having booked a sea view, and come back with gastroenteritis from living over the dustbins and now want their money back, when Elinor came running up the garden path closely followed by Nigel.
‘We've got them, we've got them!’ she called excitedly as she burst into the room waving a large manila envelope.
‘Shh!’
Otley said, ‘I want to see whether they get their money back.’
‘Hello there!’
Nigel greeted Otley.
‘How's the Ancient Britons going, done any lurking lately?’
‘To be honest no, lurking's boring and if it's all the same to you, Nigel old boy, lurking's out.’
‘You're not dropping out altogether, are you?
Give it a go.’
‘We're going to march like you.’
‘You can't.
It would be historically inaccurate.’
‘I don't give a toss, I'm not sitting in them wet bushes all day.’
‘I know,’ said Nigel, ‘if you don't want to lurk you can amass.’
‘We're not amassing either, we're marching.’
While Otley and Nigel squared up to each other Elinor emptied the contents of the envelope onto the table: family snaps, letters, postcards belonging to the Chatwins, the coat of arms well in evidence and having the same circlet of tiny flowers as the monogram on Tumbleweed's handkerchief.
‘That's spignel meu, a little mountain flower something like cow parsley,’ Elinor pointed out.
‘It's an interesting story.’
During the Wars of the Roses Roger Chatwin fled to the hills with the infant son of Lord Clifford of Skipton Castle to save the child from certain death at the hands of the Yorkists.
They lived with the shepherds and survived chiefly on mutton cooked with wild herbs, spignel meu they found to be a good substitute for rosemary and the child loved to eat the aniseed-flavoured seedheads.
On the accession of Henry Tudor, the Shepherd Lord, as the young Clifford was known, was given back his lands and his faithful retainer knighted at his request; ‘I am but a simple  man, Your Majesty, and I know not how I should be styled,’ the good servant protested.
At which Lord Clifford whispered into the King's ear and both gave a hearty laugh.
‘I dub thee Sir Roger Chatwin of Spignel Meu,’ the King declared.
‘Ah, isn't that lovely,’ said Aunt Bedelia.
‘I'm not milling about, I'm not lurking and I'm not amassing,’ Otley said vehemently as Nigel pleaded with him yet again.
‘All right, then have it your own way,’ Nigel said resignedly, ‘but we shall need to have different music.’
‘I told you, ‘Viva España’ for the Romans and ‘Any Old Iron’for the Brits.’
‘There's something else in here,’ Elinor said, dipping into the envelope and extracting a Christmas card.
‘That's it, the trump card!’
I said excitedly.
‘We're winning!’
Twenty-Five
The next day we followed my ball of string into the woods to show Tumbleweed our treasure.
It was so beautiful it broke your heart thinking what would happen to it if the developers got their way.
Foxgloves and campion in their pink frills, stitchwort with its little white stars and golden marsh marigold hiding in damp hollows, a dappled canopy in cool shades of green letting in dabs of blue sky, the fresh smell of damp earth warmed by the sun.
‘It'll be like Spaghetti Junction if that Sugden gets a foot in.’
Otley muttered.
He blew his nose and gave his behind a scratch as we picked our way through the lush undergrowth.
I've gone off him since I met Tony but we do share a love of mother earth and I want to see this thing through.
After that I'm making no more promises.
We found Tumbleweed guarding the bog asphodel and writing up his records surrounded by various specimens of damp foliage.
‘We've got the papers and things!’
I said waving the envelope, ‘and your Christmas card's here as well.’
‘How did you get hold of them?’ he asked in disbelief.
‘We did a Watergate,’
‘You mean I did,’ Otley corrected me.
He identified the photographs and was anxious to see the ones at Grindlewood Park.
Yes, that was the card he had given to old Jackdaw to post but he really didn't want all this aggravation, he was happy the way he was.
‘You owe it to the community,’
‘Be a concrete jungle in no time.’
‘They don't care about bog asphodels.’
‘They'll have this wood chopped down for Beanos as soon as you can say market forces.’
‘You're right,’ he replied, clenching his fists.
‘I'm a peaceable man but I'll murder 'em if they come up here with their bulldozers.’
‘That's what we said, isn't it, Otley?’
‘Have you seen Jeremiah Scrape yet?’
Tumbleweed inquired, eager to get things moving now that he had made up his mind.
He would be at the next meeting in the church hall along with Swire Sugden, and were they in for a surprise!
The irate villagers would have the paperwork to back them up this time.
The trust for sale terms drawn up gave the trustees the right to manage the land and an obligation to sell it if it no longer produced a satisfactory income, with the proceeds of the sale going to the beneficiary, the consent of the beneficiary being necessary before the sale could take place.
It was all in legal gobbledegook and took a bit of working out but Lord Chatwin had added some words of his own at the end: ‘If my beloved Spiggy is found everything goes to him and his heirs.’
You don't need a lawyer to explain that.
‘Don't forget to be at the meeting tomorrow then,’ we prompted as we trod carefully on the clumps of dry grass as if they were stepping-stones.
Otley put his arm round my shoulders as we made our way to Claro and began to whisper sweet nothings.
‘You're not a bad old gel, you know.’
I tried not to cringe when he chewed my left ear making a noise like a pig in a trough.
I hope I never go deaf and have to wear a hearing-aid; it will sound like the Atlantic rollers crashing up over the rocks at Land's End.
‘How d'you feel about a second honeymoon?’
Now he's got his arm round where my waist used to be.
It is embarrassing when you've got a spare tyre that keeps protruding between the bottom of your bra and the top of your roll-ons as if you were a snakecharmer with your pet python coiled round your midriff.
‘We can go roller-skating again and Olde Tyme Dancing.’
At this I cowered away from him.
Roller-skating yes, Olde Tyme Dancing no.
Foul-mouthed peasant!
I didn't know where to put my face when he told Cecil Ackroyd to eff off that night in the Temperance Hall.
‘Here's a nice little dell.
Let's have a sit down,’ Otley suggested taking off his camouflage jacket and spreading it out on the grass.
‘There's something I want to see on television,’ I lied.
‘What's that?’
‘Er, um —’ I began.
‘That's just an excuse.
I don't know what I married you for, you've always been frigid — even when Uncle Joe sent that powdered rhino horn from Saudi Arabia.’
He snatched his jacket and put it on again.
‘He got it mixed up with Aunt Isabella's ashes, that's why I wouldn't take it.
I dug it into the roses instead.’
‘You don't care a damn about anybody but yourself.’
‘I do, I love you.
I just don't want you to touch me, that's all!’
I screamed at him as I ran off through the woods.
‘I don't know what's got into you, May,’ he shouted, shaking his fist in the air as he set off in pursuit.
‘Buzz off!’
I hollered, I shall leave him as soon as we've got this business sorted out.
I'm not going back to Low Riding, I don't care how filthy the oven is.
We avoided each other all evening until it was time for the Open University programmes.
Then Aunt Bedelia made some cocoa and managed to draw us into conversation.
It was a programme about evaluations and the learned gentleman posed the question: ‘Would you rather live for five years with two legs or twenty-five years with one leg?’
It was something we had not thought about hitherto; it just shows how ignorant we are.
‘How many legs would you like, Otley?’
Aunt Bedelia inquired.
‘I'd like to live a hundred years with the ones I've got now,’ he said.
‘What about you, May?’
‘I'd like to live twenty-five years with ten legs or two hundred and fifty years with one leg.’
‘I'd settle for a few years with four legs like a cheetah and be able to go at forty miles an hour,’ Otley declared.
‘And wouldn't it be fun having three legs and being able to go round in a circle like the Isle of Man flag?’
‘It's interesting, isn't it?’ said Aunt Bedelia, ‘I wouldn't mind doing a degree in legs myself because mine are giving me gyp these days.’
It is feared in some quarters that television destroys family life but with us it's the Opposite way round.
We held hands all the way through Live Aid , having not spoken to each other for a week, and then rushed off to the Post Office as soon as we could with our three pounds.
Once, I was waiting at the bus stop one Sunday with my bags packed ready to  go to Sheffield when Otley came running up: ‘Don't you want to see Fragile Earth ?
They're chopping down the rain forests.’
‘Bastards’ I said hurrying back home.
It is without television that our family life would be destroyed.
We all squeezed into the church hall the following afternoon for a final showdown with Swire Sugden, the lads from the nail factory in a belligerent mood as they had just downed tools in protest against their foreman using bad language.
‘Who the bloody 'ell does he think he is, bleedin' ‘Itler?’
Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke and Elinor took their places on the platform with Jeremiah Scrape and Swire Sugden, who appeared to be in a hurry and frequently consulted his watch.
Apologies for absence, minutes of the previous meeting, agenda, jokes and folksy parables bored one and all for the first half-hour.
‘Get on with it!’
‘I've got a bus to catch!’
‘We don't want to be 'ere all night!’
Swire Sugden spoke first, natty in his Mafia-type suit and blue chins vibrating with barely suppressed anger.
He wanted to bring us into the twenty-first century.
Claro had been a backwater for long enough.
Conservation was all right but when did it lapse into deterioration?
One day we would all be washed away when the bridge fell in.
‘That bridge has got concrete cancer,’ he warned, ‘and if something isn't done soon there's going to be a disaster.’
There was much hilarity at this and requests to mend the bridge.
‘No, it's part of the package.
All or nothing,’ he replied.
‘The bridge is the council's responsibility.
I'll repair it as a favour if my plans go through.’
‘We don't want a holiday camp here.’
‘It'll be Scandinavian chalets, very high class, with saunas and smorgasbord in the buffet.’
‘Oh, la-di-da!’
‘Me and my Susie go walkies down there,’ said Mrs Cawthorne, prodding her guide dog with her white stick.
‘She's not bothered about saunas..
‘It's a right of way!’ came a chorus of protest.
‘You'll have access’ Sugden explained.
‘In fact’ Jeremiah Scrape broke in ‘there's no such right of way in the definitive map.’
‘You all know,’ Jeremiah went on, ‘that under the terms of the trust that we are required to manage the land and sell when it's no longer profitable.
We have come to that stage now and the council has reached the conclusion that Mr Sugden's proposition is the best on offer and we have no hesitation in recommending it to you.’
He buried his nose in a large air-force blue handkerchief and searched among his papers.
Swire Sugden looked at his watch and glanced out of the window as if he was expecting something.
‘How do we know you're telling the truth?’
‘It should be here,’ said Jeremiah, ‘it's been locked safely away these thirty years or more.’
We sat holding our breath in the front row.
We knew what he was looking for and it wasn't there.
It was Elinor's turn now.
She rose to her feet with her eyes blazing and walked to the centre of the stage.
‘Is this what you want?’ she asked, waving the envelope under his nose.
‘Give me it back,’ he said crossly as his face drained of colour.
‘You've no right to it, thieving hounds.’
‘Friends,’ she continued turning her back on him, ‘by a miracle the settlement has fallen into our hands and I can tell you that the late Lord Chatwin left everything to his son and heir.’
‘Where is he though?’
‘Fellow countrypersons, let me present to you Lord Chatwin of Spignel Meu, guardian of our heritage — Tumbleweed.’
Tumbleweed stood up and self-consciously acknowledged the cheers, sitting down again quickly.
He would clearly rather have been bogwatching.
Swire Sugden leaned over to whisper in Jeremiah's ear and then banged on the table for order.
‘This is all most irregular and we shall be consulting our legal advisers,’ Jeremiah Scrape announced.
‘You've not heard the last of this,’ Swire Sugden threatened as he stormed out of the church hall.
‘Ladies and gentlemen, this will be our last meeting before the big day and I want to thank you all for your co-operation,’ Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke  shouted above the noise.
‘We still need volunteers.
Some of you are still without your costumes so if you could all go down to the municipal tip and see if you can flush out any dustbin lids it would be a great help.’
‘What do you think they're going to do?’
Elinor inquired, nodding in the direction of the disappearing enemy.
‘Just keep a tight hold on those documents,’ Otley advised her.
‘Possession is nine points of the law.’
I could envisage a long-drawn-out court case with us all ending up homeless and bankrupt, sleeping in cardboard boxes and begging for crumbs from the rich man's Scandinavian table, and I don't like raw herrings, yuk!
‘I put it to you,’ some old goat would bleat from under his wig, ‘that these scheming, unprincipled charlatans, stopping at nothing to come by their ill-gotten gains, forged the very hand of a peer of the realm in a dastardly conspiracy to frustrate the worthy efforts of their local benefactor.’
‘Don't call me a charlatan, you miserable old creep,’ Otley would explode.
‘Take him down!’ the old fossil would splutter in a cloud of dust.
Come to think of it, I could go to Bowness-on-Windermere till he was released.
It might not be so bad after all.
Tumbleweed had vanished leaving a bundle of pondweed under his chair but everybody else seemed reluctant to go and we stood about in groups while Aunt Bedelia and the ladies of the WI handed round cups of tea.
‘Would you believe it!’
They'll be finding Lord Lucan next!’
‘They say he's in Australia disguised as a kangaroo.’
Suddenly the church bells started ringing ‘Oranges and Lemons’!
They were playing our tune, but wait a minute, they've never played that in Claro before.
What could it mean?
‘Quick, it must be the warning,’ Otley shouted.
‘Everybody out.’
We all rushed outside to find the bulldozers and an electric saw making for our oak tree.
Swire Sugden sat smirking in his black Mercedes with two of his heavy mob standing by.
‘Surround the tree and link arms,’ Otley ordered.
‘Elinor, you go home with the papers.
We don't want anything to happen to them.’
We got to the tree before the bulldozers but the electric saw was perilously close.
‘Go on, saw us in half then,’ I said recklessly as the young man came nearer.
He was a pleasant chap with blond curls and a Mickey Mouse tee shirt on.
Just shows you can't go by appearances.
I should have kept my mouth shut because he manoeuvred his machine until it was touching my midriff.
Thank goodness for my spare tyre, I can afford to lose a bit of that.
I shut my eyes.
‘Does yer mother know yer out?’ shouted one of the lads and then all at once they charged at him and manhandled him to the ground.
I felt at the torn threads in my blouse and looked at the grazed skin underneath and shuddered, but I was all right and so was the tree.
‘You stupid nit,’ Otley scolded.
‘This isn't The Paul Daniels Magic Show where they get up and walk away.’
The bulldozers had turned round now and were heading for the bridge.
It looked as if we had won this initial bout but men like Swire Sugden don't give up that easily.
He drove up to us and wound the window down.
‘Just you wait,’ he said, ‘I'll get you buggers.’
He was a handsome chap in a sinister sort of way, Al Caponish with a dash of Dracula and a smidgen of Rambo thrown in, but he spoils himself being so nasty.
When they were well out of the way we made tracks for home and I looked forward to a quiet evening.
A bite to eat, some relaxing television, an hour with Dorothy Wordsworth and so to bed.
‘Coming down the pub for a little aperitif?’
Otley inquired.
‘I've got my dandelion wine.’
I reminded him and he went out banging the door behind him.
Oh well, I can go and see Tony now.
I left Bedelia watching the box and climbed wearily up the rickety stairs.
I took a swig of wine and collapsed on to the bed fully dressed.
The Roman army's a greedy lot,
Stuck their fingers in the old jam pot,
I tiddly-i-ty
Pom pom.
It's only the ragamuffins chasing Caesar down the Fosse Way.
I don't know where Tony's got to.
He said he was coming for some gnocchi tonight.
Might as well write my letters.
At the Villa Claro AD 60 Dear Buddy,
No, the Romans are not blind, they'll see you coming if you go charging down to Colchester, go round the back and sneak up on them.
Them funny statues they make with no eyes in and titchy little things are so we won't know what they're really like.
know what I mean?
My people have just finished their knitting and a thousand dishcloths are on their way to you.
Do use them for mopping up the blood on the new road.
That dalmatica that Tony sent is for you to wear, it's not a pudding cloth for making spotted dick in.
Nutty's gone up north for more smelly Brits but I'm not leaving my lovely villa and my roses so it's civil war.
He's abducted me six times and Nero had to send the lads to rescue me.
Fancy the governor turning up after all this time!
Did you say he was on his way to Mesopotamia?
Give him a new head if you can't find any legs to fit.
He sounds a bit miffed, you'll have to put him in your other saddle-bag to keep your husband company that's all.
Men! they're never satisfied!
Nero sends his luv, you know he's coming over here to give us a turn this winter.
He says will you show him how to make a snowman?
All my luv, Carrie Brigantum
They've gone now and it's nice and peaceful just lying here doing nothing.
How I wish all this was over and I could get back to my humdrum routine.
But a promise is a promise and we have to pursue this thing to the bitter end.
Otley, I know, will never give up.
He's forgotten what it is to sit and hold hands among the buttercups.
A miracle is called for, but miracles do happen and we just need to find the villa, that's all.
Twenty-Six
‘It's time we had a talk,’ Otley said the next morning.
‘What about?’
I asked as I stirred up the tea-bags.
‘I'm not giving you a divorce so you needn't think I am.’
‘I don't want a divorce.’
‘Well, what do you want then?’
‘I just want to be able to do what I like.’
‘as if you were a person?’
‘Yes.’
‘What d'you mean, do what you like?’
We've had this conversation so many times.
I mean like royalty do, pretend to be married but do their own thing on the quiet.
Take Henry I, for example, the king who never smiled again, our teacher told us, after he had lost his only son and heir, in the White Ship: then they found he had twenty-four little baskets scattered all round the country.
All I want to do is read Dorothy Wordsworth's Journals instead of cleaning the oven, then pop over to see Tony now and again.
‘We can still be friends,’ I explained, ‘and I'll co-operate on all ecological projects of this nature.’
‘Oh, thank you very much!’
‘The planet comes first and we really must subordinate our own basic urges to the greater good of all mankind.’
‘What's that supposed to mean?’
‘That burns up too much of our energy.
It won't make any difference, I still care for you as a very dear friend and human being.’
‘You mean like Heloise cared for Abelard when he had his balls cut off?
Blow that for a lark!’
He always has to go and lower the tone of a conversation.
It was his idea in the first place to try celibacy when the Hare Krishna lot came  round ten years ago with their gongs.
Now I've got used to it he's changed his mind.
I helped Aunt Bedelia to clear the breakfast things away and get her dandelions ready.
I had lost my heart to the little, golden flowers that brightened the meadows like a thousand suns.
Unwelcomed, unwanted, despised and dug out, they had added a new dimension to my life, given me another self and I wanted never to go from Claro.
Suddenly there was a commotion outside as Nigel and Elinor hurtled up the garden path and through the front door.
‘They've been in the night and dug it up!’
Elinor panted.
‘Who has?’
‘Them, the bulldozers.
They've gone over the excavations and into the meadow —‘
‘We've not been down there yet,’ said Nigel, ‘but we can see from the tower.’
We tore after them down the hill, nimble-looted Elinor and Nigel in their jogging suits, Otley in his army camouflage, myself in old faded jeans and Aunt Bedelia puffing behind in a blue and white apron and still holding the tea-towel.
‘I don't believe it!’
Nigel exclaimed.
‘Look what they've unearthed!’
‘I told you, it's my villa!’
‘Don't start that nonsense again or they'll carry you off to the funny farm,’ Otley said wearily.
‘Look, there's the dining-room with the tiled floor.
It's got crabs and fish and ducks, and that scorch mark is where Nutty set fire to Tony's hat.’
‘Give over.’
We climbed down into the massive hole to get a closer look.
Part of a wall painting here, a bit of a fresco there.
Corridors, ante-rooms, kitchen, a flue still intact, a corner of the verandah and traces of the garden path down to the river.
‘It's impossible,’ said Nigel, ‘there can't be a villa here.’
‘I knew she was on this wavelength,’ Elinor said excitedly, ‘I believed her right from the start.’
‘We'll get the council here.
When they see it they'll stop any development,’ Nigel said, turning some knuckle-bones over in his hands.
‘Buddy sent us those,’ I told him, ‘for my birthday in AD 57.’
‘Well I never!’
Bedelia said.
‘You don't look that old.’
It was such an important discovery that the Mayor and Corporation were persuaded to inspect it the following afternoon and the whole village turned out to wait for them.
If all else failed I would have to write to the Pope.
Dear Pontiff,
I appeal to you as an honorary Roman to nip over here in your Popemobile and put a stop to this wanton destruction.
You know the Goths and Vandals you had a while back.?
Well we've got them here now and they're after building a den of iniquity on top of your Imperial Roman artefacts.
I know you like hiking because I saw a photo of you in your little bum-freezers, so we'll take you up on the moors and then call at Harry Ramsden's for some fish ‘n’ chips.
It'll be a change from going round blessing everybody.
Well Karol I have to go now, see you on the balcony at Easter and watch out for those pigeons. kind regards to the papal dunces.
Your obedient vassal, Madonna Craven
PS If you can't get over yourself can you send Maradona? he'd be a handy chap to have around.
‘Quick, they're coming!’
Otley shouted as he raced towards the bridge.
I did my best to catch up — if only I were Flo-jo.
A procession of blackclad dignitaries streamed down the road like a column of soldier ants and came to a halt on the bridge.
Then there was a crunching and a snapping sound as the bridge crumbled and deposited its burden into the fast-flowing Wharfe.
The Mayor and Corporation flapped about like mud skippers and some were swirled round by the eddies and then flung on to sprawling tree roots where they hung about like wet washing.
We couldn't help laughing.
‘Oh dear!’ said Aunt Bedelia, wiping her eyes on the tea-towel.
‘Don't they look comical in their best suits an' all.’
Always ready for a dip I leapt into the water and grabbed hold of an elderly lady with neat little curls and bifocals on the end of her nose.
I pulled her to the side where Otley dragged her up the bank and began to dust her down as if she were not wet but dirty.
‘Come on in,’ I called, ‘the water's lovely.’
Suddenly the river was full of plunging bodies going to the rescue, barking dogs and screaming girls mingling their cries with the masterful ones of the menfolk.
‘Let go of his tie, Shirley, you'll strangle him!’
‘I'm drowning, Darren.
I've got my foot trapped under a lump of concrete!’
‘Well, let go of his tie and grab hold of his ears!’
I could have sworn I caught a glimpse of Swire Sugden through the haze on the opposite side.
He seemed to be smiling and then he was gone.
The Mayor was struggling to free his chain of office from the overhanging branch of a fragile alder.
Any second now it would break and throw him back into the river.
Otley and I held on to him while Nigel searched for a large piece of wood to haul him out with, and in the meantime we had a close-up of the lush vegetation of the riverside: buttercups, forget-me-nots, dog roses and honeysuckle and the shy little water avens modestly hiding its peach-coloured face.
‘Well, I never knew there was such a thing,’ the Mayor spluttered.
‘Quick, there's a kingfisher!’
Otley said excitedly.
‘Where?’
‘Too late you've missed it.’
‘I can smell aniseed balls,’ the Mayor exclaimed.
‘It's a long time since I had any of those.’
‘That's the sweet cicely,’ I said, pointing out the clumps of lacy white florets and feathery leaves.
‘I've lost touch with mother nature these days.’
‘I expect you only know about rateable values an' that.’
‘Yes,’ he sighed.
When Nigel came back he lay down on his stomach and held out a big stick which the Mayor clutched and Otley and I pushed him from the back until we got him out none the worse for his adventure.
‘I quite enjoyed that,’ he said.
Somebody had lit a bonfire and we sat round it chatting until we had dried our clothes.
There were some bruised shins and sprained ankles, black eyes and a few cuts and grazes but nothing you wouldn't get on a rugby field, although a couple of old ladies were taken off home by ambulance with attacks of the vapours.
‘Now then,’ the Mayor said, ‘where's this Roman villa?’
We led the bedraggled procession through the meadow and up to the dig where Nigel's mature students were hard at work sifting, sorting and  cataloguing.
We tumbled down into the hole like so many Alices and gazed in wonder around us.
Jet beads, bone needles and pins and spoons, bronze horse-trappings and a tile of the IXth Legion lay on a stone table with a collection of coins and a few pieces of gold jewellery.
‘Of course, this villa has no right to be here,’ Nigel told them, ‘but since it is we must save it for future generations to enjoy.’
‘Have you found any skeletons?’ asked one of the lads from the nail factory.
‘Sir Mortimer Wheeler found one with a spear in his back.’
‘Not yet.’
‘Who lived here then?’
‘Mrs Craven can tell you more about it,’ Nigel went on.
‘She is a sensitive and claims to be able to regress to the Roman era.’
‘Don't say anything,’ Otley whispered, ‘they'll think you're mad.’
‘It was built by the Romans for our Yorkshire lass Cartimandua —‘
‘Shh!’
‘She traded with them in an attempt to bring some prosperity to the region —‘
‘May, shut up.’
‘But Venutius opposed her and civil war broke out with husband and wife leading the warring factions.’
‘We know all that, don't we?’ came a voice from the back.
‘You didn't know he was a drunken sot who beat her up on a Saturday night, did you?’
I blurted out.
‘And you didn't know he gave all her housekeeping money to the Druids —‘
‘You'll have to excuse my wife, she's not very well,’ Otley broke in.
‘This is all very interestin',’ said the Mayor, ‘but I can't say one way or t'other, it'll have to be discussed in council and there's yon bridge to be seen to now.
I understand that Mr Sugden's going to law about it.’
‘It could drag on for months,’ I protested, ‘years even.’
He shrugged his shoulders and clambered out of the hole with his retinue following on behind.
They brushed themselves down and advanced towards the bridge then came to a sudden stop.
‘Nah then, how are we goin' to get across this bloody river?’ the Mayor inquired.
It looked as if we had painted ourselves into a corner and I was on the verge of giving up and going home when Jake trundled up with his totter's cart and his little skewbald pony.
I didn't know he was interested in ancient history.
It was like a scene from the French Revolution with the gypsy ruffian and a bog-ridden Tumbleweed perched at the front and Swire Sugden trussed like an oven-ready chicken at the back, his hair singed, his face streaked with smut and his natty gents' suiting in disarray.
‘Whoa there, lass,’ said Jake as they came to a halt.
‘Oi!
Over here!
Old Sugden's got something to say to you lot.’
The Mayor and Corporation made their way back and grouped themselves round the cart, glad that somebody else was making the decisions.
Mr Sugden got to his feet when his bonds were cut and straightened his tie before he spoke.
‘I'm withdrawing my plans and will not he taking legal proceedings after all.
Lord Chatwin 'ere has the whiphand, an' I'm not throwing good money after bad, that's all I've got to say.’
‘Now Lord Chatwin wants a word,’ Jake said, giving him a nudge.
‘I'm prepared to sell to Mr Sugden if he agrees to my conditions.’
‘And what are they?’ asked Sugden, interested in spite of himself.
‘That you rebuild the villa as a health farm and hydro, we recognize the need to brine money to the area; establish a nature trail with two rangers, me and Jake, and you can have your holiday village if you reconstruct the marching camp and put some huts up there with thatched roofs like an old British hill fort.’
‘It's worth thinking about.’
‘And there's one other thing,’ Tumbleweed said, addressing the Mayor, ‘the gypsies want a proper site with lavatories and rubbish collection.’
‘You can say that again,’ came a voice from the crowd.
‘It'll have to go before t’ planning committee,’the Mayor said, ‘but as you're all in agreement I'll do what I can.’
Jake ferried them across the ford on his cart with horse and master enjoying a paddle.
Cries of ‘and don't forget the bridge’ pursued Swire Sugden as he wended his way home.
‘Well done!’
I said when Jake came back.
‘You must have thrown the book at him, getting him to change his mind like that.’
‘There's times when you have to take the law into your own hands,’ Tumbleweed laughed, ‘nothing to do with books.’
‘Aye,’ said Jake, ‘I swore I'd get him one day — I strung 'im up yon old oak and lit a bonfire under 'im.’
What a happy band we were that evening.
Now we could prepare for the Jubilee without a car& in the world.
Nigel and Elinor practised the tango to work up some more passion.
Bomp, bomp, bomp, bomp — dip — tara, ra, ra, ra.
She had her bodystocking on again; I don't know what Napoleon would say.
They are to attend the banquet as Antony and Cleopatra and hoped to outdo Taylor and Burton.
Aunt Bedelia and I were trying to watch Brookside , but it was an impossible mix, like tripe and onions with Bolognese sauce, so when Otley went down to the pub to see the lads I strolled down to the villa.
My beautiful villa — when it has been built I shall take my holidays there, no airport delays and no traffic jams, just taking tea with my little finger up and Dorothy Wordsworth on my lap.
I shall tell Otley I'm in Majorca.
After walking round the dining-room with my memories I sat down at the stone table.
It was here that Tony gave me my ring and told me that my funghi marinati was the best he'd ever had in spite of him getting an earful of it.
Here's the chap on the white horse again, he never loses his feathers.
Something seems to have upset him.
‘That man in the Third Gauls, get a move on!
Just because you eat blasted snails doesn't mean you've got to behave like one!’
Here's the cavalry behind him, he's having a go at them now.
‘First Thracian archers, halt!
How many times have I told you to dismount before letting go of your arrows?
My hat's like a flamin, pin-cushion.’
At the Villa Claro AD 60 Dear Nero,
A thousand salutes 0 Caesar and may Jupiter smile on you at the Neronian Games.
It can't be easy playing the lyre, singing, dancing and doing handstands simultaneously in the chariot race, and yes I do think it wise to have an enema the night before.
There's a ship load of dishcloths coming over COD, with a little bit of imagination they can be transformed into fig-leaves.
I couldn't get Nutty to wear that flowered frock you gave him, he's dead ignorant and I wish you'd send the lads to sort him out again.
Oh, by the way, we've got another one of your statues with no eyes in and everybody's saying it's made you go blind, know what I mean? take no notice luv they're only jealous.
It's unfortunate your big end's gone just as we've run out of lanolin, will axle grease do?
Tony and I plan to marry when all this is sorted out and he has promised me Nutty's head for a garden ornament, he says it will be very effective with parsley sprouting from its orifices.
What a good idea to build us a new housing estate so that we can pay property tax!
We haven't quite got the hang of it, square houses and straight roads, with our little round huts and coracles we can only go round in circles.
Luv to all down there in the Eternal City and be assured I turn a deaf ear to the rumours that it is a cesspit.
Your faithful ally, Carrie Brigantum
PS Hopping across Africa reciting the Iliad is a gutsy thing to do.
The scene faded and I lay there in a limbo land between that world and this.
My eyes began to flicker open as a hand grasped my shoulder.
‘May, wake up, it's raining!’
Otley said as he helped me to my feet.
‘Oh, my head!’
I moaned.
He hauled me up from the bowels of the villa, took off his jacket and placed it tenderly round my shoulders.
He needn't think I'm going roller-skating.
‘It's all over now.
You've proved your point,’ Otley went on.
‘No need for any more of this nonsense.’
‘It's a part of my life, and I'm never going to give it up,’ I said as we hurried up through the copse.
‘You won't have time for all this stuff when we get home again, what with the oven to clean and everything,’ he persisted.
‘I can do my regressing when you go fishing,’ I suggested.
‘Fair enough,’ he said.
Later on, after a warm bath and enveloped in one of Aunt Bedelia's flannelette nightgowns, I began to relax and look forward to the Jubilee.
Otley made me some hot milk and honey and helped himself to a cheese and pickle sandwich and a mug of strong coffee.
He has a cast-iron stomach.
‘Are you all right down there?’
Aunt Bedelia called.
‘Yes, thank you, Aunt Bedelia,’ I said.
‘You needn't say ‘Aunt Bedelia’ every time,’Otley reminded me.
‘Like a tiny tot; you're grown up now.’
‘I told you, I'm going down again.
It's more fun,’ I said.
‘You're still my May!’
Otley said, holding me close and nibbling my  ear in a way that drives me wild.
My hand shook, spilling my hot milk all down my flannelette frills, and before long they were lying in a heap at my feet.
I think I'm going to lose my virginity again for the jubilee.
Twenty-Seven
Jubilee day dawned with little puffs of warm air carrying the dandelion clocks hither and thither and turning the leaves on the trees inside out.‘It's going to rain,’ said Otley, trying his hearth rug on and picking up his dustbin lid.
‘How do I look?’
He had a rubber knife and cudgel and a hairy chest from the joke shop but something was not quite right.
‘It's your bald head!’ squealed Aunt Bedelia.
When he was fitted with one of Elinor's wigs he was more the part.
‘You'd never get a bald Ancient Briton, would you?’ she said.
‘That's because they didn't live long enough,’ he explained.
I wore the shantung tea-gown and a gold circlet round my forehead to make it clear that I'm the Queen.
‘She didn't dress like that,’ Otley protested.
‘She wore winter woollies and moth-eaten old rabbit skins.’
‘Nero sent me them.’
‘Look, May,’ he said, ‘if you're not careful you'll end up at the funny farm the way you're going on.’
‘So what!’
‘What would you rather do, watch colour television with me or an old black and white set with the Monster Raving Loony Party?’
‘I'd rather go to bed and read.’
Elinor was stunning as the Queen of the Nile, her long black hair smoothed out with wet-look gel, a gold and green silk robe and chunky turquoise earrings and bangles from Star of the East down the market; and how handsome was Nigel in his mini-skirt, feathers and horse brasses.
Children and dogs followed them wherever they ventured.
We helped Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke and the WI set out their stalls  with goodies.
Some members were dressed as native Britons and others as Roman matrons.
‘No orgies now!’ cautioned the honourable lady.
The meadow began to mushroom with tents and huts and the street theatre erupted into an explosion of living history, the performers flinging themselves to the ground and then leaping into the air as and when the idea occurred and making funny faces all the while.
A steady stream of sightseers made their way along the river to see the villa where they were shown round by the WEA class decked out as praetorian guards and vestal virgins.
Now here's Mike with Jilly's Jazz Band.
They might have made an effort to get the right costumes.
Parti-coloured hose with cap and bells were not worn until the Middle Ages, and, fetching though Jilly's wimple is, she's going to get caught up in the blackberry bushes before the day is out.
I must have a word with them.
‘Hello, Mike!
Yoohoo!’
He's not seen me, they've gone straight past, he has not yet come to terms with the fact that his mummy's a queen.
I've got to go on the gate now so I haven't time to run after them.
There's the Watling Street Guard lads — I think they're all there: Judd, Jack, Freddie, Bob, Mickey, Jimmy, Ted, Gordon, Chas and Harry.
‘Oi oi, can anybody come?’
‘Left right, left right!’
‘Cor, look at that!’
‘Does yer mother know yer out?’
‘Gerremoff!’
They've marched straight into the vestal virgins' changing tent.
‘Aye aye, don't do anything I wouldn't do!’
‘Come up an' see me sometime.’
‘Oo-la-la!’
There's a bus pulling up at the stop proclaiming ‘Lightwater Valley, Soopa Loopa’.
I hope they won't be too disappointed when they get off.
‘This isn't Lightwater Valley,’ came an aggrieved voice.
‘We don't go to Lightwater Valley,’ said an equally affronted bus driver.
‘All change!’
‘What's this ticket for then?’
‘That's a Metro Saverstrip.
You can go anywhere with that.’
‘I know, but we didn't want to come here.’
‘I wanna ride on the Soopa Loopa,’ sobbed a little boy, tugging at his mother's skirt.
‘Shut yer racket, Jason, or yer can't watch that man with the big fat belly on Sumo .’
‘Where's Michael Jackson?’ a toddler screamed in the mêlée.
‘Where can I go with this then?’
‘That's a NightRider.
Can't use it during the day.’
‘And this?’
‘You can go as far as Burnley if you're old or disabled.’
‘I don't want to go to Burnley.’
The besieged driver revved up his engine in a threatening manner and berated his passengers.
I'm not waiting all day for you to make your minds up.
Either get off here or stay on and go back home again.’
Suddenly they all surged towards me and flung their coins into the canvas sheet I was guarding and one old codger decided to go home.
‘We can have a paddle,’ somebody said.
‘I wanna go on the Soopa Loopa,’ little Jason wailed.
‘Shurrup!’ his mother said, giving his behind a whack.
There would be the ox-roasting at midday and then a demonstration of marching by the lads followed by skirmishing with the Ancient Britons.
I had not seen Otley for some time and climbed up on the wall for a better view.
Already there was the smell of roast beef and the white-coated cooks stood by with their carving knives waiting to hack the poor beast up and put him between a thousand Yorkshire teacakes.
The scene lay before me like the field of a medieval tourney: banners and bunting and ladies in jewel-bright colours.
Jake and Tumbleweed led a group of ecologically aware senior citizens up to the bog, taking the newly established nature trail through the woods.
A queue had formed by the table holding the teacakes and a crowd gathered to watch the animal sacrifice slowly rotating on a giant spit.
That looks like Otley standing behind the teacakes.
I'll go over and have a word with him.
I pushed my way through the munching hordes, ice-cream, gingerbread men, toffee apples and potato crisps parted to let me pass.
Jilly's Jazz Band trod the riverside path playing ‘My Old Man's a Dustman’ and pursued by barking dogs.
I waved but they took no notice.
‘Would you like some help?’
I asked as Otley and his supervisor, Mr Hawksworth, began slicing up the teacakes.
‘You can put the mustard on,’ said Mr Hawksworth putting an economy size container in front of me.
‘Can I put it on the teacakes?’
‘No, you put it on the meat.’
‘I don't eat meat, I shall be sick.’
‘Well, you asked if you could help.’
‘I didn't know I had to put it on the meat —’
‘You'll have to excuse my wife, she's not well,’ Otley broke in.
Soon the carvers were busy and the mound of teacakes began to go down, but not everyone was pleased with what they were given.
‘Can I have horseradish sauce instead?’
‘Where d'you think you are, the Ritz?’
‘Haven't you got any HP sauce?’
‘No, we haven't got any HP sauce, this isn't Tesco's.’
‘Mum always puts tomato ketchup on.’
‘Well you'd better go home then and get your tomato ketchup.’
‘Oh dear!
I prefer salad with mine.’
‘There's plenty o' rabbit food round here, help yourself.’
‘I never eat white bread.
Haven't you got any stoneground wholemeal teacakes?’ inquired a health-conscious optimist.
‘You should 'ave brought yer own, shouldn't yer?’
After an hour or two of observing the various shapes and sizes of mouths crammed with teacake the novelty began to wear off and I felt a bilious attack coming on.
‘Sit down, I'll get you a cup of tea,’ said Otley.
When he came back we sat down on the grass and had a breather while Mr Sykes, the butcher, and his assistants went on carving.
I averted my eyes.
‘That looks like Jeremiah Scrape,’ Otley said.
‘What's he up to?’
I looked in the direction he was pointing — Roman villa, vestal virgins' tent, WI stalls with Aunt Bedelia and Mrs Cartwright frantically buttering and jamming home-made scones, street theatre, Punch and Judy, and there's old Jeremiah just passing the jazz band with his fingers in his ears.
He seems to be heading this way.
I hope Swire Sugden hasn't changed his mind.
‘Make out we haven't seen him,’ Otley said as he pretended to be searching for something in the grass.
Jeremiah was wearing his pin-stripes with the seat shiny from decades of polishing the council furniture with his bottom.
He blew his inquisitive  nose on a large handkerchief and produced a notebook and pencil which he pointed at the butcher.
‘Nah then Mr Sykes,’ he said officiously.
‘You didn't get a permit for this, did you?’
‘For what?’
‘For cutting animals up and disposing of them in a public place.’
‘I'm not disposing of it, we're eating it.’
‘Same thing as far as council's concerned,’ Jeremiah said, writing in his book.
‘We've always done ox-roasting — my father and grandfather before me — anybody can tell you.’
‘Council's turned a blind eye to it previously but I'm in charge now and I'm booking you under the Fireworks and Public Entertainments byelaw.’
‘What you on about?
We haven't got any fireworks.’
Strewing guts about is the same as letting squibs off in a public venue, all comes under Fireworks byelaw.’
‘I'm not strewin' guts about,’ Mr Sykes protested.
‘What's all that offal and stuff in your dustbin then?’
Jeremiah countered.
‘Refuse collectors reported it.’
‘Well, you don't think I'm going to keep it in the fridge, do you?’
‘No, but you left it out in the street.’
‘It's my dustbin, isn't it?’
‘Causing a stink on the Queen's highway,’ said Jeremiah, riffling through the pages of his book, ‘an offence against society.’
‘Sod off,’ Mr Sykes exploded, ‘you bat-faced old creep.’
‘Yeah!’ came a chorus of voices and suddenly Jeremiah Scrape was manhandled down to the river and thrown in, notebook and all.
When he struggled out he espied a happy couple engaged in skinny-dipping in the shelter of an overhanging sycamore and went on his way muttering something like ‘without the benefit of suitable drawers’.
‘This way for the skirmishing!’
Mr Ridgeway called.
‘We're on, we're on!’
Otley cried as the Ancient Britons and the Watling Street Guard assembled to receive their marching orders.
‘Oi, oi, how's yer father?’
Jostling, raspberrying and treading on each other 's toes, they crowded round their officer to hear what he had to say.
‘Romans line up at the camp and Brits over there in the woods,’ Nigel instructed.
‘And we all converge down in the meadow where the skirmishing will take place.
Jazz band will split up into two so both sides have got musical support.’
‘We're not lurking!’
‘Nobody'll see us.’
‘Fair's fair!’
I found myself a nice bit of grass with a backrest against a tree trunk and waited for the show to begin.
The crowd began to gather.
‘I wanna go on the Soopa Loopa,’ hollered little Jason.
‘Shut yer gob, the Romans are comin',’ his mummy said, thrusting an orange drink-on-a-stick into his gaping mouth.
Presently the Watling Street Guard came over the hill to the strains of ‘Viva España’ and soon we were all singing away.
‘Tarra, rah, Espana.’
Tramp, tramp, tramp.
Jilly and the band in mini-skirts and sandals led the patrol, Nigel came next wearing a fireman's helmet and carrying a stuffed bird on a stick, then the lads in a variety of truncated nightgowns and horse brasses jangled their way down the hill.
The band had done a quick change!
Soon the marching changed to slithering as the patrol hit a scree that propelled them forward as if they were on ball-bearings and they came tumbling headlong to the bottom.
‘Watling Street Guard, halt!’
Nigel shouted frantically.
The musicians were knocked over like a row of skittles and all came to rest higgledy-piggledy as they were stopped in their tracks by a magnificent horse chestnut tree.
‘As you know,’ said Nigel, with great presence of mind, ‘the Romans introduced the chestnut into Britain — not this one, though, it was the other one.’
‘Which one?’
‘The sweet chestnut.
They ground the nuts into flour.’
‘Didn't the Roman army use conkers in their catapults?’
‘No,’ said Nigel, ‘they used boulders in their ballistas.’
While the Romans were dusting themselves down and rearranging their feathers and mini-skirts, the lurking Brits emerged from the woods  and advanced in a rabble brandishing their rolling pins.
A great cheer went up from the crowd as Otley approached daubed with my blue eye shadow and making threatening gestures in the direction of the enemy.
‘Erewiggo, erewiggo, erewiggo,’ chanted the yobs.
‘I thought we were marching, not lurking,’ the lads complained.
‘Get stuck in!’
‘Never mind abaht the fancy stuff!’
‘Away the lads!’
Otley called as he charged at the Romans.
What a racket ensued!
Catcalls and guffaws from the spectators, battle-cries from the combatants and a clashing of dustbin lids together with the strains of ‘Any Old Iron’ and ‘Viva España’.
Then when it was realized that things had taken a turn for the worse and somebody was going to get killed the vicar stepped in and bought them all ice-creams.
Girls gathered round the Watling Street Guard demanding their torn mini-skirts back and a little posse of skinheads formed in front of the Brits shouting: ‘Give 'em a knuckle samwidge, mate,’‘Yeah, put the boot in’.
I felt a migraine coming on and made my way to the villa for some peace and quiet.
I kept waving to Mike but he took no notice, and if I hang about here Otley will only ask me to fetch him a slice of ox and then I shall be sick.
The vestal virgins had gone for a tea break and I sat down thankfully in the cool of the ruins and closed my eyes.
I'm going paddling today with Tony.
Nero wants a big river pearl to go in his belly-button, he says he can't see the other one for fluff.
Who's this coming?
‘Second Asturians — you 'orrible little men — halt!’
‘Can we 'ave our castanets back, sir?’
‘No, you can't 'ave your castanets back.
Them Brits can 'ear us comin' a mile off what with your stampin' and clackin' and oléin'.
We didn't build this road for you to dance a bloody fandango on.’
There they go paso dobleing all over my rose garden, I'm fed up.
At the Villa Claro AD 61 Dear Buddy,
Fancy flogging you just because you sliced the legs off the general.
And that officer, luv, I said he was a legate from the Balearics not leg him one in the bollocks but it's a mistake anybody could have made.
I don't know what they'll  do to you either.
Why don't you come up here for a week or two and I'll show you how to knit a string bag to put hubby in then you can hang him up with the onions.
Men!
I'm sick of the lot of them.
I know how you feel, they're all or nothing.
There's Tony never out of the bath and Nutty never in it, one stinks like a knocking shop the other like a nest of polecats; I'm beginning to wonder how they'd look on the mantelpiece but don't let on I said so!
We can go down to Aquae Sulis for a bit of steaming an' that, you need to get away funny time of the moon coming up, know what I mean?
Whatever you do don't go charging down to Colchester they'll have your guts for garters.
Oh dear!
Tony's here for his gnocchi.
Your luving friend, Carrie Brigantum
PS I told Nero you'd meet him at Dover but I should leave your chariot behind he might not understand if you cut him in two, he's funny that way.
I opened my eyes to the sound of yet more crashing of dustbin lids, gales of laughter and the occasional scream coming from behind the bushes.
A good time was being had by all.
But I'd had my fill of merrymaking and decided to stay put a while until my headache eased.
It was nice and cool here in the bowels of the earth and the sounds muffled as if from the bottom of a swimming pool.
I looked forward to the banquet and wondered idly whether Swire Sugden would turn up and spoil it.
So far everything had gone our way, but it was hard to believe that the wily old campaigner would not have a few more tricks up his sleeve.
The thought occurred to me that if he had it would mean our staying on at Claro, and I didn't want to go home anyway.
Perhaps Otley would clean the oven and water the busy Lizzies and leave me here.
But now we are one again he'll expect his own personal maid, cook and bottle-washer.
Baldrics!
I'm going to sleep!
Twenty-Eight
All was quiet when I awoke and everyone had vanished as if in a dream.
Then I remembered they would be getting ready for the Roman banquet later on in the evening.
They shouldn't leave all this stuff unguarded — and what's that envelope over by the pile of coins?
It wasn't there when I came.
Dear Mrs Craven,
Sorry I have to miss the orgy.
Had the most exciting offer to do another dig at Isurium Brigantum, your cantonal capital, it's a dream come true if you'll pardon the expression.
Could this be your ring? it was found down by the river with an ear-pick and a stiletto.
Happy dandelion days and many of them.
Arrivederci.
Nigel
It is, it is!
My little band of Welsh gold with the tiniest of freshwater pearls, no good for belly-buttons so I kept it; and I remember Tony poking the funghi marinati out of his ears with this pick.
The evening sky was darkening as I made my way up to Claro.
It was airless and humid with a threat of thunder in the heavy sulphur-coloured clouds.
Aunt Bedelia stood at the gate with her arms akimbo, then Otley and Elinor joined her.
Where had I been to?
The dandelion quiche was curling up at the edges and the semolina pudding congealed into a wodge you could use as Polyfilla.
‘I fell asleep in the villa.’
‘You know I got injured in the skirmishing?
My old war wound — I'm going home to see Dr Moss tomorrow,’ Otley said in an offended tone.
‘It's your own fault,’ I said peevishly.
‘You leapt right into the middle of the Watling Street Guard with your bad leg.’
‘I didn't know they were making a tortoise, did I?
We relaxed for an hour with a cup of tea and Otley switched the magic box on to see what the world was up to.
The Tour de France flashed before our eyes in a kaleidoscope of green jerseys, yellow jerseys, black bottoms and a pink-spotted ‘King of the Mountains’; close-ups of whirring wheels and legs working like the pistons of diesel engines, induction, compression, power and exhaust.
Then the long-distance shots of the pack streaming down the highway like white corpuscles along an artery.
‘It's as good as The Living Body , isn't it?’ said Elinor.
‘That reminds me, I mustn't forget the black pudding for tonight,’ Bedelia said as yet another shiny black behind came up on the screen.
Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke had ordered most of the stuff from a local catering firm and all we had to do was add the finishing touches to make it look Roman.
We had Trimalchio's feast to go on, described by Nero's mate Petronius, so we had an idea of what they ate, and let me say that it was as much of a surprise to find they had sausages and black pudding as it was to find out they had concrete.
Aunt Bedelia had been busy for days shaping sausage meat into pigs' testicles and dormice.
For hedgehogs we just stuck cocktail sticks into the dormice.
The long trestle tables were set out in the meadow and garden lights strung out in the trees, and soon the diners began to arrive.
The lads from the nail factory were still wearing their helmets.
Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke had spared no expense to feed the multitude.
There was turkey and chicken, lamb and pork; a variety of fish, sausages, salads, jacket potatoes; jellies, trifle, cakes and enough sticky buns to satisfy a Billy Bunter.
Ginger beer, cider, real ale and plonk.
Here and there a Roman dish, cabbage cooked with leeks, stuffed dates, tripe in ginger sauce, yuk!
I'm not sitting there, I'll have the cabbage.
We had done our best and we lacked the peacocks, the ostriches, the slaves and the pack of hounds but nobody seemed to be worried.
‘Friends, Romans and countrypersons,’ Elinor said, ‘we want to thank you all for your support in these last few difficult weeks.
Thanks to your determination we have achieved our object —‘
‘Hear! hear!’
‘Up the ‘Ammers!’
‘The meadow, the woods and the old oak will still be here for our children and grandchildren to enjoy.’
‘Hooray!’
‘We shall nevah surrendah!’ came a Churchillian voice from the lads.
‘And let's have a round of applause for Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke who has provided this splendid feast for us.
Thank you, Mollie.’
When the thumping and cheering had died away Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke rose to her feet fingering her pearls and smoothing down the flounces of her garden party frock.
‘As you can see we are talking sub rosa,’ she said pointing to the wild roses above our heads, ‘so I am about to let you into a secret.
Lord Chatwin and I are going to be married.’
She turned to Tumbleweed on her right.
‘It is leap year and I lost no time in popping the question as I think he is the right man to lead Claro and Grindlewood Park into the twenty-first century.’
‘Aye aye!’
‘Don't do anything I wouldn't do!’
‘And I can assure you that he is my old friend Spiggy Meu.
He has proved it beyond the shadow of a doubt.
Now eat up and don't forget to take your litter home with you.’
The next half-hour or so passed quietly but for the sound of happy munching and quaffing.
Elinor looked lost without Nigel to tango with.
Perhaps Otley could step in there and give me a chance to get to know Mistress Wordsworth.
‘Not with this leg,’ he said.
‘She's too enthusiastic.’
‘It'll be nice in the Martello tower.’
‘You're trying to get me off with her,’ he said.
‘You don't care about me, do you?’
‘Of course I care about you — you're my husband, aren't you?
You just get on my wick at times, that's all.’
‘You'll feel different when we get home.’
‘Mr Craven,’ I said sternly.
‘Yes, Mrs Craven?’
‘I'm not going home.’
‘Oh, don't start all that guff about being a person again.’
The little pulls of wind playing with the leaves were getting stronger now, shaking the petals from the wild roses and throwing them at the diners as if they were confetti.
‘Look!
We're married to Claro!’
Mollie squealed in delight.
Thunder rumbled in the distance and then rolled away again over the  hills.
What a relief!
It was a lovely night and nobody wanted to go home.
‘With a bit of luck it'll stay over in Manchester,’ Otley said.
‘Who's this coming?’
Elinor said, pointing to a figure marching towards us along the riverside.
‘Well, I'll be blowed!
It looks like Julius Caesar.’
‘It's Swire Sugden!’
‘Can t be, not dressed up like that!’
‘It is, though.’
Sugden approached with his horse brasses jangling and his kilt lifting in the breeze revealing his Union Jack boxer shorts.
He came to a halt on a little knoll and flung out his arms in a dramatic gesture.
‘Now is the winter of our discontent —’’ he began.
‘That's Richard III ,’ Miss Briggs, the schoolmarm, called.
Sugden took a deep breath and started again.
‘To be or not to be —’’
‘And that's Hamlet, Prince of Denmark .’
‘Once more unto the breach, dear friends —’’
‘Henry V .’
‘Look, I'm not an educated man, I came here to show my solidarity and things are going to be different from now on.’
‘Beware the ides of March, Mr Sugden.’
‘Aye, that's right, lass.’
He came down from the knoll and seemed to be searching for somebody.
I hid behind Otley hoping it wasn't me.
‘There you are, Mrs Craven,’ he said advancing towards me.
‘What was in that bottle I found in the bathroom?’
‘That you were going to show the police?’
‘Aye,’ he said with his chins juddering like a jelly.
‘I told you, it was dandelion wine, Aunt Bedelia made it.’
‘I slipped it in my pocket and forgot about it till one day when I was down at yon ford and I took a swig and, by God, it's potent.’
‘Did you see things?’
‘I did that!
It was as if I were back in Roman times.
Then Julius Caesar comes up and I knew what he were going to say before he said it.’
‘as if he was your alter ego?’
‘Or doppelgänger , summat like that.’
We got talking and strolled along the riverside path too engrossed to  hear the rumble of thunder getting nearer, or note the wind getting up to a blustery gale.
‘I was a decent bloke and I never had syphilis neither,’ Mr Sugden explained, ‘I had lead poisoning, that's why I went bald.’
‘I know, it's all that lead piping you used.’
‘An’ it were just the same then.
It didn't matter what you were buildin' they didn't want it.’
‘They weren't used to square houses,’ I explained.
‘We tried to install modern conveniences but they'd rather have typhoid than aqueducts.’
‘I know.’
‘And them Druids were disgusting with their tatty beards and dirty finger-nails —‘
‘Sacrificing babies an' that,’ I broke in.
‘We used rabbits,’ he said.
It was nice to talk over old times and Swire Sugden assured me that in future he would get a consensus before sending in the bulldozers.
His life had taken on a new dimension.
It wasn't just here and now, he was part of the past and he was going to sign up for the WEA history and archaeology classes.
‘It's boring being trapped in your body, isn't it, when you can be a time traveller?’
I enthused.
‘I always used to like Doctor Who,’ he said.
We turned back to retrace our steps as a clap of thunder echoed through the valley and the wild wind battered the trees.
Everybody rushed to clear the remains of the banquet away, filling their carrier bags with chicken legs, sausages and currant buns, the lads from the nail factory draining the glasses and bottles in a last minute celebration.
‘Hey up, there's some more 'ere,’ said Mickey, with a bottle in one hand and a hunk of meat in the other.
‘That's right, don't leave it for the rats,’ Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke called.
‘Old Jeremiah will be round here in the morning.’
The gale flushed out litter left from the afternoon's festivities and soon the meadow was full of Brits and Romans chasing frantically after paper cups and plates, ice-cream cartons, streamers and sad deflated balloons.
Kilts and togas and hearth rugs were flicked up to reveal Y-fronts and boxer shorts in red, white and blue stripes; green and yellow spots; black and white snatches of music, ‘God Save the Queen’ and ‘Maybe it's  because I'm a Londoner’; and wasn't that young Burt the body-builder with his packed lunch in a posing-pouch?
‘Well, I never!’ said Aunt Bedelia stalking off with her skirt up over her head showing her fleecy-lined Directoire knickers.
‘Quick!
Catch that,’ Elinor called as she ran after a greasy, paper napkin, her gold satin pleats swirling around making her look like a giant sunflower.
Oh dear!
I think she's forgotten something.
A van stood by to take the bottles up to the municipal bottle bank, another for the cans and a red plastic hippopotamus with its mouth wide open waited to receive the litter.
‘Please leave this field as you would wish to find it,’ it said.
‘I want nothing left here that David Bellamy wouldn't approve of,’ Mrs Grindlewood-Gryke ordered as the wind whisked her flounces up to display her silk Marks & Spencer camiknicks with elasticated waist and cotton-lined double gusset.
‘Where have you been to?’
Otley asked as I ran to the hippopotamus clutching an armful of debris.
‘I was talking to Mr Sugden.
He's a reformed character.
We ran back when the gale blew up.’
‘I know.
We could see all your bloomers,’ he said accusingly.
After a struggle with the wind we managed to get the meadow looking neat and tidy, tables were loaded on to a dumper and the villagers made for home with their booty.
Suddenly there was a flash of lightning and a roll of thunder and the heavens burst sending us scuttling into the woods for shelter, but it wasn't long before the rain got through and drenched us with miniature Niagaras that came cascading down from the broad leaves.
‘We might as well go home as stand here,’ Otley said.
‘Run for the tower,’ Elinor said.
‘It's nearer.’
We didn't so much run as squelch, slosh and slither up to the marching camp with the electric storm raging about us.
One step forward and two steps back.
‘My poor little dandelions,’ Aunt Bedelia lamented.
‘They don't like rain.’
The water flattened her curls and ran in a river over her spectacles and off the end of her nose.
She slipped into a ditch and we pulled her out gasping for breath.
‘They shut their eyes, little poppets, and hang their heads till it's all over.’
‘They've gotta have rain or they won't grow,’ said Elinor angrily.
‘We know that but they don't,’ Bedelia spluttered through the wet.
As we struggled up the hill with brambles and goose-grass snatching at our clothes there was an almighty clap of thunder together with a flash of lightning that seemed to strike the Jubilee Tower.
‘It's a thunderbolt!’
‘It's hit the tower!’
‘Quick!’ screamed Elinor.
‘My books!
My souvenirs!’
Smoke was rising from the top of the tower when we fell into the round kitchen exhausted.
I sank into a squashy chair not caring whether we were on fire or not, it had to get through the water first.
Elinor grabbed a fire extinguisher and dashed up to her den.
Otley threw us a large towel each and some dry clothes which we changed into like embarrassed children on the beach, then we had a mug of cocoa and a gingerbread man with currant eyes and chocolate buttons down his front.
We would have to stay here the night.
‘I'll take Elinor some cocoa up,’ Otley said.
‘See if she's put the fire out and done anything about that Martello tower holiday.’
‘It'll do you good to get away.
I'll stay here another week or two till you come back,’ I called after him.
I can get on with Dorothy Wordsworth.
I'm anxious to know how they got on in the woods because Otley's always nice going in and nasty when we're coming out.
Otley came tearing back down the stairs white as a sheet and put the mug of cocoa down on the table.
‘She's gone!’
‘I told you,’ Aunt Bedelia said, ‘she's always doing that.’
‘Hadn't we better call the police?’
‘No, she'll come back when she's ready.’
The next morning we went down to the cottage, the sun shone and the trees sparkled with diamond necklaces.
It put Otley in a romantic mood and he suggested going to Margate for a second honeymoon.
‘I'm staying here.’
‘We can go Olde Tyme Dancing again.’
‘No!’
I said stamping my foot.
‘Not with your filthy mouth.’
‘We'll stay in bed all day and go out all night like you said.’
‘I've changed my mind.’
‘We've got to go home.
That oven's disgusting, I'll go and get the car, no need to hang about here now.’
‘I like it here.’
I kept out of his way while he fussed about with the old banger and went to get some petrol.
Bedelia was busy roasting dandelion roots, I thanked her for having us and gave her the royal wave.
I am a queen after all.
I hoped she would ask me to stay.
‘May, can you give me a hand with this,’ Otley called out.
I went to see what he wanted and before I knew it I was bundled into the car and we were on our way home.
We passed Swire Sugden out for a walk and when he saw us he held out his arms and mouthed a farewell.
‘What's he saying?’
I asked.
‘I dunno,’ Otley said.
‘He's shouting ‘Carrie’ or something.’