

DOGS today
FEBRUARY 1992 £1.10
Save Our Sanctuary
LABRADOR RESCUE'S FIGHT FOR SURVIVAL
Plus  NEW AGE SYNDROME  John Fisher on lifestyle problems
CARDBOARD CITY CANINES  Living rough with a dog
DO GOOD DOGS GO TO HEAVEN?
One man's mission to find out
PLUS…
GUIDE DOG CAREERS  DUNBAR ON PAVLOV  PRO DOGS  WINNERS  RESCUE DOG OF THE YEAR  FERAL TO FIRESIDE  FEARLESS PAT DOGS  HOME POODLE PARLOUR  KING CHARLES SPANIELS AS PETS …
AND MORE!
Dear Readers
As we go to press, the fate of Des the Desert dog is still uncertain.
Readers of last month's issue will have seen the appeal for a special home.
The discovery that he will have to master house-training as well as overcome serious temperament problems makes it a difficult task.
At PRO Dogs awards dinner he looked so loveable, the urge to give him a hug was almost impossible to resist.
Sadly, until his behaviour becomes more reliable he has to remain at arm's length.
The troops had tears in their eyes as Des was awarded his medal for pet of the year.
The evening was an enjoyable affair and it made a pleasant change not to have to leave Sally behind.
She greatly enjoyed sharing my dinner!
The gold-edged invitation said dinner jackets for men but didn't give any guidance about canine apparel.
Sal went for a subdued but glamorous sparkly hair band and matching lead.
The Hilton Hotel got the paws up from Sal.
Their hospitality pack of shampoo gave her coat a lovely sheen and the hairdryer came in very useful.
Future canine guests should be just as welcome — she didn't leave any hairs in the bath!
 Beverley Cuddy,Editor  
Volume 2 Issue 2 February 1992
SPECIAL FEATURES
SAVE OUR SANCTUARY
Is Labrador rescue irretrievable?
NEW AGE SYNDROME
Facing up to behaviour problems
DO GOOD DOGS GO TO HEAVEN?
Life after death for dogs
STROKE OF GENIUS
Dog artist to the gentry, Delia Marr
TWO'S COMPANY
Homeless people and their dogs
WILD AT HEART
From feral to fireside
FATAL PERCEPTION
Sorrel knew her sad destiny
WATER PERFORMANCE!
The art of sample collecting
LAURELS FOR HARDY COMPANIONS
PRO
Dogs awards dinner
LOVE KNOWS NO FEAR
PAT Dogs who go where others dare not
MINDING MASTER LUKE
Confessions of a dogsitter
CHARLIE IS MY DARLING
King Charles Spaniels as pets
COMPETITIONS & OFFERS
CAPTION COMPETITION
Prizes from Pedigree Petfoods
RESCUE DOG OF THE YEAR
How to organise a heat
READER OFFER
John Fisher's new book
PHOTO COMPETITION
Win Pet Value insurance
DOGS TODAY CALENDAR
Last chance to buy one
CROSS QUESTION
Win Efamol capsules worth over £20
GYLES BRANDRETH'S CROSSWORD
Omega Tasty prizes
HI LIFE'S QUICK QUIZ
Win boxes of Gourmet dog food!
REGULARS
NEWS HOUND
FOGLE'S FILES
A heavy score
THE DUNBAR METHOD
Pavlov revisited
DOGGIE POST BAG
DOG STARS
Highly strung Aquarians
POSTER PULL OUT
John Menzies's dogs
COPING WITH PET LOSS
Close to home
CAREERS
Guide Dogs
TOP TO TAIL
Grooming your Poodle
SHORT STORY
Glowing exposure
TRUE CASE HISTORIES
Sombro dodges the nick
FIDO FACTS
King Charles Spaniels
MEMOIRS OF A DOG SHRINK
Noddy goes racing
KATIE'S PROBLEM PAGE
TAIL ENDING
CAPTION COMPETITION
Can you think of a suitable caption for this picture?
To win a prize, send in your captions, as well as any photos you think could feature in this section, to:Dogs Today , February Caption Competition, 10 Sheet St, Windsor, Berks, SL4 1BG.
Entries to be received by March 3rd 1992
WIN PRIZES FROM PEDIGREE CHUM
The best caption wins vouchers for 24 tins of Pedigree Chum, a 3.5kg bag of Mixer, a sack of Pedigree Formula, and four packets of treats.
Five runners-up will receive vouchers for 24 tins of Chum and a bag of Mixer.
CAPTION COMPETITION WINNERS
DECEMBER WINNER
Oh no!
Not another bone, they're already coming out of my ears Mrs Sharon Williams, Kinloss, Morayshire
RUNNERS-UP
Dear Father Christmas I have a bone to pick with you Diana M Hillsdon, Harrogate, North Yorkshire
I may have reindeer antlers but I don't have Santa Claws!
A M Carrington, Shrewsbury
When I said I fancied myself as a bit of a Rudolf lookalike, I meant Valentino!
Mrs P Peacock, Barnard Castle, County Durham
This is ‘Bordering’ on the ridiculous!
Pam Bright, Strathcarron, Ross-shire
My owners really wanted a Deerhound — this is the best I can do S J Hale, Cheshunt, Herts
DIARY COMPETITION WINNERS
NOVEMBER CROSSWORD WINNERS
News Hound
CONDEMNED TO DIE FOR A DRINK
A Pit Bull Terrier has been sentenced to death by magistrates, because her owner loosened her muzzle to allow her to drink from a puddle in the street.
Stell's owner, Gary Morrison, had complied with all the other requirements of the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, and had registered, insured, tattooed and electronically tagged his pet, but the court in Bristol stated that they had ‘no option’ but to order the destruction of the dog.
Morrison's solicitor commented that the decision was ‘outrageous’, and that an appeal would be lodged immediately to try and save the two-and-a-half-year-old dog.
GONE WITH THE WIND
Drastic measures were called for when Scarlett the Borzoi disappeared from her home at Orston, Nottinghamshire.
Although her owners had tried every method of finding her, including local radio appeals, Tim Charlesworth eventually turned to the last resort of hiring a helicopter to help in the search.
The 11-year-old hound was spotted at last, less than four miles from home, and although frightened and hungry, was picked up safe and well.
The only painful aspect of the rescue was the bill, which came to a total of £460!
BITTER MEDICINE
A man who had been bitten by a snake in Sydney, Australia, refused medical help when paramedics wouldn't allow his dog in the ambulance.
The victim managed to reach a fire station with a Red-belly black snake coiled around his arm — its fangs still in his hand.
Even though the crew at the station offered to look after the dog, the man would not accept, and walked away.
He later received treatment in a Sydney hospital.
BIG SOFTIES
Onlookers at a charity sponsored walk were given a smile, as some rather large oriental visitors gave the event their support.
Taking time off from the Japan Festival at the Royal Albert Hall, the Sumo wrestlers encouraged even the smallest participants who were raising money for the Spastics society.
MODEL LIFE
Dog lover Sean Read, of Nottingham, designs his famous sculptures to capture the humour of what he terms the ‘good northern life’.
His latest work, ‘Walter washes his Whippet’ is a perfect example of why his tough papier-mâché art has become so popular, and is used in outside displays for companies across the world.
PSYCHIC REUNION
Les Worthington was so distressed over the disappearance of his Border Collie, Ben, that he enlisted the help of clairvoyant Pam Malkin — and found him!
Pam had suggested that the dog could be found near a church, and that his whereabouts were connected with the letter ‘J’.
When Ben was eventually found, in the Chapel House Estate, it was discovered that he had previously been looked after in a place called Jesmond .
Les, finally reunited with his beloved dog, was especially moved that no one who had helped to care for him would accept the £50 award.
OUT OF DEPTH
Firemen were called to the river Taff in Llandaff to rescue Eric, a 10-stone Irish Wolfhound who had got into deep water after deciding to go in for a swim.
Members of a Cardiff ladies' rowing club tried to pull her out of the mud, but found the current was too fast, and the bitch (yes,she is called Eric!), too heavy.
Once rescued, Eric dried out in an old sweater, and was reassured by owner Stephanie Webb.
HOLIDAY HELP
We're planning a special feature on holidaying with your dog, and need your help.
If you run a dog-friendly establishment — or can recommend one — please write to us with full details.
Mark your letter: Dog Holidays,Dogs Today , 10 Sheet Street, Windsor, Berkshire, SL4 1BG.
PIPPED TO THE POST
The Queen's Corgis are officially more popular than her husband, according to a children's survey carried out by the car firm, Toyota.
Princess Diana took the top position of children's favourite royals, and the Corgis polled tenth overall, while Prince Philip didn't even get a mention.
EVENTS
CONTEST OF CHAMPIONS
Don't forget the new Contest of Champion Show Dogs at Wembley, on Saturday February 8th!
Dogs Today will be there in force, and look forward to meeting our readers at this prestigious event, which promises to be a fascinating day out for all.
SHORT LEADS
MIDNIGHT CALLER
A howling dog caused a rude awakening for a Leicester man in the middle of the night.
Furious, he got up to complain to his neighbour, only to discover that it was his own dog which he had accidently shut outside before going to bed.
SUSPECT DELIVERY
Police in Blackpool had a surprise delivery when a holiday-maker rushed into the station to get help for his pet which seemed unwell.
The Yorkshire Terrier then gave birth to three puppies before the police could even find a local vet's telephone number.
SECURITY RISK
An Alsation proved to be a little too well trained when he managed to slip the bolt on a shed door, with his owner John Wilson on the wrong side!
John, from Durham, spent the whole night locked in the shed and said that he regretted ever letting his dog copy him when he locked up.
NOUVELLE CUISINE A restaurant in Swansea is now catering for all tastes, by serving canine customers, as well as human ones.
Roger Roberts is planning the extra service by adding kennels to the side of CJ's restaurant building, and offering dinner to the guests while he pampers the human customers.
FOGLE'S files
A heavy score
I'm as open minded and honest about my dogs as any dog owner, so let me tell you that I have the most beautiful,most gentle,most serious and most feminine Golden Retriever that ever lived.
I don't mean Liberty.
She's a cock-eyed raver, a born party girl with a permanently kinked tail.
‘Where's the action?
Who wants to body bash?’ she shouts with her body language, as she looks for her type of guy in the park — a hunky Dobermann or a Rottweiler usually twice her size!
Lexington is my beauty queen.
Gentle of spirit and as maternal as a dog can be.
While Liberty is out in the garden ardently investigating nature, Lex is on her back in front of the fire dreaming of motherhood.
SHOCK DISCOVERY
And so we decided that Lex should have pups.
After all, her sire is a recent Best Of Breed winner at Crufts and she has the old fashioned‘I'll do anything to please you’ attitude of the best Retrievers.
Because there are known inherited defects in certain breeds, I checked Lexington for those that occur in Golden Retrievers.
I examined her eyes and found no sign of developing cataracts or retinal atrophy.
I took an X-ray of her hips…and couldn't believe what I saw!
Although she had never shown even the remotest sign of lameness I was looking at the worst case of hip dysplasia I had seen for some time.
Sure enough, when I manipulated her hip joints while she was still fast asleep from her anaesthetic I could almost pull the balls out of the sockets.
I sent the X-ray to the British Veterinary Association hip dysplasia panel for assessment, and a score of 38 was returned.
To breed, or not to breed — the risks of inherited defects may force a painful and difficult dilemma
Looking back at her parents' hip scores, one was six and the other eight.
Going back a further generation, her sire's parents both scored under 12.
My problem was what to do.
Should I disregard the scores and breed from her because of her other merits?
Hip dysplasia in breeds such as Retrievers and German Shepherds has been a weighty and controversial subject for decades.
Articles on the subject appear almost monthly in veterinary journals — scientific papers that very often only make the subject more complicated.
One of the most recent, from Sweden, revealed that statistically, pups born in the winter in that country are more likely to develop hip dysplasia than pups born in the summer…but only in some breeds, not in others.
SEEKING ANSWERS
The question that begs an answer is how much hip dysplasia is inherited and how much is induced by the diet and lifestyle of the pup when it is young.
There is no doubt that inheritance is a major component of the problem.
Just look at the success that German Shepherd breeders had when they methodically examined their breeding stock and bred from those with the best hips.
In Lexington's case her parents and grandparents had good hips and she is not lame.
Right now she's carrying around a soft hand puppet, and takes it to her basket each night.
My decision has been not to breed from her, but I'm still sending letters to colleagues who specialise in genetics and orthopaedics, hoping that they might be able to shed some light on the significance of what I unexpectedly found.
BRUCE FOGLE
SAVE OUR SANCTUARY
NICK MAYS
The National Labrador Welfare Centre was started by the efforts of one lady and is run from her own home; but decreasing resources could mean the end of this rescue success story, now in desperate need of your help
Everybody feels the financial pinch during times of recession and, sadly, charities of all descriptions are no exception.
Many animal charities have reported an average 25 per cent fall in donations during the past year, and despite upbeat predictions for economic recovery this year, the future looks increasingly bleak for charities.
I'm sure, then, that readers of Dogs Today will be as concerned as I am that a well respected and successful breed rescue charity looks set to collapse this year, unless they receive real help — financial and physical — immediately.
The National Labrador Welfare Centre rescues and rehomes Labradors and crossbreeds from all over Britain.
In the past two years since its foundation, it has successfully rehomed no less than 240 dogs.
The charity was founded by Pat Drake, who manages the charity's rescue centre from her home, Birksgreen Kennels, in Spaldington, a small Humberside village.
Recently, I visited the centre to take a look at the charity's operation and talk to Pat about what help is needed.
The first thing I noticed was the air of relaxed efficiency.
The rescued dogs are housed in a standard kennel block, each with a roomy pen kept scrupulously clean.
A large concrete yard and an even larger field act as ideal exercise areas for the dogs.
A new stable block houses storage space and a kitchen, where food is prepared for the residents.
‘Just one of the many minor niggling problems we've got at the moment is that there's no hot water in the kitchen,’ said Pat.
‘The water heater broke recently, and we simply can't use funds to repair it, or pay for a new one.
‘We used to have a shop in this block which sold leads, collars, blankets, and so on, to anybody who took a rescued dog from us for rehoming.
Again, it takes money to stock a shop, so we just can't provide these goods any more.’
I asked how the financial problems afflicting the charity had come about?
DOWN ON BOARDERS
‘I'll show you one example,’ said Pat, doing her best to control her anger.
She showed me a half-built kennel block.
‘Apart from membership and donations our main source of income comes from boarding dogs for people,’ she explained.
‘The boarding funds the welfare side of the operation.
Unfortunately, we later discovered, the builder who was working on these kennels turned out to be an absolute cowboy.
He used shoddy materials and kept demanding more and more money.
‘The kennels failed health and safety standards, so they're half finished — nothing's been done for a year.
The whole matter is in the hands of the courts at the moment.
Meantime, of course, we're down on boarders as a result.’
The centre has the support of Selby District Council, and has a good rapport with the dog wardens, who bring in stray and abandoned dogs each week.
‘We never turn a dog away,’ said Pat, ‘and I know some people will say that's wrong.
Technically, if they're not claimed within seven days, then they should be put to sleep, but we always manage to get them rehomed.’
Pat is assisted in her work by students from the nearby Bishop Burton Agricultural College, who happily help out twice a week while on work experience.
The rest of the time, it's largely down to Pat to attend to all the kennel duties.
‘Certainly, more volunteer helpers would be very useful,’ agreed Pat, ‘I'm grateful for any help!’
Sitting in Pat's front room, surrounded by her nine Labradors, many of whom are rescue cases themselves, I asked Pat how the charity had been formed and what the situation was at present.
‘Well, when I lived in Sheffield I was a founder member of the North Midlands Labrador Rescue.
Of course, they dealt with a given area, and quite successfully.
About three years ago, I was left some money by a relative, so I was able to start up a national welfare charity for Labradors — something I'd always wanted to do.
‘So I sold my home in Sheffield and bought this place, which was ideal.
Together with other like-minded folk, we formed the National Labrador Welfare Centre and all went well, for a while.
The charity isn't a ‘Mickey Mouse’ outfit by any means — our constitution is being verified by the Charity Commissioners at the moment, and we've been informed that there's no problem with being granted trust status.
‘There was a chap, a member of the landed gentry, who said he'd like to become our patron, but despite several telephone calls and letters, we've heard no more from him.
I think we really do need a well-known patron to get our work recognised, preferably somebody who loves Labradors!
RE-POSSESSION THREAT
‘Our membership stands at around 95, spread throughout the country and they're marvellous, donating what they can.
But sadly, it's not enough.
Because of the problem with the boarding kennels, and the general recession, I started pouring more and more of my own money into the charity to keep it going.
Obviously, we needed food, medicine and supplies.
‘The end result is that I've large arrears on the centre's mortgage, and now the building society is threatening repossession in the new year, unless we can clear the arrears.
I know it must sound terribly irresponsible to get into this position but, truthfully, it's a case of  of ‘heart ruling head’.’
I asked Pat how people could help the centre?
‘Well, they could become members, if they wish, or make a donation.
We always need practical help — volunteers, fund raising drives, whatever.
It would be a great shame if the charity folded, after all the efforts of so many kind-hearted people.
So if anyone can help us, please do so, as soon as you can!’
Before I left, I took a look around Pat's kitchen.
Every spare inch of wall space was covered with letters and cards from the proud owners of dogs rehomed by the centre, each accompanied by a multitude of photographs of the happy dogs themselves.
For me, one summed it all up.
It was a ‘thank you’ card with a photograph of a yellow Labrador-cross.
It read; ‘Just to say thank you.
Lots of love, Max’.
Times are hard, and money is scarce, but please , if you can spare anything at all, contact Pat Drake as soon as possible.
Quite simply, animals in general and dogs in particular need people like her, people who care, whatever the personal cost.
The National Labrador Welfare Centre's membership fees are: Adult: £5, Family: £7.50, Life: £75.
Contact: Pat Drake, Administrator, National Labrador Welfare Centre, Birksgreen Kennels, Spaldington, Howden, nr Goole, Humberside DN14 7NP.
Tel:(0430) 430327.
Perhaps you'd like to organise an exemption show to raise funds?
See next page for details
INTRODUCING EUKANUBA DOGS TODAY RESCUE DOG OF THE YEAR COMPETITION
Are you planning an exemption show between April and September 1992 in aid of any dog-related charity?
Would you like to run a qualifying heat of Eukanuba Dogs Today Rescue Dog of the Year by scheduling a Best Rescue Dog novelty class?
100 exemption shows will be chosen to receive:
Free exhibit numbers and posters
A free show announcement in Dogs Today
Help with local publicity
Substantial Eukanuba prizes, quality rosettes and prize cards for 1st to 5th in the Eukanuba Dogs Today Rescue Dog of the Year Class
Planning a September exemption show?
We're looking for 12 well-established shows to host our regional semi-finals.
They will benefit from all the above — plus considerable extra publicity.
Rescue Dog of the Year 1992 will be chosen at a ritzy London final in November.
The winner will stay in a top London hotel and receive top-to-tail grooming at Peter's Posh Pets while his or her owner enjoys the human equivalent at Harrods.
Then it's a night on the town watching Cats (the musical, that is!) and being treated to a slap-up dinner at the Players Theatre.
If you'd like to host a heat or regional final, write to: Eukanuba Dogs Today Rescue Dog of the Year, Dogs Today, 10 Sheet Street, Windsor, Berkshire, SL4 1BG.
Include your name, address and contact telephone number.
The date of your show, exact location, starting time, benefiting charity and the name and address of your local newspapers.
Potential regional final hosts should tell us how long you've been running exemption shows and give as much background information as possible.
Applications must be received before 28th February, 1992.
NEW AGE SYNDROME
JOHN FISHER
Keeping our dogs alive longer, and buying a second dog as company for the first are part and parcel of modern living; but both have associated problems which are in danger of being misunderstood
As a result of the advances being made in veterinary medicine our dogs are healthier, live longer and are able to enjoy a more active life than their predecessors.
Over the past decade or so we have also seen changes in our lifestyle with dogs.
Whereas before the majority of pet dog owners would have just one dog, more and more people now decide to get a second dog — often as a playmate for their first dog.
As a practising canine behaviourist, I have seen a steady increase in behaviour problems relating to these two factors: geriatric anxiety and problems with the second dog.
Keeping our dogs healthy into old age has considerable advantages.
But every coin has a flip side; although we might be better equipped to maintain health, we should recognise that we cannot stem the effects of time.
It's a fact that a dog's senses will deteriorate with age, but because their senses are generally much more acute than ours, we don't always recognise when one is slowly failing because the other senses adjust so well.
The older dog can usually compensate for failing eyesight or hearing through a highly developed sense of smell — it gradually learns to cope.
The dog that suddenly goes deaf at 13 years of age will take some time to adjust.
Quite often, the first clue that I get to old age anxiety is when a mature dog is referred to me with, what appears to be, an ‘out of character’ separation anxiety.
Separation anxieties are usually exhibited by dogs which have become too attached to the family.
House-soiling, howling and barking, destructive or escape behaviours are not uncommon problems in these over-dependent relationships.
For the older dog the sudden loss of a sense can be quite a traumatic experience.
Because he or she appears to manage, the owners might not realise that old age is taking its toll and that the dog has become much more attached to them because of its sudden psychological inability to cope with the environment.
Left alone the dog becomes stressed, insecure and lonely.
Invariably the tension relieving behaviour of geriatric anxiety is howling and barking in the owner's absence — completely out of character with the dog that they have lived with for 13 or so years.
TIME TO ADJUST
Treating the problem by developing a less attached relationship — the normal treatment for separation anxiety — is wrong in these cases.
Of course, the owners need to slowly encourage independence, and help their dog to cope with a new sensory environment — but waiting for the dog to learn to cope with the problem is the only real cure.
Behaviourists and vets are finding that treatment used in human psychiatric problems can be beneficial until the dog learns to adjust.
Alternatively, homoeopathic treatment for the same ‘inability to cope’ condition has been equally successful.
If your dog hasn't presented a problem for years, is getting old but still appears to be healthy, and starts to display antisocial behaviour — check it out with your vet before you start to punish him or her for what might be a cry for help.
Equal care is needed for problems associated with two-dog ownership: in this more career-conscious world, many couples put off raising a family until they are financially more secure.
But there still appears to be a need to create a family environment and increasingly, the dog is taking the place of the child.
Invariably, these couples either arrange for dog walkers or return home themselves at regular intervals to exercise and feed the dog.
In this case, it is not unusual for them to decide to get another dog to keep their first dog company, and this is where the problems can arise — especially if the second dog is younger, or of a more submissive character.
FOLLOW MY LEADER
Dogs understand each other better than they understand people.
The first dog will establish the ground rules for the second dog and invariably, a better and more consistent relationship is established between the two dogs — quite often the second dog forms a far greater bond with the other dog than it does with the owners.
Because it's easier to treat both dogs as one unit, we fail to recognise that the second dog isn't getting the chance to develop its own character.
And so, when faced with something he or she feels unsure about, they seek security from the more confident (and usually more dominant) dog, which has been allowed to learn independence and develop a one-to-one relationship with the owner.
Even if we notice that the new dog has become a follower, we regard it as part of a strong friendship.
Consequently, if the first dog dies, the second dog cannot cope with life on its own, and all sorts of problems may arise.
Most owners misinterpret these problems as grief and they overcompensate by giving their dog more attention than they  are used to; they fail to realise that it howls because it is lonely and insecure!
In effect, the first dog has always been there as a crutch to rely upon.
The owners inadvertently supply another, but in their absence, this crutch isn't there and symptoms of separation anxiety occur.
But, as with geriatric anxiety, the treatment involves more than developing less attached relationships.
First we need to broaden the dog's horizons with confidence building programmes which teach the dog to cope without crutches.
(Simply removing the crutch will make the problem worse.)
A good way of gauging whether the dogs are owner or dog-attached in a two-dog environment is to take the second dog for a quick walk, leaving the first at home; when you return, the first dog will almost certainly greet you first.
Reverse the procedure, and invariably the second dog will greet the other dog, sometimes ignoring you altogether.
If this happens, problems will arise unless the second dog is allowed to learn how to cope with life alone.
BUILDING CONFIDENCE
Time and effort must be taken to break its dependency on the other dog and increase its attachment towards the owner; short walks without the other dog, short periods of being left at home by itself, perhaps feeding them in separate areas.
These don't have to be permanent measures, just gentle ways of gradually increasing individual confidence.
I don't agree that it's as easy to have two dogs as it is to have one — it's almost as easy.
You need to spend time with each dog — and that requires a little bit more effort, especially if you decide to have two puppies at the same time.
They will form the greatest attachment to each other— the more dominant will quickly learn to cope without its mate, the other will become a problem dog.
Dogs living longer, multi-dog households and buying two puppies instead of one are all signs of the times.
We should, however, recognise the problems that might arise as a result and make sure that we do not misinterpret any problem.
We cannot prevent old age, but we can be aware of its side effects; we can prevent over-attached dog relationships — and prevention is always better than a cure.
DO GOOD DOGS GO TO HEAVEN?
BRIAN KELLY
Is there life after death for dogs?
Tom Cross thinks so.
He sent Dogs Today a recording of meetings with mediums who claim to identify the spirit of Kirsty, his Border Terrier
Every day, wherever tummies are tickled and muzzles scratched, some owner somewhere will be pondering the Big Question.
Does that one-way trip to the vet's stop at the surgery?
Do, as the fluffy Disney film states, all good dogs go to heaven?
Tom Cross doesn't hear the voices of Burt Reynolds and Dom Deluise, or any voices, for that matter.
He is prepared for sceptics who think he's a crank.
This former schoolmaster and magistrate of 18 years has sat with 50 mediums 130 times to further his quest for knowledge about what we might call ‘the other side’.
Tom is convinced that Kirsty, his family's Border Terrier who died in 1983 aged 14, has a spirit.
He has recorded seven sittings with seven different mediums over eight years which give, he feels, all the evidence he needs.
Tom's world seems a lot nicer — nobody dies, they ‘pass into spirit’.
The fact he can sit in a room with someone who claims to see the spirits of his loved ones around him brings great comfort, not fright.
He shuns the charlatans.
‘Obviously, this business is open to ridicule because of the shysters, but it's not frightening.
The lights have never gone out and the table has never rocked,’ he said.
True to this tone, Tom's tape is scientific analysis as opposed to bedtime bogeyman stories.
The recordings, introduced and summed up by Tom, give seven varied perceptions of Kirsty's spirit — some more accurate, some more general.
At the very least, they make you listen and think.
Born in 1969, Kirsty led a very full, scampish and much-loved life before arthritis, respiratory problems and old age sullied her final months in the physical world.
Tom said he is fascinated to learn that her perky personality seemed unchanged in the spirit world.
A couple of the mediums got Kirsty's sex wrong, and one's observation that she could ‘see’ a brownish-grey dog could cover a broad spectrum of colourings.
All seemed a rough stab until later, when she claimed to ‘see’ the dog putting its paw on a red ball.
On checking with his wife, Tom remembered it was one of Kirsty's favourite games, cheekily daring all-comers to come and take the ball before grabbing it in her mouth and running off.
Another medium (whose West Midlands accent made ‘yappy little dog’ sound like ‘yuppie little dog’) guessed it right about Tom's father and uncle's great rivalry in gardening, especially who grew the best chrysanthemums!
She probably wasn't guessing at all.
The sixth medium featured on the tape, recorded in January last year, said the dog she ‘saw’ had a short tail and was pushing her head into Tom's hand, which Tom confirmed as typical Border Terrier behaviour.
In the seventh recording, the medium got the sex wrong, but was close to the mark with the colour — tan, with white (Kirsty was wheaten).
‘Was her name Dusty, or Rusty?’ she asked Tom.
Not a long way from Kirsty.
Before any bereaved dog owners book with their nearest medium in a conscious bid to contact departed pets.
Tom is quick to insist his discoveries have been purely incidental.
Going to a medium with the sole objective of finding the spirit of any being could be fruitless.
‘I've had a life-long interest in physical research.
I have been actively looking for evidence for 12 years,’ Tom said.
‘That Kirsty came along and appeared in the sittings was a by-product, but made me think ‘why not animals, as well?’
‘Still, I have seven mediums who appear to see the same thing, with variations, of course— seven people will always see an event differently.
I think members of our beleaguered police force would be thrilled if they could find seven parties to witness the same event.’
The rest of the time at sittings, Tom has been dealing with relatives who have ‘passed over’, including his mother, who died in 1987, and his father, who had five brothers.
‘They've all passed over now.
The eldest brother was also called Tom, and his wife, who passed into spirit in the '50s, was named Lillian,’ Tom said.
‘One medium I was sitting with told me Tom and Lillian appeared.
I'd just met this medium — how could she have known this?’
Does Tom believe?
‘I have no doubt that we, and other members of the animal kingdom, live on.
Belief is a kind of halfway house between non-belief and absolute proof,’ he said.
‘Mankind has been seeking proof for centuries.’
Will we ever find it?
‘That I cannot answer, although our knowledge is advancing all the time.’
It would appear foolish to confirm existence of a spiritual state.
It would be equally so to deny it, especially when considering the first recording on the tape.
This medium, meeting Tom for the first time, said Tom's father was with them, and he had a small brown dog.
‘Is that your brown dog?’ she asked.
‘Well, we have a brown dog,’ Tom said.
It was May 1983 — two months before Kirsty's final trip to the vet.
If you would like a copy of Tom Cross's recording, turn to the advertisement in the classifieds.
the DUNBAR method
BY DR IAN DUNBAR & DR MICHAEL STRONG
Pavlov revisited
Avoid habit-forming feeding patterns by making sure you're the one to set Fido's dinner alarm!
Most of us are familiar with the stories of Pavlov's dogs who were conditioned to salivate at the sound of a bell.
On hearing a bell ring before the appearance of food the animals quickly came to associate that sound with feeding time.
Soon the mere noise of the bell would start their digestive juices running.
Many of us, however, do not realise that we unwittingly induce Pavlovian-type responses in our own dogs by establishing a rigid routine for feeding.
A good example of this comes from an elderly female acquaintance of ours, who always used to feed her dog after she had listened to the afternoon instalment of Mrs Dale's Diary on the radio.
As soon as the show was over her dog would get up and run to the kitchen ready to receive his daily rations.
While amazed at his ability to anticipate her actions, she didn't recognise the significance of conditioning in the dog's behaviour.
He had come to equate the programme's theme tune with dinner.
What's more, he had also learned that he must ignore the first playing of the tune, and wait 15 minutes until it played again at the end of the programme — the dog would look up quizzically at the sound of the familiar music but stay still, apparently too smart to respond to an obvious false alarm.
Undomesticated dogs, like many other wild animals, do not expect to eat according to a rigid schedule.
It's not as though a wolf can say, ‘Yo Bunny!
Hang about ‘til 8pm and I'll eat you for supper’.
On the contrary, they feed when food is available, frequently going without for several days, and then gorging.
In the home however, they soon adapt to their owner's timetable, often to the extent that deviations from it induce erratic behaviour which can develop into a full-blown eating disorder.
Since dogs are so easily manipulated, it is perhaps surprising that two of the most common problems we hear from doggy ‘specialists’(dog breeders, for example) concern eating — like how to get a show dog to eat on the road, and how to get a recalcitrant dog to eat at all .
Three general principles can be applied to remedy either of these problems, any one of which will work alone.
The first is the withholding principle.
Put simply, if no alternative is made available, the dog will eat the desired food, or in the desired location, eventually.
Many owners can not stand the thought of their animal going without sustenance for two or three days at a time, but the dog will inevitably eat when it is hungry enough.
No dog is so obstinate as to starve itself to death.
A second alternative is to employ the principle of minimal change.
Thus, if the goal is for your dog to eat in the car rather than the kitchen, in preparation for a long journey, move its dish a few inches a day towards the car, and then into the car.
Similarly, if you want to change the diet from juicy brown canned food  to into a dry complete diet, start by mixing just a couple of pieces of dried food in with the juicy stuff, gradually increasing the proportion each day until you reach the desired menu.
DINING À LA CARTE s Thirdly, you can use the reward method.
This is to be distinguished from bribing, where the treat is offered up-front or mixed with the meal as a lure to entice the dog to eat.
With rewards, the dog is treated after the desired behaviour, not before.
Thus when the dried food is gone, a favourite delicacy is given for a job well done.
When a meal is consumed in a non-preferred location the dog is praised lavishly and offered a bone or a chunk of beef chew.
In difficult cases all three techniques might be combined.
Start with a single piece of dried food as a first course and offer nothing more until it is consumed.
When it is gone, reward the dog with a second course of its preferred dinner (dry food mixed with juicy brown stuff).
The next day use two pieces of dry food as a first course, the next day use four and so on, gradually increasing the size of the first course until the dog's meal comprises a huge first course of dry food followed by a minuscule second course of only a single nugget of dry food garnished with some juicy brown food as a reward for cleaning its bowl.
Generally, eating problems can be avoided by being flexible with your puppy from the start, varying the eating location, alternating types of dog food, and changing feeding times.
Otherwise, be prepared for your dog to become accidentally conditioned by circumstances that lend new significance to the sound of the dinner bell.
DOGGIE POST BAG
We love reading your letters and we'll try to publish as many as possible.
Our STAR letter wins a Good Boy hamper full of doggie goodies, and every letter published will win a special Golden Bone Award.
The editor reserves the right to edit letters.
Please write to this address: Doggie Post Bag, Dogs Today, 10 Sheet Street, Windsor, Berkshire SL4 1BG.
WELL SPOTTED
Dear Dogs Today 
I am a Dalmation called Poppy and I am three-years old.
I was very pleased to see that Tail Ending featured a Dalmation!
Please keep it up.
I hear it was your birthday so I am sending you a photo of me and my daddy, Chris Geering, at Stratford-upon-Avon which was taken on my birthday.
I was staying at a very nice hotel called The Swans Nest which allows dogs.
Recently I was in a pageant at Binham Priory.
The part was quite easy because all I had to do was stand about and wag my tail.
Are there any more hotels which welcome dogs like me?
Poppy Geering, Burnham Market, Norfolk.
We're thinking of doing a special supplement on holidays with your dog — more news later!
Dear Dogs Today I would like to say how pleased I was about your December Tail Ending .
Every month I look in your magazine for anything to do with Dalmations and I was overjoyed when I looked at the last page.
Please could you have more on Dalmations in your magazine.
 Miss C Hipkiss, Tiverton, Devon.
Keep watching Fido Facts!
KENNEL CONCERN
Dear Dogs Today 
I was very disturbed to read the tragic story of the little dog that died in kennels.
(December Dogs Today .
It brought back sad memories of when I worked as a kennel maid.
It was a so-called reputable establishment which had all the requirements your article listed.
But most of the dogs were unhappy and would bark themselves hoarse.
The runs were hosed down every day — which meant the dogs got very wet feet and the little ones got wet tummies.
In winter the small heaters were only on at night and the runs were open to the weather all day.
Most dogs come from warm, dry, quiet houses and to suddenly find themselves in a noisy, cold, wet concrete kennels is unkind.
I advise owners of small dogs who have to leave their pets in kennels to find one that specialises in little dogs.
If possible, take your dog with you, or get a reliable relative or friend to care for your dog at home.
Needless to say, I walked out of my job at the kennels.
 Rosemary, ex-kennel maid 
Have you had bad experiences with boarding kennels?
Write to us with full details.
DOG STARS
Dear Dogs Today 
Because we're mum's star sign, we think we ought to win your star prize.
Pepper is an air sign, Toffee is water, Smudge a fire sign, and Harry the Beagle is an earth sign.
Apart from choosing the breed, mum says that for maximum compatibility, why don't owners select a dog from a star sign suitable to their own (eg Capricorn owner with a Taurean or Virgo dog).
After all, she says, humans do it!
And we are true to our signs.
Harry, the Taurean just loves his food, Smudge (Aries) is always on the go, Pepper is an indecisive Libyan dog, and Toffee (Cancer) a home-loving, sensitive soul.
(Mum, by the way, is Taurean.)
Are we the only dogs chosen for our star signs or have any of you had this star treatment?
 Toffee, Pepper, Smudge and Harry, c/o A Smith, Emsworth, Hants 
Sorry to disappoint you, but I'm afraid you were just pipped for the star prize.
But it probably said that in your horoscope!
COCKER HOOP
Dear Dogs Today 
I'm a black Cocker Spaniel called Charbonnel Night Soldier, or Sam, for short.
I'm really upset, as all the birthday cards seem to be of either goldens or roans.
I think I would make a lovely doggie model.
I have a wonderful coat (so shiny that people think it has been boot polished!).
I love having my photograph taken, in fact I am a real poser!
Please print my photograph and make one ‘sad’ Sam very happy.
 Miss Suzanne Pritchard, Whitby, Cheshire 
TAIL-WAGGER'S TALE
Dear Dogs Today 
I enjoy reading your interesting and entertaining magazine.
Your claim to be the first publication to print dog obituaries made me wonder how many other readers remember the Tail-wagger magazine, which had a regular In Memoriam column.
I read it regularly as a schoolgirl in the '40s and '50s.
Our English Springer, Tessie, was a member of the club and always wore her medallion with ‘I help my pals’ on one side and our address on the reverse.
I still have a few copies and am sending this one for you to see.
I expect all the Dogs Today staff are much too young to remember the Tail-waggers Club but perhaps some readers may.
It would be interesting to know.
I loved the Pippin and PJ pictures.
They remind me a little of my two Shih Tzus.
 Mrs Elizabeth Watson, Dyffryn Ardudwy, Gwynedd 
Thank you for the magazine — it's fascinating.
While they were first with the obituary column — I think we're the only publication ever to offer a free service.
Back in 1949 it cost a minimum of four shillings for a mention in the In Memoriam section.
Quite a lot, considering the magazine only cost sixpence.
Here's the first obituary from the August 1949 issue: ‘Chue Chin Chow, T.W. 788343 put to sleep to avoid further suffering, August 1st, 1948.
Also his combings were used for Merchant Seamen.’
KNOTTY PROBLEM
Dear Dogs Today 
Having read December's issue I feel I might be able to help Laddie the unkempt Cocker from December's Post Bag .
His owner must not shampoo him while he's knotty as it will tighten the knots and make them harder to remove.
I suggest a universal deluxe curved slicker brush.
If the knots won't come out with that then she must take him to a professional grooming salon where the knots will be removed safely and painlessly.
He should be brushed daily to prevent his coat becoming badly knotted again.
I would suggest she baths him every four weeks in Vitacoat Gold Seal and uses Velvet coat spray on his feathers and skirt every day.
Brushed in, this will help prevent static building up and knots forming.
There is only one solution to bad knots — cut them out and start from scratch with proper brushing.
 Sam Evans, Top to Tail 
Thanks Sam.
If you have any other grooming questions send them to Post Bag and Sam will point you in the right direction.
Remember to check out this month's Top to Tail if you own a Poodle.
GOOD BOY STAR LETTER
THREE LEGS TO STAND ON
Dear Dogs Today 
I write in reply to Difficult Decision December Post Bag which posed the question whether a Border Collie could cope with a front leg amputation.
We've had four three-legged dogs over the years: Bless-her, who was born with a hind leg missing; Belle whose front leg was amputated at seven weeks because of a ligament problem; Tulley, a road accident victim who came to us at nine months old and fought for 18 months to keep his damaged front leg.
(The vet eventually amputated and Tulley became a different dog — getting about so much quicker.);
Choco who came to us at about seven years old.
His front leg was paralysed from an old road accident, our vet guessed the owners had abandoned her rather than pay for the amputation.
In our experience dogs manage the loss of a front leg slightly better than that of a back leg.
The photo (taken in the 1970s) shows Choco, Belle and Tully.
My advice is — don't have any qualms about the amputation.
 Mrs Connie Cuff, Pine Ridge Dog Sanctuary, Ascot, Berkshire.
WHAT ABOUT THE WORKERS?
Dear Dogs Today 
I loved your christmas centrefold but I was a little concerned that Pippin and PJ might have had to work very hard to get that shot.
I would be grateful if you could reassure me.
 A Gladstone, Doncaster 
Transforming Ann Head's living room into a christmas grotto was exhausting.
We worked very hard while Pippin and PJ watched us with interest from the comfort of the sofa.
When it was their turn to pose they were true professionals.
In total, Pippin and PJ spent only a few minutes under the lights and had a  lots of praise and Bonios afterwards.
They love their work!
Us poor workers then had the even trickier job of turning the christmas grotto back into a living room!
ON THE NAIL
Dear Dogs Today 
My daughter and I have a Golden Retriever called Sandy.
We dread having to take her to the vets for her nails to be cut.
She quivers and shakes and is terrified of the surgery.
We read your guide to clipping dogs' nails (December issue) and bought the nail cutters you recommended and did it ourselves, following your guide.
Sandy was very calm, quiet and didn't mind.
A big difference from the episode we have at the vets each month!
We have cut out the instructions and kept it for next time.
We'd like to say ‘thank you’.
Can you tell us what breed of dog was in the picture?
 Mrs Susan Corps, Eltham, London 
I'm glad you found our first Top to Tail so useful.
The dog in the photos was a Dobermann.
WELCOME ADVICE
Dear Dogs Today 
Thank you for tackling the very painful subject of pet loss in your December issue.
Laura Lee's article was well balanced and gave sound advice on a variety of ways forward.
I read this article a mere 24 hours after losing my own dog, a truly remarkable 15-year-old Collie cross Labrador who had shared my life since his puppyhood.
 Liz Jones, Brecon, Powys 
Stroke OF GENIUS
JOHN RICHARDSON
Delia Marr graphically demonstrates her sincere affection for dogs of all kinds through paintings which seem to express the very soul of her subjects
‘She is the Stubbs of the 20th century,’ said Nicky Haslam.
‘No, she's the Michaelangelo of the doggy world,’ declared society antiques dealer, John Allsopp.
Though no one can decide who to compare her with, everyone is at least agreed that Delia Marr has tremendous talent.
It is only three years since she took up painting dogs as a profession, but in that short time she has been kept constantly in work.
Her first commission came about quite casually: ‘My husband and I had gone to stay with friends and they asked me to do a charcoal drawing of their Dachshund, Rosy.
From that sketch I was asked to do a painting,’ she recalled.
Delia's favourite breed is the Labrador, but she is a friend to all dogs.
Married to financier and renowned bridge player Donald Marr they have a nine-year-old daughter called Emily.
The ‘passion’ of the family is Mrs Miniver, A Blenheim Cavalier King Charles Spaniel who makes an intense fuss of all visitors when they first arrive, and then slopes off to her chair to continue an interrupted sleep!
Mrs Miniver came into Delia's life at easter, 12 years ago.
‘I travelled down to Kent to stay with Donald, and he presented me with a cardboard box which contained this tiny puppy.
I had only three questions to ask him.
First, would it grow big, secondly would it have ‘poppy’ eyes, and thirdly was it from a pet shop?
His answer to the first was ‘no’ and to the other two ‘yes’.
I must admit, I can't claim it was love at first sight, but within a couple of hours she had firmly established herself in my affections,’ laughed Delia.
But Mrs Miniver very nearly didn't get beyond two years old, when a fall into a nearby river almost proved fatal.
Delia had taken her for a walk in the park and Mrs Miniver — always an inquisitive ‘person’ by nature — had squeezed through railings alongside the river and promptly slid down the bank into the water.
POETIC INSPIRATION
‘I was beside myself with fear, and started panicking as she didn't seem to be able to swim.
I was shouting and screaming for help and at the same time taking off my coat and wellingtons, preparing to jump in after her.
‘Just along the bank a TV crew were filming, and with all the commotion I was making someone broke away from the crowd, jumped into the river and dragged Mrs Miniver to safety.
It turned out to be one of The Goodies , who were making a comedy programme for their series in the area.
‘Since then Mrs Miniver has had a number of other narrow escapes in life, as well!’
Her incentive to take up painting came after she read an article in the Sunday Telegraph about Brigitte Bardot, and, in particular, a poem titled ‘Complaint of an abandoned dog’.
‘I still can't read it without starting to cry, it was so moving.
I really admired Bardot after reading it — she is such a committed carer and sounds the alarm bell for the rest of us.
I think she has done a lot to help the plight of animals,’ commented Delia.
The Marr technique of painting is to go and visit the subject, where she makes copious notes on eye colour and other little idiosyncrasies that will help catch the soul of the dog.
A professional dog photographer is then dispatched to take photos of the dog from which Delia will work.
‘I paint in a room with good north light, and I usually try and get the head outline, eyes and nose right first.
The smallest detail can often be the difference between a good and a bad picture.
Every evening I make my husband criticise my day's work, poor man, and I must say he's been very supportive,’ confessed Delia.
CLAIM TO FAME
She has just finished a portrait of seven-year-old Tulip Dempster, a Pekingese, commissioned by Lady Camilla for Nigel Dempster's birthday — the second one she has done for the family — and a portrait of Mr and Mrs John Menzies' two dogs.
Mysterious, the black Labrador, and Blissful, the crossbreed, were both homed from Battersea and are featured on this month's Dogs Today poster.
The speed of her rise to fame has been astonishingly rapid.
The American, Ciel Pulitzer, is now hoping to promote Delia's work in the States, which will certainly make her a busy lady.
Looking through her work you can't help but be impressed by the quality and her attention to detail — and I did just wonder if I was in the presence of someone who is going to be hailed the greatest canine painter of her era.
I'm sure it won't be long before she is on the most popular chat shows, telling us of commissions she has undertaken and regaling us with tales of her life when she was actress Delia Abraham, co-starring in the TV version of Nell Dunn's Up The Junction , and appearing in rep alongside Kate O'Mara.
Of course, I shall be able to gloat, having got there before the rest of the media!
TWO'S COMPANY
BRIAN KELLY
Living rough is desolate enough, without having to face the possibility of being separated from your only friend.
St Mungo's shelter for the homeless offers a new alternative
It was, without question, the coldest morning of the on-coming winter; bracing if you were heading for home or office, but verging on bitter if your bedroom was an alley or a doorway.
Chilly as it was, it was nothing compared to the day little Rizla came kicking into a snowy world of white.
Pedigree unknown, she was born at the height of last February's blizzards in The Bullring — centre of London's homeless community.
Rizla's better off now.
She romps around St Mungo's shelter in City Road, N1, as if she owns the place.
When I returned after nipping outside, she trotted to the stairs, eyed me carefully and yapped, but not at all convincingly.
I stretched out a hand, and she was putty — the licking, wagging kind.
In these hard and unforgiving times, some people have struggled as they've never had to before.
Jobs have been lost, mortgages forfeited and folk put out on the street — with their dogs.
It doesn't stop there.
In supposedly dog-friendly Britain, getting accommodation and keeping your pets have become regularly conflicting objectives.
A recent Dogs Today letter writer told how much strife he'd endured, merely for trying to have his three German Shepherds live under the same roof as himself.
COLD RECEPTION
Who's to blame?
Corporate giants, local authorities and individual landlords.
Many dictate that you must give up your smelly, messy, untrained child-eater (their opinion, not ours) before you may be considered lucky enough to be offered lodgings.
Some think nothing of virtually waving the keys to a room at the homeless, forcing a decision between the freezing streets, with your dog, or the cosy indoors — by yourself.
Given the hypothetical choice — none had faced it for real — three dog owners at City Road said it was easy.
There was no way they'd give up their best friends.
Peter Cairns and Sam, his black collie-Labrador, met at Euston.
In true transient fashion, Sam (background unknown) was inheriting more temporary ‘owners’ than he was having meals.
‘This young lad was getting people to mind Sam for a few days at a time.
I told him he wasn't really in a position to look after the dog properly, and he finally agreed.
Sam's been with me ever since,’ Peter said.
Sam, about 16 months old, has had the time of his life with Peter.
Before coming to City Road about six weeks before, the pair had been all over — Wales, Somerset, Kent, up north.
‘He's got his own sleeping bag, and he's a great guard dog in the tent at night,’ Peter said.
‘He knows to go to the loo well away from the tent, though.
We were separated for four hours in Peterborough once — I looked everywhere for him.
Eventually, I went back to my rucksack, and there he was.
He knew where to find me.’
The gripping fear of losing your dog has motivated the City Road hostel dog owners to issue special ID discs.
Jodie Riddell, owner of the very sweet Wolfer (Sam's ‘girlfriend’), came close to losing her 18-month-old pet on a busy street — after they'd moved to the hostel.
‘I'd popped into the chemist's.
She was outside for just a second.
When I came out, there was a man with his car door open trying to get her to jump in.
You couldn't print what I told him,’ she said.
Wolfer and Sam, with Rizla, made a comic trio as they marched around the room, pulling fashionable scarves from each other 's necks and having mock rows.
Rizla waded into some plastic sheeting and resumed her second teething phase with it.
Sandy, a gentle white Jack Russell, preferred to remain snuggled in the lap of her owner, Makala Burnett.
There are accidents, naturally — I am reminded, as Rizla tried a sly wee on the linoleum floor.
When dogs have spent long periods living outside, they don't know indoors from outdoors, and must be taught the difference.
Until then, the dog owners at City Road have organised a roster to man the mop and clean up, should the worst happen.
The story of incorporating responsible dog ownership into everyday life at City Road began before its opening last February.
A chap who had slept rough for more than 20 years was invited to offer ideas on how it should be run.
Somewhat sceptical, he spoke of the need for single rooms, safety, security…and the importance of accommodating dogs.
He became the chairman of the residents' committee, and at the official opening, had some very honest, articulate and moving words to say.
Weeks later, he had finally moved into an independent flat.
His name, perhaps ironically, was Yorkie.
MUTUAL SUPPORT
When you and your dog are forced to survive at a very basic level, you share the kind of experience that fastens and tightens a solid bond.
‘Sometimes it's really tough when you're on the street with only a quid and you're both starving.
You then have a choice,’ Peter said.
Stroking Sam, he added, ‘More often than not, it was me going hungry.’
Sam, apparently, has a strange way of showing gratitude.
‘He wakes me up at two in the morning sometimes, for no reason at all,’ Peter said.
‘I'm sure he's just doing it to wind me up.’
Dog Stars
BY JACK RUSSELL GRANT
STAR OF THE MONTH
Aquarius (Jan 21–Feb 20)
You're feeling horribly highly-strung in true hound-dog fashion, and the beast in you is rearing its ugly visage.
Try to sober down and forget your fears as there are calmer days ahead.
Owner's tip: Keep the tranquillisers out of sight.
Pisces  (Feb 20–March 20)
You will soon be meeting up with other dogs and your pack instincts will come into their own.
But don't get too carried away or your popularity with your owner may temporarily be lost.
Aries  (March 21–April 20)
A playful puppyish mood is upon you, but while this immature attitude is in evidence, be sensible enough to resist objects such as clothes, furnishings and oddments unwittingly left in your way.
If you don't want your image tarnished, chase your tail before you get into serious trouble.
Taurus  (April 21–May 21)
Humans are getting you down, and you need to slink away on your own, down to the bottom of the garden, or to a peaceful patio out of the range of everyone.
But don't despair, your depression is only temporary.
An old canine friend is due for a visit, which will give you a lot of pleasure.
Gemini  (May 22–  July 21)
You Geminian energy is taking you places, if you play it right.
Ahead you'll find a series of lucrative events which may well put you in the public eye, and carry you to further success and acclaim.
You've never been fitter, so make the most of it.
Cancer  (June 22–July 23)
A large hound with a broad studded collar is likely to cause trouble, so walk to heel when out and obey your owner instantly, in all matters.
This is one time when you need the reassurance and help of your human keeper.
Leo  (July 24–Aug 23)
A happier period is ahead, rather than of late, and you're in for some high times with plenty of hilarity.
Don't go overboard with it, or your owner won't thank you.
But try to channel your activities to the canine crowd so as to avoid a show-down which could prove to be a great embarrassment.
Virgo  (Aug 24–Sept 23)
An unusual happening will give you a new impetus and your sights are aimed at improving your position in some way.
There are an awful lot of opportunities around if you can only sniff them out.
Just persevere and you'll be certain to find a very pleasant period ahead of you.
Libra  (Sept 24–Oct 23)
There will be some sort of domestic upheaval soon, and you may be involved.
So brace yourself for events which may seem puzzling at times, but which will eventually straighten themselves out, although they may leave you in an exhausted state.
Scorpio  (Oct 24–Nov 22)
You're feeling very languid and lazy and not in the mood for ‘keeping house’ and barking at all-comers.
For a while, you might find your owner a little peeved at you, but this won't last long and you'll soon be back in favour.
A good run in pastures new would do you a world of good.
Sagittarius  (Nov 23–Dec 21)
Problems are on their way, so be ready to cope with them with a stiff upper jaw, in typical British Bulldog style (even if you're not one).
You'll need all your guile and sagacity to help your owner over this tiresome period, but your efforts will be amply rewarded and appreciated.
Capricorn  (Dec 21–Jan 19)
Your influence over another dog who is being a bit of a pain in the collar, will bring you popularity, which you fell in need of at the moment.
A pleasant period is ahead of you, as opportunities for socialising with others of your kind may be at their peak.
Make the most of this interesting time.
Dogs Today February Poster Mr & Mrs John Menzies's Mysterious and Blissful by DELIA MARR
COPING WITH PET LOSS
BY LAURA LEE
Close to home
Burying a much loved pet at home can provide great emotional support at a distressing time, but it can also present practical problems
Home burial is not necessarily a practical option available to all pet owners.
However, if you are able to bury your pet in your garden, or even that of a friend's, the acute sense of loss and separation you feel may be reduced.
The fact you know exactly where your pet is can ease your grief, while the sight of the grave serves to reinforce the fact that your pet is dead.
Being able to visit the grave and talk to your pet can also be very comforting.
However, burying a pet in your garden may stir up a variety of unexpected emotions shortly afterwards.
You may experience a strong sense of anger and resentment when the weather turns bad and your pet is outside all alone, instead of in his rightful place by your side.
You may even feel a strong urge to dig the pet up because the need to hold him one more time can be quite overwhelming.
Protectiveness towards the grave may also induce the feeling that it is a place for only you to visit.
These emotions may disturb you for a little while, but they are simply a natural response to the trauma of death and they will usually pass with time.
After the death of her mother, one lady took on the task of caring for her bereaved cat.
A year later it died of old age and she buried it in the garden.
In the spring she planted a garden of remembrance round the grave using all the flowers her mother had loved.
She felt she had created a little peaceful corner where she could sit and feel close to both her late mother and her cat.
BE PREPARED
Some people like to bury their pet wrapped in its blanket, others prefer to use a simple casket which they make themselves or buy from a local undertakers.
It is also possible to get headstones and plaques bearing simple messages of love or remembrance to mark the grave.
Whatever you do should be right for you and for memories of your pet.
If you know that your dog is about to be humanely destroyed and you plan to bury it at home, you may find it easier to prepare the grave beforehand.
‘Having made the decision to have Sandy put to sleep, my husband spent the evening before digging her a grave.
I spent the evening just holding her,’ disclosed one bereaved owner.
Once your pet has died you may be too distressed to dig the grave, as another owner testified; ‘It was raining hard and I couldn't see through my tears, I just wanted to get her buried as quickly as possible.’
MOVING PROBLEM
You may want to hold a simple ceremony in your pet's honour, as a last chance to say goodbye.
It is important that the whole family can recognise their grief and give each other emotional support.
Home burials are particularly important to children, partly because it helps them to understand that the pet has gone forever and also because seeing their parents' sorrow teaches them that it's normal and acceptable to grieve.
These days many people move house frequently, and inevitably this means leaving behind the graves of much loved pets.
If you have recently buried a pet you may even find that you don't want to move at all.
However, when you move into your new house you could reestablish a garden of remembrance, a stone plaque or a special plant.
You might even bury a personal reminder of your pet, like a toy or a lead.
Explain to the people who buy your house where your pets are buried in the hope that they won't accidentally disturb the grave.
Moving may mean leaving behind many memories of your pet that can be difficult to abandon.
It may be harder to leave your memories behind than the grave itself, but remember that the love for your pet will be buried in your heart forever.
If you would like to write to Laura about any bereavement problem, enclose a SAE and mark your letters Coping , Dogs Today,10 Sheet Street, Windsor, Berkshire, SL4 1BG .
PRACTICAL POINTS TO CONSIDER ABOUT A HOME BURIAL
1)
Have you got space in your garden for a grave?
2)
Are you physically able to dig a grave, or would it be more practical to have your pet cremated and then bury the ashes?
3)
If you are just about to move house it might be preferable to have your pet cremated and bury the ashes in your new garden.
4)
Try to choose a site for the grave that won't need to be disturbed.
5)
If wild animals have access to your garden you may need to prevent them trying to dig up your pet's body; make sure that the grave is as deep as possible and perhaps place a paving slab over it.
WILD at heart
ERICA PEACHEY
After years of foraging and running wild, Sadie was given one last chance to start a new life, but the learning process proved to be a long and challenging one
Sadie, I was told, was a feral dog.
She was probably not born into the wild, but she lived as a feral dog.
She roamed around the countryside and was often seen, but only in the distance.
Sadie lived a solitary life for about three years without even the company of other dogs.
It was impossible to catch her, but as time went on, she started to venture nearer to houses and populated areas.
Sadie would raid the bins for scraps when she could — perhaps her diet of rabbits needed to be supplemented.
Then, she came into season.
Those who disliked dogs objected to the vast number running around which had been attracted by her, while people who liked dogs were concerned about the little wild bitch's welfare.
Eventually, a couple who had been putting food down for Sadie for about six months managed to trap her in a garage and driveway.
However, after five days of trying they still could not get near to her.
They gave her the name Sadie because she had such sad eyes.
That's where I came in.
My initial impression of Sadie was that of a dog who was totally depressed.
Her eyes were dull and she was covered in scars and wounds.
She had the same blank, anxious expression as some zoo animals have.
My first thought, I'm afraid to say, was ‘What an ugly dog!’
Sadie messed herself when I touched her.
She went berserk when I put a lead on her, and bit it until her mouth bled.
I went to see her a couple of times, but there was no progress.
Ultimately, I decided that this was not getting us anywhere, but I was her last hope.
I put a lead on her and walked her home.
Those seven miles took a long time, but we worked a few things out.
As long as I did not look at her, Sadie resigned herself to wandering behind me.
She pulled backwards if I spoke to her and lay down in the grass at every opportunity, refusing to move.
Sadie wouldn't accept any of the various titbits I had brought with me, but with patient coaxing we made it home eventually.
Sadie had a lot to learn.
I am convinced she had never lived in a house before, and had never had any real relationship with people.
House-training was a nightmare.
Sadie was wary of my other two dogs; Mindy decided she would try to be nice to her, while Ben just wanted to play.
Sadie did not even know what play or being nice was.
She was so worried and scared of me that I couldn't reward her when she did something right and, obviously, telling her off was out of the question.
It took her three months to gain the confidence to walk through a door, even if the other two dogs walked out first.
She was extremely destructive when left alone.
All of that I could understand, but it concerned me that she was so nervous and desperately unhappy.
Progress was painfully slow; I had owned her for a year before she wagged her tail at me.
It was a very long year.
That was four years ago.
Sadie and I gradually learnt about each other.
I know not to expect her to react in the way other dogs do, and she knows that I will look after her and she doesn't have to be quite so independent.
She is like no other dog I have ever met.
Sadie is very quiet and gentle and is still easily worried.
She is extremely well behaved, and travels everywhere with me — to open days where she has to cope with lots of people, visits to playgroups to teach the children how to approach a strange dog, friends' houses, talks I give, dog clubs and work engagements.
I'm not saying she's perfect, but most of the time, she's fairly near.
EFFORTS REWARDED
She will play when she is relaxed, but although she is now seven or eight years old, she still has the exaggerated movements of a young puppy.
While not affectionate in the way other dogs are, when Sadie comes and gently pushes her nose against my leg, I know we have achieved something.
I have yet to come across another dog who began life in the same way Sadie did which has now successfully integrated into society.
Perhaps you have had a similar experience, or know of a dog in your area with the same background?
Are there any feral dogs in your area?
I would be very interested to hear from you.
Write to: Erica Peachey, Animal Behaviour Consultant, 9 North Road, West Kirby, Wirral, Merseyside, L48 4DE 
CAREERS with dogs
Part 14: GUIDE DOGS
DAVID APPLEBY
For those who enjoy working with people and dogs, guide dog training has lots to offer — but you'll need dedication and staying power!
As I drove into the guide dog training centre at Leamington Spa it took me back to the day I arrived there to start my apprenticeship as a guide dog mobility instructor.
I thought I would see what changes, if any, had been made to the career structure of the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association (GDBA)— a career which I reluctantly gave up to become a full-time behaviour counsellor.
Any purely dog-orientated career opportunities within the association don't really exist.
All the kennel staff at training centres are involved with the general public, fund raisers, puppy walkers and — except at the breeding centre — with the visually impaired students attending residential courses.
‘People’ skills are, therefore, as important as dog skills.
On a day-to-day social basis the kennel staff, all of whom have to live in at the training centre, interact closely with the students.
Potential staff have to be at least 18 years old and qualified up to GCSE level, including maths and English.
The GDBA provides all the practical and theoretical training required for a City and Guilds kennel staff examination which is taken after 12 months experience.
A further supervisors' exam, taken after 18 months, enables staff to apply for an assistant kennel manager's post.
KENNEL STAFF
Not far from Leamington is the breeding centre.
The career structure for kennel staff is identical here but, as Nicole Keefe the kennel manager told me: ‘Working at the breeding centre can involve more unsociable hours.
When a bitch in whelp comes into the centre one of the staff is made responsible for her care throughout her stay.
‘There's a lot of variety, as stud dogs, brood bitches and puppies all have very different care requirements.’
Neil Ewart, the breeding centre manager, firmly believes that it is the association's ‘scientific approach’ which has made the breeding programme so successful.
Kennel staff are trained in the use of ultrasound, artificial insemination, cytology (testing to assess a bitch's optimum conception time), as well as supervising the matings themselves.
The dog supply unit, managed by a senior guide dog mobility instructor, receives puppies from the breeding centre.
Their progress and welfare are closely monitored by a puppy walking supervisor who decides when a dog is ready for formal guide dog training — normally at around 10 months to one year old.
Each dog is allocated to a guide dog trainer who has a ‘pack’ of dogs, all at various stages of training.
The trainer assesses individual potential and develops basic guide dog skills, such as obstacle avoidance and traffic awareness.
A potential trainer has to be at least 18, educated up to GCSE standard in maths and English, plus a science subject, and be fit — as they walk many miles a day in all weathers.
A driving licence is essential.
Practical and theoretical training starts with two months kennel work followed by development of the necessary skills for the City and Guilds guide dog trainer exam.
MOBILITY INSTRUCTORS
After being trained to guide safely the dogs are transferred to a guide dog mobility instructor, who continues the training in increasingly complex environments.
The instructor then goes ‘on class’— normally with teams of four dogs and four suitable students — in consultation with the area supervisor.
The instructor develops their compatibility and competency over four weeks at the training centre, followed by after-care in the students' home environment.
Instructors make annual visits to guide dog units to advise, where necessary, and to check all is well.
They also interview potential guide dog owners to assess their suitability.
The regional training manager at Leamington, Keith Sanderson, made no apologies for a ‘somewhat lengthy application procedure for anyone wishing to become a guide dog mobility instructor.
The GDBA is a unique organisation and it is difficult, but essential to find people with the dual skills required for dog and people training.
‘Applicants must be at least 21, with a minimum of five GCSEs.
The association has an intake of 20–24 apprentice instructors every year.
Successful applicants go on to a three-day assessment course.
If they are selected they have 37 months of rigorous training ahead of them.’
For the first six months they have to live in at a training centre.
After two months in kennels they move on to the dog supply unit for 11 months, during which time they will be required to train at least six dogs up to the blindfold standard, and pass the guide dog trainer examination.
ADVANCED INSTRUCTION
In the third and final phase apprentices are trained in advanced guide dog preparation and client instruction techniques.
They work on five residential courses, when they must produce 17 guide dog and owner units, and then, of course, sit the inevitable final exams.
As you can see, although it is a charity, the GDBA is a highly professional organisation with superb and varied career opportunities for anyone with genuine enthusiasm.
top to…tail
A guide to home maintenance for your dog by Sam Evans
GROOMING YOUR POODLE
Poodles have become immensely popular, but whatever size, they require more attention than most other breeds to prevent them becoming matted, tangled and smelly, which can lead to skin infections, fleas and ear problems.
It is essential that your Poodle is brushed daily, preferably with a curved slicker brush.
Most people groom the top-knot and body but often miss other important areas.
Learning how to brush thoroughly means a happier, healthier dog, and less time in the grooming salon.
1
As you start brushing, part the hair down to the skin and keep the unbrushed hair separate from the brushed coat.
Groom the body and head first, then work on the front legs.
Brush hair in an upward direction, and then downward.
When you get to the top of each leg it's vital to remember the inside where it rubs against the chest, which can often matt.
However, this area is tender, so be gentle.
2
Work upwards when brushing the rear legs.
Hold the foot firmly to the floor with your free hand and use short brisk strokes on the lower and inner parts of the leg.
When you reach the hock, grasp the leg around the stifle (as illustrated) and continue brushing.
If your Poodle is in a lamb clip or similar style then pay particular attention to the inside of the legs and around the anus and hocks, to ensure there are no knots.
3
Cleaning the ears is vital — preventing infection, odour and vet's bills!
Remove excess hair around the ear canal, as this tend to collect wax and restrict fresh air.
Fold back the ear flap, and briskly pull out one or two hairs at a time, in the direction of growth.
It may be useful to have someone to steady the dog's muzzle.
Once the hair is removed, wipe the inside of the ear flap and the canal opening with cotton wool soaked in ear cleaner (from pet shops or your vet).
Never probe into the canal itself.
4
Brush the outside of the ear section by section in a downward direction.
Pay special attention to the area behind and under the ear.
Then hold the ear up over the head with one hand and carefully brush the hair down.
If you find the matts are severe, ask your groomer to remove them for you, so you can start again from scratch.
It's not advisable to try and cut them out yourself as they tend to be close to the skin.
ROBERT KILLICK'S Short Story
Glowing exposure
Sitting cosy in the lap of luxury, surrounded by knee-deep snow drifts…the sight of a strutting cockerel was too much to resist.
Curse that dog!
I am a gout sufferer, and it's no laughing matter.
In the year of the great snows, I had an attack of gout.
On the first day of the blizzard 30 of my sheep got buried and on the first night my kennel runs were covered with six feet of snow, making it difficult, if not impossible, to get the dogs out.
The following day my foot resembled a rugby ball with little pink sausages sticking out, but somebody had to dig the dogs out.
The foot was too big to get a boot on so I put on two woolly socks and a plastic bag.
Then, shovel under one arm and crutch under the other, I hobbled up to the top kennels.
It took three hours to dig them out, and it was no fun.
I snagged the plastic bag, water got in, soaked my socks and the outside froze.
I managed to rehouse all but one — the Cur(se) of the Killicks we called her, a Welsh Terrier.
She didn't care too much for other dogs but her pet hates were chickens and cats.
Naturally, chickens chose to peck about right outside her run and cats would sleep on her roof — it would drive her demented.
She would run around her pen at such speed that the centrifugal force would keep her on the vertical walls like a Wall of Death rider.
We couldn't bring her into the house because we had an old cat and we had no spare kennels, so that just left the caravan.
Well, she thought the caravan was the quintessence of OK-ness.
So did I — that is, until Rodney strutted by with his entourage!
Rodney was a Rhode Island Red cockerel, a creature of much dignity with the temper of a can-can dancer with corns.
Cats — and my daughter — kept out of his way.
He respected me — any trouble, and he would suddenly find himself projected 20ft in the air by my foot!
Have you ever watched a big heavy cockerel walk on thick, fresh snow?
He'll put one foot down, it stays on the surface for a second, he transfers his weight and sinks up to his body.
Pretending nothing unusual is happening he gives his wings one flutter, lifts the sunken foot and puts down the other — and so it goes on.
The trouble is that he attracts attention to himself — and today was no exception.
As I watched, the big window at the front of the caravan shattered — and the Curse flew through the air and fell onto Rodney, who screeched with outrage.
Huge flurries of snow and feathers as his 20 panicked concubines flew up into the surrounding trees.
The Curse had a mouthful of Rodney's tail feathers.
FEATHERED FLURRY
I have to interrupt here to tell you of Rodney's tail.
A thing of great beauty, it was not unusual to hear sharp intakes of breath as people beheld it for the first time.
Huge semi-circular feathers in dazzling hues sprang vertically before sweeping in wide arcs to the ground.
Austrian hat manufacturers wept with emotion as they offered untold wealth for a single specimen.
But I was strong — those feathers stayed firmly growing from Rodney's bottom.
That is, until that day.
Rodney's great wings flapped, driving snow into the dog's eyes, his feet with their two inch long spurs flailed and suddenly they parted.
The Curse stood, astonished, with a mouthful of feathers and Rodney ran into the distance pink-bottom naked!
By the time I'd caught the dog and put her in a box Rodney had disappeared into the gloom.
It was dusk.
I now had to find 20 chickens before dark.
I thought they had gone to join Rodney, but no!
They were still in the trees.
Now, when chickens decide to roost in trees it is not easy to dissuade them, but as the night was cracking with frost I had visions of finding deep-frozen aerial chickens in the morning.
So, climbing a ladder, I collected every one despite my swollen foot.
It was dark by the time I'd finished.
What happened to Rodney, you may well ask.
Three days later I was limping back from the village and was about half a mile from home when I saw a movement in the hedge.
Yes, it was Roders, his bright bottom shining like a beacon in the darkness of the leaves.
It was an emotional moment for me.
It took my daughter and me over an hour to drive him home, the ungrateful creature!
His feathers grew back although I had a feeling he was never quite the same — he looked, kind of, embarrassed?
Fatal PERCEPTION
MOLLY REED
Singled out from the dogs' home Sorrel knew she was destined for a special life.
But gifts of second sight meant she could sense the sinister, too
The back door burst open and six-year-old Sally came running excitedly into the room.
‘Mum, Jamie's dad has bought a retired Greyhound.
Can we have a dog please ?’
The boys looked up with interest.
Tony thought a Wolfhound would be great — and Christopher reminded me of his longing for an Old English Sheepdog.
Looking around our tiny sitting room, I wondered where we would put the furniture.
Sally wanted something smaller, preferably with a long silky coat and a bow in its top-knot.
My suggestion that mice — or even rats — would be more suitable went unheard — they were too busy arguing over breeds.
We were a one-parent family, and as I had to work full-time, I felt that a dog would only add to my problems.
However, I had to give in when, a few days later, Christopher returned from school and informed me that his teacher said a dog added to the character of a child and also taught compassion.
The mental picture of three compassionate children seemed very attractive.
School holidays started soon and maybe a pet would help to keep them out of mischief.
So, on a dull and drizzly morning we headed for the dogs' home.
There were dogs of all shapes and sizes at the kennels — but, luckily, no Wolfhounds or Old English Sheepdogs.
The children went from one kennel to another, unable to make a unanimous choice.
We were still undecided when, unaccountably, I had a strong feeling that our pet wasn't to be found here.
I asked the inspector if there were any dogs we hadn't yet seen.
‘You mean the Dachshund,’ he replied.
‘I'm sorry, she's still too vicious to handle, I couldn't let a dog like that near children.’
I begged him just to let me see her.
Reluctantly, he took us to a single kennel at the back of the offices.
The little bitch cowered against the wall, her red coat looking like a badly worn carpet, her ears bedraggled and almost bare, and a scar across her nose.
She was shivering with fear, yet her lip curled in a snarl, I whispered, ‘Come, Sorrel’, and she immediately ran towards us.
The inspector's warning came too late — just as I put my hand through the bars.
Sorrel rubbed against my palm and licked my fingers.
The man was astonished.
‘She has done nothing but snarl since she arrived last Wednesday.’
NATURAL CHOICE
It was decided — this was our dog.
The inspector was dubious.
She was to be boarded permanently so we would need the owners' permission to take her away.
Eventually we persuaded him to contact the previous owners.
My sons were slightly disappointed, but Sally was delighted and felt convinced: ‘Sorrel has always been ours, hasn't she, mum?’
A few days later the previous owners sent her pedigree and a short letter, explaining that their grandchildren were to blame for Sorrel's temper.
Letter in hand, I returned to the kennels and was surprised to see Sorrel standing by the door of her run, eager and happy.
The kennel maid remarked, ‘There's something queer about that animal, she has been waiting for you since early this morning.
How could she know?’
I was just as mystified, but then, I couldn't explain how I'd been aware of her presence on our previous visit.
I gathered the little thing into my arms and she pressed against me.
The journey home was no problem — she slept the whole way.
Within a month, Sorrel had completely settled down.
Her coat lost its moth-eaten look and became soft and glossy.
The hair on her ears grew long and silky and the scar was hardly noticeable.
To make life easier for us all I started to teach her a few commands, but I found she would obey any order before it was given.
I only had to think about asking her to go to bed when, rather reluctantly, she would go to her box under the kitchen table.
Every night before her dinner she would run to paw my knee.
Of course, I thought, she's aware of the time.
But one evening — a full hour before her usual meal — I sat quietly in the armchair, reading.
Without moving and keeping my eyes focused on the page, I thought ‘dinner, Sorrel’.
Sorrel, asleep on the settee, suddenly became alert and looked expectantly in the direction of the kitchen.
On other occasions, she knew we were all going out before any preparations were made, and would sit in the hall gazing intently at her lead.
If she was to be left at home she showed no interest.
Not having to give verbal commands seemed uncanny at first, but before long it just seemed natural.
I can see her now, running across the park, ears pricked-up.
Suddenly, she would stop and look towards our house because she had sensed Sally calling her.
One evening, when Sorrel had been with us for about five years, Sally and I got ready to take her for her usual walk.
Before, she had always jumped up excitedly, but this time she stayed on the settee.
When my daughter called her, she answered with a whimper.
Her nose was cold and she seemed to be perfectly well so I clipped on her lead and carried her outside.
At first she pulled back, but after a few minutes she relaxed a little.
Even though she was walking normally I felt worried and thought maybe she was sick or had been hurt.
Then, as we turned onto the main road — a dual carriageway — a car came careering full speed down the road on our side.
Just at the point where we were walking, the car suddenly mounted the pavement to avoid a vehicle coming in the opposite direction.
My daughter and I were unhurt, but Sorrel was killed instantly.
Sally was stunned and kept repeating over and over again, ‘She didn't want to go out — she knew it would happen’.
DÉJÀ VU It was a long time before we recovered from the loss, and I vowed never to have another dog because we could never replace Sorrel.
However, four years later I bought Bamba, a Border Collie bitch.
She gave us much happiness until her death at the great age of nineteen.
Bamba was aware of my moods and embarrassingly snarled at anyone I disliked, but wasn't telepathic — except in one respect.
She'd been with us for a year when we went for a day's walk in the country.
Bamba ran ahead across a meadow.
Then I noticed a flock of sheep in the adjoining field.
I called to her, but in my haste shouted, ‘Sorrel’.
It was the first time I had made this mistake, but Bamba immediately turned and ran back to us.
We found that she would answer to either name, but didn't respond to any other.
This made me feel that Sorrel was still with us, and I'm sure she was — in Bamba.
WATER PERFORMANCE!
FLORENCE PATTERSON
What better way to appreciate your flowers than practising the art of sample collecting?
‘Right then, I want to see him again on Friday afternoon, and bring a sample of his urine with you.’
I stared in disbelief, first at the vet and then at Cuillin, my little West Highland White Terrier.
How on earth…?
It must be possible, or the vet wouldn't have said it.
I made the appointment and took the dog home.
Over the next two days a lot of hard thinking went into my plan of campaign.
First, I needed a suitable container.
An old straight-sided glass ashtray fitted the bill.
I washed and sterilised it and put it on the hall table, beside the front door.
Next, I went out and surveyed the garden.
It is a very small one, with narrow, herbaceous borders against a wooden fence and a triangular rose bed in one corner.
The dog's favourite bush, a hypercium, is against a wall, about six feet from the front door.
Usually, the dog never stirs in the morning until I appear, fully clad, so my plan was to come downstairs, lift the ashtray, let the dog out and follow him to the hypercium.
Unfortunately, I couldn't have explained it clearly to the dog.
The following morning, I'd just got out of bed when he started barking to get out.
I leapt into my dressing gown, raced downstairs, grabbed the ashtray, opened the front door and flew out after the dog.
He didn't go to his favourite bush.
He headed for a short, thick clump of maidenhair fern.
I got down on my knees behind him and pushed the ashtray under his raised leg.
The leg snapped down.
His paw landed in the ashtray, knocking it out of my hand and spilling the few precious drops I had caught.
Fixing me with an indignant eye, he scuttled off to the peonies.
That's appropriate, I thought, as I crawled smartly after him.
All I caught was a greenfly and another filthy look.
CAUGHT IN THE ACT
That morning, everything was ahead of time.
The dog was watering the delphiniums and I was on my knees and elbows, bottom in the air, trying to push the ashtray in from a different angle, in the hope he wouldn't notice it, when the garden gate creaked open — it was the postman.
The dog whipped round and shot off to greet his friend, and I was left lying prostrate with a damp ashtray.
‘Caught you on the hop this morning!’ said Postie.
Caught me bending was nearer the mark.
He stared at the ashtray.
‘What on earth are you doing?’ he asked.
By this time I was upright, physically at least, if not mentally.
I explained.
The postman was very good.
He managed to hide his hysteria until he had handed over my mail.
I watched his shaking shoulders go out of the gate and disappear round the corner.
At this point, I accepted temporary defeat and took the dog, now very comfortable thank you, indoors.
A little later, dressed and breakfasted, I let the dog out again, and, oh joy, he headed for his favourite bush.
This time the paper girl wrecked my plan.
I could hear her giggles fading into the distance as I led the dog back into the house.
He retired to his basket in a huff and I went off to the supermarket in a quandary.
Was there another way to tackle this problem?
If there was, I couldn't think of it.
When I got home, I kept him in for a while, then, ashtray at the ready, let him loose for another try.
Maybe he was beginning to feel sorry for me, because this time he chose a tall slim rosebush.
A nifty bit of sleight of hand got the ashtray into the correct position, and in a few seconds, I had a good quantity of the precious fluid.
PUBLIC CONVENIENCE
The tests on this sample confirmed the vet's opinion that my dog has a metabolic disorder.
Fortunately, it can be controlled by diet.
Unfortunately , it means that his urine has to be tested every two months.
But I've cracked the collection problem.
I round up all the suitable containers in the house — china, glass and plastic, plain and coloured — and on U-day, I sneak out first and put them in strategic places all round the garden.
Then I let the dog out, stand well back and wait while nature takes its course.
On one U-day last winter, a short-sighted neighbour asked me what the pretty flowers were.
I told her that they were lathyrus.
Keen gardeners know this plant by its common name — everlasting pea!
LAURELS FOR HARDY COMPANIONS
BRIAN KELLY
PRO Dogs awards dinner is scattered with life-savers, canine oscar-winning pets and devoted dutiful dogs of distinction.
If you crick your neck you might spot the odd bald patch, too!
The great and funny thing about chatting and supping the night away at the Wembley Hilton in that picturesque corner of old Middlesex is the mirrors on the ceiling.
Nothing kinky or remotely nudge-nudge about them, but they are brilliant for spotting those thin of thatch.
In direct contrast on this night were the torrents of furry coverings on some others — namely, those 23 different breeds competing in the PRO Dogs breed final.
They were little loves to a dog, but whether they were, as billed, the cream of British dogdom, well, all owners would like to think their dogs were.
And it was the Miniature Poodle which caught the eye of well-known judge Jean Lanning, with the Lhasa Apso reserve.
The major task tonight was congratulating three dogs which had outshone all others during the year in areas of saving lives, devotion to duty and pet of the year.
PRO Dogs have made these awards every year since 1979.
All manner of dogs have won, including a Pekingese who saved a mother and daughter from carbon monoxide poisoning, right up to a sandy-coated mongrel who learned how to climb a ladder in his apprenticeship as a window cleaner's assistant!
Goldie, the Blue Peter dog, was pet of the year in 1981 and was deemed to have been a substitute pet for many youngsters unable to keep pets of their own at home.
Another celebrity winner was Schnorbitz, the St Bernard owned by the late Bernie Winters.
This year, the canine oscars were awarded to:
ZEN the Elkhound.
Zen's barking background could only have been a big plus the day he found a newborn baby whose entire experience of life was going to be lying abandoned for a few hours by a creek near Plymouth.
Zen, on a morning walk with a friend of owner Mark Waghorn, sounded the alarm and the baby was saved.
Police still hope the unusual rescue and surrounding publicity may bring the child's mother forward.
THOR the German Shepherd serving the police, soon to take it easy due to ill health.
One night just off the M6 in Cheshire, Thor rewarded all the training, attention and love shown to him with an avalanche of devotion and courage.
Thor cornered a knife-wielding miscreant in a small wood and, when joined by handler Derek Williams, stopped the ne'er-do-well stabbing his human mate several times.
Thor is going to live with Derek's family in Warrington.
DES — our very own bundle of cheek from the Arabian Desert.
As Dogs Today readers know, poor Des has had buckets to cope with in his short life and can be a bit free ‘n’ easy with his pearly whites.
Anyway, Des looked stunning as ever tonight, handled by former army pal Dave Forster, but was still a little, um, unpredictable.
The look on the face of the Dog World supremo Mike Boulding, urged by the photographers to squat as close as possible to Des, was priceless.
Again, dogs themselves had shown through a human medium (thanks, PRO Dogs) that they are capable, trustworthy members of society.
Founder and director Lesley Scott-Ordish hoped we had enjoyed a good night, and we had.
Should it be pointed out all three winners were males?
I will do, not that I feel the gavel-bashing toastmaster was in order by repeatedly calling for ‘gentlemen’ to cough up money for raffle tickets.
He was guilty not once and not twice, either.
Our table felt it was worth £20 of tickets for a woman to put her hand up and show him the error of his ways, but we'd already forked out enough, honest.
Long after the profiteroles had been sauced, tables were moved deftly aside for a short but gripping, and sometimes funny, obedience display by one man, one woman and both their dogs before the breeds came out and strutted for their admirers.
With the raffle short of a grand by just a few quid, the cry for the remainder went up.
An outstanding suggestion arose —Dogs Today would give the £60 if any Crufts committee member present could publicly justify why this magazine was not being allowed a stand at Crufts.
But we didn't want to cause embarrassment — after all, they had just been awarded a ‘Proddy’ award for services to dogs!
Hearing Les Crawley's Trio perform was a highlight.
Never mind the name was shared with Sussex's biggest, baddest inland town; the jazz was hotter than the scorching asparagus soup, and many cut the rug until closing.
Earlier, I'd had the good fortune to place my left ear point-blank to old Gavel Basher's larynx as he asked everyone in a 20-mile radius (or so it seemed) to be seated.
Shell-shocked, we stood in silence.
He stepped forward, made polite conversation and said to the woman in the shoulderless dress: ‘I'm a nice chap, really, you know.’
And he was.
And he had an absolutely cracking bald spot.
How Sombro dodges the nick
True Case Histories
Peter Neville is a consultant in animal behaviour and Honorary Secretary of the Association of Pet Behaviour Counsellors (APBC), 257 Royal College Street, London NW1.
He is also author of the best-selling book Do Dogs Need Shrinks?
Well, it was supposed to be a holiday, and I did promise Claire I wouldn't take anything to do with work to Barbados, but both of us noticed fairly quickly just how few dogs there were on the island.
There were a few German Shepherds and Dobermanns guarding the larger properties, and the security guard at the hotel had a Rottweiler but, by and large, dogs were thin on the ground and were usually medium to large brown mongrels.
When we did meet a dog, we always stopped to chat with the owner — if the dog would let us!
There were no problems with Sombro and Picosso.
They were as relaxed as you'd expect a couple of dogs to be in the midday sun in the West Indies and clearly had life exactly as they wanted it.
Only Sombro's scars hinted at unrest!
Manuel and Eva clearly loved their dogs, and the native Bajan Blackbelly sheep which also wandered into the bar (although one young lamb was still being housetrained!).
Still, life was as it should be — people with time to talk, relax and enjoy the company of each other and dogs and animals.
No anti-dog lobby, no ‘Schedule A’ demanding muzzling and leash orders, and no need for protection against motorways — just a happy relationship with dogs free to be dogs without too much constraint from human packmates.
Ordinarily, there would be very few behaviour problems with the dogs of Barbados, even if we were viewing the scene with the rose-tinted spectacles of tourists arrived for two weeks of beaching, sightseeing and nightclubbing!
COURTING SCARS
Sombro was presenting a common behaviour problem for male dogs, and it was nothing to do with high-strung pedigree breeding, failure to live up to expectations of unreasonable or over-demanding owners, or lack of freedom or space.
His problem was one of testosterone — the major male hormone.
It was a case of too much and too active, driving him to roam.
Manuel was a very caring owner, but from a differing viewpoint.
Why shouldn't old Sombro go off for nights on the town if he felt like it?
‘It's his choice to come or go as he pleases,’ he said.
‘If he stays, he's welcome.
If he's sick, I treat him, and take him to the vet if he's real bad.
If he's here, I feed him and play with him.
If he's not, I don't.’
It was the type of straightforward approach we lost long ago in most of England with our mortgages and businesses and expensive social activities and I was envious.
Who wouldn't be?
Manuel and Eva had a bar on the tip of paradise as well as enough time to enjoy their dogs to the full!
The problem for Sombro was that at the mere age of three, he was getting old before his time because of his rampant ways and, by the look of the scars on his face, ears and neck, he wasn't finding it any easier to hold his own with the competition.
Frequent nights on the tiles, punch-ups and eager girlfriends were clearly taking their toll on him and Manuel said it was taking Sombro longer to get over his binges when he came home.
He also suspected it was taking poor Sombro even longer to get home after a heavy session!
Indeed, Sombro was not long back from the town when he arrived at North Point and he appeared tired and wan as he looked up with those big eyes he inherited from the Labrador side of his lineage.
‘If you haven't got food, don't hassle me, man,’ he seemed to say, in true Bajan dialect.
If Sombro had been referred to me at one of my clinics in England, the problem would have been easy to diagnose and the treatment straightforward.
Roaming away from the den, fighting with other male dogs and persistent courting of bitches is a classic reflection of a little too much male hormone and best treated permanently by castration.
GROWING PAINS
While most young male dogs go through a period of excessive sexual behaviour and can be a little too pushy for their own good with older males between the ages of about ten months and two years, they usually calm down and become more sociable with other dogs and less strife to have around the home.
They can be treated in the short term with an anti-male hormone injection from the vet and this will see them safely through difficult periods without the need for the unkindest cut.
For a few dogs such as Sombro, the drives of adolescence persist into adulthood and while the dog can be okay while fit and young, life can get increasingly tough as they get older.
But being the oldest swinger in a town a hot mile's walk away was a life Sombro was used to.
In human terms, he'd reached the age of about 30 — a critical time for self-reflection, I remember!
Castration was what I would have recommended back in England, where there is less space for dogs to wander and where welfare considerations for a dog out on his own are obviously of prime concern.
While I am the last to recommend such surgery unnecessarily, there's no doubt that in Sombro's case it would be for his own good.
SUSPENDED SENTENCE
Somehow, neutering and population control just aren't the same issues in Barbados as they are in Great Britain.
As Manuel and I sat drinking our rum punch outside the tavern in the midday sun, patting Sombro and discussing dogs as pets in our respective homelands, we both knew Sombro's manhood would remain intact and that, as long as he was able to mooch down to the village, he would do so.
Maybe when he really got roughed up or stayed out for more than just a few days, Manuel would think about talking things over with the vet, but for now, well, ‘what's the hurry, man?!’
Case Notes
CASE NO:
2999
CLIENT:
Manuel Ward
ADDRESS:
Pirates Tavern, North Point, St Lucy, Barbados
DOG'S NAME:
Sombro
BREED:
Labrador cross
SEX:
Male
AGE:
Three years
PROBLEM:
Roaming in search of bitches and fighting males
Dear Mr Neville
My wife Eva and I live on the northern-most tip of the island of Barbados where we run the Pirates Tavern and the tourist centre of ‘Animal Flower Cave’.
It's rugged and sometimes windswept, but we love the remoteness.
Our two dogs — Sombro, a black Labrador cross, and Picosso, a white Boxer — also seem to enjoy the easy come easy go existence.
They spend most of their day lying in the shade…it's always between 75 and 85 degrees and they enjoy coming into the open bar to meet guests.
They get more active in the cool of the morning and evening, wandering along the cliff tops and the beach, exploring.
Like everything else on Barbados, life is very relaxed for the pair of them and they are never on a lead, but perhaps one of them should be tethered!
For the last couple of years, Sombro has periodically disappeared.
This happens maybe once every couple of months but recently, every couple of weeks, he trots off on his own.
We know where he goes — down to the town about a mile away in search of a bitch.
Presumably, he catches the scent of a bitch in season on the wind and can't help but follow it.
Either there are more bitches on heat in the village nowadays, or he's simply getting into the habit of looking.
While no one objects to him chasing the girls a bit(the roads are safe enough and drivers know him and avoid him), he stays away for days on end and is obviously getting into scraps with other dogs — presumably male rivals who've beaten the same path to the bitches' doors!
When Sombro comes home after a long excursion, he's usually very thin, in poor shape and a bit battered and bruised.
He usually sleeps for a couple of days and then slowly builds himself up for the next trip.
Picosso, who is also male, shows no such inclinations.
Is there anything we could do to keep Sombro enjoying the nightlife here instead of downtown, without having to tie him up?
 Yours sincerely Manuel Ward  
Love knows no fear
ALAN COMBES
Undeterred by frequent violent attacks, Joan Marsdon and her brave team of healers continue to instil new life into psychiatric wards
To hear Joan Marsdon talking of the PAT (Pets as Therapy) work she has done with her dogs Bewey, Chrissy and Beth, you would think she had been operating all her life.
When it emerges that she has been doing her voluntary work in York for just six years, her enormous commitment becomes clear.
Pets as Therapy is, of course, nothing new.
But Joan ventures where few other dog owners would dare to tread and her marvellous Labrador, Beth, has scars to prove it.
To become a PAT pet, dogs have to pass a temperament test.
‘The vet might put his hand into the dog's mouth or pull its ears and there must be no aggressive or nervous response from the animal,’ Joan explained.
‘Beth taught herself how to sit because on her very first session she was kicked violently in the chest.
Someone wanted to strike her and then their mood turned and they shouted, ‘Get rid of the dog’ and kicked out.
From then on she taught herself always to sit sideways or with her back to a person.’
Bewey, Joan's first dog, once belonged to an old lady who cosseted her, endlessly stroking her head and ears.
‘PAT dogs seem to sense when a person is chair-bound and that they are there to give that person pleasure.
At home I continually treat my dogs in a way which will encourage them to behave properly when they're PAT dogging.’
BRAVING DANGER
Joan realised Bewey's greater potential after watching a TV documentary about a Lincolnshire home for the elderly which used dog-stroking to soothe people.
‘I've got just the dog for that, I thought, so I registered Bewey as a PAT dog.
But I had to do my own asking round before I found a place to visit.
I decided to approach the Mental Health Unit and once I'd started visiting there, I found I could work every hour of every day.
Unfortunately, a lot of people who have dogs suitable for work with mentally ill people won't themselves set foot inside such hospitals.’
Because of Joan's willingness and experience, she has undertaken work in a ward for those who are suffering acute mental conditions.
Owing to the high risk factors, Joan and her dogs are usually accompanied by at least one member of staff.
Even so, working with the mentally ill is not easy.
‘Beth's been stabbed with scissors, had her paws stamped on and we've had cups of tea thrown at us.
Now Bewey, my other dog, wouldn't cope the same.
She's so trusting of people, whereas Beth senses any dangers and I take notice of her.’
Most PAT dogs are mature when they commence work.
However, Joan's newest dog, Chrissy, has such unique qualities that already, only six months old, she's working the community homes and mental wards.
She has a tough act to follow, though — Joan has had some spectacular successes with Bewey and Beth.
‘I went into one hospital and there was a lady strapped in a chair.
The staff told me to stay well away because she had a reputation for turning violent.
But as I was walking around I noticed how her eyes followed the dog with great interest.
The staff, too, could see her moves to stroke the dog and finally let me approach her.
‘After she'd stroked it, I asked if she liked dogs.
‘Oh yes’ she said, ‘I made a lot of money in dogs.
If you want to make money, breed dogs and send them to America’.
And as the afternoon wore on, she relaxed and talked freely for the first time in weeks.
Sadly, though, her behaviour was so unpredictable that she was moved on, and I lost contact.’
But perhaps Joan's greatest success came with a young man in the neuro-psychiatric unit who had been reduced to a pitiful existence as a result of a terrible motorcycle accident.
He had not spoken once since arriving at the unit and had suffered numerous epileptic fits.
BREAKING THE SILENCE
‘The first time we went he looked at the dog and showed no interest.
Twelve days later the consultant intervened and said to the man, ‘Wouldn't you like to stroke that dog?’
The man shook his head.
‘Why?
Why don't you want to stroke it?’ another person asked.
Then the man spoke his first word in a very long time as he looked at Beth panting away.
‘Teeth,’ he said.
So then we had something to work on and we got him stroking Beth's rear end.
‘After that he lived for our visits and started repeating ‘Stroke, stroke, stroke’ about six times.
He grew visibly happier and would cry his eyes out when we arrived.
As the years have passed, he's started waiting for us at the door on visitors' days.
He loves singing ‘All things bright and beautiful’ to Beth and would call her ‘Bethlehem’simply because, he said, she was so beautiful.’
At this point Joan got a surprise visitor; Vera Long had been a technical instructor in Occupational Therapy in York area hospitals, and enthused about Joan's marvellous dogs.
‘I accompany Joan on Troutsdale ward at Clifton Hospital.
Lots of people who don't talk and live in isolation will suddenly pat a dog and say hello.
That leads to a conversation: ‘Did you ever have a dog in your house?’
‘Oh yes,’ most of them reply.
And so you carry on, with what is probably the first conversation that person has had for weeks.
FOND MEMORIES
‘A lot of our patients have been country people and can remember having collies on their farms.
It takes them back into the past and helps them relax at the same time.
You see, we are talking about people who don't even move their hands for days on end, then a PAT dog comes in and they stroke eagerly with both hands.’
Minding master Luke
Waiting hand, foot and finger on a large and active Siberian Husky with a secret appetite isn't everyone's idea of fun…as Monica O'Hara discovered
He's tall, blonde and handsome: the only ‘other man’ with whom my husband doesn't mind me spending a weekend.
Luke, the Siberian Husky, belongs to my friend — a romantic novelist, who sometimes needs to go off alone to research her books.
Joyce used to take Luke, but people kept stopping her to admire him and generally go gooey over what a beautiful specimen he was — or should I say ‘is’.
The crunch came with the marriage of Joyce's son Mark.
Neither church nor hotel authorities could accommodate canines and Luke had never been to kennels.
My friend, a widow, was on the point of saying if he couldn't attend, neither could she, when it occurred to me that I had no engagements for the weekend in question.
‘Would Luke object to being dog-sat?’
I asked.
‘Object?’ she replied.
‘He'd love it,’ and to her pet, ‘Wouldn't you, darling?’
Of course‘darling’ wagged his tail…
That was a year ago, and I'm happy to say that all went well.
So here I am again, ‘his nibs’ lying prostrate at my feet, looking up at me; big amber eyes melting like the chocolate gateau I've just put out to thaw.
He's drooling.
I can't bear to watch.
‘Luke's food is in the fridge,’ said a handwritten note on the table.
‘Chicken, lamb, heart.
The pork-chop-shaped biscuits are his, and the sesame-flavoured, yours.’
Luke won't touch anything but top-quality meat, swears his mistress, who envies me my own two gannets.
She has painstakingly cooked, boned and chopped up every morsel for her fusspot.
‘I know where every bone in a chicken is,’ she once told me, licking her fingers as she removed the umpteenth.
Luke might be quirky, but his eating habits are not as bizarre as some I could mention.
Take my colleague Margaret's Alsation, for example.
Gemma will only eat her Chum if it is sliced and made into dainty triangular sandwiches — with the crusts cut off!
They are served at seven, on a coffee table in front of the TV.
Luke's vet's name and number have also been provided with a note about one particular drug he cannot be given — eternal optimist, my friend.
I continue reading.
‘Before his lead goes on, he enjoys being chased up and down the stairs and around the hall.
‘When you catch him, make him sit, then fasten his collar on the second hole and don't let him play you up.
‘He goes for his first walk at 10am.
Avoid the third road on the left.
Rastas the cat lives there and Luke is terrified of him.
Take him to play on the Breck — he'll shown you where.
Then, at 1.30, walk him round the village.
If you forget the key, Mrs Jones over the road has a spare.’
As I'm digesting all this, mi'laddo is digesting a bag of Liquorice Allsorts — with embarrassing results on the road.
Well, I could blame a horse.
Back to my place.
Collect little Gusto, but leave big Danny with Joe, my husband, because Luke and Danny loathe each other.
Luke, Gusto and I race to the beach and into the sea.
I quickly capture what I can on film.
Day Two.
We take a different route; this time armed with pooper-scoop, but without Gusto.
The weather is glorious, so we trot through the suburban roads and leafy lanes, and find a hitherto undiscovered park.
FILM STAR FAME
Off the lead, he disappears into the bushes to prove his manhood.
For an elderly dog, Luke is remarkably virile.
He is, as my Irish friends would say ‘a broth of a boy’.
Day Three.
He's sitting at the gate, watching the school around the corner decant its little boys.
‘Hey, look…a wolf,’ enthuses the tiniest, whose hair is the colour of carrots.
‘No, it's not, stupid’ announces another, screwing a freckled nose.
‘It's White Fang .
And he's only half a wolf.
Don't you know anything?’
‘Well, you've seen the film.
I haven't’.
‘Yeah.
That's him, all right.
Hey, is your dog really famous, Mrs?’
Now they're all at it; the tall, the short, and the toothy.
‘Was he born in the wild?
…
How did you get him here?
…
How old is he?’
‘Ten,’ I manage at length.
‘He's older than me,’ says Freckled Nose.
‘And me,’ echoes Carrots.
‘And me,’ comes the chorus, as several chubby, grubby hands smooth his back.
‘Ahr-eh.
Feel his fur.
He's like a sheep.
Isn't he ACE…?’
The object of their adulation moseys into the house and I mosey in after him.
A perfect end to a perfect day: a chocolate-smeared face peers up from under the table.
There's a cherry on his head.
Oh god…the gateau!
Joyce worries about the fact that Luke doesn't eat, yet, every time she is away, he gorges himself — stores up the food so he can starve again when she returns, and really makes her feel bad about leaving him.
Dog-sitting's not much different from babysitting, really.
Great fun once you get the hang of it…
KING CHARLES SPANIEL
Charlie is my darling
JOHN RICHARDSON
Not to be confused with the more popular Cavalier, the King Charles Spaniel reflects a regal background in its happy, intelligent and affectionate nature
The name ‘King Charles Spaniel’ is often incorrectly applied to this delightful breed's more popular cousin — the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel.
Although similar in appearance, the two breeds actually have a number of essential differences.
The King Charles Spaniel is slightly smaller than the Cavalier, and has a domed head and snub-nosed face, while the Cavalier has a longer muzzle.
In a ‘chicken and egg’ situation, controversy flares among breed enthusiasts as to which type evolved first, and each side will take the credit for being the forebear of the other.
King Charles Spaniels belong to the Toy Group.
They are an intelligent breed, quite sensitive, and although they are sometimes reserved they are particularly fond of children, and can become firm friends with them.
However, children must be watched to ensure they do not abuse this little dog's trust by pulling on their ears.
As a family pet, the King Charles is ideal, particularly for a ‘caring’ family who want their dog to be a fully integrated member.
As a breed they are not instinctive guard dogs, and their function in life is to provide hours of endless amusement and pleasure — a task which they certainly embrace whole-heartedly.
Alicia Penningtion first owned King Charles Spaniels in 1956 and began showing in 1959.
Since this time she has campaigned 30 dogs to the title of Champion, and she and her daughter Julia bred and owned the all-time top winning King Charles, Champion Curtana Morgana.
Currently, the top winning living ‘Charlie’ is Champion Tudorhurst Theron, also bred and owned by Alicia.
‘As a breed, ‘Charlies’ are very gentle, and yet at the same time strong willed.
They are full of fun and not a breed that you can leave for long periods of time, as they are so human orientated.
These little dogs want to be with people, and they are desperately willing to please.
Most people find that once they have owned one there is no other breed for them,’ said Alicia.
King Charles Spaniels may be gentle and refined, but they are also very sturdy.
‘They are a breed that will enjoy a long walk and they are excellent car travellers — in the 34 years that I have owned them I have never known one to be car sick,’ she added.
‘However, I do think that they are a breed more for the connoisseur than for the average dog owner.’
They are bred in four colours — Blenheim (red and white), tricolour (black and white with red points), ruby (red) and black and tan.
The ‘broken’ colours of the Blenheim and tricolour seem to be more popular, and it is generally held that the ‘whole colours’are the more active of the breed.
There are not all that many King Charles Spaniels born each year, and consequently puppies are hard to come by.
Alicia says you should spend time talking to a breeder before diving in to buy one, to be sure it is the breed for you.
The Breed Club runs a rescue and rehoming service which often (sadly) has an older ‘Charlie’ looking for a good home.
Most of the dogs that come up for rehoming do so because of a change in domestic circumstances rather than through any temperament problems.
GOOD HEALTH
This breed can live to 14 years of age, so giving an adult a home should still promise a good few years of companionship.
Generally, they are a healthy breed although there have been known cases of luxating patella (slipping kneecap) and the occasional heart murmur, but these are the exception rather than the rule.
Dogs and bitches both make excellent pets, and the breed is easy to socialise with other dogs and can live happily with cats.
Overall, this breed is most definitely a royal dog with impeccable manners.
MEMOIRS OF A DOG SHRINK
CARTOONIST RUSSELL JONES TAKES A RAMBLE THROUGH PETER NEVILLE'S FILES
Noddy goes racing
The slightest whirr of a motor transformed the mild mannered Noddy into the meanest roadrunner on the track — could he be beaten?
Case Number: 136 Name: Noddy Breed: Crossbreed Problem: Car chasing
From the outset of their relationship it was clear to Noddy's owner that his new acquisition, like his toy-town namesake, was very fond of motor cars.
On their first afternoon together, following an after-lunch stroll around the flower beds, the man was astonished to see Noddy leap a five foot dry-stone wall, and take off in hot pursuit of a clapped-out Morris Marina that had spluttered up the lane by the foot of the garden.
From that moment the poor man knew in his heart it was the start of his dog's career in Grand Prix car chasing!
He was right!
Noddy began pursuing everything on four wheels, or two, with such enthusiasm that he soon became a familiar sight to the farmers who made their living along the lane.
They could often be seen leaning on farm-yard gates, chewing on straws and marvelling at Noddy's turn of speed as he roared by in the slipstream of anything from a milk marketing board tanker to a Maserati!
He also became a great favourite with the occupants of the local school bus, which passed his garden gate twice daily.
The children would gather in a noisy clump at the rear window to shout encouragement and offer coaching tips to their pursuer.
Following their advice, Noddy soon learned how to corner in the wet, and how to recover from even the most dramatic skid.
CHEQUERED FLAG
After a hectic day on the circuit his owner would watch as Noddy returned to the pits, his face showing the strain of a life lived in the fast lane.
Once indoors the dog would collapse in front of the fire, there, perhaps, to dream of the day when he'd swap his flea collar for a laurel wreath, and his water bowl for a magnum of champagne with which to shower his adoring fans!
Things, however, came to a head one day when a veterinary surgeon on his rounds, in a regulation Volvo estate, was alarmed to see Noddy tearing towards him on the wrong side of the road, in hot pursuit of a Transit van.
The vet was forced into an unscheduled arrival at 50 miles-an-hour into a nearby farm-yard, much to the surprise of a herd of Jerseys ambling their way to the milking parlour!
Realising his dog was in desperate need of a 12,000 mile service and some sort of treatment for his obsession with the automobile, Noddy's owner sought the help of Peter Neville.
Peter suggested a course of therapy involving food, and something called John Fisher's Training Discs — no, I don't know what they are either, but they worked, and within a short time Noddy's behaviour had been modified and he lost interest in the motor car.
Now the school bus, full of disappointed kids, wends it's way twice daily down a country lane lined with equally disappointed farmers who stare wistfully into the distance, recalling the heady days of four-legged Formula 1 racing!
CROSS QUESTION
Can you guess which breeds Jessica's parents are?
She is a first cross between two well-known breeds.
The first correct entry drawn on March 3rd 1992 will win a pot of 500 EfaCoat capsules (containing evening primrose oil and vitamin E), worth over £20.
If your dog is an unusual first cross, please send us a photo and all the relevant details so we can include him or her in a future issue.
Send your answer to February Cross-question,Dogs Today , 10 Sheet Street, Windsor, Berkshire, SL4 1BG.
DECEMBER SOLUTION
Dibble's parents were a Whippet and a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel.
The first correct entry came from Mrs T M Taylor in Warrington, Cheshire, who wins 500 EfaCoat capsules.
Katie's PROBLEM PAGE
If you've a question about dogs, this is your page.
Katie Boyle is here to help.
Britain's foremost agony aunt has, in common with the rest of us, a real genuine love of dogs.
Remember to listen out for Katie and friends on Radio 2
ODD ONE OUT
I'm wary of generalisations.
They have a nasty habit of including exceptions — then I'm left saying ‘oh, well — that's different!’
But I must be safe with this — I hate seeing dogs dolled up in supposedly smart clothes; you know the kind — scarlet plastic macs with matching sou'wester and booties.
Maybe it's because my two Toy Poodles were horribly upset one cold day.
One became a pitbull Poodle as I approached with a coat, and Bizzie (pictured here) just froze.
But hang on — there's Bambi!
I took her on from Battersea as a barely covered skeleton, and turned to Helen Lister, secretary of the Italian Greyhound club for guidance.
‘She'll need a coat in winter,’ she said, adding ‘I'll make you a couple.’
Well, yes, Bambi does have a royal blue one lined with sheepskin, then there's the tartan edged with navy braid, and…
At the mere mention of a coat, she sits, eyes closed, nose pointing upwards to have it slipped on, then stands for the belt to be fastened.
Last week, Helen excelled herself — a black matt waterproof, lined, with a turn-back collar of fake ocelot!
Bambi positively prances with pleasure.
What was it about generalisations?
Oh, well — that's different!
FOOD FOR THOUGHT
I am interested in the diet that Leslie Kenton, the writer and broadcaster, gives her dogs.
I don't eat prepared food myself, so I have never liked it for my terrier.
I have thought carefully about the effect of antibiotics and hormones in meat, and I would like to try the diet Leslie Kenton recommends.
Could you give me any other advice about what to feed my dog?
 Mrs L Love, Leicester 
I admire Leslie Kenton greatly and share many of her ideas, but bear in mind that dogs are predominately carnivores, and they thrive on good quality meat and protein, which their systems are designed to digest.
Your dog certainly needs a properly balanced diet, and I suggest you write to Mrs Caroline Kiscoe, Meadow Cottage, Culford, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk IP28 6DT.
I have no doubt she will guide you to your dog's best advantage.
She calls her company ‘It's Only Natural’.
SMOKIE ALARM
I have a very little black Labrador called Smokie, who is 12 years old.
He chews up my glasses, and had my alarm clock the other night.
He has even had my money.
It seems he is at play while I am asleep.
He has also chewed three torches, three combs, two hair brushes, and my bed linen.
I could not have him put down as I am a widow and he keeps me company.
 Mrs Jackson, Grimston, Norfolk 
What you describe is a condition called pica, and far from ‘playing’ while you are asleep, your Labrador needs help.
The sooner you get him to the vet, the better.
If your vet isn't up to date with this problem, I suggest you write to Peter Neville, the animal behaviourist who has made a study of pica.
I feel sure he will guide you towards the right medical channel and explain what pica is all about.
You can write to him c/o Association of Pet Behaviour Counsellors, 257 Royal College Street, London NW1.
‘BOSS’ PUPPY
We have recently bought a Golden Retriever puppy bitch.
We also own another Golden bitch and a Rough Collie bitch.
The new puppy is very timid with strangers but now she is old enough to go out for walks, we have found she is growling at other dogs.
Our other dogs have never shown aggression towards other dogs.
Can you tell us how to deal with these problems?
She is very affectionate towards members of the family and is fine with our other two dogs.
 Mr & Mrs Irving, Leeds, Yorkshire 
Your problem stems from your pup living with two very gentle dogs who have allowed her to become number one in their pack.
It would be a good idea to start taking her out on her own.
With the others not around, she will be less likely to be assertive to strange dogs.
When she meets other animals, walk on and ignore her — as she is timid of strange people, I think this will overrule her aggression towards a strange dog, and she will catch up very quickly.
Praise her when she comes, and encourage her to go on running.
It won't hurt her a bit if another dog growls at her, as it will make her realise she is not considered top dog by them.
If you become over-protective of her when she growls at strange dogs, in her mind you will be ‘rewarding’ her and making your problem worse.
SHAKING THE FEAR
I got Bonnie — a little terrier-type dog — from an animal sanctuary 18 months ago when she was just nine weeks old.
She is very loving and gets on extremely well with my grandchildren.
She is happy in the house or garden, but is very nervous.
If she thinks I am going to take her out, she just panics.
Her legs shake and she hides away.
She is frightened of some noises — like the vacuum cleaner — but doesn't bother at all when I use the lawnmower or hedge-cutter.
What can I do?
I don't like leaving her on her own too long (I usually have to be away for about eight hours).
 Mrs J Legg, Birmingham 
Bonnie's behaviour stems from her early days.
She was given no emotional security at the most influential stage of her life — early puppyhood.
Although some dogs do adapt if they have a very placid nature, the majority carry real scars — and I'm afraid leaving her for eight-hour stretches certainly isn't helping.
Try to encourage Bonnie to meet different people.
In my experience, rescued dogs all seem to be extra anxious to please, especially timid bitches.
Homoeopathy takes into consideration our body and temperament (this is what Bonnie needs), and you can get a list of homoeopathic practitioners if you write, enclosing an SAE, to Dr Christopher Day, Chinman House, Stanford in the Vale, Faringdon, Oxon SN7 8NQ.
If you have any problems or questions about your pet, write to Katie's Problem Page,Dogs Today , 10 Sheet Street, Windsor, Berks, SL4 1BG.
Katie regrets she can only reply through this page.
HILIFE'S
Quick Quiz
Answer the questions below for a chance to win 12 boxes of HILIFE Gourmet Complete Moist Dog food — Beef and Cheddar Cheese variety.
Each box contains the equivalent of 6 standard cans of dog food with mixer .
Dogs on TV
NAME THE FOLLOWING TV DOGS
1.
Ethel Skinner's lap dog
2.
The Hart to Hart dog
3.
Blue Peter's original dog
4.
Your Neighbours dog
5.
Woodentop dog
fantastic facts
One German dog breeder worked out a way to have his cake and eat it.
He trained his dogs to return to the kennels after they were sold.
Police say he sold one particular dog at least nine times!
For a free copy of Dog Facts send an SAE to the competition address.