

RAP BITES BACK!
Monie Love
Gang Starr
X-Clan
The Afros
THE DOORS Jim Morrison on film
BEATS INTERNATIONAL in Japan
MATTHEW BRODERICK talks Brando
FOOTNOTES The Farm's Peter Hooton charts the history of the training shoe Jeff Koons and Cicciolina/Harry Enfield/The Shamen/Danny Rampling
MONIE LOVE photographed by Eddie Monsoon
THE DOORS ON FILM
Oliver Stone is making a movie about the life of Jim Morrison.
Exclusive on-set report
BEATS INTERNATIONAL
Norman Cook, Lindy Layton and the entire Beats posse take their pop version of British club culture to Japan.
By John McCready
FASHION
Winter sportswear styled by Karl and Derrick (UTO), photographed by Julian Broad
ENTERPRISE CULTURE
Successes, failures, blags and scams on the Enterprise Allowance Scheme — purpose-built to keep you off the dole and in your place
MATTHEW BRODERICK
A bratpacker with brains, Broderick co-stars with Marlon Brando in The Freshman this month — but he's getting tired of talking about it
LETTER FROM BERLIN
Germany may be one country now, but Berlin still bears the scars of its divided past and remains uncertain about its future
RAP BITES BACK
The music that just keeps on reinventing itself.
Interviews and attitudes from Monie Love, Gang Starr, X-Clan, The Afros
FOOTNOTES
Peter Hooton offers a new history of the humble training shoe; plus John McCready on the old school fool
JEFF KOONS
One of New York's most controversial (and successful) artists has now teamed up with Italy's most controversial MP, Cicciolina.
But is it art?
By Denise Barricklow
FASHION
Styled by Melanie Ward, photographed by David Sims
CLOSE ENCOUNTERS
Alien conspiracies and kidnaps, and why some people believe that not only have UFOs landed, but their passengers are living under the Nevada desert
PEOPLE
Boxer Chris Eubank; comedian Harry Enfield; DJ Danny Rampling; model turned singer LISA B; actress Demi Moore; and The Shamen, indie rockers turned rave innovators
REGULARS
Readers' letters 13/Disinformation 138/Back issues and subscriptions 143/Margins 146
BULLETIN
November events/Mosside's Chapter & The Verse/Swedish rapper Papa Dee/Merseyside club Quadrant Park/Leeds T-shirts/ Ninja Turtles director Steve Barron talks/De Niro in Scorsese's GoodFellas; The Reflecting Skin and The Dark Man reviewed/American author Russell Banks interviewed/Janet Street Porter's new TV dance programme/plus films on release, video, record and book selections, fashion news.
Pages 16–29
MONITOR
Why do advertisers love the Fifties?
Plus Hollywood's new mania for ghost movies, why The Handmaid's Tale is a great book but a lousy film, and a round-up of the latest music books.
Pages 33–40
Dismissed as a novelty ever since it first began, rap has not only survived but has provided us with endless pleasures and variations.
This month, for no particular reason except that we felt like it, we offer a celebration of the word, from the P-funky smile of The Afros (aboe) to the activism of the X-Clan, from Monie Love's glorious pop to Gang Starr's jazz variation.
Following on p96, The Farm's Peter Hooton dispels an enduring hip hop myth: that trainers are an American invention popularised here by rappers like Run-DMC.
Some may be surprised that Hooton writes so fluently on scally culture; they should search out old issues of his fanzine The End .
Others may be surprised that he found time to work on a feature while promoting a top ten hit in ‘Groovy Train’.
‘It's boring actually,’ he says, ‘there's not a lot to do.
And no one phones you up cos they all think you're too busy.’
Meanwhile, Jim McClellan travelled to Sheffield, where he attended a UFO conference and found enough material to keep the Sunday Sport in headlines for months.
Except that the people he talks to on p120 really do believe they were kidnapped by aliens, and some were seriously distressed by the experience.
Finally, on p68 you'll find a story on the Enterprise Allowance Scheme.
Many of the names on our contributors list have benefited from the scheme, but perhaps the final word on the subject should go to one of its most successful graduates: Davey Philips, co-founder of Edinburgh's Clan Skates and winner of this year's Prince's Trust Award for Industry.
‘It's all a government scam, and it's important to say that.
All they want is to get their unemployment figures down’.
Natural lager?
Re FACE 25.
According to Norwegian law (and German, for that matter), it's not legal to put anything in beer — both local and licensed foreign brands — except water, yeast, hops and malt.
These laws have been in force for hundreds of years — and they're one of the things that are going to disappear in 1992, at least in Germany.
This is a result of pressure from British, French, Spanish and Belgian beer manufacturers which claim Germany is using this law to keep them out of its (huge) market.
Hopefully this will not stop the Germans (nor the Norwegians) from making beer the way it should be made — naturally.
 GEIR SKOGEETH OSLO, NORWAY 
Made up
Re Julian Clary ‘pictured here without make-up for the first time’(FACE 25).
This is not strictly true on two counts.
First, Clary did appear without make-up in a photograph in Time Out a few years ago.
Second, correct me if I'm wrong, but in the excellent John Stoddart picture he's wearing foundation and eyeliner, but apart from that absolutely no make-up at all.
 DAN DOZER LONDON W 8
Yorkie bore
Re ‘The Manchester Effect’(FACE 25).
Living in both Manchester and Leeds, I am in the position to be able to put a few things straight.
Don't people realise that without the Manchester scene Leeds and similar places would still be nothing?
Why stab Manchester in the back for helping to create a bigger northern network of clubs, raves and fashion outlets?
As for people in Leeds being sick of the Manc hype, people in Manchester are sick of the Manc hype and have been for as long as people from Leeds have been tramping across the moors in their flares and Kickers to buy ‘God created Manchester’ tops and to dance at the Haçienda.
 PIG YORKSHIRE /LANCASHIRE
Spiked
Congratulations to Cynthia Rose on her excellent article on the Spike Lee industry (FACE 25).
Unfortunately it never really delivered on the tantalising opening mention of Lee's behind-the-scenes ‘control’ of black culture in NY and the unwillingness of critics to publicly diss him for fear of being shut out of the game.
Surely Cynthia didn't fall victim to the same fear?
 PHILIP HALL PRESTON 
Anti-fascist fashion
I was deeply disturbed by the letter you published titled ‘Fascist Fashion’(FACE 24).
It has always been my belief that casuals were just beer-swilling animals with the intelligence of donkeys, but the letter you published was clearly written by someone who has enough intelligence to put his radically extremist views into practice and cause a lot of harm.
If B. Hunslett had been born 50 years ago, he would have been an ideal candidate for the Hitler Youth Movement.
 TIM COSGROVE HARROGATE 
Firm stand
Re the ‘Fascist Fashion’ letter.
I have only one thing to say: bullshit.
B. Hunslett claims the Service Crew were the first élitist group to travel the country with the casual look, and that they brought it to the attention of the general public.
But the Inter City Firm from West Ham were around a long time before the Service Crew.
It was the ICF who realised that looking casual allowed them to travel in large numbers and remain undetected by the police.
I suggest B. Hunslett check his football history.
 PHIL NURSE WANDSWORTH PRISON 
Us and them
Don't mistake me for a patriot, but I want to take issue with Hardware director Richard Stanley's remarks about the US (FACE 24).
There are already enough young media stars putting their prejudices on display (eg the anti-semitic Professor Griff and the racist Axl Rose).
Now we have Stanley taking potshots at America as a society vile in culture.
Trouble is, all the while he's aiming to reap the monetary rewards American society generates for a film such as Hardware .
Or was he intending for his debut feature to have just a limited run in a few European art houses?
 ROBERT C. JONES FRESNO 
Barking mad
Re ‘A Thing Untrue’(FACE 25), what is Clive Barker on?
More to the point, what is he on about?
Why does he seem to equate circumlocutory pomposity with profundity?
‘The theatre would go out of them and there'd be no leap of faith required to come to the shore where they sit.’
What's happened to Barker?
Once he used to write short sharp shockers you couldn't put down.
Now he writes stuff like ‘A Thing Untrue’.
Also, all the monsters in Nightbreed are crap.
 UDO HORSMAN BATTERSEA 
Bulletin
Don't have a cow man!
The Bart Simpson cult continues.
This talking doll version costs around $30 in US stores, and speaks fluent brat: ‘Au contraire, mon frere!’
‘Ay carumba!’ and, most tellingly of all, given that The Simpsons are Sky-TV's biggest asset here, ‘Kids in TV-land, you're being duped’
Will the Dark Destroyer be destroyed?
On November 18 at Birmingham NEC the current WBO champion Nigel Benn meets Chris Eubank (pictured), a British boxer who is not entirely enamoured of his sport: ‘It's a mug's game,’ he says on p130
Not handed out on the street, this club flyer advertises Newcastle's Rockshots.
A spoof on washing powder packets, the colourful T-shirts are available from the club and Trent Public House And Public Enterprises, 1–2 Leazes Lane, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 4QT
‘But blow wise to this, buddy, blow wise to this: Never play cards with a man named Doc.
Never eat at a place called Mom's.
Never sleep with a woman whose troubles jolt.
And never you cop another man's plea.
I've tried 'em all and I know.
They don't work.’
From the re-issued novel A Walk On The Wild Side (Picador £4.99), the hard-boiled line according to Nelson Algren
Arnold Schwarzenegger — A Portrait has 100 photos of the world's highest-paid movie star, with quotes, anecdotes and a running commentary by ‘close friend’ George Butler, available by £19.95 from Simon & Schuster.
As many straining muscles as anyone could bear, and some attractive flares too
Including such local luminaries as Marina Van Rooy (left), singer of the sadly overlooked dance single ‘Sly One’, DJ Mike Pickering, graphics star Grand Central Design, novelist Trevor Miller and (if he ever gets round to posing for the cameras) our very own correspondent John McCready, ‘Faces North West’ is an exhibition by Liverpool-based photographers Mark McNulty and Solon Papadopoulos.
At the Open Eye Gallery, Bold St, Liverpool until Nov 24.
Further info on 051 709 2439
Fluke's ‘Joni’, a furious homage to Joni Mitchell's ‘Big Yellow Taxi’, was one of the dance singles that got away last summer.
Now the Beaconsfield trio finally release a follow-up on the Creation label —‘Philly’, which has a few string sounds that may have been influenced by (or stolen from) old Philadelphia International disco classics, but which otherwise is a solid gold indie dance tune.
Well hard, and well recommended
Chris Garnham was one of the 51 people who lost their lives in the Marchioness disaster last year.
A talented photographer who contributed regularly to THE FACE, his work can be seen at the National Portrait Gallery, London, from Nov 8-Jan 20.
Pictured left: dancer Michael Clark
They knew each other by sight as teenagers in New York, and first worked together in 1973 on Mean Streets .
Now, after a space of seven years, director Martin Scorsese and actor Robert De Niro are reunited for GoodFellas , their sixth film collaboration.
It marks a change of heart for Scorsese, who once swore he would never make a film about the Mafia, and led De Niro to break a few rules of his own: ‘I was in the middle of filming We're No Angels when we started to discuss GoodFellas and began working on my role, Jim Conway, together.
Had it been anyone other than Marty, I'd never have spent every weekend preparing and refining the script, then repeating it as I did.
But then, in a way, you're talking about a family reunion…
…’
The film opens on Oct 26 and is reviewed on p21
Chapter & the Verse: chillin' out and calling up
Great Western Street is the debut LP by Chapter & The Verse.
Put together on a shoe-string over nearly two years, it's a collection of songs, weird and sad.
Because Aniff Cousins and Colin Thorpe are both graduates of DJ Colin Curtis' legendary Manchester jazz/dance club Berlin, and because the songs on the album are fundamentally rhythmic, it will probably be seen as a dance record.
But it has a lyrical depth which reaches back to the great black music of the Seventies and artists like Stevie Wonder and Curtis Mayfield, while touching on Steely Dan, Elvis Costello and Joy Division.
The record's jazz stylings have already attracted the attention of DJ Gilles Peterson at London's Jazz FM, who has been playing it on tape for some time.
The duo first came to the fore via their input on A Guy Called Gerald's ‘Voodoo Ray’, through their own fine single ‘All This And Heaven Too’, and their production work on Kiss AMC's category-confusing ‘A Bit Of U2’.
Tracks like ‘Black Whip’ continue the rap explorations with a starting rap from Aniff which he describes as ‘stream of unconsciousness.
The kind of thing you might come out with after being hit with a baseball bat.’
And then there's ‘Stealth’, about the American public's love affair with the bomber plane of the same name; ‘Lorraine’, the true story of Jacqueline Smith, who lives on the pavement outside Motel Lorraine in protest at the commercialisation of the scene of Martin Luther King's death; and ‘Claremont Road’, with a rap from Prince Kool — a new Manchester talent from the same school as MC Buzz B. ‘It's just what we know,’ says Colin, justifying such specific references to their home patch of Mosside.
‘American music talks about America.
Maybe ‘Claremont Road’ will be as famous as the South Bronx one day.’
John McCready 
VIRGIN Records' American division has sponsored ‘Rock The Vote’, a series of voter registration TV ads focusing, in the wake of Judas Priest and 2 Live Crew, on the censorship issue.
Lending their voices to the cause are Megadeth, the Red Hot Chilli Peppers, Ozzy Osbourne, Robert Downey Jnr, Michael Penn, Iggy Pop and Donny Osmond, who, bizarrely, dons a neo-Nazi outfit to make his point
MICHAEL Jackson is rumoured to be releasing a new single before Christmas: a duet with fellow cartoon character Bart Simpson titled ‘You're Bart, Man’.
Now all the American TV networks are — surprise, surprise — preparing their very own satirical cartoon series with adult twists.
Among them are the Tim Burton-produced Family Dog , the ‘fish noir’(really)Fish Police from Hanna Barbera, and the Whitehouse-set satire Aristocritters from Steven Hill Street Blues Bucho
CLUBS
Quadrant Park is a great, glitzy three-  storeyed chasm of a club in Bootle, which on Saturday nights becomes a suffocating fleshpit of 2,500 north-western ravers tuned in and turned on to the house sound of Merseyside.
The club was launched in the spring by Dave Caul, the manager, along with Mike Knowler and Andy Carroll, who were previously spinning house and hip hop at The State in Liverpool.
Over the summer, word of mouth made Quadrant Park one of the most queued-for nights in the north; now coachloads from Glasgow, Newcastle and even Manchester begin lining up amid the warehouses and oil tanks at 8pm.
Such is the demand that the club is taking the road up to Southport for regular Monday night sessions at the Palm Court.
They've also applied for a licence to hold all-nighters in premises adjacent to Quadrant Park which could hold 4,000 people.
Mike says the secret's in the eclectic mix of music, which intersperses house classics with New York garage and European beats.
It certainly brings in a mixed crowd: baggy ravers thrash about shoulder to shoulder with the city centre Top Man set, and there are even odd scally superflies in rainbow-coloured Afro wigs.
It puts Mike, who mis-spent his youth at the Twisted Wheel and Wigan Casino, in mind of the Northern soul scene.
‘It's very similar, I suppose because of the old dance and drugs connection.
But this is more exciting, because the music is more varied.
There's no reason why this shouldn't become as big, or last as long.’
Richard Benson 
Once the exclusive domain of self-confessed ‘headers’, Leeds United's terraces have been invaded by a new breed of hedonistic supporter.
When United fans were kicking more than just sand castles down in Bournemouth, they wore T-shirts bearing the sinister motto ‘Nobody Likes Us And We Don't Care’.
This season, evidently feeling the side-effects of a third Summer of Love, the Elland Road faithful are declaring ‘Peace, Love and United’.
The old yellow smiley badge of the Seventies has been resurrected and a message of harmony, sincere or otherwise, prevails.
‘People may think there's something sardonic about Leeds United fans walking round with words like ‘peace’ and ‘love’on their backs,’says T-shirt designer Moose, ‘It might not solve football's hooligan problem, but at least they look a lot better than wax-coats and ski-hats.
And maybe people might just get the message.’
Harvey Marcus 
‘Peace, Love and United’ T-shirts are available from Buffalo, 66 New Briggate, Leeds, HMV, 9–11 Trinity St, Leeds, and outside Leeds United football ground in Elland Road, price £8 and £13 for short- and long-sleeved T-shirts respectively
FILM
The last time Martin Scorsese and Robert De Niro were on the same set was eight years ago, for New York, New York.
GoodFellas marks their much anticipated reunion — and it's easily one of the best movies of the year.
Based on the true-life confession of a Mafia bit player, it dramatises the story of his criminal career from neighbourhood racketeering to drug-crazed ruin.
It's a sardonic pilgrim's progress; a furiously lyrical meditation on the corrupt culture of male glory and the parasitical art of the deal.
All this is signalled in the inflections of the movie's style, the irony of its score (from the Marvelettes to the Rolling Stones) and the nuance of the performances.
Ray Liotta itches with sleaze in the main role, while Joe Pesci gives an explosively detailed performance in support.
Which just leaves De Niro, whose charismatic wise guy routine is disappointingly adequate and no more.
The one real problem is the voice-over give to Liotta's wife, which drifts in and out of the action and rather muddies Scorsese's operatic clarity.
Steve Beard 
Good fellow Robert De Niro (left) with Ray Liotta
SINGLES
KRISPY 3
Coming Through Clear (K3)
The hardcore hip hop sound of Preston.
Yes, Preston.
The visual and sonic similarities with Unique 3 are more than incidental.
The sound of Nineties B-Boy, meaning Bass
FIRST OFFENCE
The Government Decides/Tell Them What You Want (Blip)
White indie rap from locally notorious North Manchester foursome.
Questionable lyrics are redeemed by unusual samples and hardcore beats
PRESSURE DROP
Back To Back (Big World)
Less than famous London team burst into the light with a powerful, unusual dancefloor groover featuring an emotive, pulling-no-punches oration from a youth called Afolbi and clear, spirited singing from Allison Gordon.
Watch it burn
CUTTY RANKS
The Stopper (Fashion)
The hottest ragga MC in the reggae market right now, Cutty is young, rough and hungry.
This pits him against dance, ragga, and hip hop beats.
They don't stand a chance against a voice like his
IT'S THAT crazy Dutchman again!
Director Paul Verhoeven has caused an upset among the Hollywood community with his treatment of Basic Instinct , the record-breaking $3 million script by former Rolling Stone writer Joe Betrayed Eszterhaus.
Both Eszterhaus and producer Irwin Winkler have walked away from the project in protest at Verhoeven's stereotyped portrayal of ‘ice-pick-wielding lesbians’ and his uncalled-for use of graphic lesbian love scenes.
Leading man Michael Douglas is, however, staying put 
Cool dude Normski ready to host Dance Energy
THE HARDEST working man in showbiz?
Move over James Brown and let Bobby take over.
DeNiro, that it, who follows his three in a row of GoodFellas, Awakenings and Guilt By Suspicion with a double whammy:Cape Fear , directed by Martin Scorsese, and Mad Dog And Glory , written by Richard Se Of Love Price and directed by John McNaugton, maker of the controversial Henry — Portrait Of A Serial Killer .
DeNiro's also rumoured to be competing with James Woods for the villain role in Rob Reiner's film version of the Broadway smash A Few Good Men .
Danny DeVito is about to star in another film-of-the-play, the high-finance tale Other People's Money ; Michelle Pfeiffer is likely to co-star
PLANS to make a sequel to the charming Mystic Pizza may be foiled by the fact that, since making the original, Julia Robers' asking price has leapt to $2 million
TELEVISION
The freshness and innovation of the dance underground has shown remarkable powers of survival in the face of media attempts to drag it kicking into the mainstream.
But this autumn will provide the biggest test yet, with Dance Energy , a 10-part BBC2 series about the new ‘dance culture’, to be screened at 6.30 pm on Mondays.
The 40-minute programmes, shot in a London studio with live dancers and bands, are hosted by lad about London (and Janet Street-Porter-pal) Normski.
Each instalment packs in features on news, style, music and surveys of the dance scenes in fashionable European and American cities.
The series is the first production by Activate, a company formed earlier this year by Mary Calderwood, Dernin Schlesinger and Jaqui Doyle.
All three women were previously journalists or publishers with Smash Hits .
‘That's one of the reasons we managed to sell the idea to the BBC,’ says Jaqui.
‘They could see we knew all about mass appeal.’
 Richard Benson 
It looks like Russell Banks has finally made it.
After about 20 years of critical success which rarely translated into public acclaim, his new novel,Affliction (Picador, £12.95), has hit big in the US.
On this side of the Atlantic, it has been shortlisted for the Irish Times Prize (which, unlike the Booker, has the courage to include authors from the US).
Endorsed on its jacket by the unlikely pairing of crime supremo Elmore Leonard and literary diva Joyce Carol Oates.
Affliction succeeds in taking the detailing associated with Raymond Carver-style dirty realism and fusing it with the pace of a detective story.
On one level Affliction is the story of how a man named Wade Whitehouse, living in a New Hampshire milltown, comes to be a murderer.
On another it is an exploration into how an abused child becomes an abuser — and the novel draws its painful resonance from the fact that this theme is part of Banks' own experience: ‘Alcoholism, domestic violence and abandonment, those are the three essential characteristics of my early family life,’ he says.
Banks is an immensely amiable, bearded ex-beatnik who feels that he is at last putting his past behind him.
The past includes a violent father who walked out on the family when Banks was 12, and running away from home himself at 18 to join Castro (‘In the late Fifties, remember, he got a great press in the States.
For a while, he was a heroic figure’).
Banks ended up in Florida and got married at 19.
With that marriage failing, he worked with his dad as a plumber.
There followed three more failed marriages, going to college, teaching and becoming a writer.
At last he can cut down on teaching, write a personal travel book about the lesser Antilles and write novels that need no longer return to his own, blasted childhood.
‘With the publication of Affliction I feel liberated from that obsession with domestic violence.’
John Williams 
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: a film that director Steve Barron can ‘relate to’
After just one feature,Electric Dreams , British video whiz-kid Steve Barron was in a rut.
Another hot-shot promo director whose big-screen aspirations were quashed in a welter of blue-filtered, back-lit imagery, he was soon consigned to the wannabes pile.
With a multitude of clips to his credit, including Michael Jackson's ‘Billie Jean’ and the Human League's ‘Don't You Want Me’, the former teaboy and camera assistant gave up his film-making pretensions — and went back to videos, directing Aha's ‘Take On Me’and Dire Straits' ‘Money For Nothing’.
‘Everyone had said ‘if you don't make it with your second movie, you're in the slot of never land forever,’ so I stayed off doing films for a while,’he says.
That was until four overgrown, talking terrapins with a fine line in Valley Speak and a craving for pizza turned Barron into the director of the ‘most successful independent film of all time, by at least $60m’.
As the man behind the camera on Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles , Barron now has Hollywood pretty much at his beck and call.
Doors previously bolted shut have miraculously swung open, people are not just returning his calls, they're phoning him .
And given the power he now wields, he says he's being careful not to blow it.
Having seen his dream project,Peter Pan , scuppered by the upcoming Robin Williams/Hoffman/Spielberg version, he remains undecided on his next venture.
One thing is for certain, he will continue working in the fantastique.
‘I want to make films that I want to go and see, and I don't go to art-house movies.
I'd much rather watch Ghostbusters and have a laugh.
Those are things I can relate to.’
Mark Salisbury 
APPARENTLY the next Star Trek film (number six, but who's counting?) will definitely be the last.
Rumours are circulating that some of the cast will be killed off, and that Spock will get married.
Captain Kirk will end his boldly going where no man has gone before by becoming an intergalactic monk.
Whether William Shatner will also give up his mission to find the ultimate cosmic toupée, come clean and sport an authentic monkish tonsure has yet to be confirmed.
We're waiting 
Reborn: overkill not required
PRINT
‘The cinema is the closest that people get to an experience of the surreal.
It's a kind of dreamtime — the darkness, the way you're almost lying in bed.
Watching the ghosts!’
So says Paul Hammond, talking about the impetus behind the most original anthology in a while,Seeing In The Dark: A Compendium Of Cinemagoing (Serpent's Tail, £10.99), edited by Hammond with fellow surrealist artist/writer Ian Breakwell.
This is not a book about the experience of watching them, a collection of weird scenes inside the cinema: ‘We were chewing the fat, telling stories about peculiar things that had happened to us at the cinema, trying to top each other.
And then we thought what a great idea for a book.
The great thing is that everybody has been to the cinema, and many have had a strange experience there.’
The final list of contributors is nearly as surreal as the contents themselves.
Ivor Cutler rubs shoulders with Mike Harding, and Denis Norden shares column space with THE FACE's own David Toop.
The anecdotes themselves range from bizarre nostalgic gems, such as cricket writer J.L. Carr's memory of a pre-war Yorkshire cinema where the manager would roam the aisles cracking a whip, to the riotously surreal, as with Alyson Stoneman-Hunter's account of watching Westerns in New Zealand in the enthusiastic company of whooping Maori cowboys.
John Williams 
Taking the Bristol sound in a new direction are Reborn, a dance act rooted more firmly in the On-U sound effect than Smith & Mighty.
The bass is still heavy, but what's new is a strong mid-range mix — an atmosphere built on tough beats that owes a little to Innocence, and a little more to Gary Clail.
Reborn duo Chuck and Babba gained mixing experience with Clail, dubmaster Adrian Sherwood and Chuck's big brother Mark Stewart, who has also been put to work.
With singer Julie's abstract soul, and some haunting flute, the result is a distinct and deliberate sound system style.
As Chuck explains, ‘Any system that's rated sets a tone, a feeling, and that's what we're after.’
Bored with straight DJing (as Chuck and Looney Tunes), they started recording, intending to build their own original dub plates.
First release will either be the atmospheric ‘Tomorrow's Day’, or the livelier ‘It's Like This’ but — despite attention from major labels — Reborn aren't looking for overkill.
‘There's a sort of medium between overground and underground,’ notes Babba.
Building a system to play their own stuff is still a priority.
‘That's our pinnacle,’ says Chuck, ‘To be in a small place, and just rocking it with our own tunes.’
Dom Phillips 
Eye is a quarterly graphic design magazine to be launched in late October.
The editorial board includes luminaries from London, Milan and Berlin, and the text is in three languages (English, French and German).
Editor Rick Poynor says that Eye will be innovative in its use of long, discursive articles of up to 12 pages.
‘There are a surprising number of magazines that deal with graphics, but we find the coverage a bit soft.
There are graphics everywhere around us, but visual culture is not being analysed in a particularly insightful way.
We will offer articles with real depth and lots of visuals.’
The editorial board includes former Face designer Neville Brody.
‘The board has a contemporary attitude to graphics, people who'll come up with ideas in the future.
Brody, for example, has written something for the first issue.’
If you're still interested, details on 071 486 7419.
Amy Raphael 
One in the Eye: detail from the new design mag
ALBUMS
INNER CITY
Fire (AVL)
Upturning preconceptions about the longevity of dance music groups, Inner City deliver an impressive second LP which slides gracefully into mainstream R&B
VARIOUS
The Hot Spot: Original Soundtrack (Antilles)
Co-ordinated by director Dennis Hopper, scored by ex-Phil Spector arranger Jack Nitzsche and featuring performances by John Lee Hooker, Miles Davis and Taj Mahal
COOL DOWN ZONE
New Direction (10)
Containing one side of street soul and one side of swingbeat, the debut LP from this Manchester trio is obviously aimed at both US and UK markets.
Includes the singles ‘Heaven Knows’ and ‘Waiting For Love’
LONDON POSSE
Gangster Chronicle (Mango)
One of the best-known original London rap crews finally puts out an LP that is harder than the rest.
Hilarious and pertinent, loud, abrasive, this is a killer
SINDICUT
Changing The Scenery (Virgin)
Anyone who saw them with Soul II Soul will have some idea of what to expect, but not the whole story.
Sindicut prove that the new era of UK hip hop ignited by Jungle Brothers and De La has been fully absorbed and expanded
CARLTON
The Call Is Strong (ffrr)
Carlton's soaring vocals pitched against Smith and Mighty's bass-heavy production.
The result is slick and stylish but somehow muted
IT'S OFFICIAL — a film based on Bill Gibson's cyberpunk science fiction will actually get made (perhaps).
After he finishes Terminators , James Cameron is contracted to film Burning Chrome (script from Gibson).
However, Cameron's companion Kathryn Bigelow will not now be directing the film of another Gibson short,New Rose Hotel.
Driller Killer man Abel Ferrara will be calling the shots instead, while Bigelow does something called Johnny Utah,apparently a Western
TYPECAST, moi?
After showing the world she can act (sort of) in Dick Tracy , Madonna has decided to extend her range and play a comic book vampy villain in the planned film of Modesty Blaise .
Geena Davis will star as the Sixties femme fatale IN a desperate attempt to keep the Bat boom, DC's next treatment of the Dark Knight myth will be John Byrne's Batman 3-D, which will come complete with a pair of 3-D glasses.
Out in December, just in time for Christmas
NOW YOU'VE stopped laughing at the idea of Kevin Costner in tights, you can have a chuckle at the cast rumoured to be lined up for his Robin Hood movie Prince Of Thieves — Danny DeVito (above) as Friar Tuck, either Patsy Kensit, Emily Lloyd or Imogen Stubbs as Maid Marian and as Robin's big buddy Little John, John Goodman, who is reported to have been paid $750,000 just to stay interested in playing Fred Flintstone while the producers look for a script
FILM: ON RELEASE
Bill Murray is always worth watching, no matter how bad the movie, and Quick Change is better than most of his comic vehicles.
With his Buster Keaton sag and Groucho Marx snarl, he's a sly combination of innocence and experience, a wized-up fool.
The opening scenes of this fractious heist movie see him at his most acute.
Once he quits the bank that he's robbed, only to find his attempts to escape from New York constantly foiled, things become a drag.
With Geena Davis and Randy Quaid
Sex and Politics in Prague, 1960, was the basic recipe for The Unbearable Lightness Of Being .
With his latest movie, Henry & June, Philip Kaufman slightly varies this mix of spices to serve up a soft-focus hash of Sex and Literature in Paris, 1931.
Tough Fred Ward stars as Henry Miller, piquant Maria De Madeiros as Anais Nin, luscious Uma Therman as Henry's wife, June.
Everyone goes to bed with everyone else and has orgasms over what great writers they are.
One long fucking movie
The Comfort of Strangers must have looked good on paper.
An Ian McEwan novel adapted by Harold Pinter and shot by Paul Schrader in a very Orientalised Venice, mannered Anglo angst meets muscular American attitude on the edge of the Western World.
But while the movie has its moments, with Christopher Walken particularly impressive as a predatory aristocrat eager to sink his fingers into the sulky flesh of Rupert Everett, this is a pretty clunking effort.
High art trash
Despite the stink it raised in some quarters,The Krays made perfect sense as a symptom of the curious British habit of turning petty villains into national folk heroes.
Silent Scream attempts to do the same for Larry Winters, a Glaswegian murderer who waxed poetic behind bars before topping himself.
The movie is ambitious in its mix of fantasy and realism, and there's a sustained central performance from Iain Glen, but the big problem is that the subject himself is not fascinating in the way the Krays were.
Misguided
Made with the full support of the Pentagon, Wings Of The Apache is a standard-issue Top Gun recruiting movie which features helicopters rather than jets and drug barons rather than Reds, but keeps the gung-ho militarism and the aerial camera acrobatics.
Watching Nicolas Cage squeezing his ‘conceptual’ approach to acting into Tom Cruise's boy's own flying suit provides a few laughs, but otherwise this is awful stuff
The final part of Aki Kaurismaki's ‘working class’ trilogy, The Match Factory Girl, is a relentlessly desolate and bleak view of the human condition.
With limited narrative it shows Iris's inability to make sense of the world, whether at work, at home or socially.
Without the humour or positive ending of Ariel (the second part of the trilogy),The Match Factory Girl has a twist at the end which makes it fascinating but depressing
Young Guns II has an ageing brat pack — Emilio Estevez in the lead as Billy the Kid looks in need of a work-out — acting out endless shooting scenes and pulling pained faces when their buddies are killed.
Some stunning sunsets and breathtaking scenery don't redeem this dull, uninspired sequel
Papa Dee: putting Sweden on the map?
When news of a flourishing Swedish house scene began to break 18 months ago, it looked like being little more than a PR scam based around the fact that Neneh Cherry's half-sister Titiyo could sing and came from Stockholm.
However, this may not be the case.
Papa Dee, a 24-year-old ragamuffin rap artist of Ghanaian-Swedish descent is currently enjoying a novelty status on the New York live rap circuit.
He made his first UK appearance last month, guest-starring at the Titiyo show at London's Subterania.
After his 20-minute interlude, he had Titiyo's PR pack worried, with good reason.
He is now hoping to return to England in the autumn for some shows to coincide with the release album.
The LP, as yet untitled, will showcase him chattering like a sten-gun over a slinky, African-ish reggae backing.
It is a style which, he says, takes inspiration from Jamaican toasters and English artists such as Philip Levi, Linton Kwesi Johnson, and Benjamin Zephaniah.
This unusual hybrid, together with the Scandinavian tag, has given him an obscure appeal in the States, but denies any connection with the Nordic beat: ‘Things are happening in Sweden now, yes.
But I have nothing in common with the other new acts there.’
Richard Benson 
COMPETITION
The Krays was the centre of some controversy when it was released earlier on this year, partly because the brothers were rumoured to have made a profit from it.
But despite all the odds, it turned out to be better than most people expected.
There is some hammy acting, but the film gives an interesting insight into the gangster scene of the Sixties.
It's out on video on Nov 2, and we have 10 cassettes to give away.
Answer the following question and send it on a postcard to The Krays, THE FACE, The Old Laundry, Ossington Buildings, London W1.
Entries before Nov 19.
Who starred as the Kray twins?
a.
Zebedee and Dougal
b.
Gary and Martin Kemp
c.
Luke and Matt Goss
THIS year's dramatic increase in screenplay prices was justified by the alleged ‘instant hit’ quality of many of the properties.
However, this has not necessarily proved to be the case when the time has come to commit the words to celluloid.
The script that lit the blue touchpaper, inflation wise, was David Mickey Evans' Radio Flyer , the first purchase of incoming Columbia bosses Guber and Peters.
First-time writer Evans was scheduled to make his directorial debut on the project, but within a week of starting work he was jilted in favour of veteran Richard Donner 
Liam Neeson all wrapped up
AMERICA is in the throes of a gangster movie revival.
On release, or imminent, are Scorsese's GoodFellas , Sean Penn's State Of Grace , The Coen Brothers' Miller's Crossing , and The Godfather Part III .
Several more mob flicks are on the go: Dustin Hoffman as gangster Dutch Schultz in Billy Bathgate and Warren Beatty in Barry Levinson's biopic of the legendary Bugsy Siegel
WHEN director Alan Rudolph cast cute couple Bruce Willis and Demi Moore in his suspense drama Mortal Thoughts , little did he know the pair would do over $200 million of business this summer (with Die Hard 2 and Ghost ), an unexpected boost that could give the arthouse auteur a much-needed hit
BOOKS
RUSSELL JAMES
Underground (Gollancz, £3.50)
The most distinctive British thriller in a while.
Like a David Goodis noir novel reset in Deptford with an extraneous espionage plot thrown in for good measure
NELSON ALGREN
A Walk On The Wild Side (Picador, £4.99)
Certifiable lowlife classic.
A hallucinogenic novel set in a red light district halfway between New Orleans and hell
WILLIAM GIBSON AND BRUCE STERLING
The Difference Engine (Gollancz, £13.99)
Despite the nineteenth-century narrative sheen, this departure into steampunk is still cyberpunk at heart, and the tangled vision of Victorian cybernetics is another attempt to find an image for the unfathomable complexity of the contemporary information revolution.
Brilliant
PATRICIA DANIELS CORNWELL
Postmortem (Macdonald, £12.95)
Authorative first crime novel from a woman so obsessed with violent crime that she gave up crime reporting and got a job in the morgue
FILM
Darkman has been billed as Sam Raimi's move toward mainstream Hollywood, though given the current fascination for comic-book movies, he hasn't really had to move that far.
Nevertheless he has diluted things a bit, and where Evil Dead 2 had an almost meaningless series of gory slapstick routines,Darkman has something approaching a plot.
In a pop gothic mishmash that splices a superhero revenge drama with a hi-tech Phantom Of The Opera , Liam Neeson plays a scientist who invents an artificial skin which melts in the light and who then gets burnt to cinders by gangster psychopaths covering up big-city corruption.
He survives as the semi-psychotic Darkman and, disguised with his artificial skin, takes his revenge and tries to reconstruct his relationship with the lawyer Frances McDormand.
Raimi never quite decides whether to play it straight or go for camp laughs, although some major-league hamming from Neeson rather takes the decision out of his hands.
Luckily, though,Darkman's daft narrative gives Raimi enough space to indulge his real talents — cartoon action, smart sight gags and visual excess.
Describing what he does with certain scenes — Neeson's torture and the destruction of his lab, a helicopter chase across a city skyline — would spoil their visionary kinetics and sheer comic surprise.
Suffice to say that no one working in Hollywood can match him.
Jim McClellan 
Much heralded, the comics renaissance of the last five years has worn its For Mature Readers Only label like a badge of honour and serious intent.
But the same label also signals something rather different — graphic porn.
It's always been around in comic culture, but as cynical publishers try to cash in on the success of Howard Chaykin's gross Black Kiss , there's so much of it that the powers that be have noticed.
Last May British Customs officers seized a shipment of comics brought in by Titan, and recently comics shops in London have been raided by police.
Predictably, the main bone of contention is the depiction of ‘aroused’ males — they're happy to let naked women on to the shelves.
Double standards aren't restricted to the censors.
Retailers and distributors admit that a lot of the material is so bad they wouldn't be happy defending it in court, although they don't mind selling it.
As a result, a few famous names won't be available here anymore, most notably the new solo comic Birdland , from Love And Rockets man Gilbert Hernandez, which Titan is not importing after advice from customs.
‘Obviously, I'm against censorship.
I intended Birdland to be explicit but fun, a fantasy to counteract the Black Kiss style of violent sex comic, but these people don't seem to be able to see that,’ says Hernandez.
Meanwhile, in the comiczine Speakeasy,writer Grant Morrison has suggested that the campaign really has political, anti-government comics in its sights.
Jim McClellan 
Hernandez at bay
FILM
The Reflecting Skin , the debut directorial effort from Philip Ridley, may swap the East End gangster glamour of his Krays script for Idaho hillbilly gothic, but overall it's a very similar package.
Like The Krays , it deals in mythical allegories rather than historical realism, and swerves unevenly between some nicely controlled dark comedy and unintentionally funny ‘poetic’ dialogue.
Trying to navigate through the ‘nightmare of childhood’ and a confusing adult world, innocently nasty Seth (Jeremy Cooper) uses pulp horror as his interpretative map and becomes convinced that his grief-stricken neighbour Dolphin (Lindsay Duncan) is a vampire, sucking the life from his elder sailor brother (actually suffering from atomic poisoning).
In the meantime, all his friends have been dispatched by serial killers, his dad, wrongly accused of the crimes, has killed himself and his mum has gone mad.
Undoubtedly there is an overload here, especially in the melodramatically bleak ending.
But Ridley's attempts to expose the lush cornfields of Fifties middle America as a stunted psychic wasteland are ultimately carried by his visual confidence and imagination.
A promising debut.
Jim McClellan 
JULIA Roberts' latest film is Joseph Reuben's Sleeping With The Enemy , in which she is terrorised by a jealous, violent husband (Patrick Bergen).
One scene involved her wandering round her house in vest and pants, but Roberts refused to shoot it unless the crew took their trousers off too.
Most compiled, and the young actress took several photos — perhaps for her memoirs later
STILL admirably sticking to their principles, the Hernandez Brothers recently turned down a very large sum from Warner Brothers for the rights to make a film of the Love And Rockets comic.
‘We knew that despite what they promised we wouldn't get any real control,’ comments Gilbert Hernandez.
‘And we didn't want to see a team of scriptwriters messing around with our characters.
Really we want to get involved with an independent company’
CONTRIBUTORS Steve Beard, Richard Benson, Steven Daly, Tony Herrington, Ian McCann, John McCready, Jim McClellan, Amy Raphael, Chris Taggart, John Williams
MUSIC
Last month, Andy Weatherall called Ocean Colour Scene offering to remix their debut single, ‘Sway’.
Their reaction should shed some light on the band's self-confidence.
Guitarist Stephen explains: ‘It's a nice gesture, but we've recorded the single enough times and now wanna move on to the next one.
If he's in for working with us on the next single then it might happen.’
Ice cool, see.
Today, with an irresistible single behind them, OCS may or may not stand on the threshold of a wonderfully fresh new scene: they have successfully meshed the musical phenomenon of the past couple of years with a sound of their heroes, The Beatles and the Stones.
‘Two years ago if you said you liked Mick Jagger it would be the end of your career, but now it's suddenly cool to like them,’ says vocalist Simon.
But then these bands don't realise they can't make records as good as the Stones.
The scene isn't as great as everyone is making out.
People say, ‘Hey, The Charlatans have gone in at number 19,’ but in the Sixties the Stones would go in at number one.
So how big is this scene?’
Next summer, OCS will release an album.
‘We ‘re gonna make sure our album is one of the great albums.’
OCS are about charisma, legend, style, energy and the future.
The young Stones?
Maybe, but empty promises are not on the list.
Simon Dudfiled 
VIDEO
BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY
Tom Cruise puts in a fine performance as Ron Kovic, disabled Vietnam vet who fought back against indifference from the country he fought for, but somehow Oliver Stone's direction still leaves the viewer unmoved by his plight
TREMORS
Classic B-movie hokum.
The desert town of Perfection, Nevada — all tumbleweed and beat-up trucks — gets attacked by giant earthworms.
Good lines, fair acting, and a surprisingly fresh take on the monster movie
LET'S GET LOST
Bruce Weber's arty portrait of the now-dead jazzman Chet Baker is hopelessly pretentious — all black and white fashion shots and sun-burst silhouettes — but all this is forgotten as you get caught up in Baker's sad, pathetic life story.
Great music, too 
DICK Dick Talk: ‘Is that it?
Is that what all the fuss is about?’;
‘A heat-seeking missile’; ‘It's not the meat, it's the motion’.
Fifteen minutes of women discussing the male member, with enough visuals to give men a big complex (or some small reassurance)
HARLEM NIGHTS Eddie Murphy's movie with Richard Pryor pulls off the almost impossible: it shows two very funny men for nearly 1½; hours without raising a laugh.
Dire
Glowing out at night — by bike with luminous tyres which allow more safety when speeding down the roads at night.
Grab them from Halfords at around £6 each, available from selected stores nationwide.
Or, if you're travelling by foot or want to be seen clubbing, Red or Dead has a range of shoes with luminous soles at £50, from 61 Neal St, London WC2; Royal Exchange, Manchester; 6 Slater St, Liverpool
Ragamuffin style: these felt hats come in different colours with a variety of sewn-on shapes and are £47 from Rap, 60 Neal St, London WC2.
Perfect for clubbers
As hardy as Timberlands, motorbike boots are likely to warm pedestrian feet too this winter.
These cost £70 from Red or Dead, as above
Moving on from sports-style shirts, these hand-made knitted tops come in a range of bright colours, with or without collars and in long-sleeved and short variation.
Reminiscent of the itchy woollies you may well have grudgingly worn as a child, the range even includes hats with a choice of one, two or even three bobbles.
The tops cost around £75, and the hats around £17 from The Duffer Of St George, 27 D'Arblay St, London W1; Geese, Royal Exchange, Manchester; Hip, 14 Thornton's Arcade, Leeds; Swing, 60 Grass Market, Edinburgh; Square, 3–4 The Corridor, High St, Bath
A Chanel designer puffa jacket would set you back £1,300, a Hermes one £1,040.
And those are just the short ones.
A longer one by Katharine Hamnett costs around £730.
Nick Coleman's sell at nearly £600.
But this year the jackets — a classic item for the past two winters — are affordable.
Creek puffas (main picture), imported from France and costing £59.95 (short) and £69.95 (long), promise to be as universal as Timberlands and polo shirts.
Stockists include Seventy, 70 Lambs Conduit St, London WC1; McKenzie, 128 Buchanan St, Glasgow, 10 bold St, Liverpool; Ricci, 8 Hood St, Newcastle, 2 Hunter Square, Edinburgh
Katharine Hamnett
Hermes
Nick Coleman
Compiled by Amy Raphael and Karl and Derick (UTO)
MYTHSPENT YOUTH
Phil Thornton on the truth behind Fifties ads
Fashion, like politics and the Dutch student population, travels in cycles.
A look is created, forgotten and then reinvented years later as it hits a dead end and digs up the tried-and-tested looks of yesteryear.
Remember Mod, Primal Scream fans?
For those who regarded Levi's ads as style-pointers, the romanticised teendream of Fifties Americana indulged their Happy Days mid-west, small-town fantasies.
The adpeople's nostalgic remoulding of this period attempted to persuade Britain's youth that it really was hankering for those wholesome, innocent, optimistic times when guys courted gals with dignity, respect and slick-back haircuts.
So what began as a simple strategy to sell denim trews to impressionable, pliable teenage minds became an inter-agency conceptual war as the adpeople convinced themselves that late-Eighties Britain was in the grip of a nostalgia boom.
Jimmy Dean, that hoary old Fifties icon, became a necrophiliac fantasy for 14-year-old Malteser chompers everywhere as some bobby soxed nymphette did a gravity-defying dance with a Dean look-no-a-bit-like in a recreated picture palace.
The Wrigleys chewy ads portrayed Yankie youth, resplendent in full Sacramento High College clobber, wrecking their gums to a doo wop accompaniment.
Even the world's most boring beverage, Ovaltine, jumped on the bandwagon by using Steinski and Mass Media's parodic collage of kitsch Fifties adspeak, ‘We'll Be Right Back’.
‘Hi honey, I'm home!’ said Mr All New Ironic Ovaltine Man.
The rag trade adopted the same approach when it came to designing and flogging its clobber.
Fiorucci's Classic Nouveau range capitalised on the craze for labels and phoney forest-ranger chic by modelling its garments on carton clean-cut all-American WASP spawn with their blond flat-tops, Colgate grins and Ivy League attire.
Chipie and Chevignon pursued a similar course, and are still sticking with those weary old Fifties graphics and Top Gun sartorial sycophancy.
Of course such rose-tinted retrospection served a dual purpose in that politically it said: ‘Who needs AIDS, crack, violence, pollution and other symptoms of the modern age when you can transport yourself back to Fonzville, North Dakota, with its tidy suburban gardens, shining Chevys, fresh country air, soda bar, drive-in and upright American values?’
Today's society, the adverts pointed out, is too knowing, too soiled, and too corrupt — as if Fifties' America was some kind of zenith in Western civilisation.
Yes, the good old US Fifties, where trade unionists got shot dead for striking in Detroit, where blacks got lynched by the Klan without hindrance in the South, and where Senator Joe McCarthy or FBI boss J. Edgar Hoover destroyed peoples' lives for having beliefs contrary to their own.
Now that we're into the Nineties, the agencies have changed tack, and such Eighties' characteristics as greed, selfishness and sad Paisley ties have become passé.
Wrangler, which had continued to churn out laughably jingoistic ads, decided that Levi's had fallen victim to its own nostalgic hype and altered the perspective.
It didn't hark back to a mythical, puritan past but went super-realistic instead.
The music to its las ad, Hendrix's ‘Crosstown Traffic’, may be 20 years old, but the sordid visual tale of a New York cabbie's disillusionment with the American way is so very Nineties.
It's all a big con of course, a superficial ploy to appear as if Wrangler is swinging with the new crowd and responding to a new ozone-friendly political climate.
Multinationals care not a jot for new political perspectives unless they interfere with their ability to milk the sacred cow of dollardom.
If the moral ground changes, then the Kwikbuk plc PR division quickly maps out the new features and adapts accordingly.
Never has the start of a new decade been met with such exciting business opportunities.
The Eastern Bloc has been transformed into a gigantic Enterprise Zone for western capitalists eager to reap the benefits of suppressed consumerism.
All hail the new spirit of East/West friendship which has delivered the Iron Curtain from state-controlled economies.
But is it really ready for an all-out assault of US cultural imperialism which will, as sure as Stalin followed Lenin, lead to more phoney romanticised visions of America's mythical past and an enormous Eastern European identity crisis?
BAROMETER
UP
Brookside
After the gripping Corkhill saga, expect an appearance from The Farm in the New Year
Joseph Jossvenglos
The new Villa manager, who said ‘the boys done great’ in a heavy Czech accent after a recent victory
Excell
A ‘natural high’ that really does keep you up all night.
Available from a health shop near you
Post Office
For supplying mail staff with specially-designed black trainers with the Royal Mail red and blue flash down the side
DOWN
Amanda de Cadanet
Rumoured to be posing for Playboy for £100,000 — will she survive a second series of The Word ?
The Sunday Correspondent
They said a quality newspaper could never make it as a tabloid, and the struggle is now on
Designer logos
No longer wanted by the élite now that fakes have devalued them.
Gucci's new range will sport no prominent logos
British Telecom
Cutting staff, announcing record profits, and still intending to introduce a charge for directory enquiries ‘to compete with the American cost of 50p a call’
GHOSTLY CONFUSIONS
Jim McClellan on why Hollywood went spiritual
When is a ghost movie not really a ghost move?
Ghost , the year's surprise US box office hit, provides one answer.
Part woman-in-peril thriller, part comic financial caper, part romantic weepie, it's a lot of things but it isn't really a ghost story, not in the conventional sense.
It isn't about the dead hand of the past, the unsettled guilt-edged accounts of history returning to haunt the present.
Ghost is probably best classified as a Patrick Swayze movie, plain and simple.
Playing an investment banker, something which perhaps requires greater suspension of disbelief than the film's vision of the spirit world, Swayze gets to make all his crowd-pleasing moves in a novel setting.
He gets his shirt off (decorating his NY loft).
He does a little Dirty Dancing with Demi Moore in the absurd phallic pottery scene.
He even gets to duke it out with the bad guy — hard to do when you're a disembodied ghost, conventionally restricted to shifting ornaments and the like, but under pressure form Patrick's agents, the filmmakers find a way.
The ghost plot — Swayze gets killed, and before he can go off to heaven he has to save his girlfriend Demi Moore from the bad guys — is really just a gimmick, there to dress up the standard Swayze package with a few special effects and an impossibly sentimental ending.
The afterlife becomes an alternative heroic arena to the smalltown roadhouse, where Swayze proves himself and still gets the girl, even though he's dead.
This kind of generic gimmick has become a regular feature on the screen, as representative a product of MTV Hollywood as the multiple tie-in comic book movie, and just as symptomatic of larger structural changes in the industry.
Once you had standard generic lines.
Clearly differentiated from each other, they were mass-produced and targeted at different sections of a guaranteed market, who knew what they were getting.
Western fans knew that they'd get their mythical moral dramas, lovers of sloppy romance knew they'd get their climatic tears.
Flatliners: almost managing to be a real ghost movie
Now who knows?
As Ghost shows, everything's got mixed up.
Less certain of what is audiences really want, the film industry now tends to hedge its bets and make each individual film to serve a variety of different audience desires.
It's gone from dream factory creating durable, distinct genres to a more flexible operation trying to respond to small audience groups, to fashionable whims.
The result has been the ultimate short-term short-life celluloid product, the generic mishmash hung round a gimmick.
The problem is that a good gimmick is contagious — everyone in Hollywood gets it all at once, and then you get a rash of movies all suffering from the same big idea.
Not designed to last, they get made, released, then replaced by a new gimmick a year later.
So far there's been body swap movies, twin movies, underwater monster movies, one cop and his dog movies, baseball movies, lambada movies even.
With Ghost , Spielberg's ghostly sentimental comedy Always and the mismatched buddy ghost drama Heart Condition already out, it's obvious what this year's model is.
Still to come is the awful Ghost Dad , basically another attempt to get Bill Cosby's TV act to work on the big screen (Bill plays a workaholic dad who, once dead, gets to spend more time with his family).
Just out on video, the even worse Ghosts Can't Do It tries to resurrect Bo Derek's career.
The film sticks to the standard Bo plot — older man (Anthony Quinn) lusts comically after her body — but with Bo cracking on a bit, the stakes have had to be raised a bit .
So where in Ten Dudley Moore was merely menopausal, here Anthony Quinn is dead.
Ironically, the only current movie which really is like a classic ghost story hasn't been hyped as part of the fad.
A flashy piece of pop gothic from Joel Schumacher,Flatliners details the attempts of a group of brattish medical students (Keifer Sutherland, Julia Roberts, Kevin Bacon etc) to stop their hearts (‘flatline’ in medical slang), get revived a few minutes later, and in the process explore ‘death’.
As a result they talk a lot of bullshit about how this is their generation's answer to LSD (It's our final frontier’) and also call up the memories of past sins and traumas — playground racism, the suicide of a Viet vet father, some modish videotape voyeurism, bullying and murder even — which then return to haunt them in the real world.
(Cue some stupid horror film dialogue: ‘Our sins are back, and they're pissed.’)
Stylishly made but inherently daft, unlike the other ghost movies Flatliners does tackle the unpaid debts of the past, but only to write them off in the most superficial way.
Everybody says sorry and life goes on — it's that banal.
Flatliners' little hallucinatory moral dramas of American atonement (and even perhaps the other ghost movies), have their roots in a different gimmick film Field Of Dreams , which turned the social and political divisions of the Sixties into a family affair which could be sorted by Kevin Costner throwing a baseball around with his ghost dad.
They seem designed to tap into an audience desire to  atone for something and resolve it with a bumper sticker morality and a mushy climax.
A sanitised, depoliticised alternative to the guilt trips of the Vietnam movie, these films are like celluloid group therapy.
The sentimental message seems to be that it's never too late to open up, confess and say sorry (even if you're dead), and once you do everything is OK, everybody gets a second chance in the new kinder, gentler America, tomorrow is the first day of the rest of your life etc.
As for movies which might use the old gothic mechanisms to haunt the imagination in more complex ways, to plunge you into the real nightmare of history, in the politically and morally conservative world of modern Hollywood it looks like they don't stand a ghost of a chance
MUSICAL NOTES
Dave Haslam on the new crop of rock books
Books about music are naturally as varied as music itself.
Generally, records sell better than books, and publishers want to tap into that larger market.
For instance,I Was A Teenage Six Pistol by Glen Matlock (Omnibus, £12.95) is only on the shelves because someone calculated that if one out of every few hundred punk rockers is daft enough to shell out nearly £13 for Matlock's eye-witness account of the writing of ‘Pretty Vacant’, then they'll make a small fortune.
The collection of essays by Simon Reynolds in Blissed Out (Serpent's Tail, £8.99) at least advances our ways of responding to, and writing about, pop music.
Culled largely from pieces that first appeared in Melody Maker over the last few years, it amounts to the precise, enthusiastic explication of ‘bliss’; a kind of untidy sensual and emotional confusion engendered by the disruptive, abnormal qualities of his favourite music (which includes the Pixies, Sonic Youth and Public Enemy).
Hue And Cry is the kind of act Reynolds can't abide, but the Pat Kane interview is, in a way, the most important chapter.
Kane turns on Reynolds with some acute criticism of his stance, and Reynolds — while fighting his corner with conviction — is good enough to admit the limits of his aesthetic.
As set down here, his writing is repetitive and wide-open to disagreement, but it has virtues (purpose, passion, and seriousness) which most rock writers never touch.
Like Reynolds, Chris Heath is a working journalist.
In Pet Shop Boys, Literally (Viking, £12.99) he follows their tour to the Far East and Britain.
Interviews are interspersed with on-the-road reportage.
Walk-on parts are had by Bros, Neil Tennant's parents and Janet Street-Porter (who joins the entourage in Japan).
The book is a disappointment.
No event, however boring, is left untold.
Meals are recorded in belly-numbing details.
We fly from raw fish to live lobster, and then on to a ten-course Vietnamese.
In fact,Pet Shop Boys, Literally isn't a book; it's a list of what the Pet Shop Boys buy, what they hear, what songs they perform, who they meet, what Neil says, what Chris says.
Pop music is glitzy, wanton, and problematic.
It's misrepresented by downbeat books reeling off menus.
There are no misunderstanding, no tears, no confessions.
I'd have preferred a book that told a few truths, or even a few lies.
Sara Champion, in And God Created Manchester (Wordsmith Books, £9.99), writes directly from the most important music city of the last year and she should be much praised for attempting to dig beneath the surface.
Certainly you'll find truths and lies in these pages, and an excited, undeceived fan's-eye view.
In breathless fashion, foreswearing sweet reason and most of the rules of grammar, she reviews the things which have contributed to the Manchester phenomenon.
She traces the roots back in time; she covers some of the more obvious ground (with chapters on Happy Mondays, the Stone Roses etc); she rights some wrongs; she flirts with some myths; she gives a platform to some of the previously unsung instigators; she dumps a few reputations; and, though imperfect, it's as reliable a guide to current Manchester music as you are likely to get.
Dylan Jones treads a fine line in Jim Morrison: Dark Star (Bloomsbury, £16.99).
The more inglorious aspects of Morrison's life and behaviour, and the undignified myth-making indulged in by his ‘followers’ aren't concealed, but then Jones doesn't exactly run the hoary old rock conceit of romantic self-destruction out of town either: ‘Humility was a trait which didn't sit well with Morrison’is about as heavy as the criticism gets.
That a figure with such a subversive reputation as Morrison can be a fit subject for an extremely posh, photo-laden book is maybe more than just a little embarrassing.
In fact, Jones' text does tackle the complexity of Morrison well, and his reading of The Doors as melodrama seems right, but the whole project is unbalanced by the endless, unenlightening shots of those cheekbones, the starry eyes, and that 24-hour pout.
Lying on a coffee table, the untamed visionary goes glossy, turns safe 
Pet Shop Boys: fine records, but not so good literally
THE HANDMAID'S TALE
Colin Greenland on an unsatisfactory film adaption
Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale is a strange, almost dreamy novel about the wild feelings, memories and wayward emotions of a woman who can't express them because she's not allowed to have them.
Her name is Offred, and she's a servant, a handmaid, in a future Puritan, totalitarian America.
Her entire role in life is to get pregnant by Fred, her lord and master; to lie down between the legs of his wife Serena, who's sterile and desperate; to shut up and spread them.
Apparently there's a biblical precedent for this, which is why it's standard practice in the new Republic of Gilead.
Being subjected to it, Offred is in a very good position — literally — to see the hypocrisy of tyranny from underneath.
It's a haunting book, pulsing with a numb silence before the scream.
The movie version blows it in the first couple of minutes.
Atwood says her novel isn't science fiction, though it clearly is.
In her future, a big fundamentalist upsurge has stuck women back in the kitchen and the bedroom, turned their money into plastic and then taken that plastic away.
It's not a particularly convincing rationale, but it's not meant to be — any more than George Orwell was literally predicting the future in 1984 .
In any case, it's tucked away in the second half of the book, after Offred's prison-like existence has been thoroughly, horribly established.
Offred doesn't tell her story from beginning to end.
She keeps circling between past and present, memory and oblivion, like someone trying to wake up from a nightmare.
You think, ‘Why don't these women do something?’
And at the same time you understand — because they can't.
It's not rational.
It's just total.
More and more these days — and often the bigger the production, the more it's true — film adaptions tend to be literal .
The Handmaid's Tale is director Volker Schlondorff's first American feature, and he's done it by the book.
Offred's meanderings are glued back into chronological order, which puts the flimsiest part of the book right at the beginning.
Even with a powerful cast, including Natasha Richardson and Elizabeth McGovern, the women simply look stupid for letting themselves be herded into indoctrination camps.
The book is all atmosphere: menace, hysteria, unspoken threat.
The movie is not.
Handmaids aren't allowed to answer back, so most of the book is concerned with what's going on in Offred's head.
Screenwriter Harold Pinter made a name for himself with plays like The Caretaker , in which an ugly, unstated violence was evident in his famous pauses.
Yet Offred and Serena (Faye Dunaway, who was more threatening in the terrible costume bash The Wicked Lady ) not only discuss their bizarre way of life, they argue about it.
Even Robert Duvall as Fred doesn't tyrannise.
The best he can manage with this script is a sense of loony bigotry.
The relentlessly lumbering movie machine has taken a truly extreme, hallucinatory book about oppression and obedience, juiced it up with some patronising love interest and turned it into a standard ‘women's issues’ film: sanitised, regulated and pointless.
There's more claustrophobia in The Prisoner 
THE DOORS ON FILM
Jim Morrison playing one of this favourite roles — that of the learned poet — for the cameras
Jim Morrison, singer with the Doors and inspiration for a generation, died in 1971…
…
He never got tired, grey and dated.
He never got to clean up his act at the Betty Ford Clinic then bore us all stupid with tales of his past self-abuse.
Instead, he became an icon.
His grave in Paris is a shrine, his records still sell well, and echoes of his music can be heard in bands like the Stone Roses, The Charlatans and James.
And now director Oliver Stone is making his life into a film
Above: the classic portrait of Morrison at his peak, in 1967, and (opposite page) Bal Kilmer in costume as the Lizard King
Above left: Meg Ryan (centre) plays Morrison's common-law wife, Pamela.
Above right: the Sixties re-created for the film in Los Angeles, 1990
Jim Morrison died in Paris on July 7, 1971, of what may or may not have been an overdose.
He was 27 years old, and though they now deny it, his group, The Doors, was all but finished.
Had he lived, and continued in his intention to write poetry, he would probably now be another ageing rocker with literary pretensions, creaking his wares around the stadiums just like the Stones, The Who, Dylan and the Grateful Dead.
Instead, he left behind a potent series of myths — the rock ‘n’ roll rebel, the sensitive poet, the sexual athlete, the Lizard King — and a body of work that would influence musicians who hadn't even been born when their hero was buried and his gravestone gained its first layer of graffiti in Pére Lachaise cemetery.
Now, as the twentieth anniversary of his death approaches, a whole industry is moving into gear: books, compilations, documentaries, and, most of all, the long-awaited biopic.
A movie version of Morrison's life has been in the works for more than a decade, with male stars from John Travolta to Jason Donovan coveting the lead role and a string of scriptwriters, directors and producers slated for involvement at different times.
Now work is almost completed, with long-time Doors fans Oliver Stone in the director's chair as he once again exorcises his Vietnam ghosts through film.
For months now, Sixties casualties in Los Angeles have been pinching themselves.
Veterans of the Sunset Strip scene did a double-take when the Whiskey A-Go-Go — where The Doors once played as the in-house band for $500 a week — was restored to its Day-Glo glory after a decade of black paint and chrome fixtures.
A lucky few even made it inside to see the Lizard King roll around on stage again.
Meanwhile, the T-shirt stalls that usually clutter the Venice Beach Boardwalk disappeared and were replaced by quaint bookstores and outdoor caféd from the Sixties, so convincingly real that residents of the area walked into them, only to be thrown out by laughing security guards.
Out in the Mojave Desert, the movie world's attention to detail didn't wash as well.
In one cave that supposedly served as a backdrop for one of Morrison's legendary acid trips, ancient Indian paintings were treated to a touch-up job.
Some poor sap made the mistake of his career and applied the wrong brand of paint — the kind that wouldn't wash off.
The desecration of the cave, a holy place for the Indians who lived in the Mojave Desert, caused an uproar.
Ancient history is scarce around these parts, and you take it where you can get it — even from people you wiped out in more recent times.
But back in LA, the tension between illusion and reality — taut at the best of times — has finally snapped.
It's 1967 again and Jim Morrison is all over town.
After being stuck in traffic behind trailer upon trailer carrying ‘The Doors’ logo, I eventually found myself with director Oliver Stone watching a drunk and disorderly Morrison recording ‘Touch Me’.
Except it's not Morrison, it's actor Val Kilmer — husband of Joanne Whalley — doing a more passable impersonation for the cameras.
‘I see Jim very much as the hero who succeeded in life,’ says an unusually approachable Stone during a break in the shooting.
‘The conventional way would be to see this movie as the rise and fall of a rock star; I have chosen not to see it that way.
I think that he got better as he got older.
His work matured, even if there is no question that he abused himself and died for that reason.
The albums ‘American Prayer’ and ‘LA Woman’produced some of the best work he ever did, and I think in a sense he died for his poetry.
He wore himself out, looking for himself.’
Kevin Dillon as drummer John Densmore with guitarist Robbie Krieger (Frank Whaley); Kyle MacLachlan as keyboard player Ray Manzarek; Kilmer and Ryan
And Stone, no stranger to chemical soul-searching himself (after all, this is the man who wrote Scarface and called it ‘somewhat autobiographical’), is not afraid to tackle the dangers of glorifying this aspect of Morrison's character.
‘Death and life are interwoven,’ he says.
‘Jim knew it, because he lived on the edge.
He was saying that in order to have a greater life, you have to have a strong awareness of death.
It is the people who live without the acknowledgement of death who are in danger of destroying themselves spiritually.
Jim lived on the edge between life and death, he straddled the fence, and his balls hurt.
‘Jim had a very eventful life in his 27 years, so the question is what you leave out.
He's like a Joseph Conrad character, like Lord Jim or Nostromo or Kurtz.
You don't really know who he is.
Everybody I talk to has a different version of Jim's life.
I talked to about 30 or 40 people who knew him pretty well, and they all thought that they were one of the most important people in his life.
Especially the women.’
Meg Ryan plays Morrison's common-law wife, Pamela Courson, and of all the people involved in Stone's $40 million movie, she seems the one most affected by the story's dark undertones.
Maybe it's because she has the most substantial female role in any of Stone's films to date — or maybe it's because her character suffered the saddest fate in the backsweep of Jim Morrison's downfall.
‘Pamela came to LA to find herself — and found Jim Morrison instead,’ says Ryan.
‘She got on what I think was the wrong ride, and the tough part is that she was such a willing victim.
She kinda thought of him as a poet, and I think he loved her for that.
He liked who he was in her eyes.
She was home to him, even after all the other women.
‘Immersing myself in what's sometimes a very ugly world isn't easy.
It's hard to shake that off.
Some things stick in your mind, certain images from this movie you won't be able to forget easily.
Pamela was the one who found him, and she spent the weekend after he died stoned out of her mind, listening to his records.’
She died of a heroin overdose three years later, never having recovered her bereavement.
‘It's a very extreme film; a story about fame and excess, about people who acquire a very specific audience, people who really watch them and reflect them.’
Ryan raises one of the questions the movie will have to answer in order to be successful: whether or not creativity gives you a licence to search and destroy.
A licence, as it were, to kill.
‘Sadly, I think people have taken that privilege,’ she says.
‘I don't think it's deserved.
But people take it.
It's an interesting story to me and raises personal issues as well.
Who gives a college course on how to deal with fame?
It's a wild ride, man, a wild ride!
You meet some of the wildest, wackiest, weirdest, most fun people — and at the same time there's some really dark forces at work.’
This is the stuff of Oliver Stone's dreams: terror, fear and pity.
‘I see Jim as a hero,’ says the director, smiling.
‘A hero who sought to live out a mythological quest to find himself.
He was always looking.
He was never satisfied with anything; with success, with one woman.
He always wanted to go further, in him music, in his sexual life, in his chemical life, in his drinking life.
He's a man who made a lot of money and never had a dime on him.
Material things didn't matter to him.
He had a poet's view of life.
‘I was in Vietnam when I first heard him, and his songs addressed me very directly.
They were about love and death, very basic things.
There was no frivolity, unlike a lot of the early rock music or lyrics.
He was very primal.
He was the first white man of my generation to really tune into the sensual aspect of being physical.
Sensuality had disappeared in the Fifties; except maybe for Elvis, you didn't see much of it.
And after Jim's death, to be destructive became an attitude, as opposed to what Jim did — playing out a mythic drama where he was really wrestling his own death.
He was fighting for his life.
He walked out on stage, and it wasn't a performance.
Mick Jagger does a performance, and a really good one too, but with Jim you got the sense that any night could be his last concert.
He wasn't built to last.’
Standing in a perfectly recreated Sixties recording studio, Stone, the Last Angry Man in Hollywood, is smiling.
A happy, approachable Oliver Stone is a new phenomenon indeed — he is no a man known for his relaxed attitude on set, and the actors in Platoon especially were pushed to the limit.
But this film is different.
‘It's fun,’ says Kevin Dillon, a veteran of earlier Stone wars who is playing Doors drummer John Densmore.
‘I guess this one's easier for him to do than the others.
It's not so political and personal for him — or maybe he's getting ready to snap…’
‘No, it's just that the pressure is off him now,’ says Frank Whaley, the standout in Stone's last box-office hit,Born On The Fourth Of July , and the actor who plays The Doors' mild-mannered guitarist Robbie Krieger.
‘After two Oscars, he doesn't have to prove himself anymore.
He's the top dog now.’
‘They tell me he's a little more relaxed on this one than his earlier ones,’ says Kyle MacLachlan, Agent Cooper in David Lynch's TV-phenomenon Twin Peaks and now a dead ringer for keyboard player Ray Manzarek.
‘I don't really want to imagine what they were like but I know it's not an intense thing for him to do like Platoon was.
And I think he enjoys moving away from‘Oliver Stone Movies’ into something else.
It's a joy to work for him; as a director he's intense, but respectful.
He treats his actors as equals, and if he ask you a question, it's because he wants an answer — not because he's testing you.’
A Door closed: Morrison's grave in Paris
Oliver Stone is smiling so much because he has landed the job he always wanted: getting the last word on Jim Morrison.
‘I never thought it would be me,’ he says.
‘I heard about this project in the late Seventies, and as a screenwriter it was my biggest dream.
And nobody made the movie.
Which was good for me; if I had directed it in 1979 it wouldn't have had a chance.’
It does now: there are already trailers in US cinemas, a year before the première.
‘There was the parents' estate, his father's estate, the Doors' estate — and they were all fighting.
But they just exhausted themselves after all these years — and I was in the right place at the right time, so they all settled on me to direct it.
But I know there's going to be problems on this.
At the end of the day, they're all going to attack me,’ Stone sighs.
‘They all signed waivers, but that's not going to stop them.’
Stone shrugs, and smiles.
He prefers to have his back against the wall; he thrives on conflicts and risks.
His track record suggests a near genius at casting, and The Doors boasts cameos from people like Billy Idol, Mimi Rogers, Crispin Glover, and a multitude of Sixties celebrities.
In what could be the most crucial casting decision of his career, Stone settled on Val Kilmer to take on the most sought-after male lead role in recent years.
‘I saw Val in Willow , and I said, ‘This is Jim Morrison.’
But nobody could get the movie made at that time, and the question now was whether Val wasn't too old for the part.
We went all over town, looked at rock stars and actors, but Val just had it from day one.
He understood Jim Morrison.
He's as intelligent as Jim was, has a sense of humour and irony, and he's one hell of a singer.
I think this is it for him.
If he's going to make it, it's going to be with this picture.’
Val Kilmer greets visitors to his trailer dressed in black shirt and black leather pants.
With his flowing black curls, outstanding cheekbones, and the buckled gold belt Morrison favoured, the resemblance is more than uncanny — it's creepy.
So are the reports that have flourished on the LA gossip circuit — Kilmer is going overboard; Kilmer thinks he is Jim Morrison; Kilmer has it written into his contract that everybody has to address him as Jim.
The truth is that he has no apparent difficulties responding to ‘Val’ or ‘Kilmer’.
None at all.
‘All my friends were concerned for me when I got the part,’ Kilmer admits.
‘For me it's been exactly the opposite; I've never been healthier — and I'm much more religious than when I started doing this.
Death and life are interwoven,’ says Stone.
‘Jim knew it because he lived on the edge’
I get to act out all the horrors and pressures of fame, and some of the things that I worry about in my own life are purged.
Morrison really was out there,’ he says.
‘He chose to look for the spiritual through the physical, like Rimbaud and Kerouac.
He really believed that line of Blake's: ‘The path of excess leads to the tower of wisdom’, something like that.
Those were his heroes, and you can look at it like thy had a defeatist attitude or were grotesquely self-indulgent — or that it enabled them to have the art.
But personally I don't believe that.
I don't believe you have to be all that indulgent.
‘It's a question that you can't answer for somebody else, you know.
You see art that's created by people who are killing themselves making it, and I always wonder how it would turn out if they weren't doing that.
Their justification for doing it is that it's for this thing, this painting or whatever, and I always wonder if it couldn't be more without all that.’
‘Part of his problem was that he was just doing what everybody else did at the time, and it killed him.
I think if he'd lived now, he'd live differently.
I think he even said that in one of his last interviews, at 27, that if he had to do it all over again, he wouldn't.
Even if he was able to create this myth out of his own life.’
‘I think he had absolutely no discipline,’ says Kilmer.
‘He came from a military family — his father rose quite high in the Navy — so he was as undisciplined in his life as he could be.
It was a very clear choice that he made.
He took hundreds and hundreds of acid trips, and real strong stock enabled him to do it.
It's a high, like driving racing cars, flying airplanes.
You wake up thinking, ‘I didn't die today.’
So you go running for it, chasing that feeling of being alive, the sensation.
‘And in the end, after six years of trying he got what he wanted.
He wanted to kill himself and he did’
BEATS INTERNATIONAL
Beats International posing for the cameras in the streets of Tokyo and live at Club Quatro (above).
Main pic, left to right: Lindy Layton, Norman Cook, Wildski, Req One, Lester Noel and DJ (crouching)
BEATS INTERNATIONAL are a pop group of their time…an indie star turned dance guru, a soap star turned singer, and a motley crew of British rappers, singers, musicians, graffiti artists and dancers passing through.
Take the whole package to Japan, and it all gets distinctly surreal
Sometimes Japan is more than a Western mind can take.
You begin to wonder if you've left the Earth's atmosphere for another world after a day on the planet Tokyo.
The 14-hour plane journey only confirms this.
The jet lag induces a mild form of hallucination.
Soon your mind is asking your body, where am I?
The answer won't reassure you.
You're in a world where lamp-posts inset with small Sony TV sets show high hills and rolling waves, while new age piano music plays.
You're in a world where everyone is beautifully perfect, like dummies in some giant shop window.
A world where every Western youth culture since the dawn of teenage has been assimilated so completely that Tokyo has become a sociological Disneyland.
The real Disneyland is ten miles outside the city, but we were told that nobody goes there.
Instead they're all here, eating Kentucky Fried Chicken in their Union Jack T-shirts.
They're all being so ridiculously polite that you begin to consider the option of using ‘fuck off’ as your opening line to these people who nod and bow and smile at you despite the fact that they are merely passing by.
Instead Tokyo gets you in the end.
You discover a long lost pocket of goodness in your soul and end up with a sore neck after adopting a passable imitation of a toy dog on the back shelf of a car.
Norman Cook keeps looking at me.
I keep looking at Norman Cook.
Neither of us is making much sense of this right now.
Arriving the night before to play a series of shows in Japan, Beats International are a fresh example of Western pop to be studied, consumed and assimilated.
It's 10.30 in the morning and Norman Cook DJ is taping a tiny studio.
They smile constantly at him, making mental notes of each scratch, each movement.
His records are removed from their metal box and examined like moon rock.
They are passed around and undecipherable comments are made about Deee-Lite, En Vogue and J.C.
Lodge.
It's like those alien stories where hapless travellers are beamed up by future scientists from other worlds.
These J Wave scientists are investigating Britain's club culture at close hand, and Norman Cook is the nearest thing they have to a perfect specimen.
The Beats International show incorporates live graffiti art by Req One as well as live mixing, rap and vocals
Perhaps he'll be sitting at home in Brighton next month not remembering a thing about it, perhaps in a year or two Sony or Akai will be marketing a small black box the size of a cigarette packet that cuts and scratches at the touch of a button.
Norman Cook is a little unnerved by all this interest.
Two days later he tells me: ‘It's like they want to copy everything down to the smallest detail.
Yesterday I did another radio mix, just the kind of dodgy old thing you'd do in your bedroom, and they were videoing it.
If we come back next year, the whole of Tokyo will be scratching itself to death.’
Wildski, Lindy Layton, Req One and other Internationalists backstage at Club Quatro
And then the fun starts.
The complete Beats International entourage is booked to do a live radio interview for Tokyo Pop Arena .
They are waiting in the studio reception where the presenter appears, a human typhoon with glasses that could burn holes in paper on a sunny day and the kind of clothes you can't even find in C&A any more.
He is the first frightening indication of Tokyo's apparent infatuation with rap.
He shouts ‘Beats International !’ with the kind of enthusiasm most sane people save for a winning goal or a multiple birth, and then he breaks into rhyme.
It sounds like the Sugarhill Gang must still be in Tokyo.
He leads us to the studio, where an interpreter relays another strange question to rapper and part-time Internationalist Wildski.
While he tries to answer, the presenter whispers in his ear.
‘Motherfucker,’ he hisses.
Wildski can hardly believe it.
Welcome to planet Tokyo, New York without the noise, the dirt and the violence, where saying ‘motherfucker’ is just another way of denying an indigenous culture that's slowly being buried; just another way of saying, ‘I love Johnny Rotten and Ronald McDonald.’
Top: Norman mixes live in the studio for 81.3 FM J Wave, a perfect specimen of British club culture to be examined and emulated.
Bottom: interesting variations on the names of DJs Paul Oakenfold and Mike Pickering (left); Wildski raps and Req One sprays it again
It's hard to believe that the man who used to play the bass in a sullen and studenty pop group called The Housemartins is the creator of this year's most significant number one single, but the success of ‘Dub Be Good To Me’ is a sing that things have truly changed for the better.
Despite its almost unwitting commerciality, it is a true club record, as much a product of the underground scene as Smith And Mighty or Soul II Soul.
Aside from the cutting lyrics of ‘For Spacious Lies’ or the cheeky exuberance of ‘Blame It On The Bassline’, it is Beats International's most characteristic creation.
It's drum and bass culture, the sound of downtempo Britain after midnight.
Norman Cook will never be spoken about in the same breath as Jazzie B, yet ‘Dub Be Good To Me’ is one of the hardest records you will ever hear seeping out of a Ford Escort at the traffic lights.
Norman finds its success hard to account for.
‘To have a number one you have to sell to grannies and ten-year-olds.
I didn't think grannies would get into a record like that.
It took six hours to make.
I'm still shocked.
It appealed to me, but I didn't think it would appeal to Simon Bates.
It's got scratching noises on it and a bassline that doesn't follow the rest of the song.
I suppose anything can happen now.’
Sometimes rap was difficult to defend because at the time it was all dicks and gold.
It was politically unsound, and that was my old band's argument against it’— Norman Cook
I talk to Norman and to Beats International member Lester Noel in the hotel restaurant.
We're hiding in a corner to give our necks a rest, the logic being that if you don't make eye contact you don't have to bow.
Norman and Lester are the only two official members of the group.
The two rappers, Wildski and DJ, the graffiti artist Req One and even Lindy Layton, the angelic voice of ‘Dub Be Good’, are all just passing through.
Norman met Lester on a Housemartins tour; out-and-out indie group that expired before James Brown's Funky Drums became the backbone to every white dance record.
Norman and Lester seem to get on well.
They make a good team — Lester a black man who thinks James are the greatest, Norman a white man whose life was changed when he heard James Brown.
‘We have a lot in common,’ says Lester.
‘We were both inspired by punk.
It's just that he went one way and I went another.
I followed the indie trail through 2 Tone to Postcard Records and the Stone Roses.
Now I teach him about indie music and he teaches me about dance.
We're aware of the ironies.
The Stones Roses were interested in him remixing ‘Fools Gold’.
Norman didn't really know much about them.
I had to fill him in.’
Norman got more and more lost in black music when he was a member of The Housemartins.
Using the name DJ Ox he would play anywhere and everywhere, inspired by 1980's ground-breaking ‘Grandmaster Flash On The Wheels Of Steel’.
‘I couldn't believe that record.
I went out and bought the best turntables I could afford.
They were £60 each.
They were crap, but you could scratch with them if you put 10p pieces on the heads.
By the time it was obvious that the band were splitting up, I was already totally hypnotised by rap and dance music.’
Housemartins fans — whipped into an anti-dance frenzy by the ‘Hang The DJ’ dribblings of Morrissey — often expressed a desire to fill Norman Cook in, seeing him as a traitor.
At the time NME 's letters page was full of hysterical prose from students concerned about the spectre of dance music.
‘Sometimes it was difficult to defend,’ says Norman, ‘because at the time rap was all dicks and gold.
It was politically unsound, and that was the band's main argument against it.’
It was Norman's fellow band members who insisted on the pseudonym.
Finally, he decided that The Housemartins were contributing nothing to his life.
‘I was totally dissatisified.
Everyone had a problem with the band.
I'd lost all interest in the music.
It meant nothing to me then.’
By the time it was all over, Norman had done his first mix, a poppy version of Eric B and Rakim's ‘I Know You Got Soul’ which sampled The Jackson Five's ‘ABC’with a typical lack of concern for cool.
With an ability to take a hardcore hip hop track and make the curly-permed DJ at the local disco understand it, Cook became the pop rap remix king; an indispensable link in the chain that brought Brooklyn to Basildon and Basingstoke.
He made a good living from his extensive knowledge of breakbeats and old funk records, and eventually Beats International evolved quite naturally out of his love of DJing.
Norman began cutting and scratching the night away with Wildski MCing over the top.
Other friends from the Brighton scene, like rapper DJ and spray assassin Req One, cam later.
Top: the International check out a temple.
Bottom: Wildski (left) and Lindy Layton
Performing at Tokyo's Club Quatro, Wildski is truly an over-the-top, larger-than-life man who bounded through the Japanese experience picking up enough words and phrases to cobble together an Oriental rap which had the crowd beaming from ear to ear.
Wildski decided that Tokyo was the hat capital of the world and proceeded to buy 14 different Kangol varieties.
One particular tartan hat was so large even Russ Abbot might have baulked at it.
I talk to him walking through a packed mid-evening Tokyo, our interview interrupted as a fellow headache passes by.
‘I've got that hat!’ he shouts to nobody but himself.
We talk about the recent Kiss FM opening celebration in London's Highbury Fields where Beats International were canned offstage.
It was seen by many as a ‘fuck off’ message to Norman from hardcore hip hop fans.
‘I don't think it was as much that as people just waiting to see LL Cool J getting over-excited,’ says Wildski.
Norman is willing to accept the criticism that he's a white man making a good living from black music.
‘What else can I do though?
I love black music.
But I understand that we weren't black enough for that crowd, despite the fact that of the three people on stage [Lester, DJ and Lindy — Norman wasn't on stage]only one was white.’
This kind of willingness to accept criticism about sampling (‘I know we're killing live music’), or the group's often grey image (‘I know that's a problem’), inevitably endears you to Norman Cook.
He's an archetypal nice bloke who is the first to get his round in at the Blighty Bar, an after-hours drinking club which we establish on the steps of the hotel after we discover that Tokyo shuts at 10.30.
A machine in the hotel provides the beer.
Beats International could be found there almost every night watching a strange world go by.
Sometimes a car slows down and the inhabitants wave and shout what they believe to be a significant phrase.
Something like ‘reggae’ or ‘motherfucker’.
One night the Seven Samurai roar past on motorcycles.
They have Mohican haircuts and look like they'd like to rip us limb from limb as we wave cheerfully to them.
Thankfully they don't come back.
Norman leads the conversation at the Blighty Bar, with subjects like the Housemartin with the biggest dick (can you guess?) and the London rap star whose real name is Bottom.
During one of the many radio interviews he undertakes during the week, he is asked to name the first record he ever bought for a programme called Super DJ On Line .
He turns to me and asks, ‘Do you think they'll have ‘Mouldy Old Dough’ by Lieutenant Pigeon?’
I hated that house shit.
I couldn't dance to it.
Nothing else was given a chance when it was happening.
It held a pillow to every other form of music’— Norman Cook
An interview with Lindy Layton is arranged, though she isn't really a member of Beats International and is currently concentrating on a solo LP.
Lindy would sooner be out shopping than talking to me.
You can hardly blame her.
The sun is beating down and there are Gaultier shops on every corner.
Lindy is sharp enough, despite the fact that she's managed by Keith Chegwin's brother, a man who also looks after Michela Strachan.
Her is a ballet teacher and her dad is a theatrical agent, but she isn't a showbiz kid.
Lindy discovered Norman Cook through his bootleg mixes she heard in clubs.
A confirmed soul fan and veteran of the Wag and Mud clubs in London, she was almost shocked to find out he was ‘a Housemartin’.
She's a little preoccupied at the moment, just an ordinary person finding it hard to deal with the madness that selling vast amounts of records brings.
Yet she has sung and acted since childhood in everything from Annie to Grange Hill , from Bird's Eye commercials to a more recent — and more controversial — Army recruitment ad.
‘Success means you can spend more when you go shopping.
I don't really enjoy it.
I have been tempted to run away.
I think about it a lot.
The opportunities are there.
I think about what would happen if I did it…
…
I think I'd really like to fuck off and not come back.’
Perhaps Lindy Layton is going to run away to Minneapolis to be with Prince.
According to more than one disreputable daily, she is having a ‘steamy’ affair with him.
‘That's just ridiculous.
How can you stop them making these things up?
He's too small for me anyway…
…’
It's also been said that Prince, who writes songs for anyone and everyone from Sheena Easton to The Bangles, has written a song specifically for her called ‘Do Me Baby’.
You may in fact remember that it appeared on one of his early LPs.
Lindy is to record this song as part of her solo LP.
‘I didn't say he's written it for me.
He sent it through, suggesting that I cover it.
Those things get so twisted it just makes me look stupid.’
Bad experiences like these make Lindy Layton suspicious even with a gentle soul like me.
In future she is going to be harder.
‘When the record company first asked me to talk to people, I just did.
I couldn't be fucked to say ‘no’.
From now on I'm going to be more careful.’
Back at the Blighty Bar, Japan has gone to bed and the British dance scene is the subject of discussion.
‘I think ‘Blame It On The Bassline’ is a sign that things are changing again,’says Norman.
‘But England has always been more open-minded.
We should be proud of that.
It's the only thing that makes me proud about that country.
The fact that we can have Deee-Lite at number one and they can't get anywhere in America.’
To Norman Cook the success of records like that and music such as En Vogue's ‘Lies’, music he plays at his ‘Ted Free Zone’ night in Brighton, signals the end of the uptempo madness that was house.
‘I hated that shit.
I couldn't dance to it.
Nothing else was given a chance when it was happening.
It held a pillow to the face of every other kind of music.’
Culture clash: Norman eats it up, while Wildski (right) lets it go to his head
‘Dub Be Good’ is to him a vindication of his belief in an eccentric mix of punk, politics, reggae, ragga, hip hop, pop and the most hardfaced sampling style since Mark ‘the 45’King first laid hands on an Akai S900.
Pop music is walking Norman Cook's way.
Like Japan, the future belongs to him.
However, for the moment there are more important things.
‘My round?’ he asks, draining his can.
FASHION
This page: black and green motorbike suit to order and black racing gloves, both from Michiko Koshino, 63 Neal St, London WC2; black sleevless top from Midas, 27a Sloane Sq, London SW1; Oakley shades from For Eyes, 90–92 Oxford St, London W1
Opposite page: Oakley goggles from Rivetts, Leytonstode Rd, London E15; Respro face mask from Cycle Logical, 136 New Cavendish St, London W1; red/blue jacket from Michiko Koshino, as before
Photography JULIAN BROAD assisted by Nick Selby/Fashion KARL & DERICK (UTO) /Hair Colin Roy at Vidal Sassoon/Make-up Jo Karsberg at Debbie Walters/Models Karl at Storm, Lisa Roudette at Models One and Josefin at Premier
READY
STEADY
Opposite page: red top from Millennium, New Row, London W2; leather trousers by Dirk Bikkembergs from Jones, Floral St, London W1; red gloves from Michiko Koshino, as before; motorbike boots from Rivetts, as before; Oakley shades from For Eyes, as before
This page: black shorts with detachable pockets from Michiko Koshion, as before; red and black bra top from Sue Rowe at Hyper Hyper, Kensington High St, London W8; knee stockings from Plein Sud at Joseph, 77 Fulham Rd, London SW3; fingerless mitts from Millennium, as before
This page: sweater by Dirk Bikkembergs from Jones and Bazaar, as before; velcro and canvas brown trousers with detachable badges from Michiko Koshino, as before; black leather mitts from Nyams Gym, 857 High Rd, Leytonstone, London E11
Opposite page: black and green motorbike suit to order and black racing gloves, both from Michiko Koshino, as before; black sleeveless top from Midas, as before; Oakley shades from For Eyes, as before
GO
ENTERPRISE CULTURE
So HERE'S THE SCAM.
You beg, steal or borrow £1,000, then get your bank to certify that it's in your account before you return the cash.
If you can't get the money, you fake the bank note.
Then you're in business — any business you like, unless it's porn or gambling — with a guaranteed £40 a week from the state.
The sum has been the same since 1983, when the Government launched its Enterprise Allowance Scheme — better known in some circles as the Enterprise Allowance Scam or Enquiring Artists' Support.
In Britain's current enterprise culture, there's money available to fund anything from a cow chiropodist to a breeder of edible snails, though there's no guarantee that your venture will work.
and as a self-employed person, you get no sick pay or benefits, no training, no union protection or even much chance that you'll ever be repaid for all those long hours of work.
Most of the people interviewed here chose the scheme to escape the indignity of the dole: some have succeeded, many have fallen by the wayside.
But the biggest scam of all is run by the Government, which has somehow managed to harness young energy, ambition and initiative without ever giving it a real chance to shine through.
A scheme that keeps you out of the unemployment statistics and in your place?
Now that's enterprise
Hard, smart, and living off the enterprise culture.
Below, left to right: Davey Philips of Clan Skates; Lola Taiwao, clothes designer; Nicholas Nasmyth, musical consultant; Melanie Cox, photographer; and Ged Wells, skateboarder/artist
Lola Taiwao is a clothes designer, and last spring she and her partner opened their own boutique, Culture Trend.
It was a costly failure.
‘The hardest thing is knowing where to go to get help, to get the advice and information you need’
Fancy life as a self-employed shepherd?
A yogi?
A jeweller whose nose-rings take Manchester by storm?
If you can do business each week for less than the price of a TV licence, the government has a deal for you.
Currently, 63,500 people between 18 and 65 are part of the Enterprise Allowance Scheme.
Also known as the Enterprise Allowance Scam or, in some circles, Enquiring Artists' Support.
Since its inception in 1983, the programme's bi-weekly, computer-administered payments of £80 have brightened the bank accounts of half a million Britons.
Britons who, otherwise, would be unemployment statistics.
Britons whose receipt of these cheques let the Confederation of British Industry boast of a boom in ‘new business’.
Few strings are attached to the Enterprise Allowance Scheme.
You must have claimed dole for eight weeks or served on the Youth Training Scheme or be able to produce formal notice of redundancy.
You must fill out a form and attend a one-off Awareness Day (9am-5pm, with fares on public transport refundable).
You then complete a declaration, including proof that you have £1,000 in the bank (loans and overdrafts qualify).
One you are accepted, payment drops straight into this ‘business’ account every fortnight.
Enterprise Allowance payments were £40 a week in 1983, and they're £40 a week today.
That's less than half the weekly rent on a small flat in enterprise zones such as south London's Balham or north London's Wembley.
It's £101.65 short of the installation charge for a business telephone line.
It's £11 less than a single British Rail ticket from London to Glasgow.
Not to mention heat, electricity, groceries and one thing stressed on Awareness Day: always looking smart, professional, in control.
‘It's the government who looks good,’ says Gary Smith, 23, who joined the Enterprise Allowance first in Bradford, then in London.
‘But it's taught a lot of young people what enterprise comes down to today.
And that is surviving by any means necessary.’
Using the EA to live, Smith has freelanced as a sports reporter, a music critic, and a fanzine publisher.
‘The EA is a safety net,’ he says.
‘It gives you the ‘luxury’ of getting on with what you're really good at.
The dole is just a downward spiral.
The signing on, the hassle — the whole fucking process is shit.’
His best friend Lawrence Macmillan, 24, also now in London and also a two-time EA vet, agrees.
‘My first Awareness Day was a genuine breath of fresh air.
It didn't teach me anything.
But after years of the DHSS, it really was the first time I'd been spoken to like a human being.
The days vary, though.
Up north everyone wanted to be a window-cleaner.
When I moved here, it was all arty things.
Everyone was a ‘creative writer’.’
How do the Garys and Larrys come up with a thousand quid?
It's not all hard as one might think.
Many people borrow it for a day from a sympathetic relative.
And there are other ways.
Smith: ‘I forged both my applications.
I photocopied the form, then had my bank fill it our and stamp the copy.
They put in my real balance which was something like £7.50 — but they'd given me their stamp.
So I ran the real one through the xerox, got the stamp on that, then filled it in with a ‘balance’ of over £1,000.
The first time I did a really good job.
The second one looked amateur.’
This kind of resourcefulness can accomplish a lot in business.
Skateboarder/artist Ged Wells, 24, joined the Enterprise Allowance Scheme on the Isle of Wight.
‘I tried to get a £1,000 overdraft from my bank, but they tried to make me take out a lot of loans.
In the end, I borrowed it from my parents.’
Wells' Awareness Day was bleak’‘It was full of builders and women who wanted knick-knack shops.’
Nicholas Nasmyth is a musical consultant, writing jingles, making tapes for touring bands and programming drum machines.
‘There's plenty of talent in Britain.
But in terms of investment from here, it doesn't face much of a future’
He moved to London and used his EA money for rent and food.
But he also got the idea for Jim-Jams, a line of skateboarding shorts.
Mailing designs home to be printed on samples sewn by his mum, Wells made a start in sports couture.
Within weeks, his designs were stocked by London's Slam City Skates.
Within six months their sales had convinced Slam City to invest in Wells.
The result is ‘Insane’: a label comprising skateboard stickers, decks, sports shorts and sweat-pants, T-shirts, hip-packs and hats.
Insane's autumn line even has a promotional video — which doubles as a showreel for two skater-directors from Cambridge.
Ged Wells now has his own range of skateboard ephemera.
‘We've had a lot of interest from Europe and America.
But there's no way to get money for real investment.
I even tried the DTI — there's just no money in this country.
All they can give is advice’
Like many young entrepreneurs, Wells has found Britain slack in framing global perspectives on business.
Insane sponsors a Danish skater, Rasmus Skousen, and is stocked in Europe by shops such as Street Machine in Paris.
‘We've had a lot of interest from Europe and America.
But there's no way to get money for real investment.
I even tried the DTI — there's just no money in this country.
All they can give is advice.’
Scots Davey Philips, 25, and Jamie Blair, 26, also capitalised on the UK skateboarding boom.
They started the Scottish skatewear company Poizone Designs.
‘Davey started making shorts on the Enterprise Allowance,’ says Blair.
‘When he brought in wee pillbox hats, I suggested he add some graphics on top.’
Soon, the skaters were cutting patterns together in Philips' father's garage.
But Blair and Philips wanted a shop of their own.
And, with Glasgow's only skate retailing handled by an American-football store, the pair saw a gap in the market.
They took this idea to Prince Charles' Youth Business Trust — and came away with a low-interest loan for £4,000.
Using this as collateral the partners secured and bought the stock for Hyndland Street's Clan Skates.
Last January, it won them the Reader's Digest /Prince's Youth Business Trust Award '90 — worth £6,000.
The Prince's Youth Business Trust has provided similar funding for over 10,000 Britons between the ages of 18 and 26.
It has set up or helped over 8,000 businesses.
These range from fashion to fairground operations; music to lighting design — the scheme even sponsors a cow chiropodist and a breeder of edible snails.
Its individual grants average around £1,500, and a breeder of edible snails.
Its individual grants average around £1,500, its loans about £2,000.
But amounts of up to £5,000 can be made available.
But the Trust doesn't reach all those ‘HRH’ wants it to serve.
Unlike the Enterprise Allowance, PYBT has a reputation as formidable and ‘posh’.
‘We're working hard to encourage Asians, Afro-Carribbean Britons and other minority groups to apply,’ stresses a PYBT spokeswoman.
‘Especially in deprived areas, there's tremendous need for support.’
Jamie Blair encourages young Britons whose Enterprise Allowance falls short to take up the offer.
‘It's all Tories, suits and handshakes.
And at first it freaks you out.
But the hardest part about business really is the simplest thing: the temptation to just say ‘Fuck the pressure!’ and go work for somebody else.’
But many professions require expensive basic equipment.
Using his sister's wedding funds, keyboard player Nicholas Nasmyth, 28, joined the Enterprise Allowance in April.
He is a ‘Musical Consultant’.
‘When someone wants writing or programming, I can offer them that.
Tapes for touring bands, jingles for adverts, programs for drum machines.’
Nasmyth does fine for clients, but already needs new software — he loses time travelling between borrowed studio suites.
It also disappoints him that much of the music he works on is funded from abroad then exported.
‘There's plenty of talent in Britain,’ he says.
‘But, in terms of investment from here, it doesn't face much of a future.
The Enterprise Allowance guys know exactly what's going on.
But they also know they can give you at least a bit of a chance.’
Part of that chance is psychological.
Michael Joseph, 24, wants ‘to manage bands and see British music recognised abroad’.
But no aid scheme or advisory service fits his particular needs.
‘What I'm building is a reputation.
For that, the resources are just my wits and the help of people already in business.’
For Joseph, the Enterprise Allowance Scheme offers credibility.
‘It may not be a substantial amount, but it does help with the bank manager.
When you have to build things up over time, that's a definite plus.’
Joseph's assured income helped persuade his bank to back him in staging a three-week, all-day jazz venue at this year's Edinburgh Festival.
Entitled ‘Brilliant Corner’, it was held at Café Coste in Robertson's Close — and it garnered rave reviews in The Scotsman, The List, Festival Times and Review 90 .
Management and support skills like those Joseph strives to build are vital to our artistic future — any musician can tell you they're not a strong point here.
But responsive, strategic managership is absent across the board in Britain.
That's one reason Awareness Days are often such a charade.
Like other Thatcherite creations, the Enterprise Allowance Scheme is chock-a-block with buzzwords whose connection with reality is, at best, half-baked.
But, in this case, what they teach young people is life as a pattern of lies.
Photographer Melanie Cox makes her living from art portraiture.
Inelligible for the Enterprise Allowance Scheme, and at 28 too old for the Prince's Trust, she eventually got a grant from the Westminster Enterprise Agency.
‘It motivated me to get my act together and take myself seriously’
Gary Smith: ‘You learn to pull the right triggers, push the key words to get the money.
Words like ‘flow chart’, ‘training’, ‘forecast’.
And you always ask for information you know they can give you.
Stuff like ‘And what about help with my accounts?’’
He studies the floor.
‘Basically, it means lying.
I'm lucky, because I'm young.
I'm single.
I'm in tune with the scams.
And English is my first language.
With government schemes, the worst option of all is to play by the rules.
The people who do that, the ones who believe in it, they really get fucked.
No one can really do business on 40 quid a week.
According to enterprise expert Peter Nicholson, Smith and those who think like him are the real entrepreneurs.
Nicholson is general manager at the Royal Borough of Kensington & Chelsea's Business Resource Centre.
It's one of 100 similar self-help employment-creation agencies in the UK.
Equipped with computers, copiers, faxes, databases and well-trained staff, the Centre where Nicholson works assists over 2,000 clients a year.
Some are small businesses: record shops, architects, electrical suppliers.
But many are individuals who work in art, fashion or music.
Even though times are tough, Nicholson sees invention and initiative proliferating.
‘For the true entrepreneur, you know, money is not the driving force.
It's just a method of keeping tabs on where you are and how you're doing.
The real ballgame is getting it right, building something up.
‘And the genuine entrepreneur,’ he smiles, ‘is the one who will bend all the rules when the question is survival.’
During the Eighties, survival itself became a creative challenge.
But, despite constant rises in the price of transport, food, accommodation and communications, the talent of British youth can still match anything elsewhere in the world.
Every year, young people can still match anything elsewhere in the world.
Every year, young people here generate skills that range from fashion and film to scratch-mixing, graphic design and club promotion.
And one of their most valuable assets is consummate flexibility.
Those who fall between the official schemes — like freelance photographer Melanie Cox — need it.
Over a period of 18 months, Cox had found it increasingly difficult to front the cost of her supplies.
Never unemployed, she is ineligible for the Enterprise Allowance and, at 28, too old for the Prince's Youth Business Trust.
When she went to her bank for advice, they demanded a forecast of earnings.
Melanie hit the wall so familiar to British youth: not successful enough to manage, but too successful for help.
Attacking every available source of information, Cox discovered the Portobello Trust — a Business Development Agency founded in 1986 by West London residents.
Now in receipt of government support (and offering particular help for people under 30), the Trust helped her apply for a Westminster Enterprise grant.
She received £2,000 — for ‘start-up’ promotion and equipment.
‘But more important,’ she says, ‘was the way Portobello dealt with me.
They are as geared to you because they have advised you.
They don't try to change your choice of career.
But they help with specifics: targeting, organisations, thinking it through from a fresh perspective.’
Others have to recover without this kind of business advice.
Abby Andu and Lola Taiwo design clothing together, under the label Bibi Designs.
Last spring, they opened their own boutique, Culture Trend.
‘We had reached a point,’ says Taiwo, ‘where clients were always asking us, ‘And where is your shop ?’’
At first the retail option seemed ideal.
The clothes they made shaped traditional African fabrics into fresh new styles.
But Culture Trend's premises were a basement off a main road.
Commuting hassles ate up the time it took to re-stock one-off designs.
And, with inflation, the financial overheads quickly expanded.
Despite an enthusiastic public, their shop closed within a year.
So Taiwo and Andu re-thought their assets.
Now they supply a boutique in Nigeria — one which is keen to buy black British style.
And they promote their fashions at a rate with which they feel comfortable: via ingenious ‘clothing parties’.
Davey Philips of Clan Skates: ‘You can totally scam it or you can be committed and go for it.
But for sure it's a scam: the government get their figures down, and they can say there are all these new businesses, the country is blooming.
Which isn't true’
At these home-based gatherings, the hostess receives a discount for providing the venue, invitation list, and refreshments.
Clothes are modelled and tried on at leisure.
Also, a wide range of styles can be shown.
‘In addition to one-off orders,’ says Taiwo, ‘clothes parties generate good word-of-mouth.
The outlay is small — and it's fun.’
Fun.
From graffiti to fanzines to indie-pop, that is the glue which fuels most real youth enterprise.
But you won't find the word mentioned in Training Agency propaganda.
‘I went for the Enterprise Allowance a couple of years ago,’ says London graphic designer Trevor Jackson, 22.
‘And all the guy could say to me was, ‘We can't have gambling!’
‘We don't want pornography!’
Do you believe that?
I'm there about my future.
And all the guy can really tell me is, ‘We don't want to have porn’’
PROFILE
MATTHEW BRODERICK
Text JIM McCLELLAN Photography THOMAS KRYGIER
His choice of roles has always been intelligent, but after starring with Marlon Brando in the screen legend's first major role for years, is paying the price.
After endless interviews, he's finally had enough of talking about Brando
Matthew Broderick looks bored.
He's just spent the whole day talking to journalists.
Worse, he's spent the last hour with someone from the Daily Express .
So a certain weariness is only to be expected.
But Broderick looks almost depressed by the tedium of it all, so bored he doesn't quite know what to do with himself.
Sitting in the airless games room in the basement of the St James' Club, he stares out of the window, dreamily tracing the pattern in the glass, then stops, vaguely embarrassed at what he's doing, and turns round to face yet another tape recorder.
He puts his glasses on and looks at it.
He takes them off, and yawns.
He apologises as he stifles another yawn and tries to look interested.
But you can see it in the glazed look in his eyes.
He knows exactly what's coming.
Another yawn.
You can't blame him.
Perhaps the only thing that makes a day of interviews bearable is the narcissistic pleasure of talking about yourself.
But doing the publicity for his new film,The Freshman , a sweetly off-beat little comedy in which he plays Clark Kellog, an innocent film student drawn into an impenetrable plot involving rare animals and gangster gourmets, Matthew Broderick isn't allowed even this consolation.
No one really wants to know about him, and he knows why he agreed to do the film, why on the last day of shooting he dismissed it as a ‘stinker’, what he thinks of it now.
The Freshman is really Brando's film, his first starring role for over ten years.
Indeed writer/director Andrew Bergman virtually put the film together just for him.
Aware that Brando had enjoyed his 1979 comedy The In-Laws , Bergman reworked the same basic plot around the star's mythic bulk, casting him as the manipulative mafia don Carmine Sabatini, who gives Broderick the job of minding a komodo dragon, and adopts him as one of the ‘family’.
The role gives Brando the chance to parody his famous portrayal of Vito Corleone in The Godfather , to play his Oscar-winning method routines for laughs.
Brando is very funny, but the rest of the film creaks a little.
Bergman knows how to turn a sardonic one-liner or two, but not really how to pace a whole film; the self-consciously wacky plot never quite clicks.
As the bemused straight man, however, Broderick does his usual competent job and he handles the sentimental scenes showing the growing father-son relationship between Kellog and Sabatini with real skill.
Later, Broderick admits that he was drawing on his own feelings about the death of his actor seven years ago, just as his career was taking off (‘He watched everything I did, he was my big influence, and when I finally started to get work, he never got to see it’).
It certainly gives the film's rather hectic farce a little(necessary) emotional weight.
But at the start of proceedings Broderick is under no illusions about who he's really here to talk about.
When the film opened in America this summer he talked to the press about Brando.
Broderick on screen (left to right): Inspecting the troops in Glory ; with Brando in The Freshman ; and in Torch Song Trilogy 
He's just been to France to talk about Brando.
Now he's in London to talk about Brando.
As his yawning indicates, it's all getting a bit dull.
‘It is a little hard now to give a fresh and original answer to the same basic questions,’ he says, then hesitates.
‘But I can understand people wanting to know.
That's what I would ask.’
Fair enough, so what was it like working with the big guy?
Broderick launches into his reply like a trouper.
‘Oh, it was wonderful, fascinating, a rich experience.
He's a very generous actor and obviously he's very full.’
Sorry?
‘There's a lot to react to with him.’
Right.
Now my eyes are starting to glaze over.
OK, let's forget Brando.
Why did he, Broderick, want to do the film?
‘Um, Marlon Brando, I guess,’ he laughs.
‘Actually when the producers sent me the script they said it was Brando's next picture.
I didn't really believe the, so they showed me these pictures of themselves with Mr Brando, on his Tahitian island, their arms round him.
Andrew Bergman told me later that when they went out there to make the deal, they felt like the expedition that goes into the jungle to bag King Kong.’
The comparison is appropriate.
Brando is like a creature from a different world and time, a lumbering dinosaur who can perhaps only survive in post-modern MTV Hollywood as a kind of comic carnival turn.
Certainly Bergman treats Brando like one of the film's endangered species.
Just as he gets laughs by letting a komodo dragon loose in a shopping mall, so he puts the whalelike Brando on ice skates to humorous effect.
But even treated as an inherently comic ‘found object’, even taking the piss out of himself, it's clear that Brando could still blow most contemporary actors off the screen.
Wasn't Broderick worried about this?
‘Not really, he really leaves you with space to work.
But I was a little afraid of him, which helped me in my part.
Being afraid to meet Marlon Brando is a lot like Clark Kellog being afraid to meet Carmine Sabatini.
If I'd had to play someone who was like ‘Hey Mr Brando, where do you get off?’ that might have been harder.’
It was wonderful, fascinating, a rich experience.
Brando's a very generous actor
It might have been easier after Brando's end-of-shoot trashing of the film to the Toronto Globe And Mail .
Caused by a dispute with the film's producers over money, it's sorted out now, but Broderick confesses that he did feel angry.
‘I phoned him and said, ‘I've been telling everyone what a great time you had, I feel tricked, betrayed, like an idiot.’
He said, ‘You have to know I loved doing this movie.
I don't like doing movies anymore but I really enjoyed this,’ and he did come up with a very eloquent retraction, which no one printed.’
The next offscreen fuss around the film was caused by the attempted by The Godfather producers Paramount to block its release, claiming that Brando's self-caricature contravened their copyright on the Vito Corleone character.
‘That was bizarre,’ says Broderick.
‘If anybody owns that character, it's Marlon Brando.
If anybody can do what they like with it, it's him.’
Brando's self-parody is one solution to the problem of how to grow old gracefully; how to cope with the weight of past achievements.
In the past few years Broderick has been faced with a similar, if less epic problem: simply how to grow up on screen, how to graduate from the early ‘smart kid’ roles in War Games and Ferris Bueller's Day Off which have so far intended to resort to a tour of duty in a Vietnam movie or wearing a false moustache in a cop drama to prove their ‘maturity’as actors.
Broderick has faced more of a problem, since it seemed a few years back that he had stopped ageing.
Although he's now 28, he still looks around 20 on screen.
Was he ever worried that he might get stuck with teenage roles?
‘Not any more.
Now I assume that Mother Nature will age me along with everyone else.
But everytime I see a new line on my face, I'm also hysterically thinking it's all over.’
In fact, Broderick seems to have shown a nicely calculated amount of daring in trying to pick roles that give his bland fresh-faced prettiness a spin.
He was the gay romantic lead in Torch Song Trilogy and he played a naive straight-laced young officer hopelessly out of his depth in Glory , the well-intentioned but over-sentimental drama about the first black regiment to fight in the American Civil War.
When I suggest that Glory was a clever way of doing a Vietnam film without doing a Vietnam film, he stops yawning and gets a little annoyed.
‘I thought it was an interesting part of history.
I never thought, here's a chance to be taken seriously.
That's like saying films are just done for career or business.
Maybe some are, but not mine.’
Another thing that irritates Broderick is the way journalists have tried to interpret his 1987 car accident in Northern Ireland as a ‘maturing’ influence.
Two people were killed, and Broderick spent one month in a Belfast hospital.
Later at the inquest (which he didn't attend), he admitted through his lawyer that he may have been driving on the wrong side of the road.
‘I feel uncomfortable talking about it.
It was horrible, and I'm sorry it happened, but it should be kept in some kind of perspective.’
There's a melancholy air about him which isn't just the product of a day on the publicity circuit.
It's something that gives his performance in Glory a genuinely affecting complexity, something which suggests he may develop into an actor with some depth.
His next film,Welcome To Buzzsaw , may be a comedy, but Broderick is unsure about what he's best at.
‘I feel very early on in my forming as an actor.
I get bored easily, so the only plan I have for the future is not to get comfortable with any one thing.’
Just to make the point, he yawns.
Again.
LETTER FROM BERLIN
German reunification sees Soviet soldiers selling up and moving out, unemployed Vietnamese victimised by Neo Nazi football hooligans and a former secret police training centre transformed into an art house.
John Gawthrop reports from Berlin
Military matters are much on people's minds in Berlin these days.
Even before the two Germanys officially united, the West German government announced its desire to introduce national service for hitherto exempt West Berliners.
This has caused great alarm among the young men in the western half of the city, many of whom moved to Berlin to avoid going insane with boredom in a Bundeswehr barracks.
Victor, a friend of mine who hails originally from the east but emigrated before the Wall came down, is particularly worried.
He managed to dodge the GDR's National People's Army (NVA) for nine years (no mean feat) but now fears that he may yet be called to the colours in the west, as the proposed change in the law merely states that all those who have not yet done their time and who are under the age of 32 will be eligible.
His plight reflects the end of the special status West Berlin enjoyed under Allied military government until October 3.
In fact the remilitarisation of West Berlin began some time ago.
Several weeks before reunification,Bundeswehr units started taking over former NVA bases and re-training NVA soldiers, before quietly slipping into West Berlin, from where they had previously been banned by the 1969 Four Power agreement.
Meanwhile, equipment from the now disbanded NVA is being sold by public auction, and a number of vehicles have been despatched as part of aid packages to Mozambique and Eritrea.
But most of it seems to be going to shady ‘Near Eastern’ dealers and private citizens.
Among the most sought-after items are ambulances and mini-buses (going price DM 1,500) and elderly MZ motor-cycles (a bargain at DM100).
Other good buys can be had from the Staatssicherheitsdienst (State Security Service — the East German secret police), or rather its liquidators, who are off-loading TVs and tape recorders.
They recently managed to shift a job lot of document shredders (for DM60 a throw) to a West Berlin firm.
The Soviet Army, has also been getting in on the act.
Showing an admirable understanding of basic market economics, miserable Muzhiks contemplating a return to economic desolation and probable unemployment in the none too distant future are anxious to augment their meagre pay by selling their uniforms to Turkish entrepreneurs.
The Turks then flog them along the tourist drag between the Brandenburg Gate and what used to be Checkpoint Charlie.
Those wishing to cut out the middleman should head straight for the garrison town of Wundsdorf, headquarters of the Western Army Group and a staging post for military train on the journey home.
Soviet officers have a little more money than the enlisted men (DM800 to DM1,000 a month) and many are in the market for used cars — Mercedes and BMWs only, it seems.
Sadly, all too often they end up shelling out for mechanical write-offs which have been given a quick paint job and put up for sale at outrageous prices.
Ordinary soldiers, who are paid only 25 marks a month, are reduced to begging and rummaging through rubbish tips.
Others resort to theft, and the locals report that nothing is safe.
Everything — from alcohol to sheep — has been disappearing, recalling the early plunder-happy days of Soviet occupation in 1945.
The misery of the Russians and their dependents has been intensified by a spate of attacks from East Germans finally able to give expression to years of resentment.
Verbal abuse in the streets, broken windows and ‘Russians go home’ graffiti are common, and things came to a head recently in Perleberg, not far from what used to be the West/East German border.
Here, a series of clashes culminated in the fatal shooting of 19-year-old conscript Oleg Kosbar.
Vietnamese and Neo Nazis
The Russians aren't the only outsiders for whom there is no place in the new Germany.
There are over 50,000 Vietnamese in what used to be the GDR brought over in the Eighties as Gastarbeiter (guest workers) to do menial factory jobs.
Now, with unemployment set to reach two million by Christmas, they are no longer welcome and it's estimated that over 60 per cent are unemployed.
In Berlin itself, there are over 4,000 Vietnamese, most of whom live three to a room in cramped hostels, paying well over the odds for the privilege (Germans living in the same accommodation pay considerably less).
Most now live by selling home-made jeans in front of S- Bahn (suburban railway) stations in the eastern half of Berlin.
Those without the necessary sewing skills sell cigarettes, and all are harassed by the police who raid their pitches in the name of maintaining ‘order’ in the streets.
For most the only alternative is a flight home paid for by the German government and a DM3,000 ‘golden handshake’ they'll be forced to convert into dong (at the artificial official rate) on arrival.
The Vietnamese also face victimisation by the street gangs of the extreme right.
One street gang recently attacked four Vietnamese at an S-Bahn station, filming the whole episode on video.
According to community workers the police show little of their customary vigour in the hunt for assailants after attacks like this.
The activities of the far right have been a cause for concern over here for a while now.
The former Zentralkriminalamt (Central Crime Bureau) of the East Berlin police estimated the number of extreme right supporters in tens of thousands even before reunification.
The Jewish cemetery in Berlin's Weissensee district has been desecrated several times and groups armed with petrol bombs and rubber truncheons have attacked immigrant worker's hostels, and known meeting places of the ‘left’— bars like Café Westphal in Prenzlauer Berg and various squatted houses.
Particularly feared are supporters of the former Stasi football team FC Berlin (previously BFC Dynamo ).
After a home game in the Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn Stadium im Prenzlauer Berg, they distinguished themselves by forming a 200-strong human swastika around the statues of Marx and Engels in front of the Volkskammer (the old GDR parliament).
With unemployment and general economic disarray on the rise, the feeling in the city is that things can only get worse.
The only vaguely reassuring sign is that the right seems to be losing the graffiti war.
Exchanges on walls in eastern parts of the city often to culminate in ‘Nazis raus ’(‘Nazis out’).
One Germany, one-off sale, one-way ticket:(above) souvenir sellers with a display of Red Army caps in East Berlin and (left) the partial withdrawal of Soviet troops
New uses for old buildings
One of the oddest and most unforseeable side effects of the demolition of the Wall has been an epidemic of rabies among the city's foxes.
This has been caused by infected suburban foxes from the east (where until last month there was no vaccination programme) finding their way into the city centre and crossing what was once the border into West Berlin.
For most people though, the disappearance of the Wall has raised rather more urgent questions questions.
Property speculators in particular are addressing themselves to the question of what is to be done with the vast stretches of land once occupied by watch towers, border guards, dogs and rabbits.
These are now open to all, and somebody, somewhere is going to make a killing.
Hopes for a ‘green lung’ in the heart of the city are fading, particularly since the announcement that Mercedes Benz is to build a huge service centre on Potsdamer Platz, dashing hopes that it might be left as a park or rebuilt as the commercial hub of the city it was before the war.
Other property opportunities will open up when the Russian — and eventually the American, British and French — military finally vacate their extensive bases (the British are said to occupy some particularly fine pieces of real estate).
Already the collapse of the old East German regime has resulted in some unlikely new uses for former government property.
In Wandlitz, just north of the city, the 140 hectare villa complex until recently known as ‘Volvograd’, home to politburo members of the Honecker regime, is to be turned into sanatorium to serve Berlin and the surrounding area.
Similar fates await buildings formerly owned by the secret police, which in many districts have been inherited by the local authorities.
One such building in the suburb of Karlshorst was a Stasi training centre less than a year ago, and has now been handed over to local artists, who have turned it into a Kunst Haus (art house) and bar.
The in-house cinema (‘where they used to watch porn movies,’ speculate the new occupiers), complete with massive Soviet projectors, is now used for film shows that would have caused apoplectic fits among the old inhabitants.
Other rooms are let out as studios.
In the basement bands rehearse, and the spacious garden was used in the summer for a couple of large parties.
The only people not happy are the neighbours, who complain that the former occupants made less noise.
RAP BITES BACK!
This page: Rap styles first came to the UK via films like Wildstyle and Breakdance , and is now enjoying new interest from Hollywood after the huge US success of Kid N' Play's House Party (left).
Philly rapper the Fresh Prince (as in Jazzy Jeff &…=) even has his own primetime US TV series.
Opposite page, left to right: jazz rappers Gang Starr, happy rappers The Afros, crossover queen Monie Love and militant activists X-Clan
Dismissed as a novelty when it first appeared on record over a decade ago, rap has proved itself remarkably durable.
When threatened by the more frantic beat of house, it simply rhymed a little faster.
Then, just as it seemed in danger of becoming stale and repetitive, it threw up De La Soul.
Now it's the indie bands who are stuck with endless reruns of James Brown's ‘Funky Drummer’ breakbeat while the rappers continue to revive old musics and invent new ones.
In the US, rap has been pushed to the forefront of the political debate over censorship after a shop owner was successfully prosecuted for selling ‘obscene’ records by the 2 Live Crew.
In Britain, rap has more room to grow — from the Swedish rap of Leila K to LL Cool J's 100 per cent pure NY homeboy, from light comedy to hardcore militancy, our pop chart has accommodated every variation.
Rap is as old as the human voice and just as versatile, so what follows here is just a progress report: four different artists with four different attitudes to the word
GANG STARR
From the Last Poets to the current acid jazz fusions, the jazz rap tradition is strong
Gang Starr's ‘Jazz Thing’, the track used for the closing credits of Spike Lee's Mo' Better Blues , is a fitting finale in a contemporary context.
It's a raw, pumping track with incisive and conscious lyrics chronicling the heroes of jazz history, interspersed with inspired samples from the likes of John Coltrane and Charlie Parker.
The Brooklyn-based duo, rapper The G.U.R.U.
(Gifted Unlimited Rhymes Universal) and beats provider Premier, were enlisted by Lee along with close associate and jazz musician Branford Marsalis, who collaborated on the record.
‘Branford could immediately see a connection with us.
He's been formally trained, but he can get on a sax and he can improvise and he had a respect for the improvisation that we do in rap.’
But whereas rap music is still very much a street-level phenomenon, jazz has become more and more a domain of the white middle classes.
It's an issue addressed in Lee's movie and one which Gang Starr are only too aware of.
‘Now jazz is not a street thing, but, in its origins, with blues and all that stuff, that was street.’
Rap, they feel, may help return jazz from whence it came — to a younger, blacker audience.
‘It all comes down to how you deliver it.
There's a large sect of rap followers that just like a hard beat and a bass.
When they buy the record and listen to it properly, then they'll get educated.’
Gang Starr's album ‘Manifesto’(out this month on Cooltempo Records) contains some powerful social commentary rooted in ‘life experience in New York: stick-up kids, pimping, drug dealing.
Jazz is a form of music that came out of a social evolution in black history, and so is rap.
Rap's not gonna go away, jazz isn't gonna gow away.
It's a frame of mind.’
Lindsay Baker 
THE AFROS
Rap has rediscovered its sense of humour, happy rap with a positive message
Ever wonder what happened to the ‘security experts’ who used to accompany the likes of Run DMC on stage, permanently scowling, arms folded?
Me too.
Turns out that one of them, Hurricane, went on to team up with co-MC Kool-Tee and DJ Kippy-O to form A Funky Rhythmical Organisation Of Sound — better known as The Afros.
The rumours started earlier this year, when B-boys began showing up at New York clubs and wowing the assemblage with their traditional towering tonsors.
Then there were the guest appearances in videos by 3rd Base, Public Enemy and Run DMC — now comes ‘Kickin' Afrolistics’, the debut album on Jam Master Jay's Def Jam offshoot JMJ.
What's it all about, then?
‘We just got into all the old flicks from the Seventies,’ says Kool-Tee.
‘The Mack, Superfly, Shaft .
Just sittin' back and gettin' mesmerised by the vibe, 'cause these guys were the coolest motherfuckers ever.’
A hard-hitting and versatile set, the album is distinguished by The Afros' singular lingo (a dictionary accompanies their current US high-pitched whine.
Given the apparent novelty nature of this venture, how long do they intend to be Kickin' Afrolistics?
‘We're gonna take it to the extreme, the whole cahuna,’ says Kool-Tee, who in real life is noticeably hard of hair.
‘They ain't seen nothin' yet.
Once everybody gets to know The Afros, we're gon' introduce 'em to the Baldhead Posse.
They're a bunch of mean guys — the worst kids.’
‘They're Bebe's kids!’ adds Hurricane, who has served time as the Beastie Boys' DJ.
Bebe's kids are the nightmare invention of the late comedian Robin Harris, who're about to be immortalised in their own network cartoon series.
What about an Afros cartoon?
‘Right!’ agrees 'cane.
‘We can have the Jheri-Curls chasin' us all the time tryin' to cut our hair and throw chemicals in it!’
How, then, does the group feel about lapsed Afro wearers such as Michael Jackson?
‘To each his own,’ says Hurricane.
‘But can you imagine Michael havin' an Afro right now?
He'd be the best boy with a 'fro!’
Steven Daly 
MONIE LOVE
From London to Brooklyn with Love: Monie shows, crossing over needn't mean selling out
Criticism?
Keep it coming.
I think it's really good.
I need to learn how to handle it.’
She will.
Like a pro.
Twenty years old and Monie Love already has the world on hold.
‘Don't see me as a spokesperson for anything,’ she warns.
‘I don't know enough to be standing on a pedestal pointing a finger.’
We're in the interview room of her record company Cooltempo, here to discuss her debut album, the feet-rhyming, super-funky ‘Down To Earth’.
Monie's halfway through a whistle-stop promotional visit, playing the pop star on kids' programmes like Motormouth and 8.15 From Manchester , as well as the protofeminist for Spare Rib magazine.
It is the last leg of an interview marathon which began this summer, when Cooltempo, anticipating an earlier release for the record, flew a plane-load of Britain's music press out to meet her in New York.
Consequently she has had more than enough practice at fielding some of the more banal of my questions.
Tell me about the album, Monie.
‘It's like slices of life,’ she replies, without pausing for thought.
Indeed, ‘Down To Earth’ can speak for itself.
Sixteen exciting and versatile tracks, from ‘It's A Shame’, the current single and most commercial cut, to the heartfelt ‘Race Against Reality’ and the bass bin-shaking ‘Detrimentally Stable’.
And throughout there is the voice.
Running off words like a telex machine on overdrive.
Enunciating so fast, yet so precisely, that you can hear and still not believe.
Check the lyrics printed on the inner sleeve — crammed so tight and still not enough room for all of them.
The trip is taking its toll on Monie, but nevertheless we're talking.
An hour into conversation and she is just starting to warm up.
Overgrown hair stuffed into a baseball cap, gold stud winking in her left nostril, face unblemished by make-up.
(Monie won't wear any, and has written the track ‘Down To Earth’ to say so.)
The Mo', the mouth, is in motion.
Doing what comes naturally.
Born to chat.
Occasionally, her brisk South London accent will give way to a Brooklyn drawl which speaks clearly of a childhood spent shuttling between extended family in London and New York.
It was an experience which left her impatient with the insularity of London's early hip hop scene.
She shakes her head at the memory of the anti-commercial ‘hardcore’ aesthetic which prevailed at the time.
‘Everybody was really restricting themselves.
Like, you couldn't have pianos or sax because it wasn't hardcore.’
‘I Can Do This’ was her exit visa, a put-down to the backbiting London crews set to an infectious loop from The Whispers' ‘And The Beat Goes On’.
The follow-up, ‘Grandpa's Party’, proved how sharp she could be.
As a tribute to the Godfather of hip hop, Afrika Bambaataa, it demonstrated a due respect for the past, while signalling her intention to become a force in the future.
‘It was,’ she admits, ‘a deliberate attempt to cross over.’
Some of her former sparring partners still call her a ‘sell out’, but a more open America has welcomed her as one of their own, hailing Monie as one of the world's strongest rap talents.
She is now based permanently in the US, and is a member of two prestigious posses: The Native Tongues, consisting of the Jungle Brothers, De La Soul, Queen Latifah and A Tribe Called Qwest; and DJ Mark ‘the 45’ King's Flavor Unit.
‘Down To Earth’ will prove that she has not only mastered here medium, but that she has only just begun.
Taking my cue from her collaborations with David Steele and Andy Cox of the Fine Young Cannibals (who have produced three tracks for the album), I suggest that eventually she may be drawn beyond the usual limits of rap, towards creating real verse and chorus songs.
Monie is excited because the idea is already important to her.
‘I want to learn how to make music from scratch, to create brand new basslines and beats.
I want to be part of a live group, playing live songs.’
Monie motions with her hands, rhythmically striking empty air, revealing a secret desire to perfect her drum technique and maybe some day play beside percussion ace Sheila E. ‘The funk!
That's where my heart is.
I love rap but in the future I want to get back to the funk.
That's my dream.’
At the moment, though, Monie has to cope with more mundane matters.
‘I'm still very young, I just turned 20 in July.
And no matter how old I am, I'm still my mum's baby.
I speak to her on the phone almost every day and she's really important to me.’
She says so with an honesty which is enough to break the formal interview structure, prompting me to fold away my preconceptions of a feisty female rapper.
We are left talking to each other almost as if we had met before.
You see things in New York that don't happen in London.
Poverty.
Abuse.
14-year-old kids working a corner selling drugs
There is no doubt that it is easy for Monie to win friends and make people care about her.
But the truth is she needs them just as much.
She tends to blur the distinctions between family and friends, turning people like The Native Tongues into her ‘brothers and sisters’.
They lend her the viability of shared experience, giving her the confidence to shrug her shoulders when she feels like it.
A change from times when she felt she ‘had to act like she knew everything’.
Nor is she too bothered any more about letting go of the occasional secret.
In fact, she takes a wicked delight in setting me up as she explains the album title.
‘It's about the sort of person I am, very laid back.
It's a polite way of saying that I'm a nerd ,’ she shouts.
‘People phone me up to invite me out and I'll be like,’ she puts on a whiny voice, ‘Oh no, I'd like to stay home and watch a video or read a book.’
Monie Love, NWA — Nerd Without Attitude.
It is a smart little tag, conjuring up images of Monie bootling off to the library.
But it is not entirely accurate.
Monie gets tough when she wants to — she has to, living in New York.
‘It's opened my eyes,’ she admits.
‘You see things here which don't happen in London.
Poverty.
Abuse.
You've got 14-, 15-year-old kids working a corner selling drugs.
There's nothing you can do about it.
All I can do is transform what I see into words and tell you what's going on.’
I draw an analogy between her raps and the African and Caribbean folk tales and poetry which she likes to read.
‘Yes, that's definitely it.
In them you have real situations which are turned into stories with a message, which is just what I do with rap.’
Her songs are deceptive.
Tracks like ‘Read Between The Lines’ and ‘Race Against Reality’will draw you in with a beat that rocks, before kicking back with the word from the unheard.
They are Monie's stories: tougher, funky folk tales for these meaner times.
Down to earth.
Like Monie Love.
Ekow Eshun 
X-CLAN
Rap as a means to an end; with the Blackwatch group, the hard line message is in the music
‘In the Nineties, the mission is black nationalism, the messengers are X-Clan, the movement is Blackwatch and the oath is ‘Freedom or death'.’
New York's X-Clan are a new kind of militant rap, based on action as well as words.
The group is centred around Professor X, the Overseer; Brother J, the Grand Verbaliser Funkin-Lesson; and the Rhythm Provider, Sugar Shaft — upfront, serious brothers bringing a spiritual neo-nationalism to the streets of urban America, using hip hop culture to introduce and develop Blackwatch, a youth organisation working for self-help in the black inner cities.
So, on their recent visit to the UK, they not only performed club dates but also lectured at London's Africa Centre, holding a cultural convention ‘to promote communications between London and New York’, and to introduce Blackwatch — X-Clan minus the music.
Professor X and his father Sonny Carson, founders of the Black Men's Movement Against Crack, have led Blackwatch through a series of political actions such as registration drives to encourage the ghetto to vote, and visits to schools and youth groups to discuss surveying ‘the white kryptonite’— crack.
In London, a small, mixed house heard the call for a ‘new nationalism’— Afrocentric, using the kind of rhetoric favoured by Malcolm X before his visit to Mecca led to less separatist views, and based on self-respect and what they see as the need to free ‘the mindtrap’ blocking unification of the African Diaspora.
‘We may have different accents but we are all the same,’ they asserted.
‘The ship just came another way.’
But not all of their message travelled easily.
Rough weather fell when the platform called the sisters ‘back to the fold’, stirring protest that women had never left any mythical fold in the first place, and if anyone needed to find their way home, it sure wasn't the sisters!
Professor X, respect due, agreed to a degree with the protests of British rappers like the She Rockers, but the talk was fractured, with cracks in the argument enough of the sisters seemed to recognise.
But the power of X-Clan is not the spoken word.
It is their contribution to hip hop — the voice of African America — and the work they do for and in black communities.
Culture responds to its environment, and so the recent murders of young African Americans who transgressed New York City's virtual apartheid, provoked creative protest.
The Howard Beach outrage, when a young black man was killed while looking for a public phone in an Italian neighbourhood, provided much of the inspiration for Spike Lee's Do The Right Thing .
The shooting of Yusef Hawkins last year while looking for a car in another mainly white area of the city led X-Clan to organise ‘The Taking Of The Brooklyn Bridge’, when 10,000 black youths occupied one of the bridges connecting Manhattan Island to the rest of New York in a living roadblock.
‘A Day Of Outrage’ on X-Clan's fierce debut LP ‘Back To The East, Blackwards’commemorates the event: ‘We've been here before/The background then, the pyramids/The background now, the Statue of Liberty’.
The album is rich in representation of the black experience, with raps on interplanetary funk codes, Afronauts, and white kryptonite bringing a P-funky magical realism to hip hop.
‘We are not rappers or a musical group,’ insists Brother J. ‘We are messengers of a movement.’
Saldaan 
THE GOOD, THE RAD & THE UGLY
Trainers were not made fashionable here by Run-DMC.
British footie fans were combing Europe for new styles a decade ago, says Peter Hooton (above), who documented the rise of the humble sports shoe via his fanzine,The End 
The old school steps out: Puma States (left), Adidas Shell-Toes (back right); and the rare green Adidas Stan Smiths (front right)
LA Gear's latest range, designed by Michael Jackson, shows just how sad current sportswear has become, and explains the sudden popularity of older styles
This year marked the tenth anniversary of THE FACE, but whereas parties have been thrown to commemorate this occasion, nobody has bothered to hold a ‘do’ for the tenth anniversary of the training shoe.
It could be a unique occasion (possibly hilarious) and a fitting bash to celebrate a decade has seen trainer wear break out on a massive scale.
Training shoe espionage is now big business, and sportswear conventions where new designs are revealed have stricter security and secrecy than any Tory Party Conference: it seems that bootleggers know their stuff and can rip off a design before you can tie your laces!
I'm sure Adi Dassler and his brother Rudolph didn't know what they were starting when they began making sports shoes in Germany in the Twenties.
After the war, the brothers had a row and split (good soap opera plot, this) and Adi formed Adidas and their kid formed Puma.
The companies have been arch rivals ever since and it's only fitting now that the two main rivals in the so-called ‘old school trainers’ wars are Adidas and Puma.
Much has been written about training shoes over the last couple of years, as the style magazines and the newspapers have tried to come to terms with the massive increase in the popularity of the trainer.
Empires have been built and fortunes acquired during the Eighties, and most ‘lazy’ journalists have looked to the States to explain the phenomenon.
Unfortunately, most of what has been written has been complete nonsense, so far from the truth that it's not even funny.
If the truth be known, the obsession with training shoes for the youth of this country began in the late Seventies and not in the late Eighties, as some would have us believe.
It came from the football terraces and the council estates of the big cities, and who gives a George Best who started it — it happened and that's a fact.
In the post-punk revolution of '78/79, Adidas Samba ruled the terraces of Anfield and Goodison, quickly followed by Stan Smith's, before Puma struck back with its Argentina (blue leather, white strip) and the much sought after Puma Menotti (red leather, white stripe).
Trainer wars were well underway, and European away matches were the perfect opportunity to acquire those obscure training shoes available in Germany, but not in Liverpool.
Most of the training shoe addicts would never dream of getting a pair you could buy in the city centre in Liverpool.
This was real fashion, and the competition was intense.
A revolution was going on that had absolutely nothing to do with the streets of Brooklyn or the Bronx.
In all the years that The End magazine was printed in Liverpool, we never received a single letter about ‘trainers’ in America, but we did get hundreds about the training shoes the different football crews were wearing.
A football crew's reputation could be severely damaged by giving it toes (getting chased) at Fulham Broadway.
Finsbury Park or the Euston Road, but more serious damage could be done if a fatty was seen wearing a bad pair of trainers by the opposing teams' fashion spotters.
A young and old Adi Dassler, the man who created Adidas.
His brother Rudolf founded Puma after the two split up as business partners
In May 1981, Liverpool played Real Madrid in the European Cup Final in Paris.
We arrived at St Lazare Station on the Sunday before the game.
The next three days were spent not looking at the buildings and architecture of gay Paree but for a mythical Adidas Centre which one of my mates overheard someone talking about in hushed tones in a Liverpool snug.
Naive teenagers we may have been, but if we had found it we would have been heroes.
The bemused Parisians didn't know what the fuck we were on about when we asked for the ‘Adidas Centre’ in several differing French accents.
It was like the search for the Holy Grail, but more like the Monty Python film version.
The newspaper Paris Soir reported the antics of Liverpool supporters with some confusion.
They had been drinking, but they didn't seem to want to fight anybody.
They were too busy shopflifting, with the main targets being clothes and, of course, trainers.
By the morning of the game the sports shops of Paris were locked, with staff supervising the doors, allowing only two people at a time into the shop.
A way of life had been born and no one had even heard of hip hop, house or rap, let alone Run DMC.
It was some time before the fashion magazines and newspapers started to write about this street culture, but when THE FACE wrote a big feature on the subject in its July 1983 issue the floodgates opened.
The article, written by Kevin Sampson, concentrated on the fashion area of London's so-called ‘Casuals’, Liverpool's so-called ‘Scallies’ and Manchester's ‘Perries’.
Within weeks,Time Out had an article written by London playwright and football fan Mick Mahoney who got it right when he pointed out that ‘if Nike brought out a crocodile-skin trainer for £140, it would be a smash’.
The football crowd and estate dwellers of the big cities didn't five a monkeys what they were wearing in Harlem or anywhere else; if it looked good in the Anfield Road End, the Scoreboard Paddock or the Clock End, it was good enough for them.
Over the next year, nearly every newspaper in the country, from the Mail On Sunday to New Society , had articles on this strange breed of training shoe-clad youngster.
As usual the sports firms were slow to respond, and even by the mid-Eighties you still couldn't buy good, exclusive trainers in most cities.
Europe, not the States, was still the mecca, and many shopping trips by eager Scousers willing to supply the demand in their home city went some way to doing this.
(It also increased the letters from German/Swiss nicks asking for copies of The End magazine to relieve the boredom.)
It was during this period that a young buyer for Adidas based in Liverpool (but originally from Yorkshire) set up shop in a small back-street in Liverpool City Centre.
He set up on his own because the company he worked for, Top Man, didn't really know what was going on, on a street level.
After travelling to the Frankfurt Sports Fair he had wanted them to stock Adidas Forest Hills (white leather, gold stripes).
Adidas insisted on 500 pairs going to the ‘flagship store’ in Oxford Circus.
They didn't sell a pair and most of the reps blamed the price tag (£29.99) in 1980/81.
Wade Smith knew different.
After laughing at the idea of launching Forest Hills in Liverpool, Adidas let him have 500 pairs.
He put them on sale in the beginning of December 1980; by Christmas they had sold out.
Wade Smith was given salesman of the year in January and promptly left to set up shop on his own.
He immediately set off for Germany in a van and the rest is history.
His four-storey department-style store is testament to that.
The shop now caters for the mainstream market, but it was built upon bringing in exclusive trainers from Germany in the early Eighties, trainers that had nothing to do with America, but a lot to do with the nomad Scousers, and Wade Smith often supplemented his stock by buying from Liverpool ‘entrepreneurs’ with time on their hands to travel to Deutschland and acquire, by various methods, the much sought after, exclusive Adidas Trim-Trab.
The hilarious Clothes Show even declared that 1987 was the year of the training shoe.
Had these people been in a time machine, or chained in dimly-lit rooms in Beirut?
Judy Rumbold, the fashion editor of The Guardian , couldn't have been more wrong when she wrote about trainers (August 21, 1989): ‘In Tom Wolfe's Bonfire Of The Vanities , sneakers are documented as an intrusive part of young American street style; not just symbols of black affiliation and for high performance on the dancefloor but as crucial elements in maintaining a lugubrious, rhythmic gait that Wolfe coined the Pimp Roll.
That was in 1987; now the fad has soft-shoed across from the streets of Brooklyn and the Bronx and become a cult throughout Europe.’
Apart from qualifying for Pseuds Corner in Private Eye and avoiding the use of plain English, what Rumbold was trying to say was that British youth had just discovered trainers in the late Eighties.
The hilarious Clothes Show even declared 1987 as the ‘year of the training shoe’.
Have these people been in a time-machine or chained in dimly-lit rooms in Beirut?
This myth has got to be quashed!
Anyway, everyone knows that training shoes have gone a bit crazy in the past few years.
Hilarious designs have been churned out of the factories and many a massive tongue has been laughed at.
Competition is cut-throat and it seems some of the designers have been taking some dodgy tabs (or suffering from over-worked stress syndrome), as the high-top becomes more and more ridiculous.
Bad trainers now rule the market, but it has nothing to do with ‘fashion’— it's mass consumerism (check Tony Wilson out in his Travel Fox).
The main reason people have been wearing Adidas Shell-toes and Puma States in the past year or so is because Nike, Adidas, Troop, Converse, British Knights, Travel Fox, Reebok, LA Gear, Hi-Tec, Jordache, etc, are producing some of the silliest, shittiest trainers known to man (and woman).
The frantic search for trainers past is simply a reaction against the shit trainers syndrome!
Thankfully, according to Wade Smith's sales figures, Liverpool is not a great supporter of multi-coloured high-tops.
Big, bad and sad should be the companies' mottoes.
Even Michael Jackson has designed a trainer for LA Gear, imaginatively called ‘Billie Jean’.
It's big, black and has more studs that a biker's jacket.
Unbelievable!
Jackson must've been under the effects of the anaesthetic after a nose job to come out with something so bad.
It's not whether old trainers are fashionable or not (many of the old school trainers were crap).
The fact is that they are a million times better than many of the new trainers on the market and a lot harder to find.
Obviously American fashion does have an influence on the European market, but when the Sunday Mirror magazine declares ‘the high-top trainer rules the world and is this year's trendiest fashion accessory.
Anybody who's anybody knows that a pair of brand new trainers — bright laces undone, tongues out, displaying that all important brand name — says more about you than a wallet full of gold credit cards’, you know it's time to leave the country and live on a desert island in your bare feet or search the loft for your ex-issue Diadora Borg Elite or Stan Smiths.
Let's be plain here — the Sugarhill Gang circa 1979 dressed in Huggy Bear hipsters and hairy chests were the genuine NYC article.
A generation away from the British urchins who started it all.
American persons who wear training shoes with suits and fur coats cannot be taken seriously.
This isn't another beautifully executed US import — it's a slab of classic British hokum, and there's nothing LA Gear can do about it.
That's all.
P.S. Whatever happened to Gola?
TOP TEN SAD TRAINERS
1.
Travel Fox Barracuda (and all others)
2.
Nike Air Jordans (below)
3.
(Black) Fila Tourissmo
4.
Anything by Troop
5.
British Knights (all ranges)
6.
LA Gear (hilarious)
7.
Reebok Pump
8.
Nike Air Pressure (you've got to pump the bastards up)
9.
Hi-Tec (never seen a good pair yet)
10.
Jordache (no exit)
TOP TEN CLASSICS
1.
Adidas Samba
2.
Puma Argentina
3.
Adidas S.L. 80s
4.
Adidas Stan Smiths (top)
5.
Adidas Forest Hills
6.
Adidas Trim Trab
7.
Adidas Shell-Toes
8.
Diadora Borg Elite
9.
Adidas Gazelle
10.
Puma States
OLD SCHOOL
It says a lot about the present that the recent past has become the subject of much dewy-eyed recollection — mostly by people who were still at primary school when Grandmaster Flash began cutting his way into musical history.
‘Old school’, a term that describes the first wave of US rap originators, is now a bona fide street fashion craze.
Old school is a back-to-basics reaction to the sportswear industry's increasing reliance on pink and pastel, splash and spray, an apparent brainstorm which has forced people who have no desire to look like an explosion in a paint factory to search in discount stores and back-of-beyond sports shops for the design classics of the recent past — nylon Adidas track tops with the simple three-stripe design on each arm, or a pair of shell-toed trainers.
It's the sportswear that was the initial rap explosion of the late Seventies.
Now it's the oldest and hardest to find unless you are prepared to pay the ridiculous prices of independent fashion shops who've searched the warehouses of middle America for anything that can be labelled ‘old school’.
In America, they don't understand this retro development.
In Britain, it's a white ravers' thing, the subject of much piss-taking among the black rap hardcore.
But one look at a new shell suit splashed with luminous paint provides a perfect explanation of why old school is becoming big business for small shops in inner London.
It will take a lifetime for companies like Nike and Adidas to realise that their designers have too many coloured pencils.
Meanwhile, the cash-in merchants are hard at work, creating crap T-shirts with ‘Old Skool’ printed on the front, stealing the logos of the big names of the Seventies like Puma and trying to re-create clothing from old photos.
All this second-generation old school stuff is shite on wheels and has led to the emergence of the Old School Fool, a mug with a large disposable income who is prepared to cough up half a week's wages for anything he perceives to be pre-Day-Glo sportswear.
Be wary also of shops flogging any old trainers they can get their hands on.
Not everything old is old school.
These shops are trying to pass discount trainers from way beck when as the genuine article.
You'd never have caught Spoonie Gee wearing Dunlop Green Flash.
Such shops have gone old school crazy.
One shop in Liverpool has discounted Adidas trainers in kids' size two on display but not for sale.
Another shop in the city is trying to flog Adidas sports shirts too big for Geoff Capes.
One unfortunate woman who ran a discount shoe store was oblivious to the fact she was sitting on an old school goldmine.
Some crafty young entrepreneurs steamed in and relieved her of several pairs of Pumas at a knockdown price.
She was apparently bemused as to what these hip young people wanted with £8-a-pair shoes that were being bought by grannies as cheap slippers.
I suppose it serves her right for not reading THE FACE.
Three of the Furious Five in New York, circa '82
Like any fashion craze, all this will come to a close.
But for me and many others, old school is something that transcends fashion and has precious little to do with paying £60 in London for something that cost $5 in the backstreets of Chicago.
It's hip hop at its birth, it's DJ Kool Hero, ‘Apache’ by The Incredible Bongo Band, subway trains with Smurfs on the side, fat laces, quick cuts and the almost mythical impression of New York at a time when black music gave birth to what remains its hardest and most vital creation.
On the positive side, perhaps a renewed interest in old school rap can only be a good thing.
Republic Records is planning an old school compilation of early New York independent releases and the second-hand shops are thick with dusty Sugarhill twelves.
But perhaps I'm just dreaming.
The Old School Fool is more likely to be listening to The KLF than The Disc Four.
John MCCready 
OLD SCHOOL
Puma States
Tommy Cooper
James Brown
Jazzy Five
Marijuana
The Farm
God
Malcom X
Spoonie Gee
George Best
Coronation Street
Puma Basket
Stan Smith
Bet Lynch
Goose jacket
Old Grey Whistle Test
Adidas Official
Rufus
PLAYSCHOOL
Air Jordans
Russ Abbot
Diana Brown
Jazzie B
E
The Soup Dragons
Bono Vox
Professor Griff
Tone Loc
Gazza
EastEnders
Any British Knights
SPX
Kim Wilde
Hooded top
The Word
Adidas Torsion
Deee-Lite
ALL TITS & NO ART?
Text DENISE BARRICKLOW Portrait JESSE FROHMAN
A New York commodities broker turned artist, JEFF KOONS now claims to be in love with Cicciolina, the Italian porn star turned controversial politician.
‘She is one of the greatest artists in the world,’ says Koons of his muse.
‘Instead of paint or photographs, she articulates her genitalia.’
But even if it is created by the new Warhol, will such explicit portraiture sell?
Top: ‘Jeff in Position of Adam Touching Illona's Ass’, by Jeff Koons, 1990.
Above left: Cicciolina puts on an impromptu art show.
Above right: one of Koons' most famous works from his earlier period, ‘Rabbit’, 1986
Most people who take photographs of their lovemaking have the good sense to review such wanton moments in private.
Not Jeff Koons, America's premiere bad boy artist.
In fact, a graphic series of pictures I'm viewing of Koons getting it on with his 35-year-old fiancé are being made into paintings, sculpture and have even inspired a film.
As Koons shows the photos to me during an interview in his Greenwich Village apartment, I feel embarrassed for him.
None of the pictures is the least bit sexy.
An explicit shot of Koons going down on his girlfriend as she stuffs a glass dildo into her freshly shorn pudenda — a photo to be crafted via computer into a 12- by 8-foot painting — is particularly repugnant.
Somehow I can't imagine a Park Avenue matron shelling out $200,000 to hang this startling pre-connubial portrait on her living-room wall — no matter that the work is executed by an artist who has been likened to Marcel Duchamp and Andy Warhol and called the genius of his generation.
Left to right: ‘New Hoover Convertibles, New Shelton Wet/Drys 5-Gallon Doubledecker’; ‘Michael Jackson and Bubbles’; sculpture of Jeff and Illona
‘Beautiful,’ coos Koons, oblivious to my discomfort.
His eyes glaze over as he focuses on the photograph of him with his beloved — Illona Staller, better known as Cicciolina, the Italian porn star turned politician who recently made headlines by offering to let Saddam Hussein ‘rape’ her if he freed the hostages being held in the Middle East.
‘She's wearing red plastic boots,’ I say, trying to seem unaffected.
Koons takes the photograph in his hand and smiles impishly, looking every bit the boy-next-door in his Reeboks, jeans and button-down shirt.
‘This is Illona,’ Koons sighs.
‘Her vocabulary is so articulated.
Look how that flower is just a little bit of wire hovering over her hat.’
He points to a single red blossom that quivers on a nearly invisible thread attached to a garland of synthetic butterflies and rhinestone-dotted flowers — a bizarre piece of headgear so tacky it could only have been custom-made.
‘I didn't go in and change Illona.
If that's what she wants to wear, fine.
I trust her totally in her art,’ Koons says.
‘She's one of the greatest artists in the world, my favourite artist in the world.
Instead of using paint brushes or photographs, she articulates her genitalia.’
He hands me a different picture.
Yeah.
If she's so great, then why aren't any of these shots sexy?
I flip through more repellent photos.
Certainly, Cicciolina is a beautiful woman who looks like an older, sleazy Brooke Shields with straight, platinum-blond hair and a strange set of thick, auburn-tinted brows.
I pick up the ‘Glass Dildo’ photo again and this time I am struck by Cicciolina's expressiveness.
She is resting her garlanded head on the fingertips of a red-gloved hand, inserting the large, crystal-clear dildo with the other, her crimson mouth parted and blue-mascara'd eyes half-shut in rapturous delight as the devoted Koons goes about his business.
Cicciolina seems to capture — articulate, as Koons would say — the essence of sexual desire, or at least that intense moment before the body abandons itself to passion.
It becomes clear that Cicciolina is not the problem.
It's Koons.
With his rosy lips, false tan and windswept hair, he looks curiously out of place.
Crooked veins bulge in his hulking neck as his tongue strains to meet its goal.
He's trying too hard to please and it's not a nice sight.
Somehow Koons has turned what might have been titillating into something with the erotic appeal of a smutty, B-grade slasher film — the images draw you in only by their sheer gross-out power.
My disagreeable reaction to the photos reminded me of the way I — and a host of others — responded to the last major American exhibition of Koons' work two years ago.
A show of porcelain and polychromed wood sculpture crafted by European artisans, the work looked like oversized airport gift shop souvenirs, or mammoth three-dimensional renderings of the seemingly-innocuous cartoon characters that have ruled the imaginations of generations of TV-bred Americans.
Among the more provocative pieces were a dimpled Italian love-me bear sporting an insidiously vacuous expression, a hear-shaped button and a pot of gingham-coiffed confiture; a topless Playboy blond embracing a limp-limbed Pink Panther whose sad, yellow eyes reveal unspeakable despair; and a larger-than-life sculpture of gilded Michael Jackson, in white face, cuddling Bubbles, his scarily twin-featured chimpanzee.
The show, entitled ‘Banality’, was eerie, discomforting and seemed to offend nearly everyone.
‘You may have thought that things had gotten to be as bad as they could get, but Mr Koons' show proves you were wrong,’ wrote one particularly shrill reviewer.
‘This show really does carry things to a new low.
It is simply nauseating.’
But if the sculpture seemed tasteless, vulgar and dumb, its power was undeniable.
Laying bare the ugliest, most banal side of life in America, Koons' work packed an emotional wallop that jarred even the most jaded, and raised unsettling new questions about what art was supposed to be.
And if few found the work easy to like, most recognised that Koons was on to something brilliant.
Explained one reluctant fan, ‘The best art of the twentieth century has almost never made you feel good.’
The Sonnabend exhibition and simultaneous installations at two other galleries in Chicago and Cologne — the ‘Banality’ sculptures came in editions of three — brought in loads of cash, with prices ranging from $50,000 to $150,000.
They made Koons a multi-millionaire and one of the richest artists of the thirtysomething set.
Koons has continued to shock and offend.
His most recent succés du scandale came last spring at the Venice Biennale, the art world's Cannes, where Koons showed a polychromed sculpture of him and Cicciolina as a soft-core Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, surrounded by three laser-painted and varnished canvases of the couple making love.
Predictably, the Koons exhibit dominated attention at a festival that included work from scores of internationally renowned, but less flashy artists, and even proved so provocative that one fanatic ended up slashing each painting with a knife, some four months after the show opened.
‘The work is an incredible carrier of anxiety,’ John Caldwell, curator for painting and sculpture at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, says of the Biennale piece, ‘In a pornographic movie, the people never look at the camera because we need to sense that we're looking through a window, we're safe, we're the voyeur.
And we think we're going to get that with what Jeff has done.
But what we really get is we feel exposed.
We are them .
All of a sudden the issue is not sex, but being seen.
It's like our worst nightmare.’
Koons himself inspires great unease and deeply ambivalent feelings.
In the course of a long interview in his apartment, I found myself quite charmed by his lack of pretension, inarticulate babble sprinkled with the occasionally brilliant observation and odd habit of quoting himself, but I nevertheless remained convinced that Koons' self-effacing earnestness was a scam.
He did not shy away from probing questions about his art or sex life (he has gone to whores for the ‘psychological experience’, claims Illona makes him so hot he can ‘go again in 5 to 10 minutes’, and doesn't necessarily think porn stars make better lovers ‘if two people love each other’).
But he appeared quite anxious throughout the interview, often leaving the room or calling to one of his ubiquitous assistants when the interview started getting, as he put it, ‘too hard’(‘Uh, Susanna, who would some of my female heroes be?’).
And yet, as our talk wound down to a close, Koons begged for more.
‘Let's do the interview again,’ he pleaded.
‘I want to make sure you got everything you need.
I really like THE FACE.’
‘But I really think I have everything,’ I said.
‘Come on,’ he whined.
‘Ask me some more questions.
Was there anything you weren't happy with?
I want to give you good answers to your questions.’
It's not surprising that Koons began his career as a salesman, selling memberships for the Museum of Modern Art in New York in the late Seventies, following a stint of art school in Baltimore and a relatively nondescript youth in a small Pennsylvania town, where he listened to Led Zeppelin and ‘chased after women’.
At MOMA, Jeff's unique entrepreneurial skills surfaced immediately.
‘I used to dress very theatrical.
I dyed my hair red.
I wore a red pencil moustache, sequins, inflatable flowers, just to distract the public so I could sell memberships.
I was bringing in a patron a day.’
It wasn't long before Wall Street wooed Koons away with the prospect of higher wages as a commodities broker, which the then-aspiring artist claimed he needed to produce sculptures that were costing him $3,000 a shot.
‘I was responsible to myself,’ recalls Koons, a little defensively.
‘I wasn't walking around saying, ‘Oh I don't have enough money to do what I want to do ‘cause I don't have commercial support for my work.’
I put myself in a position to be able to make these works.’
Koons' sculpture from this period — of vacuum cleaners encased in plexiglass, basketballs floating in aquariums, and a stainless-steel bunny — garnered a good deal of critical acclaim and important fans, among them the art dealer Mary Boone.
But after just eight months with Boone's gallery — then one of the hottest in town — Koons, the salesman, became impatient with his dealer's marketing strategy and pulled his work from her gallery, reportedly declaring, ‘You haven't made me famous yet.’
‘I left the gallery because it wasn't my moment,’ says Koons.
‘It was a time for other artists.’
Subsequent financial woes — he had quit his job as a broker to work on a show for the Boone gallery — sent Koons back to Pennsylvania, where he lived with his parents for several months before heading to Florida for a political campaign job that brought him enough money to return to New York.
Illona's vocabulary is so articulated.
Look how that flower is just a bit of wire hovering over her hat
But even then, Koons says, it was hard getting into the swing of things.
‘When I came such a strategy to the Wall Street Journal : ‘It's like a company choosing a franchise: you want one on a busy corner, not in the middle of nowhere.’
For the ‘Banality’ show, Koons created a startling series of ads that showed him in four flagrantly artificial settings.
One floral paradise with two bikini-clad bimbos.
In another, he appeared as a visionary teacher indoctrinating a flock of eager young students with slogans like ‘Banality As Savior’ and ‘Exploit The Masses’.
A third ad showed him in a bathrobe seated cross-legged on a chair in a tropical tableau flanked man, hugging two freshly-scrubbed pigs.
The ads smugly mentioned nothing of Koons' show, listing only the names of his three galleries.
The ads were aimed at promoting Koons; the artist, not the art, had become the commodity.
Such promotional campaigns have served him well.
Today Koons claims to be the ‘most written about artist in the world’, with his assistants insisting they collect 50 to 100 magazine and newspaper clippings about their boss each week.
But such exposure has not satisfied Koons' craving for fame.
For him, the art world is one small path on the road to superstardom.
‘To me, Jasper Johns' flag painting is not the icon of the Fifties.
Elvis is the icon of the Fifties, and Jasper Johns' flag is shit compared with Elvis and never ever in this world will have any relevance close to Elvis,’ Koons says, defiantly.
‘The art world has never had to deal with that populist level,’ he continues — we've obviously broached one of his favourite topics.
‘I don't really think that's correct.
I think it's better to have contact.
If I'm a teacher I would rather teach ‘See Jane run……’ to a million people on the road to thinking and articulating themselves, instead of just one individual.
Sexually, she enjoyed it very much.
Susanna, is there an article you can dig up where Ilona says I'm good?
‘High art to me is just ineffective art — art that can't get an audience.
Madonna has been on the cover of every major magazine.
That's impact.’
Koons hopes to give his work mass appeal with Cicciolina's help.
This autumn, the couple will start filming the cinematic version of their romance in a movie entitled Made In Heaven .
Koons plans to produce, direct and star in it himself.
‘What the film wants to do is let everyone feel secure about life, about their own position in life, to feel that they can achieve the things they want.
Really to let them live,’ he says.
Guaranteed to include lots of explicit sex, the film will also be a tale of courage, says Koons.
‘I think the most famous sexual moment in the world was to go and conquest this person as my love, and I succeeded,’ he laughs.
‘I don't know if a lot of men put themselves up against that.’
The real story of Koons' romance with Cicciolina began about three years ago in Milan, when Koons first introduced himself to the Italian porn legend after one of her famed pee-on-the-audience performances.
Koons had spotted a photograph of Cicciolina in a German magazine, and was smitten.
After the Milan performance, Koons had a translator convince Cicciolina to do a series of soft-core photo shoots with him, sessions that evolved during the later photo shoots that Illona succumbed to Koons' charms.
‘When we did out hard session, that's when I think love on a high level happened.
Sexually, she enjoyed it very, very much.’
‘You wouldn't tell me otherwise, would you?’
I challenged him.
The question appeared to puzzle Koons.
‘It's in many articles,’ he shot back quickly, then paused, a little insecure.
‘Not many articles, but…
…
Susanna, is there an article that you can dig up where Illona says I'm good?’
Some of Koons' colleagues scoff at the Cicciolina affair, dismissing it as yet another publicity ploy, the perfect merger between two media personalities, and a disguise for a small talent.
‘He has only one thing on his mind — to be famous,’ says one sculptor.
‘And in a sense he's become a prisoner to the publicity he's generated.
He's required to play the part of the clown.
I think he's really trying to hide a lack of direction in his work.’
But other art world cognoscenti disagree.
They say Koons is a major artist who sacrifices nothing for his work.
‘In a way, Jeff is putting himself in the position of being a cultural martyr,’ says Ned Rifkin, exhibition curator for Washington DC's Hirshhorn Museum, part of the prestigious Smithsonian Institution.
‘His work is about narcissism, but not the way we normally use that term, which is when someone is narcissistic, it means they're self-involved.
Narcissus, you'll remember, jumped into his reflection and drowned.
‘Jeff's work is more about cultural self-intoxication.
He's really dealing with that whole idea of the image of the self and the reflection in the water being much bigger and more interesting to all of us that the reality of who Jeff Koons is,’ Rifkin says.
‘I think that's what Warhol was interested in, but Warhol was a voyeur by nature.
I think Jeff, on the other hand, is willing to give up himself in order to become his reflection., for example, that half of its projects consumed less than 2% of its total development manpower.
Projects of this sort certainly do not call for an elaborate cost-benefit analysis; resources should be assigned to them on the basis of a simple ‘back-of-an-envelope’ analysis or an informed subjective decision.
As end-user programming becomes more prevalent, these small tasks will shift largely to the user organizations, which are in the best position to make rational resource allocation decisions.
At the d be amazing if there really was a mass audience for Jeff's work, because I think it's too difficult.’
Koons will only grudgingly admit his work — especially the new sculpture and painting — is problematic, but never that it's inaccessible.
‘My work embraces, it communicates.
And that's what's threatening to people, because it is looking for a direct response; it's looking to form a dialogue.
‘But I think the work is very, very beautiful.
This isn't pornography.
It's not work that's alienating in any way.
When work alienates, people find a sense of security, because they're not in a position of having to really deal with something.’
And despite the fact that he is unveiling his Cicciolina-inspired work at a time when sexually-adventurous artists are regularly harassed, progressive museum directors arrested on obscenity charges, and an increasing number of independent films slapped with the dreaded X-rating — a proven box-office poison — Koons says he is not worried about achieving his goals.
With his usual aplomb, Koons insists his work is in a different league.
‘I never do anything for shock value.
Anything that is done for shock value has no future because it's done for the moment.
The only thing Illona and I have is future’.
The more explicit pictures referred to in the text have not been reproduced as we felt they could cause unnecessary offence to both readers and distributors
BACK TO LIFE
This page: Rev wears slipover by Ralph Lauren, 143 New Bond Street, London W1; cap-sleeve T-shirt from Portobello Road Market, London W11; identity bracelet from Camden Passage, London NW1
Opposite page: Rev wears rib-knit sweater by Jean-Paul Gaultier from Bazaar For Men, 4 South Molton Street, London W1; Sixties pinstripe hipsters from Wild Child, Unit F31, Kensington Market, Kensington High Street, London W8; vest from Portobello Road Market, London W11; Skinner, Oxford Street, London W1 and branches, studded wristband from Oxfam
This page: Helen wears mohair sweater made to order or for hire from Contemporary Wardrobe, 66 Great Queen Street, London WC2; Sixties hipster trousers from Wild Child, as before; and Scholl sandals from Selfridges, Oxford Street, London W1, and good shoe shops
Opposite page: Rev wears Sixties pinstripe suit made to order or for hire from Contemporary Wardrobe, as before; grandad top by Ally Capellino, from Ally Capellino, 95 Wardour Street, London W1, and Harrods, Knightsbridge London SW1; Claddagh ring from Camden Passage, London NW1; and studded wristband from Oxfam
Opposite page: Rev wears parka by Romeo Gigli from Browns, 23–27 South Molton Street, London W1; and vest from Damart Thermal Wear, 235 Regent Street, London W1, and stockists nationwide.
This page: Helen wears secondhand Levi jean jacket from Rokit, 23 Kensington Gardens, Brighton, and 225 Camden High Street, London NW1; A-line leather mini-skirt by Hamnett Active from Browns, as before, and Jones, 13 Floral Street, London WC2; vest from Damart Thermal Wear, as before; moccasin boots from Camden Market, London NW1; and zodiac rings from Oxfam
This page: Rev wears tank-top made to order or for hire from Contemporary Wardrobe, as before; Sixties pinstripe hipsters from Wild Child, as before: Clark's desert boots from Lilley and Skinner, as before; studded wristband from Oxfam
Opposite page: Helen wears patchwork top from Camden Market, London NW1; and Sixties tartan hipsters from Wild Child, as before
CLOSE ENCOUNTERS
Text JIM McCLELLAN
Left: the lucrative face of alien abduction.
This is the image, from Whitley Strieber's Communion book , that helped sell the book that launched the film that…
Was John F. Kennedy assassinated to protect aliens resident on earth?
Are aliens at this very moment chewing on babies under the Nevada desert?
And do UFOs make a habit of abducting unwilling victims to look into their private parts?
This may sound like standard Sunday Sport fare, but some people sincerely believe it, and more than you'd think — the UFO business can be very big business indeed
It was the high fives that did it.
Up until then the Philip Mora film of Whitley Streiber's best-selling tale of alien abduction,Communion , just about cut it with the audience of UFO watchers and real-life abductees invited to a small preview theatre in Soho.
The little blue trolls from space, the black-eyed pointy-chinned grey things in charge, the anal probing they inflicted on Christopher Walken inside something that looked like it might have been a UFO, event he awe-inspiring ham standard of Walken's performance — they were all OK.
But when one of the little blue aliens made some John Travolta-style dance moves, indulged in a comic face-pulling session with Walken, then gave him five, that's when the film lost them.
‘The general public is just going to laugh at this.
It will set back the public status of abduction research for years,’ Mike Wooton, the editor of the UFO Times concluded solemnly at the post-show party.
It was an odd thing to say (it wouldn't matter if the film was brilliant — it would still probably provoke mirth among non-believers), but then it was also an odd thing to see in a film which was presumably trying to revamp the alien invasion genre for a new age, because it was such a throwback to the cinematic aliens of the last few years.
Recent film aliens have been parodic reflections of the everyday absurdities of post-modern culture rather than attempts to imagine something genuinely other.
There's been a plethora of TV-watching, burger-eating breakdancing aliens.
The advance word on Communion was that it wanted to deal in the uncanny again, to unsettle its audiences rather than make them laugh knowingly, yet here it was with something that belonged in a Joe Dante movie.
However, a section of this particular audience wasn't that interested in pondering the semiotic history of the movie alien.
For them, aliens aren't cultural ciphers, free-floating symbols of a whole range of social and psychological fears.
They're real.
‘What I saw wasn't anything like those little dark blue things,’ commented Jane, a rather shy young woman who has had an experience with an alien.
‘Nor the little greys.
It was bigger, darker, it had a sort of cloak……’
Jane is an abductee, someone who believes they have been forcibly abducted by aliens, spirited up to spaceships and physically experimented on in various alarming ways (rectal probing, artificial insemination, induced premature births).
Although they have apparently been happening for much longer, abductions first started coming to light in the late Sixties, but they've really taken over UFO culture since the publication of Communion in 1987.
In Strieber's wake, across America, all sorts of ordinary Joes seem to have had similarly extraordinary experiences.
Now they've started to appear over here.
Mass hysteria?
Bandwagon jumping?
Hard to say, but Jane wasn't faking.
Something had happened to her and she looked uneasy, vaguely disturbed by the memory.
It was easy to spot others like her.
They looked a little out of it, the wallflowers at the party.
The people who did seem to be enjoying things (although they didn't much like the film) were those who, unlike Jane, were there on their own terms.
They had chosen to sign up with the UFO subculture.
The idea of the UFO freak suggests boozy, bearded eccentrics or ladies in twin sets in contact with Venus, but the people at the Communion show were a disappointingly ordinary bunch.
Apart from the abductees, the only people who stood out were a few suits.
It turned out that these were the guys who run the show, the kingpins of British ufology.
Rather like pathological ‘organisation men’, they seem so addicted to bureaucracy that they can't get enough of it in their day jobs.
They write the magazines, circulate letters, run UFO hotlines, organise the conferences, compile statistics, collect evidence, write reports.
Whether they do anything with what they collect, or whether it's an exercise in pointlessness, a little like cosmic trainspotting, is another matter.
One ufologist who collects information with more purpose than most is Ken Phillips, a downbeat ex-teacher who runs a support group for British abductees.
For about a year he's been analysing abduction experiences, with the aim of putting together a psycho-social profile of the classic victim.
So far he's concluded that the typical victims are intelligent and creative, but have not achieved much in their lives, are usually stuck in dead-end jobs or unemployed.
‘I try to make it a therapeutic education process for the abductees as well.
I don't want to be like a medieval inquisitor.
I'm not trying to prove or disprove anything, or to firm up a particular belief system.’
Not everyone is so hesitant.
‘For some, ufology is like a religion,’ says Phillips.
‘You do get the believers and the buffs, the little sects who just stick to their beliefs and won't listen to anything else.
You can't shift them.
Everyone else is wrong and they're right.’
To see what the means, you really have to go to one of the national UFO events, something like The Phantoms Of The Sky conference, which took place in Sheffield this summer.
There, alongside Elsie Oakensen, an amiably ordinary grandmother who told how she was snatched by aliens in Northamptonshire in 1978, a group of bone fide fruitcakes from the Aetherius Society (who believe that Jesus and Buddha came to Earth in flying saucers from Venus), turned up and did their party turn.
Paul Devereux argued that most UFOs and lights in the sky weren't flying saucers, but ‘earth lights’, naturally occurring sentient phenomena, something like very big fireflies, I think.
Peter Hough ran through his investigation into a photograph of what appears to be an alien clutching an intergalactic attaché case on Ilkley Moor in a slide show which was like a conceptual exercise in boredom (‘Here's a slide of the letter I sent asking to hire a Geiger counter to search for radioactive traces left on the moor by the alien…
…
Ah, here's the Geiger counter I actually used…
…
Yes, this is me with the Geiger counter looking for radioactive traces on the moor, nothing much actually, so in the end it was a bit of a waste of time’).
Although the audience nodded their heads through all this, it wasn't really what they had come to see.
They were there to hear Budd Hopkins, author of Missing Time and Intruders , and the leading US researcher into alien abduction.
But before Budd came on, they had to listen to Andy Roberts, who stands at the opposite end of ufology to Hopkins and whose new book,Phantoms Of The Sky (written with Dave Clarke, published by Robert Hale), gave the conference its name.
Roberts described himself as ‘the enfant terrible of British ufology.
I'm as interested in the ufologists as the UFOs, in exposing what they do.’
Like everyone in the field, Roberts has his own explanation of UFOs.
They're all in the mind; experiences like abductions are psychological states that we don't understand.
In our ignorance we interpret them according to the prevailing cultural myths.
So, while 200 years ago people were kidnapped by the fairies, now it's aliens.
Evidence of alien visits?
Florida, 1986 (above), and Indiana, 1983 (below)
This sounds pretty reasonable.
Indeed the whole post-war UFO phenomenon is an example of millenial panic, which has mutated to reflect different anxieties.
During the Cold War it seemed that aliens, like communists, were poised to invade the West.
Now that the political realm has shrunk to the body — and people are worried about bodily rather than territorial invasion, about viruses, additives, contaminated bodily fluids — aliens have changed accordingly.
However Roberts didn't go down at all well with the Sheffield audience.
At the question session afterwards, one disgruntled UFO watcher summed up the audience's feelings: ‘If you want to talk about psychology, why don't you bugger off to a psychology conference.
This is a UFO conference and I'm here to hear about UFOs.’
Budd Hopkins delivered what they wanted — and endless stream of stories about abductions, accompanied by sketches of the aliens and bizarre slides of the tiny wounds their probings had left on victims' bodies.
Hopkins played nicely to the crowds too, although it was hard to figure out if it was conscious manipulation or the unconscious product of his enthusiasm.
He continually veered close to grand statements, then pulled back.
He dropped hints that real alien implants have been discovered, but said he couldn't reveal anything yet because, well, you know……but something pretty earth-shattering may be on its way.
(Afterwards Andy Roberts pointed out that the only ‘alien implant’ so far discovered turned out to be a ball bearing that had got lodged up a child's nose.)
Nevertheless it all sounded pretty convincing, so much so that you came out wondering whether that persistent zit on your face wasn't the result of bad diet, but actually something implanted by alien beings, determined for their own mysterious purposes to make you suffer the social embarrassment of a bad complexion.
Inside a UFO: six-year-old boy sketches an account of his own abduction
A fairly successful artist — he makes abstract expressionist constructions which borrow motifs from primitive ritual — Hopkins has been doing this since the mid-Seventies.
He was the investigator in the Whitley Strieber case, and reveals that although they were friends, they have now fallen out, mainly because Strieber tried to get Hopkins to delay his book about the abduction phenomena — he though it might hurt the sales of his own book.
‘Essentially, Whitley changed his story about 14 times,’ says Hopkins.
‘His books are the product of a fictional imagination, they're what I call ‘involuntary fiction’.
That's not to say he's lying, of course.’
Hopkins is worried that Strieber is turning his experiences into the source for a new religion.
As well as the books and the film, there is now a circuit of Communion meeting groups and a regular newsletter which is trying to impose a particular view on the phenomenon.
Hopkins has an answer for virtually any question you throw at him.
For example, most abduction experiences, which often take place in childhood, are repressed and have to be recovered using hypnosis.
When I suggest to Hopkins that many abductees could in fact be drawing on repressed memories of childhood sexual abuse and, as a result of bad hypnosis, end up believing mistakenly that they were messed around with by aliens instead, he agrees it's a possibility, but then argues that some cases of childhood sexual abuse may in fact be alien abductions.
He also has a smart answer to the real big question about abduction — why exactly do these super-intelligent beings travel halfway across the universe in hi-tech spaceships to stick blunt instruments up people's bottoms?
‘What I always say is, if it made sense, it wouldn't be alien.’
So stupidity is a guarantee of truth?
‘You have to remember they may be interested in something about us that we don't know about yet.
It's like if you had a doctor testing some aboriginal tribe for blood types — they wouldn't necessarily know what he was doing.’
Genetic experimentation remains the most popular theory, but though Hopkins has plenty of wild stories about artificial insemination, or half-breed alien/human babies already in existence (all strictly off the record of course) all he's prepared to say is that things are coming out into the open.
‘They, whoever They are, certainly seem less concerned with remaining secret, and that's worrying.
I worry about my daughter, she's growing up in a world where things are inevitably going’ Asked whether he may just possibly have got it all wrong, Hopkins pauses melodramatically.
‘You know, I really wish it weren't real.
All I can say is, this is either bullshit, or it's the biggest story in the history of mankind.’.
The further you go into this subculture, the more you begin to realise that Bud Hopkins is in fact quite restrained for an American ufologist.
If you want to know how how far they can go, read The Leading Edge , an occasional bulletin published by the Nevada Aerial Research Group that generally carries at least 15 of the biggest stories in the history of mankind in each issue.
This has the real hard stuff — cattle mutilations performed by aliens (apparently, ‘for reasons we don't yet understand’, they're also interested in cows' bottoms), UFOs and AIDS, stories about he ‘men in black’, CIA men from space, who drive brand new Fifties' cars, wear trousers that don't crease and harass people who claim to have seen UFOs.
There are also articles that argue solemnly that all stories in the National Enquirer are 95 per cent true.
The main obsession of the NAR group is the ‘alien base’ conspiracy.
Taking its impetus from the alleged crash of a flying saucer at Roswell in 1947 and the supposed recovery of alien bodies, this is the theory that the US government has been in contact with aliens for years, but has kept it secret.
The theory maintains that there is a secret base under the Nevada desert that houses aliens, who are highly intelligent cannibals supplied with live babies by the government in return for technological secrets.
Perhaps the most paranoid variation on this theme comes from William Milton Cooper, who suggests in his pamphlet The Secret Government that J.F. Kennedy was in fact killed because he was about to blow the gaff on the alien conspiracy.
‘Where all this is supposed to take place is in fact the site of the US military testing grounds,’ Andy Roberts observes.
‘It doesn't seem to occur to anyone that all these people going on about UFOs and the general hilarity they cause would be quite a good disguise for the government if it did want to cover up weapons testing.’
Roberts does admit that, next to all of this, British ufology looks a little quaint.
‘It's down to restraint — we have it and the Americans don't.
It's got something to do with America being the new frontier.
UFO experiences definitely reflect the surrounding cultural context.
The aliens that Americans worry about are versions of the bad guys of the American psyche, they're ‘little yellow devils’, they're the Vietnamese, the Chinese, the Japanese.’
Certainly different nations are visited by very different aliens.
Whereas America has visitors with little bodies and big heads, Russia has them with big bodies and little heads.
Predictably, British aliens are the most normal around and are virtually humanoid in appearance.
We may have the world's most boring aliens, but we do have corn circles, something no one else has got.
As a result, corn circles are threatening to take over ufology here.
Based in the South-west, Richard Tarr, a shop assistant, runs a motorcycle rapid response unit for the UFO group Quest International and says that more and more of his calls are about crop formations.
‘With the bikes we can be on the road in 15 minutes.
You really have to get to the circles before the coaches arrive and mess things up.’
So has a summer of bombing round country lanes and setting psychics loose in the circles helped him figure out whether whirlwinds, UFOs or tabloid journalists are responsible?
‘We're still gathering research.
I discount whirlwinds.
The complex patterns you get now are like pictograms.
It's not necessarily involved with UFOs, but there's definitely a thinking element involved.’
That discounts tabloid journalists.
Mention of the press's glee at the humiliation of the investigators behind this summer's high-profile surveillance project Operation Blackbird, who were fooled by an obvious hoax, brings out Tarr's own nascent conspiracy theory.
‘There are rumours that the hoax was done by government departments.
The public were getting obsessed with it, euphoric, and something had to be done.’
He goes on to claim that the military are also involved.
‘They say they're not interested but they send in helicopters and troops to take measurements.’
When I mention Tarr's stories to Andy Roberts, he smiles.
‘They're all mad at Quest International.
They're always about to reveal something important, then it turns out to be nothing.
I think they convinced themselves recently that one of the crop formations spelled the name of God in Yiddish.
It didn't.’
But why exactly do these super-intelligent beings travel halfway across the universe in hi-tech spaceships to stick blunt instruments up people's bottoms?
You get the impression that Roberts could quite happily slag off most of his fellow ufologists in this way.
As a result he has been threatened with libel action and even physical violence.
He describes ufology as ‘a war zone in which everyone desperately defends their own theory and hates everyone else.’
So why does he bother with the phenomenon?
Other ufologists are on a mission.
They really believe in the existence of aliens, but he doesn't.
Other ufologists also make money by writing sensational books which crack the cover-ups or solve the mystery.
But Roberts owns up that his book will probably lose money, because it doesn't deal in big secrets, and says instead that there is no secret.
Roberts suggests that in his own way he's as obsessed as the people he's observing.
‘I think I'm a belief junkie.
I'm interested in why people believe in things like flying saucers.
Ufology is a pop mythology, a space-edge folklore.
I'm in a position to investigate it as it develops.
People have never done that before.
They've always reconstructed things retrospectively.’
And it does give him a few funny stories to tell his mates in the pub.
‘Yes, there is that to it as well.’
PEOPLE
‘Obviously the thing I have is the looks, which will help, but hopefully people will like the music too’
LISA B
MODEL/SINGER
‘I didn't have a boyfriend till I came to London when I was 17.
I was so skinny when I was young — boys prefer girls with voluptuous bodies and breasts.
I was always a stick walking down the road with a flat chest.
I wasn't very pretty and I certainly wasn't a diva.’
Now 20, Brooklyn-born Lisa B — she would use ‘Barbuscia’, but says no one can pronounce it — has three successful years of modelling behind her and is venturing into the world of music.
It's 4.30 on a Friday afternoon and she's ordering a cheeseburger with mayo, ketchup and fries and a cup of tea.
‘Gosh, I'm starving!
I have to eat something.
I haven't had lunch yet.’
She rolls her fries in ketchup and nibbles at them vaguely, not like she's starving at all.
She smiles and laughs easily and is quite gorgeous.
She talks of her beauty as a fact which she will neither boast about nor play down.
As yet unsigned, Lisa B has several major record companies with a pen at the ready.
But she is taking her time.
‘I had a record company approach me in New York.
They didn't even know I could sing, but they said they could do things to my voice.
That put me off completely.’
Before leaving Brooklyn for London, she did some off-Broadway productions, went to the High School Of Performing Arts and was disappointed when she missed getting a part in Fame because she was too young.
‘My initial ambition was to do Broadway productions, to dance, act and sing.
Then I did my first modelling job and got $400 for two hours' work.
I used to struggle, working in a hosiery shop on weekends for $20 a day.
I take modelling for what it is; I made money I'd never otherwise have made so quickly, and I'm still young enough to do something else.
I'm sure I wouldn't have got this far musically had I not been a model.’
Lisa B says again and again that she knows as a model going into music she has to prove herself.
She wants her image ‘sorted out’ before she signs a deal to prevent any manipulation, to ensure no one tells her how she should present herself to the record-buying public.
With the help of producer Mike McEvoy — who produced a track on the current Soul II Soul LP — she has put together a video promo instead of the usual demo cassettes or industry showcases.
The video has two-minute excerpts of three songs, interspersed with shots of Lisa B talking about herself and her music.
The video gives an interesting taster of what is to come.
Lisa B looks older than in person, more sophisticated and completely au fait with the eye of the camera.
The sixties look adopted by Betty Boo and by Deee-Lite's Lady Miss Kier is visible in the eye kohl, the bodysuits and the dark, straight hair curled at the ends.
But Ms B's look is more versatile.
There is a poppy song, ‘What I Do’, in which she dances around in leggings and a bra top, and a cover of Astrud Gilberto and Stan Getz's Sixties hit ‘The Girl From Ipanema’ done in smoky café style, where she takes advantage of the sensual Puerto Rican looks she inherited from her mother.
The third number, ‘Felines In Motion’, is reminiscent of a James Bond soundtrack, especially with Lisa performing in a black satiny bodysuit.
A promo video stressing the artist's style is a shrewd marketing ploy which exploits the music industry's visual obsession.
But if Lisa B is worried about people seeing without really hearing, her video is not going to help.
Will it not encourage the image of a model singing rather than a singing model?
‘Obviously the thing I have is the looks, which will help, but hopefully people will like the music too.’
Lisa has written eleven songs — she writes her own melodies and lyrics — and three of these will be chosen as a follow-up to the video demo.
She hopes to secure an album deal on the strength of the songs, a deal which will allow her total artistic control.
As long as she carries on smiling, she'll have no problems.
Amy Raphael 
ON A London Saturday, an unknown and unsigned dance band called Motion Incorporated were supposedly playing second billing to My Jealous God, and ended up catapulting themselves into the crowd's heart.
By Manchester Monday I'm sitting in Dry surprised to discover that that was only their second gig, and there are only five of them — Tony, Phil and Richard, who are mostly responsible for the music, guitarist Paul, and vocalist Theresa — when live it sounds like at least 20 keyboards going down at once.
They make ‘modern dance music with an edge to it.
But we're not rigid or formularised.’
Their need for live practice has since seen them support The Paris Angels and Northside, though they admit they'd be better or suited to a dance crowd.
‘We do have a bit of indie in us, it's about 10 per cent indie, 90 per cent dance.
But we see ourselves as a sound system, and in a way everybody is a part of Motion Incorporated.
The only rule is there are no rules.
Oooh that sounds terrible.’
But someone had to say it.
Simon Dudfield 
‘It's time the old setup of band, support band and dodgy tapes in between was run off the circuit’
THE SHAMEN
INDIE INNOVATORS
From improvised sampling to Dream-Machines, The Shamen's mobile club, Synergy, has gone beyond the novelty of semi-legal parties, taking dance club body-pleasure and scientifically intensifying it.
The venue is transformed with lights and effects, the stage is shared by DJs Sticker and Mixmaster Morris, by rappers, MCs and live keyboards in a seamless blend of records, tapes, samples and live performance.
A Shamen show is designed so you don't just stand and stare at the band: and though the live act might be the heart of the show, the spectacle of Colin (cropped Aberdeen curls, Trotsky shades), and Will (shoulder length braided locks, shabby green fatigues) is only part of an evening of light, music and effects that now involves around ten people.
‘Synergy's not a spectacle.
It should feel like an event .’
Will insists, downing tea in quantities only a survivor of the planet SquatWorld could manage.
‘All the Synergy ideas we've tried to work out as we went along —‘interactive’ isn't the right word, but that element is important to us.
If the dancefloor at a gig isn't happening, the gig won't be as good for everybody; if the lighting didn't suit the hall, you wouldn't get the right atmosphere.
So if we can get a situation where the audience also feel that they are stimulating what's going on, then that all works together.
‘It should feel a bit more like going to a festival, where the peripheral things are always really important.
That's why we've had things like the Dream Machine, and setting up a Chill Out room — so that people feel they're involved in different things, yet connected to the band.
Because as well as the band's set, we're interested in the larger scope of how we are affecting the audience, how what we're doing affects the audience's conception of what a gig should be, if you like.
It's time the old set-up of band, support band and dodgy tapes in between was run out of the circuit!’
The Shamen, former Syd Barrett-fixated indie support rockers (with dodgy oilslide'n'light shows in between), are now techno-guerrillas working towards the Synergy ideal of the all-live club, where DJs won't even be using records, where the environment itself is being scratch-mixed to audience requirements.
‘It's something that requires more work on the live side and I think that electronically we can manipulate that area a lot more.
We now take a really big 14K PA out on the road with us.
It isn't used for power, it is used for purity and clarity, and that's how you create that sense of space.
And with a creative use of light, creative use of decoration, you can actually make the space you're in feel different.
‘That congregational aspect — which is a pretty Presbyterian word and I quite like the connotation — of the emotional effect of things happening to people while they're gathered together, that was the big thing in the early acid clubs, that feeling that you were in a place with 200 people all going the same way as you, all into being there, enjoying being in this mass of people……
‘The social implication is what people respond to on a broader scale, their access to technology, their access to information, their comprehension of their environment — as soon as you start to manipulate that, then you get what I think was always related psychedelic experiences.
People did acid trips to start thinking about things in a different way: they underwent a set of experiences that question fundamental structures about the nature of reality and the nature of personality.’
Which is another way of saying that the value of Blissing Out only really arrives when you choose to break back in.
Mark Sinker 
THE SHAMEN photographed by Mike Penn
ANTONIO ‘Chico’ Garcia — whose tribute to Jimi Hendrix was painted on a huge poster in Piccadilly Circus on the 20th anniversary of his death — is continuing his work with Wrangler.
Chico, whose street paintings were first used by the denim company in the ‘Crosstown Traffic’ advert, has now customised a number of their jackets with scenes of urban America to be used for promotional purposes and to raise money for charity.
With previous work including graffiti on the set of Batman and numerous ‘legal’ graffiti in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens, Chico is keen to spend time in England making similar run-down areas more colourful, which may, unfortunately, prove hard to legalise 
‘I box to pay the mortgage.
The majority of fighters are being exploited.
It's a mug's game’
CHRIS EUBANK
WORLD TITLE CONTENDER
‘I live this like a religion,’ says Chris Eubank, anticipating a question about his commitment to his chosen profession.
A Brighton-based boxer, Eubank is a middleweight world title contender the boxing critics love to beat up in print.
At 24, there is little of the pug image about him.
Eubank started his career in New York eight years ago, although born in Britain.
His brothers Simon and Peter Eubanks (Chris dropped the s , perhaps to give himself some breathing space) were both fighters, but Chris took a somewhat different approach.
With a detached air, he wears down his opponents with pure skill and occasional showboating, the flashy moves that a clearly superior boxer can get away with.
This is where the boxing  writers' grumble: they want to see you flatten your opponent, not display your moves.
‘You stay in the business longer and you won't get hurt with my approach.
The craft of boxing is to hit and not be hit,’ responds Eubank.
Critics seem to view this as a cowardice, as if a boxer should want his brains pulped.
Eubank is dismissive.
‘They say that because they're not in the ring.
It's ridiculous.
This is what they teach fighters in Britain and that's why most British fighters are only of a certain calibre.
Trainers teach fighters the wrong mentality.
I learnt in the South Bronx and the way you're taught there is a do or die situation.
You don't want to get hit.’
Eubank has a point.
Boxers can and do die in the ring.
The chances of Eubank ending up a punch-drunk boxing casualty are remote, and, likewise, he's sparing in the abuse of his victims.
His fight with Kid Milo this summer saw Eubank facing a badly cut opponent.
Other boxers would have tried to cause the maximum damage, but Eubank calmly waited for the referee to do his job properly and stop the fight.
Eubank isn't a fucked-up man venting aggression in the ring, he's a skilled professional, although he has the punch to destroy anyone in his division.
‘My power is not something I want to portray.
I don't care much for knocking people out — that is not the craft.
I train to go into the ring and have a boxing match, not just take an opponent out.
I knocked the guy out in my last fight in 20 seconds and that's good promotion — but I don't care for it.
No one has come near to me when it comes to boxing skills, and that's what I'm interested in.
‘To get anywhere in this game you've got to be stubborn, bombastic, what may appear to be ignorant.
You must become assertive, face realities.
To be a top fighter, your frame of mind is such that you're not normal.
You depend only on yourself — no matter who 's with you in training, it's only you in the ring.
I'm a transcendentalist in that I think for myself, no one tells me what to do in my career, my training.
The leaders of the world are messing up, so I'm following myself.
I do what I do to pay the mortgage.
I enjoy the craft, but I don't enjoy the business, the people you deal with.
The majority of fighters in the world are being exploited.
It's a mug's game.’
Does that mean he's a mug?
‘It's a mug's game and I happen to be very good at it.
You become a mug when you're getting beaten up and not getting paid for it, when you're being exploited, when you're getting hurt.
My mentality is make the money, pay my mortgage and get out.’
Eubank has seen what happened to his brothers — Peter, one-time conqueror of Barry McGuigan, was particularly talented — neither of which got the business end right.
‘They were mugged.
They listened to people who knew nothing about the game, to people who exploited them, people who taught them the wrong things.
I won't fall into that trap.’
Eubank's next fight is a much hyped challenge for Nigel Benn's World Boxing Organisation title, the lesser of the four world crowns.
There has always been a certain emnity between the two fighters, which, predictably, nearly exploded at the press conference announcing the match.
Benn relishes a ruck, Eubank cherishes his craft: it's the old boxer-versus-puncher cliché.
‘When Benn puts himself in my face and tries to discredit and disrespect me, I take that personally .
I am not a street fighter, I don't need to hate him to beat him.
I'll bide my time until I'm in the ring and then I'll prove that what I've studied and believe in is right.
Not only shall I win, I'll humiliate him.
Skill will prevail over power.
I've got power, but that's not what I'm trying to portray.
Benn is a stereotype fighter and I'm against that.
With all this hype and cheap talk they make the game look ignorant.
I want to bring the game out through skill so that the educated, the sensible and sensitive people can appreciate the skill of the game.’
Whether Eubank can ever actually get around the fact that boxing attracts crowds because people love to see two men beating each other up is for time to decide.
The most fêted boxer of all time, Muhammad Ali, was adored because of the skill he brought to the ring.
Eubank may not have Ali's skills, but it is hard to imagine him becoming as used by boxing as the great man was.
BJ McCann 
‘I don't want to be walking around in ten years' time with people shouting ‘Loadsamoney’ at me’
HARRY ENFIELD
COMEDIAN
‘I don't want to be walking around in ten years' time with people shouting ‘Loadsamoney’ at me’
Harry Enfield has just been through a tough day auditioning people for his new BBC comedy series.
This has mainly involved checking off names, shaking hands, sorting out cups of tea, making small talk and carefully noting down phone numbers.
The business of the audition is squeezed into all this in less time than it takes to shake a leg.
Which is exactly what Enfield is interested in seeing.
‘I'm looking for a partner for this new act, the Double-Take Brothers,’ he explains as he busies himself with tea-bags and mugs of boiling water in the back offices of Hat Trick, the Soho production company responsible for putting together the series.
‘Do you take milk?’ he asks.
‘Yeah, thanks,’ I reply.
He hollers and jumps back three feet, ‘You do?’
Then drops back into puttering amiability.
‘That's the kind of thing I've been making people do all day.
I want to see whether they can do a good double take.’
The whole interview is like this.
Throw Enfield a question and he'll bounce it around, knock off a few apt replies and then launch himself into one of the manic routines from the new show.
In our half-hour chat, I meet Little Brother (‘He always comes in when you want to shag your girlfriend’); the Gits (‘They like looking through the obituaries and camping out next to accident black spots’); Lee and Lance (‘a couple of garage owners, they spend all their time putting Garfield stickers on cars’); and Euro-Man (‘as far as he's concerned, the Euro-Parliament is just one big Amsterdam squat’).
When he's in the middle of doing a character, Enfield flaps and blows like an animated cartoon.
His eyes pop, his ears burn, his chin rolls out an extra volume.
It's as if he's possessed by some Looney Tune demon.
Then he snaps out of it, all dimpled innocence and fresh-faced cheek.
If he resembles anyone from the less-than-hallowed history of TV light entertainment, it's Dick Emery, with his gaggle of thumb-nail stereotypes and music hall turns.
It's a comparison which Enfield is surprisingly happy with.
‘That's fair enough.
I don't mind that at all.
The new show is very much that kind of format, except I won't be doing any vicars or skinheads.
And I won't be doing anything in drag.’
He also won't be doing Stavros or Loadsamoney, either.
They're over and done with.
‘I don't want to be walking down the street in ten years' time with people shouting ‘Loasdamoney’ at me,’he says.
‘It was bad enough at the time.
I did get a bit paranoid for a few months, stopped using the tube.
You know, you're standing there and you get, ‘What're you doin' on the tube, I thought you ‘ad loadsamoney, hur, hur.’ and there's nothing you can do.’
At the height of all the media fuss over a comic creation which was basically nothing more than a walking catch-phrase, it seemed as if Enfield's career was in danger of burning out before it had properly ignited.
One minute he was busking away on the cabaret circuit, the next he was on late-night TV, and then suddenly he was grinning all over the tabloids.
He barely had time to pay his dues, let alone think up any new material.
Luckily, Enfield had his writing partners, Paul Whitehead and Charlie Higson, to fall back on.
If he's been largely absent from the small screen for the last two years (the South Bank Show spoof,Norbert Smith , was a revamp of an old idea), that's because he's unplugged the phone, taken time out with his two old drinking pals and got down to the serious business of mucking about.
‘People think, ‘Oh, you just sit in the pub and observe.’
But it doesn't happen like that.
It's more that you just pick up on something.
Someone says something particularly stupid in a shop, or you wait half an hour in the British Rail canteen because someone can't decide whether they want some fruitcake or not.
The things you tell stories about to your friends afterwards, adding a few details here and there, until you suddenly realise you've got a character.’
It seems that the initial spark for any character is always something accidentally generated; a pub routine, a bus stop lark, an improvised evasion.
Some means of escaping the waiting time of boredom and temporary unemployment.
In many ways, it's the story of Enfield's whole comic career.
Here was a bloke who left York University with a 2.2 in politics and no idea what he wanted to do next.
So he made a go of permanently avoiding the issue.
Even though the new series looks good (with one of its highlights promising to be the small-screen debut of Paul Whitehead) and he has at least three other projects on the go, Harry Enfield still hasn't figured out what it is that he does exactly.
Not that he really cares.
He's just happy to get on with it.
‘When you come down to it, I'm getting paid for farting about all day long,’ he says.
‘I've got no complaints.’
Steve Beard 
DEMI MOORE giggles.
‘We're so boring that they have to make up stuff about us.’
She's talking about her film Ghost , and US tabloid reports claiming that husband Bruce Willis showed up on the day of her crucial love scene with Patrick Swayze wielding a baseball bat.
‘Another story was that Bruce came in one day with Rumer, our baby girl, and said, ‘That's mommy.
You remember mommy, don't you?’
There aren't an easy jobs in this wold, but our high public profile adds to the pressure.
I guess we just have to learn to live with people taking pot-shots at us.’
The film's unexpected success must have been a relief after her long maternity break, proof that she could come back: there are now talks of buddy pic with Madonna.
‘This is a tough town if you go away,’ admits Moore.
‘But I was so ready to become a mother, and I'm happy and more confident than I've been before.
I've grown up, basically.
Until recently, I was just amazed that I was doing this with a reasonable amount of success.
I started out in this business not having any concept about what an actor did.
It was something I felt driven to do — even if most of the time I felt that I was just faking it.
But now I feel that I actually have the ability.’
Sindre Kartvedt 
‘The club scene is quite fresh at the moment.
People are there for the music, not just to get totally shitfaced’
DANNY RAMPLING
DJ/ARTIST
The only real surprise about Danny Rampling's fine debut single ‘I Hate Hate’ is that it's taken so long for a DJ of his reputation to commit himself to vinyl.
But then, Danny rarely does things according to the book.
The man behind Shoom — a club that is now so legendary that if all the people who claim to have been there in its formative months really had attended, it would have been held in Wembley Stadium not in a sweaty south-east London basement — he resolutely refused to cash in on the boom that became known as acid.
‘I prefer to stay with what the scene started with — small parties,’ he says.
‘You can still make a bit of money and enjoy yourself without ripping people off.
I didn't agree with the big raves.
OK, it's fun to have that many people together, but it lost the whole meaning of the scene.
The peace vibe and friendliness was taken away by the greed.’
As a result, although his club was one of the first to develop Smiley culture, much to his relief Danny never became a tabloid Mr Big.
Indeed, when the rave scene threatened to swamp it, he closed Shoom for good.
‘What we started out with was totally different to how it ended up.
That upset me.
I wish people had looked deeper and seen if for what it was — breaking down all those barriers and giving people a good time.
Before that scene came along, it was quite hard to go out on your own and meet new people, and for a while that was possible.
Now people aren't as open, but that's because they got taken advantage of.’
It was at Shoom that Danny first met Steve Eusebe, the tall, dreadlocked singer who fronts the single, a mellow house groove with deep, soulful vocals that you would swear came straight from a gospel-trained Chicago house singer if you hadn't already caught the London inflections.
A cover version of an independent soul track from the collection of DJ Bob Jones, it was originally released in 1974 by one Razzy Bailey.
‘It didn't make it then, but the whole message of the song, the vibe was good,’ says Danny.
‘I loved the lyrics, because it was keeping the Shoom message going through music.’
DANNY RAMPLING AND STEVE EUSEBE photographed by Patrick Harrison
Depending on reactions to this first effort, there may be more tracks to ‘get more people involved from the club’, but Danny is unwilling to commit himself to anything except his work as a DJ —‘I love it and I'd never give it up for anything.’
Apart from his weekly show on Kiss FM, he has a regular night at London's Milk Bar as well as weekend guest spots, and a possible UK tour as part of a package put together by his label, Creation.
‘The club scene is quite fresh at the moment, it's got exciting again.
It's gone back into smaller venues, and people are there for the music, not just to get totally shitfaced.
It's getting back to a sensible level again, and the music — especially the British music — is really pushing forward.’
‘We've proved we can do it, and we're more innovative at the moment than the Americans,’ says Steve, who admits his career would have been far more difficult without the success of groups like Soul II Soul.
‘Acid house was nothing to what's in store,’ he says, and Danny nods excitedly in agreement: ‘Who knows what's going to come along in the next few years?’
Sheryl Garratt 
TEN TRACKS for autumn — Danny Rampling's recommendations: Eve ‘Love Come Down’(More Protein); Camachos Project ‘Slave’(US Nu-Groove); Crazy Eddie ‘Nena De Ibiza’(Creation); Rumbledub ‘God Is In The House’(white label); Be Big ‘That's When It's Gold’(10); Rio Rhythm Band ‘Carnivale de Case’(white label); Pleasure Inc ‘Sexy Dancer’(US New World); Leslie Sunder ‘One In A Million’(Major Force); Lupo ‘Keep It Up’(Low Spirit); Danny Rampling ‘I Hate Hate’(Creation)
WHAT'S going on?
Donovan, the folk guru who was a git in the Sixties with grooves such as‘Goo Goo Barabajagal’ and ‘Mellow Yellow’, has come back into vogue.
Artists from the Happy Mondays and the Butthole Surfers to The Adult Net (Brix Smith has now pulled in boyfriend Nigel Kennedy) have decided to record his songs, and London trio No Man released a version of ‘Colours’ in the summer.
Cashing in on the interest, Donovan is releasing his own album later this year.
Will The Charlatans or the Roses be queueing to cover his new material?
DISINFORMATION
Bullfighting may be about grace and beauty, a poetic dance between man and beast, but it all comes down to the kill.
Having weakened the bull, the matador in this Madrid fight at the last moment refused to deliver the fatal thrust.
Denied the blood they'd paid to see, the crowd went wild, with outraged spectators throwing down fireworks, coins, even sections of seating.
The hapless matador eventually managed to leave the arena under heavy police protection; the fate of the bull was not documented.
SCENARIO
A nasty dictatorship wants to grab a neighbouring country.
It invades.
The UN backs sending international forces to the area.
In practice, it's an American operation with minor contingents from other countries under the US wing — and under US direction.
The American commanders are far more gung-ho than the politicians in Washington, and pressure mounts for an all-out attack on the enemy, including massive air strikes.
To avoid embarrassment, the US president is forced to sack a particularly outspoken general.
That was 40 years ago.
The UN forces went into South Korea with the aim of pushing the North Korean invaders back to the border.
But commander-in-chief Douglas MacArthur wanted to play for higher stakes.
His goal was to neutralise the ability of the North Koreans' Chinese backers to make war for generations to come.
Eventually, he demanded a couple of dozen atomic bombs to do the job.
General Michael Dugan, the US Air Force Chief of Staff sacked recently by Defense Secretary Richard Cheney, is no MacArthur.
All he wanted to do was bomb ‘downtown Baghdad’.
He's not the only one — but he made the mistake of telling it to the Washington Post .
And many influential Americans agree that getting Saddam out of Kuwait is not enough: there's plenty of talk about the need to neutralise Iraq's warmongering capacity for ‘a generation’.
Nearly three million people died in the Korean War.
The North Korean leader, Kim II Sung, is still in power 
General Douglas MacArthur: heard it all before?
WHAT do you do with an MP who says Hitler was ‘chosen by providence’ and calls the Third Reich ‘glorious times’?
If you're the new united German diplomatic corps, the answer's obvious — send him off to be ambassador to Austria.
Envoy Philipp Jenninger and President Kurt Waldheim should get on like a Reichstag on fire 
New faces of dictatorship: keep time with these Saddam Hussein watches, US$135 each from Baghdad's old market
CHANNEL Tunnel security squads are ready for the rabies menace.
Slavering foxes will be stopped from trotting down 30 miles of tunnel by ten-foot fences, electric ‘stun mats' and being shot with humane killers.
The airborne threat is harder to deal with, but bat patrols will be mounted.
Chunnel cynics think the high profile of the rabies defences is meant to draw attention away from the real hazards of what's been called the longest crematorium in the world
WHILE America's eyes are fixed on the Gulf, at least one US official hasn't forgotten the enemy within — marijuana smokers.
Take them outside and shoot them, LA police chief Daryl F. Gates told a Senate hearing.
And even people ‘who blast some pot on a casual basis’ are guilty of ‘treason’.
The House Armed Services Committee is wet by comparison.
All it wants to do is dump drug offenders on ‘extremely remote Pacific islands’
HEARD about the Skoda that's made of concrete and runs on uranium?
Westinghouse Electric hopes you soon will.
America's leading supplier of nuclear power stations has chosen the legendary Czech firm as its global partner.
Maybe it hopes the plants will become a cult
IT'S been a good year for German neo-Nazis.
West Germany's internal intelligence agency reported a tally of 35,900 activists, up 28 per cent on last year.
That's not counting the 28,000-strong Republikaner party; although they're the fascist group with the highest profile, they're not considered extremist
A FEW years back, Neville Brody had a go at redesigning the CND logo.
In the end, he decided it was a classic he couldn't improve on.
Not so CND house designer John Parke, who produced the anti warmongers' new hallmark.
Parke thought the old version was ‘a bit Seventies’, and went for something ‘more authoritative’(below).
More respectable, in other words?
Parke doesn't deny it, noting a shift from protesting outside bases towards well-mannered lobbying in the corridors of power.
But, he says, there have been no complaints from the grassroots
NOW THAT the Second World of formerly communist countries is falling over itself to join the First World, the name ‘Third World’ suits the rest of the planet less well than ever.
Whatever it's called, though, one of the most gloomy facts about it is that it now spends more on weapons than on health and education put together
NOW pounding the pavements of Greenwich Village: the Pink Panthers.
The teams of volunteers have been formed to counter gay-bashing attacks.
Over here, there have been calls for the Guardian Angels to set up a chapter of Pink Angels.
Anything to lose those stupid berets……
THE heady air of freedom must have gone to the PM's head on her jaunt to Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
Tomorrow's Europe must have a Bill of Rights and a Thatcher Carta, she cried, despite being about as keen on a Bill of Rights for Britain and a Social Charter for today's EC as she is on workers' soviets
Let's have more pictures of threatened animals in THE FACE, says reader Waldemar Januszczak of Clerkenwell, London.
Delighted to oblige, Wal!
This little beast is an indri, and it lives in Madagascar.
One of our fellow primates, the two-foot-long lemur is vegetarian, monogamous, and makes a noise like a saxaphone.
Male indris respect female rights, waiting at the bottom of trees until the females have finished feeding (and getting a clip round the ear if they don't).
In fact, the indri is an utterly Nineties creature — not least because it doesn't look like surviving much longer than the decade.
Indris and other lemurs are endangered by deforestation, carried out by Madagascar's impoverished human population.
Do you have a favourite endangered species you'd like to see in Disinformation?
Write and tell us.
(No invertebrates.)
MARGINS
News footage showing an angry crowd mobbing badger baiters as they entered a courtroom for trial suggests that there is something especially odious about using dogs to tear badgers apart.
I despise the idea and practice of blood sports, but this violent reaction threw up a profile of wildly inconsistent attitudes which puzzles me; how is it that fox hunting is legal and fishing is the most popular outdoor recreational activity in Britain, yet badger killing invokes a desire for public retribution — lynch mob fever, almost — over and above the punishment of the courts?
Do tourists go abroad and mob octopus catchers, swordfish slayers, monkfish murderers?
No, they do not.
They tuck in
It is not good enough to say that badgers are lovely creatures; so are foxes and salmon.
Badger Watch is a popular TV programme, something of a cult among those of us who relish the fact that television can risk screen time on static shots of holes in the ground, but then so is Reef Watch,a reliably sumptuous visual meditation on our fishy brethren.
Do tourists go abroad and mob octopus catchers, swordfish slayers, monkish murderers?
No, they do not.
They tuck in.
Are fish shops besieged by angry crowds carrying ‘Filleting fish is not funny’ placards?
No.
If you suspect that this is leading up to a tirade about vegetables suffering pain, flowers having feelings and ants being cleverer than humans, then I am sorry to disappoint you.
I have only seen one badger in the so-called ‘wild’, caught in the beam of car headlights as it dashed across a small country road in Cornwall.
The thrill was out of all proportion to the event, of course, and serves only to reflect the overwhelmingly domesticated aspect of much British countryside, dominated as it is by cows and sheep, as well as some of what historian Keith Thomas has called ‘our anti-urban bias’.
The fantasy of a rural arcadia — a myth that has already been condemned by both Margaret Thatcher and the Archbishop of Canterbury — is not, I hope, something I suffer from.
On the other hand, though, it has to be said that some of the local urban excitements have been on the tame side recently: a swimming pool murder, an outbreak of cholesterol war between rival pizza outlets, the car that drove into the non-drive-in dry cleaners, and so on.
Looking at the bigger picture, there is, perhaps, some link between the extreme reaction against badger torturers and urban, cultural trends.
Put it this way.
There is an aesthetic, if we can dignify it with that word, which distinguishes blood sports from each other.
To quote Thomas again, writing about the history of cruelty to animals in his book,Man And The Natural World : ‘…the methods of pursuit, capture and kill were highly stylized…’
There are profound differences, obviously, between blasting birds out of the sky with a shotgun, sitting quietly on a riverbank waiting for the fish to bit, chasing foxes or stags over open country on horseback or sending dogs down a hole to dismember badgers.
The consequences for the animal are ultimately identical, but for the humans their actions are couched in a class-ridden dressing of either romanticism or oafish brutality.
Clearly the most ghastly image is that of the badger, at bay in its subterranean home.
Some fear lurks within; butchery in tunnels — a nightmare terror of entrapment, claustrophobia, premature burial, which, at the same time, evokes a contradictory appeal of the underground as a womb-like refuge or a clandestine network of opportunities for proscribed behaviour.
As the London Underground becomes more dishevelled and unpredictable, so the number of suicides who throw themselves on to the track seems to increase.
Is that because of a heightened awareness of the dangers of tube travel, or do statistics bear out the intuition that death by subterranean dismemberment is one of the current favourites?
People talk about ‘underground’ now with a funny mixture of excitement and resignation: artists, image-makers, mediacrats ‘n' brats shaken by the collapse of arts funding, the drive towards mainstream art business sponsorship, the pinch of censorship, absurdities such as the proposed ‘impartiality’amendment to the Broadcasting Bill, the oppressive pressures of being simultaneously controversial, safe, presentable, marketable, accessible, new, glamorous and radical.
Musicians have been withdrawing from mainstream record companies, aware that success means a lifetime of Elton John remixes and failure is the void of an imprisoning contract and no action.
As science fiction writer John Shirley wrote in an essay called Beyond Cyberpunk: The New Science Fiction Underground , in last year's Science Fiction Eye,‘Like influenza and sexual desire, the alternative press comes and goes in cycles.’
A few years ago you would not have caught me talking about underground publishing; I have too many bad memories from the Seventies.
But, for the moment, the cycle has turned.
Every Underground movement that goes overground is devoured by banality.
I was surprised, yet strangely pleased, to discover that the worst seller so far on the exemplary, semi-underground techno label Network has been ‘Mood’ /‘Science of Numbers’/‘Tear Drops of Yesterday’by Symbols And Instruments.
As one of the best records of 1990 it was actually a lucky escape that it sold so few copies, missed Top Of The Pops , slipped the chance of a slot on youth TV and lost the chase for Sunday newspaper publicity.
I am sure neither the record company nor Symbols And Instruments share my view, but wait until the mass media gets its claws into the return of the underground.
Badger baiting may seem bloodless by comparison.
By DAVID TOOP