

It was a pretty churchyard.
An ugly church, monstrous and vulgar as the cloth merchants who had built it.
But a pretty churchyard.
Hubert Gaily liked churchyards, they gave him a curious sense of well-being.
If the worst of it all, he often thought, ended in a place like this, then nothing was ever so bad as you pretended.
Ma agreed with that.
Ma had some nice opinions on churchyards.
‘Churchyards are the way of nature,’ she said, ‘not like those Crems.
People forget you too quick if you're burned up.
They don't find it so comfortable to forget you with a nice headstone.’
The headstones here were all erect and orderly, close-shaven, loyally inscribed.
Hands in his clay-coloured raincoat, Gaily, myopic, bent down and read one at random, wonderingly.
SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF ALOYSIUS ALBERT QUENTIN SAVAGE SON OF ALBERT AND JEMIMA SAVAGE BORN FEBRUARY 5 1801 DIED DECEMBER 28 1883 Quidquid agas prudenter agas et respice finem
Gaily straightened up.
His bus was about due.
Above his  head, above the outrageous tower, rooks wheeled and the sky was crimped and furrowed like the underside of tripe.
At his feet were seven early snowdrops, fronded with grass.
Gaily picked them — they did not belong to any grave — to take to Ma.
She liked flowers, liked even more the thought behind them, but Gaily only remembered when he caught them staring him in the face — or in the feet, as now.
He took a last look at the green churchyard, turned up his collar and picked his way respectfully round the side of the church.
At the head of the path, beside the porch, Gaily stopped snowdrops in hand.
A funeral cortége was making its way towards him.
The Reverend George Jocelyn Bottingley, six feet four and stooped like a crane, awaited them inside the porch.
It upset him that all the mourners should be women.
Thirty, forty years ago, that would not have been allowed to happen, and fifty years ago, the women would not have been allowed here at all.
Male mourners only.
For funerals, the Reverend Bottingley felt, were not a woman's occasion, they were too hard on the emotions, and on the feet and knees, and he did not like to see women weep in public.
Not, he observed, raising his eyes a little, reverently, as they approached, not that any of these women were weeping.
Their faces were tucked and grey, scooped out or nerveless, but they were tearless faces.
Poor Miss Lavender (Miss Faith, the eldest Lavender), he thought.
And then thought again.
For Miss Lavender would not, perhaps, have cared, Miss Lavender would never have cried at her own funeral.
They had reached him, with Miss Faith Lavender alone in her grained and silk-lined box.
They shuffled on the gravel, and a February gust cut cold across the green churchyard.
The Reverend George Jocelyn Bottingley turned and bowed his head.
Hubert Gaily was not in the habit of thieving, still less of being caught thieving.
Standing before the coffin, with seven stolen snowdrops in his hands, he flushed with shame.
The fact that nobody noticed him, let alone the flowers, did not give him ease of conscience, but that was what he sought.
Pointless, quite, to return and replace the plucked stems.
In the end, Gaily followed the clergyman, the coffin, and the small bunch of women, black as crows, into the dust-smelling church.
It was the least he could do.
As he passed through the doorway, he heard his bus go grinding by the church and away up the hill.
Twenty-three miles away, at Number 14, Maxstone Villas, Mrs Ada Gaily decided to defrost the refrigerator.
She had no idea how to go about it but she disliked waking an hour early from her rest and having nothing to do, and she disliked even more the idea that there was some household task or mechanical appliance which might defeat her.
Ada Gaily had known how to do things all her life.
The very reason she had always forbidden him to bring a refrigerator into the house was this fear that, because she was old and no longer so quick of eye and nimble of hand and foot, it might defeat her.
The television had not defeated her because nothing had ever gone wrong with it, and it had only to be switched on and off or, scarcely more complicated, over.
In any case, the television provided entertainment, information and company and Ada Gaily knew when to keep quiet.
Refrigerators were different.
‘I'll not have one in the house,’ she had said, ‘we've a larder haven't we?’
‘The food goes bad.’
‘I'll thank you to remember when you ever ate bad food, in all the years I reared you and there were no refrigerators.’
‘Fishmongers had them,’ Gaily had said.
‘Fishmongers had ice.
Slabs of ice.’
‘Refrigerators make ice.’
‘You'll not bring one into this house.’
But he had brought one.
Ada Gaily had begun to realise just how much her son did in spite of her.
Secretly, under layers and wads of protest, was her admission that he was right, that these things were for the best.
Like the refrigerator, which she was determined to defrost before he came home.
Gaily knew very little about the ways of church services, and so he sat halfway towards the back, looking at the coffin and the windows full of pale saints carrying lilies and the dust motes in the groin of the roof.
His snowdrops were already wilting like wax candles in the warmth of his hand, and as he copied the mourners ahead of him and stood up, one flower slipped between his fingers on to the rust-coloured floor.
Gaily dared not bend to retrieve it.
At that moment, they were passing slowly by him on their way out, the tall parson with the crumpled clown's face, the coffin with its bearers, the black-clad women.
This time, one by one, they noticed Gaily.
He stared down at his hands as each pair of eyes ran over him swiftly, took in his face and his boots, his snowdrops and his clay-coloured raincoat.
Each pair of eyes questioned and then looked away, wondering.
Gaily followed them at a discreet distance and watched as they lowered Miss Faith Lavender into her last resting place.
After they had all begun to move away, twitching up astrakhan collars, eyeing him sharply, Gaily remained beside the new grave.
He examined the three wreaths:
‘From Kathleen and Isabel, with our dear love and remembrance.’
‘Remembering always my dear friend Faith, with deep affection, Alida Thorne.’
‘With love from Dorothea.’
And a thin sheaf of forced daffodils, ‘From the Reverend and Mrs G. J. Bottingley.’
Then, Hubert Gaily dropped the six remaining snowdrops on to the coffin.
They made a faint brushing sound as they fell.
It was not a sentimental gesture, and Gaily felt nothing save curiosity, though there was, perhaps, a slight element of touching wood.
But he was a man for the proprieties.
The stolen flowers had been, in a manner of speaking, restored.
It was the least he could do.
Gaily turned away, the last to leave Miss Faith Lavender in the green churchyard.
‘An old flame, perhaps,’ suggested Dorothea who, often an unthinking woman, felt vaguely that the afternoon might now benefit from a stroke of the unlikely.
She should not have done so.
The other three turned their eyes on her like a trio of hanging judges.
They had no need to speak and they did not do so.
Dorothea flushed from neck to hairline and, bending her head, took a sip from her tea-cup.
But there were only soft, cold leaves remaining, and they got sucked in beneath her plate, to rest there clammily until she could get away to the bathroom.
Alida shot her a glance of triumph.
‘I noticed,’ Isabel Lavender said, ‘that he wore boots .’
Through Dorothea's head flitted the tune, but she had been too facetious already, to her shame.
If she was really too old to cure herself of facetious thoughts , at least she could bite them back from the tip of her tongue.
So she kept the tune trapped in and it marched up and down inside her head.
Isabel was going on about the boots.
‘Black,’ she said, ‘well polished and without broken laces.
But they were boots.’
‘And yet he wore a collar and tie,’ put in Kathleen, tipping Madeira cake crumbs deftly from her plate into the little blue tin always brought in for that purpose with the tea trolley.
Dorothea had often wondered about the crumbs, whether they stored them up in some kitchen jar and you got them, months later, coating your fish.
The two remaining Misses Lavender continued to discuss the stranger at the funeral.
Alida Thorne, who had not finished eating, listened, her thick jaws chomping up and down, her back turned just perceptibly to Dorothea.
Dorothea Shottery herself was bewildered.
As far as she could remember, she had never seen the man before, he was no friend of Faith's.
And even if he were?
All this talk of his clothes, his grubby raincoat, his boots — what did they matter?
He was a man at Faith's funeral and they should be grateful to him, shouldn't they?
For what a poor showing they had made, the four of them, that afternoon!
Of all Faith's friends, of all the correspondents and Visitors, who had come?
Every one had slipped away into the mists during the past two or three years until only she, Dorothea, was left.
Alida was really the sisters' friend.
It was not much, for a lifetime, two sisters, and a handful of neighbours.
Whoever the man had been, with his blue eyes and thinning hair, Dorothea was grateful to him for his presence.
She said, ‘Anyhow, it was kind of him to stay.’
The eyes turned on her again.
‘Yes, Dorothea,’ said Isabel Lavender, her small mouth pointing the consonants, ‘but you could hardly say he took part .’
‘He hung about,’ said Alida Thorne.
Dorothea still protested.
‘He was probably a stranger — just a visitor,’ she said, ‘who might easily have rushed away.
So polite….’
Isabel Lavender pursed up her mouth.
The conversation was at an end.
But the women continued to think about Hubert Gaily's presence at the funeral.
Dorothea merely remembered  it, occasionally, with gratitude.
Alida thought about the man once, to decide that he was not worth thinking about, and then though t no more.
Isabel and Kathleen Lavender, however, gave considerably more attention and care to the subject in the silence of their own minds.
But they would not be ready for some time to admit the fact to one another.
The tea trolley was wheeled out.
Behind the net curtain, the sun was setting on cushions of soft mauve, pearl and beige.
No further conversation was opened, no invitation to supper was proffered, and so Dorothea could do nothing else but leave for home.
Isabel's quick kiss was like the peck of a very small bird, Kathleen's cheek was downy as a fern-leaf but as cold.
Out of view of the front window, in the last light of a late February sun, Dorothea Shottery wept a little, for her own loneliness and for the absence of her friend.
Ada Gaily had remembered to switch off the refrigerator.
Indeed, to make quite sure, she had switched off everything, electricity, gas and water, at the mains.
She put a red plastic bowl on the refrigerator floor and sat down to wait for the ice to melt.
She half-expected it to be a beautiful sight, the white-furred blocks crumbling and cracking like Arctic floes under the August sun.
From below the Welsh dresser, the cat watched with sulphurous eyes, disturbed by this small change of routine.
Her son would be annoyed.
His hand would come up to his head and he would wipe back his hair in a little, unconscious gesture of annoyance.
Ada Gaily grinned, squatting on the kitchen chair.
Let him be.
When, after perhaps quarter of an hour, the ice was opaque and solid as ever around the sides of the refrigerator, she became impatient and tried to chip at it, first with her fingers and then, finding them painful as well as useless, with the  point of a kitchen knife.
But she had to bend almost double and she was too large a woman, thickly fleshed, for that.
At the last, clumsy thrust of her knife, a sharp sliver of ice chipped off the surface and flew into her eye.
It hurt enough to frighten her and she was not a woman easily frightened.
At the kitchen door, the cat, neck-fur upstanding like the spines of a hedgehog, wailed to be let out.
Ada Gaily was seventy-four.
A recalcitrant refrigerator, an aching back, an eye stinging with pain, a wailing cat, any of these would have sapped a lesser woman's determination.
But to her they merely served as spurs and she was used to those.
The texture of her life was roughened with the stubble of physical work, lack of money, personal and public sorrow.
The world believed that women like Ada Gaily were uncomplaining; the world was wrong.
Ada Gaily complained, had always complained, loud and long and bitterly, against the tenor of her life.
The descant accompanying it for fifty years had been one of complaint.
But complaint was — had to be — an end in itself.
It was a small release, like swearing or spitting.
Ada believed that nobody could grudge you the right to complain.
Now, she hitched herself upright, ejected the cat, and sat down again to think about the refrigerator.
Heat, plainly, was needed but in what form she was unsure.
Always a resourceful woman, Ada Gaily knew she would come up with the solution.
Meanwhile, she dabbed her handkerchief at her eye, ate a soft-centred peppermint and wondered where her son had gone.
But he was coming back.
From the Village which was called Haverstock, through twenty miles of Warwickshire countryside and three of brick and brown Midlands, home to 14 Maxstone Villas.
All the way, on the back seat of the long bus, Gaily smoked a Park Drive and thought about death and dying.
You had to  think of it, now and then.
Ma was seventy-four.
You had to admit the possibility.
Out of the bus window he saw a manor house, with barley-sugar-stick chimneys.
He enjoyed his days out.
Of course, she might have another twenty years, which would make him seventy-four and what would there be left to speak of then?
Gaily looked back over his shoulder at the rosy-bricked manor house, for he was too near to remembering the time he had wished his mother dead.
He cringed from that single revelation of himself and of his motive, even while knowing it wasn't really true to his nature, that the instance had come, gone and never would return.
It was just after he had come home in 1945, with his raw imagination still straining to assimilate the only excitements of his life and the strange dust of Italy and Egypt still upon his boots.
Returning to his old job, he'd learned of the opportunity.
L.M.S.
would give selected staff a London training, to be followed, if you were lucky, by a London job — at Euston, or King's Cross, or at least a post in one of the large cities, at Snow Hill, Crewe or even Edinburgh.
Gaily had thought he stood a chance.
He had eleven years' good service before the start of war.
He was not clever but he was interested and thorough.
A reliable man.
‘Take your chance,’ Monks had said, Monks his friend, who was already accepted.
‘Take your chance and come with me, you'll do no good stopping here.’
Monks' curry-coloured eyes had filmed over lasciviously at the vision of London, of freedom and promotion and advance.
That night, Gaily had told his mother, told her, not asked her, since he was thirty-two now and master of the house.
Ma had sat, large, aproned, silent, whilst he talked.
On the mantelpiece, above and between them, stood his father's photograph.
When Gaily had finished, he sat back, his heavy legs sprawled anyhow over the hearth, and ran an anxious hand over his already thin hair.
Ma Gaily had not spoken.
On either side of the shiny-faced photograph of Harold Herbert Gaily were four more photographs, two pairs.
On the right, nearest his father, Hubert, best-suited school-leaver with a downy boy's face and sharp cheek-bones.
Next to him, Eric, the long-dead little brother.
On the left were his sisters, May, in Australia, and Alice, gone on the first available post-war ship to America and her man.
Gaily felt them looming over him.
‘Well,’ he said tonelessly, shifting.
Ma heaved off her chair.
‘So you'll be gone too, then,’ she had said, her own voice flat as lead.
She went off into the kitchen.
Gaily had shaken his head.
He knew that he would not.
Only once had he let himself begrudge it, only once, that night, and never since, for he knew it was his duty and his right to stay at home with her.
He was too much a man of his tradition to resent it, to take flight.
And he knew he had not the justification of genius.
He had none of Monks' clever ideas.
All the same, that night Gaily had wished her dead.
Then he might have gone with Monks.
The bus stopped to pick up a passenger off one of the first terraced streets of the town.
She was old, small, shrunken, a woman unlike his mother, to blow away with a single puff.
Gaily was again reminded of death.
He got up, as the only other occupant of the long bus, to help her to her seat.
‘Lovely,’ she said, appreciative of his firm grip.
A reliable man.
The smell, when he opened the front door, took him back half a century.
Electricity was erratic in the old, two-up, two-down house and as often as not the children had gone to bed with candles.
It was candles Gaily smelled now, the thick, snuffed-out smell of candle-smoke.
Ma peered at him over the top of the evening paper, Her eyes were shifty with guilt.
She said nothing.
Gaily followed the trail of the smell.
‘God help us!’ he said, finding it, ‘God help us!’
Except that it seemed to him rather funny.
Upon the rack  immediately below the ice-box was a tin baking sheet and stuck on to the baking sheet were innumerable dirty candle-stubs.
But the ice was still inches thick, furred as tongues, and the smell hung acrid inside the refrigerator doors.
When he went back into the room, she got her word in first.
‘You can say what you like,’ she said, ‘but show me another way it can be done.
You show me.
Because it can't.
It can't be done.’
It sounded defiant but they both knew it was defensive.
‘I've tried all ways.’
Her eyes never lifted from the newspaper.
‘You'd no call,’ Gaily said, standing his ground, ‘no call to try anything.’
‘No machine has ever seen me beaten.’
‘Candles !’ he said, but half-laughing at her enterprise.
‘Lighting candles!’
‘Common-sense.’
‘It's common-sense the ice'd drip and wet them all out.’
‘I'm not arguing.’
‘The food'll smell.
Smell of smoke.’
‘There's other places to put the food.
Always has been.
I never wanted one in the house.’
There were layers of Gaily's patience, built up grain by grain over the years like geological strata.
‘You switch the refrigerator knob to zero, you pull out the plug and you put a bowl of boiling water inside,’ he explained sweetly.
‘And you leave it.
An hour, two hours.
Changing the water every now and then.’
‘There's a man here,’ Ma said with an air of wonder, ‘been down a pothole for one hundred and thirteen days.
Now why would anybody want to do a thing like that?
I don't see it, myself.’
‘Next time you think a job needs doing,’ he said, knowing her to be listening, ‘tell me.
I know the way of things.’
‘Black as pitch,’ she said, ‘I don't get it.
Might just as well bury yourself alive.’
A picture flitted across Gaily's mind.
‘I went to a funeral  today,’ he said.
She glanced up.
The pupils of her eyes, black as sloes, dilated a little.
‘Fancy,’ she said.
Gaily turned back into the kitchen.
It was a tiny, unjustifiable triumph and he felt mean.
She came heavily in.
‘Get out of the way,’ she said, flapping at him.
‘Get out, you want your tea, don't you?
Get your great body out of my way.’
He knew better than to offer help, after all these years.
Neither of them spoke again until she brought his meal to the table.
‘Anyhow,’ she said, setting it down.
‘You can't expect me to go hefting bowls of boiling water.
Not at my age.
You've no call to expect that.’
She sat down.
‘I near blinded my eye as it was.
Flies up like coal under the hammer.’
‘What?’
‘Yes,’ she said, and put a dainty forkful of fish — it was one of her distinctions, this dainty way of eating — into her mouth.
Gaily sighed.
‘I can't carry bowls of boiling water about the place,’ she observed again to the bread and butter plate.
Gaily fought against any reply.
‘Whose funeral was it then?’ she asked, her composure about the subject regained now.
It hadn't been fair to hurl it at her.
‘Miss Faith Lavender,’ he said, giving the words more sonority than they deserved.
‘Oh,’ she waited a second.
Gaily allowed himself a smile.
‘Friend of yours?’
‘You could say that.’
‘Speak plain!’
She snapped, ‘I can't do with that.’
‘I wonder what he thought about, down the pothole all that time,’ Gaily said.
‘You didn't tell me anyone had died.’
‘No.’
‘So she was a friend of yours, then?’
‘Yes,’ he lied.
Ma frowned.
Quits, he thought.
Among the petit-point and apple-green cushions of her bedroom, Alida Thorne stood, waiting for the postman.
From behind the ruched net curtains, she could see him plodding his way around the green.
Alida Thorne, soft and nerveless and firmly-bounded as a fruit, expected at least one, possibly two, small parcels.
Since her inheritance, ten years ago, all her pleasures and hopes and excitements had come to her in such small parcels.
Perhaps more than the end of work, these had continued to spell riches and freedom.
Or no, she thought, no — for that last, golden day at the girls' preparatory school, which had coincided with her fifty-first birthday, that had been a joy such as she had never dared to hope for, a once-in-a-lifetime joy.
Aunt Fosters had died at the right time.
Wasn't that a hideous thought to have?
Yes, probably, but it did not lessen her joy in the past ten years of leisured, ladylike existence and in the arrival of innumerable small parcels.
Hearing a slight sound, a scraping noise through the wall, Alida, though she ignored it, stiffened her corseted thighs, Aunt Fosters, her mother's last surviving sister, might have had the wit and grace to die in time but it was not a family trait.
Alida knew better than to follow up that particular avenue of thought.
All the same, watching the thin, lemon beam of sun catch across the postman's bicycle bars, she let herself think it unfair that her dear friend, Faith Lavender, should  have died so suddenly and so much younger than the husk of a woman left in the next room.
Blattern the postman reached her gate.
He propped up his bicycle and opened his bag.
He took out two small parcels.
Alida Thorne turned away from the window with a pursed smile of pleasure.
‘Seven counties,’ she told him wonderingly, ‘Imagine that!
Seven counties.’
For that was what she had been brought up to believe, that was how the rhyme went:
God rolled seven counties
Down Tantamount Hill.
They fell at the bottom,
They lie there still.
‘Imagine that!’ she had said again, to her escort, who wore white gloves, of course, because it was evening, but whose name she could never remember — it might have been any one of half a dozen — and whose fresh, young face was in shadow.
He must have been a stranger to the village, that was why she was telling him.
And he seemed to disbelieve her, which was ill-mannered.
Eleanor Thorne changed her mind about her partner.
‘I would like to go back now,’ she announced, and they set off down the grassy path in the scented April darkness, back to The Gantry.
Other couples wandered in their wake, or else lingered on the hilltop by the Commemorative stone, happier in their partners.
For, of course, you could not see to the foot of the hill, let alone seven counties, under the stars.
‘Seven counties,’ Eleanor repeated as he held open the pad’dock gate.
‘Seven counties….’
Eleanor Thorne jerked her head on the pillow and opened her eyes, awakening in time to hear the echo of her own voice.
‘What was I saying?’
And then, ‘Did Alida hear?’
For she was afraid, nowadays, of what she said aloud, foolish things, remarks made to other people, in her dreams, in the past, remarks she repeated now accidentally.
Her curtain blew in the wind and the wind found its way to her face.
Cold.
December, was it?
Or April?
No, it had been April then.
April.
What a sharp, sneering face he had had, though she could not see it, as she had not seen it in the darkness of her dream.
Not to believe her, not to believe what everybody knew, what was proven and accepted.
Her hand on the sheet was a little stiff.
For a moment, Eleanor Thorne did not recognise it and wondered whose hand it might be.
As a girl, she had had beautiful hands: someone had asked to photograph them.
Had they photographed them?
She wondered, until the wind shifted the curtains again and she felt the cold of February, a February morning, for that was what it was, and her room empty.
‘Alida,’ she said, and then — as she thought — shouted, ‘Alida.’
I would like a drink, she decided, a hot drink.
The curtain was sucked sharply outwards again.
She could not make out the patch of canary-coloured light on the opposite wall, could not make out why the sun was shining and why her brown-stained hand, on the sheet, would not move for cold.
Was it too soon to wear Faith's amethyst brooch?
Isabel Lavender was sensitive to propriety but other people would be still more sensitive.
Her ears caught the echoes of future remarks.
‘And her sister hardly cold….’
There had been nothing written, only a long-standing tacit agreement about the brooch.
Isabel had always understood Faith to mean that she should have it.
And certain other pieces.
Kathleen had never been one for jewellery and the amethyst picked up the heather mauve of Isabel's new dress and even, she thought, gave something of a fresh nuance to her mist-blue eyes.
Only a week had passed.
She was unsure.
She tried it on, high at the neck, to the left side, to the right side.
No, it was best dead centre, just as Faith would never have worn it.
And why shouldn't she have it?
It was little enough to expect.
As a young girl, Isabel Lavender had expected a great deal.
She had known hope.
She had stood up, full-breasted and straight-spined, in church and sang lustily about the virtues of right.
She had assumed that God and goodness, and therefore luck and all earthly and spiritual rewards, were on her side.
Unconsciously assumed since her faith necessitated the admission of man's utter unworthiness and the unmerited grace of God.
She had heard and read about the sufferings of innocence, she had observed sorrows and tragedies in those around her.
But, for a long time, she had neither the intelligence nor the insight to associate them with herself.
Health and strength and a certain robust attractiveness had been hers, good marks in the classroom, an ear for music, parental praise, had been hers.
Therefore, hope had been hers, too.
Isabel Lavender had never for one moment doubted that everything would somehow, eventually, go her way, though she could accept the idea of temporary setbacks.
Not that she had wanted very much: admiration, long-lasting good teeth, a well-placed husband, town rather than country life.
She had hoped even more confidently that certain things would not come her way.
At the age of twenty-eight she had awakened one morning to the realisation, clear as dawn, that to hope for things did not necessarily bring them about, that there was no earthly reason why she should be happy, healthy and husbanded.
She had looked out of her bedroom window upon an unjust world, upon undeserved sadness, upon concatenation of ill-luck, upon the at least equal odds of sickness, spinsterhood and narrow horizons.
But she had not possessed the capacity to benefit from her revelation, and so bitterness, petulance and self-pity became the only possible responses.
Isabel Lavender, now sixty-eight years old, sat before the mirror, the pretty amethyst brooch at her neck, and felt that she ought to have it, for it was owed to her, it was a little enough thing to covet.
She found herself more and more hunting down and making sure of the little things.
Above the mirror, the sunlight danced in a ring, water-pale on the pale wall.
She heard the snap of the letterbox and, at once, the opening of Kathleen's door.
Kathleen had always rushed for the post, even in the days when their father had laughed at her eagerness and stood above her as she scooped up the white and brown envelopes.
As a matter of fact, he hated anyone to get to the post before himself, needed to be the first to turn them over and sort them out.
Only he had never minded about Kathleen, the youngest of them.
Isabel suspected her still of watching behind the curtains for Blattern.
It was an unpleasant, a sneaking habit.
The sunlight showed up a dead fly on its back beneath the window.
Isabel started.
She did not like to be reminded of dead things, even flies, by the stiff, still bits of leg.
She was moving towards it, to sweep it away, when Kathleen opened the door.
Isabel's hand shot up to conceal the brooch at her throat.
‘A letter has come,’ said Kathleen, timidly, ‘a letter has come from the solicitor.’
Even the jar looked costly, Alida thought, chalice-shaped, gilt-lidded and made out of what could so easily have been milk-glass.
She was a little disappointed in its capacity in relation to its size, for it cheated as a false-bottomed suitcase cheats.
But that was the way of things.
It had a most elegantly printed label, gilt on grey.
‘Crème de framboises,’ she read in her governessy accent, ‘supernourissante et révenescente.
Avec le Vitamin C. Imprimé en France.’
Inside the jar the cream was whipped up, light as a soufflé, and smelled delicately of mimosa.
Alida Thorne was happy.
She ranged it beside a dozen other pots and jars and bottles on her dressing-table and it looked well.
The sight of them all gave her a feeling of warmth and contentment.
So she felt when she allowed herself a journey to London and made like a homing pigeon for the perfumery counters of department stores.
They were her Aladdin's caves and, ever since her inheritance, open to her as often as she chose, though for most of the year she contented herself with a reminder of them in the small parcels.
Her belt had come, too.
The skill and habit of a lifetime refused to desert her altogether now she had no need of it and Alida Thorne still made her own dresses.
All save the belts.
These she had made up to her exact requirements, with precisely the right number of holes, by an exclusive shop in Knightsbridge.
She chose her materials with care.
By small things, she had learned, people knew you, by the quality of shoes and gloves and belts.
This one was of champagne-coloured silk.
Her plump, spike-nailed hands closed on the little parcel.
‘Alida!’
She ignored it.
It was ten o'clock and she had been ignoring it for half an hour.
‘Alida!’
She dropped the parcel and, pulling the welt of her jumper down to her hips, strode to the door.
‘Oh, there you are.’
‘Here I am.’
‘I had to call and call.’
‘I was busy downstairs.
The house does not run itself.’
‘I'm so cold, dear.
My hands are cold.’
‘The sun is shining.’
‘I couldn't move my fingers for cold.’
Alida banged the window shut.
‘The primroses are out,’ she said.
‘So funny, I was dreaming about Tantamount Hill and those Saturday balls.
I wonder why?
We often went up the hill from The Gantry, for a stroll, you know.
Often.’
‘I shall be going to the shops in half an hour.’
The brown eyes, watered to the thin gold colour of whisky, were doubtful on her face.
God help me, Alida thought, God help me, it is an indecent age!
She would not care to live to such an age.
‘I would like a hot drink now.’
‘It's bad for your digestion, mother, too much tea.’
‘I would like meat extract.
Very hot.’
‘You burn your mouth — you know you cannot manage it without burning your mouth.’
Alida went round to the far side of the great bed, the unseemly bed, in which her mother's shrunken body was lost as in a great sea.
Yet she would not give it up.
‘It was very cold.’
‘Not cold out, I'm sure.
Quite spring-like, in fact.’
‘Yes, it was spring then.’
‘Then?’
‘You weren't listening, you never listen.
I was telling you but you never listen.
All the best balls were in the spring.’
‘Oh.’
Alida hauled up the eiderdown from the floor, threw it over the width of the bed, And I, she thought bitterly, I am not young, not a girl, to bend and stoop and struggle with making and tidying this great bed.
I am sixty-one.
She does not realise.
‘Of course there were winter balls, too,’ Eleanor said.
‘We wore capes.
We had muffs.’
‘I'm going to the shops, mother.
Is there anything you want?‘
‘You had a muff, as a child, and matching bonnet, from a sealskin coat of your Aunt Fosters.’
To quieten her, to get away from the dark, lurking forest of the past, she said, ‘I'll get you a drink, though for the life  of me I can't imagine why you are cold.
Enough bedding for a great frost.’
As Alida reached the door, her mother said, ‘Will Faith come today?
Is it Wednesday?’
Alida Thorne sighed.
How could she, how could she not remember, there was nothing else to think of, nothing to get in her way, to confuse her.
‘Faith Lavender is dead.
I have told you so.’
‘Faith?
Dead?’
‘Faith.
Dead.’
As she closed the door she glanced back.
The old woman, her skin fine-scored as a leaf, was picking at the sheet between two fingers, picking and picking, still uncertain at this news.
Alida went downstairs, stooping a little, not knowing that she stooped, annoyed at the trouble a hot drink caused.
In the bedroom, Eleanor Thorne, Faith Lavender's death forgotten, reminded herself to ask her daughter about The Gantry.
When Dorothea Shottery awoke, she could not remember what day it was, not for several minutes.
She had fingered the lamp and slid back an edge of the curtain on to a sun-flecked, eight o'clock day, searching for a clue.
She was anxious, for no such thing has ever happened to her before, her memory was always clear and rounded as a bell-note and utterly reliable.
In time, she remembered that it was Tuesday, a week since Faith Lavender's death, pension day, her birth-day, as a child ‘full of Grace’.
But as she washed her breakfast cup and saucer and rinsed them meticulously under the cold tap, she was anxious.
She was sixty-six years old.
Was this, then, the way it all began?
Beyond her kitchen window, crocuses sprouted up from the grass, bright as doubloons, orange and heliotrope.
Banded  in sunlight, her cat slid and slunk, stomach-wise, towards a bird.
‘Hastings!’ her voice commanded through the open window.
‘Hastings!’
The cat rolled over on to its back and shadow-boxed with imaginary flies, guileless of face.
Dorothea smiled.
‘Cats!’
She remembered Alida Thorne's voice, soft as fondant, coloured with scorn.
‘Uncompanionable things.
I don't know what you find in them to admire.’
Dorothea always defended Hastings, the most companionable of creatures, when he chose, but she felt no less of a fool.
‘Cats!’
Alida would say, raising her eyes, a smile pinching her pin-cushion mouth.
Dorothea frowned into the mirror above the sink.
I should like Alida, she thought, I should be kind to her — I will be kind to her.
It did not strike her, for she was a modest and, on the whole, an outward-looking woman, that she had never been anything but kind to Alida Thorne.
Such a life, however eased and softened by money, Dorothea would not wish upon herself.
Eleanor Thorne would be ninety in July, and Alida had no memories.
Even after thirty-one years, Dorothea's memories sweetened her days.
Even just now, when for a moment she had not been able to remember what day it was, and when Faith Lavender had already been dead a week.
Her memories were like a small, locked box of securities and because she knew they were there, safely there, she had no need to open them.
Only sometimes, alone with sleeplessness or through one of the long evenings of early dark, Dorothea became afraid.
She might open the box and find nothing there, she might be unable to remember the features of his face and the habits of a marriage.
What day is it? she said to herself abruptly, and her heart jerked in alarm.
Tuesday?
‘Tuesday,’ Dorothea said aloud, tapping her right hand with her left forefinger.
‘Tuesday, you silly woman.’
She laughed.
She had shopping to get, a visit to make, a meeting to attend.
She began to sing, stabbing a  hat pin through her smart, lime-green hat, for wasn't it almost Spring?
Tuesday.
A week ago.
Perhaps not the lime-green hat, then?
Yet why?
The sunlight struck her reflection between the eyes.
Silly, she thought, you silly woman!
And Eleanor Thorne is eighty-nine.
God help us!
‘The whole thing is nonsense.
I do not propose to discuss it further.’
Isabel Lavender began to smooth down finger after finger of her gardening gloves, intent upon maintaining appearances, even through domestic tasks.
‘But how can it be nonsense?
How can it be?’
There was a whining note to Kathleen Lavender's voice.
‘The letter….’
‘…is in error.
Isabel turned, wanting to end the conversation.
Kathleen had always needed a firm voice.
But the memory of her sister's surprising her with the amethyst brooch was like a rubbed sore in her mind.
‘But responsible people don't make mistakes like that.
A business letter cannot be crammed full of lies.
How can it be?’
As well as being irritating, the refrain was unanswerable, Kathleen Lavender leaned back against the kitchen door, hands behind her in a schoolgirlish pose.
Her sister faced her, waiting.
They were just of a height.
‘How can it be?’
Kathleen asked again.
Isabel sighed.
‘There was no will,’ she said, ‘You know it and I know it, so this solicitor clearly has some confusion on his hands.
Do not ask me how it can be, I have no idea.
A mistake has been made.
I shall tell him so.’
‘You intend to see him, then?’
‘I do.’
‘But shouldn't we both…’
‘Why?
Is there something you wish to say to the solicitor which I should not hear or say for you?’
‘The letter was jointly addressed.’
Isabel paused.
‘Well,’ she said eventually, ‘you have every right to accompany me.
Of course.’
In the further short silence, Kathleen's mobile features sought an expression and, when they had found it, it was one of anxiety.
Isabel stood.
Beyond the window the sky was a brittle blue.
‘Shall you help me in the garden?
Chrysanthemum cuttings need to be taken if we are to have any flowers next season.
Everyday things go on.’
Kathleen moved slowly from the doorway and shook her head, without speaking.
Her sister paused.
‘I suppose you had never expected Faith to have any money of her own?’ she asked.
Kathleen looked up and moved her hands, bending the long fingers experimentally at the joints, turning her wrist.
‘She had no secrets,’ Isabel Lavender reproved her sister, ‘she was never a secretive person.
No secrets and no money, that we do not know about and does not belong to all of us.’
Because her sister still appeared to hesitate, Isabel took up the refrain.
‘How could she?’
‘Yes,’ said Kathleen, and then, hastily, aware of her sister's eye, ‘I mean, no.
No, of course not.’
‘If you wish to see the solicitor….’
‘No.
Oh, no.’
Kathleen opened the larder door.
‘No.’
Isabel nodded and went off into the garden.
As she carried the clay pots, six at a time, from the greenhouse, a light wind scuttled her skirt.
She smiled.
Kathleen had always seen the sense of things, once they were explained.
She was, after all, several years younger, besides taking after their mother for irresolution as well as for smallness of feature.
In the larder, Kathleen Lavender stared Vaguely at various vegetables, at tins of soup, at flour bins and chutney jars, worrying about lunch and not understanding how a solicitor could be mistaken.
‘To discuss the will of your sister, the late Miss Faith Margaret Lavender, which has today been brought to my attention.’
How could Isabel read any possibility of error into that?
How could she?
A badly-balanced packet of tapioca crashed from shelf to floor and burst open like a ripe seed-pod.
Kathleen Lavender started and, looking down at the spreading carpet of white beads, felt that it must be her fault.
As far as Gaily could judge, the cards got more and more unsuitable each year.
Not to say more and more expensive.
He took his time, as always, mostly because he owed it to Ma.
And the shop was warm.
He had set down the bag of washing on the floor between his feet, for she hadn't been able to manage the washing since last year's fall.
To you Mother dear,
On this special day.
May every blessing
Come your way.
Nothing to that, nothing out of the ordinary, and the flowers were nastily coloured.
He wasn't paying one and sixpence for that.
Nor for two pekinese dogs tied up in bows and saying ‘Hi, there!
Happy Birthday!’
His fingers ranged over mauve condolences and a group of ‘Hurray, Hurray, You're One Today!’ until they came to one he liked, a carpet of spring flowers beside Lake Windermere, and the writing within plain and tasteful.
‘With every good wish for a Happy Birthday.’
Gaily sighed.
Cold, she'd call that.
‘Doesn't say much, does it?’
Someone kicked his washing-bag over and stared down at the spilled shirt sleeve, the maroon-edged handkerchief.
Gaily moved it nearer the counter.
He knew he must buy what meant something to her, however ugly.
He found it.
‘To mother dear’, in gilt, hidden among roses.
‘It's nothing Very new
But still as dearly meant,
With my love good and true,
Is this birthday message sent.’
It cost two shillings.
Gaily reached into his pocket, and then spotted a long, thin orange and yellow card, decorated with a cartoon.
He didn't like the cartoon.
It was the words.
‘You're only a bird in a gilded cage,’ he read.
It was Ma's favourite song.
Now, if she thought he'd remembered that…he opened the card.
‘So how about me for a mate?’
He stuffed it hastily back, afraid someone had seen him reading it, and took ‘To Mother Dear’ and his two shillings up to the counter.
George was already in the snack bar, a cup of tea and a pork batch on the Formica ledge and his yellow scarf saving Gaily's place.
Gaily heaved and hitched himself up on to the high stool, shoving the bag of laundry between his feet once more.
‘Sorry, I couldn't manage a table.’
Gaily shook his head.
Since George always did the arriving early and the saving of places, it was not for him to complain.
George was one of nature's kind men.
‘Ham or pork?’ he said now, sliding down from his stool, before Gaily could protest, and pottering over to the counter-queue.
George was a small man, shaped like a bowling pin and with the same, curious, rocking movement as he walked.
His eyes were the milky, undersea colour of green marbles.
Gaily was fond of him.
‘Now then,’ he said, back with the food.
Gaily nodded.
‘Yes,’ he said.
They sat in silence, eating, drinking, two amiable and contented men.
Around them, plates, cups, spoons, came together among the smoke and shopping bags of Saturday morning.
‘Washing day again?’
George Aspinall said at last, wiping his mouth.
Gaily nodded.
‘All right, is she?’
Gaily nodded again.
George leaned forward slightly and poked Gaily's arm with his index finger.
‘Got a surprise on,’ he said, ‘do you good, as well.’
‘Surprise?‘
‘For tonight.
After a time,’ George said, ‘the Cross Keys gets boring.’
Gaily had never thought so.
Every Saturday night, for a good many years, he and George and George's wife Annie laughed themselves to stitches and talked, glassy-eyed among friends, in the bar of the Cross Keys.
Rarely did Hubert Gaily go out anywhere else, on any other night, and never had he failed to enjoy his close, companionable, ale-coloured Saturday night.
‘It's what men do,’ Ma had always said.
‘Go out, of a Saturday.
Always have.
It's to be expected, it's what men do.’
Her friend came in on Saturdays, on two buses from the Maudslay Road estate, and they had a fish supper.
They didn't want him there.
‘What's it all about?’ said Gaily, frightened at this threat of some unknown change.
George pressed the tips of his fingers together.
‘It was Annie's idea,’ he said, by way of justification.
‘She fancies going to a club.’
‘A club?’
Microphones floated before Gaily's eyes, and singers with lamé dresses like mermaids' tails, jokey young men and dirt-darkened pianos and mouths rounded in community song.
‘No,’ he said hastily.
‘Now, have you ever been?
No.
You have not.
Then how can you make up your mind, just like that?’
‘Have you ever been?’
‘I know all about clubs,’ George said, ‘they're very popular.’
‘Yes.’
‘You have to keep an open mind.’
‘I haven't said anything against them,’ Gaily knew himself to be a tolerant man, ‘the young…’
‘No.’
George's finger prodded him.
‘The average age is forty-three.’
Gaily stared into his cold teacup, anxiously.
‘It's comfortable, it's a change.
You have a drink, different faces.
They have top-class performers, you know, not any of your has-beens.
Not now.
Two hundred pounds a week, some of them can earn.’
‘How do you know all this then?’
It seemed to Gaily that his friend was going away from him, penetrating new areas of experience, talking with authority.
He was saddened.
‘I'm surprised you don't know, personally,’ George countered, ‘very surprised.
You're a man who keeps his eyes open, a man aware of things.
I'm surprised.’
Gaily sat in silence, the washing lumpy between his ankles, reassuring.
‘Well then?’
George said.
Gaily shook his head.
‘I enjoy the Cross Keys,’ he said, ‘always have.’
‘Well this won't be all that different.’
Gaily met his eyes.
‘Then why,’ he asked, ‘bother to go?’
George blew his nose.
In his agitation, Gaily carried the brown bag of washing all the way back home.
His lunch was ready.
Ada Gaily stared at the spilling-out white shirt and the maroon-bordered handkerchief.
‘You've never done a thing like that before,’ she said.
‘Never.’
And peered into his face, as she had done to him as a child, searching for signs of fever.
His dark navy-blue suit lay on the bed, as a man might lie, sleeves folded, legs neatly together.
At the foot of the bed, the toe-caps of his shoes shone blackly.
It was 7.10 p.m.
Gaily could not decide what to do.
What worried him far more than the prospect of change, was the fact that he shied away from it, as a man set in his ways, and that was something he had never considered himself to be.
True, his life was ordered and uneventful, and to many would appear monotonous.
Gaily's quiet defence had always been that he liked a certain monotony.
A man set down roots, and thought.
He was even prepared to go so far as to admit that monotony was the most comfortable way.
Now, he stared down at his Saturday suit and was afraid at the new possibility that he had become a man set in his ways, upset by change.
When Ma died, he had always planned to break away completely, give up this life and build a new one.
Now, he accepted with distress the possibility that he might finally fail to do so.
Suddenly, a world without his present routine, above all a world without Ma, seemed a world without foothold or boundary.
Gaily let in the cat, scratching at the door.
Still, he did not know what he should do tonight.
The cat leaped lightly on to the bed and padded over the bodiless sleeves.
For a second, he watched it absently, and then hauled it off.
He had been anxious in case white hairs got on the suit, which must mean that, wherever he decided to go, he would go somewhere.
From the floor, his mother's cat eyed him viciously.
In the kitchen, Ma Gaily buttered bread.
‘You're out then?’ she said.
Gaily nodded.
He hovered in the doorway.
‘Elsie hasn't come yet?’
‘It doesn't look like it does it?
You may feel like looking behind the sofa.
She maybe floated in.’
It was good humoured.
‘Don't wait up,’ he said.
‘Do I ever?’
‘No.’
He had reached the living room door before she called after him.
‘What about the washing?’ she said.
Gaily stopped dead.
There was silence, except for a creaking from the gas-meter.
Down the stairs came the cat, sullen-eyed.
‘Have you heard?’
Gaily returned to the kitchen.
Ma bent over the stove.
inserted two large plates to warm, slammed the door.
‘Am I supposed to take it,’ she said, her back to him again, ‘or what?’
‘You know you're not.’
‘Do I?’
‘I'll take it Monday evening.’
‘You're not in need of a change of underwear then?’
‘I can have it on Monday.’
‘It has to dry.’
‘I can wait.’
‘You can.’
She pushed past him through the doorway, her hands full of salt cellar, Vinegar bottle, sauce bottle and pickle jar.
‘You don't have to tell me,’ Gaily said, ‘that all the clothes either of us has are in the bag or on our backs.’
Ma sat down and picked up her reading glasses,
‘I'll take it Monday,’ he said.
He reached the door again.
‘Have a good time,’ he Said.
Ma unfolded the evening paper.
‘See you in the morning,’ he said.
‘I see they've caught up with him in Huddersfield,’ Ma said, ‘that prisoner.’
Gaily went out, smiling to himself.
The street was just moist with rain, sweet-smelling.
Then he remembered George Aspinall and the change of plan, and that he had not decided what to do.
He turned the corner miserably, bumping into Elsie with their fish and chips.
‘More haste,’ she said.
Gaily nodded.
A little further up the street, he realised who she was.
‘I cannot do it,’ Alida Thorne said, desperately.
‘I cannot do it, and there is an end.’
Dorothea sat her down and padded her in with cushions, smiled vaguely and went off to make the tea.
She did not understand it.
Never had Alida visited her, unannounced and uninvited, before.
Dorothea had always wondered if it was because she despised her.
But now, she thought, I know that it is not so.
Here is proof.
She is the sisters' friend and mine, too, she has come to tea on my birthday.
Not, of course, that she is to know that, and not, of course , that I shall tell her.
Dorothea spooned glistening black gobbets of jam on to a silver dish and wished that she could like Alida Thorne a little more.
‘Cannot do what?’ she said brightly, returning with the tray.
Alida was weeping quietly, snuffling a little, into her floral handkerchief.
‘Oh, my dear!’
Dorothea disposed of the tray and bent down.
‘My dear, what is it?
What can I do?’
She hastened to let her concern cover her embarrassment.
Alida lifted her head and Dorothea thought how unbecoming tears were, after childhood, how old and ugly and formless they made a face.
‘Please tell me,’ Dorothea urged.
‘If you want to, if I can help.’
Although I already know, she said to herself, it is her  mother.
Eleanor Thorne is eight-nine years old and Alida is sick and weary.
Who would not be?
She herself had lost her mother quite early in life, and mourned her still.
Alida, suddenly conscious of company and place, blew her nose wildly, put away her handkerchief and sat up.
‘There,’ Dorothea said, ‘there,’and poured the tea.
‘I have never let myself go like that,’ Alida said, ‘never.
It proves to what a point I am brought.’
Dorothea reassured her.
‘It is best to cry,’ she said, ‘I sometimes cry, when nothing else will serve.’
It was a harmless lie, for she could see that Alida was a little ashamed.
‘If Faith had been here,’ Alida Thorne said, biting daintily into a scone, ‘I would have asked her advice.
Many a time I have wanted to ask her about this, and thought it wrong.
At the last minute, I have held it back.’
Jam dripped from her plump, white finger.
‘You were closest to her,’ she said.
Dorothea looked at the garden, at the sun shining between the apple trees, remembering her friend.
‘Dear Faith,’ said Alida softly.
No, Dorothea thought, no that is wrong.
Alida made her sound a different woman, some pale, sweetly-smiling, malleable soul.
In her lifetime, nobody had said dear Faith, though they had loved her.
Faith would have had no patience with it.
She had been boisterous and sharp, a humorous woman, a woman of decision.
Alida would not have called her dear Faith then.
‘Isabel…’
Dorothea began.
‘I cannot talk to Isabel,’ Alida told her.
‘No one can, Isabel is an old woman, the mistress of her own affairs.’
Dorothea wondered why that should preclude her concern in the affairs of others.
But perhaps Alida knew the remaining Misses Lavender best, after all.
‘Have another slice of cake?’ she said.
‘I have made up my mind,’ Alida Thorne said, accepting it.
‘It's hardly fair I should be required to go on in this way.
How  many people could have been under such a constant strain, for so long?
I have had to make a decision.’
Dorothea nodded.
Outside the door, she heard the gentle scratching of the cat Hastings and she dared not, in Alida's company, let him in.
‘You must advise me,’ Alida said, setting down her plate.
‘If you have already decided….’
‘You must be the one to tell me I am doing the right thing.’
Yes, thought Dorothea, that is it, and that is different.
But when the announcement came, she was truly shocked.
‘I have made an appointment to see the Matron of The Gantry.’
Outside the door, Hastings scratched and, in her distress and confusion, Dorothea rose and let him in.
But Alida was absorbed in herself.
‘She is eighty-nine,’ she told Dorothea, unnecessarily.
‘Senility is known to set in a good deal earlier in many cases.’
Dorothea nodded vaguely.
I must not be shocked, she told herself, I must remember that Eleanor is eighty-nine years old and that they are most kind in mental hospitals, these enlightened days.
I must remember that she will be cared for and will not suffer.
Alida has a right to some freedom, she herself is…
Dorothea realised that she did not know how old Alida was but it must be around her own age.
Not a girl.
‘There is an accepted difference between a geriatric ward and a lunatic ward,’ Alida was saying, ‘people realise that nowadays.
I would not like it to be said that I had had my mother put away.’
But what else is it, Dorothea thought anxiously, what else is it that you are wanting to do?
‘Come for us at home,’ was what George had said, ‘we're setting off from there.
Come for us about eight o'clock.’
George Aspinall had not doubted that his friend would turn  up.
Now, Gaily hesitated at the junction with Chapel Street.
It was not a question of committing himself.
He could go this once, for George's sake, because George was so anxious to show off his new-found club and next Saturday, he could revert to routine and the Cross Keys.
But Gaily knew that he would not go, not even once, to the club, though he did not know of any reason, beyond a feeling, a shrinking-back from an uncongenial world, a novelty, the element of surprise.
He turned back into the town, away from the buses to George's road, towards the public house.
There, he was known, there friends would be, and there were, after all, other people besides George Aspinall.
And George might easily have changed his mind.
George had not, and the Cross Keys was strangely empty.
Gaily sat over his pint of mixed until a quarter past nine, when the barmaid called to him.
‘So you haven't gone with them,’ she said.
Gaily looked up.
‘The club,’ she said, ‘or hadn't you heard?’
‘I didn't fancy it.’
‘It won't last, can't do.
But that's where they've all skipped off to.
Like the grave in here tonight.
Like a Monday.
Oh, they'll be back, they've none of them got that sort of money.
You see.
Not like a Saturday night at all though, not really.’
‘No,’ said Gaily.
He wished he had the way of talking to women, to individual strangers.
He was happy enough, full of ale in the crowd on Saturday nights, listening, laughing.
It was not the same.
He finished his beer sadly, wondered if he would have been better off, after all, among them at the club.
‘You see,’ the barmaid said, ‘next week, they'll all be in here with their tails between their legs.
Habit's hard to beat.’
Because he could think of nothing to say to her in reply, Gaily bought her a drink and left.
‘Goodnight,’ she said, disappointed, turning back to the empty bar.
Outside, the rain gurgled in shining gutters.
Maybe it was  only to be expected, a sudden change that tilted your world sideways, slipped the ground from under you a shade.
Maybe this was what happened to most people.
He was lucky to have led such an ordered life.
The moon rode high, a sixpenny bit of white gold, over the Town Hall tower.
Gaily walked home, opened the front door, called out to them not to worry, took the brown leather-cloth bag of washing and left the house again.
He might as well save himself a Monday evening.
Besides, Ma would be glad of the clean clothes.
Wednesday afternoon.
The first of March.
Wind.
At the top of Tantamount Hill the sky raced, all shades of grey, so near a hand might reach and take it.
At the bottom of the hill, six poplar trees swayed, graceful as girls with their hair long.
Wind shaved over the new grass near Faith Lavender's grave, and Dorothea Shottery's cat went mad on the back lawn, leaping, rolling, falling over its own paws.
Upstairs in her room alone, Eleanor Thorne dozed and the wind entered her dreams, confusing her, until the bed was a great sea, and the howling came round the mast of the chimney-pots.
In the town, slates and bin-lids took flight and at the corner of Maxstone Villas, a rheumy old man, blue chinned, bent his back against the blast.
Isabel Lavender, emerging from the railway station, was glad of her tight-fitting coat and her well-pinned, tight-fitting hat.
She crossed the footbridge that led into the red and grey brick town.
Now, she thought, now we shall get things done, sort things out, arrive at a solution.
Now, we shall have an end to Kathleen's nonsense.
Though, since the day the letter came, Kathleen's nonsense had been all unspoken.
Nevertheless.
‘Nevertheless,’ said Mr Cecil Whittaker, ‘I have the will.’
He was a tweedy man, with rough-chopped hair and a blotchy complexion, younger than Miss Lavender liked a professional man to be.
She had wanted to argue the matter out, for she had every next sentence there, in her head, only to be followed like a crochet pattern.
It had not gone according to plan.
The March gale hurled itself against Mr Whittaker's windows.
‘I suppose you hadn't bargained for a will?’
Mr Whittaker said.
Isabel Lavender inclined her head.
She did not intend to commit herself to this man.
‘No,’ he said, grinning, another thing she did not like.
‘Many people don't.
It's often the way.’
‘I cannot understand why we were not informed.’
‘Who knows?‘
‘Not my sister,’ she drew herself up in the chair.
‘You, your firm.
It is a little late in the day.’
‘It might easily have been later.
We were not notified of your sister's death.
We chanced to find it out.’
‘You cannot blame me for that.
I knew nothing about any will, I knew nothing about my sister's having consulted you.
Nothing that would lead me to inform your firm of her passing.’
‘Quite so.’
Isabel Lavender felt uneasy, as though he were mocking and trying to get the better of her, as though she were guilty of something.
He lolled back in his swivel chair, one huge thigh thrust over the other, a bright-eyed man.
Not his father's son.
Isabel noticed a large grease-spot on the carpet.
‘So,’ he said, ‘you'll want to see the will.’
Again she inclined her head.
He opened the box file.
‘I've had a copy made,’ he said, ‘you can take it with you, show it to your sister.
I shall need to keep the original document.
Unless…’ he took the steel-stemmed pipe out of his mouth and grinned again, ‘unless you want to transfer your business?‘
Isabel did not speak.
‘It's quite straightforward,’ he said, fishing out a piece of paper.
Isabel scratched her left palm with her right forefinger, anxious.
On the soup-coloured wall, above the fireplace, a portrait of Jas.
John Whittaker 1801–1880 frowned upon her.
‘The sum of two hundred and fifty pounds, invested in Premium Bonds…’
Isabel looked up sharply.
Premium Bonds, whenever had Faith bought Premium Bonds?
But how like her, she allowed herself to think quickly, how like her, without a by-your-leave, without a word, to invest in Premium Bonds, in a lottery.
For it was a lottery, no matter how you excused it.
Let me not be prim, she thought, let me be sensible, a woman of the world, let me not be unfair.
But it was a lottery and lotteries were undesirable.
We have always said so, she thought, wanting to cry with annoyance, as a family we have always agreed about it.
‘…for sick children.’
‘What?’
Mr Whittaker sighed.
‘To the Great  Ormonde Street Hospital for Sick Children,’ he repeated.
‘What is?’
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘I did not hear…’
‘The sum of two hundred and fifty pounds.’
‘Is that all?
’ Meaning, what about us, about us?
‘Generous, I'd have thought.’
‘No, no, I….’
‘All she had.’
‘All?’
‘Why, yes.’
Isabel sat mutely, angrily, hands folded on her mushroom leather bag.
‘Some personal bits and pieces,’ he said dismissively, ‘all shares in property, furniture, personal belongings…and so on…jointly to be shared between my sisters, Isabel May and Kathleen Opal Lavender.’
He looked up.
Isabel nodded.
‘Jewellery,’ he said.
Isabel's hand shot to her throat.
A great ball of wind puffed out of the old chimney-place, rocking the portrait of Jas.
John Whittaker.
Faith had left all her jewellery, excepting mother's pearl and ruby eternity ring, to Dorothea Shottery.
Mr Whittaker threw the piece of paper down on his desk.
His green-lizard-lidded eyes appraised her.
‘That's all,’ he said, and began to strike a match.
She did not begin to think of what she might say to Kathleen.
Had to say.
Though Kathleen was meek and would accept.
Isabel Lavender had always been less good than most people at losing face, since she had never learned how to compensate for it, she had never learned to wallow, to conceal partial humiliation in an expression of total defeat.
Thinking of her sister made her impatient.
‘But,’ Kathleen would say, clasping her hands together, and ‘Oh, surely…’and ‘Why, then…’
Certainly she would be craven enough to accept the news without comment, or any thought of a fight.
Good heavens, she might even be relieved!
‘Oh, thank goodness, it is all settled, dear, I never wanted any trouble, I do so hate trouble.’
As a child, Isabel had been forever wanting and having to shake her younger-sister, shake her out of smiling acceptance, out of vagueness of mind, out of bewilderment, into rebellion and action.
Isabel Lavender stopped dead in the hall of the railway station.
Behind the gothic-arch pigeon hole, counting out change, she saw the man in boots, the man who had hung about at Faith's funeral.
Was it him?
Under cover of buying a magazine from the stall opposite, Isabel glanced over, and  then stared more persistently, for he had not seen her, was not so much as looking up from his counting.
Yes, it was the same man.
He had a broad forehead, rather sallow face, and thinning hair.
He looked somehow smarter and more formidable now, than at the funeral.
Because, of course, this was his place, he knew it, he belonged, and there he had not known where to look or how to fold his hands.
He went on counting.
Well, Isabel told herself, putting back the magazine, here is one mystery partially solved, one set of questions answered.
Faith could not possibly have known a booking-clerk at a railway station, therefore he had certainly been a stranger, idle and curious, a watcher at the funeral.
She stepped on to the train, allowing one minor satisfaction to screen her anxiety at the absence of a major one.
‘Three hundred pounds.
I think a fair amount.
Yes.’
‘Fifty up on last year?
Surely not.’
‘Colonel Baxter…?’
‘I said, surely not.
You can't go on putting it up, year in, year out.
It's a struggle as it is.’
‘Well...’
‘I say no.’
‘Oh, dear!
I had thought we might reach an early agreement on our target.
If only to get on to the practical arrangements.’
‘Haggling,’ put in another voice, ‘barefaced haggling.’
‘Two hundred and fifty, I say.
We managed that all right last year.
Comfortably.’
‘Which is precisely why we hope to…’
‘…made it a den of thieves.’
‘Oh, come, Mrs Marchebanks!
Come, now!‘
The Reverend George Jocelyn Bottingley sounded deeply upset.
And, behind the screen of his catarrh, a little angry.
‘Ladies and gentlemen,’ he began again, on the downbeat of a sigh.
Dorothea Shottery, her eyes fixed unseeingly on the cream paint of a radiator, heard the sigh and wondered about it.
The conversation came from far away, the words like beautiful, meaningless sounds in another language, unspoken, impenetrable, Arabic, perhaps, or Persian.
She sat sadly, in her old camel coat and her feathered hat, hearing the words.
But she did not see the features of the Reverend Mr Bottingley, broad and bland behind his handkerchief.
Thirty-four years ago, the very first Sunday morning, she had put on her new, spruce-green costume, because that was what her husband liked best, and she and Hallam Shottery had walked through their new-found land to this church.
Dorothea remembered little more, though sometimes she would pretend that she did.
Not, at least, until after the service.
Then, both of them a little awkward, a little shy, not liking to make the first move, the Shotterys had walked together down the path, away from the little group at the church porch.
‘Excuse me,’ she had said, coming after them, and they had turned gladly.
‘Mr and Mrs Shottery?
I am so pleased to meet you.
My name is Eleanor Thorne.’
‘Now there was a woman!’
Hallam had said later, though a little puzzled by her.
‘Somebody different.’
‘Kind,’ Dorothea had replied.
Or meant to have replied, but perhaps she had not, perhaps the knowledge of later years had imposed itself on that first memory.
Eleanor Thorne had been thin, even then, but an upright woman, straight as a twig, straight in the old way they were all taught, books on heads, stiff-corseted.
‘Oh, I have a daughter,’ Dorothea remembered her saying, at one of their early meetings, ‘she is a teacher.
She has an excellent place in a girls’ boarding-school in Worcestershire.’
Eleanor Thorne had been proud, blue-eyed, a widow in her late fifties, energetic and generous.
Proud, too, of her solemn-faced daughter in the framed photograph.
‘You  must be of an age,’ she had said.
‘You must become friends.’
But it had been she and Eleanor who had become the friends, though the distinction was never made in public.
When Alida came home, they were polite to one another, no more.
Alida had been conscious of Dorothea's married state, hating her for it, burning with scorn at the preoccupations and trivialities of a marriage.
Which, Dorothea had often thought, they probably were, and really, she had half-envied Alida, not for her independence but for the responsibility she had, and for the pride and satisfaction she was entitled to feel in her work.
Dorothea had never considered the world was a better place for her own existence and activities but surely Alida could feel just that?
So many young women educated and developed, and fulfilled, so much knowledge imparted, all because of her efforts.
Dorothea had once tried to tell her this, but Alida Thorne had flushed with anger.
‘Stop patronising me,’ she had shouted, ‘stop pitying me!’
The incident had never been referred to again and Dorothea did not believe that Alida would remember it.
But, after that, they had little time to spend together, little to say to one another.
It had been Eleanor, quiet, firm, devoted whom Dorothea had loved, and Eleanor had been the only living person whose presence she could bear when Hallam died a year after their coming to Haverstock.
Now, Eleanor Thorne was eighty-nine years old, and her conversation was erratic, but Dorothea still sat with her, and for the odd fifteen or twenty minutes, and sometimes as long as an hour, they would talk, as they had always done and the present world swung temporarily into focus for the old lady, and she held on to it, like a crystal ball, firmly in her hand.
Dorothea did not even mind when she lost her grip and wandered off down the avenues of the past, for sometimes she could accompany her, at any rate part of the way, and
Eleanor would talk of Hallam, as if he had been there, in her  room, recalling his expressions and conversations more clearly than Dorothea herself ever could.
There was nothing alarming, she decided, about such a life in the past, about such a dependence upon memory.
It seemed to her a precious gift, far more than just an alleviation of present discomfort.
It proved to her, somehow, that the imagination mattered, that people, events, joys, experiences, visions, had a permanence, and some kind of lasting value.
You could leave them behind so much more easily, to get on with the present, if you knew that some day you were going to return.
Eleanor Thorne was returning, her life in the great bed had value.
She had been a good woman.
And now, Dorothea thought, and now….
Not in shame, but in confusion and surprise she realised that her eyes were opaque with tears, and that the voices had swayed into the foreground and taken on a meaning.
‘The provision stall, Mrs Shottery,’ he was saying, ‘the provision stall.’
‘Yes,’ she said hurriedly.
‘Oh, yes.’
‘I knew we could rely on you.’
There was a faint murmur of satisfaction, though only a murmur, for it was what they had all expected.
Dorothea wiped her eyes and blew her nose and looked around her, at the overcoated figures, huddled and sneezing about the table-tennis table under the Vestry lights.
But none of them noticed, they were hunched within themselves, absorbed, waiting to be done with the decisions and get home.
The vestry walls shone with damp.
I suppose I have agreed to run the grocery stall, she thought, and with annoyance, for she always ran the grocery stall and tonight she had come determined to ask for a change.
Her idea had been rather startling, even silly, but she had wanted to have a black crepe dress and bangles and a tent, and to tell fortunes.
Harmless after all, and the Rector was not superstitious but perhaps it was as well, for they would all have laughed.
Not that Dorothea minded their laughing at her but  she felt protective towards her idea.
Madame Claudia, she had wanted to be, Your Guide to the Future.
Two Shillings.
She would tell the people joyful things, cheer them up, make them happy.
Dorothea smiled to herself.
‘Then if there is nothing else…?’
The Rector was saying, and their cold faces were relaxed again, grateful, and they were standing for prayers.
Dorothea prayed, very formally and with no hope whatsoever, for Eleanor Thorne.
Alida had made up her mind and that was that.
Dorothea's heart turned cold and heavy as stone, thinking of it.
All the way home, not listening though half-replying to Mrs Marchebanks's chatter, Dorothea worried about it, and in the night she awoke, to find her eyes again thick with tears.
She felt helpless.
But perhaps it would not come, after all, perhaps they would take one look at Mrs Thorne and refuse her admittance into a ward of lunatic old ladies.
At the foot of her bed, the cat Hastings rose, turned around and around, pushing his paw gently into the eiderdown, and then curling into the soft silk hollow.
That, together with the new thought, was a comfort and Dorothea slept.
‘But we have always had fish on Fridays.
Always.’
Kathleen Lavender's hands hovered above the dish of buttered plaice, uncertain what to do.
‘You know we have.’
‘Well, I cannot imagine why.
We are not papists when all's said and done.’
‘I don't see what…’
‘Of course that has something to do with it!’
Kathleen Lavender sighed.
Everything was changing now that Isabel was in charge.
At least, she supposed that Isabel was in charge.
Faith had been of certain mind but easier to please.
‘You don't want any, then?’
Kathleen replaced the lid of the dish.
‘Have we some alternative?’
‘Why no, but…’
‘I do not intend to starve ,’ Isabel said sharply, taking up the serving slice.
‘I simply meant that we should not have fish so unfailingly, on a regular day of the week, in future.’
Kathleen began to eat.
‘You always were rather against Roman Catholics.’
Never mind, she thought, never mind, for it isn't that, she is still upset about the will and still unsure what to do.
Kathleen herself saw nothing at all they could, or should, try to do.
Faith had disposed of the money and belongings as she chose and everyone had that right, at the very least.
And it is not, she thought, sliding the mottled skin deftly off her fish, it is not as though we are starving.
No, we are lucky, we live comparatively well.
There are so many others who do not have a portion of the things we have, in our state.
Isabel coughed.
Her grey hair had a dusty look, as though it had been powdered like a flunkey's wig.
She coughed again and looked reproachfully at Kathleen.
Bones, the look said.
‘They were fillets,’ Kathleen countered.
‘So I am imagining a bone?’
‘I didn't say that, Isabel.’
‘You implied it.’
After a short silence, Kathleen took courage, feeling sorry for her sister.
‘If you are still anxious about the will…’ she began.
Isabel stiffened.
‘They do need money, you know.
For…well, I suppose for research and so on.
It is a worthy cause.’
‘Have I ever suggested that it was otherwise?’
‘No.’
‘We did not expect Faith to have any money at all.
What real difference would £250 make to us?
We do not need anything, we have no debts.’
Isabel Lavender closed her knife and fork together.
‘It is not the money,’ she said grandly, ‘it is a matter of principle.’
‘But….’
‘Shall we forget it?
Your ideas are rather undeveloped and ignorant and, after all, it was I who saw the solicitor.
Shall we talk of something else?
What pudding have you made us?’
No, Kathleen thought, it is not the money, I am sure of that now.
Though she would have liked it.
It is partly the very fact that Faith saved and disposed of it without a word to us, but more, it is the jewellery, what little there was.
She wondered if Dorothea knew about the money and the will — if anyone knew, she would.
They had been quite close.
Without thinking, therefore, Kathleen Lavender said, ‘So I suppose we shall see Dorothea soon?
Shall I invite her to lunch?‘
Oh, but I have said the wrong thing, she thought, for her sister's face had tightened and her eyes burned with a coppery light.
‘I hardly think that we need to do that.’
‘Oh.’
‘She will receive a letter, she will know.’
‘And then what happens?’
‘Happens?’
‘Well — she will have to…to collect….’
‘I have already packed the few things to which she is entitled, in a small box.
I shall send it by registered post.’
‘Oh, goodness, Isabel, how silly!
How childish!
We cannot send them, by registered or any other post, to a house two hundred yards across the green!‘
‘I see no good reason why not,’
‘It is unkind.
I hate unkindness, that is so petty.
Dorothea has done nothing wrong.’
‘She has insinuated herself.’
‘Nonsense!
We have known her for years.’
Righteous anger loosened Kathleen's tongue.
I am not a mouse, she thought, and I will not stand by and watch this idiocy.
‘I will take them to her,’ she said.
‘You need not come.’
She handed Isabel a slice of lemon meringue pie.
‘It is the very least one can do.’
‘What right …’
‘Every right.’
Kathleen Lavender sat calmly down and picked up her napkin.
She would not be taken for a fool, either, not when it mattered so much as this.
Isabel had always known that, with Kathleen, one might, on very rare occasions, go too far.
‘This pie is tart,’ she said now.
‘Oh, I am so sorry,’ Kathleen handed her the caster sugar.
She did not wish to remain outside of her usual, blameworthy self for longer than was necessary.
She had achieved her end, and self-assertiveness was not comfortable for her.
‘Good evening,’ Gaily said.
This time, she was wearing a hat, which pulled her face back, somehow, and made a line round it, so that she looked older than she had the other night.
He wasn't sure he liked the hat but he recognised the gesture in wearing it and was half pleased, half afraid.
‘Oh, I didn't think you would come,’ she said, and laughed, not at all a confused laugh, but quiet, and at herself rather than at him, looking down at her cupped hands as she did so.
‘I'd have to keep a promise.’
He stood awkwardly by her table.
‘A man of your word,’ she said.
‘That's it.
I hope so.’
‘Aren't you going to sit down?’
She said that as though she wondered whether it was the correct thing to say.
‘I'll get myself a coffee.
Will you have another?
You'd no need to have bought your own.’
‘Oh, I had to, in case you didn't come.
You can't just sit here.’
‘No,’ he said.
‘No.’
Standing at the counter waiting for the coffee, he wondered how he could have let it come about, and he felt a stranger to himself.
‘Folk don't know where they are with you.
I can't understand it,’ Ma had said.
Because this was a Thursday and he had never thought of going out on a Thursday before, and  because of the previous Saturday night, coming back to collect the washing.
Routine was the stuff of life to Ada Gaily, had always been so, and now she felt it shifting out of her reach.
Yet, Gaily told himself, there is no need for her to worry.
She doesn't really know me.
‘This is very nice,’ she said, when he got back to the table.
‘Yes.’
But hadn't it been a mistake though, he thought, wasn't it more pointless than most evenings?
For what could he say to her?
There seemed nothing at all, no way of climbing back on to the free wheel of conversation they had somehow set going the other night.
She was different, after all, he decided, in her hat, and with the grained leather gloves neatly folded, and Gaily hadn't for a moment the wit to see this, prepared self as the false one and her accidental self, in an older coat and head-scarf, of Saturday night, the true one.
Neither did he, for the moment, recognise her own diffidence as an indication that she felt in the same way about him.
He is different, Florence Ames thought, he hasn't anything to say because he is embarrassed to be with me.
It was a mistake, then, after all.
‘The washing dried all right, did it?’
Gaily could think of no other remark.
Mrs Ames looked up.
‘Oh, yes.
Yes, thank you.’
‘They're marvellous inventions, aren't they?
The coin-ops?
Did you know that in London — because they had them there first, of course, some years ago — in London, the — well, beatniks really, aren't they?
They come in during the winter time, and take off their coats and sweaters and put them in the big dryer for a sixpenny warm-up.
No, I read it.
They've nowhere to sleep you see, having left home and so on.
You don't believe me.’
She was smiling.
‘Oh, yes,’ she said.
‘But do you often remember things like that?’
‘Like…?’
‘Well — odd things you read.
For no reason.
I do.
I remember that a spider killed a fifteen stone Rugby player, in Australia.’
‘That's it, that's just the kind of thing!
Stupid really, because what good can a bit of information like that ever do you?
When you think of all the valuable things you ought to remember and never can.
No sense in it, is there?
I'm full of useless bits of knowledge like that.
Well, not even knowledge really, is it?
You can't call it knowledge.
I must tell Ma about the spider, she'd like that.’
‘Is she the same?’
‘Yes, but she has a better memory than me, even.
Things strike her and she remembers them.
She can't ever get over some of the things people do, things that happen, every day.
Just casually, you know.
She reads them out, never stops being amazed.’
‘That is a splendid thing.’
Mrs Ames said firmly.
‘It is?’
‘Oh, yes.
To go on and on being surprised by life, however old you are.
Most people don't.’
‘Don't they?’
‘Well — do they?’
She laughed.
‘I'd have to think about it.
I suppose not.
I don't know so many people.’
‘Oh.’
‘You must though.
Having been a nurse.
New faces all the time.’
‘Yes, but too many.
You never got time to think about them, you were too busy.
Or else you sort of jotted them down at the back of your mind, you know, to think about them later, but you never remembered, or you did but it was too late, they'd gone, your head was full of other things.’
‘Like spiders and Rugby players.’
‘Yes, that's it.
Silly things.’
‘Don't you miss the life?’
‘Yes.
I do.’
But Gaily could not bring himself to ask why she did not return to it.
They sat in silence again, in the empty café, and he wondered if the girl behind the counter recognised him from  Saturday mornings and would make any future remark.
It seemed important that George Aspinall should not know.
‘Do you fancy a cake?’ he asked suddenly, but she shook her head.
‘Perhaps you'd like to go somewhere else?
Would you like to…’ but he did not know what.
Florence Ames relaxed suddenly.
Why, she thought, he is so much more uncertain than I am, he has lost touch with the world of women, as I have with the world of men.
So she said, ‘I am quite happy here, if you are.
It's Very pleasant.’
‘Oh, yes.
Right.’
‘It was kind of you to ask me.’
‘No.
No….’
‘And,’ she went on, gathering more courage, ‘it's a good deal more comfortable than the launderette.’
‘I don't know,’ he said.
‘It couldn't be warmer than there and you've got chairs and the coffee machine.
I'd have said there wasn't much to choose.’
‘No tables.’
He looked at her and then grinned.
‘No,’ he agreed, ‘no tables.’
‘How is your mother?’ she asked.
‘All right.
Very well,’ and, out of politeness.
‘How is your son?’
‘Very well, thank you.’
I shouldn't have asked that, Florence Ames thought, he doesn't care to be questioned about his mother and it makes me seem too familiar, too prying.
And Gaily took her quick reply for unwillingness, too, and decided that they did not know one another well enough yet to ask such questions, such casual, family questions, as between friends.
‘She's decided the Empire Road launderette isn't as good as the old one, in Cambridge Street, though,’ he told Mrs Ames.
‘It mangles up the clothes, she says.
Had you noticed that at all?’
‘No, I'm happy with it.’
‘Yes.’
‘They come out very clean.’
‘So I thought.’
They paused.
‘So you won't be using Empire Road in the future,’ she said.
‘Oh, yes, I shall.
Oh, yes.
For one thing, it's a lot nearer, for another, there's no difference but in her imagination.
It's just something to say.
You know.’
‘I see.’
‘So I'll certainly be using it.’
‘Oh.’
‘Shall you?’
‘Oh, yes,’ Florence Ames smiled at him quickly.
‘Yes.’
Gaily nodded, satisfied.
Alida Thorne wore her best suit, a straight-skirted mohair tweed in jewel green.
She also wore a new lipstick called Chloe, which took some attention away from the slight sallowness she imagined she saw in her complexion, and a splash of light cologne.
The previous afternoon, she had set her hair on small rollers.
She intended to give the best possible impression.
They should not think her a woman who had let herself go.
And so many did.
Dorothea's hips must be all of forty-four inches and Isabel, with that straight figure, Isabel dressed so dully and her face was colourless.
None of the Lavenders had ever turned heads.
It all came of being so confined, of knowing nothing beyond the village of Haverstock.
But I am well preserved, Alida thought, turning a little to the glass, I have taken care.
‘Now I shall not be long,’ she said to the old figure in the great bed.
‘And Dorothea will be here.’
‘What day is it then?
Is it Wednesday?’
‘It is Friday.’
‘Oh.
Dorothea is coming.’
‘I have said so.’
‘I knew it could not be Wednesday, it is Faith Lavender who comes on Wednesdays.
Of course, I have not forgotten.’
Dear God, thought Alida, is it any wonder I am going where I am going, is it any wonder?
It is more likely to be a wonder I have borne with things so long.
She did not bother to say it, again, again, again, that Faith Lavender was dead.
‘Are you comfortable, mother?’
‘Oh yes, thank you.
I shall be pleased to see Dorothea.
Are you going out, dear?’
‘I am.’
‘You didn't say.’
‘I told you.’
‘Perhaps I did not hear.’
‘Most likely you did not.’
‘It is a long time since I went outside.
Is it a summer's day?’
‘A spring day.
But cold, I think, much too cold for you.’
‘If I were to be wrapped up warmly, and…’
‘Don't be ridiculous, mother!
You cannot go out.
And I cannot take you with me.’
‘I am sorry for that.’
‘I shall be late.’
‘Yes, now, I knew there was something, of course I did.’
The old lady raised her head a little, her face bright with interest.
‘What is it?’
‘I knew it and now I have remembered.
You must tell me.
It all came back into my mind because of the ball, the spring ball, and the partner whose name I could not remember, although I have remembered now.
It was Miles.
Miles, Miles — what?
Never mind that, that will come.
But I remembered him and I didn't like him, you know, not really, only I was too well-bred to say so to anyone.
That was...’
‘Mother, have you anything to say that cannot wait?
I am already late.’
‘Late?‘
57 
‘For my appointment.’
‘You hadn't told me.’
Give me patience, give me a little more patience, Alida thought, for it is soon coming to an end.
‘You must have forgotten.’
‘I don't forget the important things.’
‘What did you want to ask me?’
Eleanor Thorne lay back again on the high pillows, and her nut-brown face was petulant.
‘I don't know,’ she muttered.
‘You have interrupted me.
You made me forget.
You were not listening and now I have forgotten.’
‘It's time you had your sleep.’
Alida shut the door and leaned on it, breathless for a second.
Then, she had to return and re-powder her forehead and compose herself and try not to be anxious that she was already late.
At least it would give them some idea, at least they would now understand how things were.
Her life could not be called her own.
‘My life cannot be called my own.’
The Matron pursed her lips, in what Alida took to be sympathy, but she did not comment.
‘She has lost all sense of time.
One moment she is here, the next she is thirty years or so ago, and then again, she is a young girl and cannot remember who I am.
It is mentally so exhausting, that is perhaps the worst.
I am under such a constant mental and emotional strain.
Why just today, you see, before I came out, she insisted a friend would be coming to see her, a friend who died — so sad — a few weeks ago.
I have told her, as gently as I can, but quite firmly.
‘Faith is dead, mother,’ I have said, ‘Faith is dead.
She will not be coming to see you.’
I cannot repeat myself indefinitely.
It is like talking to a child.
She does not take it in — you will understand this, with your experience.’
The Matron's office was papered with light blue flowers on white and there were canary-yellow curtains.
It had none of the institutional smell Alida had prepared herself for.
There was a silence, the Matron, who was a Miss Cress, tapping her fountain pen lightly on the blotter.
Beyond the window, Alida could see Tantamount Hill, poplars at the foot, banks thick with daffodils, climbing out of sight,
‘She would enjoy this View.
We have nothing like it, only a view across the green.
When The Gantry was a private house, many years ago now, she came here, to balls and parties, it was quite the social centre of the county.
Oh, she talks about it so much, just as though it were yesterday.
The house is in her bones.
She was so fond of it.
It would please her to come back here.’
Miss Cress had periwinkle-blue eyes, small and clear as stars.
They were on Alida's face and Alida felt a chill and shifted in her chair, as though Miss Cress, in her navy uniform and bib, were one of the old headmistresses.
‘Have you a doctor's report?
A recent one.
I mean…’ she stressed, as Alida opened her mouth, ‘on her physical health.’
‘Oh, she is very weak, she cannot get out of bed without assistance.’
‘It was a medical opinion I wanted.’
‘Doctor Sparrow calls perhaps once every month.
He came last week,’ Alida said, annoyed at not being believed.
‘And?’
‘And — well, the situation had not changed, it cannot change.
It was I who needed to see him because of the broken nights, the strain involved in loss of sleep.’
‘You sleep badly, Miss Thorne?’
‘I sleep perfectly, I have always been an untroubled sleeper.
But my mother wakes and calls, two, three times and even more, although there is never anything wrong.
I cannot very well lie and ignore her.’
‘Do you mind telling me how old you are, Miss Thorne?’
Alida did mind.
In front of this woman, under any normal  circumstances, she would have dropped half a dozen years, for she knew she did not look her age.
But it occurred to her that today, it might matter.
‘I am sixty-five,’ she lied, and was gratified to see the Matron's eyebrows raised.
‘You do not look it.
You could well give me ten years.’
Alida bowed slightly.
‘Now, there are several things that must be done.’
At last, Alida thought, at last we are getting down to business, to the signing of papers, the question of money.
Soon, it will all be settled.
‘I shall ask Doctor Sparrow to come and see your mother and give her a complete medical check.’
‘Oh, but…’
‘Yes, I know we are primarily a mental hospital, but you must understand how important it is.
With old people, the physical condition has so much bearing on the mental state.
And frequently, I am prepared to take patients who are only physically ailing and frail, but whose mental faculties remain unimpaired.’
Alida was silent.
She had never liked Doctor Sparrow, who was too young and wore a constant air of disbelief.
Old Doctor Tinsley had been so much more sympathetic.
‘Then, with your permission, I should like to come and see Mrs Thorne myself.’
‘Oh?’
‘You have no objection?‘
‘I suppose not, if it is necessary.’
‘I think it is.’
‘And when can she — be admitted?’
‘I have to decide first if I will have her!
If she needs to come.
I have a waiting list, Miss Thorne, and I am overcrowded as it is.
There are plenty of people without the benefit of a home and a relative, who must be taken.’
‘If it is a question of money….’
The blue eyes were hard as diamonds.
‘It is not a question  of money.
Some people here pay nothing at all.
They, or their families, cannot afford to do so.
Others pay high fees.
They can afford them.
You will see I am something of a democrat.’
She rose and the apron made a tissue-paper sound, ‘And we have to bear in mind, Miss Thorne, that for many people a hospital of this kind is not the answer.
It would be positively a bad thing for them.
They are better at home.’
‘Do you not think of those who must be responsible for them, who bear the burden and strain without training, and without help of any kind?
Surely they need to be considered?’
‘Oh, they are, I assure you, they are.
Now — perhaps you would care to look round?’
Alida shrank back.
‘Oh, no, thank you, but I am afraid I have to hurry home.’
‘Are you sure?
It is…’
‘Yes, quite sure, thank you.
I cannot look round today.’
‘Just as you wish.’
They shook hands in the light-filled hall, and Miss Cress stood to watch Alida Thorne walk smartly away down the drive.
Alida was breathless.
But, she thought, I might be called back and I would not know what to say, I do not want to go amongst mad people, to have them stare at me, to see the unpleasantness of a lot of geriatric cases.
I have enough.
The thoughts of madness and senility frightened her.
As she turned away from the house, into the lane, she gave a shudder of relief.
Miss Cress rested in the sunshine at the top of the steps for a moment or two, saddened.
And she did not even want to see, she thought, she had not enough interest to see round the place to which she was so anxious to consign her mother.
Dorothea Shottery sang.
She sang because she was miserable and hoped that it might cheer her up.
That was all, there didn't seem to be much to sing for.
The arthritis, an inherited  complaint, was painful in both knees, she had slept fitfully, disturbed by nightmares, and now she was to go and spend a distressing afternoon with Eleanor.
For it would be distressing, if Dorothea was to sit there and know the future and be forced to act as though she did not.
Two or three times, during the past few days, she had caught herself blaming Alida Thorne bitterly, but had pulled herself up short, for she had no experience of life alone with an elderly and ailing dependent, she could not say, I would never do such a thing, because how did anyone know?
It was hard to imagine Eleanor's contrariness, since she rarely saw it, but even, Dorothea told herself, were she the dearest, most unselfish soul in the world, she is old, nevertheless, Alida has to carry heavily trays up and down stairs and see the food being left uneaten, to get up in the middle of night after night, to listen to the rambling memories, to put up with incoherence and with having to repeat everything because her mother did not remember.
I cannot imagine what it must be like, but of course, facts have to be faced, one's own life has some kind of vestigial importance, the question of cruelty really does not arise.
All this Dorothea Shottery told herself.
And told the cat Hastings, to whom she talked, because cats liked to be talked to, it comforted them, and because it comforted her, too, helped her marshal her thoughts.
None of it removed the nagging misery from her mind, the horror at the thought of Eleanor Thorne, sweet-natured as she was, being consigned to a mental hospital for geriatrics, to a public ward in a public bed, her possessions named with white tapes, her false teeth removed, her talk and actions, perhaps even her death, made common property.
Nobody deserved that, and Eleanor perhaps less than most people.
But, she said to herself, if Alida were not here, or if anything happened to the daughter before the mother, then Eleanor would have to go away.
But no, that was not true, she would not go, for she herself would gladly look after her.
‘That is an easy thing to say,’ she observed to Hastings, who lay sleek in the sun, ‘when I know how unlikely I am to fulfil it.’
Hastings extended his back legs slowly.
The clock struck two.
The front door bell rang.
‘I did so want Isabel to come, too.
You must forgive her, but she is still not herself.
She would not come, she would not.’
Now here is another unhappy woman, Dorothea thought, and they all come to me, though goodness knows why, for I am surely no inspiration?
‘Shock treats people so badly, Kathleen,’ she said now.
‘Do not worry at all on my account.’
‘Oh, I do hope you are right, Dorothea!
But perhaps I shouldn't have come, now, you were just going out.’
‘Only to see Eleanor Thorne.
I can be a little late.’
Kathleen Lavender held out a cardboard box between her hands, speechlessly, so that it looked like some kind of dumb offering and Dorothea at once remembered the solicitor's stiff letter, her own shamed surprise and then her agitation.
Almost at once, she knew what she must do.
‘I have always wanted Isabel to like me,’ she said sadly, looking down at the box, ‘but she never has.’
Kathleen sat still, the box outheld.
‘Perhaps because I was so friendly with Faith and never with her.
Though I have always been willing.
Faith did not tell me about this, you know, she would have realised how angry I should be.
When I got the letter, I knew how angry Isabel would be, too, and perhaps you are angry — you have every right.’
Kathleen Lavender shook her head mutely.
‘In any case, whatever you both felt, I decided that I could not possibly accept these things.
I was going to come and see you, or write a note about it.’
Kathleen gave a little cry and put the cardboard box down on the table in front of her, as if afraid of it.
‘Do say something,’ Dorothea said, standing over and smiling a little.
How cowed Kathleen Lavender has become!
‘There was nothing I wanted,’ she said, ‘I was quite happy for you to have them, Dorothea.
They are of no great value, you know.’
‘I know.’
‘You might have had them….’
‘But I am sure Isabel did not like the idea?’
Kathleen looked up.
‘There is so much Isabel does not like,’ she said, a note of real scorn in her voice that threw Dorothea into confusion, and she fidgeted, avoiding Kathleen's eye.
Anyone acting out of character worried her in this way, until she had had a silent time alone, to work it out and grow used to the change.
Though when she did so, she knew she would be pleased at the small show of spirit.
‘So take the box back with you,’ she said gently, ‘and say I would not dream of accepting anything, because of course they are family things.
But I will always appreciate Faith's kindness.’
It was a stiff, formal speech, not at all what she had wanted to say.
Kathleen rose.
‘You will be late,’ she said, ‘I mustn't keep you longer.’
‘But Eleanor has lost all sense of the present.
She will expect me when she sees me.
Indeed, why not you, too?
Perhaps you would care to come with me?’
‘Oh, no.
I.
.. there is so much to do.
Another day.’
But there would not be another day.
Faith had been the only sister to visit regularly, for Isabel and Kathleen were afraid, afraid of sickness and infirmity, of germs and ill-health and old age and death.
Kathleen was kind but she would not bring herself to visit and Dorothea knew she ought not to have asked.
She had expected to get satisfaction from refusing Faith's jewellery, because it seemed an action on principle, and because  there was always a surreptitious pleasure to be gained from snubbing Isabel.
Now, Dorothea felt justly punished, for she was merely sad, and Isabel would in any case consider it as inevitable good manners to have refused.
She would have expected it.
Dorothea put on her coat and went out into the garden to cut some flowers for Eleanor.
The cat followed her, ‘Now I shall be late,’ she told him, ‘and Eleanor will have been alone.
I must hurry.’
The cat began to stalk her through the blade-broad iris leaves with such solemnity that she laughed and paused even longer, to play with him, and was cheered.
‘Then we will bury them,’ her sister said.
‘We will bury them in the garden.’
Kathleen Lavender stared.
She is referring to something else, she told herself, I have been dreaming and have not followed the conversation.
‘What?‘
Isabel's eyes were suddenly opaque, you could no longer see into them and Kathleen shook her head.
Across the card-table, they faced one another and, between them, the careful pattern of red and black.
Spades 2, 3, 4, 5 and Jack of Hearts, Queen, King, Ace.
Isabel had the pack in her hand but she kept her fingers still.
‘What?’ she mimicked, like a schoolmistress, ‘What?
What?
What?’
Kathleen flushed and was angry with herself for it and for allowing her sister to get the better of her again.
‘I mistook what you said, Isabel.’
‘You did?’
Isabel removed the seven of diamonds from the third row, placed it over the six, on the seventh row, and turned up a new card, the four of hearts.
She shook her head, while Kathleen stood, uncertainly, watching, still in her coat and hat.
She was just on her way to see Eleanor Thorne,’ she ventured.
‘Oh.’
‘She wanted me to go with her.’
Isabel shot her a sharp glance over the cards and there was still that curious opaqueness, that veil over her eyes.
‘But you did not.’
‘No.’
‘No.’
‘Well — well, then, I will get us some tea.’
‘Already?‘
‘I thought I would bake some scones.’
‘Before you bake anything, you can help me.’
‘With the game?’
‘No, not with the game.’
Isabel laid down her cards.
‘As a child, you never listened to anything properly.
Always half an ear, half a mind.
I can remember our mother complaining about it.’
‘What is it that you want me to do, Isabel?’
‘We will bury it in the garden.
Have I not said so?’
‘Bury what ?’
‘The box, girl, the box.’
Kathleen looked over at the square cardboard box she had just brought back from Dorothea.
‘But it is such a useful box,’ she said, ‘I have been looking about for one like it.
I could make a hole in the lid and feed balls of string through.
It's too handy to be thrown away.’
‘I was not talking about the box alone.
Very well, keep that if you are so parsimonious, and we will find something else for them.’
‘Something else?
For what?’
‘Kathleen?’
‘Yes?’
‘Do you not know what we are going to do?
Have you no idea?
Are you now unable to fit two sentences together, form an idea?
Have you not listened at all ?’
‘I wish you would not speak to me like that.
I am not a child, Isabel.’
‘We will bury the jewellery in the garden in whatever container you prefer.
You shall choose.’
‘Bury …but we…’
‘Yes?’
‘Oh, what nonsense!
What a silly, petty, childish idea, Isabel!
How can you?
‘She did not leave them to me, so nobody shall have them.’
Oh, how ridiculous!
I fear you may be ill.
Are you ill?
And if Dorothea is too good to accept a few semi-precious brooches and earrings, if you are too sensitive to wear them, very well, I will have them and I will wear them.
They will be of use to somebody.’
Kathleen took off her hat carefully in the big fireplace mirror, noting the two pin-points of scarlet anger on her own cheekbones.
Isabel sat at the card-table, her hands folded calmly.
‘You will not help me?
Is that what you are saying?’
‘Help?
I won't hear of such idiocy.
I wonder what has got into you.’
‘I see.
Are we then, at our age, to have a fight, to come to scratches and blows?
Two sisters, two elderly women, clawing at one another?
Is that it?’
‘Isabel, do you feel unwell?
I am really worried....’
‘I am perfectly fit.
You have not answered me.’
‘No.’
‘Well?’
‘It is hardly a question a sane person can answer.
You always were spoiled, and petty, if you did not get your own way.
I am going to make the scones now.
Perhaps you should have a rest.’
‘Very well.
If you prefer not to have anything to do with it, if you prefer not to sully your hands…’ her voice was heavily sarcastic, ‘I will do the job myself.
I will bury the wretched box.’
Kathleen Lavender stared at her sister.
And realised, her heart churning a little as she did so, that this was no joke, that it was not an angry expression of Isabel's pride.
She was quite calm and serious and, for reasons of her own, she intended to bury the jewel box.
She is mad, Kathleen thought, she is surely mad.
We say these things, we accuse others of madness  so lightly.
But my sister is unbalanced, At three-thirty on a Monday afternoon in March, she has become unbalanced in her mind.
Kathleen went into the safety of the big kitchen, and shut the door.
She had no idea what to do, less than if her sister had become violent and raved and attacked her, or claimed to be Lady Hamilton.
That was how insanity had always presented itself to Kathleen Lavender's imagination.
And now, here it was, calm and quiet and peculiar.
She glanced out of the kitchen window.
Isabel was walking towards the bottom of the garden, where the apple and cherry trees grew, where the compost heap was kept.
She wore her old green and brown tweed coat, and her gardening gloves and, in her left hand, she carried the cardboard box.
In her right hand was a spade.
Kathleen turned away from the window, hastily, for fear her sister should see her watching and began to get out the mixing bowl and pastry board, the flour and the milk.
Above all, Alida Thorne said to herself, she must not receive the impression of neglect.
The way to convince this Matron of my mother's extreme need of a hospital bed is not through any show of carelessness on my part.
She would rightly suspect something.
And, in any case, I have always cared.
I have run upstairs and downstairs, ironed huge sheets and four pillowcases at a time, spent a good deal of money on nourishing and delicate foods and extra milk.
There can be no question of her discomfort.
That is not the way.
Alida Thorne took a china bowl and rose-patterned jug into her mother's room.
I have a logical mind, she decided.
‘Now let me prop you up,’ she told her briskly.
‘Let me have you sitting up straight and firm against the pillows, please.
I have come to wash your hands and face and do your hair.
There is some new, scented soap.’
Never let me have this humiliation, she thought, looking at  the drowsing face.
Let me be able to wash and dress myself to the last.
‘Come along.
You are to have a visitor.’
‘Oh no, dear.
You are quite mistaken.
Faith Lavender is dead, that you have told me.
I do remember that.
Faith Lavender is dead and there will be no visitors.’
Alida slid the blue crocheted sleeves deftly up the stick-thin arms.
At least that is something to be thankful for, something I shall not have to explain a tenth or fifteenth or hundredth time, one worry off my mind.
‘Other people have been known to visit you, haven't they?
You cannot say that you are a neglected invalid.
Indeed not.’
‘Dorothea?’
The old hands slipped ruminatively over the oval soap.
‘Do I have a wash especially for Dorothea,’ she glanced up sharply, ‘with the scented soap?’
‘You have a wash every day, as well you know.
Oh, now be careful, I cannot be changing sheets again, not at this time.’
And the water is splashing over my dress, Alida noted, to herself.
She wore a soft, hyacinth-coloured jersey, for she had summed up Miss Cress as a rival and as a woman who took everything in, clothes, manners, appearances, weighed and judged them.
Besides, the hyacinth jersey was an older woman's dress, adding just a little frailty.
On the bathroom shelf, Alida's special salts for rheumatism were prominently displayed.
She hoped Miss Cress would ask to use the bathroom.
In any case, Alida intended to make a clear point of lifting.
Her previous doctor, the understanding Tinsley, had been firm about it.
‘Do not lift things, Miss Thorne — no heavy lifting.
The consequences for someone in your condition can be quite serious.’
He had confided to her that he himself suffered with back trouble.
‘Surely you can organise your life so as to avoid lifting?’
He would unquestionably have recommended that her mother be given a hospital bed, and long before this.
Indeed, the suggestion might well have come from him in the first place, which would have been so much better for everyone.
But how can I change my life?
Do I allow her to slide further and further down into that great, that unseemly bed, to smother and suffocate?
For she cannot raise herself, her limbs are no longer able to do their work.
She is old and she is helpless.
A hospital would be a kindness to her.
‘It doesn't lather,’ Eleanor Thorne said, ‘it is a cheap soap.’
‘You know nothing of modern soaps.’
‘Soap is soap, has always been soap.
And cheap soap is hard and does not lather.’
‘I have to economise where best I can, you must realise that, mother.
We are not rich people, I cannot afford to buy the costliest brands of this or that.
It is an extravagance.
You are not denied the best of foods, chicken breasts, cream, fresh vegetables, asparagus.’
She lifted the bowl of scummed water.
‘In any case,’ Alida id, ‘the argument is spurious, for it is not a cheap brand of soap.’
She left the room.
Eleanor Thorne moved her head about uneasily on the pillow for a moment or two, wishing she had not complained about the soap, for now Alida might change the brand, keep that tablet to herself, And if it did not lather well, it had such a distinctive scent, a scent Eleanor liked.
She lifted her left hand to her face and sniffed.
It would be pleasant to use that soap every day.
Aunt Harriet Craven had been married to a politician, a Cabinet Minister, so that always their Surrey house was full of weekend guests, men strolling in twos and threes about the lawn before luncheon, tall and important, and their lady wives, as Eleanor must learn to call them, in drooping hats.
She had gone about in awe of these adults, to whom she must-not chatter, before whom she must be silent and polite and smiling.
Though sometimes, the gentlemen chucked her beneath the chin absently, or gave her a sixpence, and one, even, pushed her for a whole quarter-hour on the swing.
Afterwards, she had learned that he was an important man, more important  than any of the visitors, who seemed to smile and bob to him, and sidle up to take his attention.
He took care of the nation's finances, Aunt Harriet had said, you might call him the Keeper of the Purse.
Eleanor remembered the swing, up and down, high into the cherry trees, and laughing with delight, and saying, Oh, thank you, thank you, as he pushed her higher and higher.
She wore a white muslin dress because, with her long black hair, white was thought so striking on her.
Aunt Harriet would have been cross, normally, for the seat of the swing made green press-marks on her skirt, but the visitor had spoken up for her, taken whatever blame there was and Aunt Harriet had led Eleanor away to wash her hands before tea, telling her how very, very lucky she was, and how she must always be grateful to the Minister and remember this occasion in future years.
And in the bathroom, she had been allowed to use one of the tiny, individual soap shells especially provided for the guests, and to keep it afterwards.
It had smelled like this soap today, a light, entirely distinctive smell, a little like — what flower?
Any flower?
Eleanor had known so many flowers as a child, each by its botanical and by its common name.
Though she had not pressed them, as her friend Lois pressed them in between the pages of her Bible.
That seemed in some way cruel, a form of burying.
Burying.
Yes, Faith Lavender was dead, and so young.
When Faith Lavender was born, Eleanor thought, I was already a married woman, far from Uncle Arthur and Aunt Harriet Craven, both dead, and from the Surrey house, sold, with its lake and cherry trees.
The Gantry had become so much more important, a house of enchantment and adult delights, not one of childhood pleasures.
For there she had met her husband.
Eleanor Thorne lifted her hand to her face again, happily.
‘She will be delighted,’ Alida Thorne said, ‘she's so looking  forward to a visitor.
I cannot spend all day with her, I have the house to run, things to do.’
‘Your own life to lead,’ said the Matron, Miss Cress, startlingly smart in navy blue, with a chiffon blouse.
‘Oh, dear.
I cannot be said to have a life outside these four walls.
With my mother….’
‘You should try.
You will not always have her company.’
Miss Cress examined a photograph on the bureau.
‘Your father?’
Alida nodded.
She herself would not have peered so openly at personal photographs.
‘Yes, I see there is a resemblance.
A firm face.’
Alida turned away, to the tea trolley, impeccably laid out with the Worcester china, for she intended to give the impression of perfect comfort, and a good background, of genteel upbringing and attention to detail.
Miss Cress should not think she had let things go.
‘I have received Doctor Sparrow's report,’ the Matron said, accepting a cup of tea but refusing anything to eat.
Alida frowned.
She had hoped to guide the early conversation along vaguer, more social channels, not to have this immediate plunge into medical details, definite decisions, not to face a situation already cut and dried by her opponent.
‘Doctor Sparrow was concerned about the lifting,’ she said.
‘Lifting?‘
‘My mother is a small woman, I grant that, but it is nonetheless a considerable strain.
I have had a long history of muscular trouble, of a weak back.
Doctor Tinsley, my old medical man, absolutely forbade me to lift any kind of weight, not so much as a shopping basket.’
‘Yes, quite…’ said the Matron, and to Alida's ears it was a firm interruption.
‘What an attractive garden you have here?
Are you a gardener, Miss Thorne?’
The woman is looking me straight in the eyes, Alida thought, she does not know even the basic elements of courtesy, she  has paid no attention at all to the very relevant account of my condition.
‘I can hardly be expected to have a great deal of time for gardening,’ she said, ‘I am forced to pay out money for gardening help.’
‘Quite clearly money well spent,’ Miss Cress smiled, a sharp-eyed smile, and set down her tea-cup.
‘Perhaps I may now see Mrs Thorne?’ she asked, and Alida was forced to rise.
‘Ah, now that you will not remember,’ Eleanor said, wagging her finger, ‘for I was just twenty and you cannot have been born.
But they would roll back the great doors that divided the hall from the morning room, and carpets would have been lifted and floors polished, earlier in the day.
Such a simple idea, I always thought to have a wall of panelled doors that folded back.
Perhaps it is no longer there?’
‘No, the wall has been made a permanent fixture, I'm afraid.’
‘Oh, but things change, I understand that.
I am not too old to accept the difference in life, Miss Cress, and nowadays, people do not dance, they lead such serious, earnest lives.
Well, at the morning room end, there would be a small orchestra, on a specially built, movable dais.
And we were all around and below them.
And how we would dance!
Dance until we nearly dropped.’
The Matron smiled.
‘But you did not drop,’ she said.
‘Oh, no!
’ Eleanor Thorne shook her head, laughing, for this visitor of hers understood so well.
‘No, we walked out of the French windows — they are still there?’
Miss Cress nodded.
‘Ah!
Yes, down the lawn and through the orchard and then, if it were a really fine evening, out, up the hill.
Looking back, we could see the orchestra and everyone swaying and whirling round, and the room lights glittering.
Oh, it is a splendid house!‘
‘You knew it in its best days, Mrs Thorne.’
‘Yes, but how lucky you are to live there!’
How can I begin to tell her for what reason, in what capacity I live there, the Matron thought.
If ever I have to do so.
‘Your husband was a visitor to the house, you tell me.’
Eleanor smiled.
She could not have guessed how much she would enjoy herself with a stranger, how completely this woman was in sympathy with her, could not have hoped for a new friend to come out, at this stage in her life, and give her so much pleasure.
‘My husband was a cousin of the young lady to whom the son of the house was engaged.
He was in the Royal Navy — my husband, you see.
So for eighteen months we only met three times, when he visited during his leaves.
Oh, what a time there seemed between those visits!’
Eleanor Thorne laughed at her young self.
‘I have seen a photograph of your husband today.’
‘A photograph?‘
‘Your daughter has one in the sitting room, on the bureau.’
‘Alida?
Alida has a photograph?
’ Eleanor Thorne shook her head.
‘She was barely three when her father died, she will not remember anything of him.
I wonder that she keeps a photograph.’
‘There is a close resemblance between them.’
‘You could tell that?
I can see it, of course, even now.
But for a stranger to see it.
...’ She stopped and lay silent.
Then she said, ‘Alida is very good,’ the tone of her voice a little vague, ‘she is…’
Miss Cress watched her, not for any signs of betrayal but wondering if this might be the vague mind, the senility that her daughter had stressed, this symptomatic breaking-off of sentences.
Eleanor Thorne was resting, her eyes looking beyond the window and into the distance.
‘In August,’ she said suddenly, without changing the direction of her gaze, ‘next August, I shall be ninety years old.’
‘For ninety,’ the Matron said, ‘you have a most agile mind.’
The old woman looked at her speculatively, ‘I have a long memory.
That can often be mistaken for agility of mind.
I have almost ninety years of memories.’
No, Miss Cress told herself, and wanted to tell the daughter, angrily, no, this woman is not senile, she is not in need of a geriatric bed in a hospital, I could not take her, it would be’ morally wrong, a sin.
She is happy.
For her age, she is remarkable.
‘My daughter does not have patience with memories.
I wonder if it is because she has so few of her own.
I am guilty in that respect.
Perhaps I sheltered her from experience.
But she did not seem to want to see it.’
‘You cannot accept responsibility for the life of another.’
‘That is a wise remark.’
‘No, a common truth.’
Mrs Thorne turned her head.
The eyes are a young woman's eyes, Miss Cress observed, bright, shrewd.
‘Now,’ she went on, ‘now I would so like to hear about this Uncle you talk of, the Cabinet Minister.
I have long taken an interest in nineteenth-century history.’
‘My Uncle Arthur Craven, Member of Parliament.’
‘Oh, that is a familiar name!
One of Mr Gladstone's Liberal ministers.’
She watched the old face overspread with brightness, began to listen to the clearly-presented, carefully-recalled recital of the past.
In the sitting room, Alida Thorne sat and fidgeted, like a parlourmaid banished below-stairs.
She was anxious at the long absence of her visitor, and at the voices, her mother's voice in particular, sounding on and on through the afternoon.
Yet she dared not interrupt, and show the woman rudely out, for fear of an influence upon her decision.
Above the photograph of her forgotten father, full-bearded and with the braid and sword of a naval officer, the clock struck five.
It is becoming a habit, Dorothea thought with a shock.
I must not give way to it, because it is so unlike me and quite causeless.
I must guard against the habit of depression.
For, when she had woken up, rather late that morning, her usual brightness had been replaced by a quiet, sinking unhappiness, and instead of getting straight out of bed and opening the curtains to see what kind of weather was there, she had huddled down between the sheets, reluctant to face anything.
Dorothea had always believed in the idea of a new day, a new start, and always looked forward to something pleasurable in it.
Something pleasurable had, therefore, generally happened.
In the face of misfortunes and petty irritations, of death and daily pain, and the loss of love, she had held to her expectations and they had never let her down.
Yet now, she thought, when nothing is wrong, there are no misfortunes to speak of, now I am lying here loath to admit the weariness of getting up.
It was only because she was a Christian woman, with a clear view of the seven deadly sins, that she pushed the bedclothes back firmly.
Sloth was much on her mind.
And what an ugly word that was, sloth, fat and white and slow, like slug and slither, so expressive.
She herself, this morning, felt fat and white and slow.
Down the stairs, followed by the cat, was a long way, and the mirror on the landing showed up in full light the pouches beneath her eyes.
Dorothea allowed herself to make a pot of tea, in her dressing gown, and carry it back upstairs, to enjoy over the newspaper and any letters there might be, though she did not allow herself to return to bed.
From girlhood she had always risen early.
Now, she felt, I am suddenly old, and I would like to crawl back into my cocoon of bedclothes and sleep and sleep, for what else is there?
Only, of course, there were the plans to make for her grocery stall, people to see, the same plans as last year, and year upon year before that, the same people, the same questions, the anticipated replies for help.
‘Mrs Day, how very kind!
How reliable you are.’
‘Mrs Lucas, your chutney is so much in demand each year, could I prevail upon you…?’
‘Miss Brotherton, the date now, is August 10, Saturday, August 10.
If I asked you to give your usual willing hand, would…?’
‘Kathleen, it would be so kind of you to bake the cake again, for the guessing competition — a different weight, of course— have you your record book? how very …’
Dorothea shook her head, angry with herself, for everyone expected her, rushed to help her, everyone, truly, was so kind and the Rector relied upon her industry.
Besides, Madame Claudia had been a foolish idea.
The cat Hastings was at the kitchen door, alert, a shaft of sunlight dappling the stripes of his back.
Dorothea saw herself, barefooted on the plastic mat, dressing gown wrapped round her and staring into space, towards nothing, half-thinking, unaware.
For company, and a reminder of where she was and how much she had to do, she switched on the radio, let the cat out, filled the kettle and began to plan her morning's round of visiting.
After that, she decided, I will clean every window in this house.
And then, she had a recollection of a letter on the mat.
‘My dear Dorothea.’
Florence Ames had written after all this time, four or was it six months?
Florence Ames, with her new address, a welcome friend.
Dorothea stayed in the sunlit kitchen with her tea, happy at the letter, her loss of purpose, her anxiety dissipated like a past illness, already wondered at, the symptoms forgotten.
‘My dear Dorothea.’
Florence Ames wanted them to meet, as they had always met so regularly, sharing a common isolation never expressed.
Dorothea smiled.
She was to travel the twenty miles by train, into the city, and they were to meet, in the restaurant of Marshall and Snelgrove, to have coffee and talk, to shop  together for this and that, a new spring suit, some curtain material, a lampshade and the Ceylon tea nobody would stock in the village, and back for lunch, and then for tea, with aching feet and happy conversation, until their trains home.
She may even be persuaded to come back with me, to stay a week or longer, Dorothea decided, for she had no reason to live in that ugly little town house alone now that her father was dead.
She had always been too conscientious, never spared herself, been afraid to leave him for longer than a day, she deserved a rest, a holiday.
I can look after her, Dorothea thought, and we will do the garden together, I shall take on a new lease of life.
She rebuked herself, feeling deeply ashamed, for having given way earlier to despair and self-pity.
How good Florence Ames will be for me, she thought.
The tea streamed, honey-gold, from a blue pot, and round the door came the cat Hastings, pert of face, in search of cream.
‘Oh, you should have brought her to me long before, long before, Alida.
Such a kind, charming woman.
I cannot think when I have enjoyed a visitor so much.’
Alida hauled her up by the arms, plumped up the pillows, and shook them hard, until the dust soared.
‘You have talked your head off,’ she said, ‘I heard you.’
‘I talked and she talked.
She was so interested, she wanted to hear.’
‘She was being polite.’
‘That is real politeness, then, to stay for two and a half hours, in an old woman's bedroom, listening and asking questions.
That is courtesy of a rare kind.’
‘Miss Cress is a busy woman, I am astonished she would waste a whole afternoon in such a way.
I do not have afternoons to waste.’
‘I felt I wanted to keep her, to have her back day after day.’
Alida did not speak.
Miss Cress had left, smiling, had not committed herself, nor had she asked to use the bathroom.
She must have some complaint, Alida decided, to stay in this house two and a half, three hours, and not ask for the bathroom, it is unnatural.
‘She will come again.’
‘No, she has too many other people to visit.’
‘Oh, but it was a firm promise!
And so very clearly to be trusted.
A firm promise to spend an afternoon with me again.’
‘We shall see.’
‘What have you for my supper?
I would like some soup — cream of mushroom soup.’
‘You have clean sheets.
Soup is out of the question.’
‘I am very fond of soup.’
‘I have made a shepherd's pie and there are fresh runner beans.
It is not everyone who can enjoy such home cooking.’
The door clicked shut.
Eleanor Thorne would have enjoyed a bowl of soup.
But she was too bright and restless with happiness, the newly-stirred memories, to be gone over, noted and enjoyed, for any unhappiness merely because soup was denied her.
Miss Cress had a well-bred, kindly face, tasteful calf handbag and gloves.
She had made a firm promise.
She would come again.
‘I will come again,’ Miss Cress had told — told, not asked — Alida, on the doorstep.
‘I have so enjoyed this afternoon.
Your mother is a remarkable woman and I have promised to come again.’
Alida dared not ask, could say nothing, though she had shut the front door quickly on the Matron's moygashel back.
In her heart, Alida Thorne knew both the future and the truth, and she was both oppressed and afraid.
‘Such a good woman,’ her mother began, as she took up her supper tray, ‘such an understanding woman.’
‘She did not seem to me to have very much insight,’ Alida said bitterly, ‘I doubt if she could assess a human situation very accurately, I doubt if she would know where the truth of a matter lay.’
Eleanor Thorne dropped a forkful of meat and gravy on to the clean sheet.
‘What is it?
I am busy.
I am changing.’
The knocking stopped and Isabel Lavender, who had turned the key in her door, went back to trying on the old, brown skirt.
She had discarded it several years ago, as being much fuller than she really liked, but everything came into its own, she reflected, for every article purchased she took pride in finding an eventual use.
On the landing outside, Kathleen Lavender turned the corner of her apron anxiously between her hands.
‘It is the butcher,’ she said, ‘I have to know what you will want.
You asked me to consult you, not to buy at my own discretion, as before.
You have complained about the toughness and the cut of meat, you will no longer eat liver and pork.
The butcher is on the back doorstep for the order.’
She hesitated, and then said lamely, ‘That is all.’
There was a silence.
Downstairs, the butcher stood, waiting, curious, impatient, and through the open door, he saw fresh pies, a wire rack full of small cakes, a chocolate sponge.
‘Isabel....’
‘He must call back.
I am busy, can you not understand?’
‘The butcher has better things to do than make journey upon journey, until we are ready for him.’
‘Nobody has mentioned journey upon journey.
Have they?‘
‘You can at least decide and call to me through the door, whatever you are busy with.’
‘That is my affair.’
‘Isabel, I do not wish to know, I am not interested and there is pastry burning in the oven.
I simply wish...’
‘Lamb chops.’
‘And what else?
A joint of beef for the weekend?’
‘Beef?
I hardly think we can afford beef, particularly uneatable beef, such as the piece you cooked for us yesterday.’
‘I cannot simply order lamb chops.’
‘Why?‘
‘That is a single meal.
I am ordering for the week.’
‘Are you quite at the end of your resources, that you cannot provide a meal of fish, or eggs or cheese?
Is it vital for us to eat meat daily, meat which is both costly and tasteless.’
Kathleen Lavender sighed in her confusion.
She no longer looked forward to each day, so much had she come to dread her sister's peremptory orders, the changes of routine, the explanatory telephone calls.
To nobody else did she appear ill and unbalanced, because before nobody else would she now appear.
Isabel remained indoors, taking fresh air at night, in a solitary walk to the bottom of the garden and back, in her old tweed coat.
Kathleen Lavender lay awake and feared for her own sanity.
‘I am tired of lamb chops,’ she said at last.
Isabel was pleased with the fit of her skirt.
It would do nicely, the fullness would give her ease of movement.
There were so many trunks and piled boxes in the attic, and she would have to make dozens of journeys up those narrow stairs.
She heard her sister's complaint and paid no attention.
Lamb chops were both nourishing and cheap.
The butcher had lined his pockets too thickly in the past at their expense, and Faith's will had been a warning, a pointer to their future.
Kathleen went heavily down the stairs.
The smell of sweet, warm pastry, of fruit and yeast, comforted her, gave her a sense of direction and purpose.
She would make herself a pot of tea, put the confusion to the back of her mind.
‘Lamb chops,’ she said.
‘Yes, I think four lamb chops.’
Dorothea drank Russian tea in a tall glass, with one of the silver holders.
Florence Ames ate two chocolate éclairs.
But the waitresses in Marshall and Snelgrove had new uniforms, dark purple instead of the old coffee-cream shade, and a different style of cap, more up to date and less obtrusive.
Dorothea supposed that change must affect even such trivialities as the uniform of waitresses, although she did not quite see why, and it was a note of uncertainty in an otherwise happy day.
There was nothing uncertain about Florence Ames.
Her friend had not changed in looks or in firmness of purpose.
‘Now what is there,’ Dorothea asked, stirring her lemon tea with the elegant long spoon, ‘what is there to prevent your coming?
You have no longer any excuse.’
‘But I have not said I will not come!
I should enjoy staying with you, Dorothea.’
‘Oh, a weekend, but what is a weekend?
It is hardly worth your while bringing a suitcase all that way, just for a weekend.’
‘Twenty-three miles.’
‘A weekend is nothing.’
‘I think you are lonely, Dorothea.’
‘And are you never lonely?
Your father was company.’
‘Yes.’
‘We could cheer one another up.
You would cheer me up, for you are ten years younger and at my age the years once again begin to tell.’
‘Nonsense!’
‘No.’
‘You have always been the soul of industry and cheerfulness.
‘Oh, how like a fussy old woman you make me sound, an embroiderer, a jam-maker, a do-gooder.’
Florence Ames smiled.
Yes, Dorothea thought, I would enjoy  her company, she would take me out of myself, for she has never for one moment lost her grip upon life, her grasp of a situation, her confidence.
Not that, until very recently, I have begun to do so.
How sudden it all is, leaving us no time to make adjustments and to learn acceptance.
‘A week,’ Dorothea said.
‘What is there to stop your visiting me for a week?
Nothing at all.’
Florence Ames ate the last half of her second chocolate éclair, laid down her fork, wiped her mouth, finished her coffee, wiped her mouth again.
At the adjacent table, a loud, powdered woman in a cyclamen hat slipped her shoes off under the table.
‘Very well,’ Florence Ames said.
‘A week.
I should enjoy that.’
‘Do not let me persuade you against your will, now.
Nothing is worse.
Haverstock is very quiet.’
For Dorothea suddenly saw herself as an old woman badgering a friend into giving up her time and company, and, self-sufficient as she had always been, the picture repelled her.
‘There is nothing I should enjoy more.
I have always liked your house.’
‘Yes, it is a comfortable house.
I am a lucky woman.’
‘And you miss Faith Lavender.’
Dorothea nodded.
‘I have a new friend,’ Mrs Ames said, ‘I should not like to stay away from home too long, just because of that.
It is a question of companionship.’
‘Oh, but why can you not bring your friend to stay with me, too?
That is an idea?
We should be three very gay companions, we could make excursions, the sort one never ventures upon alone.
We could visit a theatre, and there would be an extra pair of hands in the garden.
What a selfish thought!
Oh, but yes, of course, your friend would have to like cats.
Hastings is very unobtrusive, you know, but he is a cat.
Does your friend like cats?’
‘My friend's name is Hubert — Hubert Gaily, and I think  his mother has a cat.
But that, as you see, is not altogether the point!’
Florence Ames smiled.
After a moment, Dorothea smiled too.
‘No,’ she said.
‘No.’
And they suddenly began to laugh, the joke toppling over them like a wave, until they wept tears of laughter, stared at by the loud, powdered woman, and by the waitresses newly attired.
‘Oh,’ said Dorothea Shottery, ‘Oh, oh, I am so enjoying myself!
Oh, I have not enjoyed myself so well for years.
I must have another glass of tea.’
Florence Ames was too overcome with laughter to trust herself to speak.
‘Dear Miss Thorne,
I so much enjoyed coming to see your mother.
I do understand that the burden of an elderly, dependent relative, even of one so sprightly as your mother, can be great.
How ever, there is no doubt in my mind that it would be quite wrong to confine her in a geriatric home among seriously deranged patients.
Her physical and mental condition would deteriorate.
Moreover, as I explained to you, I have a waiting list of really deserving cases.
I will visit Mrs Thorne again, as I promised.
I found her company most entertaining.
Meanwhile, Doctor Sparrow recommends that she be allowed to sit out of bed, in a chair, for an hour a day, during the summer months.
And that, if a wheelchair can be obtained, a breath of fresh air would do her no harm.’
Alida Thorne read the letter again, and then tore it into forty or fifty tiny squares, her hand shaking with anger.
But I am not so much angry, she decided, as upset at being misunderstood, at this complete and utter disregard of my  situation.
I am sixty-two and what life have I had, what opportunities?
Even Dorothea Shottery had the comfort of a home and money left by her husband, even Dorothea who has contributed nothing to life, has a married name and her freedom.
Who has the right to ordain that I should be the one to go mad in this house, with a senile old woman of almost ninety years?
‘Even one so sprightly….’
‘…her company most entertaining….’
And all this nonsense about getting up and going out.
I am now expected to lift her, helpless as a fool that she is, out of that great bed, daily, across the room, into a chair, and back again, and to run up and down when she catches a chill, when her back aches from being pressed against the chair.
The village is to enjoy the spectacle of me, pushing an old woman in a bath-chair.
For I cannot expect to be offered help, nobody else will care to take a turn at the heavy work of pushing.
Besides, she is to be got downstairs, and how is that to be managed?
Am I to sling her across my shoulders in a fireman's lift?
Alida almost laughed aloud at the picture this presented to her mind, except that it was scarcely an occasion for laughter.
‘Oh, it is unfair, the hard-heartedness, the blindness!
How can they know ?’
Alida Thorne allowed herself to weep.
In her yellow-curtained office, the Matron, Miss Cress, picked up her pen to record a death and, as she did so, thought momentarily of Alida Thorne.
She'll be back, she nodded, she will undoubtedly be back.
But, poor woman, tied to a mother she can no longer love, with whom she has no patience, because of her resentment, her lonely guilt.
In truth, Mrs Thorne has the best of it.
She is not an unhappy woman, by comparison.
Kathleen Lavender stared down once again at the shopping list in her hand.
It was divided into two parts, her own list of household requirements, and the list that Isabel had given to her, which read:
One ball stout string
One packet economy labels
One small reel adhesive tape
One indelible marking pen — permanent black
A large quantity of brown wrapping paper, obtainable free from shopkeepers
So Isabel intended to pack a parcel — several parcels.
Of what or to whom, Kathleen did not know and dared not ask.
She hoped very much to meet someone this morning, Dorothea perhaps, or Alida Thorne, or Mrs Bottingley, wife of the Rector, for they might invite her home to coffee and she could confide in them.
She needed to confide in someone, to present the situation as clearly as she could, to ask for advice about her sister's condition.
She is surely not herself, this cannot be normal behaviour, Kathleen Lavender said to herself, day after day, night after night.
Chopping onion for a casserole, mopping the kitchen floor, her hands would pause and she would be overwhelmed with fear and confusion, not knowing what to do.
A doctor was out of the question, Isabel would never see doctors, had always been in rude health, had not, indeed, wanted to call the doctor to Faith, until her colour had changed and, by her breathing, they had known that the illness was grave.
Kathleen had several times suppressed the thought that if they had telephoned to the doctor half a day earlier, Faith might.
... But no, for he had said her heart was badly damaged, death might have come at any time.
Kathleen Lavender had a respect for death, for the propriety of letting it take its due, as and when it required.
I would not like to be kept alive by a machine, like a vegetable, day in day out, she had once decided, I would prefer to accept my appointed day.
The house was silent.
Isabel sat in her room, behind a locked door, and her sister knew neither what she did there or what she was planning to do and least of all did she know why.
Kathleen buttoned her coat.
If she could only persuade Isabel to come downstairs, other than for meals, to talk to her, to listen to the radio, not to be afraid of meeting the butcher or the postman or whatever visitor might call.
No, Kathleen thought, looking at herself in the mirror, at her own, pale face, no, she is not afraid, that is not it, Isabel has never known fear.
It is something else, I cannot understand.
She shook her head.
Isabel Lavender heard the click of the door, her sister's sharp footsteps, the latch of the gate.
She breathed out in relief, at the silent house.
There was so much to be done.
And she will forget the shopping list, she said, she will return with a basketful of trivialities, domestic purchases, and everything I require will have been forgotten.
I have had to bear with a stupid younger sister for too many years.
Wearing her full brown skirt and white gloves, Isabel Lavender went upstairs to the attic, oiling the lock and shifting cases to make a passage for herself.
Whether Kathleen remembered the list of requirements or not, things might as well be got ready, the sorting out begun.
The attic stairs were rather narrow.
If I fall, Isabel thought suddenly, I am alone in the house, there will be nobody to hear me cry out, Kathleen will be delayed, she wanders around the shops, gossiping everywhere.
Not that I am old or likely to fall, not that I have ever for one moment been unsteady on my feet.
But if I should fall….
No, I have thought of that, I shall have to waste time, to sit about until she returns, and what help can she ever be?
Isabel Lavender went back to her own room.
Outside, a thin rain fell, staining the newly-turned soil.
It was Faith's fault, after all, and speaking ill of the dead was one thing, making correct, clear-minded private judgments about them quite another.
Faith had behaved without thought, without foresight, and now, all this work must be done, risks must be  undergone, trouble taken, because of one secret and foolish action.
At the bottom of the garden, under the cherry trees, Isabel saw the low mound of earth, below which, two or three feet below, was the cardboard box, containing Faith's pieces of jewellery.
The mound satisfied her, it was the visible result of a correct decision.
And why should we not think ill of the dead, she wondered suddenly, for they cannot hear, word cannot be passed to them, they cannot be hurt.
Surely it is better to speak ill of the dead than of the living.
The idea was a novelty, it illumined a new area of thought in Isabel Lavender's mind, and she felt a little daring, a little afraid, at bringing up for scrutiny something she had so long taken for granted.
It had been part of the creed of childhood, indeed, the whole of life, unquestioned as so many other maxims were unquestioned, respect for parents and elders, the courtesy of men towards women and the inferiority of women to men, and original sin.
Isabel was proud of herself, proud of her incisive mind.
I am able to examine concepts, she thought, to test values, for I have thought things out, I am not like my sister who bakes and cleans and shops and irons, and goes from day to day, never realising what her mind might discover, content to accept what has always been told her, without a doubt.
In the end, I am a better woman, for my values are secure, they have been tried and not found wanting.
There is good reason why we should not speak ill of the dead but no good reason why we should not think it, if it seems to be necessary.
She was comforted, being able to lay the full quota of blame at her dead sister's door.
Beyond the window, the rain ceased, giving way to sunshine.
‘I don't understand you.
I do not.’
‘So you say.’
‘Change like the moon.’
‘Very likely.’
‘It used to be Saturday nights, and that was all, bar taking the laundry, an hour Wednesdays.
And then those jaunts, on and off.
That was how I'd got used to it, at any rate,’
‘I know.’
‘I'm seventy-four.
I'm too old for all this shifting and altering.’
Gaily put a brief arm around Ma and grinned into her face.
‘Get on,’ he said, ‘you're young yet.’
Ma's face remained blank.
‘Look,’ he said, ‘why don't you sit out, while it's like this.
You don't know when we'll get a day like this again.
Why do you stay cooped up in here?
I don't know.’
Beyond the back sitting room was the conservatory, full of geranium pots, and piles of old magazines, and thick with dusty heat, and beyond its glass windows, the garden lay.
‘I'll get you out a deckchair,’ Gaily said, lacing his shoe.
‘I've more to do than sit about.’
‘What?’
‘How do you mean, what?’
‘What more have you to do?
Tell me.
You invent jobs, that's your trouble, you can't bear to think of being idle.’
‘A house runs itself, does it?
A house with a great man in it and an old woman and a cat, that runs itself?’
‘The sun's out.’
Ma heaved herself into the armchair.
‘I get blisters in the sun.
My arms come up in great red weals.’
‘Sit in the shade.’
‘Well where's the point of that?
I can't see it myself, sitting outside, in the shade when I can sit in here and be comfortable.’
‘It's comfortable there.’
‘There's midges.’
‘Not till the evening.’
‘I'm not having her next door peering at me all day.’
‘She has better things to do, as well.’
‘And I have.’
Gaily went to the door.
‘Right then,’ he said, ‘don't go out.
Stop in.’
‘Not like some.
Always off, these days, every free minute.’
‘No.’
‘Just off out, the moment you've eaten.’
‘I stay in Monday and Tuesday, Wednesday I take the washing, Thursday I stay in.’
‘That's another thing,’ Ma said, to the centre tile of the fireplace.
‘Washing never used to take you the whole night, two hours or more.’
‘There's a queue.’
‘There is?’
‘Yes.
Are you all right, then?
I'll be off.’
‘I'll have those conservatory doors shut and locked before you go.’
‘You'll grill in here, you will.’
‘That's my lookout.’
Gaily shut and locked the conservatory doors.
The cat shot up behind the panes, waving its tail and glared at him.
Gaily opened the doors, let it in, closed the doors, and locked them.
‘I don't want that cat in here,’ Ma said, ‘I might want to do  all sorts of jobs and cat gets under my feet.
Outside's the place for a cat in the afternoons.’
Gaily picked the cat up, pushed it out, shut and locked the conservatory doors again.
On the lawn, the cat arched its back and spat at Gaily through the glass.
‘Right,’ he said.
Ma did not glance from behind the paper.
‘I'm off.’
She turned a page noisily.
Gaily went out, grinning to himself.
‘And you can leave that door open.
It gets like an oven in here.’
‘Right,’ said Hubert Gaily, pushing open the door.
‘It won't last,’ he said.
‘Not for April.
It's too soon.’
‘Then we shall have to enjoy it while we can,’ Florence Ames said.
And that was an end of it.
Gaily always felt that she decided things, signed them and sealed them and delivered a verdict.
‘We shall have to enjoy it while we can.’
Of course, it was as easy as that.
‘You've a very reassuring nature,’ he told her.
That was how he felt.
There was no blurring of the edges with her, no worrying round in circles, no temporising.
With Ma, there was decisiveness, but somehow, the two things were not related.
Florence Ames was quieter about it, as though she had the measure of things because she had spent a long time in looking at them.
The sides of the pond were flat, slabbed with grey stone, and in and out of the water lilies, also flat, great goldfish, thick as your fist, slid underwater.
Gaily watched.
‘Placid,’ he said.
‘The fish?’
‘Yes.’
‘Do you suppose they find it monotonous?’
‘Well — they don't know any different, I suppose.
‘No.’
Gaily relaxed in the sun.
Behind the hedges and plane-trees, the town traffic.
He could see the clock tower.
‘I'm going away,’ said Florence Ames.
Gaily opened his eyes.
You could never expect things to last, after all, could not plan more than a few days ahead.
A goldfish lay low in the water, coloured like a slice of tinned peach.
‘I see,’ Gaily said.
He would have liked to say I'd rather you stayed, except that he had no real reason, or no reason he could give her easily.
He was still wary of her taking things amiss.
He scarcely knew her.
‘Only for a week,’ she said, folding her hands on her bag.
‘A week in the country.’
‘A week?’
Oh, a week was different, a week was all right, he had not understood.
Gaily was surprised at himself, at his own reactions.
‘Well, that's all right,’ he said expansively, ‘that'll do you good, a week in the country.
You'll enjoy that.’
‘I'm to stay with my friend, you remember, I told you I'd met her last week?
Perhaps you don't remember?’
‘Yes,’ Gaily said.
‘Oh, yes, I do.’
For, ever since, he had been turning the name over and over in his mind, puzzling over its slight familiarity.
Dorothea Shottery.
‘Dorothea Shottery,’ she said.
‘That was it.’
‘We were friends a long time ago, during the war.’
The Town Hall clock struck three, and still it was warm, April sunlight lying across the pool, lacing over the backs of fish.
‘Haverstock, Gaily said suddenly, ‘Haverstock.’
‘Yes,’ she said, and looked at him.
Gaily began to tell Florence Ames about the funeral, about the snowdrops and Faith Lavender's coffin, about Dorothea Shottery's name on the wreath and his own confusion among the female mourners.
‘Then you must meet her,’ Mrs Ames said, ‘I must bring you together.
Two friends.’
‘I'm not very good with people — new people,’ Gaily said.
‘Oh….’
‘Unless it's what you'd like, for me to meet her.’
The fish darted, gold in the dark water.
Gaily looked at her.
‘Any friend of yours…’ he said.
Today, she wore no hat and her face looked younger and a different shape.
He wanted very much to do something to please her, and it was hard, for he had never had any kind of a way with women, did not know their minds or their tastes, except for Ma.
Only what he'd read.
Now, here seemed to be something.
‘Perhaps I'd surprise myself,’ he said at last, ‘if I met your friend.’
Florence Ames turned her head and smiled.
‘Are you trying to talk yourself into it?
I wouldn't want you to do that.’
‘I'd like to meet anyone — if you say so.’
‘Then you shall.
She is a good person.’
‘Good?’
Nobody ever said a person was good, like that.
They were nice, or all right, kind or likeable or easy to get on with.
Not good, right out like that.
‘I can't say I know any of what you'd call good people.’
She turned to him in surprise.
‘Not,’ Gaily said, worried, ‘not that I meet bad people.
No, it's just — well, it's not a word you tend to apply, is it?
You know….’
He began to confuse himself.
‘I'm not sure what it means,’ he finished up, ‘a good person.’
‘Why,’ she said, ‘you are a good person!
It is quite easy, That is what it means.’
Gaily did not disclaim it.
He opened his eyes wider, struck with the forceful novelty of this application of such a difficult word, to himself.
He could not ask her to define it further, that would be asking for flattery.
Yet Gaily knew flattery and this had not been it.
She had said it, just in the way she said all  things, as she might say, it is cold, your hair is brown, the sky is cloudy, and Gaily had come to accept her words implicitly.
So he would accept that she thought him good, whatever she meant by it, and he at once felt a curious sense of relief and surprise within himself.
The goldfish shuttled to and fro, beneath the flat leaves, and there was an hour longer for them to sit there.
Gaily smiled at Florence Ames.
Kathleen Lavender did not have her mind on what she said to her sister.
It seemed that she should say something, for Isabel would let the meal run on in total silence, as every meal now ran, until Kathleen feared that she might scream.
And so, she said, ‘You seem to have been busy this morning, Isabel,’ but absently remembering the bumping noises from above and the journeys her sister had made to the front sitting room (locking the door after her) and back again to the attic (locking the door).
Isabel Lavender laid down her dessert spoon.
‘So I am to have no privacy?’ she said flatly.
Kathleen looked up.
‘Privacy?’
‘I am to be questioned and interfered with and hounded, not to be left, doing a job of work the way I choose, a necessary job, a job our sister has made tediously inevitable, a job the result of which may save us from potential disgrace, even if we cannot go so far as to expect it to improve our situation out of all recognition.
I am to be given no privacy.’
Kathleen Lavender sighed, her mouth full of baked apple, cold and solid, her appetite gone.
It was not even easy to remember exactly what she had said, so lightly had she said it, that had offended her sister.
And now, Isabel had spoken the first words for a day or more, only to make them aggrieved, angry words, and incomprehensible too.
Kathleen sighed again, not daring to look up.
I am afraid of my sister, she thought, and why?
What can her words do to me?
But  it was as much her actions, now, that Kathleen Lavender feared.
‘The garden is in a state of wanton neglect,’ she said.
‘I shall go out this afternoon and make a start on the borders.
The sun is shining, things need to be done.’
‘Your mind is wandering.’
‘There is nothing wrong with my mind!
Why should there be?’
‘Your mind is wandering in line with your conversation.
One moment, you are prying into my affairs, the next you are burbling about the garden.’
‘Will you have some custard?‘
‘And the next,’ Isabel shot triumphantly, ‘about food.’
‘Isabel….’
‘It is trying, to keep up with you.’
‘Whatever the fact of the matter is, I intend to do the garden.’
‘Oh, I believe you!’
‘The sun is shining.’
‘So I see.’
‘Then if it is all right….’
‘Why should it not be all right?
I am not interested in the way my sister spends her afternoons.
Am I my sister's keeper?
‘A small smile played about Isabel Lavender's mouth, a smile of delight.
‘And will you help me?’
‘No.’
‘But it would not…’
‘No.’
‘Very well, Isabel.’
‘I should like some more custard.’
‘There is plenty.’
‘I am glad to hear it.’
‘I do wish you would not laugh at me, Isabel.
Smirk is more the word.’
‘Perhaps you would prefer my room to my company?
You  are welcome to serve my meals in my room, there is plenty for me to do alone upstairs.’
‘I am quite happy with your company.
And why do I talk in this way?
Your way.
It is your fault, Isabel.
I enjoy your company, this is where we should eat our meals, together, of course it is.
That is what I was trying to say.’
‘Then you have succeeded.’
‘Isabel.…’
‘Kathleen?‘
‘This job you have to do….’
Isabel Lavender laid down her spoon.
‘Oh, nothing, dear…nothing at all.’
‘Then your mind is wandering,’ Isabel said, and attacked her second helping of the pudding.
Kathleen Lavender lowered her head, in tears of distress.
I believe that it is, she thought, I truly believe that it is my mind, for Isabel has always been so firm, so clearly in control.
I have been the weaker vessel.
Perhaps this is the way of it.
‘Eat up,’ Isabel said, ‘we cannot afford to let things go to waste.
Isn't that the very thing I am trying to prevent?’
Kathleen Lavender did not know.
That afternoon, Isabel finished packing her parcels, upstairs in the attic.
She labelled them neatly, writing the addresses in ball point pen and capital letters.
It had taken her three full days and now they were to be carried downstairs and arranged in the hall, after which her sister would take them to the post office.
Isabel felt a great calm, a satisfaction, for all this would surely go some way towards cancelling out the effects of her sister Faith's thoughtlessness.
In all, there were sixteen parcels.
She went to her room, changed out of the full brown skirt and the old twin set, and lay, full in a patch of late afternoon sunshine, on her bed, smiling a little.
In the garden, her sister drove ferociously at the root of a weed clump with her fork, allowing her aching back and legs to take the place of thought.
That was the best way.
For, she said to herself, standing momentarily, I am going out of my mind.
It is not my sister, it is I who am going out of my mind, and that is a terrible thing.
I am dying, Alida Thorne said, I am surely dying.
Her heartbeats came in great, straining jerks, she could feel the blood squeezing through.
I am dying.
For a second, she lay back and the pillows and the nightmare took her, sweat ran from her pores, and she felt herself falling and the great straining of her heart.
I am dying.
Alida flailed upwards, tearing off the bedclothes, and switched on the light.
I am not dying, no, I have suffered a terrible nightmare, but I am here, in my room, and the night must be far gone, it must be almost morning, I shall go downstairs and make myself a first pot of tea.
But her legs shook and she clutched at the bed, which seemed to recede and there was a strange, fizzing sensation in her head.
The house was silent.
The clock gleamed a phosphorescent midnight.
What is happening to me, she asked, sitting on the bed and holding out a shaking hand, what is wrong?
I do not wake in the night, I am a sound sleeper.
My mother did not call.
Then why is this happening, if I am not ill, what is wrong with me?
For answer, she put her right hand on her heart and could feel nothing.
My heart has stopped, Alida Thorne said.
She put her finger to her pulse.
Nothing.
I am dying, oh, dear God!
And then a great lurch and pit-pat pit-pat pat-pat-pat-pat-pat-pat-pat, racing until she wanted to hold it, rein it in, for this was surely worse, this would overtax the heart muscles, until it fell, exhausted, this was a race to death.
Downstairs in the hall, midnight struck, so that her own clock had been slow and she had seven hours and three minutes before morning and the sound of the milk bottles on the step, of Eleanor's waking movements.
If I were to die, she thought, there is nobody to find me, perhaps for days and weeks, for we do not have visitors, and my mother would die too, of fright or starvation or a broken limb, after her voice gave out in screaming, and she tried to struggle from the bed.
I might not reach the telephone, or I might be unable to dial a number, the doctor might be out….
Alida Thorne clutched at her wrist with its thudding pulse.
As long as my hand is here, she thought, I cannot die.
Well, then, she would sit here, conserve her strength, not move until morning, nor sleep, either, for fear of slipping away without warning into unconsciousness and death.
If I watch, if I am awake and aware, I cannot die, I shall not allow myself to die.
Far away in the darkness, a train sounded a horn, and it was a small proof of human existence, even at such a distance from her, even flashing past across the countryside powerless to assist to her.
If I sit here, she thought, my hand guarding the pulse, if I sit here and do not move, I shall not die.
‘Alida!
Alida!’
I cannot go to her, she does not realise, she can never understand.
‘Alida!‘
I know what it is to be alone, to fear death, I know and she is unaware that I know, and yet I have to go to her, I have to leave the safety of my room.
But I cannot do so.
Alida Thorne sat rigid until the calling ceased and the house folded back into silence, and her clock showed twenty minutes past twelve.
I shall not sleep, she told herself, I must not sleep, and shivered in her nightdress on the edge of the single bed, afraid to reach up to the hook for her dressing gown.
I may not sleep.
And slept, half crouched, falling at last across the pillow, her right hand over the left wrist with its quiet pulse.
It began early in the morning, with the milk boy.
‘Seventeen and fourpence, Miss Thorne.’
‘Nonsense.’
‘Seventeen and…’
‘Sixteen shillings and one halfpenny.
I keep a most accurate record.
I am surprised at you.
You must not expect to deceive me , no matter how many others you manage to deceive.’
‘Now just a…’
‘There are sixteen shillings, and there is one halfpenny.’
‘Seventeen and four.’
‘I do not propose to argue with you, I propose to give you sixteen shillings and a halfpenny.
It is up to you, either to take it and go away, or go away and return when you are in a less deceitful frame of mind.
I cannot stand here chattering, it is a cold morning.
I am ill.’
‘Suit yourself, suit yourself.
Seventeen and four it is, you owe me one and threepence halfpenny, and it'll go down in the book.
Don't blame me.’
Eleanor Thorne would not eat, she felt sick, her breakfast, a carefully boiled egg, the brown toast thinly cut and allowed to cool before buttering, all was left for Alida to clear away and waste.
Blattern the postman walked slowly across the green, more slowly than ever, whilst Alida waited, twitching at the curtains, and then he paused at their gate before walking past.
Alida went out and stared at the empty letter cage in the hall, called sharply after the man, that there had been some mistake.
‘I expect an important letter.
Kindly go through the mail that remains in your hand.’
But Blattern muttered and walked away and there were no letters that morning.
Not, in truth, that she expected any, important or otherwise, but it would have made a difference to the day.
It was as though she had been swept aside, neglected, and Blattern took note of these things, and would rejoice because Alida Thorne had received no letter, was an unwanted woman.
She touched her fingers to her pulse and drew her breath hard.
Within the cage of bone, her heart turned over, packed two beats into the space of one.
I am dying, she thought, as her forehead broke out into a fine sweat, I do not even have to think of it, my mind is on other things, but there is a disturbance, quite plainly to be felt, in the mechanism of my heart.
And I am alone, I can talk to no one.
I shall die alone.
‘Perhaps I shall not be alone.
Perhaps my new friend will come.
Miss Cress.’
‘I doubt it very much.
Do not lie here all afternoon in hopes of that.
She is a busy woman, as I have said before.’
‘She promised me that she would come.’
‘I would not trust her promises.’
‘So you are leaving me alone.’
Alida clenched her hands, until the nails bit into the soft palms.
‘Will Dorothea come today?‘
‘Possibly.
I do not know her plans.’
‘Well, I shall lie here and think, as usual.
There are always my thoughts.’
‘What have you to complain of?’
Alida asked her, very quietly.
‘What have I ever done to give you grounds for fault-finding and self-pity?
You are old, you are bed-ridden, the work falls to me, you do not think or care, lying here day after day, waited upon and given in to, without worries or anxiety.
You know nothing of me, of what I suffer.’
Alida listened to her own voice, soft in the chilly room, watching her own hands, plump, well-creased and polished, banded with rings, twisting together.
Eleanor Thorne moved her head on the pillow.
‘Do you suffer?’ she asked.
‘I would not have it so, Alida.
I do not complain, I am content.’
‘You are an old woman.’
‘And you will be late for whatever appointment you have made.’
Alida stared at her.
She is not hurt by what I have said, she thought, she is neither hurt nor angry, she does not understand what I have said, her mind is losing the powers of comprehension and she has no longer an emotional response.
‘You must accept things, Alida,’ her mother said.
‘You have never learned to accept.
Acceptance of things is so necessary, it leaves one free.’
‘What do you know of that?
What have you to accept?
What do you understand of my situation or my mind?
Accept !’
‘Yes.’
‘I am ill.’
‘Then why do you not go to bed?’
‘And who is to run up and down after you, in that event?
Who is to answer your demands and cook for you and carry your meals?‘
‘Someone would come in.’
‘No one would come.
We have no friends.’
‘I have friends, Alida, you have forgotten that.
Do not confuse yourself.
I have visitors, people come to see me.
Miss Cress came to see me.’
‘Miss Cress!
What do you know of Miss Cress?’
‘And Dorothea and Faith Lavender.’
‘Faith Lavender is dead, can you not hear, can you not understand?
Faith Lavender is DEAD.’
‘Faith?
Dead?’
Alida slammed the door and stood trembling on the landing, listening to her heart, like the sound of the sea rushing through her ears.
I am a wicked woman, she thought, to speak to my mother, who is eighty-nine years old and cannot help herself, in that way.
I am a wicked woman and it is a punishment that I am also ill.
There is no forgiveness for me, none.
She pushed open the bedroom door again.
‘Have you everything you want before I go?’ she asked.
But Eleanor Thorne slept.
The soft, tight band strapped around her arm was nevertheless a comfort, as the pointer pushing up the dial, achieving a number, was a comfort, too, for now something was being done, someone would give her treatment to ward off the attacks of death.
‘Well,’ said Doctor Sparrow, young and arrogant.
‘I was quite unable to get my breath.’
‘But you managed it eventually.’
He had a dark line of beard beneath his pale skin, and a mephistophelian smile.
Alida hesitated.
‘Well, if you hadn't, you would not be here to tell the tale, Miss Thorne?‘
‘I was afraid.
I was alone and it was late at night.
There was nothing amusing about it then.’
‘Oh, these things always look better in the cold light of day.
Smaller.
Less significant.
The shadows are always long at night.’
‘It is all one, by day or by night.’
‘What is all one?’
‘Heart disease.’
‘I daresay that it is.’
‘What will be done?
Clearly, I can no longer be expected to run up and downstairs, the very thing all heart patients must beware of, and clearly my mother must be moved.
I can no longer be responsible for her.’
‘Why is that?’
‘Why?
But I have just explained, surely you do not need me to tell you.
I have just stated the relevant facts.’
‘You have just told me what patients with heart disease may or may not do.
I am grateful to you for the information.
That is all.’
‘Quite.’
‘You have no heart disease.’
‘Perhaps disease is not the correct medical term, I would not know.
Perhaps you prefer failure, or weakness?
Nevertheless…’
‘Neither weakness nor failure.
Your heart is as sound as any heart, as a healthy young man's heart, as a new-born heart, Miss Thorne.
Your heart will give you another thirty years of sound service.
I would not have you worry about the stairs.’
‘You do not know what you are saying, you have clearly misunderstood my symptoms!
Well, you are a young man, Doctor Sparrow, without sufficient experience.’
‘I am also a remarkably tolerant man, Miss Thorne, and is not that a very good thing?’
He swivelled round in his chair, lifting his feet from the floor.
He is an irresponsible boy, Alida thought, making malicious fun of a woman's anxiety, not understanding symptoms, uncaring.
‘I require a second opinion,’ she said.
‘Oh, my opinion is a very sound one, you may rely upon it.’
‘I have said that I require a second opinion.’
Alida noticed that Doctor Sparrow had no lobes to his ears.
Aunt Fosters had always seen, in the lack of ear lobes, a lack of character, a trait of unreliability and of deceitfulness.
‘Miss Thorne,’ he leaned forward, no longer good-humoured, but patient, quiet-spoken.
‘If you are not satisfied with my treatment, you are at liberty to find another doctor.
That is your privilege.
While you are a patient of mine, however, you must accept my professional judgment.
I have no reason for acceding to your request for a second opinion.
Doctors are not idle men, Miss Thorne, and you are a fit woman.
It would be a criminal waste of someone's time.’
‘So, nothing is to be done.
I am to remain ill and without treatment, I am to carry on with the exhausting task of caring for an old and senile woman.’
‘Ah, that is the crux of the matter, is it not?’
‘I do not understand you.’
‘Think about it, Miss Thorne, think about it.
Do not think about your heart, that can look after itself.’
‘Can you offer me no explanation of such clear symptoms, or are you ignoring these, are you telling me that such suffering is a figment of my imagination?’
‘Your symptoms are real enough, I have no doubt, Miss Thorne.
And common enough.
You are merely a little anxious — perhaps you have a problem on your mind, some emotional conflict?
Ignore your symptoms and sort out that conflict.
Relax.
Get out in the fresh air.’
Doctor Sparrow waved his arms.
‘What chance have I to rest, to take walks?’
‘I said relax, not rest.
As for the walks — did not Miss Cress tell you — but I am sure she did — that you should take your mother out occasionally?
Good for both of you.
If you need help in acquiring a chair, that can be arranged.’
Alida rose.
‘You need not trouble yourself, Doctor Sparrow, you need have no anxiety about the question of a wheelchair.’
After she had gone, Doctor Sparrow swung round slowly in the chair, hands behind his head, annoyed, angry, concerned.
And wrote, then, a single sentence on a line of Miss Thorne's medical record card.
Alida stepped from the surgery door into sudden sunlight, and beneath the contempt and the anger was a seed of relief, of new hope, of freedom, for the instrument did not lie, the sounds must have been clear, she had no heart disease, no weakness, no need to accept the fact of death.
Is it only a fortnight ago, Dorothea asked herself in amazement?
Is it only two weeks since that bleak morning when I had nothing for a future and everything seemed too late, when I dragged myself about the house, alone and miserable and weighed down by self-pity?
Yes, on the calendar it is only two weeks.
But it might be months, or even years away, for it seemed to belong to another person, a different life.
Above Dorothea's head, six new, blue mugs hung on six newly-erected hooks, for Florence Ames thought of all things and was constantly suggesting improvements — not that she insisted upon them or took anything in hand, only looked and suggested and then left the idea to be considered, accepted or rejected.
And the pretty new mugs were a symbol, something Dorothea would never have found or thought of for herself, for they were hand-thrown pottery, and she had always been brought up to fine-spun china.
Florence Ames opened new doors upon life, it was a quality Dorothea had always been grateful for.
I am happy, she said, smiling at herself a little.
From the window, she could see her friend, Florence Ames, filling the freshly-turned beds with rows of small green plants from the boxes by her side.
We will go and buy some bedding plants, she had said yesterday, only an hour after her arrival.
There is just time and I will make a start.
When they come up,there will be something to remember me by.
But Dorothea needed nothing to remember her friend by.
She rinsed flour from her hands, dried them, crimped the edges of her two pies and remembered Kathleen Lavender, hurrying away from the nursery garden.
‘Oh,’ she had said as they came towards her, distraught, her face and neck colouring as though with guilt.
‘I have to be home, I am so late, I dare not stop.’
All before Dorothea had a chance to ask if she would come to tea to meet Florence Ames again.
‘But,’ she had said suddenly, ‘I have only been ordering a dozen geranium plants.’
Dorothea had been puzzled, and then, recalling the silly, embarrassing episode over the box of Faith's jewellery, thought that she understood.
Today, lighting the oven, she was sure that she did not understand.
Why should Kathleen not visit the nursery garden, why had it been necessary to make the explanation about the geranium plants, why had she flushed with guilt and fear and concealment?
Surely not over the box of jewellery, surely not, Kathleen Lavender who bore nobody a grudge.
No.
Dorothea shook her head.
‘Now, that is pansies, fuchsias, geraniums — but you must speak very severely to Hastings.
He digs things up.’
Florence Ames took off her old shoes and left them on the step.
‘We are coming on,’ she said.
‘I am making us coffee.
How good of you to do all that work — and it is such hard work!
And how long it would have taken me alone!’
Florence Ames smiled.
‘I am so glad you are here,’ Dorothea said, wanting to laugh or cry, ‘I am so glad, you cannot imagine!‘
‘And I am glad to be here,’ Florence Ames said, ‘so we must enjoy ourselves.’
‘Oh, I am, I am,’ said Dorothea pouring the coffee, ‘Indeed I am!’
‘It is his mother,’ Mrs Ames was saying later, dropping a blob of cream on to a warm scone, ‘she is seventy-four.
That is a lot for one man, alone, being responsible in that way.’
‘And he has never married?’
‘Never.’
Dorothea paused, cup in hand, thinking of Hallam, sun-tanned from his hours in the garden deck-chair, reading, reading.
‘How sad that is,’ she said.
‘Even sadder than for a woman.
Men are not so resourceful, they do not know how to be friends and companions to themselves.’
‘He is not a clever man,’ her friend said and Dorothea recalled that she had said it before, anxiously, determined that Dorothea should understand but, nevertheless, accept.
‘He is not — well, he is perhaps not the man you would expect.
Not…’
‘You forget,’ Dorothea said gently, ‘you forget that I have seen him.’
‘Oh,seen him, yes, but…’
‘And I remember him very well, I remember him still.
I could not get over the kindness of it, his attention.
Another man would have gone away, would have pretended we were not there, would have stood looking up at the wall-plaques and the windows until we had gone safely away.
But he stood there in a pew, with the flowers.
I do remember him so well.’
Dorothea had told Florence Ames the story of Gaily in the church twice before, and neither of them was yet tired of it, Dorothea because it pleased her friend so to hear it, and Florence because it pleased her that the man had been somehow vindicated, turned out to be as good as she had thought, and a friend.
She remembered Isabel Lavender at the tea.
‘He wore boots ,’ she had said.
‘I was afraid you might not think him the right friend for me,’ said Mrs Ames.
‘And would you have been influenced by my opinion?’
‘Oh, no!’
‘Any friend is the right friend.
I am happy for you.
One needs friends, one needs to be a friend.’
He is a good man,’ Florence Ames said, ‘and excellent company.
He has made me look at the world again, made me see things I had never seen before, and see familiar things in a new light.
Things you would perhaps be amused by.’
‘No.’
‘Can you understand?‘
Dorothea nodded.
How right for one another they must be, how happy together, each with his gift for presenting the world anew.
How glad I am for them!
For as a girl, she herself had been taken through the world, as through a series of doors, by her young husband, each door opening on to fresh joys and colours and perspectives, and she had exclaimed in delight, followed him, learned, and even afterwards, when the final door had shut, she could retrace her steps, spend a longer and longer time in each place, as in a series of gardens, and gratefully.
All this her friend Florence Ames was now to have.
On the lawn, the cat Hastings lay stretched out like a rabbit pelt, his fur ruffled by the breeze, and feigned sleep.
‘If he digs up any more plants,’ Mrs Ames said, smiling, ‘I shall be very angry.’
But even Dorothea did not mind.
She went to answer the ringing telephone.
‘Dorothea,’ the voice said, the words running together indistinctly.
‘Dorothea, you will have to come, now, at once.
You must come, Dorothea.
I am ill, I cannot go on.’
Dorothea Shottery held the receiver a little away from her ear, startled and trying to identify the voice.
‘Please!‘
And she recognised Alida Thorne.
‘Whatever is the matter, my dear Alida, whatever is wrong at five o'clock in the afternoon?’
‘I am ill, very ill.
Nobody can do anything, Doctor Sparrow does not answer, he refuses to listen, he gave me no reassurance, but I know, I know that I am seriously ill and there is  no one here except my mother, and who is to look after her, Dorothea?
I cannot, I can no longer do it.
I am so afraid.’
Dorothea gathered her wits, calm and reassuring even to herself in a crisis.
‘Now do not upset yourself, Alida, do not worry at all.
Of course I will come and of course something can be done.
I will bring my friend Florence Ames, she has been a nurse — perhaps you remember her?
We will come at once, do not worry at all .’
Alida Thorne wiped away the tears with the back of her soft hand, only wanting to be taken to bed, like a child, and soothed, to have someone decide and make arrangements, tell her that all would be well, she should have her way.
She sat on the hard hall-stool beside the telephone, safe in the semi-darkness and waited for Dorothea and her friend Florence Ames who was a nurse, someone who would recognise her condition instantly, who would be on hand should emergency treatment be required, who was trained and capable.
Upstairs her mother slept or woke or dreamed, Alida did not know.
‘It is not my fault,’ she whimpered in the dark of the hall, ‘indeed it is not my fault, and nobody can blame me, nobody can raise their voice to me, for it is not my fault.’
‘I would like to go away from here.
I would like that very much.’
Eleanor Thorne half-sat up in the great bed, astonished at the freshness, the absolute appeal of her idea.
‘I would like to go away from here.’
It was in the nature of a revelation but like all revelations, she thought, it has been just below the surface of my mind, lingering unrecognised, waiting, and now I see it and it is  a familiar friend.
For what do I have, what can I miss, from here?
She looked round the room and lifted her head to see, beyond the window, the tops of spruce-trees and the slope of Tantamount Hill.
Well yes, I have that, I would perhaps miss that, so largely and happily does it figure in my dreams.
Age and this way of life seemed to have crept upon her unawares, she had not questioned any of it, scarcely looked back.
And now, she thought, how is it that my world has shrunk to this one room, which is, in truth, rather a nice room, exceptionally light and airy and quiet, but nevertheless a room, one room, instead of acres and miles and countries, of a world.
How is it?
I would like to be away from here, I am not too old for new surroundings, not so old that I feel dread and insecurity in the prospect of a change.
I am eager for new faces, for a life elsewhere.
The answer seemed to her quite plain.
Alida did not need her, Alida could surely manage, surely was not afraid to be left alone?
I should like to live in a community, Eleanor Thorne decided, I should like to taste the fruits of life in a small home, a retirement home, an old people's house, whatever it might be called.
She smiled to herself, at a vision of new friends and television programmes, of various people having tea on a lawn, sharing parcels and visitors and family photographs, being alone when they chose to be alone.
There is no need for me to live and die in this little world, with my only view a view out of the same window, at the same spruce-trees, the view from my bed.
But perhaps she could say nothing, for Alida would not like it, there would be financial considerations.
‘You don't think,’ Alida always said, ‘you do not know how much we spend, simply to keep alive, you have no idea how much things cost.
You do not think.’
This time, Eleanor Thorne decided, I must think, I may not be selfish.
For what would my daughter do alone, a single woman of sixty-two, without relatives of her own age, without children, without memories?
She has been so strange, a sullen, lumpy girl, given to peering in the mirror and walking despondently in and out of empty rooms, scorning experiences and emotions.
A strange daughter, and a woman I have never known.
I am to blame, I can say nothing, not yet.
She turned restlessly on to her side, and back again.
When had life become all bed, all pillows and sheets and lying down?
She did not remember.
‘I would like to go away.
Oh, I would very much like to go away.
I am a selfish old woman.’
Voices sounded on the stairs and came nearer.
‘Do not let anyone in, I cannot see anyone,’ Alida Thorne said, turning on Dorothea.
For visitors would stare at her, ask her questions, would talk and expect a reply, and Alida knew that she could say nothing, could not cope with any demands.
‘But it is Doctor Sparrow.
You wanted to see him and here he is.
Everything is going to be all right, you will be looked after, Alida.’
‘Now then, Miss Thorne,’ he said, brisk of voice, weighing down the end of the narrow bed so that Alida, if she moved her left leg, could feel the pressure of his body.
‘Mrs Shottery has explained,’ she said, looking away across the room, ‘I can tell you no more.’
‘You were in pain?’
‘I collapsed.’
‘You were unconscious?‘
‘I was weak, I could not get my breath, I was dizzy and my limbs were shaking, I have explained it all to you before now.
They found me sitting in the hall, I had to be helped upstairs to bed.’
But she could see the misunderstanding, the impatience, like a shadow across his face.
He does not believe me, she thought, and I can tell no one, there are no words to convey the fear, the blank fear.
Instruments can lie, after all, heart disease can remain undetected.
For only that morning, she had read in  the paper a case of a man, and not an old man, who had dropped dead in the street of some heart complaint.
That had not been spotted and the coroner had pointed out how all the instruments in the world could not have detected it.
The man had had a full medical check-up only a month before.
‘I am going to give you a sedative, Miss Thorne, and some tablets.’
‘Tablets for my heart?’
‘Mild tranquillisers.’
‘I do not need those drugs, I am not insane.
Tranquillisers are for the control of manic patients.’
‘Nonsense.’
The locks snapped shut on his case.
He is going, Alida thought in despair, and no more is to be done, no examination is to be made, tranquillisers are the only treatment I am to have….‘a full medical check-up only one month before.’
‘Have a rest today, take things easy tomorrow, that's all.
You'll be fit.
Don't worry.’
‘Doctor…’
‘Miss Thorne?‘
‘My mother….’
‘Yes, I'll have a look at her while I'm here, cheer her up a bit.’
‘No, it…’
‘Good afternoon, Miss Thorne….’
The door shut on the hopeless, silent room and Alida turned on to her side.
‘…only one month before….’
People forget these things, she thought, they do not bear them in mind, doctors work to routine, finding only what they expect to find, they glimpse these cases in a newspaper and then pass on, they are hide-bound, they do not remember.
Only I remember and nothing can be done.
‘Now I have made you some tea,’ Dorothea said, coming into the room.
Alida did not move.
‘And you are to swallow your tablet with it — what a gaily-coloured tablet, such a bright orange!
Everything will be all right, I am going to cook  something light for your meal — an omelette perhaps?
Do you like omelettes?
Eleanor has said she would like an omelette.’
Alida Thorne took her tea cup and felt better now that someone was taking charge, running the immediate affairs of the house.
‘I am tired,’ she said.
‘Yes, dear.’
‘That is a symptom….’
‘Oh, but when you have taken your tablet and had a good rest, you will be perfectly all right, has Doctor Sparrow not told you?
But then, they are such busy men, they rush away.
Yes, there is nothing wrong with you, nothing that a rest cannot cure.
There, is that not good news?
A weight off your mind.’
Alida turned her face away, her thoughts bitter.
‘Then what are we to do for the best?’
Dorothea asked her friend.
They sat in the cold front room, not daring to light a fire in the strange house.
‘She is quite adamant,’ Florence Ames said, ‘nothing will satisfy her, she says she will get no rest until it has been arranged.’
‘Doctor Sparrow does not agree.’
‘And yet, he does not experience the situation full-time, he has only one view of it.
Because she has worked herself up into a pitiful state of fear and tension, this does not mean that her suffering is not real.
Indeed it is some small proof that it is real.
It is all very well for doctors.’
‘I saw this coming,’ Dorothea said.
‘Several weeks ago the first hint was given.
Her mind was made up long before today.
It has made me very sad.
Eleanor Thorne has long been my friend.
Her only sin is age.’
And what sin is that, she thought, for I am old and Alida is old, everyone grows old, so why must Eleanor Thorne be punished?
But I must think of Alida, too, and of her suffering.
It cannot have been easy, all these years, and who am I to criticise, to look askance, I who have been lucky, who have only myself to please, whose time is free.
‘So that is what you think?’ she said aloud.
‘I do not see that anything else will do, not for the moment.
The situation is too far gone.
This is what she wants and so perhaps it is what she needs.
We can only carry out her wishes, we can only try.’
‘You are so sensible, you have always seen things in a clearer light.’
Florence Ames shook her head.
‘It does not make me happy.
I have seen too much of this.’
The two women thought, but did not speak, of Florence Ames' disabled father, lately dead.
‘I have her name and telephone number here,’ Dorothea said.
‘Perhaps I should ring, as they are both asleep.’
‘It may only be a temporary measure.
That is perhaps all it can be.’
Dorothea sat for a moment longer, remembering Alida, her tears, her loss of all control.
She will not like me to refer to this time when she is better, Dorothea thought, she will avoid my company and we will only wish one another the most formal good morning.
That is how it has been in the past, we have never been friends, and perhaps it has been altogether my fault.
Alida Thorne is a lonely woman, but it is easy enough to make an effort, to understand and accept and perhaps I have not tried.
Well, I will try now.
I will think of her welfare.
She rose from the stiff armchair.
‘Her name is Miss Cress,’ she told Florence Ames, ‘I have it written here.’
Dorothea left the room.
‘I wish you would not do it,’ said Isabel Lavender, descending the stairs.
Her sister jumped back from the letter-cage.
‘You are like a child on a birthday.
Who do you expect will write letters to you?’
Kathleen Lavender stared at the three envelopes, two white, one brown, one long, two small.
‘Well?’
‘I am sorry, Isabel.’
‘The letters will be for me, they are always for me.
I would prefer you to let me take them in.’
‘Very well, Isabel.’
‘How acquiescent you have become!’
Isabel Lavender paused, her left hand hovering above the letter cage.
‘Well?’ she asked again, waiting for her sister to go.
Kathleen turned away.
‘Yes.
I will get on with the dining room.’
‘It is only because you want to pry, to discover who writes to me, that you come out in this way every morning.
‘No.
I am not at all interested, Isabel.’
‘Then why have you developed your powers of hearing so acutely that you are able to detect the click of the gate and the snap of the letter-box, even above the roaring of that vacuum cleaner?‘
‘I heard nothing at all, it was purely accidental.
I came out into the hall and…’
‘Why?‘
‘Why?‘
‘Why did you come out into the hall?’
‘For…oh, I cannot remember now, Isabel.’
Kathleen Lavender turned away from her sister's glance of triumph.
But it is true, she told herself, alone in the dining room, I cannot remember why I went out into the hall but there was a reason.
My mind is wandering, as Isabel has said, I forget things.
Did I forget things before now?
Yes, she knew that she had.
Their mother had been forever running after her with a pencil box or an exercise book or a threepenny piece for church collection, and the maid had turned up a lost doll, a coin, a glove in every corner.
‘Wool-gathering again,’ their father had said, rubbing his hand roughly through her dry curls.
‘Day-dreaming Kathleen Opal Lavender.’
Yes, and Isabel must know, must surely remember it, Isabel who had had such a well-developed, careful, private system for the storing, ordering, labelling, arrangement and organisation of things, whose books were in a certain line, so that she could tell you at once, and without ever having to get up, what sat next to what and where Lewis and Short or Cassell's French-English would be found, were she to consent to your borrowing them because you had lost your own.
That is why, Kathleen told herself, she took such pleasure in packing up the parcels.
The parcels.
I am not a prying woman, I have never really been interested in the affairs of others, I would never examine the contents of their drawers and cupboards and bathroom cabinets, as Isabel did, wherever we went to stay.
She is mistaken in accusing me of that.
Nevertheless, I cannot help wondering about the parcels, for that is something so out of the ordinary, and about the things which are now missing.
Kathleen had not dared to mention those things, must pretend that she had not noticed their absence.
A small clock had gone from the sitting room, and a watch in a slightly mildewed case.
A set of leather-bound novels by Thackeray and the Works of William Shakespeare  in red morocco had gone, too, leaving obvious gaping holes on the shelves.
What had gone from the attic she could only guess, for she did not remember half the things they stored there.
But a short fur jacket that had belonged to Faith, one which fitted Kathleen and which she had looked forward to wearing the following winter, that had gone from its polythene bag in Faith's wardrobe.
Isabel had locked the door to Faith's old room, and taken the keys off somewhere.
She would not open it, even for cleaning.
Well, all those things had gone in the parcels, parcels that Kathleen had been obliged to carry down to the post office in five separate journeys, parcels that were heavy and had cost altogether two pounds four shillings to send.
Isabel had not offered to refund that money.
Kathleen Lavender saw herself, for a moment, standing vacantly in the middle of the dining room, the vacuum cleaner at her feet.
But I will not be ordered this way and that, she said, I will do the work in my own time, as I choose, for my sister has no right to treat me like a maid, to give orders and expect me to run her errands.
All this Kathleen Lavender told herself, knowing that it would never be voiced aloud, but even the thoughts were some small comfort.
She switched on the vacuum cleaner.
I shall have to go out, Isabel Lavender decided, sitting in an armchair in her bedroom, behind a locked door and holding the three opened letters in her hand.
I do not wish to see people, to have to talk and explain, to be stared at and wondered about, to become the object of scorn, for they are all foolish.
But once again, a sacrifice is necessary, and there is no one else to make-it.
I shall have to leave this house for the first time in many weeks.
My sister can never understand what I am prepared to do for her, for our welfare.
The letters had made her angry, though at first she had simply not been able to believe them.
Only one contained a cheque, that from Regis, the bookseller in Maidenhead, and the cheque was for one tenth of the sum she had confidently expected.
The other two letters were simply refusals, statements that, regrettably, parcels would be returned, no value, no possible demand….
The clock belonged to my grandfather, Isabel thought, it was made not later than the year 1850 by a craftsman, but such things are clearly no longer appreciated, nothing has value, it is all gimcracks and gewgaws.
The dealers and auctioneers are clearly dishonest men, for did not the newspapers contain, almost daily, stories of this or that forgotten family possession, found in an attic or lumber room or trunk, and fetching colossal sums?
It is only the American buyers who are now attracted by genuine objets d'art, they are the only ones who understand their true worth and what kind of reflection is that upon us?
Perhaps, Isabel decided, it is the wrong time of the year and I must wait until July or August, when they arrive as tourists.
Meanwhile, we have a cheque for five pounds, and no reply from the furriers.
I shall have to go out.
I may go to see Alida Thorne.
Yes, for she has money and an acquisitive nature.
I have things to offer her that she cannot help but want.
Isabel Lavender opened her bedroom door and shouted above the noise of the vacuum cleaner.
Four times she shouted, before the house went suddenly silent.
‘It is extraordinary,’ she said, when her sister appeared, ‘very, how your ears are attuned to the noise of the letter-box and not to my voice.
But I can quite understand how the one is so much more interesting.’
‘What do you want, Isabel?’
Isabel Lavender raised her eyebrows.
‘Well, is it not coffee time?’ she asked.
‘I might have known,’ Ma said.
‘Oh, yes.
That's about typical, that is.’
Ma had taken to knitting again, long grey pullovers and slipovers and socks.
It was socks today, the four fine needles shooting in and out like shuttles, click-click-click.
‘Nothing surprises me any longer about you.
It does not.’
Ma was an expert knitter, a knitter by feel not by sight of pattern, a measurer by holding up, by arm-length, not by inches and tapes.
So she could knit and watch the television, knit and read, she had no need to follow the needles.
Gaily knew that.
Only it still managed to give her an excuse not to look at him.
‘I just thought I'd tell you,’ he said, ‘that's all.
In good time, so you know what's going on.
You can't complain I don't tell you things.’
‘Forty-five, forty-six....’
‘Can you?’
‘I'm counting, aren't I?
Forty-nine, fif…’
‘You're always game, aren't you?
You don't give in.’
‘You don't want socks then?’
Ma said, laying down her knitting.
‘What's that to do with it?’
‘You can't do it, not to fit.
Haven't you learned by now, when I'm counting, I'm…’
‘…counting.
All right.’
‘Well?‘
‘You've finished counting, then?‘
‘It looks like it, doesn't it?’
‘So I can talk now?’
‘You'll talk if you want to talk.
Nothing I can do.’
‘I like you to know what's going on.
Not that you believe it.’
‘At your age.’
‘I'm fifty-four.’
‘I suppose I didn't know that either?’
‘Jody Beach — you remember Jody Beach, don't you?
I told you about him.
He was sixty-eight.
He got married.’
‘You've said nothing about getting married.
It's all coming out, isn't it?’
‘No, it's not, and I'm not.
I was only giving you an example.
Jody Beach…’
‘…got married at sixty-eight years old.
Well, he should be ashamed of himself, he ought to have better things to think about.’
‘Why?’
‘Stands to reason — a man of his age.’
‘I don't see that, myself.’
‘Well, you wouldn't, would you?’
‘And nobody's said anything about getting married.
I just thought I'd tell you.’
‘Only good friends, are you?’
‘It's nothing for you to snigger at.’
Gaily watched Ma's face.
He couldn't tell, not really, what she was thinking.
Only sometimes he could.
She presented him with barrier after barrier of enigmatic remarks, as now.
She had said nothing, nothing at all to reveal to him how she took the idea of Florence Ames, whether she cared or did not care.
He wondered if she knew herself.
‘Maybe I'll bring her to see you.’
Gaily said.
‘Oh, yes.’
‘You'd like that.’
‘How do you know what I'd like?’
‘You would.’
The needles shuttered in and out faster, glinting in a single bar of sunlight.
‘She was a nurse at one time,’ he said.
‘Oh, yes?’
‘You'd have plenty to talk about.’
‘Such as?’
Gaily turned back to his book.
Anyway, he'd tried hadn't he, and what more was there?
His book was fascinating, it  gave innumerable hints, told him a dozen short cuts, helped with clear diagrams for various well-known difficulties.
A Complete Illustrated Guide to Card, Balsa and Matchstick Models .
It had cost him twenty-five shillings, but worth it because of not being able to keep it out of the library long.
There was always a demand.
‘So it's Sunday,’ Ma said.
‘That's it.’
Gaily did not look up.
Two can play, he thought.
‘You won't be back here till all hours.’
‘Not very late.’
‘Have to mind what you're doing, won't you?’
‘Very likely.’
‘Be getting a car, I suppose, before we know where we are.
To take your lady-friend out.
They all have cars these days.’
‘Public Transport's good enough for me.
It should be.’
‘You could afford a car.’
‘I daresay.’
‘I could get out more if there was a car.’
‘Nothing to stop you from getting out now.’
‘Oh no, nothing at all!
Heaving myself on and off buses, sitting in smelly trains.’
Gaily looked up instinctively.
That had to be answered, after all.
‘Trains these days,’ he said slowly, ‘do not smell.
It's years since you went on a train, you haven't any idea.
Trains aren't what they were, there's been a revolution in trains.’
‘You wouldn't be trying to sell me a ticket?’
In spite of himself, Gaily grinned.
She still had an edge, Ma, you could only hand it to her.
‘Elsie's off on a coach trip,’ Ma said, ‘just booked up, she says.
Tour of Scotland, seven days.’
‘Well, why don't you go on that?
I'll give you the money to go on that.
You'd enjoy yourself.’
‘Stuck in a stuffy bus.’
‘And that's something else you don't know, there's been a revolution in buses as well.
Luxury coaches they are now, with  air-conditioning and reclining seats and a toilet even, comfortable as they can be.
You want to go?’
‘You what?
With the ‘Evergreens’, with a gaggle of old fogies?
Catch me!’
Ma put a spare needle in her mouth and began to count the rows down, but she spat out ‘Evergreens!’ again, between her teeth.
Gaily sat back with his book.
You couldn't blame her, not about the ‘Evergreens’.
No.
Kathleen Lavender, hat and coat still on, flung open the sitting room door.
‘They have taken away Eleanor Thorne,’ she said.
Her sister did not look up from the list of figures.
‘Did you hear me, Isabel?
I passed the house on my way from Tibbetts, I saw the ambulance, a navy-blue one.
I did not stand staring but I could not help but see.
Dorothea was there and the person she used to bring as a partner for Faith's bridge games when I could not play.
I cannot remember her name.
They don't seem to have been much together in recent months, I thought perhaps the friendship had petered out.
Apparently not, though, for there she was.
I wish I could remember her name.
Perhaps you can.
Well — they have taken Eleanor Thorne.’
She stood, panting a little.
Isabel Lavender glanced up in disgust.
‘And of what possible interest is it to us?’
Her sister did not reply, confused by the question, and the anxiety that had been aroused by those few moments, during which two men had helped old Eleanor Thorne down the front path and into a waiting ambulance.
Of Alida there had been no sign.
‘Or rather,’ Isabel said, ‘of what interest is it to me , since clearly you are enthralled by the news?
Your eyes are protruding with excitement, at such an appearance, you have the air  of a gold-digger.
I cannot bear this obscene, grubbing curiosity about the affairs of others, it has never failed to repel me.
Is it not quite plain, even to you, that Eleanor Thorne became senile long ago, and even plainer that Alida wished to be rid of her?
She is going to some home, that is all, nothing could be less remarkable.
And yet there you stand, gloating, without even the self-command necessary to remove your outer clothes and leave the shopping basket behind before rushing in here.’
But when her sister had trailed dejectedly from the room, Isabel Lavender laid down her pen.
So they had taken Eleanor Thorne away.
So Alida had not been there.
To be deprived of freedom and of choice was the final fear, and Eleanor Thorne had been carted away like a splitting and discarded mattress beside someone's dustbin.
Isabel became suddenly aware of her own vulnerability and of the need for preventive action.
Arrangements would somehow have to be made, for Kathleen, unstable, light-headed and suggestible as she was, might some day take outside advice and consign her to an institution.
Such a move was by no means beyond her.
I am neither very old nor at all senile, Isabel Lavender thought, but I do have a sister who is selfish and easily led, and in this world, none of us are safe from the navy-blue ambulance.
Kathleen Lavender sat on the end of her bed and wept a few tears of fear and uncertainty and regret.
I am not going out of my mind, she thought, and if, at the moment, the outside world does not recognise me for what I am, my sister knows she has only to speak a word here and there, to take a decision, and who will listen to me?
And where have they taken Eleanor Thorne?
Madness had a smell, as Kathleen Lavender had watched the very old body move down the garden path.
I should do something now, because perhaps it was for want of normal company that Eleanor Thorne lay until her mind turned the corner into madness and final decay, I should go out, I should not allow  myself to brood, to carry out my sister's peculiar whims and defer to the judgments she passes upon me.
I should visit Alida, who is now also alone, and Dorothea, for she has her friend whose name I cannot remember, and that is yet another person for me to talk to, make friends with.
I should not run home and stay here in fear, for my sister cannot harm me.
The sight of Eleanor Thorne had been disturbing, unreal, something that should not have been allowed to happen.
Kathleen had run home, and she now understood that it was, on this occasion, for reassurance, as though, by conveying the news to her sister, she would convey by implication something of her own anxiety, and receive comfort in Isabel's own concern.
It had been altogether too much to expect.
‘You wouldn't have a hand-drill, I don't suppose?’
Gaily asked.
Dorothea Shottery shook her head.
She was most anxious to supply the right tools and be of all possible help.
But a drill, no.
‘Large screwdriver, then.’
‘Oh, yes, I have several screwdrivers.
I shall bring the cardboard box with everything in it, and you shall sort out exactly what you need.’
‘Now see how well you are getting on together,’ said Florence Ames, when Dorothea had gone, ‘I am so pleased.
I do so enjoy introducing one friend to another.’
Gaily nodded.
It was strange, his feeling of contentment, sitting here in this garden, empty coffee cups in front of them on the white table.
You couldn't have expected it, he had been doubtful about this day from the beginning.
It was not his sort of place, this friend Mrs Shottery not his kind of person.
Or so he had thought at first, hearing her voice, looking round the well-furnished rooms, the shelves full of old china  figures, in her polished house.
She was some years older than Florence Ames, too, and older than him.
But it hadn't been like that.
The sun had shone so that, after their lemon meringue pie, they had come out here, where the long-haired cat danced about the lawn, and Gaily had noticed the back-gate swinging off its hinges.
‘I could mend that for you,’ he had said, hating anything broken or untidy only for want of a firm nail.
He was shocked when she told him that the gardener came three times a week and did not offer to mend it.
‘You have had plenty to talk about,’ said Mrs Ames, sitting back in her canvas chair, her eyes closed.
Gaily watched her.
Delicate lines, like tracings, rayed out at each corner of her eyes.
They seemed to him beautiful, showing up the texture of her skin.
Noticing things like that, about Florence Ames, had become usual, something to look forward to almost.
He never knew, from one meeting to the next, what he might discover in her and it astonished him.
‘I like to learn,’ he said now, ‘you can always learn things.’
Mrs Shottery's husband had collected everything, and china figures in particular.
He had, she said, been unable to pass any shop in any town, any market-stall or window, for he might find a Nelson, a Gladiator, Henry Irving, a Shepherd boy with dog, twins, Dick Turpin.
The named ones were apparently the most interesting and valuable, and he could see their charm, the fresh colours and glazes.
Her house was full of curious objects, hidden away in corners.
In a glass case were some early scientific instruments, clocks and watches, and on the walls plates and dishes in blue and white, vermilion, and gold.
‘It was all my husband,’ she told him, ‘he knew about them, he bought them all.
I only read a little in the books he gave me, picked up what I could.
But I love them, I would be lost without them.
I suppose the house must seem full of clutter.’
But it was not clutter, for everything had its place, Gaily could see that, all was arranged and polished and separate.
He  felt a plan behind it.
He would have liked to talk to her more about her husband, but he couldn't really bring himself, not yet, to ask any more questions.
He scarcely knew her after all.
‘He'd have been an interesting man,’ he said to Florence Ames.
‘I didn't know him.
They were only married a very few years.
She had been widowed some time when we met.’
Gaily nodded, and, bending forward, clicked his fingers at the cat.
It rolled over and over several times, preening its paws.
‘Oh, Hastings is spoiled,’ said Dorothea Shottery, returning to the garden, ‘but you are honoured.
He can be so funny with strangers, even bite them.
Now here you are, a boxful of tools.
I'm sure they are in a mess and perhaps you will not find the right thing, after all.’
‘I can make do.
You learn how to make do, it's surprising.’
‘You don't have to begin working, doing my jobs and setting my house to rights.
This is your holiday, too.’
‘I like to see a job done.’
‘Then thank you.’
Gaily selected the tools and took them off down the path to the back-gate.
The cat Hastings followed at his heels.
‘Oh, that is very kind!’
Dorothea said, settling back and picking up her crochet work.
‘This is an enjoyable day!’
Florence Ames smiled.
Down at the gate, Gaily had taken off his jacket and rolled up his shirt sleeves.
His head was bent.
What long arms, Florence Ames thought in surprise.
I have never seen such long arms!
‘And so Alida did not come,’ Dorothea said.
‘But perhaps after all, they would have had little to say to one another.’
‘I think I am not surprised.’
‘It worries me.
But then, I have never found her an easy person.
I have always known that she did not care to have me as a friend.’
‘She was glad of you when she needed help.’
‘Oh, but that is natural you know and she was very upset.
We are all glad of whatever help we can beg, in that case.
But I do not like to think of her, shutting herself away, unwell.!
‘There is nothing really wrong with her, Dorothea, you understand that?
Doctor Sparrow is clearly a sensible man.
Once she has had a good rest, her world will put on a fresh complexion.’
‘I hope so.
I would so like to see Alida lead a fuller life, less anxious and restrained.
I would so like to see her make some new friends.’
‘She may do so, she has to work out her own salvation now.
You cannot do that for her, cannot alter her frame of mind.
She has her respite and she must use it.
I am sorry if I sound harsh.’
‘You could not be harsh.’
Dorothea smiled.
‘I do feel for her.
It is not that I am heartless.
But perhaps I have not your generosity.
And I am not proud of that.’
Dorothea shook her head.
I cannot allow myself to be praised, for that is not a virtue, she thought.
I am not generous.
If the truth were known, it is only because I have for so long been lonely that I welcome demands for help.
It is only that I feel I may make a new friend and be rewarded with company.
That is not selflessness or goodness.
No.
I have, after all, my own interests at heart and I must recognise this.
Dorothea sighed shortly.
Well, that is the way I am.
But I would not have Alida need friends or be lonely in any way, however difficult a person she may be.
I would so like her to find some relief.
At the bottom of the garden, Gaily bent to lift the gate back on to its newly-placed hinges, and the cat forestalled him, leaping on to the top bar, tail waving in his face.
Gaily shook his head and, watching them, Florence Ames laughed with delight.
Why, Alida thought, in the middle of stripping bare the  great bed, why I can go away on a holiday!
She sat down.
She had forgotten about holidays in recent years, merely snatching an odd day or two in London for shopping.
If anyone can be said to deserve a holiday, she told herself firmly, then I am the one.
I have worked, I have exhausted myself day in day out, for years, and nobody has ever considered my age or health, it never entered my mother's head that I might welcome a break, new surroundings, a chance to be waited on.
Well, she is comfortably settled in now, being very well looked after, and in a wholly suitable atmosphere.
She is back in the house that she is always remembering and talking endlessly about, she has her precious Miss Cress.
And I can go away on a holiday at last.
It was a comfort that the money was solidly there, presenting no problems and solving many.
Alida began to think about where she might go, as she piled sheets and blankets on to the floor.
A very comfortable small hotel it must be, with home cooking and a choice of breakfasts, with armchairs and small tables in the lounge, morning tea at whatever time one chose, and a good bedside lamp.
There were numerous hotels of this kind, she must make enquiries, send for brochures.
That would be something to look forward to, the arrival of brochures.
Blattern should not pass by the gate again without delivering any letters.
Groups or pairs of ladies, often sisters or cousins, ran hotels of the kind she required and they understood the necessity for quietness and a late-night pot of tea, for Egyptian cotton sheets and a hot water bottle and plenty of cushions, for sufficient pastries at the tea table and permission to have one's own wireless set in the bedroom.
Yes, she would go into the country rather than to a seaside resort, for they were full of old, retired, ill-tempered people and had she not had her full share of that?
And they were the hunting grounds, too, of unscrupulous proprietresses and café-owners.
A small market town, a place by the river, a Suffolk village  or a Spa, one of these would suit her, though it must not be too quiet, too isolated.
Alida had need of company, a variety of faces, after the years of being shut up alone with her mother.
And what is more, she decided, in order to go away I must have suitable new clothes.
Oh, there are all manner of things I need, it is so long since I went shopping.
A trip to London for the day, or even two days, staying overnight in some good hotel, that is what I shall have.
Alida Thorne glanced round.
She needed someone to talk to about it all, needed a sharer of secrets, an ear to listen to her plans and, above all, someone to agree that she was on the right course, that both shopping expedition and holiday were what she stood in urgent need of.
She walked slowly downstairs and sat in her own armchair beside the sitting room window.
The house was very quiet.
Now, if she had gone to lunch with Dorothea Shottery after all, there would have been three people to talk to.
Perhaps she had been foolish to remain here, eating a poached egg and spinach off a tray.
But no, for Dorothea might ask if she felt well enough to go away, might start prying into her affairs.
And Dorothea talked so, about nothing at all, spinning her phrases out and forever trying to win attention and applause.
It is the occupational disease of widowhood, Alida had long ago decided, they are none of them self-sufficient, they have been cushioned for so long they cannot keep silent or rely upon themselves.
Besides, I do not wish Dorothea's friend to know of my arrangements.
It is better not to extend what was, after all, an accidental and purely professional relationship.
Nor do I wish to meet the man from the funeral.
by no means.
The man from the funeral.
Alida had been shocked, seeing him with Florence Ames walking from the bus stop towards Dorothea's house.
You could not always tell, of course, and today he looked smart enough in a navy-blue suit and highly polished black shoes, his hair well flattened and combed down.
But he was the same, odd man, who had hung about at the  church in boots at Faith Lavender's funeral.
Alida felt that it was quite unseemly, in a woman of Florence Ames' age, to bring a man-friend openly through the place, to flaunt such a curious person.
No, she had done the right thing in ignoring the invitation to luncheon.
But she thought that she would have been glad of someone to talk about her new plans with, all the same.
And at that moment, up the front path came Isabel Lavender, dressed in black.
‘You can do it with golden syrup tins,’ Gaily said, ‘easier than with coconuts.
I mean, they're easier to get hold of.’
‘Are you sure?
I've enquired into the question of coconuts, and they can be bought wholesale.’
‘Yes and you have to pay for them, don't you?
Well, treacle tins people just save and give you.
They give you all the prizes, too, tins of things you see and for every tin you knock down, you win a tin of something.
Or maybe you have to knock down two or three tins to win a prize — yes, that'd be best.
You'd start running out of prizes unless — too many people would be winning them.’
‘You are clearly a man with a wide experience of garden fêtes, Mr Gaily!’ said the Reverend George Jocelyn Bottingley.
‘What a pity you are here only for the day — I could pick your brains very profitably.’
‘It's only what anyone knows, really, you couldn't say I'd had exactly wide experience.
No.
I ran a fête, two years at a trot, some time back now, though, it was.
I organised it for a boys’ club.
That's all, that's only how I come to know about the treacle tins.’
‘But,’ said Dorothea Shottery, ‘but surely, it wouldn't be possible to get enough empty treacle tins between now and the day.
It takes such a long time to use up a tin, you probably wouldn't realise.
I think we should have started asking people a year ago.’
Gaily nodded his head.
It was right, and he was sorry about it, because he'd have liked to think his idea had helped them, been taken up so that he could feel part of the activity.
It was a long time since he'd organised anything like a fête.
He used to enjoy himself.
And then it came to him, and he had to wait, fidgeting his hands while the Rector talked on.
Florence Ames glanced across at him.
‘I know,’ Gaily said at last.
They looked at him and he began to explain about his models.
‘I've done the Tower of London, and Nelson's Column — that was hard, very hard, because of the balance, you see — and I'm thinking of doing Westminster Abbey.
Now that will be hard, that needs a good deal of thought and it'll take a long time.
I'm saving that up for winter.’
‘Amazing,’ said the Reverend Mr Bottingley.
‘Yes, indeed!’
‘What I thought — well, if you're agreeable, if it'd be of help — between now and August, I could make a model of St Paul's Cathedral.
And I'd keep a very careful record and it'd be on display, the day of the fête, people would have to guess the number of matchsticks in it altogether.’
‘Like raisins in a cake,’ said Dorothea.
‘Or peas in a jar,’ said Mrs Ames.
‘And they'd win…?’ said the Reverend Mr Bottingley.
‘The model of course,’ said Dorothea, ‘what a splendid idea!
Now aren't we so lucky to have you here, Mr Gaily, and all full of ideas!’
‘Of course,’ Gaily said, ‘I'd need a good photograph to work from.’
‘Oh, you shall have that.’
‘And mind you, a lot of people might not want to win the model.
I mean, they take up space and so on, they need dusting.
A lot of people might not have any taste for such a thing.’
But they all exclaimed that, oh yes, of course, anyone would be pleased, and especially a model of St Paul's Cathedral, as  was suggested, anyone would be quite delighted to win that, indeed they would, and Gaily blushed with pleasure.
He would bring Ma to the fête, that's what he'd do.
She'd been going on about the outings, never getting away, hadn't she?
Well then, he'd give her an outing, he'd bring her here and she could enjoy herself, have a tea, go home by train or bus, whichever she chose.
In the end, he found himself being asked to advise about the hiring of marquees, and the erection of stalls, the choosing of sites for swings and the marking out of an area for the donkey ride.
He would come down for the weekend before and see to the final arrangements, of various things.
The Reverend George Jocelyn Bottingley was extremely grateful, for a man like Gaily was what they needed.
The village was too peopled by women, fit only for the baking of cakes and arranging tombola stalls.
It was odd really, Gaily decided, on the way home, odd how easy it had been, how he'd seemed to fit there without too much trouble, and settle down into a way of talking, and acting without any strain.
You wouldn't have expected it at all.
He'd worried, often enough, that he hadn't got the measure of Mrs Ames, that their friendship would one day founder on a simple misunderstanding.
She didn't say much, you couldn't tell.
But he liked her friend, too, Mrs Shottery, even to thinking he knew what Florence Ames meant about her being a good woman.
She took you for granted, as though she'd always known you, that was really what it was.
And it was funny how he had looked at them all, during that funeral, and thought about them afterwards, but they had all been just strangers, not people he was ever likely to meet, or even see again.
Here he had been, though, sitting in that garden, eating her food, offering to give a hand at their garden fête, and it all seemed to come easily enough.
Thanks to Ma really, he thought, and grinned, thanks to her fall and not being able to manage the washing herself.
Otherwise, he'd never have met Florence Ames.
Yes, he'd bring Ma to the fête, by way of introducing her to the new life.
Gaily settled back in the bus seat.
‘I am sorry, I simply do not understand, I cannot follow what you are saying at all,’ Alida Thorne said.
‘Is this some kind of game or elaborate joke?
What is it that you are trying to tell me?
Have I understood correctly?
That your sister, Faith, left a large sum of money, which belonged to the three of you, to a hospital, that the money would have supported Kathleen and yourself in the years to come?
That you are now almost penniless?
But surely, in that case, your solicitor can invalidate the will?
If the money can clearly be proven to belong to you all, and to be your only means of support, it cannot be let out of the family, casually, at the whim of one member.
I assure you of that.
There is nothing you can tell me about solicitors and the ways of the law with regard to legacies, Isabel.
You are sure to be given every help by your firm.’
Isabel Lavender, hands resting on black handbag, black handbag on black gloves, looked over Alida's head and out of the sitting room window, an expression of disdain on her face.
She had been here for twenty minutes, during which time Alida Thorne had backtracked and made difficulties, pretended not to understand.
It was a considerable strain.
‘The solicitor can be of no help,’ she said at length, ‘he has refused, he has passed judgment and there can be no appeal.’
‘Well, I simply cannot believe that, for it is not for him to say.
You must change your solicitor.
If what you have told me is true….’
‘Are you accusing me of telling lies?’
‘…if you have not confused matters….’
‘Or of madness?
I am clear in my mind, I am an honest woman.’
‘I have no doubt.’
‘You can be of no help to us, then?
You are turning your back.
I see.’
Alida stared at her.
So she had not misunderstood, she had not misheard.
‘You are asking me for money,’ she said, shocked.
‘Yes.
Or failing the gift of a sum in cash, I am asking you to make it a business transaction, to buy what you clearly must need and what we can no longer afford to keep.
I am asking you to take up the privilege.
I have asked no one else, I have given you the first opportunity of owning these things.’
‘Why, you sound like a salesman!’
‘Is it surprising?
We can never know, any of us, to what level we may be reduced.
You do not know, Alida.’
‘But I do not wish to buy anything from you!
I have no use for second-hand books and unfashionable clothes and bits of ornament.
I am quite astonished that you should suggest such a thing.
Are there not shops or agencies to which you can send off parcels?
Are there no longer any second-hand dealers in the town?’
‘They are dishonest.
They will give me next to nothing for valuable objects.
It is out of women in distressed circumstances that such people line their pockets, and run their motor cars.’
That Alida Thorne could believe, but she was not prepared to agree with Isabel Lavender at this moment, with a woman whose behaviour had become disturbing in the extreme.
It could not be true, surely it could not, that the Misses Lavender were destitute.
No.
Alida thought of her own capital with some alarm.
It was not so very much, after all, she might easily live another twenty years or more, and money was not endlessly elastic.
There could be no question of a gift to the Lavenders.
‘How is Kathleen?’ she asked, to give herself some time and in an effort to restore the conversation to a level on which she could cope.
‘I have seen so little of anyone recently, with my illness, and before that with the twenty-four-hour tie of my  mother.
I am to go away shortly, on a convalescent holiday.’
Perhaps now, Isabel would listen to her in a normal manner, help mark the newspaper columns with hotel advertisements.
‘We cannot look forward to holidays,’ Isabel said.
‘Well, I am sorry for it but there is nothing I can do.
Only give you the name of a good solicitor.’
‘I have no need of such a thing.’
‘This is a legal matter, it cannot be dealt with by friends and laymen.
‘You are not prepared to help us,’ Isabel Lavender said again, but in a cold, flat, accusatory tone, without any note of pity or pleading.
Alida wished the woman away.
‘I have been very ill,’ she said, ‘I have a heart condition.
You must excuse me now, Isabel, it is time for my rest.’
‘And what am I to do when there are hospital bills to find payment for?‘
‘Hospital bills?‘
‘My sister is becoming mentally ill.
It has shown itself all at once, she cannot remain at home for very much longer.’
‘Kathleen?
When did she become ill?
She seemed to me quite normal the last time we met.’
‘And when was that?’
Several weeks ago, Alida realised, and so, perhaps it was true and Isabel Lavender was living under a double strain, of fear of a demented sister, and of poverty.
Alida could understand her state of mind.
It is very near to all of us, she thought, we are none of us free from the threat.
‘I will write you a cheque,’ she said abruptly, ‘but that must be all.
I am not a wealthy woman, Isabel, and my own mother's hospital bills are draining my income.
But I will give you money, and without strings.
I am not an unfeeling woman.
But you must understand that, after this, I can do no more.
There are state agencies to help you, you must apply to them.’
When the cheque, for fifty pounds, had been written, Alida Thorne felt better.
I have discharged my duty, she thought, I  cannot be troubled by my conscience in that respect.
We can never know when these afflictions will strike us on our own doorsteps.
Fifty pounds is a good sum, however, she should have no need to beg any more.
‘I advise you to see your solicitor,’ she said, folding the cheque into an envelope, as a mark of privacy.
‘Something may yet be done.’
‘All the responsibility devolves upon me.
My sister cannot be trusted with any but the simplest of tasks.’
‘I am sorry,’ Alida said.
But Isabel Lavender walked out of the door, the envelope in her handbag, without a further word, of acknowledgment or thanks.
Alida watched her black figure, stiff as a crow, from the window.
That is the last time I shall put myself at a loss or disadvantage for her, she decided, unable as she was to thank me.
And, if she has a sister who is going out of her mind, I have had a mother eighty-nine years old and senile, I cannot be said to deserve any further burdens nor to have failed in carrying out my duty.
She turned from the window, back into the room that still smelled faintly of Isabel Lavender's black coat and black feathered hat.
And a sudden lightness of heart took her.
There were no longer any cries from upstairs.
That is all over, Alida Thorne said, that is past.