

The Prophet in the Political Wilderness
On the Margins of Unionism
From the first elections for the Stormont Parliament in 1921, the Unionist Party had dominated the politics of Ulster with a virtual monopoly of unionist votes.
Given the beleaguered state of Ulster, it is not surprising that there should be a high degree of cohesion among the Protestants, most of whom were members of either the Irish Presbyterian Church or the Church of Ireland.
These two populations were then brought together in the fraternal Orange Order and the Order had a major say in the composition and policies of the Unionist Party.
However, support for the Unionist Party was neither total nor uncritical.
There has always been an independent unionist tradition on the edges and just outside the party, supported by two sorts of people.
There was a working-class element, centred on the Shankill Road, West Belfast, which was suspicious of the élite nature of the Unionist Party's leadership and which campaigned for higher wages, better housing conditions, and various welfare provisions.
Although populist, this element was staunchly unionist, often more so than the leadership, and expected to be rewarded for the ‘loyalty’ of the Protestant working class.
There was a second marginal element, this time province-wide, which was suspicious of the leadership, not because of its class interests but because of its lack of evangelical piety.
This group wished to maintain and increase the evangelical  religious element in ‘Protestantism’.
Like the populists, the pious Protestants were profoundly opposed to Irish nationalism and republicanism and hence tended to be aggressive in defence of the Union with Britain.
The two independent unionist members at Stormont during Paisley's early days in Belfast were Tommy Henderson (Belfast North and then Belfast Shankill) and ‘D. I.’ Nixon (Belfast Woodvale).
Nixon was a District Inspector in the Royal Irish, later Royal Ulster, Constabulary who was sacked in 1924 for making a fiercely unionist speech at an Orange function.
In 1929 he won his Woodvale seat which he held until his death in 1949.
Henderson made his reputation as a spokesman for the working classes of Belfast against the economic policies of the Unionist governments of the 1930s.
Ian Paisley had been born into the rural pious Orange tradition of politicized Protestantism in County Armagh.
His grandfather and great grandfather had both been long serving District Masters and his father had been an Ulster Volunteer.
Hence it is no surprise that, within two years of arriving in Belfast, Paisley was felt in politics.
In 1949, cross-border influences were felt in the Northern Ireland elections.
De Valera's Republicans decided to contest seats in the North and thus allowed Prime Minister Brooke to present the election as a plebiscite on partition and the existence of Ulster.
The presentation of that election as a popular referendum prevented a new populist attack on the Unionist government.
Norman Porter, the general secretary of the National Union of Protestants and at that time still a close colleague of Ian Paisley, had been asked by a number of conservative clergymen to stand against the Minister for Education in order to protest against amendments to the Education Act which increased and regularized state funding of Catholic schools.
Once the Republican intervention had made the election into a plebiscite on partition, pressure was put on Porter to withdraw to avoid unionist vote splitting.
He did so at the last moment when the Unionists agreed not to oppose Henderson.
Paisley, then a member of the Unionist Party, was asked to stand in the marginal Belfast Dock ward seat.
He declined but agreed to  campaign for T. L. Cole, and he and Norman Porter worked hard to produce an unexpected Unionist victory.
Paisley was given much credit for the win but his commitment to the party was considerably eroded when the defeated Labour candidate was given a post in the Ministry of Agriculture.
From 1949 to the late 1950s, Paisley remained on the fringes of Unionist politics.
His sympathies lay with the independents such as Henderson and Nixon (who at one point in the 1930s constituted, in the absence of the nationalists, the official opposition at Stormont), but the Unionists had not yet shown the degree of liberalism they were to show under O'Neill in the 1960s and Paisley confined himself to promoting various ‘ginger group’ enterprises on the margins of politics.
One of these — Ulster Protestant Action — argued for preferential employment policies to favour loyal Protestants.
It also campaigned for what later became a symbolic division between ‘extreme’ and ‘mainstream’unionists: the right to hold parades and marches.
Many of the misunderstandings of the conflict in Ulster stem from a narrow interpretation of the Protestant ‘Ascendancy’.
Many critics of the Orange state suppose that unionists followed the politics they did in order to maintain and increase their material position at the expense of the Catholic nationalist population.
It is certainly true that a great deal of the competition between nationalists and unionists concerned the distribution of resources.
Nationalists wanted their ‘fair share’; unionists, especially in the working class, wanted those who were loyal and who supported the government to be rewarded for their support.
But material resources are not the only things that matter to people.
Both populations also competed for the prestige of their culture.
In such a competition, the right to display or flaunt the symbols of one's own culture, even when it was almost certain to provoke a violent response from the other side, was a crucial right.
At various times, the Unionist government attempted to curb such displays either by banning marches or by re-routeing them through areas with the same politics as the marchers.
The more militant Protestants saw this as a weakness, a lack of will on the part of the government.
It was now illegal to be a Protestant in a Protestant country.
The result was periodic clashes between the government and organizations such as Protestant Action which insisted on the right  to march where they wished.
Porter and Paisley were frequently to be found leading such marches and various Ministers for Home Affairs found themselves being denounced by loyalists at Orange rallies.
The first Free Presbyterian involvement in an election was a classically ad hoc and reactive affair.
Paisley had brought an ex-priest, Father J. J. Arrien, to Northern Ireland and Wylie booked the Ballymoney town hall for a meeting.
I had a poster done out and had it outside the town hall.
I had it in big letters —‘Father’ Arrien (the father in inverted commas!) will preach on the blasphemy of the Roman Mass on such and such an evening — and the priest of the town, he went up to the council and objected to this and said that Wylie's a trouble maker.
Father Murphy, the local priest, was joined by the Church of Ireland and Presbyterian clergymen in his objections and the council decided to cancel Wylie's booking.
Paisley's rebuttal of Murphy's claims to speak for the majority of local people was characteristically florid:
Priest Murphy, speak for your own bloodthirsty persecuting intolerant blaspheming political religious papacy but do not dare to pretend to be the spokesman of free Ulster men.
You are not in the South of Ireland….
Go back to your priestly intolerance, back to your blasphemous masses, back to your beads, holy water, holy smoke and stinks and remember we are the sons of the martyrs whom your church butchered and we know your church to be the mother of harlots and the abominations of the earth.
The meeting went ahead.
Under the banner of Ulster Protestant Action, Paisley brought a double-decker busload of supporters and a flute band to swell the open-air rally.
Before Arrien spoke, Paisley, in Lutheran style, nailed the following ‘theses’ to the town hall door.
We protest against the iniquitous decision of the Ballymoney Council in closing this hall to the message of Protestantism.
We repudiate the lies of Priest Murphy, bachelor agent of a foreign power and brand as traitors all those associated with him and those who hastened to do his will.
We affirm Article 31 of the church of our Gracious Lady Queen Elizabeth II that ‘masses are blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits’.
It is worth dwelling on that short text, for it contains in brief, almost coded, form many of the key elements of anti-Catholicism.
The false doctrines of Rome are attacked by repeating the judgement of the mass found in the Articles of the Episcopalian Church of England, of which the Queen is the head; thus correct religious belief is linked to loyalty to the monarch and the loyalty issue is again raised in describing the priest as the agent of ‘a foreign power’.
Sexual deviance is hinted at in the use of the term ‘bachelor’ which manages both to describe and to cast doubts on the celibate state of the priest, and the general honesty of Catholic priests is challenged by branding Murphy as a liar.
Finally, there is the criticism of ‘those associated with him’, presumably the Protestant clergymen who shared his objections to the meeting, and there is the suggestion that they and the Ballymoney Council have been manipulated by Rome.
At the next elections to the Council, Wylie continued his protest by standing as a Protestant Unionist and he was elected.
The same year, 1958, Albert Duff, a Belfast Alderman and the superintendent of a small mission hall, stood for the Stormont Parliament in the Iveagh constituency.
Duff had sat in the Belfast Corporation since 1946 as an official Unionist but he was now backed by Ulster Protestant Action as a protest against Maginess, the Attorney-General at the time of the Maura Lyons case.
He failed to win.
The same year Duff and another candidate won seats in the Belfast Corporation as ‘Protestant Unionists’.
Three years later, Protestant Action fielded six candidates for the Corporation; two were elected.
The sort of people who were attracted to the militant populist Protestantism of Protestant Action can be clearly seen from the occupations of the candidates.
Three were shipyard workers, two were self-employed businessmen, and the sixth — Albert Duff — was a full-time Christian worker.
The urban working class in an occupational area which had traditionally been dominated by Protestants, the petite bourgeoisie , and evangelical Protestants; these are the constituencies from which UPA drew support.
What generalized the appeal of Paisley's critique of the unionist élites was the accession to power of Terence O'Neill.
Reformist Unionism
During the 1960s, under the leadership of Terence O'Neill, the Unionist Parliamentary Party found itself devoting an increasing amount of time to questions of economic and social reform.
At the  central government level at least, the traditional preoccupation with loyalist unity and the constitutional issue seemed to have been superseded by an active concern with setting up ‘development’ programmes.
Indeed, political activity at a variety of levels showed signs of breaking out of the loyalist versus republican deadlock.
Terence O'Neill was the son of a Westminster MP and country squire whose family owned large estates in North Antrim.
Educated at Eton and then sent to Europe to improve himself, he worked for a short time in various jobs in ‘the city’ before becoming an ADC to the Governor of Australia.
When war broke out he returned to England and was commissioned in the Irish Guards.
At the end of the war, he returned to Ulster hoping to inherit one of the family's traditional seats and a career in politics.
He was selected for the Bannside, North Antrim, constituency at Stormont and was returned unopposed to the Northern Ireland Parliament at a by-election in November 1946.
Like most of the Anglo-Irish, the O'Neills were Church of Ireland rather than Presbyterian and moderate in their religion.
His autobiography makes it clear that Terence O'Neill had no sympathy with what he saw as parochial unionism.
The Orange marches during what his cousin Phelim O'Neill (Westminster MP for North Antrim) called ‘the silly season’ meant nothing to him.
Being a unionist meant being British or, more exactly, English, rather than being anti-nationalist and anti-Catholic.
His values were those of cosmopolitan, highly educated, and cultured London society.
In his Stormont career, and especially during his period as Minister of Finance, O'Neill gradually developed a liberal reforming unionism in which the pettier aspects of conflict between the two populations would be removed and Protestants and Catholics would work together to modernize the Northern Ireland economy.
Nationalist critics of O'Neill such as Michael Farrell believe that the O'Neill administration was more reformist in its rhetoric than it was in reality.
The B Specials were not disbanded, nothing was done to reverse the gerrymandering of local government boundaries, and the great new development plans were side-tracked by traditional Orange discrimination.
The new university was not created in the obvious place — Magee College, Londonderry.
Instead it was put in the Protestant town of Coleraine.
The new town development was not sited on Londonderry but between the largely Protestant towns of Lurgan and Portadown.
Certainly one would have to agree that O'Neill did little to change either the reality or Catholic perceptions of their subordinate position in the polity and the economy but his failure almost certainly owed more to his lack of power than to his lack of desire.
Farrell uses the fact that O'Neill joined the Apprentice Boys of Derry and the Royal Black Preceptory (two Protestant fraternal organizations similar to the Orange Order) to portray him as a ‘closet’ die-hard unionist but in so doing misses the glaring point that O'Neill had to join these organizations because he was not already a member.
Any genuinely orthodox unionist would have been a member since late adolescence!
O'Neill's suspect views were known to many unionists and the conservatives did not have to wait for the fruits of O'Neillism, however timid they may have been.
They already knew that he was a man who could not be trusted to preserve the Union and to safeguard the social superiority of Protestant culture.
His subsequent actions in office, however little they may have done to encourage serious Catholic commitment to the Ulster state, were enough to confirm the conservative Protestant suspicion that O'Neill was another Lundy, prepared to follow the original by opening the gates of unionist Ulster's walls to the disloyal Catholics and the Irish Republic.
To appreciate the impact that O'Neill had on Ulster, it is important to bear in mind the power of symbols .
Material realities may be profound sources of satisfaction or discontent but it is more often symbols which signal to people their own position, their own worth, and their own precariousness.
Working-class Protestants had some material advantages over their Catholic competitors and enjoyed preferential treatment in housing and local government employment but these advantages were sometimes marginal and were not often felt to be considerable advantages because the Protestants did not sit down to statistical comparisons of their standards of living with the opportunities of Catholics.
What was more important was the status of certain symbols.
A Sandy Row shipyard worker told Sarah Nelson: ‘What did politics mean?
Flags, parades, the red, white and blue, that's what you remember.’
When  Protestants did accept that they enjoyed material advantages over the Catholic population, they argued that these were their just rewards for loyalty.
Why should rebels who would not commit themselves to the support of the state enjoy its fruits?
If Protestants were superior, it was because they deserved to be.
They had the right religion, they were hard-working, and had small families which they could afford to keep in decent circumstances.
They drank less and saved instead of gambling away their earnings.
And they had fought for their country in 1939 when the Irish Republic remained neutral which was, after all, just what one could expect of rebels who had taken advantage of Britain's involvement in the First World War to stage the 1916 Easter Rising.
While O'Neill would have shared some of those views, he was more concerned with the future than with the past and he deliberately set about ending Ulster's ‘petty apartheid’ by visiting Catholic schools (no previous Ulster premier had ever set foot in one), being photographed talking to priests and nuns, and meeting a cardinal.
He then offered the greatest possible affront to traditional unionism by inviting Sean Lemass, the Prime Minister of the Republic, to visit Stormont!
Whether Terence O'Neill was committed to promoting the sorts of reforms which might have satisfied the Catholic minority is unknown.
What is obvious is that he was sufficiently removed from traditional unionism to be quite happy to ignore its symbols and its sacred history in favour of elements of an instrumental and rational view of politics.
Whatever his standing with Catholics (and for a short time it was high), he was set on a collision course with the representatives of traditional unionism and with no representative more so than Ian R. K. Paisley.
Courts and Confrontations
The commitment of Paisley and his supporters to protesting against both religious apostasy and political compromise ensured that the movement would eventually be confronted by the legal powers of the state.
In 1957, Paisley and Wylie were charged with causing a disturbance in Donaghadee by preaching through a loud hailer.
The charges were thrown out by the magistrate.
Paisley's second court appearance resulted from him, Wylie, and Harold V. Magowan, the short-lived Free Presbyterian minister of Antrim, heckling Donald Soper in Ballymena.
Soper was displeasing to the Free Presbyterians for a number of reasons — his commitment to ecumenism, his left-wing politics — but more than anything it was his rationalism which provoked the ire of conservatives.
Soper was firmly in the tradition of those liberals who tried to make the Christian gospel more acceptable to ‘modern man’ by explaining away the supernatural and miraculous elements.
He believed, for example, that Christ had been conceived in the normal way and then sanctified by God rather than being born of a virgin.
The three Free Presbyterian ministers and their supporters heckled Soper's open-air meeting in Ballymena so persistently that the police had to intervene and the meeting was abandoned.
They were later charged with disorderly conduct and fined.
The fines created so much public interest that, on the following Sunday, the Ravenhill Church ‘was packed half an hour before the service began and throughout the proceedings men climbed onto the windows to listen and people thronged the open doors and queued out in the street at the back and side of the church’.
The audience heard Paisley denounce Soper for his blaspheming, the Methodist Church for not opposing them, and the government for misusing the law to punish legal protest.
In concluding he promised to go to prison rather than pay his fine.
His choice was blocked by the pro-government Unionist newspaper which paid his fine for him.
In a defence of the action which recognized the emotive nature of the case, the Unionist said:
Dr Paisley could not foresee that he would be in gaol during the throes of a general election.
The cause of Northern Ireland must be greater than the individual and it would mean a very unfavourable hearing for many government speakers which would give the wrong impression.
Such a thing would cause repercussions far and wide.
In other words, while leading government spokesmen publicly derided the Free Presbyterians as a trouble-making minority, others with the interests of the Unionist Party at heart appreciated that Paisley's militant stand was popular enough to cause problems if his challenge was accepted.
Paisley's third appearance in court resulted from a protest against Rome rather than against liberal Protestants.
In June 1963, Pope John XXIII, the Pope who had called the second Vatican Council, died.
O'Neill sent the following message of condolence to Cardinal Conway, the Vicar Capitular of the archdiocese of Armagh: ‘Please accept from the Government of Northern Ireland our sympathy on the great loss which your Church sustained on the death of your Spiritual Leader.
He had won wide acclaim throughout the world because of his qualities of kindness and humanity.’
The Lord Mayor of Belfast had the Union Jack on the City Hall lowered to half-mast.
Paisley reacted quickly by calling a rally in the Ulster Hall and then leading a march to the City Hall to protest ‘at the lying eulogies now being paid to the Roman antichrist by non-Romanist Church leaders in defiance of their own historic creeds’.
For Paisley, the issue was both religious and constitutional.
The Revolution settlement which formulated the basis for the offering of the British crown to William of Orange in 1689 asserted that British freedoms and liberties could not be safeguarded under a ‘popish’ prince and closed a number of public offices, including the monarchy, to Catholics.
Although the nineteenth century had seen almost all restrictions on Catholics removed, the loyalists of Ulster still believed that to accept the authority of the Pope was to open the way to papal domination and the erosion of civil liberty.
When this is combined with the fact that the Republic was an overwhelmingly Catholic country whose constitution recognized the special superordinate position of the Catholic Church, it is easy to see how any state recognition of the Pope or the Catholic hierarchy could be seen as a ‘constitutional’ issue.
The liberals regarded sending telegrams of condolence as a polite gesture.
The conservatives saw it as just another step in a ‘Romeward’ march, and every such step had to be protested.
Paisley, Councillor James McCarroll (a Protestant Unionist Councillor and an elder of the Free Presbyterian Church), and three other Protestant Action activists were summonsed for holding a march without giving the statutory notice to the police and fined £5.
For an insight on the complex intertwining of religious, political, and constitutional elements, it is worth quoting at length from a newspaper account which, despite some odd punctuation and grammar, gives the gist of Paisley's speech:
He referred to the Bible that had been presented to him by the people of Memel St on July 10 at the opening of their march.
He said that ‘the powers that be’ had presented him with a summons and the Protestant people had presented him with that book and he thought a parallel could be drawn between the two.
The rank and file of the Ulster people are still loyal to the core, but he declared ‘we have been badly led, both politically and religiously’.
He then declared that he and those with him on the platform had pledged themselves to pay no fines and refused to be bound over, ‘and we have authorised no one to pay these fines for us.
Any Protestant who does so will be a Lundy and a traitor.
We are ready to take any penalty Mr Mills desires to place upon us’.
He declared by this determination, Ulster is going to see that Protestantism is neither dead nor buried but is on the march.
There was a time, let it ever be remembered, only about 400 years ago, when our fathers were ruled over and tyrannised and when men like Calvin, Knox, Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer broke rather than bend for the Gospel and liberty.
Mr Paisley declared that Ulster was in terrible jeopardy.
We are losing our liberties and our heritage and he declared ‘I tremble what Ulster will be like when the children in our homes reach the years I have reached.
Our gospels and their preachers are being assaulted and insulted.
Men who have preached for years in the city streets are now under the intimidation of RUC sergeants and police constables’.
Continuing a long and impassioned address, Mr Paisley said ‘If the Roman Catholic Church flew the Union jack at their chapel I would have no objection, and when they wished to pull it down was their business and their property, but the City Hall was our property’.
Here then was the world as it appeared to Paisley.
Disloyal Catholics did not fly the Union Jack.
Protestants who should have known better paid tribute to the Antichrist, the spiritual leader of the disloyal Catholics.
Orthodox Protestants doing no more than exercising their democratic right to protest against the paying of tribute to the Antichrist were taken to court and fined.
And the final but crucial element: this scenario was contrasted with the government's failure to punish rebels.
In the Revivalist which carried the reports, Paisley added that, while loyal Protestants were charged for a peaceful protest, rebels could attack an open-air evangelistic meeting in Dunloy and get off.
The end of the story is an anti climax.
The Free Presbyterians' fines were paid by an anonymous donor.
Although this dispute was ostensibly about Protestant dominated councils paying tribute to the Pope, the real contest was between O'Neill and Paisley.
In his biography, O'Neill mentions his innovation in sending the government's condolences and explains the Lord Mayor's action as ‘responding to the general atmosphere’; an atmosphere which O'Neill was helping to create.
When the fines were paid and Paisley's martyrdom postponed, he responded by sending a telegram to O'Neill: ‘Congratulations to you, the Minister of Home Affairs, the Crown solicitor, the Police and the Unionist Lord Mayor, on not permitting your own law to take its course, and on arranging for my fine to be paid.
No SURRENDER!’
The public confrontations continued.
Despite putting up Protestant Unionists against specific Unionists, Paisley was still willing to work with the Unionist Party provided the candidate was acceptable.
In the 1964 Westminster election in West Belfast, Paisley and Desmond Boal (whose Stormont constituency was encompassed by the Westminster seat) backed the Unionist candidate, James Kilfedder.
Sinn Fein were contesting the seat and a tricolour, the flag of the Irish Republic, was flown in the window of the Sinn Fein election office in Divis St. Although the Flags and Emblems Act made such displays illegal, the RUC had often ignored them if they were in nationalist areas.
On this occasion, Paisley made sure that the display was not ignored.
At a meeting in the Ulster Hall, he insisted that if the RUC did not go in and remove the offensive flag, then he would do it himself.
The RUC moved in and triggered what Farrell describes as the worst rioting since 1935.
In the same year, Protestant Action again fielded candidates for the Belfast Corporation.
Paisley, with Ivan Foster and William Beattie, two student ministers of the Free Church, was active in campaigning for them.
After all, one of them was Mrs Eileen Paisley, who was standing against the outgoing Lord Mayor to protest his papist flag-lowering.
She was roundly defeated by a ratio of two votes to one and the only Actionists elected were the two sitting members in the St George's ward, which took in the fiercely loyalist area of Sandy Row.
1966: O'Neill Must Go!
As the general direction of O'Neill's policies became clear, conservative Protestants began to organize against him.
The conflict operated on two different levels: in the party and on the streets.
Unionists who opposed his policies, such as Sir Knox Cunningham, the Westminster MP for South Antrim, spoke against O'Neill both in public and in the councils of the Unionist Party.
Those people who did not have access to that sort of platform took their protests onto the streets and it was here that Ian Paisley and his followers earned their public reputation.
As the examples already given illustrate, most of the protests concerned what the conservatives saw as government weakness.
Any event which celebrated Catholic, nationalist, or republican culture and history was to be opposed.
This was especially the case if it appeared that government legislation was being flouted.
The rioting in West Belfast which followed the RUC's removal of a tricolour from Divis St in 1964 has already been mentioned.
The loyalists saw the toleration of ‘rebel’ meetings as being the first signs of weakness which would only encourage the nationalists in their campaign to destroy Northern Ireland.
If the government would not prevent such acts of rebellion, then the loyalists would take action themselves.
As often as not, the government would then act against the loyalists to prevent the increase in tension.
The loyalists would then interpret the government's actions as being proof that there was one law for the nationalists and another for the loyalists.
A classic clash of symbols occurred in April when the government took no action to prevent the 1916 Easter Rising being commemorated in Belfast.
This is O'Neill's account:
Considering that Belfast was not involved in that event fifty years previously one might have hoped that those so minded to would have contented themselves with attending the ceremony in Dublin, less than a hundred miles away.
But all indications were that there was no prominent Catholic prepared to give a lead in the interests of peace.
I decided to form a committee consisting of all former Ministers of Home Affairs under my chairmanship and between us we survived the celebrations.
O'Neill survived but as he goes on to record: ‘The Catholic streets in Belfast became and remained a forest of Irish Republican flags for the duration of the celebrations.’
Nothing could have been  more galling to the Protestants.
In their view, the cowardly IRA had taken advantage of the fact that Britain was involved in a world war to stage their rebellion and to murder Protestants.
Paisley responded with public protest meetings and a march of over 6,000 loyalists to the City Hall Cenotaph where Councillor James McCarroll, a Protestant Unionist and an elder of Paisley's church, laid a wreath: ‘In memory of the members of the UVF, RUC and other civilian population [sic ]who died in defence of the Ulster Constitution at the hands of Rebel Forces during and since the 1916 rising.’
Although there was as yet no sign that the IRA was capable of mounting the sort of offensive which followed four years later, Paisley had no doubt where O'Neill's reforming policy would lead:
Capt Terence O'Neill…will soon have to make up his mind whether he intends to appease the Republican minority or serve the vast so-called extremist majority.
Surely he does not seriously think that appeasement will stop the IRA attacks or the cries of discrimination.
Or is he secretly selling us to the South?
This latter possibility had been uppermost in loyalist minds since January of the previous year when O'Neill had broken with all previous precedent and invited Sean Lemass to Stormont.
While O'Neill and his supporters represented that visit as the Republic s de facto recognition that the North did exist as a separate entity and that doing necessary economic business with the North meant the Republic attenuating its claims to the territory of Ulster, the conservative Protestants saw it as an horrendous betrayal of the history and sacrifice of Ulster Protestants.
As a betrayal, it had, for the political sphere, the same symbolic quality as leaders of the Protestant churches welcoming the Pope.
Opening Catholic schools was bad enough but consorting with the head of the Dublin government was entirely beyond the pale for loyalists.
Symbols were again at issue in the controversy in 1966 over the name for the new bridge over the Lagan in Belfast.
The city council planned to call it the ‘Queen Elizabeth Bridge’ but the more assertive Protestants wanted a memorial to Lord Carson.
So angry was Ian Paisley at the affront to Carson's memory that he increased his tirade of abuse against O'Neill, produced Carson's son to  contest the Westminster elections in March (promising four Protestant Unionists in all) and only withdrew when he realised how devoid of constituency organisation he then was.
The rudiments of a constituency organization were then provided.
As is so often the case in Paisley's career, the crucial step was taken by someone other than Paisley and then offered to Paisley as an opportunity the possibilities of which he could appreciate.
Noel Doherty, a committed loyalist, had been a member of Paisley's congregation since 1956.
He became a member of Protestant Action and founded Paisley's printing enterprise.
In 1966 he suggested the formation of the Ulster Constitution Defence Committee: a body of twelve loyalists chaired by Paisley and quickly nicknamed ‘the twelve disciples’.
Linked to the UCDC would be the Ulster Protestant Volunteers which would provide a province-wide structure for rank-and-file supporters.
Despite adopting some of the paramilitary trappings of the old Carson Ulster Volunteers, the UPV made significant efforts to discipline the movement and separate it from illegal violence.
Boulton records that the constitution provided that: ‘any member associated with, or giving support to, any subversive or lawless activities whatsoever shall be expelled from the body.
The chairman of the UCDC has vested in him full authority to act in such cases.’
However good the intentions behind the drafting of that section of the constitution, some members of the Ulster Protestant Volunteers did not share the chairman's stated views about violence.
James Murdoch, a Free Presbyterian and a member of the Loughgall UPV, introduced Noel Doherty to James Marshall, a quarryman who said he could provide explosives, and Doherty arranged a meeting between Marshall and a member of the Shankill Road UVF.
Although Paisley drove Doherty to his first meeting with Murdoch and Marshall, there is no evidence that he was himself involved in the discussions.
The strongest link between the UPV and illegal acts of violence came with a series of bombings in 1969 which, ironically, the Protestant Telegraph was quick to blame first on the IRA and then on the Eire government.
In fact, they had been organized by members of the Ulster Protestant Volunteers.
The explosions in March and April of 1969 at an electricity sub station in Castlereagh  and at the Silent Valley reservoir in the Mournes were followed by an explosion at an electricity sub-station over the border in County Donegal.
In this case, the device seems to have exploded early and Thomas McDowell, a member of the Kilkeel Free Presbyterian Church and the South Down UPV, was fatally wounded.
Although a number of members of the UPV were charged with these explosions, all the cases failed because juries were not convinced by the evidence of an Ulster Protestant Volunteer who turned police informer.
It is important to note that it was only the statements of this man and his wife which contained any evidence of Paisley's knowledge of the crimes, and the juries determined that they were not trustworthy witnesses.
The view of Paisley's critics was that he was implicated but was clever enough to avoid any direct contact.
Others maintained that, even if he knew nothing of these crimes, he was morally responsible in that he had contributed substantially to the general climate which allowed members of his organization to believe that such acts were justified in order to destabilize the government of Terence O'Neill.
This second charge is impossible to evaluate.
While it is certainly the case that Paisley was prepared to use militant rhetoric in denouncing O'Neillism, it is also the case that he was a vocal critic of private initiative in vigilantism and of attacks on Catholics.
When a young Catholic barman was murdered by loyalists in Malvern Street in 1966, Paisley was quick to announce:
Like everyone else, I deplore and condemn this killing, as all right-thinking people must.
Incitement, direct or indirect, must be treated with the full rigour of the law.
Under the Special powers Act the government has the full authority to act and has failed to do so.
If it continues to abdicate its responsibilities then the British government must act immediately in its place.
This and other statements were clear enough, and it seems a little one-sided to attribute causal power to one set of statements — those which encouraged Protestants to reject the O'Neill government — and yet deny causal power to those statements which called for such rejection to be confined within the limits of legality.
If the perceptions of Paisley's critics are revealing of their underlying attitudes, the same could be said for the perceptions of his supporters.
Paisley has always provoked strong emotions.
To his critics, ‘Hell won't be full until he's in it’, as one old Catholic lady put it.
For many of his supporters he could do no wrong and any semblance of wrong having been done was explained as part of the ecumenical conspiracy to defeat true Protestantism.
Thus County Armagh Free Presbyterians, looking back on the explosives cases and the charges laid against Free Presbyterians, recollected that far from supposing these people might be guilty and hence in need of church discipline, they assumed their innocence and believed that the charges were just another part of the plot to discredit Paisleyism.
Such a view was made easy by the reliance of the police on informers of dubious character.
In the cases against the Shankill Road UVF, the police case rested considerably on ‘verbal’ statements, supposedly made to the police, which the witnesses refused to repeat in court.
One of these entered the popular literature and is still repeated by journalists, despite the fact that Hugh McClean, who, in admitting his part in the Shankill UVF killings, is supposed to have said: ‘I am terribly sorry I ever heard of that man Paisley or decided to follow him’, later denied making such a statement to the police.
The extensive use of ‘supergrasses’ in the eighties has made many people sceptical of informers and verbal statements, but such scepticism was far less widespread in the 1960s, and the impression that Paisley was heavily involved in illegal acts became common.
In truth, all that can be said is that, in both the Free Presbyterian Church and in the UPV, there were a small number of people (none of whom were figures of any stature in the Church) who were prepared to abet others in the commission of crimes to further the aims which the vast majority of people in the Church and UPV wished to see promoted by less violent means.
On his release from prison in 1985, Gusty Spence, the leader of the Shankill UVF and the man convicted of the Malvern St murder, was asked about  Paisley's role and he was frankly dismissive: ‘I have no time for Paisley's type of religious fervour or his politics but he had no involvement in re-forming the UVF though he stirred up a lot of tension at that time for his own ends.’
The General Assembly Protest
On 6 June, Paisley, this time wearing his church leader hat, clashed with the police when he led members of the Free Presbyterian Church to picket the Irish Presbyterians' General Assembly.
In previous years, the Free Presbyterians had gathered outside the Assembly Hall for their picket, which was almost an annual event.
This time, Paisley filed notice with the RUC that he intended to lead a march from his church at the bottom of the Ravenhill Road, across the Albert Bridge, and through Cromac Square en route to the city centre and the Assembly Hall.
Accounts of why this route was chosen vary.
One marcher thought that it had been deliberately chosen to be provocative; others suggested that it was simply the most direct route.
Most thought nothing of it, and clearly the RUC did not anticipate any trouble.
They did not suggest re-routeing the parade.
The fact that many of the Free Presbyterian marchers were women and children suggests that they were equally sanguine.
A mob of young Catholics was waiting at Cromac Square, armed with a good supply of bricks and metal objects to hurl at the marchers.
The police called for reinforcements and struggled to keep the rioters back.
In view of the subsequent controversy, it is an important point to note that the Free Presbyterians did not retaliate but maintained their composure under a considerable volley of missiles.
As film footage of the riot clearly showed, the rioting was exclusively Catholic against RUC.
When the Free Presbyterians arrived at the Assembly Hall in  Fisherwick Place, the police threw a rope across the road and stopped the march.
Paisley about faced and led the parade around the block so that it now came upon Fisherwick Place from the west.
In his evidence at the subsequent trial, Paisley maintained that he did this to keep the parade moving and hence diffuse tension.
The Paisleyites now flanked both sides of a rope-way stretched between the Assembly Hall and the other Presbyterian building across the street.
When the Moderator and the other dignatories came out of the Assembly to cross the road, they found themselves flanked by a crowd of Free Presbyterians shouting anti-ecumenical slogans and waving placards.
In retrospect, the events of that afternoon seem trivial, but the combination of stone-throwing rioters and Paisleyites abusing the dignatories of the Irish Presbyterian Church and the Governor of Northern Ireland and his wife triggered a considerable wave of anti-Paisley feeling.
The emotions raised by the events quickly led to considerable confusion in the media and Stormont about just who did what.
The Newsletter ran the story under the headline: BATONS IN CITY STREET BATTLE: EIGHT ARRESTED AFTER CLASHES PAISLEY MARCH MEETS MOB VIOLENCE GOVERNOR FACES STORM OF ABUSE
Already in this presentation there is the possibility of ambiguity.
We have ‘clashes’ and ‘mob violence’but apart from the Governor we have only one named agent: ‘Paisley’.
There is no specific mention of Catholics as rioters.
By the time Terence O'Neill returned from London to face press questioning on what he intended to do to quell the violence, there was a general notion abroad that it was the Paisleyites who had been violent.
The process of attributing the blame to Paisley continued the next day with a debate in Stormont in which a Labour member said:
The attack last evening was mainly directed against the Presbyterian Church.
The parade was making for the Assembly Hall.
I am quite sure that the Moderator and his colleagues will be able to withstand any theological attack directed by the Rev. Ian Paisley, but when it approaches physical violence this is another matter.
Here again the images are being confused.
A wide variety of things could be construed as ‘approaching’ violence but to use that expression while condemning the violence of the previous day and to do so in a critique of Paisley while failing to mention the Cromac Square rioters is to exaggerate.
News film of the General Assembly disturbance shows much shouting and placard waving but nothing that comes near the sort of heckling and barracking to which present-day government ministers are regularly subjected in visits to the north of England!
When O'Neill returned from a meeting with Harold Wilson in London, he reacted in a manner guaranteed to confirm the Free Presbyterians' claims that O'Neill's policies were designed to achieve in the political sphere what the ecumenical movement was trying to do in inter denominational co-operation.
He delivered a strong attack on Paisley and sent his Minister for Home Affairs to the General Assembly to apologize for the demonstration and to promise that ‘the Government will take all possible steps to put a recurrence of such indignities to the Head of this great church and his distinguished guests’.
On 15 June, the House of Commons in Stormont met to debate a motion urging action to preserve law and order.
After other speeches condemning Ian Paisley, Terence O'Neill rose and delivered a long statement in which he made it clear that he regarded the defeat of Ian Paisley as a central part of his reforming Unionism.
For him, Paisleyism and republicanism were allies, both movements bent on destroying Northern Ireland through the  stirring up of community strife.
He was able to marshal the support of the Grand Master of the Orange Order who had previously condemned Paisley's extremism.
And he reinforced the concern which underpinned his whole political philosophy; the need to placate Westminster:
Do we want or can we afford to alienate our British friends?
Do the mindless individuals who use unspeakable language in the streets and hurl vile insults at Her Majesty's representatives and other dignatories ever pause to reflect that our standard of living, our Welfare State services…our economic health all depend on our links with Great Britain?
Only one member of the House was in any way sympathetic to Ian Paisley.
In a brilliant and witty, though unappreciated, speech, Desmond Boal QC did his best to clarify the events of 6 June.
He reminded the House that the police had been given forty-eight hours notification of the proposed route: ‘Honourable members on this side of the House who in this respect are charging him [Paisley]with gross civic and social irresponsibility must also charge the police with exactly the same thing.’
The critics had argued that the Paisleyites had provoked the Catholic population of the Markets with the anti-Romanist slogans on their placards.
Boal reminded the House that the parade did not pass through any Catholic areas:
If their argument is worth tuppence it means that the people in the Markets area must have been aware of the inscriptions…before they in fact took the steps they did.
It is perfectly clear that long before the procession came into sight, long before the procession had formed, these people in the Markets in their desire to be offended had come down from the side streets and had taken great trouble to he offended, and not only were prepared to be offended but were prepared to throw missiles, stones and other weapons…
There is not a suggestion that one of these missiles were returned; there is not one suggestion which can be made by anybody, no matter how evilly disposed he is to the organizer of the procession or to the purpose of the procession, that any violence was offered by a member of that procession.
For his pains in defending Paisley, Boal was fired from his lucrative job as counsel to the Attorney-General.
Whether or not the procession from the Ravenhill Church and the barracking of the Presbyterian Church Assembly had been designed to constitute a direct challenge to the government, things were moving rapidly in that direction.
Paisley, John Wylie, and Ivan Foster, with two others, one a Protestant Action Councillor and the other a staunch old loyalist lady from the Shankill Road, were charged with public order offences.
Two thousand supporters marched to the Belfast Magistrates' Court with the accused who were all found guilty.
After some discussion, Paisley, Wylie, and Foster decided to refuse to pay their fines and to go to gaol.
As had happened previously, the fines were paid anonymously but the magistrates had made it impossible for an outsider to defuse the situation on this occasion by also binding them over to keep the peace.
They refused to sign the bond, arguing that to do so would prevent them from making any public protests.
On 20 July, Paisley, Wylie, and Foster entered Crumlin Road prison.
Someone who had worked closely with Ian Paisley in the 1950s claimed that he had once joked that the only way they would get anywhere would be if they went to gaol for the Protestant cause.
Whether or not the story is true, there is no doubt that the imprisonment was a major breakthrough for both religious and political Paisleyism.
Different sorts of supporters reacted in different ways.
The young urban loyalists took to the streets:
There was a serious riot with Loyalists fighting the RUC outside the prison on 22 July.
The next day the RUC tried to block a 4,000 strong Paisleyite protest march from the centre of Belfast, but the marchers broke through and rampaged through the centre of the city breaking shop windows, stoning the Catholic-owned International Hotel and going on to Sandy Row where they tried to burn down a bookie's shop which employed Catholics.
That night there was savage rioting outside the jail with repeated baton-charges by the RUC.
Only heavy rain stopped it.
The government banned all meetings and parades in Belfast for three months, and gave the RUC power to break up any gathering of three or more people.
As with the links between Paisley and the UVF, one must be careful of supposing that Paisley provoked the violence committed by urban working-class Protestants who were active in supporting his attacks on O'Neill but who were generally not members or  adherents of his Free Presbyterian Church.
Mrs Paisley brought a message from her husband in prison, condemning the rioting and asking for it to stop.
According to one of the tabloid papers, she said: ‘The people who have been fighting the police have no connection with our church.
The vast majority of the rioters are just hooligans.’
At first the remaining Free Presbyterian ministers were demoralized and confused.
Apparently innocent of the opportunity which had been presented to them, they met in the Ravenhill Church and talked about what they should do and even hesitated about talking to the journalists waiting outside.
Beattie argued that they should go out and present their case.
Although O'Neill tried to present the case as one of the law simply taking its natural course to deal with illegal disorder, the Free Presbyterians saw it as a deliberate attempt to use the apparatus of the state to suppress true Bible Protestantism.
And once they started to present their case, many evangelicals accepted their interpretation.
Here one can see the value of Paisley's province-wide preaching during the ‘wilderness years’.
William McCrea's family were Presbyterian farmers from Tyrone who had heard Paisley preach in a tent near Dungannon:
We couldn't get seats in the main tent.
It was so crowded they had to unlace the side-flaps of the enormous tent and raise them up so that people could sit outside the tent, down the sides, and though we couldn't see him very well, we heard him.
The word of God was fully preached that afternoon, and many, many souls were saved.
It was a wonderful meeting.
When, after that, we used to hear controversy about Dr Paisley and later heard about his imprisonment in 1966, because of that afternoon when we heard the gospel preached with power and conviction, we found ourselves tending to take his side in the controversy.
There was an interesting difference in the political involvement of different generations of Free Presbyterian ministers.
Beattie and Foster were fully involved with Paisley and Wylie in their protests and in electioneering.
The slightly older students, John Douglas, Alan Cairns and Bert Cooke, were less often involved in public protests.
On this occasion Cooke led a delegation to see O'Neill who had responded to pressure from a Unionist MP, Austin Ardill, to meet the men.
He refused to consider what he regarded as interfering in the judicial process and what they saw as moderating his policy of harassing the Free Church.
The campaign was taken to the country.
The remaining ministers and elders found themselves being invited to address meetings all over the province to explain the imprisonment.
As Robert Wilson, an elder in the Rasharkin church, recognizes, this was a period of unprecedented interest in the Free Church:
At that time that was a sad day for many people, the day he went to prison.
I know people who were in tears as a result of Dr Paisley going into jail, but in the long term God answered prayer.
If he hadn't been put into the jail, I don't know what would have been the result today but…before he even had his jail sentence served, applications were coming in from town an in that short space of time about 1966, our church more than doubled in membership and in churches.
i think it was very important that he served a term in jail…
I look on it as a work of God.
But the police harassment did not stop with the imprisonment.
John Douglas found himself charged with behaviour likely to lead to a breach of the peace as a result of some remarks he is said to have made at a meeting in Rathfriland.
Two plain clothes women constables were in the audience with a concealed tape-recorder.
Although Douglas was eventually acquitted of any offence, his initial conviction and the methods of the police — which included presenting in court what they claimed was a transcript of their tape of his speech, but which was only one third of the length of another tape-recording which was played to the court — led many Free Presbyterians and sympathizers to believe that the whole force of the state was being directed against them.
Paisley's whole career has been distinguished by a finely developed sense of symbolism and an event like the imprisonment was not to be wasted.
Every Sunday, the huge congregation, gathered in the Ulster Hall, heard either Mrs Paisley or one of the ministers read out a message from their leader in prison.
Hitler, Gramsci, and Regis Debray had spent their time in prison writing political treatises.
Paisley used his time to hammer home the religious significance of the battle with O'Neill by writing a commentary on Paul's Letter to the Romans, the book which Paul had written while awaiting trial in prison.
Church Growth
For the Free Presbyterian Church the main consequence of 1966 was religious revival.
In the period from the foundation of the Free Church in 1951 to 1966 only thirteen congregations had joined and one of those had lapsed.
In the eighteen months which followed July 1966, twelve more congregations were formed.
On his release Ivan Foster went to Fermanagh and started meetings in Lisbellaw near Enniskillen.
John Wylie held a mission in Londonderry and a congregation was founded there.
Others were formed in Moneyslane, Tandragee, Dungannon, Lurgan, Portadown, Kilkeel, Ballynahinch, Lisburn, and Magherafelt.
In most places, there was considerable opposition to the Free Church as the local unionist élites did their best to prevent Free Presbyterianism becoming established.
But as one might have predicted, such opposition backfired by confirming the very claims which the Free Presbyterians made about the great apostasy and the undemocratic nature of Terence O'Neill's rule.
When Beattie tried to hold evangelistic meetings in Hillsborough, he found the Church of Ireland aristocracy who controlled the parish council using planning laws to make it difficult for him to get a site.
A land developer, who was not an evangelical but who sympathized with claims to freedom of speech and assembly, offered them land in Lisburn.
A site was also secured just outside Hillsborough and thus two more congregations were added to the growing Church by the opposition to one.
This period of growth confirmed the patterns of the earlier period in the support for Paisleyism.
Just as Protestant Action had been supported by the almost completely separate constituencies of rural evangelicals and urban loyalists, so the same divisions can be seen in the reaction to the prison sentence.
Paisley's standing among the urban working-class ‘secular’ Protestants was considerably enhanced, and that support was later to be translated into support in elections.
At the same time, rural conservative Protestants, especially those from the Irish Presbyterian Church, were attracted to the religious movement.
By far the greatest proportion of those joining the new congregations were Presbyterians and they were mostly from rural areas.
In occupation they were mostly either farmers or people who worked in agriculture-related industries.
In terms of social composition, it is difficult to be more specific because ‘farmer’ covers a considerable diversity of wealth  and social status.
My impression, based solely on those farmers whom I have met, is that the supporters of Free Presbyterianism tended to be small to medium farmers running family operations with only one or two labourers.
The wealthy farmers were either Church of Ireland in religion or pro-O'Neill in politics and, for either or both of those reasons, were not attracted to Free Presbyterianism.
To return to the second point about church growth made at the end of the second chapter, ‘demand’ is not the only factor in church growth; one must also consider supply, and the Free Church was gradually coming into the position where it could service the new demand.
Had the imprisonment and the subsequent ‘religious revival’ come six years earlier, it would have produced less spectacular growth because the trained personnel were not then available to lead the movement and direct the sympathy for the Free Presbyterians into recruitment to the Church.
By 1966, the Church was better able to take advantage of the new interest in its separatist stance because it now had a core of Ulstermen who had been converted under Ian Paisley s preaching and who had grown up with his politicized evangelicalism.
They had a strong sense of shared identity, had been trained together, and were strongly linked by kinship ties.
Beattie, Douglas, and Foster were all in-laws.
Cecil Menary had married into the large McAuley family which played a major part in the life of the Cabra congregation and in evangelical culture generally in the North Antrim area.
In addition, a greater cohesion was resulting from Douglas, Cooke, and Cairns taking a greater part in the teaching of their more junior colleagues.
A reliable cadre had been created which could ‘supply’ the demand which O'Neill's response to Paisley's challenge had created.
Political Crisis and Religious Revival
An important point in the analysis of Paisleyism is that the religious wing of the movement predated the Catholic civil rights movement.
The Church did not grow as a result of Protestants reacting to evidence of increased Catholic demands and assertiveness.
The political crisis which created fertile conditions for the growth of the Church was that caused by the conflict between O'Neill's reformist Unionism and Paisley's traditionalist stand.
To understand the link between the political crisis and the religious revival, we must separate two elements: the universal and the particular.
As was suggested in the previous chapter's discussion of the Nicholson crusades in the 1920s, there is a well-observed connection between political instability and religious revival,if the culture is already religious .
It is not the case that social dislocation and uncertainty necessarily make people turn to God.
Rather, it is the case that people with a fairly strong religious tradition may react to crises by turning back to the traditional patterns of belief which not only made sense of their individual predicaments but which also created a strong sense of communal solidarity.
We might suppose that this universal process played some part in the attraction of the Free Presbyterian Church.
But what was much more important was the relationship between the particular nature of this political crisis and the religious recourse which some people took.
The point can be made best by returning to the Hunter and Grier schism from the Irish Presbyterian Church in 1927 and its failure to attract popular support, even from those people who shared Hunter and Grier's religious beliefs.
I have suggested that they were limited in their appeal because the changes they opposed were confined to doctrinal issues.
Paisley's religious appeal was based on the claim that orthodox Protestant beliefs were being ‘downgraded’ and that, at the same time, liberal Protestants were actively seeking greater harmony with other apostate denominations, in particular the old enemy of Rome.
There was a conspiracy to sell out true Bible-believing Protestantism.
Even without Terence O'Neill, such claims would have had a better hearing in the 1960s than they had had in the 1920s.
The ecumenical movement had become better established and although it would be an exaggeration to say that the major Protestant denominations were heavily committed to a ‘Romeward trend’, it was clearly the case that many church leaders were seeking better relations with the Roman Church.
By 1966, it had become common for Protestant church leaders to visit the Pope and to voice ecumenical sentiments.
Even though Rome was giving little in return in terms of moderating its claims to be the  only true Christian church, faint liberal breezes had been blowing through the Vatican since the second Vatican Council.
Furthermore, some liberals had pushed their rationalizing of the Christian faith to the extreme point where it was fashionable to argue that ‘God is dead’ and that the only truly Christian thing to do was to abandon the churches altogether.
Although such heresies were far more common in America and in England than they were in Ulster, Ulster Protestants knew of these postures and could see that their own denominations were in formal organizational contact with other churches which did not move to sack ministers and theologians who had obviously given up the traditional beliefs affirmed at their ordinations.
All of this meant that Paisley's criticisms of apostasy were being uttered in a considerably more apostate era than the times in which Hunter and Grier had failed to promote their schism.
But what really enhanced the receptivity of the market was O'Neillism.
It is always possible to ‘compartmentalize’ one's life; to separate religion and work and politics so that different criteria are used for decision-making in each compartment.
The traditional nature of religion in Ulster meant that such compartments were less water tight than they would be in, for example, America, but the very structure of Ulster society, economy, and polity meant that changes in one sphere would have repercussions in the others.
In visiting a Catholic school, O'Neill might have thought he was doing no more than acknowledging that Catholics formed a sizeable part of the population of Northern Ireland and that Catholic schools were largely supported from public funds which his government administered.
In such a view, ‘Catholic’ was simply a term which described part of the population.
But for Ulster's evangelical Protestants, Catholic schools were places in which soul-damning heresies were transmitted, and to visit them was to recognize that Catholicism was a permitted variant of the Christian church.
And then all the other elements in the complex which bound religion and politics together would pour down.
Catholics were rebels who only wanted to destroy not only Northern Ireland but also the Protestant nature of the rest of the British Isles and the only thing which maintained civil liberties was adherence to the Protestant faith.
Ulster owed its prosperity, such as it was, not to the accident of a good deep-water harbour and its trade links with Glasgow and Liverpool, but to its sabbatarianism, temperance, and evangelical beliefs.
If the Romanists did not destroy Ulster by forcing its people into a united papist Ireland, then God surely would as a punishment for departing from his standards.
What O'Neillism did for Paisleyism was to raise in a concrete way the possibility of change from being a Protestant society and culture (constantly threatened by the old enemy within and without) to being a secular modern society in which religious affiliation would be of little consequence.
The spectre of the great apostasy was always a threat to the more ideologically committed evangelicals but Terence O'Neill's reforms, tepid and half-hearted as they were, raised the spectre to a power and status from which it threatened a far greater number of rural Presbyterians who saw the proposed changes as proof that Paisley had been right all along.
In Moneyslane and Tandragee and the farming areas around Hillsborough, the Presbyterians rallied to ‘the old paths in perilous times’.
The Political Rise of Paisley
the Political Rise of Paisley
In retrospect it is clear that O'Neill was in an impossible situation.
It is well recorded in the political science literature that the relaxation of an oppressive regime, far from placating its opponents, encourages further opposition as the expectations of the disadvantaged population are raised.
O'Neill's minor reforms or, as Utley perceptively describes it, his ‘government by gesture’ i served only to politicize further the frustration of the Catholic population, without making it any more committed to the Northern Ireland state.
O'Neill also failed to appreciate the extent of Protestant misgivings, preferring instead to see Paisley and his supporters as a small and unrepresentative rabble.
Dismissing Paisley's support as ‘a fascist organization masquerading under the cloak of religion…deluding a lot of sincere people…hell-bent on provoking religious strife in Northern Ireland’, he seemed unprepared for the reaction against him within his own party.
While attempting to respond to the civil rights movement and to the pressure from the Wilson government in London, O'Neill was being threatened from within the Unionist camp.
Although the first revolt was crushed, Desmond Boal could still raise thirteen Unionist backbenchers' signatures for the removal of O'Neill, and Lord Brookeborough, only three years after handing the premiership to O'Neill, was leading a whispering campaign against him.
There is no need to chronicle in detail the conflicts of the last years of O'Neill's administration.
That has been done well elsewhere.
An example will show the precariousness of his position.
In November of 1968, he responded to the demands of Derry  Catholics by proposing that the Londonderry City Corporation (which since partition had been gerrymandered so that the Protestant minority retained control) be replaced by a nominated body, that housing allocation be removed from political control to be administered on a fair ‘points for needs’ system, and that the Special Powers Act be re-examined.
By then, such gestures were not enough to placate the civil rights supporters who decided to go ahead with a proposed march through Armagh City on 30 November.
Paisley and Major Ronald Bunting announced a counter-demonstration.
William Craig, the Minister for Home Affairs, refused to take the advice of moderates to ban the Paisley demonstration and although there was a considerable police presence, nothing was done to stop the Paisleyites blocking the civil rights marchers.
Had Craig banned the march, he would have infuriated the civil rights people.
Had he banned the counter-demonstration, he would have provoked the Protestants.
And so what credit O'Neill might have acquired for his reform package was instantly lost by what Catholics saw as a refusal to confront the loyalist mobs who really ran Northern Ireland.
O'Neill made an impassioned defence of his policies on television and appealed for support for what he saw as the only course that could save Ulster from deepening civil unrest.
For a month or so it looked as if he had succeeded in defusing the time bomb, but soon Catholic leaders were arguing that nothing was really changing.
In January 1968, Farrell and the other militant civil rights activists of People's Democracy started a march from Belfast to Londonderry, modelled on the famous American civil rights march from Selma to Montgomery.
Along the route the marchers were harassed by the RUC and by bands of loyalists, many of whom were off-duty policemen and Specials.
The final bloody confrontation at Burntollet Bridge took place before the eyes of the world's media, and united moderate and militant Catholic opinion in a hardening rejection of Unionist rule.
To the British government, Burntollet was further evidence of the need to force reform on Stormont.
Almost certainly under Westminster pressure, O'Neill announced the Cameron Commission to investigate the causes of the disturbances.
Unionism was collapsing.
Bill Craig had already been sacked for criticizing O'Neill's televised plea to the province.
Now Brian  Faulkner resigned from the cabinet over what he saw as O'Neill's capitulation to British pressure.
Paisley was back in prison, this time for his part in the Armagh demonstrations, but that did not stop him characterizing the Cameron Commission as a betrayal of the Ulster people to the rebels.
Under his direction, the Ulster Constitution Defence Committee maintained its traditional line that O'Neill was not responding to the legitimate demands of a disadvantaged section of the population, but giving in to the demands of rebels who would never be satisfied with anything less than the destruction of Northern Ireland.
Instead of worrying about how to make the RUC acceptable to the minority, O'Neill should have been using the legitimate power of the state to crush an illegal insurrection.
In January 1969, O'Neill took the only course left open to him: he went to the country to seek a mandate for his policies.
For Northern Ireland the election was extraordinary.
All previous elections had possessed a ritual quality with the outcome determined in advance by religious demography.
Almost all Protestants voted for the Unionist Party and Catholics either voted for nationalists or abstained.
The attempts by O'Neill to change the basic grammar of the language of Ulster politics had left both sides in disarray.
Paisley stood against O'Neill in Bannside: the first time O'Neill had been challenged since he inherited the seat in 1946.
Other Protestant Unionists were fielded against liberal O'Neillites.
But there was also a conservative revolt against O'Neill within the Unionist Party with some ‘official’ candidates being pro-O'Neill and others being nominated by branches which shared Paisley's politics (and which in some cases were run by Paisley supporters).
And on the Catholic  side, older nationalist members were opposed by a younger generation raised in the civil rights movement.
When the dust of the election battle settled, Terence O'Neill found himself with a minority government and the support of only eleven of the Unionist backbenchers.
Violence on the streets escalated.
The civil rights marchers continued their demonstrations.
In order to increase the tension and dramatize their fears of an IRA campaign, militant loyalists bombed a reservoir and a power station.
The Catholic Bogside in Derry rioted.
On 28 April, Terence O'Neill resigned and his cousin Major James Chichester-Clark was elected as leader of the Unionist Parliamentary Party and hence Prime Minister.
Under pressure from Westminster, he pledged his government to continue the O'Neill reforms.
Richard Ferguson, the Unionist MP for South Antrim, resigned with O'Neill.
Although he had been nominated as a conservative by Protestant Unionists within the constituency, he had quickly become an O'Neill supporter.
The two planned by-elections gave the Protestant Unionists the opportunity they needed to maintain the momentum of their electoral challenge.
The importance of the contest was well appreciated by the Unionist Party which sent not only the Prime Minister but also a number of other cabinet ministers to Bannside to canvass for Dr Bolton Minford.
In the event their prestige was not enough to hold the seat.
Paisley added another 1,650 votes to his score against O'Neill and achieved the platform he needed.
A reporter described the scene at the count:
In the midst of a victory celebration in Ballymena, Mr Paisley said: ‘This is the dawn of a new day for Ulster.
Good night Chichester-Clark’.
He was given a rapturous reception by a flag-waving crowd of 5,000 when the result was announced shortly after midnight.
Speeches, relayed to the milling crowd outside Ballymena Town Hall, where the count was being held, were drowned in deafening cheers, and as the triumphant Free Presbyterian Church leader faced a barrage of questions before TV cameras, an accordion band struck up ‘The Sash’.
Wearing his now familiar Russian-style hat and white Ulster Protestant Volunteer sash, Mr Paisley was carried shoulder-high through the town hall's main entrance to ‘meet his people’.
Despite the late hour the town put on the appearance of a miniature ‘Twelfth’ as he and his wife Eileen and brother-in-law and election agent, the Rev. James Beggs, were paraded on the back of a Land Rover to the Waveney Road, where Mr Paisley was greeted by his  78 year-old father, the Rev. Kyle Paisley who was unable to attend the count.
While the election of Paisley was a major blow to the credibility of Chichester-Clark, who might have been better advised to save face by not becoming personally involved in opposing Paisley, William Beattie's victory in South Antrim was probably more damaging in that Beattie was far less well known, was standing in a more cosmopolitan constituency, and was competing against a man who had previously been a cabinet minister.
There could be no explanation for his victory other than that there was considerable support in Unionist circles for the traditionalist positions represented by Paisley and Beattie.
Paisley was developing a distinctive political position which stressed the religious element in the conflict between nationalist and loyalist.
While his loyalism gave him urban working-class support, it was the rural Protestants who were most receptive to his evangelical emphases and who made a seat like Bannside obviously attractive.
His rural support was again crucial in June, just two months after the Stormont by-elections, when a Westminster general election allowed Paisley to test his wider appeal.
He contested the North Antrim constituency (which took in the Bannside Stormont area) and defeated Henry Clarke, the sitting MP, who was a liberal and a member of the O'Neill clan.
It is an indication both of the confusion within the Unionist Party and of the wider appeal of Paisley's politics that the election was punctuated by claims and rebuttals concerning a pact between the Protestant Unionists and the Unionist Party.
Paisley asserted that, had he wanted to destroy the Unionist Party, he would have fielded candidates in all the constituencies.
Few, if any, would have been elected but the splitting of the Unionist vote would have let in more anti-Union candidates.
Eamonn McCann, the ‘unofficial Labour’ candidate in Londonderry, demanded that the Official Unionist, Robin Chichester-Clark, dismiss those members of his constituency party who had made a deal with the Protestant Unionists or be seen as a puppet on a Paisleyite string.
Chichester-Clark denied that any such deal had been made.
Whether or not specific arrangements were discussed by the two unionist groupings, the  election was more of a success for the conservatives than would be implied by the victory of one of the two Protestant Unionists.
In other seats, conservative Unionists who had considerable reservations about the direction of the government — James Kilfedder in North Down and James Molyneaux in South Antrim, for example— were elected.
The Last Stormont
1970 and early 1971 saw the Ulster crisis deepen as the government stumbled on, alternating promises of reform with heavy-handed repression.
The Catholics, having come so far in undermining the old Orange State, were not easily going to be satisfied, and the urban working-class Protestants were not about to relinquish fifty years of social and political superiority without a fight.
Rioting became common and the British Army had to be called in to replace the overstretched Royal Ulster Constabulary.
In an attempt to make the RUC more acceptable to the minority, its leadership structure was radically altered, outsiders were brought in to train and lead it, and the B Special Constabulary was disbanded to be replaced by the Ulster Defence Regiment under army command.
But any popular appeal to Catholics that such moves might have had was undermined by repressive acts such as the introduction of internment — imprisonment without trial — for suspected nationalist terrorists.
People began to die in riots.
Catholics and Protestants in marginal areas were burnt out of their homes and forced to move into their respective ghettoes.
In March 1971 Chichester-Clark resigned to be replaced by Brian Faulkner.
For all his previous reputation as a hard-line Unionist, Faulkner attempted to broaden his political base with some astute appointments such as that of David Bleakley, ex-Chairman of the Northern Ireland Labour Party, as Minister for Community Relations.
He unveiled plans for involving the minority in administration through the creation of three policy-making committees to review government performance in industrial, social, and environmental services.
With the already established public accounts committee, this would have  given four such bodies, each with a salaried chairman, and the Catholics were to be given two of the chairs with the committees being made up to reflect parliamentary seats.
This plan was given a cautious welcome by the Social Democratic and Labour Party, led by Gerry Fitt, John Hume, and Paddy Devlin, which had taken over the leadership of ‘constitutional’ nationalist opinion.
However, as Harkness puts it:
It was undone, immediately, by passions once more loosed on the streets of Derry.
After sporadic violence there from the beginning of the month, full scale rioting erupted on 8 July and in the early hours of 9th two men were shot dead by the army.
One died of loss of blood on his way to hospital in Co.
Donegal; the other where he stood in the street.
Local opinion denied their involvement in terrorism, and John Hume, local SDLP MP, persuaded his party to demand an official inquiry, failing which it would withdraw from Stormont and set up an alternative assembly…
No official inquiry could be offered: the SDLP withdrew from Stormont on 16 July; and the IRA campaign increased in ferocity.
Until the middle of 1971, the IRA had played little part in the conflict.
It had been largely dormant since the late 1950s and during the communal violence of the summer of 1969, many embittered Catholics had voiced their anger at its lack of action by saying that IRA stood for ‘I Ran Away’.
At the annual Sinn Fein conference in Dublin in January 1970, a majority broke away to form the Provisional IRA, and in the following years planned and executed an increasing number of shootings and bombings.
Internment, introduced in August, was intended to take leaders of the IRA out of circulation, but the information on which arrests were made was often out of date or just plain mistaken.
The republican movement flourished.
Loyalist intransigence was bolstered not only by the new IRA campaign but also by the actions of three leading Fianna Fáil politicians in the South who were open and vocal in their support for the IRA.
Although they were later acquitted of illegally importing arms and ammunition for use in the North, they were dismissed from the cabinet for their part in the affair.
At the height of the troubles in 1970, the Irish Army brought field  hospitals to the border ready for refugees from Ulster.
Although the open civil war which so many feared did not then break out,
The civil rights movement had apparently begun as the vehicle for Catholic claims to full and equal participation in the Northern Ireland state.
In its early phase it reflected broad Catholic opinion which wanted acceptance as full citizens of the North and had some liberal Unionist support.
The inability of O'Neill and Chichester-Clark to satisfy those demands without destabilizing the state had created the very condition that people such as Paisley had argued had obtained from the first: the rise of old-fashioned nationalist anti-partitionism.
The aim was now not assimilation in the Northern Ireland state but its destruction.
As the minority population became more vociferous in its demands and more openly nationalist and republican, the stature of Paisley in the loyalist camp was proportionately increased because Protestants looked back at what he had been saying in the early days of O'Neill's reign and saw that ‘he had been right all along’.
They could see that there was no satisfying the Catholics.
Appeasement did not work, because nothing short of a united Ireland had been their ‘real’ ambition from the start.
It is not the intention of this book to discuss in any detail the shifting politics of the Catholic population.
Others have already done that.
Furthermore, it is generally the case that what the Catholics were actually doing is far less important in understanding the actions of the Protestants than Protestant beliefs about what Catholics were doing.
It is Protestant perceptions which explain their actions and those perceptions were amplifying the fundamental divisions between those unionists who remained committed to pragmatic reform, either because they believed in liberal unionism or because they believed that satisfying the Westminster government's demands for reform was the only way to maintain Stormont, and the right-wingers who wanted to preserve traditional unionism.
Ian Paisley was one potential leader of the right wing, but there were others and a key question that has to be asked in any explanation of Paisley's career is ‘how did Paisley triumph over other right-wing unionist figures?’
In order to answer that we must look  closely at Paisley's relationships with other unionists.
Once Brian Faulkner had succeeded Chichester-Clark as premier, there were two main groups of ‘official’ Unionists who were opposed to the general political direction of the Westminster-directed Stormont government.
One such grouping was led by Harry West and the West Ulster Unionist Council, which brought together the conservatives west of the Bann.
The second grouping centred on William Craig who remained in the Unionist Party despite his constant criticisms of its direction.
Craig toured the province building support for what, when it was launched in 1972, was called the Vanguard Movement.
He was supported by Martin Smyth, a Presbyterian minister who was the leader of the Belfast Orangemen and about to become Grand Master of the Order, and Billy Hull, the founder of the large Loyalist Association of Workers.
Many activists in Paisley's Protestant Unionist Party insist that they would never have become involved in politics if there had remained one reliable traditional unionist party.
This would certainly be the case for someone like Gordon Cooke, the Free Presbyterian minister of Rasharkin, who found himself chairman of the ‘parent’ branch of the officially constituted Protestant Unionist Party largely because he was a strong supporter of Paisley's political line and a leading evangelical in the Bannside area at the time when Paisley decided to stand against O'Neill.
Such people would always have been willing to subordinate their political action to unionist unity, if it could be recreated on a sound basis.
Throughout the summer of 1971 there were lengthy discussions between Paisley, Boal, and a number of other dissidents within the Unionist Party about the formation of a new unionist party.
Boal sought and received assurances from a number of leading Unionists that they would join such a movement but, when the Ulster Democratic Unionist party was launched on 30 October 1971, many of those who had expressed interest were absent.
Official Unionists, no matter how critical of their leadership, were reluctant to give up their party.
As one rather disillusioned Protestant Unionist put it: ‘they were a party who believed in their God given right to rule this country’ and they were not about to give up that right, especially as they could see signs of regaining control of their own party.
With the selection of some anti-O'Neill candidates in the 1970 Stormont elections and the Westminster elections of the same year, the conservatives sensed that they could  win back the Unionist Party machine.
In such circumstances, they were reluctant to abandon their own positions for a possibly lesser place in a new party in which Ian Paisley would play a major part.
Many Protestant Unionists also had doubts about the new party.
In their view, the old party had been doing well.
It now had members in Stormont and increasing popular support and, more importantly, it had a clear Protestant identity.
In many areas, it took the full weight of Paisley's authority, exercised either directly or through loyal supporters such as Gordon Cooke, then chairman of the North Antrim branch, to persuade the Protestant Unionists to dissolve in favour of the new organization.
In the event, the failure of large numbers of Official Unionists to join meant that the new party was more congenial to the old Protestant Unionists than they had initially feared.
Protestant Unionists made up about two-thirds of the new Ulster Democratic Unionist Party (hereafter ‘DUP’).
The two new MPs to join Paisley and Beattie were Desmond Boal and Johnny McQuade.
Boal was a successful barrister who combined staunch unionism with a left-of-centre position on social and economic issues.
McQuade was a working-class Protestant, ex-soldier, docker, and professional boxer who sat for North Belfast and continued the independent unionist tradition of men like Henderson and Nixon.
Some of the older evangelicals were concerned about the name of the new party, sensing in the dropping of the word ‘Protestant’ a weakening of its evangelical emphasis, but even among the rural evangelicals there was an awareness of the need for a broader party.
Although there is considerable value in the notion that Paisley's political movement always consisted of two elements in tension — rural evangelicals and urban ‘secular’ Protestants — it is also the case that many evangelicals could be quite pragmatic and recognize that the preservation of things which they valued because of their religious beliefs required them to work in alliance with others who wanted the same things for different reasons.
On 23 February 1972, the DUP took a major step towards establishing its own political identity when the four MPs crossed the floor of the house to take up the position left vacant by the withdrawal of the Catholic SDLP as Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition at Stormont.
The period of opposition was almost comically short and its brevity showed how far events in Northern Ireland had passed out of control of Stormont.
A month after the DUP crossed  the floor, the British government in London gave up the hope that the Northern Ireland government could restore order and suspended Stormont.
The politics of the street, which had played such a large part in putting Ian Paisley into Stormont, had now returned him and his supporters to the streets.
Limbo, Power-Sharing, Strike, and Limbo
The first eighteen months of the DUP's existence were not especially auspicious.
As the party's official historian admits, recruitment was slow.
Craig's Vanguard Movement seemed to be making most of the running on the right wing of unionist politics and the DUP seemed to lack a clear policy direction.
Paisley had acquired some further support for his reputation for prophecy by his prediction of the introduction of direct rule and he did not publicly regret the end of Stormont.
This was not surprising given that the Parliament was dominated by Faulknerites but even so, it was not clear to Ulster Protestants what it was that the DUP wanted in Ulster's relation to the mainland.
Fortunately, Craig's position was not obviously clearer and his credibility was partly undermined by the refusal of some leading Unionists, such as Captain Austin Ardill and Martin Smyth, to follow him when he turned Vanguard from a ginger group into a party.
For most of 1972 and early 1973, the eyes of political observers were focused as much on London as on Ulster.
Introducing direct rule had been easy enough; ending it was a problem.
Westminster promoted the notion of a power-sharing government in which ministries would be shared between liberal Unionists and the largely Catholic SDLP.
It was also suggested that some sort of ‘Irish dimension’(to borrow the term of the 1980s) be institutionalized by the creation of a Council of Ireland made up of representatives of the Westminster and Dublin parliaments and members from the to-be-created Stormont ‘Assembly’.
Although the Council of Ireland proposal was by no means an open door to a united Ireland it would be enough to concentrate loyalist voters in opposition to the new proposals.
Elections for the new assembly were scheduled for June 1973, but before that date there were local council elections.
The DUP  and Vanguard had intended to boycott the local elections, saving their effort for the more important Assembly elections, but activists in both parties thought that the earlier contest should be fought, if only to make use of the free publicity that would be created and to have the advantages of a trial run and an early opportunity to canvass for the more important second elections.
It is difficult to assess the performance of the DUP and Vanguard because there was considerable overlap between the two groups and the affiliation of some candidates was in doubt.
Deutsch and Magowan claim that the DUP fielded seventy-five candidates and Fred Proctor, who was involved in the Shankill Defence Association (one of the constituents of the Ulster Defence Association) and instrumental in getting the DUP to contest the elections, made the same claim but that figure includes Vanguard members.
It is more accurate to say that the DUP fielded thirty-nine candidates of whom twenty-one won seats (but again there is disagreement with David Calvert claiming only thirteen wins for the DUP).
In the preparation for the Assembly elections, the issue of the relationship between the DUP and the Free Presbyterian Church was again raised.
One of the biggest problems for any new party is finding competent activists.
Although one might suppose that the creation of a new party offers attractive opportunities for people previously excluded from local élites to establish themselves as leaders, it is often the case that such people do not obviously possess the right qualities.
In one respect the Free Presbyterian Church was a valuable resource of the DUP in that it provided a cadre of people who had considerable training and experience in organization and oratory: the ministers and elders.
But there were difficulties in recruiting DUP candidates from the leadership of the Free Presbyterian Church.
Clifford Smyth stresses the damage that would have been done to the electoral appeal of the DUP if it had been too closely associated with the Free Presbyterian Church and offers this as the main reason why the Presbytery of the Free Church refused to allow ministers other than Paisley and Beattie  to stand as DUP candidates.
While Smyth might be right about the consequence of the Party being too heavily associated with the Church, he is wrong in reading backwards from that possible consequence to the motives of the men who debated at Presbytery.
The reason why the Free Church was concerned with the political activities of some of its members was that it saw its main purposes as evangelism and the servicing of church life.
It wanted a full-time ministry of people who were first and foremost ministers of the gospel.
When Alan Cairns and other leading ministers opposed the candidacy of William McCrea and James McClelland they did so to preserve the interests of the Free Church and not to aid the DUP by reducing the public presence of Free Presbyterianism in the lists of candidates.
In his analysis of the links between the Church and the Party in this period, Smyth gets confused by his concern with the question of how ‘democratic’ the DUP really was.
He cites the Presbytery meeting which debated the issue of ministers in politics as an example of the way in which the Church undemocratically affected the policies and direction of the Party.
This seems a rather curious reading.
There seems nothing at all strange about the Church, which paid the salaries of these men and expected them to serve it, considering the question of whether or not they should be able to engage in an activity which, no matter how acceptable, would have diverted them from their main task.
Had the Presbytery been selecting candidates and foisting them on the DUP, Smyth's view would be more plausible.
As it was, the Church was simply acting to preserve its interests and these were not the same as the interests of the Party.
In the event, permission was given for Paisley and Beattie to go forward because they had been members of the Stormont Parliament before it had been suspended.
It was obvious to all participants that the Assembly elections were a referendum on the proposals for the future of Ulster.
Those opposed to power-sharing wanted an arrangement to maximize the loyalist vote.
Paisley and Craig had spent a good part of the previous year publicly disagreeing about the future of Stormont.
Paisley accused Craig of proposing UDI and seemed most committed to the complete integration of Ulster with the mainland if the old  majority-rule Stormont could not be reintroduced.
However, the need to maximize the anti-power sharing vote convinced both DUP and Vanguard to instruct their followers to vote for the other party as their second or third preference in what was to be a single transferable vote type of proportional representation election.
As in the 1970 O'Neill election, the Official Unionists were divided with thirty-nine candidates pledged to oppose power-sharing and forty pledged to support Faulkner.
The DUP's view of the Ulster crisis, its solution, and the Assembly were presented to the Ulster electorate:
The DUP says that Republican violence paid off in the disarming of the RUC, the disbanding of the B Specials, the banning of Orange, Black and Apprentice Boys' parades resulting in the imprisonment of Loyalists, the overthrow of Ulster's parliament, the plan for talks with Dublin to change the status of Northern Ireland within the United Kingdom, the abolishing of the Oath of Allegiance to the Queen in the new Assembly and Executive, the making of such oaths illegal for appointment to government boards, the removal of the Governor, the obliteration of ‘On Her Majesty's Service’ from official paid envelopes, the attempt to destroy democracy by power-sharing which was a blow at the secrecy of the ballot box and an insult to British citizenship and standards, the proposal to set up machinery for the transfer of Northern Ireland's powers to a body or bodies in or with the Irish Republic, and the continued existence of areas in Northern Ireland where the Queen's writ did not effectually run.
Seventy-two per cent of the electorate decided to voice an opinion.
The DUP won eight seats, Vanguard took seven, and Faulkner had twenty-two.
But there were also ten anti-power-sharing Unionists elected.
This meant that, with the nineteen SDLP members, Faulkner could form a government but he represented only a minority of the unionist voters.
From the point of view of Paisley and the DUP the elections were an important point on the road to acquiring political legitimacy.
No longer was Ian Paisley some sort of raving lunatic on the fringes of unionist politics.
He was now part of a coalition with people who had held cabinet office in Stormont and, more than that, his party had polled better than one led by an ex-Minister.
Craig had fielded twice as many candidates and won fewer seats; a result which was probably a combination of public reaction to Vanguard's lack of clear policy and a lack of enthusiasm for some of the Vanguard candidates.
It was generally the case that working-class loyalists, especially those connected with the paramilitary organizations, fared less well in the election than more ‘respectable’ loyalists and Vanguard had a larger number of such candidates than the DUP.
In the competition with other unionist groupings, the DUP had a major advantage in its cohesion .
Unlike other loyalist parties, it spoke with a single clear voice: that of Ian Paisley.
Even before Desmond Boal stepped down from the chairmanship of the Party to advocate his idea of a federal Ireland, the Party was very much what even DUP activists admit to have been ‘Paisley's fan club’.
There was hardly any organized party structure.
Peter Robinson went so far as to say that until late 1974 ‘there was no party’.
Thus Paisley was free to create party policy and to articulate it without having to convince a large membership.
Furthermore, other activists such as William Beattie and Ivan Foster were very obviously his juniors.
In the other loyalist groups there were a number of competing leadership figures who offered differing responses to events and who were obliged to engage in more extensive consultation with their supporters before pronouncing.
The absence of a strong party structure was not something in which the DUP rejoiced.
Beattie as deputy leader devoted a lot of energy to trying to build up branches and Robinson, on becoming party secretary, hired the Party's first full-time worker before himself becoming a paid official.
Thereafter all press statements were produced from the party office, but the cohesion advantage remained because the leadership of the Party was still very clearly in the hands of one man.
This is not to say that Paisley was dictatorial and simply imposed his will on other activists.
Rather, he was able to use his considerable personal appeal and powers of persuasion to convince others to take his line.
As Robinson put it: ‘even with a less persuasive argument he has been able to get a democratic decision in his favour but the democratic process is used throughout the party’.
Quite what the Faulkner/SDLP executive might have achieved will always remain a matter of speculation.
According to a survey conducted for the BBC in April 1974 by Professor Richard Rose, sixty-nine per cent of the people of Northern Ireland thought that the executive should be given a chance to govern but this finding was contradicted by the results of a general election two months earlier and may reflect the general tendency of survey respondents to make statements in response to poll questions which are more moderate than their real views.
The first nail in the executive's coffin was hammered in by the Westminster government.
In February 1974, just a month after the executive took office, Edward Heath called a general election on the theme of ‘who rules Britain?’: the elected government or the striking miners.
Being entirely devoid of miners, striking or otherwise, Northern Ireland treated the election as a referendum on the power-sharing system and was overwhelmingly convinced by the loyalists.
The DUP/Vanguard arrangement of the Assembly elections was extended to take in anti-power-sharing Unionists in a ‘United Ulster Unionist Coalition’ which fought the election on the slogan ‘Dublin is only a Sunningdale away’and won every seat except the West Belfast constituency of Gerry Fitt, the leader of the SDLP and the Deputy Chief Executive in the executive.
The loyalists now had the grounds they needed to be able to argue that the executive was undemocratic: the people of Ulster had finally been given a chance to vote on the issue and 50.8 per cent of them were opposed to power-sharing.
However, it was not politicians or election results which destroyed the power-sharing experiment.
Since the start of the Troubles, a number of loyalist trade unionists had tried to create a province-wide organization of unionist workers and by late 1973 the plans of men such as Billy Kelly, a power workers' shop steward, Billy Hull, ex-Northern Ireland Labour Party, and Hugh Petrie, a precision engineer from Shorts, were sufficiently advanced for them to propose to the loyalist politicians that the province could be brought to a halt by a strike.
The politicians were initially less than enthusiastic, largely because, like the Stormont and Westminster civil servants, they underestimated the power and planning of the Ulster Workers Council.
The workers decided to push ahead despite the reservations of West, Paisley and others and the politicians were presented with a fait accompli .
The strike began on the morning of Wednesday 15 May and within a week was bringing Ulster close to a standstill.
Public support for the strike Was hardly necessary when the electricity workers could reduce the supply so much that basic economic activity had to stop.
With the paramilitary organizations such as the UDA, the UVF and the Down Orange Welfare setting up road blocks and, in some areas, using considerable ‘persuasion’ to prevent people going about their normal business, the government was seriously challenged and it hardly responded.
The army refused to become involved in what it maintained was an ‘industrial’ strike and, anyway, it was incapable of running the electricity industry.
But most importantly, once the strike had lasted out its first week, a large number of businessmen and middle-class professionals tacitly co-operated with the strikers in return for being able to pursue some of their normal business.
All round there was a lack of shared will to break the strike and maintain Faulkner's executive.
On 28 May, with the electricity all but completely cut and threats of sewage rising in the streets of Belfast, Faulkner resigned.
Power-sharing was at an end.
Paisley played a part in the Ulster Workers Council but, like the other politicians, he had had to be forced by the workers' action in starting the strike despite his reservations.
He was less prominent in the action than William Craig and he felt sufficiently distanced from it to be able to absent himself for a few days in the first week of the strike when he went to Canada to attend a funeral.
On his return he took a more active part and in the House of Commons bore the brunt of the hostility of Mervyn Rees, the Labour Northern Ireland Secretary, but the relations between Paisley and the paramilitaries were never entirely cordial or trusting.
The paramilitaries felt, quite rightly as it turned out, that the politicians would use them when it suited them and then reject them once the threat of anarchy had achieved the desired end of bringing down Brian Faulkner.
In March of the following year, when the feuding between the UDA and the UVF reached the point of tit-for-tat assassination, Paisley called on Protestants to withdraw all support from the paramilitaries and accused them of committing crimes ‘just as heinous and hellish as those of the IRA’.
Fred Procter, by then a DUP Belfast city councillor, was shot, apparently by the UVF, who objected to his spirited criticisms of  ‘gangsterism’ on the Shankill Road.
The fighting between the UVF and UDA, and the struggles for power within the UDA, did much to damage the reputation of the working-class loyalist organizations and to permit the professional politicians to regain control after the UWC strike.
What also helped to undermine their credibility were the claims that the UDA and UVF were ‘socialist’ or ‘communist’.
Few accusations, if they can be made to stick, are more damaging in the context of Northern Irish politics where leftism has traditionally been associated with nationalism.
Glen Barr of Vanguard and the UDA went to Libya to seek financial support from Colonel Gadaffi for an independent Ulster and was quickly accused of communism by Clifford Smyth, then a leading DUP Assemblyman, who told the DUP's annual conference in November 1974 that Libya was a ‘significant springboard for Russian subversion in Western Europe’.
The complexities of the inter-paramilitary disputes need not concern us.
What is important is that, having used their muscle to overthrow the power-sharing executive, the working-class loyalists failed to capitalize by creating an enduring political presence and more traditional loyalist leaders returned to pre-eminence in the struggle against nationalism.
And in particular the position of Paisley and the DUP was enhanced by having done enough to prove themselves implacably opposed to appeasement of ‘rebels’ while distancing themselves sufficiently from the working-class loyalists to avoid the opprobrium of being closely associated with thugs and gangsters.
The autumn of 1974 saw the DUP's position further consolidated when Harold Wilson decided to call a general election only seven months after forming a minority government.
Once again the three main anti-power-sharing groups — the DUP, Vanguard and the conservative Unionists — fought the election as a coalition.
Brian Faulkner, having lost control of the Unionist Party, had formed the new Unionist Party of Northern Ireland which could only field two candidates and won less than three per cent of the poll.
The non-sectarian Alliance Party won only 6.3 per cent of the votes cast.
The majority of Ulster voters supported the  SDLP, if they were Catholics, or the unionist coalition, if they were Protestant.
Power-sharing was dead.
Ian Paisley held his North Antrim seat with a massive personal majority of 34,497 voters.
Almost half of the eligible voters had chosen Paisley as their representative.
He had come a very long way in the decade since his wife had failed to win a Belfast Corporation seat!
And Then There Were Two: The Break-up of Vanguard
The collapse of the Ulster Workers Council and the failure of the paramilitaries to pursue a consistent and popular policy left three competitors for the support of Ulster loyalists: Paisley, Craig, and West.
The advantage that Paisley enjoyed of being master of his own house has already been mentioned.
But he remained only one of three competitors for the leadership of the loyalists.
The competition was soon simplified with the fall from grace of William Craig.
Craig was an intriguing character.
A Lurgan solicitor who could speak menacing words in a slow quiet voice, he had come close to the leadership of the Unionist Party, had held cabinet office and retained good links with the paramilitaries and the workers' leaders who had planned and organized the 1974 strike.
But his good loyalist credentials could not save him when he departed from the narrow path.
In 1972 he had suggested independence as Ulster's best course and been severely criticized by Paisley and others.
Vanguard had performed well in the 1974 elections but, as Sarah Nelson notes, ‘The VUP's future was bound to be in doubt once it shed its two distinctive Vanguard features: militant opposition to British domination and alliance with workers and paramilitants.’
None the less it performed well in the elections for the Convention, the constitutional debating chamber established in May 1975 to find an agreed political structure for Ulster.
What caused its collapse was Craig's conversion to something which could be presented to loyalists as power-sharing.
Craig proposed an emergency voluntary coalition with the SDLP because he saw it as the only way in which some sort of devolved government could be maintained.
He managed to persuade the central council to accept the policy but, led by the deputy leader Ernest Baird, a majority of the fourteen Vanguard Convention members broke away from Craig.
Paisley had Craig expelled from the unionist  coalition.
Although the confusion of shifts in allegiance within the various loyalist groupings made it difficult for contemporaries to see the underlying direction of change, with hindsight we can see a simplification of unionist politics.
The liberals had been defeated and the Unionist Party was once again being led by traditional unionists.
Vanguard was breaking up and its supporters were either rejoining the Unionist Party or moving to Paisley's DUP, which was consolidating its position as the more militant and more populist loyalist party.
As a footnote to the Assembly and Convention periods, it is worth making two points about the Democratic Unionists.
Although I have described the events in terms of the DUP's success in displacing other Unionist groups, the leaders of the DUP were not fixed on personal aggrandizement at any cost.
At a number of points, Ian Paisley and others had tried very hard to create a new party which would embrace all traditional unionists.
When the DUP was being planned in late 1971, Desmond Boal kept pushing Unionists such as Austin Ardill to join the new party and received assurances from him and a number of others that they would join.
It was only their reluctance to abandon their own party which prevented the creation of a mass anti-appeasement party.
At a number of times since, there has been a genuine willingness among some of the DUP members of the United Ulster Unionist Coalition to merge their party into a new wider organization.
Although Ian Paisley had unfailing faith in his own leadership qualities — a faith that was shared by his supporters — he was willing to work in coalition with the other unionist leaders, and the continued divisions within the unionist camp cannot be laid entirely at his door.
The second footnote is related to this point and it concerns the career of William Beattie.
The voluntary coalition plan floated by Craig also temporarily damaged Beattie in that many DUP members felt that he had failed in his duty more clearly to oppose such a scheme in the discussions at which he was DUP spokesman.
He was demoted from deputy leader and replaced by William McCrea, the Free Presbyterian minister of Magherafelt in Londonderry.
This suggests an important theme which will be taken up in a later discussion of Paisley's leadership style.
Observers who have been taken by Paisley's personal influence over his followers have often  missed the point that those who supported Paisley only did so conditionally and the condition was that he continued to articulate traditional unionist positions.
Although formal channels for the rank and file to influence Party policy may have been either weak or entirely absent in the early years of the Party, this did not mean that Paisley was free to lead the party wheresoever he wished.
There were clear lines beyond which he and the other senior figures in the Party could not go without forfeiting the support of the members and the ordinary voters and, in appearing to have countenanced the idea of an emergency coalition with the SDLP, Beattie had crossed those lines and he paid the price.
To connect these two points, I would stress the obvious point which may be forgotten when one simply looks at the fortunes of particular party organizations.
Whatever initial reasons people had for being attracted to Ian Paisley as a politician, the main reason for their support was their commitment to the principles he enunciated.
In the end they were committed, as he was, to the preservation of a Protestant Ulster, to the suppression of what they saw as a republican rebellion, and to the restoration of majority rule in Northern Ireland.
The leaders and the activists were no doubt also motivated by personal ambition and by a jealous regard for their own organizations but, at various crisis points, many were willing to subordinate their own ambitions to the greater goal of ‘saving Ulster’.
The 1977 Strike and the Collapse of the Coalition
Most of the leaders of the 1974 strike felt that they had achieved their goal when Faulkner's power-sharing executive was forced to resign.
Others, perhaps with greater foresight, wanted the strike to be continued until they had created an acceptable alternative political structure.
The end of power-sharing had left a vacuum, which the constitutional convention had failed to fill, and Ulster staggered on with a vicious IRA campaign, tit-for-tat assassinations, unconvincing direct rule, and no obvious sense of direction.
In an attempt to generate some sort of political movement, Paisley led the DUP into a United Unionist Action Council with the remnant of Craig's Vanguard (now called the United Ulster Unionist Movement and led by Ernest Baird), the paramilitaries, and smaller groups such as the Down Orange Welfare and the  Special Constabulary Association; in effect, the 1974 strike leadership without the Official Unionists.
The aims of this new coalition were to press the British government into acting more forcefully against terrorism and to force a return to something like the old majority rule at Stormont.
In May 1977, the coalition attempted a repeat of the 1974 strike.
Billy Kelly, the power workers' leader who had then been instrumental in halting industry, promised that the electricity workers would again bring the province to a halt.
This time Paisley led from the front.
And, as one loyalist joked: ‘Were the people behind him?
Aye, miles behind!’
The UDA made some half-hearted attempts to block the roads but they were unpopular enough for the RUC to have little trouble in shifting them.
Some of the power workers refused to act as a militant vanguard and said that they would only come out when it was clear that the majority of people supported the stoppage.
Paisley stood on a picket line outside the Ballylumford power station in Larne and tried to persuade workers not to go in.
The next day, four Official Unionist MPs — Bill Craig (now back in the fold), James Molyneaux, Harold McCusker, and Robert Bradford — went to Ballylumford and asked the workers to keep the supply flowing.
The pan-unionist coalition was clearly ended.
In the wake of the 1975 UDA visit to Libya, it had been the DUP who had played the red card and accused the paramilitaries of flirting with communists.
This time the Official Unionists made the red scare claims, asserting that the Protestant paramilitaries were in league with the Provisional IRA to create a socialist republic in Northern Ireland.
Such accusations resonated with considerable middle-class fears about the power of the UDA and UVF.
After all, these people had paralysed the country three years earlier!
In 1974, the threat of working-class mobs had been moderated by the presence among the strike organizers of old Unionist leaders like Harry West.
With the Official Unionists opposed to this strike, the respectable middle classes had far less assurance that the working-class ‘Prods’ would be kept in their place.
Furthermore, there was a challenge to the legitimacy of the strike from within the leadership of the working class.
A number of the more left-leaning activists from the first strike, such as Bob Pagels and Glen Barr, made clear their opposition to this second stoppage.
For once, Paisley had misjudged the climate.
As a detailed opinion  poll conducted in May showed, there was considerable support for the general aims of the strikers — better security and majority-rule devolved government — but there was also a strong sense that the strike was ill advised and would only play into the hands of republicans.
Within ten days the strike collapsed.
However, for the DUP, ignominious defeat produced a surprising increase in their popularity.
Given that Paisley's ability to predict political events had always been a major part of his public image, one would have expected the electorate to turn against him, especially when he had committed his personal prestige to the extent of offering to resign if the strike did not change British policy.
But when the electorate went yet again to the polls on 19 May, this time to elect their local government representatives, the DUP did quite well in what was the first genuine free-for-all among unionist parties.
The OUP took 29.6 per cent of the vote, the SDLP 20.6 per cent, the Alliance 14.4 per cent and the DUP gained seventy-four seats with 12.7 per cent of the votes cast.
The main sufferers were the small parties.
That the strike did not cost the DUP support suggests an important point about Paisley's political appeal.
Because he was still ideologically sound , strategic and tactical mistakes could be forgiven.
This particular campaign may have failed but Paisley had demonstrated that his heart was in the right place.
He was at least trying to do something.
The DUP had the advantage over other politicians of not being in the game of pragmatic compromise.
The party stood for certain unchanging principles.
It managed to sustain a comparison of itself as the resolute party to the OUP's vacillation.
With that as its dominant posture, particular schemes could fail and it would still retain and perhaps even enhance its support, if it could claim that it pursued a course which was known to be difficult but which was still the ideologically sound thing to do.
The day after the elections, Enoch Powell, the Official Unionist MP for South Down, put the formal touch to the end of the coalition by announcing to the Speaker of the House of Commons that Dr Paisley would no longer be welcome in the office used by the Official Unionist members.
Protestant politics were being simplified.
The power-sharers, relocated in the Unionist Party of Northern Ireland, were wiped  out, as was the Baird-led remnant of Vanguard.
The competition was now between Ian Paisley's DUP and the Official Unionist Party.
In 1979, the DUP received a major boost to its fortunes when it gained two more Westminster MPs.
One of its gains was at the expense of Bill Craig.
Craig had first won the seat for East Belfast as a member of the coalition.
But at that and the second Westminster election, he had been put in office by the DUP.
Vanguard had little organization in East Belfast and the Official Unionists gave very little assistance.
Craig's campaign manager therefore was the young leader of the DUP in East Belfast, Peter Robinson.
With the collapse of the coalition, Robinson felt free to challenge the man for whom he had previously campaigned and he won the seat by the extremely narrow margin of sixty-four votes.
When asked about his victory, Robinson was surprisingly frank.
He thought that Craig might have lost some votes because people had not forgiven his voluntary coalition heresy but recognized that, had Craig emulated Paisley and created a reputation as an active constituency MP, he would have retained the seat.
The second new DUP seat was won by Johnny McQuade who had moved to contest North Belfast after failing in earlier elections to unseat Gerry Fitt in West Belfast.
While it would be dangerous to build too much analysis on the characteristics of the three main public representatives of the DUP, Paisley, Robinson and McQuade between them represented the full spectrum of DUP support.
Paisley was the evangelical preacher, embracing the religious and the political in his two careers and he was backed by the Protestant farmers.
McQuade represented the old working-class independent unionist combination of militant loyalism and a populist critique of the ruling élite.
Robinson was the first of a new generation of supporters of Paisleyism.
As a teenager he had been attracted to hear Paisley because he shared his evangelical religion.
He quickly became convinced of the need for political action and founded a branch of the Ulster Protestant Volunteers.
Better educated, brighter, and more articulate than many of the older men who had supported Paisley since the 1950s, Robinson gave the party managerial and organizational skills it had previously lacked.
Establishment
Winning three Westminster seats gave the DUP an important edge  in the first direct elections to the European Parliament.
When the United Kingdom had entered the EEC, it had asked the major parties to nominate representatives to the Parliament.
In 1979, British voters were given their first opportunity to elect representatives.
In order to ensure that the Catholic population won at least one of the three seats allocated to Northern Ireland, the whole of the province was treated as one constituency with three members.
The election could hardly have been better designed to promote the DUP.
Although Robinson and others were achieving success in building a province-wide organization, the DUP's greatest asset was its leader.
Treating the whole province as a single constituency gave Paisley a chance to cash in on his considerable personal support.
Paisley was the sole DUP candidate and John Hume was the candidate for the SDLP, but the Official Unionists made the tactical mistake of fielding two candidates.
Supporters in the west were asked to give their first preference to Harry West and their second to John Taylor; those in the east, vice versa.
Paisley's view of the EEC will be discussed in chapter 8.
It was hardly important for the election where, as in almost every other Northern Ireland election, the main issue was the constitution.
Although some Catholics (and fewer Protestants) voted for the socialist platform of Paddy Devlin or the militancy of Bernadette McAliskey (née Devlin), most voted for Hume.
The interesting competition was between Paisley and the Official Unionists for the title of spokesman for the Protestant people, and it was a contest which Paisley won comfortably.
He took 29.8 per cent of the first preference votes, Hume took 24.6 per cent and John Taylor did not pass the quota until West was eliminated and he collected his transfers.
Together both the Officials took only twenty-two per cent of the first preferences.
In an opinion poll conducted in 1967, ninety per cent of the people asked said they preferred Terence O'Neill to Ian Paisley as premier.
One can assume that all the nationalists preferred O'Neill but even eighty-four per cent of those who called themselves unionists were opposed to Paisley.
Now, twelve years later in the first province-wide ‘beauty show’, the majority of Ulster unionists chose Ian Paisley as their spokesman.
United Again?
The last five years have seen the DUP establish itself as the voice of about half of the unionist population.
They have also seen the electoral rise of Sinn Fein, the political arm of the IRA.
The two things are connected.
The political climate reacts like a see-saw.
Increased weight at the republican end calls for increased weight at the loyalist end and the rise of Sinn Fein has added to the appeal of Paisley's political postures.
In terms of proportions of votes cast at elections, the Official Unionists have recently regained the advantage but they have done so by becoming more and more like the DUP.
In November 1981, the IRA assassinated the Revd.
Robert Bradford, an Independent Methodist minister and Member of Parliament for South Belfast.
Like Paisley, Bradford was extremely conservative in theology and sufficiently opposed to the ecumenical movement to be forced out of the Irish Methodist ministry.
Although an OUP member, he had been active in Vanguard and was well to the right of the Party.
The DUP's first reaction to the murder was to suggest to the OUP that a joint candidate, acceptable to both parties, be found.
When the OUP rejected such advances, the DUP fielded the Revd William McCrea, minister of Magherafelt.
McCrea polled very badly against the OUP candidate Martin Smyth, and some journalists hailed this as the turn of the tide in the DUP's electoral fortunes.
But Martin Smyth, although a minister of the Irish Presbyterian Church, was active in conservative and anti-ecumenical  Presbyterian circles.
He was also Grand Master of the Orange Order.
He had been active with William Craig in Vanguard.
All in all, he was the closest thing the OUP had to a DUP man.
In the last six months, inter-party rivalry has been subordinated to the need for a united unionist front.
The Sinn Fein successes in the 1985 local government elections were dramatically symbolized in the election of a Sinn Fein councillor as chairman of Omagh District Council.
Unionists responded by either boycotting council meetings or trying to exclude Sinn Fein councillors, depending on whether or not there was a unionist majority.
Although one or two local DUP and OUP groups continued to squabble about tactics, the leadership of the two parties managed to present a common front and the signing of the Anglo-Irish accord in November 1985 gave unionists a very good reason for laying aside their differences.
On a wet January afternoon in 1986, Ian Paisley and James Molyneaux walked around the North Down seaside town of Bangor with the local MP and Speaker of the Assembly, James Kilfedder.
As usual on such occasions, Molyneaux looked a little embarrassed and out of place, as if he did not particularly relish the ‘glad-handing’ of strangers.
Paisley was in his element, at one point stopping two old ladies to say ‘We're here to introduce this young lad to you 'cos you'll not recognize him, will you?’, laughing and nodding in the direction of Kilfedder, who, with a 13,000 vote majority, needed no introduction in North Down.
In the twenty-two years since Ian Paisley had campaigned for Kilfedder in West Belfast, the world had been turned upside down more than once and the three men had crossed and re-crossed each other, like figures in a bizarre dance.
Paisley had broken with Kilfedder because he had not been sufficiently outspoken in his criticism of O'Neill.
Paisley had supported him again once he had broken with the Official Unionists.
Kilfedder had been Paisley's choice for Speaker of the Assembly.
Kilfedder and Molyneaux had once been close but Kilfedder's desertion of the OUP had divided them.
When Molyneaux was first elected to Westminster for South Antrim in 1970, he had been regarded by Paisley as a conservative ally.
But when he became leader of the Unionist Party, he also became the target for accusations of vacillating leadership.
Now, faced with the Anglo-Irish accord, the three unionist leaders were again united and Paisley and Molyneaux were working the main street of Bangor to boost Kilfedder's support.
The initial aim in forming the DUP had been to create a united unionist party which would be as orthodox in its constitutional position as the Unionist Party of Craig and Brookeborough.
It would be a stronger party because it would win popular support from all sections of the unionism by advocating equitable social and economic policies and by removing power from the undependable unionist élites.
The DUP failed to achieve its goal, largely because conservatives recaptured the Unionist Party.
However, if one forgets for a moment the organizational structures of the two parties and considers their policies, one sees a relatively united unionist movement.
In this sense, the DUP has succeeded in establishing its view of the constitutional crisis and the proper reactions to it.
Whatever the future holds for Northern Ireland, it is clear that Ian Paisley has moved from being a prophet crying in the wilderness to the centre of the unionist stage.
Church and Party
Free Presbyterian Union
In the first chapter I argued that the fact that the Scots settlers and the Irish natives were respectively Calvinists and Roman Catholics had profound consequences for the development of social conflict.
Specifically, it established a cleavage along religious and ethnic lines which prevented other sorts of conflict, such as those of economic interest, developing.
The preservation of the basic Ulster divide of Protestant and Catholic into the age of nationalism ensured that competing political ideologies would be added to the religious and ethnic divisions: the Irish Catholics became nationalists while the Scots Presbyterians and the Anglo-Irish drew together as unionists.
If most Protestants in Northern Ireland are unionists, are Free Presbyterians especially committed to the Union with Great Britain?
The reasons for unionism can be placed in two broad categories: those specifically concerned with religion, and those which are concerned with a wider range of social, political, and economic considerations.
The first category is easy to describe.
Putting it bluntly, many Protestants fear that they will be unable to continue to practise and promote their religion in a united Ireland.
In discussion, they point back to the Spanish Inquisition or the St Bartholomew's Day Massacre as evidence that the Roman Catholic Church is set on persecution of dissenters.
Older Protestants can point to examples of Catholic persecution from their own lifetimes: in Spain under Franco or in a number of Latin American countries in the 1940s and 1950s.
The sceptic might argue that the modern Roman Catholic Church in civilized societies no longer acts in this way but the convinced anti-Catholic can turn Rome's own claims to be  unchanging back on the Catholic Church and insist that the basic aim remains the same.
Only the tactics have changed.
It is certainly the case that, a deviant fringe aside, the core of Catholicism maintains the claim to be the only true church, insists that church unity must mean unity with Rome on its terms, and, in such practices as insisting that the children of mixed marriages be raised as Catholics, continues to behave in an ‘intolerant’ fashion.
So even those Protestants who do not believe that the Catholic Church would actually sanction a return to the thumbscrews if it thought it could get away with it view with profound misgivings the decline of the Protestant population of the Irish Republic from 330,000 in 1911 to 130,000 in 1971.
By 1981, it had fallen from being four per cent of the population in 1971, to just 3.49 per cent.
In addition, the Catholic Church's reaction to the recent IRA campaign — in particular the refusal to excommunicate convicted murderers and to condemn for mortal sin the hunger strikers who committed suicide — has been taken as confirmation that the Church does not really mind if other people exterminate Protestants.
It is difficult to exaggerate the strength of Protestant feeling about this issue and it is worth quoting Allister's statement of the views expressed by many of the people I interviewed:
For those republicans who lose their own lives in advancing their struggle, there is available the full solace of their Church as IRA murderers are buried with no lesser Roman Catholic Church rites than the very priests of that Church.
Glorification rather than the more seemingly fitting excommunication is the response of the Roman Catholic Church to the terrorist.
It is this insoluble marriage of Roman Catholicism to militant Irish republicanism, where the latter is seen as the ‘political’ expression and promoter of the former, which makes what should otherwise be possible, namely the co-existence of the political expressions of Protestantism and Roman Catholicism impossible in Ireland.
No amount of public condemnation of terrorism by cardinals, bishops, and priests has altered the basic perception of many conservative Protestants that, by its refusal to deny religious ordinances to terrorists, the church subtly countenances such actions.
If this is what happens in the North now, how much worse then would things be in a united Ireland?:
The people of Northern Ireland naturally and rightly reason that if what they have suffered at the hands of the southern-spawned IRA, they have suffered while a majority, how much greater would that persecution not be if they ever entered a state in which they were a perpetual minority.
It is difficult to put a percentage figure on the proportion of Ulster Protestants who would accept this perspective.
It is probably a minority, but a general feeling that the Roman Catholic Church is a threat is widely shared.
Only nine per cent of Moxon-Browne's survey described themselves as evangelicals, but 74.5 per cent gave ‘fear of the power of the Roman Catholic Church’ as their reason for being unionist.
The offensive section of the 1937 constitution of the Republic which recognized the special position of the Catholic Church has been removed but this is largely irrelevant to Protestant perceptions.
When ninety-five per cent of the population of the Republic professes to being Roman Catholic, the Catholic Church does not need a constitutional commitment to dominate moral and social legislation.
The Irish Republic is a Catholic country and even those Protestants who do not expect to be actively persecuted doubt that they will have full civil and religious liberty when the major religious institution refuses to engage in fair competition by, for example, permitting the parents free choice of their child's religion in the case of mixed marriage.
Free Presbyterians would differ from other Protestants in their attitude to the above reasons for unionism only in taking them more seriously.
If they do have a distinctive perspective it comes from their belief that Rome and terrorism are further linked in a more roundabout fashion through the ecumenical movement and the World Council of Churches.
In the 1970s, the WCC launched a programme to combat racism and, as part of that initiative, gave money to a number of African liberation movements.
The funds were designated for humanitarian rather than military aid, but given that such funds freed existing funds for arms purchase, it was not difficult for critics of the WCC to argue that it was supporting terrorism.
At the same time, a number of leading liberal church  leaders in Northern Ireland became involved in negotiations with the IRA to establish a cease-fire.s Thus the conservative Protestant critic of the ecumenical movement can equate ecumenism and terrorism and, given that the ecumenical movement is on the road to Rome, Rome can be equated with the IRA.
So Free Presbyterians and other evangelicals critical of the ecumenical movement can add a further set of elements to their ideological objection to a united Ireland.
It is possible to identify a second cluster of reasons for unionism.
These could loosely be described as ‘secular’ Protestantism.
In talking about what is good in the Protestant way of life, even evangelical Protestants go beyond theology and begin to list things that are thought to be the results of the right religion.
These would include loyalty, diligence, honesty, affluence, a lower crime rate, families small enough to be supported by one's own labour, a certain independence of mind, democracy, and so on.
Obviously different social groups have a varying ability to articulate these concerns, but there is a widely shared general notion that there is something valuable —‘the British way of life’— which would be undermined by translation into an overwhelmingly Catholic country.
Generally this is perceived, not in the abstract, but by listing the failings of Catholic countries.
Spain and Portugal are poor.
The Republic is poorer than Ulster.
Franco was a dictator.
The Republic has more alcoholics.
Or comparisons are drawn between Protestants and Catholics in the same country.
If Protestants are better off than Catholics in Ulster, it is because they work harder and have fewer children.
If Catholics figure disproportionately in the crime statistics, it is because Protestants are more law-abiding.
Thus, beyond the specifically theological reasons for unionism, there is a broader penumbra of social concerns.
Protestants believe that Protestantism produces better people and a better society, and this belief is held by even those people who have ceased to have any active religious commitment.
Again, this second set of reasons would be subscribed to by Free Presbyterians, who would only differ from the bulk of the Protestant population in being more consciously committed to such arguments.
While non-evangelicals and atheists might agree that there have been historically specific benefits from  Protestantism, and that we ought to preserve such benefits, the evangelical adds a more direct link with the belief that God will punish us if we deviate further from his commands.
A failure to defend the Protestant heritage will cause God to remove from us what benefits remain.
Is the Free Presbyterian Church Democratic Unionist?
The detailed history in the previous chapters has given an account of Ian Paisley's personal combination of religion and politics.
Against those who see his political career as stemming from mundane and this-worldly considerations such as a desire for power, I would argue that there is no good reason to reject his own understanding of the connection between the two.
In his view of the circumstances in which he found himself, the preservation of his religious culture required a political response.
Given his initial assumptions and central beliefs, his political involvement has been rational.
From where he stands, it makes sense.
To what extent do other members of the Free Presbyterian Church, especially other leaders, share Ian Paisley's politics?
And how important has the Church been in promoting Paisley's politics?
These are the questions which I wish to address.
Some ministers fully endorse ‘the Doc's’ politics.
In fact, a number were attracted to the religion and to the ministry by the political conflict.
For someone like William Beattie who was raised in a tradition which firmly linked the preservation of a religious culture with the maintenance of a Protestant and unionist polity, changes in the political world acted to reinforce his religious commitment.
In his explanation of how he became involved in the Free Presbyterian Church, he combines two elements: the appointment of O'Neill as premier and his attention being drawn to a biblical text which talked of the ‘evil to come’.
He believed that God was drawing his attention to this particular message from Scripture and that O'Neill was a harbinger of the troubles that lay ahead.
So from the very outset, before O'Neillism was widely recognized as a new force in Ulster politics, Beattie was committed to the politicized evangelicalism which Paisley promoted.
Unlike Beattie, who was socialized into evangelicalism and unionism, Ivan Foster was recruited after a more dramatic conversion.
Although his uncle was a keen Pentecostalist, his family  had a strong Orange background, and his parents were ‘saved’, Foster had little interest in religion or politics.
He was working as a trainee film editor with Ulster Television in Belfast and, like most young men, pursuing an active life of sin when he felt the Lord speaking to him.
Once saved, he entered into the life of the Free Presbyterian Church with gusto.
Immediately after hearing Paisley, he wanted to become involved: ‘I was mad keen.
I rang the Big Man up the next day after I had talked to him and said: ‘When's the next meeting?’.
I was bursting for meetings, bursting for meetings!’
He simultaneously became an enthusiastic supporter of Paisley's politics:
I didn't divorce the spiritual battle in Ulster from the political and I still wouldn't.
So I felt that our heritage was basically a spiritual heritage….
I went to Gaelic matches in Dublin.
I went to Croke Park and I had not the slightest interest in Protestantism but I did come from a Fermanagh family where you did live cheek by jowl with republicanism so I had imbibed it undoubtedly and it resurfaced, the inherited knowledge of the heart of the controversy in Ulster.
It was there all the time but I had turned my back upon it in a sense, so when I got converted, and of course I was listening to the Big Man's comments on events and I recognized the validity of what he was saying.
I don't come from an evangelical background, I came from a raw environment straight into the contentions of the Big Man and you couldn't have been too extreme.
It didn't bother me.
Up the Shankill Road in the riots!
I had no problem relating to the roughs and whatnot.
For Foster the resurfaced family tradition of unionism and his newly acquired loyalty to Paisley made him an active and enthusiastic supporter of his political activities.
Other early ministers were pushed into politics by the reaction of others to what they saw as religious activity.
John Wylie's experience in Ballymoney is a good example.
He saw nothing political about inviting an ex-priest to publicly denounce the mass as a blasphemy, and took the council's refusal to let him use public property for this purpose as the state interfering in valid religious activity.
The liberals wanted to promote a modern secular understanding of religion as a largely private matter which should be pursued in such a manner as not to offend people of other religions.
Wylie's desire to maintain a more traditional notion of religion as a matter of truth and falsity (where those with the truth have an obligation publicly to denounce falsity) brought him into conflict  with the state and he responded to that challenge by standing for election to the council.
The experiences of 1966 and the imprisonment of the three ministers politicized a number of ministers and elders in this way.
Some, such as Cecil Menary of Crossgar, remained largely uninvolved, but most found themselves becoming increasingly involved in public criticism of O'Neillism.
Even those men, such as Bert Cooke and John Douglas, who were later critical of ministers becoming professional politicians, found themselves acting in the political arena as they tried to explain to an increasingly interested audience why their spiritual leader was being sent to prison.
One can best describe their position, in contrast to that of Paisley and Beattie, as being one of reluctant and short-term involvement in politics.
Where possible, they emphasized the spiritual side of the conflict and used the interest in the Paisley-O'Neill conflict as a means of ‘religious revival’.
Bert Cooke describes the imprisonment rallies which he addressed with Alan Cairns:
Alan and I took a lot of meetings…in Londonderry, Coleraine, Portglenone.
We were involved in a large one in the Ulster Hall.
Alan set up the legal part of it and the political side and I would come in with the more spiritual side of it: the demand for separation from the Irish Presbyterian Church that was operating in cahoots with O'Neill at that time.
Because this was our charge; that the government linked up with leaders of the Irish Presbyterian Church in order to silence Paisley.
And so we were involved a great deal in what we would call ‘protesting’ but as far as political activity, that was never my thing.
The Free Presbyterians can be divided into a very small group of what one man called ‘the bible college — God bless you brother — every blessing’ types who remained distant from politics; the majority who saw themselves as being unionist, but not especially so, who were forced into political activity by the alliance of O'Neillism and the ecumenical movement; and a small circle of fully politicized ministers.
It was this last group which provided Paisley with the resources necessary to launch his campaign against O'Neill.
In the absence of a well-organized party machine, it was his friends and colleagues who were called on to turn out for hurriedly organized demonstrations.
When he decided to challenge O'Neill in Bannside in 1969, he asked Jimmy Beggs, the Free Presbyterian minister of Ballymena who had married his adoptive sister, to act as election  agent.
The minister of the Rasharkin congregation, Gordon Cooke, became the chairman of the Bannside branch of the Protestant Unionist party.
Of the six Protestant Unionists who stood in that election, three were Free Church ministers (Paisley, Wylie, and Beattie) and a fourth was an elder.
Nevertheless, Paisley was keen to establish a public distinction between these two roles, At an early election meeting in an Orange Hall in the Bannside constituency he arranged to have a friend ask him if Protestant Unionism was just Free Presbyterianism by another name.
He replied that he recognized that ‘there are those who agree with me politically but who disagree with me religiously’ and said he wanted their political support.
Ironically, his reliance on Free Presbyterians for his early support is demonstrated by that story.
The stooge who set up the question was a local Free Presbyterian elder!
There are two separate elements to the Free Presbyterians' support for Paisley's politics which in practice reinforced each other.
As I have tried to demonstrate, there were good ideological reasons for Free Presbyterians to be Protestant Unionists, but there was also an element of personal loyalty.
For the early Free Presbyterians, who had joined the Church when it was still small and there was still a great deal of personal contact between Paisley and his followers, there was a strong personal commitment to Paisley's political analyses because they had come to trust and respect his judgement and ability as a spiritual leader.
The fact that the major period of growth for the Church was a result of the political conflict with liberal unionism meant that most of those who were attracted to the Church were aware of its high political profile and either positively endorsed it, or at least did not find it offensive.
Controversy had two major advantages for the Church: considerable free publicity, and such a negative public image that only those who were strongly committed would join.
I have very little knowledge about why ordinary members joined, but my knowledge of why those people who later became ministers joined should be fairly representative of the core support.
Again, the cases can be grouped in types.
There were those who did not like the Church's controversial image.
Most of them left the ministry and moved to other evangelical outlets for their vocation.
There were some who were initially repelled by the controversy which surrounded Paisley, but who overcame that revulsion and became committed supporters.
Although Bert Cooke, shortly after  his conversion, became an active supporter of Paisley's evangelistic work, he was less than enthusiastic about the public image of the Church: ‘When I started thinking about full-time service, I didn't want to be a Free Presbyterian.
I wanted to be non-controversial, popular with people.’
His complete acceptance of the ‘protest’ in ‘Protestant’did not come till a few years later when some leading members of his Mount Merrion, Belfast, congregation insisted that he object to the Church's ‘street corner boy’activities of picketing the Irish Presbyterian Church General Assembly.
He considered this for a short time and concluded that he had to make a public stand for those things which he believed.
From that point on he was ‘a real dyed in the wool Free Presbyterian’.
The third group consists of those who were positively attracted by the controversy and some of these were unionist before they were ‘saved’ Protestants.
Harry Cairns first met Paisley in 1958 when he was promoting Albert Duff as a Protestant Unionist candidate against Maginnis, the then Attorney-General, in the rural Iveagh constituency.
Although he had recently been converted, it was Paisley's conservative attack on unreliable unionist leaders which first drew him to Free Presbyterianism.
When the 1966 imprisonment again gave Paisley a high profile, he attended meetings being led by Beattie in Hillsborough and became a founding member of the Free Presbyterian congregation there.
He then felt called to the ministry.
If that is the biography of a rural evangelical Free Presbyterian activist, the following is the urban working variant:
Way back in the 1960s, when the tricolour flew in Divis St, I was only sixteen at the time.
I thought the man was crazy really but in 1966 I did develop an interest and started to attend the services…
I went to him for the political because I was a red hot loyalist at that time.
Doc Paisley was the first man I ever heard preach to me directly that I was sinner, that God loved me and that Jesus died for me…
It was shortly after that I was converted, in my own home, 5th November 1966.
He went on to add that, had his interest not been channelled into the evangelical Protestantism of the Free Church, it would probably have led to him getting in with ‘a bad crowd’ and joining the tartan gangs of loyalist youths.
Of course, it was possible for people to accept Paisley's political analyses and the need for evangelicals to be politically involved  and yet not support the particular organizational expressions of those views which Paisley led.
The Church was always broad enough to include such people.
Cecil Harvey was one of the founding elders of the Free Presbyterian Church.
He sat as a Unionist councillor and, when the Unionist Party became dominated by powersharers, he moved to Vanguard, then to Baird's United Ulster Unionist Party, and only switched to Paisley's Democratic Unionist Party after the demise of the UUUP.
It may have been that Harvey enjoyed such seniority in the Church that in his case such deviation was permitted, but given that two or three other committed Free Presbyterians have been active in the Official Unionist Party (in 1985 there were two Free Presbyterians in local government as Official Unionist councillors), it is more likely that the Church leadership was genuinely able to maintain some distance from Paisley's politics.
So far I have been suggesting ways in which the Free Church benefited from the political activities of its founder and other leading members.
There have also been corresponding costs.
The first and most general cost has been to give the impression that Official Unionists would not be welcome in the Free Church.
Despite their best efforts, the ministers have not been able to break the public association of Church and Party.
In the early days, when unionist politics were in a state of flux, some people may have been alienated from the Church by their dislike for Paisley's political image, but they would not have felt that the Church was a DUP church.
It may have been a controversial church, but its image as a party church dates only from about 1977 when Vanguard disappeared and unionist politics became a straight fight between the Officials and the DUP.
There was a time when I felt that the Free Church could present a broader appeal to the Protestant people, while there was greater harmony among the unionist parties as such.
Now when you find a lot of political infighting between the Officials and the DUP, a lot of people, wrongly in my opinion, suspect that the Free Church is just the religious arm of the DUP.
I would like to think that my ministry would appeal to a cross section of the population, that Official Unionists could come to my services and not be insulted by anything I might say.
They almost certainly could go to the services of any Free Church and not be insulted.
None the less, in many congregations, many  of the elders are DUP activists or members, and in some congregations all of those members who vote at all would vote DUP.
And at times of crisis the Church has rallied to the political Position of the Party, and ministers such as Bert Cooke who are not normally politically active have supported the DUP's initiatives from their pulpits.
The call for a day of action to protest against the government's security policies in the wake of the murder of the Revd Robert Bradford, MP for South Belfast, in 1981, is an example.
This close association of Church and Party may well have had a cost to the Church in limiting recruitment to people who are not committed supporters of the Official Unionist Party but, given that the DUP support is twenty times the size of the Free Church and that there is a large uncommitted population, this is probably not something which explains why more people do not join the Free Church.
A second cost to the Free Church of its political involvement is a drain on leadership resources.
I have already mentioned the debate in Presbytery in 1974 about ministers going forward in elections.
The arguments had actually been rehearsed on many occasions:
The Presbytery has not encouraged party political participation and it has only been because we felt certainly that Dr Paisley's position, that the country needs it and we felt that he should be allowed to go.
For years we had requests from political people, parties, you know, around the country, to allow other ministers to go forward and we said ‘No’.
The Free Church had got its hands full.
We are not going to have all our ministers in politics.
Alan Cairn's view was echoed by most other ministers I talked to.
Even those who are active in the Party expressed concern at the diversion of energies from their primary task of building the Church.
It is interesting that Cairns saw the pressure for ministers to run for office coming, not from ambitious ministers, but from party activists who thought that certain ministers would make good political leaders.
We should not forget the general point that, in many communities where religious affiliation plays no part in political decisions, the clergy are still seen as leading figures who can be called upon to lead and organize activities outside the narrow remit of religion.
The political involvements of Free Presbyterian ministers can be described as follows.
No minister is a member or is active in any party other than the DUP.
But of forty-nine ministers in Northern Ireland (which includes one retired man and three students), only six have held elected office, only eleven in total have been office holders in the DUP, and only fifteen in total are members.
That is, less than a third of the clergy are members of the DUP.
Although the Free Presbyterian clergy are probably more politically involved than the ministers of the Irish Presbyterian Church (unfortunately data for comparison are not available), there is certainly not the tight connection which many outsiders assume.
A further problem for the Church is that it may be seen by some people as a stepping-stone to a political career.
In the second part of this chapter, I present evidence from a survey of the denominational affiliation of DUP activists.
Much of the information was gathered by asking Free Church ministers if any of a list of local DUP people were members or attenders of their church.
In these conversations, an interesting sub-theme emerged.
In a very small percentage of cases someone was described as having been a Free Presbyterian.
Although some of these may have been cases of a genuine change of religious commitment, in many I was given the strong impression that these were people who had come to the church regularly at the time when they were building their political careers but who had subsequently fallen away and now professed no strong denominational attachment.
Although the ministers were too polite to commit themselves, even when I pressed them on this point, it was clear to me that they felt they, and their church, had been used.
Still, this is hardly unusual or unique to the Free Church.
Although its connection with a political party, and the fact that some of its ministers and elders are leading figures in the DUP, provides some people with a good ulterior motive to participate in the life of the Church, it is often the case that people have more than one motive for church involvement.
Many people attend churches in order to foster an image of respectability, to make business contacts or to make friends.
What makes the position of the Free Church more problematic is that, where the  ulterior motive is connected to a set of strong commitments outside the Church, then changes in those commitments can cause disruption in the Church.
The already mentioned case of Cecil Harvey suggests that active membership of another party is not a problem for Free Presbyterians, provided one has been consistent.
There are, however, Problems when someone who was active in both Church and Party leaves the Party.
Arguments started outside the congregation may spill over into it.
When Clifford Smyth was persuaded to resign from the DUP, he also felt obliged to leave the Free Presbyterian Church, not because the leadership of the Church suggested it, but because he felt a tension between himself and other congregation members who had previously been political colleagues.
When conflict between Ken McFaul, a founder member of the DUP and an ex-mayor of Carrickfergus, and other DUP members reached the point of McFaul being expelled from the Party (and simultaneously resigning), he also left the Free Presbyterian Church of which he had been an elder.
William Belshaw was another founder member of the Party who has recently left.
As in all such cases, the actual sequence of events and the combinations of motives is complex.
Belshaw seems to have been disappointed that he was not selected to fight an Assembly seat.
For whatever reason, he chose to break the DUP's stance on relations with representatives of the Republic's government by attending a dinner at which Garret Fitzgerald, the Republic's Prime Minister, was guest of honour.
After falling out with the Lisburn DUP, Belshaw resigned his office of treasurer in the Lisburn Free Presbyterian Church and began to attend the church only rarely.
To summarize: although Paisley and the other ministers of the Free Presbyterian Church have always maintained a clear division between ‘constitutional’ and ‘party’politics — the Church has a position on the constitution but does not back any particular party — the close historical and biographical links between Church and Party have made it impossible for the Free Presbyterian Church to avoid either being tagged with the label of being the DUP at prayer or on occasion being disrupted by the spill-over of tensions from the Party into the Church.
Although the overlap in personnel is less than many commentators might suppose, the  presence of Ian Paisley is such that, despite his best efforts to keep his roles as Church and Party leader distinct, the simplifications of unionist politics into just two parties has left the Church firmly associated with the DUP.
Is the DUP Free Presbyterian?
In the early stages of his political career, Ian Paisley depended a great deal on the Free Presbyterian Church, largely because it was through his evangelistic work that he had become well known.
Most of his friends and close supporters were Free Presbyterians.
But there was always a second non-evangelical element in his political support which drew on the independent unionist populist tradition.
Especially in the Belfast area, people would work for him, not because he was an evangelical who denounced apostasy and promoted sabbatarianism and temperance, but because he was a strong loyalist who articulated their suspicions that the leaders of the Unionist Party —‘the fur coat brigade’— were rather more interested in looking after themselves than they were in protecting working-class Protestants.
The DUP was formed with the intention of increasing the non-evangelical element in the movement, but it had little initial success in broadening the recruiting base.
Almost half of the seventeen DUP candidates for the 1973 Assembly were Free Presbyterians.
For the 1975 Convention election, the proportion rose to almost eighty per cent: fourteen out of eighteen.
Scrupulous analysers of elections might argue that the proportion of Free Presbyterians in these contests was artificially inflated by the election pact with Vanguard.
Vanguard was stronger than the DUP in urban working-class areas and, as the pacts were designed to maximize loyalist votes by giving the strongest party in any area a clear run, this would have reduced the number of DUP people standing in urban areas.
So the DUP candidates would have been drawn  predominently from rural areas, the places where the evangelical influence on the Party was greatest.
However, the 1977 local government elections were a free-for-all.
Of the seventy-two DUP members who sat on councils in 1978, sixty were Free  Presbyterians: eighty-three per cent!
The growth of the DUP in recent years has seen that proportion fall.
Sixty-two per cent of the 218 candidates fielded in the 1985 local government elections were Free Presbyterians.
Many of the newer activists who are not Free Presbyterians are members of other small evangelical denominations.s
The presence of Free Presbyterians increases as one moves up the party hierarchy.
All twelve of the 1975 constituency party chairmen were Free Presbyterians.
Apart from the brief chairmanship of Desmond Boal, the senior party leadership was drawn exclusively from Free Presbyterian circles until the early 1980s, when Peter Robinson started attending a gospel hall and Sammy Wilson, an Elim Pentecostalist, replaced Jim Allister as press officer.
The Protestant Unionist Party and the early DUP were overwhelmingly Free Presbyterian for the obvious reason that the first activists were recruited through their friendship with, and loyalty to, Ian Paisley, and such qualities tended to be concentrated among Free Presbyterians.
These activists then recruited their friends, who were likely also to be Free Presbyterians.
The fact that the early DUP was Free Presbyterian explains why the senior leadership still is.
Promotion is related to seniority in the Party.
This still leaves a problem.
The membership of local DUP branches now includes lots of non-Free Presbyterians.
It may be that this will gradually work through and become apparent in the activists in about five years.
But even now, some senior DUP men are slightly perplexed at the apparent willingness of non-evangelicals to ‘take a back seat and push the others forward’, as one man put it.
This suggests an important point which will be taken up in detail in the final chapter but which should be mentioned here.
Some commentators suppose that there is a considerable Free Presbyterian presence in the lists of party activists because the leaders of the Party favour people who share their religious affiliation.
Of course, this is possible but there is good reason to suppose that it is not the case.
One area which the leaders unambiguously control is the hiring of staff, and the full-time staff of the DUP is now drawn widely from all the major denominations.
Let us suppose for a moment that the over-representation of  Free Presbyterians (and other evangelicals) exists because even those members who are not evangelicals wish it.
Is it possible that ‘secular’ Protestants have a good deal of respect for evangelical beliefs and values even though they do not share them?
In the final chapter, I will argue that this is the case.
In the meantime, I will turn to potential conflicts within the DUP.
Tensions in Party Support
In the absence of extensive survey material on the attitudes of DUP voters, we can only reason backwards from the platform of the Party to the interests of the people who support it.
The manifesto for the 1982 Assembly elections has fifteen paragraphs.
The first and second call for the end of direct rule and a return to ‘Ulstermen in control of all major government functions by means of legislative as well as executive devolution’.
The third and fourth promise that the DUP ‘offers the firmest stand against all attempts to force Ulster down the Dublin road’, while the fifth section calls for an all-out war against the IRA and the return of the death penalty as ‘the only suitable punishment for the heinous murders committed in our Province’.
The second section of the manifesto outlines the DUP's social and economic policies, which are moderately Keynesian, calling for ‘additional but sensible public expenditure on a sustained jobs creation offensive’, cheaper energy through a link to the British mainland's North Sea gas network, and major investment in housing.
The strong rural support for the Party is recognized by a call for ‘a realistic return for the farming community, with special measures to offset the disadvantages, especially in the intensive livestock sector, resulting from our isolation from Great Britain’.
The manifesto then proposes more democratic control over education and leisure, an end to the financing of two distinct educational systems, an increase in old-age pensions, and more facilities for the handicapped.
It is only in the very last paragraph that there is a distinctly evangelical position in the Party's platform.
Under the heading ‘Moral Matters — Morals Matter’, the Party promises that:
A strong and forthright stand will continue to be taken in accordance with Christian principles on the great moral issues of our day.
We utterly deprecate the imposition by Westminster of alien moral standards upon  Ulster.
The DUP will lead opposition in the Assembly to such matters as the legalising of homosexuality, opening sex shops and Sunday opening of public houses.
Ulster should decide its own moral standards and codes of behaviour.
It is clear from this manifesto, and from other DUP election literature over the years, that the Party is mainly known for, and hence presumably supported for, its hardline unionism.
With some minor deviations — such as Paisley's preference for fuller integration with the mainland in the early 1970s — the DUP has maintained the image of being the most traditional of the unionist parties and the one with the record of consistent opposition to any changes in the political structures of Northern Ireland which could be seen as compromise with nationalists and republicans.
Especially since the demise of Vanguard and the simplification of the inter-unionist competition, the DUP has stressed its own reliability (‘for trustworthy leadership, vote DUP’) and made much play of divisions within the Official Unionists and the continued presence in the Unionist Party of some people who were tainted by O'Neillism and power-sharing.
Many 1983 Westminster election advertisements mention only law and order, job creation, and the Union.
It does not seem implausible to suppose, therefore, that it is the loyalism of the DUP rather than the evangelicalism of many of its leaders that accounts for its support, especially in the greater Belfast urban area.
This poses what is potentially a serious problem for the DUP: the ‘Christian principles’ which are dear to the leaders of the party may cost them popular support.
Certainly some commentators see the unpopularity of the DUP's stand on Sunday opening as part of the reason for its fall in votes in recent elections.
What prevents sabbatarianism becoming a major vote-loser for the Party is the absence of serious competition from any group to the right on the constitution.
The DUP and Working-class Loyalists
The Democratic Unionist Party is in the curious position of being  dominated by evangelicals and hence being more favourable to temperance and sabbatarianism than the Official Unionists and at the same time being better supported than the Officials by working-class loyalists who are not known for their piety and who are prepared to support acts of criminal violence.
Critics from both the nationalist and the loyalist side have attacked the DUP (and its predecessor, the Protestant Unionist Party) for using working-class loyalists to further its aims.
It encouraged them to break the law and used the threat of a ‘backlash’ to discourage the British government from compromise with Dublin, and then denounced loyalists for law-breaking.
To quote the UDA's magazine Ulster :
No body established by the two parties will do anything outside the law to halt any sell out; what they will do is to engineer situations and emotions that lead other people to break the law.
They are the mirror image of the Eire politicians who use the IRA.
Thousands of Ulster citizens have taken the law into their own hands to save their country, many of these people were encouraged by the speeches of our ‘leaders’; many were frustrated that speeches were all they made.
While it is easy to see how those people who took the aggressive martial language of Paisley and others as justification for violence can feel used, such an analysis over-simplifies and fails correctly to identify the ‘respectable’ Protestant's view of the law and the genuine dilemmas of loyalism.
In this section I will look in some detail at the DUP's role in recent illegal demonstrations and marches, the party's attitude to law-breaking, and the complex relationship between the DUP and working-class loyalists.
Parades are the very stuff of Protestant politics.
Public marches permit the display of one's symbols: the flags, the banners, the open Bible, and, on occasions, the uniforms which hint at potential violence.
The flaunting of symbols has so often been the occasion for counter-demonstrations and rioting that the government has often banned parades or re-routed them away from particularly sensitive areas.
Bans on parades are always seen as a sign of weakness, and as such have frequently given militant Protestants a chance to show, by defying the bans, that they will not be a party to any ‘sell-out’.
In the 1950s, Paisley and Norman Porter led banned parades.
William McCrea was imprisoned in 1971 for  taking part in a banned march in Dungiven.
Paisley's second prison term was the result of his organizing a blockade of Armagh to prevent a civil rights march.
In Protestant history there is good precedent for such opposition to bans.
In 1866, William Johnson of Ballykilbegs led a banned march, was sent to prison, and on his release was elected to Parliament by Protestant voters.
In the summer of 1985, bans on a number of parades led to rioting, loyalist attacks on the RUC, and a revival of interest in DUP views on illegality.
A loyalist band parade through the at least ninety per cent Catholic County Down town of Castlewellan was banned.
Local DUP councillor Ethel Smyth called for defiance of the ban.
The RUC surrounded the town with a cordon of divisional mobile support units.
Ivan Foster announced that the Third Force would take part in the march.
Although the RUC succeeded in preventing the march, twenty-two people, including Ethel Smyth, were injured, and Foster and another DUP Assemblyman, George Graham, were among those arrested.
The DUP view was that the ban was intended to placate the Dublin government.
If Protestants could not parade wherever they liked in Ulster, then the day was not far away when they would be sold into a united Ireland.
As George Graham put it: ‘The day has come when we see that the country has gone to the dogs.
We have lost everything that we cherish and hold dear.
Our backs are to the wall and we must fight.’
Ivan Foster added: ‘We are declaring war.
If we didn't do what was done at Castlewellan we would have had a complete sell out.’
DUP Assemblyman Jim Wells was also present but apart from the DUP politicians, the only other leader who was present was George Seawright (of whom more later).
The following night there was a similar confrontation between loyalist marchers and RUC in Cookstown and again the DUP was prominent, this time in the figure of William McCrea, the local Westminster MP.
The major scene of confrontation was to be Portadown.
There the 12th of July parade had been re-routed to take it away from the ‘Tunnel’, part of the traditional route which had become a Catholic area.
This time the Orange Order, which had distanced itself from the Castlewellan and Cookstown incidents, was  involved.
Senior Orange leaders, DUP representatives and Official Unionists held a series of negotiations with the RUC and the Secretary of State to have the re-routeing order lifted.
On 4 July, 30,000 Orangemen gathered in Portadown ‘to demand the right to march anywhere in Ulster’.
This time the leadership of the OUP joined Paisley in lending political weight to the demonstration, which passed without incident.
The Chief Constable of the RUC added confusion to the parades policy by announcing that he would permit an Orange church parade on the Sunday before the Twelfth to pass through the Tunnel because it would be a ‘peaceful, dignified, church parade’ but insisted that the Twelfth march had to be re-routed.
When the first parade passed off without serious incident (but with a massive police presence), the Portadown Orangemen reaffirmed their determination to go through the Tunnel on the Twelfth.
At this point, the Orange leadership began to retreat, suggesting that they had made their point with the church parade and calling on the Portadown loyalists not to break the law.
While Martin Smyth was trying to persuade the march organizers to relent, Ian Paisley was promising his support.
Although committed to the Independent Orange Order's rally in Ballycastle, he announced that he would begin the Twelfth by visiting Portadown to add his support to the planned march.
The marchers did not walk through the Tunnel.
The massive RUC presence prevented them, but over that weekend fifty-three police officers and at least nineteen civilians were injured in serious rioting which wrecked shops in the town centre.
At least forty-eight loyalists were arrested, two of whom turned out to be full-time members of the Ulster Defence Regiment.
To make matters worse, the Dublin government complimented the RUC on their firm stand against loyalist agitation.
Over the following weeks, Portadown loyalists harassed the police in retaliation for what they claimed was police persecution.
In Portadown and Cookstown, RUC officers were driven out of their homes in areas which had once been safe because they were loyalist.
In response to demands for figures of loyalists arrested, the police first announced that 130 nationalists and seventy-five loyalists were arrested.
The next day, they admitted that they had  miscounted and that ‘in the period June 27-August 9…the numbers of persons detained for the whole range of offences connected with public order were loyalists 468; republicans 427’.
All Protestant politicians were agreed that, in theory, Protestants should be allowed to march anywhere in Ulster and there was agreement that marches should not be banned or re-routed simply because nationalists would be offended or would attack the marchers.
However, there was a significant difference about the extent to which loyalists should break the law to exercise their right to march if the RUC decided to ban or change the route of a march.
As has consistently been the case, Paisley and other DUP politicians were prepared to go further than the Official Unionists and the provincial leadership of the Orange Order.
It has also always been the case that Democratic Unionists have been more willing than Official Unionists to try to prevent republican marches.
After her Castlewellan protest, Ethel Smyth was arrested in Downpatrick while trying to stop a Sinn Fein march and was roundly condemned by the local Official Unionist Assemblyman for trouble-making.
However, the DUP has consistently criticized loyalists who attack the RUC or wreck shops.
Pushing at a line of policemen or refusing to be moved on is acceptable; throwing bricks is not.
This is precisely the sort of position one would expect given the combination of their respectable backgrounds, in almost all cases their membership of the Free Presbyterian Church, and their belief that the appeasement policies of the government and the Chief Constable have to be opposed publicly.
The interesting point is that the really quite moderate and bourgeois position of the DUP is often over looked, not just by its critics (one would expect that), but also by its supporters.
Because the DUP is more willing to court confrontation with the police and the forces of law and order than is the OUP, working-class loyalists seem to suppose that the DUP endorses and shares their willingness to go even further in seeking confrontation.
When DUP spokesmen give their view of the conflict, which is that the rioters were clearly in the wrong but their actions were understandable, and that the fault really lay with the leadership of the RUC, the loyalists seem to hear only those parts which marked the DUP as being more supportive of their acts than was the OUP.
This selective hearing was clearly demonstrated in a meeting in  Portadown on 22 August.
Some 400 loyalists had gathered to explain their grievances about police action in the town and to call Ken Maginnis, the Fermanagh and South Tyrone MP who was the OUP law and order spokesman, to task for his description of the rioting as ‘orchestrated thuggery’.
He had said, of those who wrecked the town centre in rioting on the sixteenth, that ‘they were not loyalists in any sense of the word but despicable rebels in the same mould as those in Sinn Fein'.
Maginnis had been listening to almost two hours of complaints about the police when a woman announced that she would clap her hands if she heard of an RUC constable's death.
He walked out of the meeting to jeers and catcalls.
Just as he was leaving, Paisley arrived and the meeting broke into cheering and clapping.
When Paisley was later told about the woman's remark, he immediately condemned it and rebuked her, but this made little impression on the basic loyalties of the audience.
As far as they were concerned, Paisley and the DUP were on their side, the side of the common Protestant people being squeezed between the nationalists and an RUC directed from London to enforce the government's compromising policies.
Maginnis, and by implication the Official Unionists, were weak and failed to stand up for the common man.
One can identify a similar pattern in the DUP's relationship with the Protestant paramilitaries.
Paisley has gone on record time after time to condemn the assassination of Catholics and has insisted that the potential violence represented by the old Protestant Volunteers and more recently by the Third Force should only be exercised in a defensive manner and in the event of a complete breakdown of law and order.
However, the DUP still enjoys better relationships with the paramilitaries than does the Official Unionist Party.
When the loyalist prisoners were campaigning for segregation from republicans (a campaign which involved the tactic so loudly condemned when used by republicans: the hunger strike), DUP spokesmen were conspicuously more active than the Officials in the promotion of the prisoners, case.
When Vanguard was a force, its leaders, rather than those of the DUP or the OUP, were most active in courting the paramilitaries.
With its demise, the DUP retained the greater working-class loyalist support.
Because it appeared more resolute in its unionism, it was taken to be more trustworthy by those who were prepared to break the law for their unionism.
It is clear then that the DUP will receive the votes of the working-class loyalists so long as it retains an image of being more unionist than the Officials, unless there should be an alternative to the right of the DUP.
George Seawright and the Ulster Protestant League
In 1984, the beginnings of an alternative were offered when George Seawright was expelled from the DUP.
I have already mentioned the failure of the paramilitaries to create and sustain a political initiative.
The voters of the Shankill Road in Belfast, traditionally the home of working class populist independent unionism, had supported Johnny McQuade rather than the UDA or UVF and McQuade had taken that vote into the DUP when he joined it in 1971.
George Seawright is a Scot who had developed an interest in Ulster politics while still in Springburn, near Glasgow, where he was one of the few Scottish members of Paisley's Ulster Protestant Volunteers.
When he moved to Belfast he joined the DUP and campaigned for McQuade, and he became an elder of the John Knox Memorial Free Presbyterian Church in North Belfast.
From the start, he was in conflict with the DUP's leadership who tried to persuade him not to accept the local branch's nomination to stand for the Assembly.
His view is that he was unacceptable because he was working class, lived in a council flat, and was in debt to the Housing Executive.
Underlying the objection to Seawright's lack of respectability was the fear ‘that they could not control us’.
The debt problem was solved by someone he hardly  knew paying his debt and Seawright was elected to the Assembly where he turned out to be a thorn in the DUP's flesh.
The problem with Seawright was that he openly voiced what many people took to be the true feelings of Democratic Unionists, often to the embarrassment of the DUP spokesmen who were presenting a more moderate position.
When Protestant gunmen tried to kill Gerry Adams, the President of Sinn Fein and Westminster MP for West Belfast, Seawright applauded.
Although the DUP condemned the use of uncorroborated evidence in the ‘supergrass’ trials, it was Seawright who went to the court day after day to offer sympathy for the families of loyalist prisoners.
Eventually, in June 1984, Seawright went too far when, during a meeting of the Belfast Education and Library Board, he suggested in regard to Catholic schools that ‘taxpayers’ money would be better spent on an incinerator and burning the lot of them.
The priests should be thrown in and burned as well.’
Sammy Wilson, the DUP press officer, dissociated the party from Seawright's remarks: ‘The DUP has always made it crystal clear — as Protestants we believe in civil and religious liberty for all men, and no one should be persecuted for their religious beliefs.
Seawright was first suspended and, when he failed to withdraw his remarks and apologize, was expelled from the Party.
It has generally been the case that people who leave the DUP see their political careers terminated.
Only those who move to the Official Unionists have continued to win elections.
But Seawright revived the ‘Protestant Unionist’ label and won a convincing victory in the 1985 local government elections.
Where the three DUP candidates in his area of Belfast could win only 1.25 quotas, Seawright took 1.7 quotas in first preference votes.
Belfast loyalists did not vote for Seawright because he wanted to burn Catholics but because he lived in a council flat, spoke up for those loyalists who tried to kill IRA men, and was not prepared to abandon working-class Protestants in order to appear respectable.
Like the young Paisley, he talked straight and was prepared to act .
In a piece of street theatre almost copied from Paisley's early days, Seawright climbed on the roof of the Whiterock Leisure  Centre and removed the tricolour which other unionists had complained about.
And although he is a teetotal sabbatarian lay preacher who now attends the Church of God, Seawright has not allowed his religious principles to come between himself and working-class loyalists who do not share his temperance and sabbatarianism.
The fact that he won re-election suggested that the working-class independent unionist vote was only temporarily lodged with the DUP while Johnny McQuade was alive.
Although Nelson is probably right to say that the DUP had lost its role ‘as the articulator of poor Protestants’ social grievances' by the end of the 1970s, this would not cost it votes until there was an alternative.
The paramilitaries had failed to provide such an alternative.
They could not develop an agreed political ideology, they were tainted with the ‘red’ smear, and they had less success than the IRA in making themselves acceptable to their own communities.
The failure of the DUP to endorse the illegality of working-class loyalists, which stems from a general reluctance to break the law and an evaluation of the present situation which argues that such extreme acts are not yet justified, should have made it unpopular with working-class loyalists and to an extent it has.
Yet until someone like Seawright can build a province-wide alternative, the DUP will remain the home of the loyalist vote.
If the DUP's criticisms of ‘gangsterism’ have made it unpopular with some sections of the working-class Protestant population, its view on the sabbath and alcohol consumption have further widened the divisions and it is to this sort of issue which I now want to turn.
Evangelicals in Politics
It should be clear from the preceding chapters that the Free Presbyterian Church is no ordinary evangelical sect (using that term in its sociological rather than pejorative sense).
The political crisis which vastly increased its recruitment could not help but give it an unusual character.
Other religious organizations, such as the Dutch Reformed Church in South Africa, have played important parts in providing religious legitimation for political ideologies, but few modern churches have had so many of their personnel actively involved in one particular political organization.
This close association of religion and politics has also given the organizational vehicle for the politics — the DUP — an unusual character which I now wish to explore by examining the tensions caused by the presence in a political agenda of religious attitudes.
In theology, Free Presbyterians are Calvinists.
However, they are not Calvinists when they come to think about politics.
Knox and Calvin were not democrats.
They believed that society ought to be ordered, not according to how sinful men wished to live, but in accordance with God's divine commandments.
They believed that the saints had a divine obligation to rule and to impose righteousness, even if the mass of the people showed no particular desire to live righteously.
Ivan Foster, in an attempt to show that Knox and Calvin were democrats, pointed out that they sought such popular mandates as were available in their societies.
Calvin left Geneva and only returned to lead the city when the city council asked him to return.
Knox tried to create as wide a base as possible for his theocracy.
But even making allowance for the circumstances of their times, it is impossible to save the Protestant reformers from their own political philosophy, which finds its clearest statement in the old Scots Covenants, documents much loved by Ulster conservative Protestants and the model for many unionist statements of political faith.
The Covenants called for the state to ‘extirpate’ and ‘suppress’heresy, popery, prelacy, and diverse superstitions and blasphemies.
That is, they believed that the civil state could and should be used to enforce religious conformity.
No modern conservative Protestant holds that position.
Whether because they have genuinely changed their political philosophy or because they simply realize that they will never get away with it in a modern pluralistic society, for whatever reason, conservative Protestants have preferred to follow the democratic inheritance of the Reformation.
In passing, one might note that democracy was never an intention of the reformers but rather an unintended consequence of their theological reformation.
Once they had established that all men were equal before God and that all men were theoretically capable of finding out, for themselves, what God demanded of them, they could not confine that principle to the religious  sphere, no matter how much they may have wanted to.
Luther took fright at the anarchy he had loosed but could do little to prevent it, even when he threw his weight behind the German princes in their crushing of revolutionary movements.
Many of the Free Presbyterians to whom I talked are themselves confused about their political philosophy.
Most begin by asserting their commitment to democracy, yet few would commit themselves completely to the notion that if the people want to wallow in sin, they should be permitted to do so.
Some would take this view, arguing along the lines of the story of Christ healing the lepers, that some of God's gifts are given free to men who may then go and abuse them.
Thus benefits such as a welfare system or a national free education system should be given to all people who may do with these things as they wish.
The Christian has an obligation to try to persuade the sinner to give up his or her sin but he has no right to prevent the determined sinner from following his chosen course.
The quite understandable confusion comes in the area of just what is meant by persuasion and permission.
What one person would construe as simply permitting a sinner to dig his own pit, another would see as encouraging further sin.
Thus the Free Presbyterians (and other conservative Christians) who picketed a newly opened sex shop on the Castlereagh Road in Belfast (so successfully that it closed) saw themselves, not as denying anyone their basic right to sin, but as preventing further incitement and encouragement to sin.
These issues need not bother the ordinary Free Presbyterian, but they do concern those Free Presbyterians who are also active in the DUP.
The conventional political party exists to promote certain key principles.
These are seen as essential and other parts of the party's platform are negotiable: things that may be changed in order to increase popular support for the party.
Obviously, if a party changes its central principles, it becomes another party.
In most modern societies, parties have key positions on economic and social issues or on constitutional matters.
Thus, for example, the Labour Party in Britain supposedly stands for the redistribution of wealth, the maintenance of a national health and social security  system, considerable government intervention in the economy and so on .
The DUP is one of two unionist parties.
Its raison d'être is the preservation of the Union with Great Britain.
The other positions it takes are presumably negotiable.
Its strong defence of farming interests is designed to win the support of the large rural community.
If only ten per cent or less of the Protestant population were engaged in farming, one would expect the DUP to reduce its interest in farmers.
That would be sensible politics.
This is where the special evangelical emphasis in the Party becomes interesting.
The DUP can argue that part of what is meant by being a unionist is that one should be teetotal and sabbatarian, opposed to homosexuality and divorce.
They can argue that they make their position on these things perfectly clear, and that if people vote for them then they know what they are going to get and have no right to claim that sabbatarianism is being forced on them.
But what if sabbatarianism costs the DUP votes?
Some members would abandon the evangelical parts of the platform, while others would rather give up politics.
This argument is usually presented in the media as a battle between the Free Presbyterians in the DUP and the secular working-class loyalists.
While there is some truth to this, it is an over-simplification.
Some of those active in both the Church and the Party, who hold the combined ideologies of evangelicalism and unionism as being inseparable, are quite pragmatic.
They are so strongly committed to their unionism that they are prepared to go some way towards moving some of their evangelical principles into the area of private life and personal choice, rather than alienate non-evangelical unionists.
This can be seen in the way in which the sides lined up in recent arguments about sabbatarianism in the DUP manifesto.
The 1985 manifesto shows an interesting change from previous documents.
It again begins with strong positions on the need for government action to ‘smash Sinn Fein', for a rejection of the Anglo-Irish ‘sell out’, and an end to cross-border collaboration.
Less than half-way through the document is the paragraph headed ‘The Republican Sunday’:
Recognizing the laws of God and the inherent benefits of the Ulster sabbath as part of our heritage, the DUP is opposed to the introduction or promotion of the Continental and Republican Sunday in Northern Ireland.
As it is the ratepayer who funds and owns Council facilities, the DUP believes that any change to Sunday opening of Council provisions should only be undertaken following the test of the electorate's opinion in a local poll held for that purpose in the district of the council.
If the Government seek to deny this facility to a Council, or if other parties successfully oppose such a democratic test of ratepayers' views being held, then DUP councillors will vote, as in the past, against a Republican Sunday.
In one way this statement is more conservative than the previous one in that it has elevated the popular usage ‘Republican Sunday’ to a part of party language and thus confirmed the belief that Catholicism and republicanism are the same thing, but it represents an important departure from previous positions in clearly tying the DUP's position to that of the electorate.
In practice, the issues may never be put to the test because it is very likely that other parties would succeed in preventing referenda, but it is still enough of a departure for some evangelical DUP activists to have been initially opposed to the change.
Although it is difficult this long after the crucial debate to reconstruct correctly people's positions from their own and others' accounts, it does seem that, while some Free Presbyterian ministers in the party were opposed, others, including Paisley and Beattie, supported the new position.
Ivan Foster took the unexpected but reasonable position of arguing that sabbatarianism should never have been in the manifesto: ‘I do not believe that that particular one is something for parties to legislate on.
If I had been standing I could have put it in my personal manifesto that I was a sabbatarian but when the Party committed itself to that, it was placing itself in the position of a church.’
However, given that it had been DUP policy, he was opposed to changing it, even to the extent of the local option position, because he thought the change would be seen as a weakening, as a change of principle.
Gordon Cooke reluctantly accepted the change but only on the understanding that the DUP was not committed to encouraging local option votes.
But while some of the most vocal opposition to change came from the Free Presbyterian elders and laymen in the party, other members of this group, in particular Beattie and Paisley, supported it!
It is difficult to capture accurately the complex patterns of motivation that produce an individual's actions but I think the position of Paisley, Beattie, Foster, and others can be better understood if we distinguish motivational background and front  stage.
The background to, or fundamental source of, political ideology and action is an indissoluble mix of evangelicalism and unionism.
They are committed to each because they are committed to the other.
But they are prepared to act on the political stage according to a script which permits pragmatic compromise up to the point where further compromise would endanger the fundamental evangelical principles of the background.
Fortunately for their own consistency, the dimensions of the conflict in Northern Ireland do not encourage such a degree of pragmatic compromise.
In the slightly similar American case of the Moral Majority, evangelicals have no choice but to work in political alliance with secular conservatives, conservative Catholics, and conservative Jews.
They entered politics because their Baptist fundamentalism has produced certain moral and social positions which they see as threatened and which they wish to preserve or re-establish.
While Baptist fundamentalists are powerful in the ‘Bible Belt’ of North and South Carolina and Virginia, they can only ever succeed at federal level by working in alliance with other conservative blocs, of which the biggest is that of American Roman Catholicism.
To pursue political objectives seriously, they must work with the very people whose religious beliefs are most antithetical to their own.
In order to do this, Jerry Falwell and the other Baptist pastors in the movement have to operate with almost watertight compartments for, on the one hand, their religion (in this box Catholics and Jews are doomed sinners), and on the other, their politics (we are all part of a shared Judeo-Christian tradition).
That sort of compartmentalization has been roundly denounced by Bob Jones University and those sections of American fundamentalism with which Paisley is most at home but we will never know if his religio-political system would permit such pragmatism because the constitutional issue so overrides everything else in Northern Ireland that there is no expectation or need for him to work with conservative Catholics.
This does not mean that Paisley would not be glad of the support (such as he had in his campaign to ‘Save Ulster From Sodomy’) of individual Catholics, but he  would not work with Catholic organizations or officials of the Catholic Church because that might dilute his separatist witness.
The Evangelicals and the Orange Order
The only problems of alliances and compartmentalization faced by Free Presbyterian Democratic Unionists are those which concern the ‘fraternal’ orders.
To what extent the Orange Order, Apprentice Boys of Derry, and Royal Black Preceptory have ever been thoroughly evangelical is debatable.
Nevertheless they were considerably more evangelical at the turn of the century than they are now.
The problem for the Free Presbyterians is that the fraternal orders have always seen themselves as linking the broad Protestant religious tradition with the main unionist party, hence the common arrangement of Orange Lodges holding their annual church parades at each of the Church of Ireland, Presbyterian, and Methodist churches in turn.
As the main churches have become more liberal, Free Presbyterianism emerged to challenge the lack of ‘real’ Protestantism and hence offered an implicit challenge to the fraternal organizations to purify themselves by breaking their ties with the main, and now apostate, denominations.
Ian Paisley was once a member of the Shankill Road Lodge of the Orange Order and a lodge chaplain, but he resigned from the Order when the County Grand Lodge refused to expel Sir Robin Kinahan for attending a funeral service in a Roman Catholic chapel.
Another Free Presbyterian minister, Austin Allen, resigned from the Order because it would not accept Free Presbyterian ministers as district chaplains.
His district stuck to the tradition of only accepting chaplains from the three main Protestant churches.
A third Free Presbyterian minister said: ‘Perhaps the main reason [for leaving the Orange Order]was that in 1969 I was saved by the grace of God and therefore felt that I could not sit and be associated with members of the Orange and Black while they consumed alcohol in their meetings on the 12th and 13th mornings each July.’
Given the Free Presbyterian Church's high political profile one would expect that many of its ministers would be active in the Orange Lodge, Black Preceptory, and Apprentice Boys.
Of forty-four ministers whose affiliations are known, twenty-one have never been members of any fraternal organization.
Ten have been members of the Orange Order but nine have resigned.
Three have been members of the Independent Orange Order and one has resigned.
Ten ministers are known to be members of the Apprentice Boys of Derry.
It would be easy to exaggerate the extent to which the lack of genuine evangelicalism in the fraternal organizations creates motivational problems for Free Presbyterians who wish to be active in politics.
Some districts are clearly sympathetic to the Democratic Unionists and are willing to invite Free Presbyterian Democratic Unionists such as William McCrea to preach at their church parades.
Some have church parades to Free Presbyterian churches.
Nevertheless, the fact that Paisleyism in both its religious and political forms is a reactionary movement which seeks to purify Protestant religion and politics creates a background tension which regularly produces public arguments.
For example, in 1977 the Revd Ken Elliott, the Free Presbyterian minister of Portadown, offended many Apprentice Boys by refusing to take a collection for the restoration of the St Columb's Church of Ireland Cathedral in Londonderry, which is regarded by the Apprentice Boys as their spiritual home.
His argument was that the Church of Ireland was ‘poisoned by ecumenism’ and as such he, as a Free Presbyterian, could not take part in fund-raising on its behalf.
To place these observations in the general context of the special qualities given to the Democratic Unionist Party by its close links with Free Presbyterianism, we can summarize by saying that, were the Democratic Unionist Party a ‘secular’ political party, it would certainly cultivate links with the fraternal orders to strengthen its ties with the ordinary Ulster Protestant voter.
Some Democratic Unionists do precisely this by, for example, listing their active involvement with the Orders on their election literature.
However, the evangelical element in the DUP refuses to cultivate such links and occasionally offends the ordinary Protestant voter by taking what appears to the general unionist public as an ‘extreme’ stand.
For example, in 1976, three DUP councillors in Ballymena  boycotted the Remembrance Day service (an event they would normally have been very keen to support) because a Roman Catholic priest who had served in the Royal Naval Reserve was reading a lesson.
It seems likely that a local commentator is right in thinking that the boycott cost the DUP votes in a subsequent by-election.
However, and this is the point which will be argued in detail in the concluding chapter, the Free Presbyterian critique of the laxity of the Orders is not as damaging to the DUP as one might suppose because there is no legitimate direction in which the liberal or lax element in the Orders can go without, for other reasons, losing the support of the ordinary Ulster Protestant.
There is no sound ideological position from which the more liberal elements can challenge the ‘enthusiasts’ of the DUP because all the DUP is asking for is strict adherence to the constitutions and traditions of the Orders!
If the Orders are not anti-Catholic, what are they?
Their history, the interests of their members and the circumstances of conflict in Northern Ireland do not permit the evolution of Orangeism into something which would still have meaning if it abandoned its evangelical Protestant symbols and stated beliefs.
It may, and does, tolerate considerable neglect of those symbols and stated beliefs, but those people who find the Free Presbyterian/DUP element petty in their refusal to help restore a Church of Ireland church or attend Remembrance Day services cannot promote a coherent ideology which would justify their criticisms.
The middle-class Protestants of an O'Neillite or Alliance Party persuasion must take the logic of their dislike for Paisleyism to its conclusion and resign from the Orders.
Most of them did.
The working-class Protestants who totter back from the Twelfth field, obviously drunk but still marching behind a ‘Total Abstinence Lodge’ banner, will continue to be annoyed by the evangelical ideologues, but will respect the fact that the evangelicals' hearts are in the right place.
Although the evangelicals in the DUP are clearly out of step with most Ulster Protestant voters, they still represent the ideological centre of unionism, of what it means to  be a Protestant.
Like the Israelite prophets, they may not be honoured in their own country but they are recognized as belonging.
The Young Professionals: a Generational Conflict?
I have already mentioned the common reference in the media to conflicts between the evangelical and secular elements in the DUP, or between Church and Party, and I have argued that such a simple distinction does not accurately describe the situation.
A number of journalists have overlaid the evangelical/secular distinction with a generational difference.
Ed Moloney of the Irish Times wrote: ‘…a large number of those attracted to and recruited into the party through Robinson's efforts were different in a number of important respects from the traditional Paisley follower of the early rabble-rousing days….’
It is generally supposed that while Paisley, Beattie, Foster, and such people wish to maintain the evangelical ethos, the younger generation of Peter Robinson, Jim Wells, Jim Allister, and others recruited through the Queen's University branch of the DUP want to create a mass popular party by playing down the evangelical elements in the party platform and by pursuing more respectable methods of political action.
There is a strong tradition in the sociological literature which would lead us to expect such a change of direction.
Based largely on Michels's study of trade union organizations, the model supposes that once any radical organization has grown to the size where it needs to delegate responsibility to professional organizers, and once it has been in existence long enough to produce a complex bureaucracy, then the original radical thrust is lost as the  professionals redirect the organization to serve their own ends.
Keeping the organizational structure going becomes more important than attaining the initial goals of the movement.
For members, there is a shift in the main source of satisfaction.
When the movement began they were attracted by a desire to attain certain goals.
As it settles down and the chances of ever attaining the radical goals become ever more remote, members begin to shift their attention to the routine satisfactions of just ‘being a member’.
For the leaders of the movement a dilution of the radical goals is attractive because it will reduce the stigma attached to the movement and reduce the tension between it and the wider society of which it is a part.
There are substantial rewards for accommodation to the prevailing consensus.
Again Moloney offers such an analysis of the younger DUP activists: ‘…men like Robinson, Allister and Kane who are at the start of political careers know that the negative politics practised for so long by their leader would deny them the office and power that could be theirs.’
What is rarely stated openly but constantly implied is that the younger generation should be less negative because they know better; they are university educated men.
Alan Kane, Jim Allister, and Nigel Dodds are law graduates.
Jim Wells has a first degree and postgraduate qualification in town planning.
Because in the past, upper-class unionists have been less than staunchly committed to the defence of traditional loyalism, it is assumed that others who acquire elements of upper-class status, such as a university education, will themselves be more moderate than their uneducated elders.
At first sight there is some evidence to support this sort of assumption.
The younger generation did seem less committed to the politics of the street demonstration and the illegal parade.
Willie McCrea, Ethel Smyth, and Ivan Foster are often found in the forefront of such confrontations.
While Robinson was involved with Paisley and McQuade in the demonstrations against the invitation of Charles Haughey, then the Republic's Prime Minister, to the enthronement of the Church of Ireland Primate in Armagh in May 1980, he has not been a conspicuous street demonstrator.
Allister, Kane, and Dodds have also been noticeably absent from public confrontations.
While Jim Wells was in Castlewellan for the banned parade in June 1985, he preferred to negotiate with the RUC rather than be arrested like Foster and Graham or, like Smyth, lie down in front of a Landrover.
A second source of support for the idea of a generation gap in the DUP is found in the statements of embittered defectors or expellees.
When McFaul was expelled from the DUP, he said: ‘Dr Paisley is now effectively being swept aside by younger men like Jim Allister, Peter Robinson and Alan Kane on the party executive.’
Such a response seems understandable given that it allows McFaul to explain why he is at odds with the Party while still maintaining that he is loyal to its principles and to its founder, but it cannot stand as a general proposition.
It assumes a major difference in interest between the founders and the younger men and that, as will be argued, is not the case.
The first point is that, of the five people generally named in any discussion of the generation gap theory, four are Free Presbyterians, which is a similar concentration to that found in the first generation of Paisley activists.
Furthermore, they are not nominal Free Presbyterians but people who are active to the extent of giving their testimony in Free Presbyterian pulpits.
They are as morally conservative as their parents.
Alan Kane turned down an opportunity to explain the Save Ulster From Sodomy campaign on television because the studio discussion would take place on a Sunday.
Wells has been active in opposing the opening of a Banbridge disco which will operate on the sabbath.
Apart from the fact that they have an arrest rate lower than that of some of the older generation, there seems nothing of substance to distinguish them from the founders of the DUP party.
Furthermore, there is little about splits in the various branches which makes them understandable as a product of conflict between moderate younger activists and older extremists.
William Belshaw, and Roy Beggs of Larne before him, left the Party because they moderated and abandoned the party's policy of non-recognition of the Republic's representatives, and they were part of the founding generation.
Although the complex divisions in the DUP's North  Belfast branch accord slightly with the view that there is a basic conflict between old extremists and new ‘moderates’ in that McQuade, while he was alive, supported Seawright against the executive, the departure of Seawright has seen some of the founder members, who left when he became a force, returning.
It is important not to concentrate too much on ideology.
Although the DUP has a strong ideological identity, its members are also motivated by the complete range of normal human emotions and interests.
They have ambitions and they have pride.
Most of the disputes within the DUP can be understood better if they are seen as ‘personality’ clashes rather than if one attempts to find major ideological rifts.
Focus on the personalities involved, albeit with the addition of one important shared characteristic, also offers a better explanation of the supposed generation gap.
What the younger men have in common is competence.
They are well-educated, competent managers and articulate spokesmen.
In addition to their orthodoxy on the issues, this is what makes them an asset to the DUP and this is what accounts for their displacing of some of the stalwarts.
In the early days, Paisley was so short of support that he press-ganged people into standing for election.
One Protestant Unionist recalled that Paisley arrived at his house a month before a Belfast Corporation election and asked if he and another person would be willing to stand.
As the Party has grown and recruited more articulate and able activists, a number of the old ‘war-horses’ have been put out to grass and, quite naturally, some of them have resented this.
Yet they could hardly express their resentment in terms of thwarted personal ambition and so preferred to see their fate as a result of ideological changes in the Party.
They, the true defenders of orthodoxy, were being pushed aside by unscrupulous and ambitious young men who were more interested in power than in principle.
Instead of the Michels notion of a radical movement being compromised by a leadership more interested in its own future  than in the goals of the movement, a more fruitful theme from the social movements literature is Smelser's distinction between various ‘means’.
A simple reason why the younger activists are not seen as often on the picket line as their elders were, is that they are too busy pursuing the same goals by other means.
When the DUP began, the only formal channel through which it could pursue its politics was Stormont and Paisley and Beattie were outnumbered in a very short-lived parliament.
As the Party has grown it has been able to achieve representation in local government to the point of having controlling power on some councils, it has had a major voice in the first Assembly, the Convention, and the second Assembly, and it has elected representatives at Westminster and the European Parliament.
These avenues have not only taken up a lot of the time and energy of the present generation of activists but they have also reduced the reliance on the politics of the street demonstration by presenting alternative means of expression and action.
However, this should not be taken to suggest that the present generation are seduced by their salaries and expenses to the degree that they will abandon their principles in order to continue to have access to the institutional channels for political activity.
The disputes in the councils which followed the election of Sinn Fein representatives in 1985 has made it clear that loyalists are willing to close down councils rather than work with Sinn Fein, and the younger generation of DUP activists has been fully active in the promotion of that position.
They have also been to the fore in the planning of opposition to the recent Anglo-Irish talks even though they know that the collapse of those talks will make it very unlikely that the constitutional Catholic Social Democratic and Labour Party will take its place in the Assembly.
And without the SDLP, the Assembly does not have a very bright future.
There is thus no evidence to suppose that the younger generation is prepared to act like Michels's trade union leaders and moderate the principles of their movement in return for personal power and prestige.
The main difference between the situations envisaged by Michels  and the Northern Ireland context is the entrenched nature of the divisions in Northern Ireland.
The DUP is working in an environment in which there are no great rewards for compromise and accommodation.
This is even more the case since the Anglo-Irish accord of November 1985 which clearly represents the British government's view that ‘solutions’ to the Northern Ireland problem require the active involvement of the Dublin government.
For the DUP to embrace this accord and attempt to make it work would be for it to abandon its opposition to anything which presages a united Ireland.
It is usually the case that those things which best suit the Michels model are social movement organizations which have goals which can be ‘compromised’ because they are things — like an increase in workers' standards of living or an improvement in working conditions — which are divisible.
Trade unionists could be persuaded to accept a moderation of their organization's stated goals in return for the fulfilment of part of those goals.
The position and ideology of Ulster unionists is such that their goals cannot be divided.
They have already lost a great deal of the autonomy and self-determination they possessed under the Stormont regime.
It ‘what we have, we hold’ was a meaningful slogan in the 1920s, it is even more powerful now when the ‘what we hold’has been so drastically reduced.
Putting it more generally, I am suggesting a major difference in ‘compromisability’ between different kinds of goals.
In a modern industrial society economic goals are divisible, both because an increased standard of living is such a broad goal that success on one front can be presented to the members as a decent reward for abandoning some other aim, and because the economic goals of competing groups can be simultaneously satisfied provided there is economic growth.
Thus, although the Labour movement has had no great success in squeezing the capitalists until the pips squeak, its leaders can point to a variety of real improvements in the living standards of the working class as good reason for continued support for their moderating policy.
Political conflicts of the sort which characterize the Northern Ireland problem are of a quite different nature because they are seen as part of a ‘zero-sum’ game.
There is a fixed pot of political power and cultural dominance.
If Catholics get something which makes them happy, then Protestants must have lost something.
There is no way in which both sides can improve simultaneously.
Every street name in Gaelic  which goes up is an English street name coming down.
O'Neill tried to argue that this was not the case and lost.
The Alliance Party insists that the conflict is not a zero-sum game but very few people are impressed by it.
Accommodation and compromise have not characterized the recent history of the DUP, despite journalists' frequent attempts to portray Paisley as a man sufficiently set on personal power to be willing to compromise to achieve it.
Accommodation and compromise have not characterized the attitudes and actions of the young university-educated activists of the DUP of recent years because they grew up in the zero-sum game, and even if they forgot its rules long enough to consider shifting the DUP's aims, there is no reason to suppose that the voters would support them in their deviation.