

PEBBLES
Breeders' Cup Turf, Aqueduct, 2 November 1985
To the New York Times Pebbles was ‘the English filly who drinks a pint of stout every morning and went to post in the company of a British gelding she has a crush on’; in the 1985 Breeders' Cup Turf at Aqueduct she ‘overcame a poor start and traffic problems to beat the boys by a neck’ and provide Britain's first win in a Breeders' Cup event.
The four-year-old Pebbles who travelled to New York was already one of the toughest and most popular fillies of recent years.
She had won two of her six races as a two-year-old and finished a neck second (at 33–1) to Desirable in the Cheveley Park Stakes at Newmarket, the most important race for two-year-old fillies run in Britain.
As a three-year-old she won the Nell Gwyn Stakes at Newmarket before coasting home by three lengths in the One Thousand Guineas, after which she was sold by owner-breeder Captain Marcos Lemos to Sheikh Mohammed.
In her first run in the Sheikh's colours she came second to Katies in the Coronation Stakes at Royal Ascot and in October was a strong-finishing second, beaten a neck, to Palace Music in the Champion Stakes.
Kept in training as a four-year-old, Pebbles won the Trusthouse Forte Mile at Sandown Park, was second in the Prince of Wales's Stakes at Royal Ascot, and then became the first filly ever to win the Eclipse, beating subsequent Arc winner Rainbow Quest by two lengths.
She was rested until October, when she beat the Derby winner Slip Anchor by three lengths in the Champion Stakes at Newmarket, showing brilliant acceleration to pull clear of a top-class field which also included Commanche Run and Helen Street.
Pebbles was an outstanding racehorse, but the Breeders' Cup bid was none the less a characteristically bold move on the part of trainer Clive Brittain, for the Turf race is over one and a half miles and she had never raced beyond ten furlongs.
In her favour, though, was the configuration of the Aqueduct track: at a little over seven furlongs round it is very tight, and demands the pace to lie in a handy position, the balance to negotiate the turns, and the acceleration to dominate the race in the home straight.
Pebbles had all three in abundance, and these would counter her doubtful stamina.
There were fourteen runners.
Pebbles, whose owner had been required to stump up $240,000 to supplement her as a late entry, started 11–5 favourite, with Greinton (whose gallant run against Teleprompter in the Arlington Million two months earlier is described on pages 96–7) at 135.
Next in the betting on 19–5 was Bob Back, who earlier in the season had sprung a surprise by beating Pebbles and Commanche Run at Royal Ascot, though Pebbles had got her revenge in the Eclipse; he had been trained in England by Michael Jarvis, but was now in the care of Angel Penna in the USA.
Also on 19–5 was the six-year-old Strawberry Road, champion colt in Australia as a three-year-old and winner of several good races in France, where he was now based.
Teleprompter himself was back to try to lift another mammoth American prize: but though he had run second to Shadeed in the Queen Elizabeth II Stakes at Ascot since his wonderful victory in Chicago, another English challenger, Shergar's half-brother Shernazar, was more strongly fancied, for he had beaten Slip Anchor at Kempton Park in September.
French-trained Lashkari, owned like Shernazar by the Aga Khan, had won the inaugural running of the Turf in 1984 but had not seemed at his best in 1985.
The European contingent was completed by Baillamont, trained by François Boutin, and Theatrical, trained in Ireland by Dermot Weld and second to Law Society in the Irish Derby.
Steve Cauthen had partnered Pebbles in her first three races of the season but Pat Eddery had ridden her with sublime confidence in the Champion Stakes when Cauthen was claimed for Slip Anchor, and it was Eddery who had the mount at Aqueduct.
In the early stages he was content to keep her towards the rear of the field as Teleprompter — also attempting a mile and a half for the first time — took his accustomed role of front-runner.
As in the Million, Teleprompter soon had the field at full pelt, and he tore down the back stretch and round the final bend.
Pebbles had to snatch up briefly to avoid scrimmaging in front of her on the tight final bend, and for a second it looked as though she might be shut in.
But as those boxing her in came away from the rails at the  entrance to the home stretch she found a good run up the inside, and when Teleprompter ran out of stamina with just over a furlong to go Pat Eddery shot the favourite into the lead and made for the wire.
Pebbles stretched out her neck and responded to Eddery's exhortations with the utmost gameness to go a length up.
If there was any problem with her stamina this was where it would show — but as Steve Cauthen detached Strawberry Road from the pack she kept going strongly.
Pebbles had not come this far to capitulate now, and at the wire she was a long-looking neck to the good.
The 51–1 outsider Mourjane was third.
Pebbles had broken the course record and brought her owner $900,000 (£629,371 at the prevailing exchange rate), the greatest amount ever won by an English-trained horse in a single race.
The Breeders' Cup Turf proved to be Pebbles' last race.
This enchanting white-faced chestnut could be excitable before her races — it was the Royal Hunt Cup winner Come On The Blues, her travelling companion and calming influence, on whom she had her crush — but was admirably genuine, and her home-stretch surge to bring British racing its first great triumph in the Breeders' Cup ensured that the affection in which she was held during her racing career would not fade.
Racehorses of 1985 encapsulated her appeal: ‘Pebbles acts as a tonic to any race in which she competes.’
Pebbles acts as a tonic to any race in which she competes.
ABOVE Pebbles and Pat Eddery return to unsaddle, with trainer Clive Brittain (light raincoat) looking well satisfied.
LEFT Pebbles waltzes clear of Strawberry Road.
PHAR LAP
Agua Caliente Handicap, Tanforan, 20 March 1932
The Agua Caliente Handicap at Tanforan, Mexico, in March 1932 saw the last racecourse appearance of a horse who was beyond dispute one of the greatest horses that ever raced — Phar Lap.
‘The Red Terror’, as Phar Lap was to become known, was a freak of breeding: his sire Night Raid failed to win at all in England before being sent to Australia and his dam Entreaty was unplaced on her only start.
He was foaled on the South Island of New Zealand, and his entry in the catalogue for the 1928 Trentham Yearling Sales took the eye of Sydney-based trainer Harry Telford, who persuaded owner David Davis to send in a bid for the horse.
Davis agreed to go up to 200 guineas, and in the event secured the unseen yearling for a mere 160 guineas.
Subsequent events were to make the horse a leading candidate for the greatest bloodstock bargain of all time, but when the new owner first saw his purchase he was horrified.
On his arrival in Australia the unnamed chestnut colt was a tall, ungainly and unsightly animal with no hint of quality, and Davis so regretted his outlay, however modest, that the only way Telford could keep the horse in training was to make an arrangement with Davis whereby Telford himself took a three-year lease on the horse, taking two thirds of any prize money won in return for footing the training bill.
The colt was named Phar Lap, Sinhalese for ‘lightning’.
He was gelded and given time to mature a little before being asked to race, and he did not make his debut until 23 February 1929.
He scored once as a two-year-old, in his final outing of five.
As a three-year-old he was unplaced in his first four races then ran a good second in the Chelmsford Stakes at Randwick.
In the Rosehill Guineas a week later Phar Lap won easily, and then took the AJC Derby, the Craven Plate and the Victoria Derby.
Despite the reservations of his trainer he next went for the Melbourne Cup: he started even-money favourite, but pulled his way to the front in a slowly run race against the wishes of his jockey and faded in the straight to finish third.
This was but a temporary setback, for after a rest and a defeat on his return he proceeded to win his next nine races, completely outclassing his rivals at distances from nine furlongs to two and a quarter miles.
His most spectacular success came in the AJC PLate, where he handed out a ten-length beating to his Melbourne Cup conqueror Nightmarch.
At four he lost only on the first and last outings (beaten narrowly on both occasions) of a sixteen-race campaign.
He competed in handicaps and in weight-for-age races, and over distances from seven furlongs to two miles.
On the morning of the Melbourne Stakes, which was to be Phar Lap's warm-up race for the Melbourne Cup three days later, he was shot at from the window of a car as he returned from exercise.
The would-be assassins missed their prey, and Phar Lap, unperturbed by the incident, duly won the Stakes and then ran one of his most brilliant races to lift the Cup, for which he carried nine stone twelve pounds and started at 11–8 on, the shortest-priced favourite in the history of the race.
In February 1931 Telford bought a half-share in the horse shortly before his lease ran out, and henceforth Phar Lap was the joint property of Davis and Telford.
By the time of his third Melbourne Cup in November he had already won eight races as a five-year-old and had become a national idol, but the handicapper had shovelled ten stone ten pounds on his back for the Cup, so it was no disgrace when he could finish only eighth.
The winner White Nose carried three stone twelve pounds less than ‘The Red Terror’.
The 1931 Melbourne Cup was Phar Lap's last race in Australia.
The intention was to continue his career in the USA, and he was shipped to California, where, trained by Tommy Woodcock, his first target was the Agua Caliente Handicap, originally billed as the world's richest horse race and run just over the Mexican border in Tanforan, out of reach of California's restrictive betting legislation.
Some 15,000 spectators — mostly from California — had come to see the world's greatest horse, who had top weight of nine stone three pounds in a field of eleven.
His highest weighted opponent was the 1929 Preakness winner Dr Freeland with eight stone eight pounds, but the horse most fancied to give him a true test in his first race outside Australia was Spanish Play, who had won the New Orleans Handicap eight days before.
Reveille Boy, at six the same age as Phar Lap but here in receipt of eleven pounds, had won the American Derby in 1930.
Phar Lap started at 6–4, Spanish Play 3–1, Joe Flores and Cabezo were coupled on 13–2, and Reveille Boy was 72–10.
Phar Lap was ridden by Bill ‘Urn’ Elliott, who got the gelding smartly into his stride, but Phar Lap drifted right over to the outside rail, with the result that after a quarter of a mile of the ten-furlong race he was well adrift of the field.
But having had his look at the outside Phar Lap returned to join the rest of the pack, and though he remained at the rear he was going very easily.
With about half a mile to go Elliott decided that it was time to make a move, and in a matter of a few strides Phar Lap had stormed up from last to first.
Coming round the final bend he had opened up a substantial lead and seemed to be coasting home.
Elliott began to take things easy and Reveille Boy, who had been in hot pursuit for some time, reduced the gap.
He was a high-class horse and under strong driving came upsides, but the jockey was not bothered.
One slap from his whip and Phar Lap cruised into the lead again, winning by two lengths in a course record time and hardly coming off the bridle.
Phar Lap was now poised to conquer further heights in America, but just over two weeks later he was dead, apparently as a result of having eaten grass or plants which had been sprayed with an insecticide.
Rumours that he had been deliberately poisoned were generally discredited, but the exact cause of his death was never established.
What was established beyond doubt was that Phar Lap, winner of thirty-seven of his fifty-one races, was one of the finest racehorses ever.
Much of his extraordinary combination of speed and stamina can be attributed to his physique.
Over 17 hands high, he had a girth which measured seventy-nine inches (Secretariat's girth was thought to be remarkably large at seventy-six inches) and housed a heart which after his death tipped the scales at fourteen and a half pounds: the average for a Thoroughbred is around ten pounds.
He was tough, he was genuine, he was durable, he was versatile.
Reassuringly, he was also good-natured: he loved having his tongue pulled.
Half a century after his death he was paid the unusual tribute of becoming the subject of a feature film.
At the very end of the movie Phar Lap a newspaper reporter in Australia seeks out trainer Harry Telford, who has just received news of the horse's tragic end.
‘Why is it, do you think, that there's been this incredible reaction to Phar Lap's death?’ asks the reporter: ‘After all, he was just a horse.’
‘He wasn't just a horse,’ snaps Telford: ‘He was the best.’
Phar Lap relaxes in his private sandbath during his preparation for the Agua Caliente race.
Phar Lap scorches in from Reveille Boy.
He was the best.
ARKLE
Gallaher Gold Cup, Sandown Park, 6 November 1965
If the 1964 Cheltenham Gold Cup (see pages 26–8) was Arkle's coronation, the Gallaher Gold Cup at Sandown Park in November 1965 produced his greatest individual performance, an astonishing burst of acceleration which demolished any lingering doubts about his exceptional quality.
In the year and a half which had elapsed since the famous showdown between Arkle and Mill House at Cheltenham their fortunes had contrasted starkly.
Arkle had won six races (including the Irish Grand National, the Hennessy Gold Cup, a second Cheltenham Gold and the Whitbread Gold Cup) and been narrowly beaten once, when conceding large amounts of weight to top-class horses Flying Wild and Buona Notte in the Massey-Ferguson Handicap Chase at Cheltenham.
Mill House had won three of his seven races but seemed to be in decline as his rival rose to yet greater heights.
The gulf which had opened up between them was apparent from the weights for the Gallaher Gold Cup: Arkle was set to carry twelve stone seven pounds, Mill House eleven stone five pounds, a difference of sixteen pounds.
Among their rivals were several good chasers — Rondetto, The Rip and John O'Groats — but the big two dominated the betting, Arkle starting 9–4 on with Mill House at 7–2.
There was a feeling that Mill House might just be coming out of the doldrums: he had won his last race, beating his solitary rival at Sandown Park for the princely sum of £426, and appeared to be coming back to his old self.
The memory was still fresh of the time when he was considered a world-beater, and in receipt of so much weight from Arkle he could certainly be given a realistic chance.
Thus an air of tremendous expectation hung in the autumn air as the runners filed out of the paddock down to the course, Arkle ridden as usual by Pat Taaffe and Mill House on this occasion by David Nicholson, as his usual partner Willie Robinson was injured.
The feeling that something special was about to happen spilled over into an exhibition of appreciation then unparalleled on an English racecourse: the crowd applauded the rivals as they made their way on to the track and burst into cheering as they reached it.
Nor did the cheering cease when the runners got down to business and the three-mile race commenced, for at almost every fence Arkle and Mill House produced leaps which drew from the spectators whoops of appreciation.
As they turned into the straight on the first circuit Mill House, jumping like a buck, had the lead, with Arkle pulling hard in his wake and taking his fences superbly.
‘The cheers melted into gasps of admiration and roars of approval from the stands as, in turn, this famous pair of chasers made some of the most prodigious leaps  ever seen on an English racecourse,’ wrote Len Thomas in the Sporting Life : ‘It was a spectacle which I shall never forget.’
The cheering swelled as they passed the stands, and as they turned down the hill for the second circuit Taaffe could no longer restrain Arkle, who took up the running.
Down the far side the two cleared the first three fences with speed and accuracy, and at the water jump Mill House, swinging along just like the ‘Big Horse’ of old, regained the lead.
Less than a mile to go as they pinged over the three obstacles set close together at the far end of the back straight, and Mill House was ail of three lengths ahead: as they stretched out round the long sweeping turn towards the Pond Fence, the third from home, it really seemed as if he was at last going to take his revenge on Arkle.
What happened next will never be forgotten by anyone who witnessed it: in an instant Arkle swept contemptuously past Mill House to open up an unassailable lead.
He had caught up with and passed his rival in a latter of a few strides in a quite extraordinary spurt of acceleration for a steeple-chaser carrying twelve and a half stone at the end of a three-mile chase, and for the big horse it was simply too much: Mill House weakened rapidly and by the time Arkle had strode home to a rapturous reception Mill House had been passed by Rondetto.
Arkle won by twenty lengths, with Mill House four lengths back in third.
It then transpired that Arkle, under no pressure, had beaten the course record for the distance by no less than eleven seconds.
Arkle and Mill House did not meet again.
Arkle continued to prove himself a chaser of extraordinary ability — in effect, a freak — before untimely retirement was forced on him after he broke a bone in his foot in the 1966 King George VI Chase at Kempton Park, while Mill House had his own moment of Sandown Park glory when winning the Whitbread Gold Cup in a desperate finish in 1967.
That day emotion ran high as the big horse, so long the underdog, at last had his day again.
But for sheer quality of performance, nothing in modern steeplechasing history matches Arkle's acceleration on that final bend in the Gallaher Gold Cup.
It was a spectacle which I shall never forget.
An exhibition round: Arkle leads Mill House on the first circuit.
Arkle after the race with owner Anne, Duchess of Westminster (green coat) and trainer's wife Betty Dreaper.
JOHN HENRY
Arlington Million Arlington Park, 30 August 1981
John Henry was retired in July 1985 after a racing career over eight seasons which made him one of the most popular horses ever to run in the USA.
Horse of the Year in 1981 and 1984, his earnings were £6,597,947 from eighty-three starts, of which he won thirty-nine.
None of his victories was more characteristic of his indomitable will to win than his first success in the Arlington Million.
Foaled in 1975 and humbly bred, John Henry changed hands three times before reaching Dot and Sam Rubin's Dotsam Stables (Sam Rubin bought the horse unseen over the phone, and did not at the time know that his new purchase was a gelding).
John Henry won his first race for his new owner and ten days later took a £35,000 claiming race on grass at Belmont Park by fourteen lengths.
Gelding or not, John Henry was quite a horse, and by the end of his first season with Rubin he had won six races, including five on grass (of which two were Stakes races).
In the spring of 1979 he moved from trainer Bobby Donato to V. J. (‘Lefty’) Nickerson in New York, with whom he continued to show his preference for racing on grass rather than on din.
But opportunities for races on grass on the East coast were limited, so he was flown out to California to join Ron McAnally, in whose charge he won a division of the $40,000 Henry P. Russell Handicap.
By the end of May 1980 — in which year he first raced on 1 January — he had won six out of six in California and Florida.
Then it was back to Nickerson in the East for a campaign which included a second in the Jockey Club Gold Cup and a third in the Turf Classic.
Then California again, for a brave victory in the Oak Tree International.
That year he won an Eclipse Award as champion grass horse, though he was rated eight pounds below Spectacular Bid, the Horse Of The Year.
In 1981 John Henry was a six-year-old.
He won his first four races in California but after a defeat was off to Nickerson again: do horses qualify for Frequent Flyer Privileges?
He won the Sword Dancer Stakes in July, with 50-year-old Bill Shoemaker replacing his regular jockey Laffit Pincay.
After a short rest in California, John Henry was flown to Chicago for the inaugural Arlington Million.
The field of twelve was truly international, with runners from England, Ireland, France and Canada as well as the USA.
Lester Piggott rode Madam Gay, winner of the Prix de Diane at Chantilly (the French Oaks) and second to Shergar in the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Diamond Stakes at Ascot the month before the Million.
Steve Cauthen rode another English challenger in Fingal's Cave, a short head behind Madam Gay at Ascot.
The French horse Argument had won the Prix Ganay at Longchamp earlier in the season.
John Henry, coupled for betting purposes with his stable-mate Super Moment, was 11–10 favourite.
It was not only the top-class international field which made John Henry's task a stiff one, for days of heavy rain — which persisted during the race — had made the going very soft, conditions which the gelding did not like.
And John Henry was drawn on the outside in the starting gate at number 12.
From this position he could not expect to be prominent going to the first bend, the clubhouse turn, and Shoemaker held him back in about eighth place, some four horses out from the rails, as the runners came past the stands.
Once in the back stretch the jockey manoeuvred John Henry across to the rails, but the horse was ill at ease on the soggy ground and appeared to be out of contention.
Then he started to pick off his rivals, but time was slipping by and up in front outsider  nd to Mill Reef in the Eclipse, Miss Dan, two lengths behind Nijinsky when third in the Arc in 1970, Bourbon, who had won the Prix Royal-Oak (the French St Leger) and Irish Ball, who, though third to Mill Reef in the Derby and unplaced in the King George, had between those two races won the Irish Derby at The Curragh.
Also representing France were Ramsin, who had won the Prix du Cadran and the  Grand Prix de Saint-Cloud, and his stable-companion Arlequino, winner of the Prix de Chantilly.
From the USA came One For All, who had won over $300,000 but was a distinct outsider in Europe's top race.
The only English-trained horses pitched in against Mill Reef were Ortis, second in the King George after winning the Hardwicke Stakes at Royal Ascot, and the three-year-old Royalty, unbeaten but untried in high-class company.
A hefty contingent of English spectators had made the trip to Paris to support Mill Reef, and at the off his price on the Pari-Mutuel was 10–7 on.
Pistol Packer and Bourbon were coupled on 17–4, with Arlequino, Ramsin and his pacemaker Ossian on 7–1.
No other horse started at less than 20–1.
First out of the stalls was the American challenger One For All, but then Ossian took up his pacemaking role and led along the far side from Ramsin and the Aga Khan's Sharapour.
Mill Reef was about sixth, with Pistol Packer towards the rear.
At the top of the hill Ossian still had the lead, and he kept in front as the runners made down to the final bend, though Pistol Packer and Caro were improving their positions.
Once in the straight Ossian surrendered to Sharapour and Ortis, then Lester Piggott on Hallez came to the front.
As Sharapour fell back it seemed for a moment as if he would get in the way of Mill Reef on the rails, but Lewis was alert to the perils of getting boxed in up the short Longchamp straight and pulled Mill Reef out to begin his challenge.
One smack with the whip — the first time that Mill Reef had received such encouragement since the Guineas — and he was through a gap between Hallez and Ortis with less than two furlongs to race.
Meanwhile Pistol Packer was getting into top gear on the stands side, and Caro and Arlequino were not done with.
But a furlong out Mill Reef had sprinted clear, and only Pistol Packer could deny him the greatest moment of an outstanding racing career.
She got to his tail, but then in the final hundred yards Mill Reef produced a fresh surge of power and trebled his advantage.
At the post he was three lengths to the good, with Cambrizzia running on to be third.
Caro was a neck further back in fourth.
Mill Reefs victory had proved him one of the greatest European racehorses of the age.
He received a tumultuous welcome on returning to unsaddle, and when the dust settled the plaudits rained down.
Freddie Head, rider of Pistol Packer, opined that ‘Mill Reef was the best horse I've ever seen’, and the French press compared him with the horse whose stunning victory in the Arc six years earlier had marked him out as the very best horse of the era: ‘Comme Sea Bird II — mais plus vite’, raved Paris-Turf He was indeed plus vite , for his Arc time of 2 minutes 28.3 seconds set a new course record.
Mill Reef returned to Longchamp the following spring to notch up a ten-length victory in the Prix Ganay, but after a lacklustre display when beating Homeric a neck in the Coronation Cup at Epsom he did not race again: he was being prepared for a second Arc when on 30 August 1972 he fractured a foreleg on the gallops, and was retired to stud.
He was put down early in 1986 at the age of eighteen when an incurable heart condition was diagnosed.
Mill Reef goes clear of Pistol Packer.
Comme Sea Bird II — mais plus vite.
Mill Reef at the National Stud in Newmarket.
DANCING BRAVE
Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe, Longchamp, 5 October 1986
The tidal wave of Dancing Brave's progress up the Longchamp straight to win the 1986 Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe provided the greatest moment of European Flat racing in the 1980s.
And though the winner was US-bred, owned by a Saudi Arabian prince and ridden by an Irish-born jockey, this was a moment of the utmost sweetness for British racing, for Dancing Brave, here proving himself the horse of the decade by treating with contempt an international field of the highest quality, was trained in Sussex by Guy Harwood.
Such was the speed that Dancing Brave showed when winning the General Accident Two Thousand Guineas at Newmarket that some felt that the Derby — half a mile longer than the Guineas — might not be his race, but he took his chance at Epsom and started 2–1 favourite.
He was beaten half a length in probably the most controversial big Flat race run in England in the 1980s.
Greville Starkey's riding of the horse came in for fierce criticism, but he made no mistake in Dancing Brave's next race, drawing right away from Triptych to win the Coral-Eclipse Stakes at Sandown Park.
However, Pat Eddery replaced the injured Starkey for the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Diamond Stakes, where revenge was taken on Shahrastani, beaten into fourth as Dancing Brave disposed of Shardari and Triptych.
One warm-up race at Goodwood (for which Dancing Brave was such a certainty that the bookmakers returned no starting price), and it was off to his appointment with greatness in the Arc.
The field for the 1986 Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe was the strongest the race had  offered for years, adding up to the most valuable collection of bloodstock ever assembled fur a single race in Europe.
Apart from Dancing Brave, the three-year-old generation was represented by the Derby winner Shahrastani, by the filly Darara, who had recently won the Trusthouse Forte Prix Vermeille, one of France's top races for three-year-old fillies, and by Bering, unbeaten in four races that season including the Prix du Jockey-Club Lancia (the French equivalent of the Derby).
There was the ubiquitous Triptych, now a four-year-old: she had won only one race in the 1986 season but had been placed in the Coronation Cup (beaten a short head by Saint Estephe), the Coral-Eclipse Stakes, the King George, the Matchmaker International at York (beaten threequarters of a length by Shardari) and the Phoenix Champion Stakes (third to Park Express).
In the Arc she was reopposed by Shardari and by Saint Estephe, who had himself been beaten in the Grand Prix de Saint-Cloud by the German-trained Acatenango, also in the Longchamp field and unbeaten in his last twelve races, including the German Derby.
Mersey had won the Prix Royal-Oak (the French St Leger) in 1985; Iades had won the Prix Dollar at Chantilly; Baby Turk had won the Grand Prix de Deauville.
That Dihistan, who had won the Hardwicke Stakes at Royal Ascot, was in the race as pacemaker for Shahrastani and Shardari, bears witness to the class of the race.
Well backed by the huge number of British racegoers who had flocked to the Arc on the first Sunday in October, Dancing Brave started at odds of 11–10 on the Pari-Mutuel to beat his fourteen opponents with Bering second favourite at 11–4.
The going was  firm.
In the early stages both Pat Eddery on Dancing Brave and Gary Moore on Bering held up their mounts towards the rear, but had improved to the middle of the pack as the field made the downhill run towards the straight.
At the turn for home Baby Turk led from Nemain and Acatenango, but behind them the four runners owned by the Aga Khan — Shardari, Dinistan, Darara and Shahrastani — were making their efforts, and over a quarter of a mile out Shardari hit the front, closely pursued by Shahrastani and Darara.
Then Bering got into top gear and swept past the Aga Khan's runners, taking it up from Shahrastani inside the final furlong.
It was a surge of acceleration which in any normal race would have ensured victory, but this was no normal race: suddenly Dancing Brave was there, charging up the middle of the track with a relentless power.
One moment halfway up the straight it looked as if Eddery might have cut it too fine; the next it was a question of how far he would win by, for this burst of speed was so decisive that it made the top horses in Europe look one-paced.
It proclaimed Dancing Brave one of the great horses of the century.
The official winning margin over Bering was one and a half lengths.
Triptych ran a marvellous race, making up a vast amount of ground in the straight to finish third.
The time for the race was a course record.
The following day it was revealed that Bering had chipped a bone in a knee during the race, but such was the power of his acceleration as he took up the running that he could hardly have been affected until the very final stages.
Sadly Dancing Brave's career ended in anti-climax.
Sent to Santa Anita in California for the Breeders' Cup Turf a month later, he could only manage fourth behind Manila, Theatrical and Estrapade.
He was then retired to stud.
Dancing Brace surges past Bering (black sleeves), Triptych (no.
9) and Shardari (brown cap)…
…and goes clear.
Dancing Brave (Pat Eddery) in the parade.
CRISP AND RED RUM
Grand National, Liverpool, 31 March 1973
The 1973 Grand National was won by Red Rum, ridden by Brian Fletcher, by three quarters of a length from Crisp, with L'Escargot twenty-five lengths away in third and Spanish Steps a further twelve lengths back in fourth.
Those are the facts.
But somehow they are wrong, for at every stage of this incredible race — at every stage, that is, bar the one that matters, at the winning post — the only rightful winner had to be Crisp, whose astonishing display of galloping and jumping in the toughest race in the calendar must, were there any justice in the world, have been blessed with success.
Thirty-eight runners went to post, with Red Rum and Crisp joint favourites at 9–1.
Red Rum was an eight-year-old, and had had to work hard for his corn, being trained in several yards and shrugging off the effects of damaging foot disease, before finding his true vocation in the care of trainer Ginger McCain, who bought Red Rum for 6000 guineas on behalf of owner Noel Le Mare, and gradually made the horse into one of the best chasers in the north; he owed his position in the Grand National betting to highly encouraging runs in three handicaps early in 1973 following five successive victories the previous autumn.
Among his main rivals were L'Escargot, who had won the Cheltenham Gold Cup in 1970 and 1971, the 1972 Whitbread Gold Cup winner Grey Sombrero, the high-class chaser Spanish Steps — and Crisp, who in the National carried joint top weight of twelve stone with L'Escargot.
Spanish Steps carried one pound less.
Red Rum was saddled with a mere ten stone five pounds.
Bred in Australia by his owner Sir Chester Manifold, Crisp had come to Britain in 1970 to be trained by Fred Winter.
He won his first race at Wincanton in brilliant style and then took the top two-mile chase of the season — the Champion Chase at the Cheltenham National Hunt Festival in 1971 — by twenty-five lengths.
The following season he was back at the Festival as favourite for the Gold Cup, but soft going and the distance of three and a quarter miles proved his undoing, and he finished fifth.
In 1973 he again tried his hand at Cheltenham and ran third in the Champion Chase before being directed to Liverpool for the Grand National.
This seemed a race well beyond his stamina range, for the Grand National is over nearly four and a half miles and Crisp's ideal distance was apparently no further than two and a half miles.
On the other hand, his jumping was superb, and the thirty formidable fences of the National course would hold no terrors for him.
He was a chaser of the highest class, and had not other horses of unproven stamina excelled themselves in the National?
From the moment the tapes rose Crisp was in the front rank, and by the time the field swept over Becher's Brook — the sixth fence — he was sharing the lead with Grey Sombrero.
Two fences later, as the runners swerved left over the Canal Turn, he had sped to the front and was inexorably increasing his advantage and turning the Grand National into a glorious exhibition round.
He gambolled over the four fences on the run towards the turn for home on the first circuit, and made towards the stands with a commanding lead.
He bounded over the thirteenth and fourteenth and set off for the Chair, that huge open ditch which forms the biggest obstacle on the course.
By now he was some twenty lengths in front of his pursuers, and it was becoming a matter of how long this horse of doubtful stamina could keep going.
At the Chair he pricked his ears and sailed over the gaping ditch with such abandon that he pecked slightly on the landing side.
But he recovered his balance in a stride and made off for the water jump.
Behind him Grey Sombrero took a crashing fall at the Chair and broke his shoulder, but all eyes were on Crisp as he skipped over the water in front of the exhilarated spectators in the stands and swung out towards the second circuit.
His lead now was enormous.
The pursuers were keeping up as best they could but held little hope of catching him, though at the first fence on the second circuit — the seventeenth in the race — Red Rum could be seen to be keeping on gamely.
But Crisp was still way ahead, disdaining his top weight and jumping with a breathtaking fluency.
At the nineteenth, a big open ditch, he stood back and put in an extravagant leap: he still had plenty of gas in the tank.
Way behind him Red Rum had moved into second.
Crisp was putting in an astounding performance.
‘I  can't remember a horse so far ahead in the Grand National at this stage!’ enthused commentator Julian Wilson on BBC television as Crisp came to Becher's Brook for the second time, still looking uncatchable: galloping relentlessly and jumping brilliantly, he was thirty lengths clear and showed no signs of flagging.
This would be the most spectacular victory in the history of the great race.
He took the Canal Turn as fluently as he had on the first circuit, then swept towards Valentine's Brook.
Now there was only one possible danger — Red Rum, a long way in arrears but slowly, very slowly, getting closer.
Six fences from home, and the winner could still only be Crisp.
Five from home, four and three — the nearer the finish came, the more certain his victory seemed to be.
Richard Pitman stole a quick look round to assess the closeness of his nearest pursuer — at least twenty lengths — and shortened the reins to keep Crisp together for the final draining half mile.
He was still going well enough, but then, as he turned towards the stands for the last time, a doubt began to nibble, and then to gnaw, Was he losing his momentum?
Brian Fletcher on Red Rum thought he was, and urged his mount to keep up the pursuit.
The gap was surely closing, and Crisp was not home yet.
At the second last fence Crisp was still ten lengths to the good but he was clearly coming to the end of his tether.
After  the second last Pitman sneaked another look behind him, and this telegraphed to Brian Fletcher that all was not lost.
As Crisp, tiring with every stride, made for the thirtieth and final fence the awful prospect of defeat loomed large.
He was losing his action, and beginning to roll around with fatigue.
Could he last home?
Trainer Fred Winter had watched the race with Crisp's owner Sir Chester Manifold without uttering a word, but now, as their horse plugged gallantly on, he announced, ‘I'm afraid, Sir Chester, we are going to be beaten.’
At the last fence Crisp, though he walloped the gorse into the air, still held a substantial lead, but Red Rum — with twenty-three pounds less on his back — was charging along now, and it was simply a matter of whether Crisp could survive the desperately long run to the winning post.
Coming to the Elbow, where the runners veer right-handed off the main course towards the line with little more than a furlong to go, Pitman gave his mount a smack down the right-hand side.
Crisp, out on his feet staggered away to the left.
Pitman yanked him back on to a true line and managed to steer him clear of the rails, but the two hundred yards he had left to run seemed like two hundred miles, and Red Rum was now only five lengths back.
Crisp had slowed almost to a trot, but still it seemed that he might hold on.
Richard Pitman describes those gut-wrenching moments:
No longer was Crisp's action light and forward it was now laboured and sideways as if he was drunk.
The tell-tale noises were close, but so was the winning post — or was it?
It almost seemed as if it was moving further away with each stride.
With only fifteen yards to go Crisp tightened as he felt Red Rum's presence but it was his dying effort and only lasted for a second.
Two strides away from the post Red Rum's head forged past my gallant partner to snatch victory from our grasp.
Red Rum had won.
Crisp had lost.
L'Escargot was third, Spanish Steps fourth.
The time for the race — 9 minutes 1.9 seconds — beat the previous record (Golden Miller in 1934) by nearly twenty seconds and was to stand until 1990.
Beneath those facts lie the high emotion, the drama, the fever-pitch excitement, the wrong of this extraordinary race.
For although Red Rum went on to win two more Grand Nationals in 1974 and 1977 (and to finish second in the intervening years of 1975 and 1976), and although Crisp beat Red Rum easily the next time they met, there has never been a big race which a beaten horse so deserved to win.
Red Rum may have won the race, but never mind the facts.
This will always be Crisp's Grand National.
I'm afraid, Sir Chester, we are going to be beaten.
LEFT Crisp and Richard Pitman at the Grand National start on the morning of the race.
Crisp soars over Becher's Brook on the second circuit.
OPPOSITE Norton's Coin is led from the unsaddling enclosure after the Tote Cheltenham Gold Cup, March, 1990.
BELOW Red Run (left) catches Crisp just before the winning post.
A SENSE OF OCCASION
DEVON LOCH
Grand National, Liverpool, 24 March 1956
Poor Devon Loch.
The fate that befell him in the 1956 Grand National booked him a permanent place not only in the reminiscences of racing folk but in the British national memory.
For he was the Queen Mother's steeplechaser who belly-flopped yards from the Grand National winning post, the horse who grabbed defeat from the very jaws of victory in such a way that even those with no interest whatsoever in the sport of racing still recall the sight of ‘that horse who jumped the fence that wasn't there’.
Since the late 1940s the Queen Mother had been the darling of National Hunt racing: it was largely her enthusiasm for the sport that raised its status from that of a poor relation to the Flat to, by the mid-1950s, a position of near equality — in popularity if not in the prize money available.
She had owned good horses such as Manicou (who had won the King George VI Chase in 1950) and Monaveen (who had finished fifth to Freebooter in that year's Grand National as his royal owner's first runner in the race), but in Devon Loch she had a chaser who apparently had all the attributes to win her the greatest steeplechase in the calendar: he was a big horse, strongly built and bold yet intelligent enough to look after himself in the hurly-burly of four and half miles and thirty fences.
In December 1954 he was ridden for the first time by the reigning champion jockey Dick Francis: after the race Francis told Cazalet that he would like to ride Devon Loch one day in the Grand National…
The New Century Chase at Hurst Park in February 1955 marked Devon Loch's first victory in the colours of his royal owner — blue, buff stripes, blue sleeves, black cap, gold tassel — and he won once more that season, beating a future Cheltenham Gold Cup winner in Linwell.
By the spring of 1956 Devon Loch, now a ten-year-old but lightly raced, was clearly a serious candidate for the Grand National: he had won two good chases the previous autumn and finished fifth in the King George VI Chase to Limber Hill.
He then ran a gallant race when third to Linwell in the Mildmay Memorial Chase over three miles five furlongs at Sandown Park, conceding twenty-three pounds to the winner and finishing only one and a half lengths behind him.
Dick Francis was sidelined through injury, and Bryan Marshall, who rode the horse in the King George and the Mildmay, informed Cazalet that on both occasions his mount had seemed to falter halfway through the race, before finding his second wind and running on again.
This quirk was to come under scrutiny in the Liverpool post-mortems a few months later.
In his pre-National race Devon Loch gave a stone to another future Gold Cup winner, Kerstin, when running third to her in the National Hunt Chase at Cheltenham, after which Dick Francis reported to the Queen Mother that ‘Devon Loch was staying on  really well, and I feel we have a great chance at Aintree.’
On National day the bookmakers assessed his chance at 100–7, with Must the favourite and Sundew (who was to win the race the following year) second favourite.
Also in the field of twenty-nine were previous winners Early Mist (1953) and Royal Tan, who at the age of twelve started at 28–1 to repeat his 1954 victory.
Bracketed with Devon Loch at 100–7 was E.S.B., trained by Fred Rimell and ridden by Dave Dick, and the Queen Mother ran a second string in M'as-tu-vu, ridden by Arthur Freeman.
The bulk of the race does not need much describing.
Suffice it to say that Devon Loch gave Dick Francis a dream ride, as the jockey related in his autobiography The Sport of Queens : ‘I have never ridden another horse like him.
He cleared the formidable Aintree fences as easily as if they had been hurdles.
He put himself right before every one of them, and he was so intelligent at the job that all I had to do was to ride him quietly and let him jump without fussing him.’
(It is worth remembering that in those days the Grand National fences did not incorporate a sloping apron of gorse on the take-off side to help the horses jump accurately: the take-off side was sheer, and consequently more difficult to gauge correctly.)
The longer the race went on, the better Devon Loch jumped, and as he soared over Becher's Brook on the second circuit no runner was going better: the Queen Mother's dream of winning the Grand National was about to come true.
By the Canal Turn he was second, and he kept up his gallop as the field came back towards the stands, taking up the running with three fences to go.
His only serious challenger was E.S.B., but Devon Loch was a length to the good at the last fence and started to pull away up the run-in, over a quarter of a mile long.
E.S.B. was dead tired and Dave Dick had accepted that he would not win, for Devon Loch was scooting along, increasing his lead and certain to land a famous and hugely popular victory.
The crowd was wild with excitement.
Hats were in the air.
Here was the most loved owner in British racing, the most adored individual in British society, about to win the country's greatest steeplechase — a fitting reward for all that she had put into the sport.
Devon Loch had a hundred yards to go, ninety, eighty, seventy, sixty.
Twelve strides and he would be home — eleven, ten…
The next heart-stopping moment can only be properly described in the jockey's own words:
In one stride he was bounding smoothly along, a poem of controlled motion; in the next, his bind legs stiffened and refused to function.
He fell flat on his belly, his limbs splayed out sideways and backwards in unnatural angles, and when he stood up he could hardly move…the rhythm was shattered, the dream was over, and the race was lost.
To the massed spectators in the stands, flung in an instant from joyous acclaim of a Royal winner to horrified, dumbfounded silence, Devon Loch had seemed to leap at an imaginary obstacle before slithering to the ground and skidding along to a halt, the momentum throwing Francis up on to the horse's neck.
As Devon Loch struggled up there was still time for him to get going again and hold off E.S.B., but his hind legs seemed not to function and he could not move on.
E.S.B. went by him to register a ten-length victory from Gentle Moya, with Royal Tan another ten lengths away third, but all eyes — stunned, disbelieving eyes — were on the stricken Devon Loch as Dick Francis slid off his back.
Peter Cazalet's travelling head lad rushed on to the course to lead the horse away as a bemused jockey was taken back to the weighing room.
The Queen Mother and Cazalet went over to see Devon Loch and he appeared to be sound: inspection by a vet immediately after the calamity revealed nothing amiss with him.
The most sensational collapse in the history of British racing has never been conclusively explained, though many theories were advanced.
Devon Loch had appeared to take off right by the water jump, which the runners on the second circuit of the Grand National by-pass as they approach the winning post: had he caught that fence out of the corner of his eye and tried to jump it?
Close examination of the film shows that he took off well before it; he was not under pressure and had no apparent reason to panic.
Some thought he had suffered a momentary heart problem, but he was not running like a tired horse and afterwards was completely sound.
Perhaps he had hit a patch of false going which caused him to lose his action, or had a fleeting muscular spasm which lost him the use of his hind legs — something like Bryan Marshall had reported after a couple of his races earlier in the season.
Probably the clue to the most plausible explanation — and the one put forward by the man most likely to know, his jockey Dick Francis — lies in the fact that just before he slid to the ground Devon Loch pricked his ears, in the way that a horse might do just before jumping a fence — or on suddenly hearing an unfamiliar noise.
Certainly what Devon Loch heard at that moment was not a noise which he had heard before, and it was some noise — a raucous surge of patriotic fervour as the Royal horse galloped to certain victory in front of his owner the Queen Mother and her daughters Queen Elizabeth II and Princess Margaret, a rapturous climax befitting what was about to be one of the greatest moments of racing history.
Francis wrote that ‘the cheering was incredible’:
I have never heard in my life such a noise.
It rolled and lapped around us, buffeting and glorious, the enthusiastic expression of love for the Royal family and delight in seeing the Royal horse win.
The Grand National course narrows approaching the winning post and bends round to the left immediately after, and with crowds manically screaming at him in the stands and on both rails and directly in front of him it would hardly be surprising if Devon Loch had suddenly been startled by the deafening noise.
Perhaps he stopped simply because he was scared.
The Queen Mother took the reverse stoically, writing to Cazalet a few days after the Grand National: ‘We will not be done in by this, and will just keep on trying.’
The only creature who could explain what had happened was Devon Loch, and he was not in a position to give interviews.
To this day Devon Loch's collapse remains one of the Turfs greatest unsolved mysteries.
TOP Devon Loch (black cap) swings over second Becher's just behind E.S.B. and the falling Sundew.
ABOVE The Royal Party at the instant of Devon Loch's leaping into the air.
Some catch on more quickly than others, and some aren't watching the race at all.
As the newsreel saw it: Devon Loch collapses, then struggles to his feet as E.S.B. comes past.
The calamity which overtook us was sudden, terrible, and completely without warning.
A bewildered Dick Francis walks back to the weighing room as Devon Loch is led away.
EMILY DAVISON, ANMER AND ABOYEUR
Derby Stakes, Epsom, 4 June 1913
On rising ground at the western end of the churchyard of St Mary's at Morpeth in Northumberland stands, sheltered by cedar trees, a funerary monument.
This is the last resting place of the local Davison family, and under the name Emily Wilding Davison, born 11 October 1872, died 8 June 1913, is inscribed the phrase ‘Deeds, not words’.
Whether she intended it or not, Emily's deed during the 1913 Derby at Epsom afforded her the status of martyr, and her grave was to become a shrine.
Events in the race itself summon up less pious images, for this running of the world's greatest Classic saw a brawling match up the straight and a sensational disqualification which to many smelled of more than one personal vendetta.
And for plenty of people, now as then, Emily Davison was not a martyr but an obsessive fanatic whose activities brought no credit to her cause and whose action on Derby Day 1913 was that of a hooligan, not a heroine.
No one emerged from the day with much distinction.
Emily Davison was among the most militant members of the Women's Social and Political Union — the suffragettes.
Soon after joining the WSPU in 1906 she had embarked on a campaign of disruptive action which by the time she went to Epsom for the Derby had brought her numerous prison sentences for offences such as obstruction, throwing bricks, setting fire to pillar-boxes and smashing windows in the House of Commons.
(She had attacked a man in Aberdeen in the mistaken notion that he was Lloyd George: in fact he was a Baptist minister.)
At the end of May 1913 Emily Davison was at home in Longhorsley, near Morpeth, recovering from her latest spell in prison, when she received by telegram the instructions that took her to Tattenham Corner as the Derby field approached.
It is not known who sent the instructions, nor exactly what they were.
What is certain is that on the bright and sunny morning of 4 June 1913 the forty-year-old Emily Davison called at the offices of the WSPU in London and asked for two of the union's white, green and purple flags.
One she carried tightly rolled up in her hand; the other she pinned inside her coat.
She then went to Victoria Station and bought a return ticket to Epsom, where she took up a position in the pressing crowd on the inside rails at Tattenham Corner, a few yards before the runners reach the straight.
Fifteen horses were competing that year for a first prize in the Derby of £6450.
The hot favourite at 6–4 was Craganour.
He had apparently been a most unlucky loser of the Two Thousand Guineas at Newmarket, when the judge Charles Robinson had called Louvois the winner despite the conviction of most people present that Craganour, finishing on the other side of the course from his rival, had held on.
Bill Saxby, who had ridden Craganour in the Guineas, lost the ride to Danny Maher for the colt's winning run in the Newmarket Stakes, and in the Derby rode Louvois, joint third favourite with the French challenger Nimbus.
But Maher could not ride Craganour in the Derby as he had been claimed for Lord Rosebery's Prue, and the favourite was partnered by the American jockey Johnny Reiff.
Second favourite Shogun at 6–1 was the only horse apart from Craganour to start at less than 10–1; King George V's horse Anmer, ridden by Herbert Jones, was 50–1.
Among four horses on 100–1 was Aboyeur, the mount of Edwin Piper and a forlorn hope in the world's greatest Classic: he had won once from three runs as a two-year-old and been unplaced at Kempton Park on his only previous outing at three.
To all appearances Aboyeur was a no-hoper and Craganour a certainty.
But Aboyeur's blinkered head showed in front soon after the start as he took the field along from Craganour and Aldegond, with Shogun, Nimbus and Louvois all handy.
With a mile to run the King's colt Anmer was struggling to stay with the pace and started to drop back, and as the runners came down the hill Aboyeur was three lengths to the good, with Craganour, Day Comet, Shogun and Louvois best of the rest.
At the rear Agadir and Anmer headed the stragglers but were both lost causes.
In position at Tattenham Corner, Emily Davison waited until the leading batch of horses had thundered past, then quickly squeezed through the crowd and under the rails on to the course.
She managed to avoid  Agadir but then Anmer was upon her.
She held out her arms and tried desperately to grab at Jones's reins, but three quarters of a ton of racehorse hit her head-on at nearly forty miles an hour and the three went down in a heap.
The playwright St John Ervine was standing nearby and described what he saw to the Daily Mail :
Miss Davison, who was standing close to the rails a few yards from me, suddenly ducked under the railings as the horses came up.
The King's horse Anmer came up and Miss Davison went towards it.
She put up her hand but whether it was to catch hold of the reins or to protect herself I do not know.
It was over in a few seconds.
The horse knocked the woman over with very great force and then stumbled and fell, pitching the jockey violently onto the ground.
Both he and Miss Davison were bleeding profusely.
Another eyewitness, quoted in the Daily Sketch , recounted:
Like a rabbit she ran across the course to intercept Anmer and as the horse was hugging the rails she stood up in front of him holding both her hands above her head, and then sprang at him.
She caught the reins or bridle in her hands, and there hung suspended for a second as Anmer rushed on at a speed of over thirty miles an hour.
Then the horse plunged as Jones shook the reins to get rid of the swaying woman who still hung like a limpet, and Anmer rolled over towards the inside rails with Jones underneath.
The woman was hurled clear and fell onto her side near the horse's flanks.
It is important to take into consideration more than one eye-witness report of these few seconds (and the Gaumont newsreel film) in an effort to decide what did happen; but no account or film can tell us exactly what Emily Davison's motive was.
Eight decades later the incident still causes discussion and disagreement, and opinions vary about just what she intended to do.
The most likely explanation is that she intended some disruption of the race and, having ducked under the rails, found herself the beneficiary of the sheer coincidence of the King's horse — whose colours she would have recognized — being isolated from the other runners.
It would seem that she intended to pull him down — in itself a tall order — and so grabbed at the reins.
But no explanation of the most horrendous moment in the history of the Derby can be other than speculation.
As the crowds at Tattenham Corner pushed under the rails to reach the stricken pair the race itself was developing into a barging match.
Aboyeur was on the inside with Craganour mounting an effective challenge on the stands side, and Nimbus, Great Sport, Louvois, Shogun and Day Comet on the heels of the leading pair.
Shogun, having come off best in a bout of shoving with Day Comet, was making ground up the rails when Reiff moved Craganour over to lean on Aboyeur, causing the outsider to swerve to the left and cut off Shogun's run on the inside.
Again Frank Wootton on Shogun tried to get through, and again Aboyeur cut him off.
Now Craganour had gone half a length up, but Aboyeur fought back as Piper sought to straighten him by taking his whip in his left hand and applying it liberally.
But this caused Aboyeur to veer away from the rails and collide with Craganour, carrying him out towards the centre of the course and interfering with the finishing runs of Nimbus — who had been far enough back at Tattenham Corner for his jockey to have seen the suffragette incident — and Great Sport, both coming up the stands side.
Reiff retaliated by trying to push the favourite back on to Aboyeur, and as the two went past the post Craganour was a head up, with Louvois just behind in third and Great Sport  fourth.
There is good photographic evidence to suggest that Day Comet did in fact finish third, but the Epsom judge that day was the same Charles Robinson who had controversially denied Craganour the Two Thousand Guineas, and he placed Day Comet fifth.
Although there had clearly been a great deal of bumping and brawling, Aboyeur's jockey Edwin Piper declared on unsaddling that he had would not object.
The ‘All Right’ signal was given from the weighing room and the red flag hoisted to coffin that the result stood.
But a moment later, as Craganour was being led away, the ‘All Right’ decision was rescinded and the winner called back: the sensational news spread across the Downs that the Stewards themselves had objected to Craganour on the charge of jostling the second, Aboyeur.
Initially few believed that the favourite would lose the race, for the scrimmaging had clearly been caused by both parties, and odds of 4–1 were laid against the outsider getting the race.
But as time passed and the Stewards had still not delivered their decision it became obvious that the matter was not so clearcut.
Two of the Stewards, Lord Wolverton and Major Eustace Loder, interviewed the jockeys concerned in the finish; the third, Lord Rosebery, did not take part in the adjudication as he had a runner in the race.
After a long period of deliberation, during which Craganour's owner Charles Bower Ismay was seen to become ever more pale, the official announcement was given: the race went to Aboyeur.
Was there a hidden agenda behind this decision?
Eustace Loder, the prime mover of the Stewards' objection, was said to have a personal grudge against Craganour's owner Ismay, who in any case was far from universally popular: the son of the founder of the White Star Line, whose greatest ship the Titanic had gone down on its maiden voyage in 1912 with the loss of 1,517 lives, and himself a passenger on that fateful voyage, his survival did not endear him to the public.
He was also considered in some quarters to be less than entirely open in his Turf operations: his trainer Tom Coulthwaite had had his licence withdrawn earlier in 1913 over the running of two Ismay horses, though this was widely held to be an injustice.
Whether personal acrimony stimulated Loder can only be surmise, but it is certainly likely that Bill Saxby, jocked off Craganour after the Two Thousand Guineas, would not be bending over backwards to support that horse's cause in the enquiry in which, as rider of Louvois, he was called to give evidence.
Whatever the validity of such speculation, the amended result stood, for Ismay's appeal the following weekend came too late.
That it did stand is just as well for the connections of Aboyeur, who were reported to have won £40,000 in bets on the horse.
He ran twice more, beaten on both occasions, and was then sold to the Imperial Racing Club of St Petersburg for £13,000.
Craganour never ran again in England and was exported to Argentina, where he enjoyed great success as a sire.
Herbert Jones, Anmer's rider, was not seriously injured.
While recovering in hospital he received a thoughtful telegram from Queen Mary, who expressed herself ‘very sorry indeed to hear of your sad accident caused through the abominable behaviour of a brutal, lunatic woman’.
The woman herself lay in Epsom Cottage Hospital for four days without regaining consciousness.
Her friends and supporters showered her with mail.
So did some less sympathetic correspondents: ‘I am glad to hear that you are in hospital.
I hope you suffer torture until you die.
You idiot.
I consider you are a person unworthy of existence in this world, considering what you have done.
I should like the opportunity of starving and beating you to a pulp.
Why don't your people find an asylum for you?
Yours etc., An Englishman.’
She died on Sunday 8 June.
A fractured skull and haemorrhaging of the brain were the causes of death, and after the official inquest the Coroner at Epsom recorded a verdict of death by misadventure.
Five years after Emily Davison's death the first women won the vote.
The abominable behaviour of a brutal, lunatic woman.
Anmer, Herbert Jones and Emily Davison crash to the ground.
Aboyeur (blinkers) fails by a head to push his way past Craganour (light cap).
NORTON'S COIN
Cheltenham Gold Cup, Cheltenham, 15 March 1990
Sirrell Griffiths got out of bed at 3.45 a.m. on his dairy farm just outside the village of Nantgaredig, near Carmarthen in South Wales.
He had a busy day ahead of him, and although he did not yet know it, he would not be able to get back to bed until nearly twenty-four hours later.
Having milked his seventy-five Friesian cows, he set about the main business of the day, loading Norton's Coin, one of only three horses he trained under permit on his farm, into the horsebox, then taking the wheel to drive his stable star to Cheltenham.
For this was Gold Cup day, and Norton's Coin had a very small supporting role in a performance that Thursday afternoon which would see the hugely popular grey Desert Orchid set off fresh waves of fanaticism with a second victory in the most coveted prize of the National Hunt season.
Norton's Coin's participation in the race was something of a mistake, for Sirrell Griffiths had wanted to run him in the Cathcart Challenge Cup on the same day of the Cheltenham meeting, only to discover that the horse was ineligible.
By then it was too late to enter him for his other preferred Cheltenham Festival target, the Mildmay of Flete Handicap Chase, so he had to take his chance in the big one.
Although he had not a prayer against Desert Orchid in the Gold Cup, Norton's Coin came to Cheltenham with the reputation of being a useful enough horse despite lowly origins.
Griffiths had bought his sire Mount Cassino for 700 guineas in 1975 (mainly to cover cobs and ponies) and had put the stallion to the unraced Thoroughbred mare Grove Chance, whom he had purchased for just £425.
He sold Grove Chance, then in foal for the first time, to his neighbour Percy Thomas, but when she died shortly after giving birth to Norton's Coin he bought back the foal.
Norton's Coin won four point-to-points out of ten runs over three seasons and then developed into a good chaser: by the time of his Gold Cup attempt he had won four of his fourteen races under Rules, including a valuable chase at Cheltenham the previous April.
Not for him, though, the heated boxes and all-weather gallops of Newmarket or Lambourn.
He was housed in a converted milking shed and brought to fitness by being ridden around the farm, when time allowed, by Sirrell Griffiths himself — all fifteen and a half stone of him — and occasionally by the Chief Constable of the Avon and Somerset Police, David Shattock.
Lack of peak fitness had told against him on his first run of the 1989–90 season when pitched in against Desert Orchid and other top chasers in the King George VI Rank Chase at Kempton Park on Boxing Day.
He caught the eye with a highly encouraging performance despite finishing last but was not seriously considered to be in the same league as the adored ‘Dessie’.
Desert Orchid would not have given Norton's Coin a second thought since their Kempton meeting, for he had his public to deal with.
His Cheltenham Gold Cup victory in 1989 (see pages 66–9) had unleashed a wave of public adulation unparalleled in racing history.
His manure was not sold (as Red Rum's had been), nor had his exploits been celebrated in song (as was the case with Arkle, Red Rum and Dawn Run), but his fans were not sold short: there were books (three), video tapes (two), countless portraits, a white rocking horse called ‘Dessie’, sculptures and figurines (some of which actually bore a resemblance to the horse), an official fan club, and even a recorded phone message on which Desert Orchid's part-owner Richard Burridge would update  worshippers on the well-being of their idol.
When it was announced that he would be entered in the Grand National a fierce debate raged about whether the nation's best-loved horse should take part in such a dangerous event: the letters columns of the sporting press argued the pros and cons for weeks, a national newspaper ran an opinion poll (in which the voters came down very heavily against his participation), and the publication of the weights for the race (Desert Orchid twelve stone two pounds) added fuel to the fire.
Eventually it was announced that he would not run — not in 1990, at least— and the fuss subsided, but Desert Orchid was clearly more than a national favourite.
He was now a national issue.
‘The Grey Horse’ had enjoyed a line season, losing just once (when conceding a great deal of weight in a handicap over two miles, a distance now too short for him to show his best), and winning the King George VI Rank Chase, steeplechasing's other classic, for the third time.
Less than a month before the Gold Cup he had produced what for many experts was his best performance ever when bouncing around Kempton Park to win the Racing Post Chase under top weight.
He was in good shape and in good heart, and although it was known that he did not run up to his best at Cheltenham, the conditions would suit him much more than those of a year ago and few opposed him.
For the adoring public which flocked to Cheltenham to pay him homage (the official attendance was 56,884), defeat was simply out of the question.
Cheltenham Festival racegoers in 1990 enjoyed three days of spring sunshine, and the going was good to firm — conditions almost unheard-of on Gold Cup day.
On the first day the Champion Hurdle had been won by Kribensis (owned by Sheikh Mohammed and trained by Michael Stoute) from Nomadic Way (owned by Robert Sangster and trained by Barry Hills)— powerful Flat racing connections elbowing in on the jumping scene.
The Gold Cup was to demonstrate that there was still some room for the small man.
Desert Orchid faced eleven opponents, of whom those most likely to spoil the party were Bonanza Boy (twice winner of the Welsh National and representative of the formidable combination of trainer Martin Pipe and jockey Peter Scudamore), Toby Tobias (a highly promising young chaser trained by Jenny Pitman and ridden by her son Mark), Nick The Brief (who on his last appearance had easily won the Vincent O'Brien Irish Gold Cup at Leopardstown) and Cavvies Clown (trained like Desert Orchid by David Elsworth and second in the Gold Cup in 1988).
Though ridden by Graham McCourt, then third in the jump jockeys' table, Norton's Coin was a rank outsider.
The Sporting Life's run-down of the runners described him as ‘this no-hoper’.
the Racing Post did not mention him at all in its main preview of the race; and the official Cheltenham racecard form guide nominated him ‘more of a candidate for last place than first’.
Described by his owner-trainer as ‘a long, leeky, plain-looking horse’, Norton's Coin ambled along quietly while the fan club squeaked its excitement at the appearance of Desert Orchid, striding jauntily around the parade ring and clearly eager to get on with the business.
Ripples of applause greeted the great grey as he cantered past the stands to the start under jockey Richard Dunwoody, who had taken over as Desert Orchid's regular partner on the retirement of Simon Sherwood.
Dunwoody had in the  past won on Norton's Coin and would have been riding him in the Gold Cup had Desert Orchid been absent.
The public was putting its money where its heart was, and at the off Desert Orchid was 11–10 on favourite (though he had opened in the betting at slightly shorter odds).
Of the others, only Bonanza Boy (15–2) and Toby Tobias (8–1) started at less than 10–1.
Norton's Coin, who had been 200–1 with some bookmakers that morning, started at 100–1 having opened in the course betting at 66–1.
Only The Bakewell Boy, a real no-hoper, was at longer odds.
As expected Desert Orchid went straight into the lead, and after putting in extravagant leaps at the first two fences seemed to be set fair for an exhibition round.
But as the field swung away from the stands for the first time it became clear that the grey would not have matters entirely to his liking, for first Kildimo and then Ten Of Spades kept him close company and would not allow him to dominate affairs.
With a circuit to race Nick The Brief was pulled up, and though Desert Orchid continued to dispute the lead with Ten Of Spades as the runners went away from the stands for the second circuit Toby Tobias and Norton's Coin were making noticeable progress through the field.
At the fifteenth fence, on the uphill stretch, Kildimo fell and Ten Of Spades went two lengths clear of Desert Orchid.
The favourite still seemed to be going well enough, however, and the adoring masses were not particularly worried as the leading group — Ten of Spades and Desert Orchid, with Toby Tobias and Norton's Coin close behind — thundered down towards the third last fence.
The race was really on now, and as the quartet came away from the third last and turned into the straight Desert Orchid suddenly had a fight on his hands — not from Ten of Spades, who had exhausted himself in drawing the grey's sting and now fell heavily at the second last, but from Toby Tobias and Norton's Coin.
The three came to the last fence together, Desert Orchid on the stands side, Toby Tobias on the far rails, Norton's Coin between them.
Desert Orchid had often won from worse positions, but he seemed unable to quicken, and was half a length down on his two younger rivals as they landed over the last obstacle.
Toby Tobias was quickest away and Desert Orchid could find no more, but the race was far from finished, for as Mark Pitman on Toby Tobias made for the winning post Graham McCourt urged Norton's Coin to a final effort, and as the two jockeys, whips swishing, pushed their courageous mounts up the hill the cheers from the stands which moments before had been tuning up for another Dessie triumph lapsed into a disbelieving murmur: this was not the right script at all.
Desert Orchid was beaten, but ahead of him two brave steeplechasers were fighting out a stirring finish, and fifty yards from the line the no-hoper, the candidate for last place rather than first, stuck his plain-looking chestnut head in front and kept it there.
Norton's Coin had won the Cheltenham Gold Cup.
It took a while for the true magnitude of his achievement to dawn on the crowd, shell-shocked as they were by the defeat of their hero.
But there was no semblance of a fluke about the result — it was the fastest Gold Cup ever run — and as Norton's Coin made the long walk past the stands to the winner's enclosure he started to receive the reception he deserved.
At 100–1 he was the longest-priced winner in the history of the race, but that was not the point.
What made the result so glorious was that it epitomized the essence of steeplechasing: at its most prestigious moment the sport had returned to its rural roots and shown that the humblest contestants can win the biggest prizes.
Norton's Coin was not the subject of videos and telephone hotlines and fan clubs and exquisitely crafted models and opinion polls.
He lived in a converted cowshed and was exercised by his owner, who raced his three horses simply for the fun of it.
Norton's Coin got back to his cowshed at about 10.30 p.m.
After the horse was bedded down it was time for Sirrell to celebrate properly, and most of Nantgaredig turned up to assist: he eventually got to bed at 3 a.m.
Two hours later he was up again to milk the cows.
Desert Orchid is out of the picture as Norton's Coin (left) and Toby Tobias fly the last fence.
More of a candidate for last place than first.
Norton's Coin gets up to pass Toby Tobias (right) as Desert Orchid (left) plugs on to be third.
The finishers return to unsaddle.
Tom Morgan on Yahoo (yellow colours) leans across Richard Dunwoody on Desert Orchid to congratulate winning jockey Graham McCourt.
Mr and Mrs Sirrell Griffiths with unexpected extra luggage for the journey home.
MICHAEL DICKINSON
Cheltenham Gold Cup, Cheltenham, 17 March 1983
The Cheltenham Gold Cup was won in 1983 by Bregawn from Captain John and Wayward Lad, with Silver Buck fourth and Ashley House fifth.
All five were trained by Michael Dickinson.
Dickinson was no stranger to success in the Gold Cup — he had trained the first two home, Silver Buck and Bregawn, in 1982 — but his feat in the 1983 contest is unique in big-race records, and to find anything remotely comparable you have to go back to 1822, when James Croft's four runners in the St Leger filled the first four places.
Dickinson had already set a new training record earlier in the 1982–3 season when sending out the winners of twelve races on Boxing Day 1982.
The son of Tony and Monica Dickinson, who respectively preceded and succeeded him in charge at Poplar House, Harewood (not far from Leeds in Yorkshire), Michael Dickinson had ridden 378 winners in eleven seasons as a jockey before taking out a trainer's licence for the 1980–1 season.
He trained eighty-four winners that season (including Silver Buck in the King George VI Chase at Kempton Park), and the following season was champion trainer for the first time (with the same number of winners and a strike rate of winners to runners of an astounding 44.9 per cent).
But his performance in the 1982–3 campaign was phenomenal, for not only was he producing winners in quantity and at a very high strike rate, he was also winning big races: before the Gold Cup, Bregawn had won the Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup at Newbury, Silver Buck the Edward Hanmer Memorial Chase at Haydock Park, Captain John the SGB Handicap Chase at Ascot, Wayward Lad the King George VI Chase and Ashley House the Peter Marsh Handicap Chase at Haydock.
With that painstaking attention to detail which is always held to characterize genius, Dickinson had spent the Sunday morning before the Gold Cup briefing his stable jockeys, Robert Earnshaw (Silver Buck), Graham Bradley (Bregawn) and the assistant trainer Dermot Browne (Ashley House), and on the morning of the race walked round the course with these three, Jonjo O'Neill (Wayward Lad) and David Goulding (Captain John) to discuss riding strategy.
Of the quintet Bradley looked to have the best chance: second in the Gold Cup in 1982 and a gutsy winner of the Hennessy, the nine-year-old Bregawn was clearly a chaser of great ability, though he had begun to show signs of temperament, being reluctant to line up for the start on occasion.
Silver Buck, now eleven, had won four of his five races during the 1982–3 season but had been beaten in the King George by Wayward Lad, who had not run since and whose participation at Cheltenham had been in doubt until a searching gallop had proved his readiness.
Only Ashley House had given Dickinson no training problems, but, good chaser as he was, he seemed to be a little out of his depth here.
Six other horses were in the line-up, of which the most fancied were Combs Ditch, who had beaten Bregawn in their warm-up race at Wincanton, Fifty Dollars More, winner of the Mackeson Gold Cup on the course the previous November, and Brown Chamberlin, a promising eight-year-old from Fred Winter's stable who had won the Sun Alliance Chase in 1982.
Bregawn started 100–30 favourite, with Combs Ditch second favourite at 9–2.
Of the other Dickinson runners, Silver Buck was 5-1, Wayward Lad 6–1, Captain John 11–1 and Ashley House 12–1.
Bregawn gave no trouble at the start and in the early stages of the race stayed close behind the leader, 500–1 outsider Whiggie Geo.
Climbing the hill for the first time  Whiggie Geo dropped back and Bradley decided to try to make the rest of the running.
At the end of the first circuit Brown Chamberlin, who had been jumping sketchily, was pulled up, and as the field came past the stands and swung away into the country again Bregawn kept up his gallop.
Towards the top of the hill he made two bad jumping errors but these made little difference to his progress, and with Fifty Dollars More falling at the final open ditch only Combs Ditch looked to have any chance of getting in the way of a Dickinson clean sweep.
‘Come on, my lot!’
The trainer, watching the race on a television screen in the weighing room, had gazed in silence until the field reached the top of the hill and turned towards the stands for the last time.
Now he shouted his encouragement, and come on his lot did.
Bregawn swept over the third fence from home and made his way into the straight, Pursued by Captain John (who had lost ground when blundering at the third last), Wayward Lad and Silver Buck.
By the second last only Captain John looked dangerous, and at the final fence Bregawn had it sewn up, scampering up the hill to win by five lengths.
Wayward Lad was one and a half lengths further away in third, Silver Buck a tired and remote fourth, and then Ashley House stayed on up the hill to pass Combs Ditch amid cheering never before heard for a horse running fifth!
In recognition of this surely unrepeatable feat the Stewards allowed Ashley House to join his four stable companions in the unsaddling enclosure, and he it was who first received the attentions of his trainer.
In post-race interviews Dickinson emphasized the difficulties of getting a horse fit and ready for the Gold Cup, let alone winning it, and he confided that the stress and tension of training the five had caused him to lose a stone in weight since Christmas.
But Bregawn was the winner, and the £45,260 he earned that afternoon made a major contribution to the £358,837 prize money which saw Michael Dickinson champion trainer again that season, with 120 winners in all — a record total — from 259 runners, a strike rate just short of one in two.
(His record stood only until the 1988–9 season, when Martin Pipe trained the winners of 208 races, but at a lower strike rate of 37 per cent.)
The next phase of Dickinson's career was not a happy one.
After winning a third trainer's title in the 1983–84 season he left Yorkshire and took over as private trainer to Robert Sangster at Manton.
He transformed the famous estate into one of the most modern training complexes in the world, but in November 1986 it was announced that Sangster and Dickinson were to part company, and the trainer took his skills to the USA.
Bregawn's temperament got the better of him the following season, and on his racecourse appearances he displayed increasing sourness.
He was fitted in blinkers for the 1984 Gold Cup but behaved mulishly, twice trying to pull himself up before finishing a distant sixth to Burrough Hill Lad.
Thereafter his behaviour deteriorated further.
Trained in Ireland at the Cullinane yard for his first run of the 1984–5 season, he was then moved to Paddy Mullins, winning a handicap hurdle at Limerick Junction on his second outing for his new stable before his mood let him down again in the 1985 Gold Cup: he tried to pull himself up after a circuit and was tailed off when refusing at the last fence.
But the memory of Bregawn should not be of a recalcitrant mule goaded into action as the rest of the field leaves him way behind, but of a good Cheltenham Gold Cup winner storming up the hill to head the procession of Dickinson horses which was the most remarkable training feat of modern times.
Bregawn (right) and Captain John jump the last fence, with Silver Buck (red cap) well beaten.
Come on, my lot!
Michael Dickinson with his Famous Five: left to right: Ashley House, Silver Buck, Wayward Lad, Captain John, Bregawn.
DAWN RUN
Cheltenham Gold Cup, Cheltenham, 13 March 1986
Statues of three famous horses preside over the Cheltenham parade ring.
From his vantage point high in the new stand Golden Miller, five times winner of the Gold Cup, pricks his ears.
At the top end of the paddock Arkle haughtily stares into the distance.
And at the point where the placed horses enter the paddock to unsaddle after the race stands a bronze of the mare Dawn Run, with jockey Jonjo O'Neill patting her neck.
It is entirely fitting that Dawn Run should share the statuary honours with the other two Cheltenham legends, for she was the first — and to date the only — horse to win both the Champion Hurdle and the Cheltenham Gold Cup.
And it is especially fitting that her statue should stand so close to the parade ring, the scene of such joyous pandemonium at Cheltenham after she had completed her unique double in March 1986.
Dawn Run, trained in Ireland by Paddy Mullins, was favourite for the 1986 Gold Cup.
A tall, well-built mare, she first encroached on the English racing scene in spring 1983: she came second to Sabin Du Loir in the Sun Alliance Hurdle at the Cheltenham Festival; three weeks later, ridden by her trainer's son Tony, she ran on successive days at Liverpool, winning on the Friday and the next day running Gaye Brief, fresh from his Champion Hurdle success, to a length.
The following Christmas she beat Gaye Brief by a neck in a thrilling race at Kempton Park and three months later (in the meantime winning the Wessel Cable Champion Hurdle  at Leopardstown) took advantage of his absence from the Champion Hurdle line-up to become the first mare to win the race since African Sister in 1939, though she had to fight hard before scrambling home by three quarters of a length from Cima.
Her jockey at Cheltenham was twice-champion Jonjo O'Neill, brought in earlier in the season to replace Tony Mullins.
Dawn Run then won the Sandeman Hurdle at Liverpool and the Prix la Barka at Auteuil as a prelude to her victory in the Grande Course de Haies d'Auteuil, the French equivalent of the Champion Hurdle.
By mid-1984 Dawn Run had won the Champion Hurdle in three countries.
Her first run over fences was on 1 November 1984, in the Nobber Chase at Navan.
She duly won, but was then sidelined by a leg injury and did not appear again until December 1985, when she won chases at Punchestown and Leopardstown.
By now the Cheltenham Gold Cup was her target, and in January 1986 Dawn Run was sent over to Cheltenham to run in the Holsten Distributors Chase as a preliminary to her big date less than two months later.
Tony Mullins was again in the saddle, but the reconnaissance mission was a disaster.
Never the most fluent of jumpers, she put in some unnecessarily extravagant leaps before settling down on the second circuit, but then met the final open ditch all wrong and deposited the hapless Mullins on the floor.
He remounted immediately and set off in pursuit of the other runners, but as a Gold Cup trial the race was a mess, and the announcement that Jonjo O'Neill was once more to replace Mullins for the big race came as no surprise.
So Dawn Run came to Cheltenham on Gold Cup day with only four races over fences behind her, and in many quarters it was felt that inexperience would prove her downfall against her much more seasoned rivals.
Ten lined up against her, including the first three in the previous year's race — Forgive ‘N Forget, Righthand Man and Earls Brig.
On Forgive 'N Forget's most recent outing he had run fourth behind Combs Ditch at Haydock Park, and that horse was also in the Gold Cup field, third favourite after a highly successful season which had brought him three good prizes and a neck defeat by Wayward Lad in the King George VI Chase at Kempton Park.
That was Wayward Lad's third victory in the King George, and now he was making his fourth attempt to win the Gold Cup.
Another runner to attract support was Run And Skip, who had won four races that season — including the Coral Welsh National at Chepstow — and come second in the Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup.
These were old hands, and Dawn Run was effectively still a novice.
She faced a stiff task but started at 15–8 to overcome her inexperience in — very significantly — the first Gold Cup to give mares a five-pound weight concession.
Forgive 'N Forget started at 7–2, with Combs Ditch 9–2, Run And Skip 15–2 and Wayward lad 8–1.
Dawn Run took the lead from the start and hopped nimbly over the first two fences.
But as the runners made round the left-hand bend in front of the stands and set off into the  country for the first time she was joined in the lead by Run And Skip, and the company clearly put her off, for she hit the third fence hard.
For the rest of the first circuit Run And Skip and Dawn Run, both regular frontrunners, vied for the lead on the fast ground, and their duel took them well clear of the rest of the field.
At the water jump on the second circuit — the fourteenth of the twenty-two fences — the mare dropped her hind legs in the water, and this mistake handed the initiative to Run And Skip.
But Dawn Run was back alongside by the next fence only to suffer another reverse when clouting the fifth from home.
Now the heat was being turned on, and this was where her inexperience would really tell.
At the top of the hill she was still in the forefront of matters with Run And Skip, but behind them Wayward Lad and Forgive 'N Forget were travelling smoothly and coming ever closer.
Righthand Man was not far in arrears but started to lose ground as the principal four swept down the hill.
At the third last Run And Skip touched down just in front of the mare, who was soon under pressure.
But Dawn Run was not a horse to give in meekly, and as the four came round into the straight she stuck resolutely to her guns.
At the second last she put in a tremendous leap and was back in the lead as Run And Skip started to fade, but Forgive 'N Forget on the stands side and Wayward Lad inside him were now going for home, and they passed Dawn Run on the approach to the last.
Here Forgive 'N Forget made a mistake and handed the initiative to Wayward Lad, but he was very tired and started to wander to the left towards the rails.
To Jonjo O'Neill, who a moment earlier had been plugging on towards a certain third place, this sign of weakness in Wayward Lad's finishing effort offered remote but renewed hope: ‘I suddenly saw he was tiring,’ he reported later, ‘and so did she.’
The jockey managed to spur Dawn Run to one last effort, switching her from the inside to rally up the centre of the course.
With great courage she fought her way past Forgive 'N Forget, but halfway up the run-in Wayward Lad was still two lengths up.
He was out on his feet, though, and when Dawn Run appeared on his right he had no answer.
A few yards before the winning post she found yet more courage and stamina and forced herself in front to win by a length.
This was real racing history being made — and, what's more, being made by an Irish mare ridden by the most popular Irish-born jockey around at the Cheltenham National Hunt Festival, Ireland's annual pilgrimage to English racing.
The crowd in the stands had been roused to fever pitch by the drama of the finish and the almost unbelievable manner in which Dawn Run had come through to win, and now complete mayhem broke out.
Hats were flung into the air, the cheering reached higher and higher levels, and Dawn Run and Jonjo O'Neill were engulfed as they came back past the stands and up the walkway to the unsaddling enclosure in the parade ring.
It was hardly a stately progress, but as she made her triumphant way back the seas of people around her grew and grew, so that she was accompanied back into the parade ring by a whooping mob, pushing and shoving to get to her, all carried along on a tide of exultation.
Nor did the tide ebb once the horse was unsaddled: Jonjo O'Neill, having weighed in, hoisted the rejected Tony Mullins on to his shoulders, and the diminutive Mrs Hill was lifted into the air by the ecstatic mob.
There has never been anything like it at Cheltenham.
All this jubilation had a sad epilogue.
On her next outing Dawn Run came down at the very first fence at Liverpool, giving Jonjo O'Neill a terrible fall.
Worse was to follow for the great mare, for after winning a match at Punchestown against Buck House (who the day before her Gold Cup victory had won the two-mile Queen Mother Champion Chase at Cheltenham) and running second in the Prix la Barka at Auteuil, she returned to the French course in June to attempt a repeat victory in the Grand Course de Haies.
This time tragedy struck: at the fifth last obstacle she fell and broke her neck, dying instantly.
Steeplechasing can exact a terrible price from its participants, but it can also provide moments of unparalleled sporting rapture.
No one who saw the 1986 Gold Cup and knew of Dawn Run's subsequent fate could look with unmixed emotions on her statue by the Cheltenham parade ring, where she left a permanent mark on racing history.
The Triumphant return.
Dawn Run is third behind Wayward Lad and Forgive ‘N Forget at the final fence.
I suddenly saw he was tiring, and so did she.
PRETTY POLLY
Gold Cup, Ascot, 21 June 1906
Many of the races described in this book produced famous victories.
The 1906 Ascot Gold Cup produced a famous defeat.
Pretty Polly was indisputably one of the outstanding racemares of all time.
Owned and bred in Ireland by Major Eustace Loder (she was foaled only two years after Sceptre (see pages 18–19)) and trained at Newmarket by Peter Purcell Gilpin, she made her racecourse debut in the British Dominion Two-Year-Old Plate at Sandown Park in June 1903 and turned in an electrifying performance to win by an official margin of ten lengths — though some put the correct distance at nearly a hundred yards!
That Pretty Polly was something out of the ordinary was confirmed as she sailed unbeaten through a nine-race campaign as a two-year-old and continued to carry all before her in 1904, notching up facile victories in the One Thousand Guineas (at 4–1 on), the Oaks (100–8 on), the Coronation Stakes (5–1 on), the Nassau Stakes (33–1 on), the St Leger (5–2 on) and — just two days after the final Classic — the Park Hill Stakes (25–1 on).
In October this seemingly unbeatable filly went to France for the Prix du Conseil Municipal, and here she met her first defeat, beaten two and a half lengths by the 66–1 outsider Presto.
There were plenty of excuses (she had endured a very bad journey to Paris, the going was appallingly heavy, and her regular jockey William Lane was injured and could not take the ride), and she resumed her winning ways later that month with an easy stroll in the Free Handicap at Newmarket.
As a four-year-old she won all her four races, including the Coronation Cup, the Champion Stakes and the Jockey Club Cup; in her other race she started at 55–1 on to defeat a solitary opponent.
She was kept in training as a five-year-old with her main target the Ascot Gold Cup, and arrived at the Royal meeting unbeaten in her two earlier races that season: never much of a betting proposition once her ability became apparent, Pretty Polly started at 1000–35 on in the March Stakes at Newmarket and at 11–2 on in the Coronation Cup at Epsom (despite the presence in the latter of the 1904 Derby winner St Amant).
She sauntered through both.
And so to Ascot, where she started at 11–4 on to beat just four opponents for the two-and-a-half-mile marathon.
She had only once before raced at a distance beyond two miles, in the Jockey Club Cup at Newmarket in November 1905, when she had won, hard held, by half a length from Bachelor's Button.
Now seven years old, Bachelor's Button was to take Pretty Polly on again, and started 7–1 joint second favourite with the 1905 Derby winner Cicero.
Bachelor's Button was not of Classic calibre but had won many good races, including the Champion Stakes in 1904 and the Hardwicke Stakes and Doncaster Cup in 1905.
He came to Ascot fresh from a victory under nine stone in the Manchester Cup, and would have the benefit of a pacemaker, St Denis — who had himself won the Princess of Wales's Stakes and run third to St Amant in the 1904 Derby.
The three-year-old Achilles completed the field.
Pretty Polly's jockey in the Gold Cup was Bernard Dillon: he had ridden her several times before.
But so had Danny Maher, who now had the ride on Bachelor's Button, and who was of the opinion that Pretty Polly did not have sufficient reserves to last home in the Gold Cup.
His ride against her when beaten half a length on Bachelor's Button in the previous season's Jockey Club Cup had convinced him that her stamina was flawed.
By now Pretty Polly was a national heroine, and to the vast throng which crowded into Ascot any suggestion of defeat was heresy.
But already there had been hints that this would not be her day.
When she had won the Coronation Cup a wart was beginning to grow on her belly, and this had been lanced not long before the Gold Cup.
There were even rumours that her condition would force her withdrawal, but such scares proved unfounded and she duly arrived in the paddock.
Fresh doubts were raised here: the mare was bathed in sweat and seemed uncharacteristically agitated and disinclined for the job in hand.
It was clear to the crush of admirers which pressed around her that she was not at her best.
St Denis, the 500–1 outsider (despite his Classic form) on account of his role as pacemaker for Bachelor's Button, went straight about his task and took a good lead as the runners came past the stands, packed with  morning-dressed spectators on a stiflingly hot afternoon.
Achilles was second, with Cicero reluctant to settle, third.
Bachelor's Button and Pretty Polly brought up the rear.
The pacemaker maintained a good gallop as the runners swept away from the stands down towards Swinley Bottom and still had the lead as they made the long right-hand turn with just under a mile to go.
From here to the final stages it was all uphill, and with six furlongs left St Denis had had enough, so Achilles took up the running until the runners came into the straight.
Cicero, whose stamina had been in doubt, could not keep his place and dropped away, but Bachelor's Button and Pretty Polly — the mare on the stands side, her rival on the far side — were closing rapidly on the leader.
Achilles tired and veered towards the stands, seeming to some spectators to carry Pretty Polly wide, but once past she appeared to be set for victory.
Maher on Bachelor's Button, however, was still convinced that his mount could outstay her and held on tenaciously.
A hundred yards out Dillon drew his whip and Pretty Polly was hit for the first time in her racing career, but it was no good.
Bachelor's Button was the stronger, and went on to win by a length.
The crowd was stunned, and Bachelor's Button returned to unsaddle in almost complete silence.
For once the cliche that racegoers wept openly was all too true, but these were tears of real sadness — though it was hardly fair to ‘blame’ her conqueror, who had won the race in dour style (and afterwards took the Jockey Club Cup from his sole opponent Achilles before ending his racing career unplaced in the Prix du Conseil Municipal).
The notion that Pretty Polly was simply beaten by a better horse at the distance on the day was well down the list of possible explanations for her defeat, and George Lambton aired the widely held view that jockeyship had proved the decisive factor: Bachelor's Button ‘was a sterling good horse, especially at Ascot, but he was not a Persimmon, and if a real good jockey had been on Pretty Polly I think she might just have scrambled home.’
Trainer Gilpin echoed that view when claiming after the race that Dillon had disobeyed his instructions —‘No doubt he was carried away by the excitement.’
Add the possible problem with the wart, her upset at being all but mobbed by the crowd on a very hot day, and her apparently being carried off a true course in the straight by Achilles, and you have a long menu of excuses or explanations.
In all probability it was a combination of several factors, not least the suspected flaw in her stamina which made her vulnerable once that fierce early pace had been set by St Denis.
Whatever the reason, the gloom which her defeat threw over the racing scene was genuine.
The Sporting Life the following day paid no lip-service to impartial journalism: ‘Alas, and again Alas!
Pretty Polly beaten!
Lamentations as sincere as they were loud were heard on every hand after the race was over.’
Sadly she had no chance to make amends, for she suffered a setback in training when being prepared for the Doncaster Cup and was retired.
Rarely has the Turf seen her like.
Alas, and again Alas!
Pretty Polly beaten!
Bachelor's Button throws the racing world into mourning by beating Pretty Polly.
Pretty Polly attracts admiration in the paddock.
GORDON RICHARDS AND PINZA
Derby Stakes, Epsom, 6 June 1953
Few races have ever produced such a division of loyalties as the Derby in 1953.
This was Coronation year, and the young Queen Elizabeth II, crowned in Westminster Abbey just four days before the running of the race, had a real chance of owning the winner in Aureole.
Among his opponents was Pinza, ridden by Gordon Richards, the most successful and (more to the point) most loved jockey in British Turf history, yet still trying to win the Derby after twenty-seven unavailing attempts: to add further spice to the occasion, the announcement had just been made that Richards had been awarded a knighthood, the first jockey to be so honoured.
Victory for either horse would be received rapturously, but at the same time with a tinge of disappointment.
Oblivious to the emotion riding on their backs, Aureole and Pinza came to Epsom  with excellent credentials.
Aureole, trained by Captain Cecil Boyd-Rochfort and ridden by Harry Carr, had scored a smooth victory in the Lingfield Derby Trial.
Pinza was owned by Sir Victor Sassoon (who had spent a huge amount of money over many years trying to win the Derby) and trained by Norman Bertie.
He had won the Dewhurst Stakes by six lengths as a two-year-old but had been a 33–1 chance for the Derby in the spring of 1953 until an impressive victory in the Newmarket Stakes brought his odds  down to 8–1.
Two niggling reservations lingered about Pinza as a Derby horse: his physique — a big horse, he might not be nimble enough down Tattenham Hill — and his temperament, for he was so highly strung that he was invariably ridden by a stable lad when led around the paddock, and the drawn-out preliminaries of the Derby might cause him to boil over.
The Queen's Aureole was if anything even more highly strung than Pinza.
In the event both were very much on their toes before the race but behaved well enough.
Pinza started 5–1 joint favourite with Premonition, who had won at Epsom and York earlier in the season.
Aureole, despite attracting all that monarchist money, was a 9–1 shot, with the Two Thousand Guineas winner Nearula at 10–1.
In all, twenty-seven runners went to post, but this Derby's appearance of being an extremely open race was not to last long.
The early running was made by the 100–1 outsider City Scandal, who after two furlongs conceded the lead to Shikampur, with Pinza in about sixth place and Aureole unable to take up a handy position.
At the top of the hill, about six furlongs out, Shikampur still led while Aureole had made significant improvement, but Gordon Richards had found a welcome opening on the rails on the run down to Tattenham Corner and slipped a perfectly balanced Pinza into second place on the turn for home.
Shikampur kept his advantage as Richards roused his mount to full steam, and a quarter of a mile out Pinza swept past and went into a decisive lead.
Meanwhile Aureole had got into top gear and came through into second place, but try as he might he could never pose a threat to Pinza, who galloped on relentlessly to win by four lengths, with Pink Horse running on to take third place a length and a half further adrift and the gallant Shikampur a tired fourth.
Ecstatic scenes greeted Gordon Richards as Pinza was led to the unsaddling enclosure, and although to some he seemed oddly unmoved, he wrote subsequently that ‘my mind was in a turmoil, and my brain perhaps a little numbed…the reception which the crowd gave me was something out of this world.’
Pinza ran only once more, Gordon Richards partnering him to an easy victory in the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes at Ascot; Aureole was again second.
The intention then was to run Pinza in the St Leger and the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe, but he broke down and was retired to stud.
He was a brilliant horse, and his absence from the top races was keenly felt, though Aureole was the beneficiary as a four-year-old, winning the Coronation Cup, the Hardwicke Stakes and the King George.
Premonition, who had never been seen with any chance in the Derby, won the 1953 St Leger.
Sadly, the 1954 season saw Richards forced to retire from the saddle by injury; so the 1953 Derby was his last ride in the race as well as his first victory in it.
Sir Victor Sassoon, who had waited so long to own a Derby winner, won three of the next seven runnings.
But the 1953 Derby belonged to Gordon Richards.
None of his 4,870 victories was more popular than that of Pinza in the 1953 Derby.
The newly crowned Queen and the newly knighted jockey meet on the way to the parade ring.
My mind was in a turmoil, and my brain perhaps a little numbed.
Pinza strides home from Aureole.
Sir Victor Sassoon leads in his — and Gordon Richard's — first Derby winner.
FRED WINTER AND MANDARIN
Grand Steeplechase de Paris, Auteuil, 17 June 1962
Mandarin was one of the best and toughest British-trained steeple-chasers since the War.
Fred Winter was one of the most skilful and durable jump jockeys of the same period.
What they performed together in Paris in June 1962 almost defied belief.
Mandarin was eleven but showed no signs of losing the powers which had brought him numerous victories, including two in the King George VI Chase.
After his second King George, in 1959, he had developed tendon trouble and was given nearly a year's rest by trainer Fulke Walwyn, but if anything he was improving with age, and he had gone through the 1961–2 season unbeaten.
After winning a small chase at Ludlow he took the Hennessy Gold Cup for the second time — highly appropriately, as he was owned by Madame Kilian Hennessy of the sponsoring brandy company — and then, after a warm-up victory at Kempton Park, had beaten Fortria by a length in the Cheltenham Gold Cup.
That hard-fought win might have been deemed enough for the season, but his French owner was keen to run her little battler (bred in France) in the top French jumping event — in which he had finished second three years earlier — and so three months after the Gold Cup, when he might have  thought himself to have earned a summer holiday, Mandarin was despatched to Paris.
The steeplechase course at Auteuil is a far cry from Newbury or Cheltenham, and the runners in the four-mile Grand Steeplechase have to negotiate a bewildering variety of obstacles: some of the fences are soft privet, to be jumped through rather than over; there are two natural brooks, including the Rivière de la Tribune — four metres of water preceded by a hedge one metre high and one metre wide; and then there is Le Bullfinch, a rail, ditch and fence on top of a stone wall.
To compound the difficulties, the track itself is a figure-of-eight, with a dizzying number of twists and turns.
Mandarin's jockey Fred Winter, four times champion, was no stranger to Auteuil yet still had to work hard at memorizing the peculiar configurations of the course.
This time his powers of concentration were not helped by the fact that on a hot and humid Sunday afternoon in the Bois de Boulogne he was feeling awful: he had been wasting in order to ride Beaver II at nine stone ten pounds later in the afternoon, and was severely debilitated by a stomach upset which had kept him up all night.
Winter then suffered an attack of cramp in the jockeys' changing room and had to be assisted in preparing for the ride on Mandarin.
He claimed to be feeling like ‘a bit of chewed-up string’ when he walked out for what was to be the finest ride of his life.
Mandarin, a somewhat clumsy horse and a hard puller, was wearing as usual his special bridle which incorporated a rubber-covered bit.
As he led the field towards the fourth of the twenty-one fences — a privet hedge nearly six feet high — the bit snapped in two and fell out of Mandarin's mouth, leaving Winter with over three miles to cover and no means of control, the reins dangling uselessly in his hands.
‘What could I do?’, he said afterwards: ‘I couldn't steer him, I couldn't stop, and I was much too frightened to jump off!’
Fortune owed Fred Winter a big favour and provided it, for the next part of this tortuous course was quite straight, with four fences to be jumped, and this at least gave the jockey time to work out how to respond to the calamity.
Also in his favour was the demeanour of his mount, for although Mandarin must have felt horribly unbalanced he made no attempt to take advantage of this unwonted freedom and run away.
Winter discovered that he could apply a limited amount of control by squeezing Mandarin with his knees, by swinging his body to one  side or the other, and by applying such pressure as he could with the reins on the horse's neck.
He also had the assistance of his rivals, for at the next bend the French jockey Jean Daumas, well aware of the difficulties Winter was in, pushed his mount Taillefer up on Mandarin's outside, and his presence helped keep the British-trained horse on course.
But hurtling towards Winter was the most difficult part of the track, where the course divides into three, and the approach to this junction was not railed.
Winter had to aim Mandarin for the middle course but his mount started wandering off to the left before pressure from the vice-like grip of the jockey's thighs pointed him in the right direction.
Thereafter the company of the other horses kept him on course, and a bad mistake at the water jump on the second circuit worked to Mandarin's advantage, as it put him back to fifth place and gave him horses to follow.
Then, just before the final turn and with four fences to take, it looked as if Mandarin might yet run out, and Winter had to put all his strength into forcing the horse to the left, the correct side of the course marker.
This manoeuvre succeeded, but at some cost.
Mandarin lost several lengths and — much worse — he had broken down in the tendons of one of his forelegs.
Now the runners were nearly into the straight, and Mandarin — lame and exhausted — called up extraordinary reserves of courage to retrieve the forfeited ground.
Round the final bend he was still several lengths down but was beginning to claw back the deficit, and at ‘Le Bullfinch’, two fences out, he was second.
At the last he was in front, but he was dead tired and Winter could do nothing to hold him together for the final desperate few yards to the line.
Mandarin, head down and drained of all energy, was all out, and it still seemed that his heroic effort might come to nothing, for the French horse Lumino was gaining with every stride and closing inexorably on the leader.
At the line no one really knew which had prevailed.
As the horses were led back to unsaddle, the broken bit dangling under Mandarin's bowed neck, the result was announced: Mandarin, by a head.
Forty minutes later Fred Winter was again being led in on the winner, for his wasting to ride Beaver II had paid off.
But Mandarin never ran again.
In his retirement in Lambourn he was the daily recipient of two bottles of Mackeson stout, delivered from the local pub courtesy of Colonel Bill Whitbread, whose company sponsors the Whitbread Gold Cup in which Mandarin was twice runner-up.
John Lawrence (now Lord Oaksey), reporting in the following day's Daily Telegraph , afforded this almost unbelievable race an appropriate encomium:
I never expect to be more moved by a man and a horse than I was by Winter and Mandarin this afternoon.
Separately they have always been superb.
Together to-day, taking disaster by the throat and turning it into victory, they have surely earned a place of honour that will be secure as long as men talk, or read or think of horses.
Bit dangling under his neck, Mandarin holds off Lumino.
I couldn't steer him, I couldn't stop, and I was much too frightened to jump off.
ABOVE In retirement at Lambourn, Mandarin reflects with Fred Winter on their afternoon in Paris.
RIGHT Mandarin comes back to a hero's welcome.
BOB CHAMPION AND ALDANITI
Grand National, Liverpool, 4 April 1981
Bob Champion was thirty-one when in the summer of 1979 he was told he had cancer.
One of Britain's top jump jockeys, he had ridden the winners of over 350 races in his career and was recognized as one of the toughest of a tough breed.
Now he faced the biggest obstacle he would ever have to clear, for the only chance of cure lay in a long and horrifically painful course of chemotherapy.
The alternative was death within as little as eight months.
After two courses of treatment, he was driven home to Wiltshire, where he would remain until the start of the third course.
Josh Gifford, for whom he had been first jockey before his illness and who had assured him that his position as stable jockey would be waiting for him as soon as he had recovered.
The horse of which Bob Champion especially wanted news was Aldaniti.
In 1979 Aldaniti was nine years old, a tall, tough, old-fashioned sort of steeplechaser who had been bought by Josh Gifford at the Ascot sales in May 1974.
Aldaniti was back at Ascot for his first race — over hurdles — in January 1975 and, ridden by Bob Champion, won easily.
He was then sold to shipbroker Nick Embiricos, one of Gifford's owners.
A bad tendon strain in Aldaniti's off-foreleg had to be fired, and he was on the sidelines for eighteen months.
Once back in training he was put over fences: after unseating Champion at Newbury he won at Ascot on 1 April 1977 and was soon being singled out by his connections as a future Grand National winner.
Whatever his eventual Liverpool prospects, he was becoming a fine chaser and ran third to Bachelors Hall and Fort Devon in the 1977 Hennessy Cognac Gold Cup at Newbury.
But he had chipped two bones in the pastern of his off-hind leg in the race and was sidelined again until fully recovered, remaining in his box from December 1977 until July 1978.
The following March Bob Champion rode him into third place behind Alverton in 1979 the Cheltenham Gold Cup (at 40–1) and the month after that Aldaniti ran second to Fighting Fit in the Scottish National at Ayr.
Despite his injury problems Aldaniti was clearly a candidate for the Grand National, and to the stricken Bob Champion the idea  of winning the Liverpool race on this horse became an inspiration as he awaited his third course of chemotherapy.
In the event it took six courses of treatment to eradicate the cancer, and by the time of the 1980 Grand National he was in no condition to take part.
But nor was Aldaniti, who had broken down again at Sandown Park in November 1979 and was to spend most of 1980 recuperating at his owner's Sussex home.
Meanwhile, Bob Champion had left hospital in January that year.
The illness and its treatment had left him bald and so weak that he could hardly stand, but throughout the spring and summer he gradually regained his fitness.
His comeback ride — in a flat race at Fairhill, Maryland — was a winning one, and his first competitive ride in Britain since his illness came on Roadhead in a steeplechase at Stratford on 30 August 1980: ‘Hail Champion the Wonder Horseman’, headlined the Sporting Life .
Just over three weeks later he won on Physicist at Fontwell Park.
Bob Champion was back.
So, eventually, was Aldaniti.
In February 1981, after fifteen months hors de combat , he made yet another reappearance, this time in the valuable Whitbread Trial Chase at Ascot.
Starting at 14–1 and not expected to be fully fit after his long lay-off, he won easily.
Liverpool beckoned, just so long as his legs remained sound.
They did, and on 4 April 1981 Aldaniti started 10–1 second favourite in a field of thirty-nine.
Favourite at 8–1 was Spartan Missile, bred, owned, trained and ridden by 54-year-old John Thorne: this brilliant hunter-chaser had twice won the Foxhunters' Chase on the course and was strongly supported to thwart the Champion dream.
The 1979 winner Rubstic was on offer at 11–1, followed by 14–1 Zongalero and 16–1 Royal Exile, Royal Stuart and Royal Mail.
Bob Champion had been advised by Fred Winter, who had twice ridden the winner of the Grand National, to take a pull halfway to the first fence in order to prevent his mount from rushing at it.
But the horse was not to be restrained:
As we came to the fence Aldaniti stood off far too far away, pinged it, but came down much too steep.
I slipped my reins to the end of the buckle but I thought we had gone.
What a waste for both of us.
He was on the ground down.
His nose and knees scraping the grass.
We'd had it.
They hadn't.
Aldaniti recovered his balance and sped on towards the second.
When he reached it he stood off even further and almost landed on top of it though he never felt like falling.
He scraped his belly on it.
That hurt him and taught him an even sharper lesson.
After the third he learned to treat the Liverpool fences with the respect they deserved: from then on his jumping was exemplary, and by the eleventh he had pulled his way into the lead.
He turned back towards the stands, jumped nimbly over the thirteenth and fourteenth and soared over the Chair with Sebastian V, Royal Stuart and Zongalero keeping him company and Spartan Missile starting to make ground from the rear.
At Becher's Brook on the second circuit he put in a stupendous leap, pitched on landing but was confidently gathered together by Champion to continue on his triumphant way, pursued by Rubstic and Royal Mail.
Spartan Missile had made a bad mistake at the eighteenth and Thorne was giving him plenty of time to recover.
At the third last Rubstic was  back-pedalling and it was still the two crocks — Bob Champion and Aldaniti — making the best of their way home from Royal Mail.
As Royal Mail hit the second last hard the fairy-tale result seemed inevitable.
Champion let Aldaniti take the last fence in his own time and then set off up the run-in which the jockey later described as ‘the loneliest place in the world’.
Meanwhile behind him John Thorne was desperately trying to provide some company, for Spartan Missile was running on at a tremendous rate.
Third at the last fence, he passed Royal Mail and with just over a furlong to go was finishing so strongly that it looked as if he must catch Aldaniti.
Champion picked up his whip and waved it at his mount to encourage him over those last few yards, and Aldaniti responded gamely.
He was dead tired but he kept up his gallop, and at the post had four lengths to spare over Spartan Missile, with Royal Mail two lengths further back in third.
The dream had come true.
Bob Champion had conquered cancer and Aintree and a horse three times crippled had galloped his rivals into submission.
In 1983 the jockey would found the Bob Champion Cancer Trust, and four years later Aldaniti himself (who fell at the first fence in the 1982 National) would play his part in the Trust's fund-raising activities by undertaking a 250-mile charity walk from London to Liverpool, arriving at the course to massive acclaim on the day of the Grand National: among the riders who partnered the 1981 hero on his trek was the Princess Royal.
But Bob Champion's immediate duties after his victory included the obligatory press conference, and his words there sum up why the 1981 Grand National has gone down in history not only as one of the most emotional races ever run, but as perhaps the most inspirational:
I rode this race for all the patients in hospital.
And all the people who look after them.
My only wish is that my winning shows them that there is always hope, and all battles can be won.
Aldaniti at Becher's Brook on the second circuit.
All battles can be won.
Aldaniti passes the post.
Owner Nick Embiricos (left) greets Aldaniti and Bob Champion in the unsaddling enclosure.
LESTER PIGGOTT AND COMMANCHE RUN
St Leger Stakes, Doncaster, 15 September 1984
No jockey in British racing history has ridden more Classic winners than Lester Piggott, who notched up twenty-nine triumphs during a riding career which spanned nearly four decades.
His first Classic victory came on Never Say Die in the 1954 Derby, his last on Shadeed, who beat Bairn by a head in the 1985 Two Thousand Guineas.
Commanche Run's neck victory over Baynoun in the 1984 St Leger gave Piggott his twenty-eighth Classic, breaking the record previously held by Frank Buckle with twenty-seven wins between 1792 and 1827.
The 1984 St Leger was classic Piggott in more ways than one, for the run-up to the race had been accompanied by a typical controversy over whether he had filched the big-race ride from a fellow jockey.
Commanche Run was trained at Newmarket by Luca Cumani, whose stable jockey was the American Darrel McHargue.
Piggott had replaced McHargue, then sitting out a suspension, on Commanche Run in the Gordon Stakes at Goodwood, which he won by a very wide margin; and though the stable jockey was back on board for the colt's victory in the March Stakes on the same course, his preparation race for the St Leger, Commanche Run's owner Ivan Allan, claiming ‘There's only one St Leger and only one Lester,’ insisted that his close friend Piggott replace McHargue for the Classic.
Despite a scare with grazed knees during the week before the St Leger, Commanche Run was favourite for the race, and with much justification.
He had been lightly campaigned as a two-year-old but had shown himself a three-year-old of the highest class by his two facile Goodwood victories, and he started a 7–4 chance at Doncaster.
Second favourite, ridden by Steve Cauthen, was the Aga Khan's Baynoun, winner that year of the Queen's Vase at Royal Ascot and the Geoffrey Freer Stakes at Newbury.
The field also included another Aga Khan runner in Shernazar, a half-brother to Shergar, as well as two trained by Guy Harwood — Alphahatim, winner of the Guardian Classic Trial and the Highland Spring Derby Trial, and Crazy, winner of the Ebor Handicap.
At Talaq had won the Grand Prix de Paris after finishing fourth in the Derby, and French challenger Mont Basile had won four races during the season.
This was the initial running of the world's oldest Classic under commercial sponsorship, and for the first time the winner's prize money topped £100,000.
But in truth the field was disappointing: only one runner (At Talaq) had won a Group One event and only four of the others had won any Pattern race.
But as an occasion it promised much, for Lester Piggott was idolized by the racing public and expectations were running high that Commanche Run would bring him the record.
It was wholly appropriate that to  reach this landmark the jockey would have to produce one of his greatest efforts.
Liberate, pacemaker for Alphabatim, took the field along at a strong gallop as far as the straight, a good half mile from home, where he fell back and allowed Commanche Run to take up the running.
In typical Piggott fashion the pace was steadily increased, until three furlongs out Commanche Run was going for all he was worth, closely pursued by Shernazar and Baynoun, with Alphabatim and Crazy close enough if good enough.
Commanche Run responded courageously to pressure from his jockey, and by the final furlong he and Baynoun, running equally gamely, had the race between them.
Both were hard ridden but neither flinched, and throughout the final hundred yards Commanche Run kept just ahead of his persistent challenger to prevail by a neck.
Alphabatim was third, one and a half lengths behind Baynoun, with Crazy fourth.
It had been a hard-fought victory, and Commanche Run did not race again that season.
The following year he developed into one of the best European middle-distance horses of the 1980s, winning the Brigadier Gerard Stakes, the Benson and Hedges Gold Cup and the Phoenix Champion Stakes before being comprehensively beaten by Pebbles in the Champion Stakes.
Baynoun ran only once as a four-year-old (finishing fourth in the John Porter Stakes) before being exported to the USA.
Of the subsequent careers of the other runners in the 1984 St Leger, perhaps the most interesting is that of At Talaq, who won the Melbourne Cup in Australia in 1986.
Whether Darrel McHargue would have won on Commanche Run is irrelevant, for this was vintage Lester Piggott — the jockey completely at one with his horse, pushing it just enough to achieve maximum effort but always keeping it balanced, willing and galloping straight for the line.
The trials and tribulations which beset Piggott after his riding career was over — imprisonment in October 1987 for tax fraud — do nothing to distract from his achievements in the saddle, and never have his skills been better demonstrated than when he won his twenty-eighth Classic.
Lester Piggott and Commanche Run leaving the paddock.
There's only one St Leger and there's only one Lester.
Commanche Run beats Baynoun.
LESTER PIGGOTT AND SIR IVOR
Washington DC International, Laurel Park, 11 November 1968
Sir Ivor was the first Epsom Derby winner to race in the USA since Papyrus in 1923.
He duly won the Washington International, but the race did little for harmony in transatlantic racing relations, for Lester Piggott's handling of the colt provoked a bemused American press into heaping criticism on his apparently indifferent head.
The controversy still goes on.
Was this one of Piggott's finest hours, riding his horse with such supreme confidence that he was able to win despite encountering traffic problems at a crucial stage of the race?
Or was he so inept that Sir Ivor was nearly beaten unnecessarily?
Owned by Raymond Guest and trained in Ireland by Vincent O'Brien, Sir Ivor came to Laurel Park as probably the best European challenger there had yet been for the Washington International.
He had won three of his four races as a two-year-old, including the Grand Criterium at Longchamp, and as a three-year-old had taken the Two Thousand Guineas Trial at Ascot before beating Petingo and Jimmy Reppin in the Two Thousand Guineas itself and then producing a telling burst of speed to win the Derby from Connaught.
Defeated in his next four races — the Irish Derby, the Eclipse, the Prix Henry Delamarre and the Arc — he returned to winning ways at the end of the season when cruising home in the Champion Stakes at Newmarket.
Despite those defeats his form was of the highest order, and he was favourite for the International, his odds of 19–10 at the off being slightly shorter than those of the American horse Czar Alexander.
Fort Marcy, who had won the race in 1967, was third favourite in a field whose eight runners bore witness to a truly international contest.
Apart from the two Americans and Sir Ivor from Ireland, from France came Carmarthen, third in the Arc, La Lagune, winner of the Oaks, and Petrone, facile winner of the Prix Henri Foy; from Argentina, Azincourt II; and from Japan, Takeshiba-O.
After days of heavy rain and snow the  going on the grass track at Laurel Park was soft, conditions very much against Sir Ivor.
Although he had won the Derby, plenty of people were still convinced that he did not truly stay a mile and a half and that Piggott's sensitive handling of him at Epsom, producing him at the very last moment, had masked this lack of stamina.
Soft ground would put stamina at a premium over the twelve furlongs, and doubts about Sir Ivor's getting the trip contributed to Piggott's tactics.
Takeshiba-O made the early pace followed by the two American horses Czar Alexander and Fort Marcy, while Piggott was content to keep Sir Ivor well covered up at the back of the field with La Lagune.
This order was maintained as the runners came past the stands and started to make their way along the back stretch, and with half a mile to go the field was tightly bunched.
Coming round the final turn Takeshiba-O dropped away rapidly and was soon in last place, with Petrone and Azincourt likewise back-pedalling.
Sir Ivor came smoothly round the retreating horses to take third place on the rails behind Czar Alexander, with Fort Marcy on the outside.
For a moment Fort Marcy grabbed the lead, then Czar Alexander took it back.
Carmarthen was a close fourth, and as he made his challenge he completed the box around Sir Ivor.
Now they were in the home stretch, and Sir Ivor seemed hopelessly hemmed in as the American horses pushed for the wire.
Then, as they came inside the final furlong, Piggott got the break he needed.
Carmarthen drifted to the centre of the course, Fort Marcy ducked in towards the rail, and a gap had appeared.
With one brief spurt of acceleration Sir Ivor was through it.
Under the whip, he spurted past Czar Alexander shortly before the line and went a length up before Piggott, the race won, dropped his hands.
At the wire Sir Ivor had won by three quarters of a length.
This had been Sir Ivor at his brilliant best, striking with one deadly burst of speed.
But the American press, used to seeing horses flat out from the start and going at it hammer and tongs, were not in tune to the subtleties of Piggott's unleashing that burst, and the criticism started.
Although Joe Nichols in the New York Times wrote that ‘Lester Piggott rode with the competence that has stamped him as one of the world's great riders, and brought his mount home in time’, the Washington Post thought that ‘there could be fault-finding with Piggott's tactics in tucking in on the rail and not asking his mount for more of the effort he had in reserve’.
Gerald Strine in the same newspaper was more forthright: for him Piggott ‘nearly got the best horse beaten’.
Also in the Post was a quote from an anonymous jockey who proclaimed: ‘That was the worst ride I've ever seen.
He was running up horses’ rears all the way round.
He shoulda won by fifteen lengths.’
And an anonymous journalist: ‘If he were an American jockey he'd be crucified.’
Piggott tried to explain.
‘If the turf had been hard,’ he said, ‘we'd have won by a hundred yards,’and then elaborated about Sir Ivor:
He started gawking at the people in the stands when he came into the stretch.
for a second I thought it might be a struggle.
But I got after him and he got his mind back on business.
We were never really boxed in.
But the course was too soft for him.
He just wasn't getting hold of it too good.
I just had to leave him alone.
Trainer Vincent O'Brien put it more succinctly: ‘Once he got the opening — ping!’
It is just as easy — and as pointless — to criticize the American press for misunderstanding the Piggott style as it is to criticize Piggott for flirting so dangerously with defeat.
What really matters is not how the horse won, but that he did win, and that in doing so he ended his racecourse career displaying that sparkling but short-lived turn of foot for which he will long be remembered.
For Lester Piggott himself the differences with the American press were simply answered:
I didn't think they were qualified to make any judgements.
I knew a bit more about.
Sir Ivor than they did.
I also knew the going was very soft.
I knew what I had to do.
Sir Ivor (left) nips through to lead Czar Alexander (right) and Fort Marcy (blinkers).
I knew a bit more about Sir Ivor than they did.
Owner Raymond Guest with Sir Ivor after the race.
Twenty-one years later at Claiborne Farm in Kentucky, Sir Ivor can still laugh about it all.
FOINAVON
Grand National, Liverpool, 8 April 1967
Popham Down was a 66–1 outsider for the 1967 Grand National — a decent price for a horse who three years previously had won the Scottish equivalent at Bogside — but his backers did not enjoy much of a run for their money.
Landing over the first fence he crashed into the prostrate form of the faller Meon Valley and was brought down.
He struggled to his feet and, free of his human burden, galloped after the surviving runners.
A few minutes and twenty-two fences later Popham Down would secure for himself a notorious footnote in racing history…
There were forty-four starters in the National that year.
The 15–2 favourite was Honey End, ridden by Josh Gifford.
Second favourite at 10–1 was Bassnet, with Freddie, a gallant second to Jay Trump in 1965 and second again to Anglo in 1966, third favourite at 100–9.
Anglo himself was 100–8 to repeat his victory, and on offer at the same price were Kilburn, The Fossa, and Different Class, owned by Gregory Peck.
Among the apparent no-hopers at 100–1 was the blinkered Foinavon, a tall, well-built nine-year-old gelding accompanied to Liverpool by his constant companion, Susie the goat.
Foinavon had come a remote fourth in the King George VI Chase at Kempton Park the previous December but few disputed that his starting price in the Grand National was a true reflection of his chance.
Foinavon had not won for two seasons and was considered a plodder and a sketchy jumper — hardly the type for the rigours of the National.
Charles Benson in the Daily Express on the morning of the race had baldly written: ‘Foinavon has no chance.
Not the boldest of jumpers, he can safely be ignored, even in a race noted for shocks.’
Foinavon had been trained by Tom Dreaper in Ireland for Arkle's owner Anne, Duchess of Westminster, but while in Dreaper's charge had been notable mainly for his extraordinarily laid-back demeanour: in a chase at Baldoyle he was in the lead when falling at the third fence, throwing Pat Taaffe well clear, but Foinavon did not bother to scramble to his feet, preferring to remain on the ground and pick quietly at the grass beside him.
Tom Dreaper could not convince him that racing was a business to be taken seriously, and Foinavon had been sold for 2,000 guineas.
He was now trained at Compton in Berkshire by John Kempton, running in the colours of Cyril Watkins.
Kempton usually rode the horse himself (and had done so) three weeks before the Liverpool race when Foinavon was last in the Cheltenham Gold Cup — at 500–1 — behind Woodland Venture), but his normal riding weight of ten stone ten pounds was way above Foinavon's Grand National mark of ten stone, and so John Buckingham was engaged for his first ride in the great  Liverpool race.
On National day John Kempton also had a runner at Worcester — Three Dons in a novice hurdle — and opted to take the ride there: having duly won, he settled down in the jockeys' changing room to watch the National on television, safe in the knowledge that his father Jack was at Liverpool to supervise Foinavon's forlorn attempt.
Also watching on television, at home, was owner Cyril Watkins.
They would not easily forget what they saw.
The race was run at a tremendous pace, and Foinavon was soon feeling the strain.
Having been in the front rank at the first fence he dropped back, and as the field came past the stands for the first time, with most of the runners still surviving, he had few behind him.
Approaching Becher's Brook on the second circuit Freddie and Different Class were moving into challenging positions behind the leaders, who were accompanied by two loose horses.
Foinavon was plodding along towards the rear, but not that far behind the favourite Honey End, whose jockey Josh Gifford had not been tempted by the furious early pace and who was still running well within himself.
The leaders — Castle Falis, Princeful, Kapeno, Rondetto and Rutherfords — swept over Becher's and made for the twenty-third fence, the smallest on the course and, though taken at a left-hand angle, a simple preliminary to the trappy right-angled bend to the left at the Canal Turn.
It was now that Popham Down wrote his footnote.
After parting from his jockey Macer Gifford at the very first fence he had continued with the rest of the field all the way round, clearing every obstacle and keeping with the herd.
He had leapt with ease over the fearsome Becher's Brook on the second circuit, but he was tiring and had no jockey to keep him going.
At the twenty-third he decided that enough was enough.
Galloping towards the fence on the inside, at the stride before take-off he veered to the right, slamming into Rutherfords, whose jockey Johnny Leech had no chance of staying aboard.
Immediately behind, the leading group on the inside crashed into Popham Down and Rutherfords.
Limeking went down as if shot, and his rider Pat Buckley desperately tried to get him to his feet as the horse, flanks heaving, lay in a mess of thorn and fir and mud.
Other horses slid to the ground.
Different Class went down in the melee, and behind him horse upon horse piled into the scrum.
Some forced their way through to the landing side of the fence, but without their jockeys.
It was chaos.
Horses which a moment before were just off the pace crashed into the leaders, tipping off their riders and running up and down the fence, preventing any of the horses following from getting over it.
Some skidded to a halt and deposited their jockeys on the landing side.
Most simply stopped.
Horses careered into the fence and sent gorse flying in all directions.
Unseated  jockeys were scurrying around and fighting madly to reunite themselves with their mounts, but even as they clambered on board there was nowhere to go.
The Grand National had been brought to a halt.
John Buckingham on Foinavon, well behind this chaos, was still keeping an eye on Josh Gifford on Honey End, though he was aware that his mount would be likely to prove more one-paced than the favourite.
But as Honey End was among those balked, Buckingham seized the initiative and pulled Foinavon to the outside.
He has described the moment which put him and his mount into Grand National legend as they approached the twenty-third fence:
I was just far enough behind not to get caught up in the thick of it.
I had to make an instant decision, so I steered Foinavon to the right — the outside — to get away from the main part of the melee.
There was a small gap in the fence that was unaffected by the pile-up and we approached it at a forty-five degree angle.
At that stage I had no idea whether anyone else had jumped the fence or not and I was purely concerned about carrying on if I could possibly could.
Foinavon had reduced to a canter and he jumped the fence off his hocks like a show jumper.
I kicked on away from the fence and realized then that we were in front.
Foinavon was the first horse over the twenty-third and found himself in a very long lead.
He set off for the Canal Turn in glorious isolation while behind him the rest of the field manically tried to salvage some hope from the disaster.
Josh Gifford wheeled Honey End round, took him back a few paces and put him at the fence a second time.
Terry Biddlecombe on Greek Scholar did likewise, Brian Hetcher remounted Red Alligator, Pat McCarron tried time and again to get Freddie through the sea of flailing legs and eventually did so.
Now it was simply a matter of whether the embarrassment of a Foinavon victory could be headed off, but he was thirty lengths in the lead turning away from the Canal Turn and showed no signs of giving up.
Gifford on Honey End rode like a man possessed, but as Foinavon sailed over Valentine's Brook and the next three fences and made towards the stands the pursuit seemed hopeless.
And so it proved, for the horse with no chance was not going to accommodate the pundits now: Foinavon jumped the last two and set off up the run-in still twenty lengths to the good.
Gifford never gave up and seemed to be making an appreciable dent on the gap, but at the winning post Foinavon was still fifteen lengths in front.
Red Alligator, who was to win the National under more orthodox circumstances the following year, was third and Greek Scholar fourth.
In all, eighteen of the forty-four starters completed the course.
Mindful that the shenanigans at the twenty-third would do little to enhance the image of the Grand National, then at a low ebb, the Stewards of the meeting were moved to issue a statement:
As a result of a leading loose horse running across the fence after Becher's on the second circuit (the 23rd), there was a pile-up and Foinavon was the only horse to jump the fence first time.
The remainder of the finishers were either remounted or put to the fence a second time.
Whether such a statement did much to repair the damage is questionable, but the jockeys and trainers did not mince their words.
An exasperated Josh Gifford claimed — with much justification — that ‘I should have won by a furlong.
‘For Ryan Price, trainer of the favourite, ‘Honey End was robbed’; for Peter Cazalet, ‘This was an awful race.’
The complete freak result?
Foinavon's effort deserves a better entry in the roll of Grand National honour than that of the luckiest winner in the history of the race.
For while his victory certainly overturned the basic tenets of any horse race — he won because he was so far behind at the crucial moment — still he gained that victory by adapting to the circumstances which had suddenly presented themselves, by his jockey's quick and skilful manoeuvring by his jockey, by jumping accurately and by keeping up his gallop to the end.
Foinavon should not have won the 1967 Grand National.
But he did.
Pat Buckley rushes to help his stricken mount, Limeking.
This was an awful race.
TOP Confusion reigns, but Foinavon (stripes, right) is on his way as Josh Gifford (white sleeves, hooped cap, right) wheels Honey End round for another go.
ABOVE With a furlong to run the favourite Honey End is still in hot pursuit of Foinavon, but the shock result cannot now be averted.