

FROM THE ORIGINS TO 1800
The Early Christian Community
HENRY CHADWICK
Jesus and the Apostles
THE earliest Christian communities were marked out by their allegiance to Jesus of Nazareth.
They believed that in his teaching and life, God had ‘visited his people’ and sent a prophet and more than a prophet, an example and teacher of the way of truth and righteousness surpassing John the Baptist; the ‘Messiah’or anointed leader of ancient expectation.
He performed cures of both body and mind but from compassion, not to impress doubters.
People who demanded miracles to prove his divine mission were refused: his power came from the presence of the Father and was discerned by those ‘with ears to hear’.
Also disappointed were some who hoped for an inauguration of a holy war against the Roman occupation of Judaea: he taught non-resistance, love to enemies.
Yet he certainly taught the relativity of earthly authority, and even that by his bringing in of God's kingdom the Mosaic law and Temple cult ceased to be final.
By the high-priestly families of Jerusalem he was felt to be a threat both to their authority and to their political collaboration with the Roman power.
The claim that with his coming God was inaugurating his rule on earth laid him open to a charge of blasphemy, which was without difficulty transformed into a plea to the prefect Pontius Pilate that Jesus was instigating sedition.
Betrayed by one of the inner circle of disciples, Judas, he was arrested and, at passover-time probably in the year 30 of our era, executed by crucifixion — a method of killing in which the preceding torture is prolonged as long as possible, death being certain.
Four centuries earlier Socrates at Athens observed that a really righteous person would be so unacceptable to human society that he would be subjected to every humiliation and crucified.
For the community of disciples the crucifixion was not the end.
The rising again of Jesus is described in the earliest Christian texts in two related but distinguishable streams of language.
The first speaks of the empty tomb or rising again after burial, of appearing to apostles, women disciples, and other witnesses.
The second stream speaks of the Lord now delivered from the limitations and particularity of human life to be present to his people at all times and places.
As an act of God, Easter is not accessible to the methods of historical investigation.
The historian knows that something important occurred to transform the disciples from a huddle of frightened men into bold missionaries risking their lives for their faith.
But resurrection is not resuscitation (even in those texts where the this-worldly nature of the event is most stressed), but a mysterious ‘going to God’.
The apostolic community experienced his presence in their worship, in the proclamation of divine forgiveness and renewal, visibly embodied in the ‘sacraments’(a much later Latin term for a religious symbol with instrumental effect).
This presence in and with the community was to them the sign of the kingdom of God on earth.
Faith that Jesus was God's anointed prophet and king (Messiah) was basic to self-definition for the first church.
The Christians did not initially think of themselves as separate from the Jewish people, though Jesus had had severe things to say about Pharisees.
(But then, so has the Talmud.)
God's call was to the Jew first.
The call to Gentiles was a disputed matter for a time.
To the earliest Christian communities Jesus was not the founder or originator of the community of God's people, but the climax of an already long story of a divine education of humanity through the special illumination given to the prophets of Israel.
To interpret his significance they turned to the Hebrew sacred books, the Mosaic law as well as the prophetic writings.
The Christians fully shared with Judaism the ethical passion characteristic of monotheism.
Monotheism is first a critique of nature religion, but then of tribalism — that is, of the notion that the function of religion is to ensure the coherence, survival, and prosperity of the tribe.
The Hebrew scriptures contained prescriptions that enforced a separateness and particularity of the Jewish people, in tension with the universalism of monotheistic belief: if there is but one God, he is Lord of all peoples, even if some of them feel after him more coherently than others.
Like some Greek-speaking liberal Jews, the early Christians read the prophets as foretelling a universal mission of the Jews to illuminate all peoples.
Yet the law imposed prescriptions apparently designed to mark off the Jews from other nations.
The Christians believed that by the death of Jesus, the suffering servant of Isaiah, God had formed a new covenant not only with the Jews but with all peoples of the earth.
The Hebrew scriptures imposed a law not to be binding on Gentiles, yet (for all its moral imperfections) not to be set in sharp antithesis to the new and more excellent way of love embodied in Jesus' life and teaching.
These last propositions were hotly contested in the apostolic community.
Many adherents of the young church were Pharisees, a meticulously devout party among the Jews anxious to preserve their national religion from liberal assimilation to the surrounding Gentile world.
To many of them it seemed abhorrent to suggest that the Mosaic law was other than final.
The controversy ran contemporaneous with a delicate question of authority.
Was the representative of the ascended Lord to be found in the members of his family, in particular in ‘James the Lord's brother’?
James emerged as generally acknowledged head of the community at Jerusalem.
Side by side with him were the ‘apostles’, those commissioned by Jesus to proclaim repentance in view of God's imminent kingdom.
The risen Lord had appeared not only to women, Peter, and the rest of the Twelve but also to James (1 Cor. 15: 5–7).
James embodied strict conservatism in regard to observance of both the moral and the ceremonial law.
Among the apostles Peter held a generally recognized position of leadership: the gospel tradition preserves explicit commissions given to him by Jesus (Matt. 16: 16–18; Luke 22: 31–2; John 21: 16–17), and his prominent role is conceded in the Pauline letters.
According to the Acts of the Apostles Peter took the lead in opening membership of the church to Gentiles.
He appears to have occupied a middle position, holding that while Gentile Christians need not be circumcised or keep traditional Jewish festivals, they should respect Jewish food laws.
St Paul
A more radical position, at least in principle, was held by the most prominent figure (though not the originator) of the Gentile mission — Saul or Paul of Tarsus, a Hellenized Jew with Roman citizenship.
A Pharisee by training and once a vehement conservative, he had at one stage harassed the infant church but was dramatically converted by confrontation with a vision of the risen Lord.
From then onwards, he knew himself commissioned to carry the way of Jesus beyond the particularity of Judaism to the Gentile world.
His rejection of the view that non-Jewish believers should keep the Mosaic law implied a break between church and synagogue; his theology had vast social consequences.
At the same time he profoundly believed that in the church Jew and Gentile were to be united in one fellowship.
Peter's apostolate to the Jews was paralleled by Paul's in the Gentile world, which was to have its own focus in the capital of the empire at Rome.
‘Freedom from law’, however, was heady language for Gentile converts without the strong moral training provided by an orthodox Jewish family.
At a very early stage the apostle Paul was confronted by opposed parties, the one contending that the freedom of the Spirit so emancipated them from social convention that they could act as they pleased, especially in sexual indulgence, the other with more plausibility holding that the life of the Spirit required renunciation of marriage.
The pagan world was familiar with the widespread beliefs that sexual contact between man and woman hindered the soul's rise to higher things, and even that one who has been favoured with the love of a god ought to forgo mortal love.
The apostle insisted that marriage is no sin, and celibacy, a gift not granted to all, is better for the missionary service of God's kingdom.
The Gentile world was full of gods, local regional deities for the most part, who needed to be placated with sacrifices to ensure good crops, fertile spouses, successful commercial ventures, or even military victory for the emperor's army.
Philosophers could argue against them, playwrights could mock them, but their following remained strong among the many who felt that one cannot be too careful not to offend the cosmic powers.
To the rituals myths were attached.
If the myths were incompatible, that hardly mattered, since no one with education really supposed them to be plain prose.
Few thought the stories about Zeus were historical.
St Paul understood the distinctive heart of Christianity to lie in the historic facts of the gospel; the Jesus of history was one with the Christ of his faith, who was also the eternal wisdom of God in creation.
St John likewise believed that God was uniquely present in Jesus.
But even as early as St John's Gospel (undated but often hypothetically dated late in the first century — it cannot be later) the ‘incarnation’ implies a manifestation within time and history of the eternal Word of God.
In the epistle to the Hebrews (by an unknown Christian of learning and sophistication) there is equal emphasis both upon the spontaneity and fullness of Jesus' humanity and upon the faith that in him the eternal Son of the Father has come to unite believers to himself; he is the pioneer of our salvation, our representative bringing to the Father and to the heavenly company those who put their trust in him.
Gnosticism
This stress on the events of the gospel history as making a difference, as a revelation of new light from God, was not an easy concept for the Gentile world to assimilate.
Sophisticated pagans were accustomed to reinterpreting the myths of the gods allegorically, either as an imaginative picture-language describing the natural order of the world or as a projection of human psychological states.
To treat the Christian story in this way was to produce the phenomenon of Gnosticism in which a claim to disclose secret revelation is combined with a mixing of myths and rites drawn from a variety of religious traditions.
Gnosticism was (and still is) a theosophy with many ingredients.
Occultism and oriental mysticism became fused with astrology, magic, cabbalistic elements from Jewish tradition, a pessimistic reading of Plato's doctrine that man's true home does not lie in this bodily realm, above all the catalyst of the Christian understanding of redemption in Christ.
A dualism of spirit and matter, mind and body, was joined with a powerful determinism or predestinarianism: the Gnostics (or ‘people in the know’) are the elect, their souls fragments of the divine, needing liberation from matter and the power of the planets.
The huge majority of humanity are earthy clods for whom no hope may be entertained.
Most of the Gnostic sects claimed to be Christian; that is, to represent the secret tradition which Jesus had taught the apostles in private .
They collected sayings of Jesus shaped to fit their own interpretation (as in the Coptic Gospel of Thomas ), and offered their adherents an alternative or rival form of Christianity.
Gnostic teachers claimed that their dualism explained the origin of evil far better than the orthodox church's view that the created world comes from a perfectly good and all-powerful God.
Some of them urged that the imperfections of the creation cohere with those of the Hebrew scriptures, of which they held a low opinion.
The Creator was incompetent or malevolent.
Only one second-century sect — the Mandeans of Iraq — remains alive today.
But the version of Gnostic mythology and practice propagated by the third-century heretic, Mani (from Mesopotamia), enjoyed a millennium of diffusion from Cadiz to China: one text from a Christian writer of late fourth-century Spain, Priscillian of Avila, first becomes intelligible in the light of a Manichee catechism of ad 800 extant in Chinese.
In one form or another Gnosticism has permanently remained an underground concomitant of the church.
The church soon constructed fences against it.
In antiquity the Gnostic separation of spirit from matter had consequences for two prominent features of mainstream Christianity.
The Gnostics could not believe that in Christ the eternal God could have polluted himself by taking flesh and enduring crucifixion; in the first epistle of John this denial is directly combated.
Secondly (and relatedly) the Gnostics tended to deny significance to the sacraments of baptism in water and eucharist.
Some of the sects offered their adherents ‘baptism of fire’, an inward psychological elevation perhaps.
Mani attacked the church for using wine (an invention of the devil, he thought), and for believing in any special significance for the sanctified bread.
The early prevalence of such opinions probably illuminates the intensity with which St John's Gospel (chapters 3, 6, and 15) stresses the necessity of being reborn ‘of water and the Spirit’ and of participating in the bread of heaven and the true vine.
St Paul was emphatic that by receiving the broken bread and poured out wine, the believer is participating in the self-offering of the Son to the Father in his broken body and shed blood.
Only the baptized were admitted to the thanksgiving (eucharistia ).
To share in it was so distinctive a mark of membership that, in time of persecution in the second and third centuries, pieces of the consecrated bread were taken round to baptized believers languishing in prison or on a sickbed.
A characteristic of many Gnostic sects was to treat the sacraments either as magic or as mere symbols for a subjective psychological state within the individual believer.
Bishops, priests, and deacons were held in scorn by them; but they allowed positions of leadership and liturgical presidency to women, as orthodox communities did not.
The closer the Gnostics stood to orthodoxy, the more likely they were to wish to infiltrate the catholic community; this was especially the case among the Manichees, but they could be detected by their refusal to drink of the eucharistic cup (since they regarded wine as an invention of the devil) and to make the sign of the cross (since to them the suffering of Jesus was no actual event but a symbol for the universal condition of the human race).
Other features of Gnosticism especially objectionable to orthodox teachers were the radical dualism of spirit and matter, the determinism which assured a small elect minority of salvation with everyone else being predestined to annihilation, perhaps worse, and the tendency to merge myths and cults, incorporating a few Christian elements with adaptations of Mithraism, astrology, magical spells, and anything else lying to hand.
Moral virtue was of little interest to Gnostics, whose confidence in their own salvation made all that seem a matter of indifference.
Although the Gnostics claimed to offer a higher knowledge than the simple faith of the church, their teachings were highly mythological and encountered an opposition, no less vehement than that of the church, from the late pagan Platonists, such as Plotinus (mid-third century) and his successors.
Plotinus wrote his most impassioned tract to attack Gnosticism as pretentious mumbo-jumbo.
He particularly disliked their deep pessimism about the visible material world.
Marcion
The Gnostic critique and rejection of the Creator God of the Old Testament was taken to extremes by Marcion in the first half of the second century.
He and his followers listed moral contradictions between the Old and New Testaments, and abominated allegory as a sophisticated device for evading difficulty.
But the apostolic writings themselves had been corrupted, he thought, by unknown persons determined to keep Christianity Jewish, preserving the new wine of Jesus in old bottles.
Marcion felt that even the apostles themselves had seriously misunderstood the intentions of their Master by failing to see how utterly new his message was.
He therefore set out to produce a corrected text first of the letters of Paul his hero, then of the gospel of Paul's companion Luke (the other gospels being scrapped), which he thought the work of Paul himself in its original form.
New Testament Canon
Marcion's principle of exclusion gave sharp impetus to the early church's need to define which books did or did not rank as authoritative documents to which appeal could be made.
Unlike Marcion, many Gnostic sects welcomed numerous gospels other than the four which were finally included in the canon, and enjoyed producing ‘secret’ or apocryphal gospels, acts, epistles, and apocalypses (the choice of these and not other literary genres being a silent testimony to the existence and currency of the canonical texts).
Many of these ‘apocryphal’ texts portrayed Jesus as a strenuous advocate of sexual renunciation.
Some developed the reticent traditions of Jesus' infancy to provide stories about Mary's parents, and her (miraculous) birth and perpetual virginity.
To the Gnostics it was a commendation to label a text ‘secret’ or ‘apocryphal’.
The orthodox gave the latter term a pejorative sense; the apocryphal texts were correctly seen as an attempt to replace the books accepted by the mainstream communities and included in their church lectionary as authentic representatives of the apostolic tradition of faith.
In later Christian debate the history of the formation of the biblical canon has at times become a sensitive issue: were the books admitted to the church's canon because they were self-authenticating, and a passive act of the community was to acknowledge their inherent authority?
Or did the church actively create the canon in response to Marcion and other sectarian leaders whose ‘inspired’ writings were either more or less than the church accepted?
Both questions have to receive affirmative answers, and they are not mutually exclusive.
The books were acknowledged because of their content as witnesses to the apostolic gospel; their formal acceptance as canonical scripture was a matter of discussion and decision by gradual consensus among the communities of the late second century and afterwards.
But the term ‘canon’ was being used for the standard of authentic teaching given by the baptismal confession of faith well before it came to be used for the list of accepted books.
The criterion for admission was not so much that traditions vindicated an apostolic authorship as that the content of the books was in line with the apostolic proclamation received by the second-century churches.
Montanism
Gnosticism and Marcion's onslaught on everything Jewish in the Christian tradition were not the only factors in precipitating the formation of the canon.
The early churches had charismatic prophets who, in some cases, spoke with ‘tongues’, that is, unintelligible sounds of ecstatic excitement.
At Corinth St Paul found the phenomenon deeply divisive and productive of censoriousness; he taught the Corinthian church that the authenticity of a gift of the Spirit should be tested by whether or not it contributed to love and edification of the community as a whole.
The gifts of the Spirit being many and diverse, it is a mistake to make the recognition of one gift the supreme criterion, as some of the Corinthian charismatics wanted to do.
In the mid-second century in Phrygia a vehement anti-Gnostic reaction helped to inflame a powerful movement of charismatic prophecy, led by Montanus and two women, Prisca and Maximilla.
Their inspired utterances, which were cast in the first person as direct statements by the Paraclete, were collected.
A touch of regional pride appeared in the expectation that the New Jerusalem, of which the Apocalypse of John had spoken, would descend to earth on a hill in their own Phrygia.
The Montanist prophets required everyone to acknowledge their utterances as the true work of the Holy Spirit.
Despite the conversion of some entire communities in Asia Minor to the sect, and despite the advocacy in the West given by their most eminent convert Tertullian, the great church did not concede recognition.
Instead, there came to be a vehement emphasis on the ending of the age of miracle and revelation now that the last of the twelve apostles was dead.
To Irenaeus, the normal ministry of word and sacrament is in principle the point where the Spirit of God is encountered, not at emotional ecstasies which reject rationality and tradition.
Anti-Montanist reaction reinforced the belief that the apostolic canon is closed; but it did nothing to diminish millenarian hopes which long retained orthodox defenders, though there were also second-century interpreters of the Apocalypse who did not think intended to be literal and earthly the seer's vision of Christ returning to a rebuilt Jerusalem.
A Book Religion?
The outcome of this development was to give Christianity something of the character of a ‘book religion’, a concept hardly known to the pagan world but significant in Judaism.
This shift in emphasis created a theological problem.
The books of the Bible are marked by a rich diversity of genre, content, and manner.
By the first half of the third century some expositors (Cyprian, Origen) begin to speak of the books as a single book, because given by the one author, God.
That in turn led to the assumption that diversity was embarrassing, that different standpoints within the biblical books should be harmonized, lest the authority of the sacred writings be diminished.
The first beginnings of this process can be discerned as early as Irenaeus,c. 180.
The obscurity of parts of scripture was also a source of embarrassment if one took the books collectively to be the essential medium of divine revelation; but that could be mitigated by allegory, or by the principle that obscure texts are interpreted by what is clear.
Before the time of Irenaeus, the sacred books of the Christians were in the main the Hebrew Bible, ‘law, prophets, and writings’ or ‘Old Testament’.
The tradition of the words of the Lord was largely oral, and even after the canonical gospels were freely circulating, second-century citations of Jesus' teaching often suggest oral rather than written transmission.
About 130 ad Papias of Hierapolis in Asia Minor recorded traditions about the authorship of the gospels of Matthew and Mark, but also knew a story about Jesus found in the non-canonical ‘Gospel according to the Hebrews’ and was quite convinced that the mind of Jesus was captured less from written books than from the oral teaching of those seniors who had known apostles personally.
To form a New Testament canon was to give special importance to the written tradition, imparting a fixity which protected it against adulteration.
Nevertheless, the formation of the canon of writings did not mean that the living tradition of the teaching Church was downgraded.
The ‘writtenness’ of the apostolic tradition was of the accidents rather than the substance of the apostolic proclamation concerning Christ.
At the same time, to set a New Testament canon beside the Old carried implications for the concept of ‘inspiration’.
That the apostle Paul thought of his letters to his churches as constituting inspired revelation to instruct all subsequent generations is unlikely.
But to treat the apostolic writings as ‘prophecy’ given by Spirit-inspired men altered the perspective.
In pre-Christian antiquity two theories of inspiration were widely current.
According to the first view, inspiration is an enhancement of natural, rational discernment, not a suspension or abolition.
This view allowed room for disagreement between prophets and for the recognition of limitations in the human factor.
According to the second view, inspiration was mantic possession: the divine afflatus took over the voice of prophet or prophetess, and employed the human agent as a musician plays a lyre which has no mind of its own.
Both these theories are found among Christians seeking to interpret biblical authority.
The mantic view implied that the words are divinely given; so any text can be interpreted in the light of other texts where the same word occurs.
This theory of a ‘verbal inspiration’ especially held good for the Greek translation of the Old Testament, commonly called that of the Seventy (Septuagint), made at Alexandria in the third century bc .
The legend recounted how seventy translators had worked in independent cells and had all come up with the identical version of the sacred text.
Among the church Fathers some thought the legend ridiculous, others (like Augustine) firmly adhered to it.
Nevertheless, both Origen and Augustine could also presuppose the first view of inspiration.
At times this took the sophisticated form of explaining contradictions between biblical texts at the literal, historical level as being deliberately placed there by the divine author to teach the point that a deeper meaning lies beyond the literal sense.
But Origen and Augustine could also explain differences between (for example) the evangelists by observing that different eyewitnesses normally give different accounts of the same event.
Augustine added that the same story is seldom repeated in precisely the same words by a single person.
In the second century a variant of this theme appeared in the assumption made by writers in the orthodox tradition that on the essentials all Christians rightly believing are agreed: the cacophony of dissension is a characteristic either of heretics or of pagan philosophers.
The modern historian sees greater variety than the thesis's defenders wished to concede.
Nevertheless it is instructive that the Christians of the ‘great church’(as a pagan writer, Celsus, called it c. 177–80) thought in this way about unity in diversity.
There was a pressure towards standardization.
Bishops
The formation of the New Testament canon from late in the second century was only one feature of this process.
A much earlier development than the biblical canon was the evolution of the threefold ministry of bishop, presbyter, and deacon.
The apostles of Jesus were not merely witnesses to the Lord's resurrection (clearly an unrepeatable function in the historical sense), but also a source of decision-making or pastoral jurisdiction in the early communities.
The tradition recorded that Jesus had entrusted his church with the power of the keys, that is, a commission to decide disputes and to give rulings about erring individuals.
As the early church came to see that history was not coming to an immediate end, they also saw some permanent ministerial structure was needed.
The mother church at Jerusalem in the apostolic age had a single head in the person of James, the Lord's brother.
In the Gentile churches spiritual leadership might be in the hands of ‘presbyters’(Acts 20: 17) under the overall authority of an apostle such as St Paul.
But it soon seemed natural for one man to be held first among equals; or the first prominent convert in a city, like Stephanas at Corinth (1 Cor. 16: 15–16), might form a community round his household.
At Philippi there were bishops and deacons, officers also mentioned in the Pastoral Epistles to Timothy and Titus.
Evidently the general itinerant care exercised by Paul and his helpers is supplemented by permanent resident officeholders.
Several other first-century texts speak of the two ‘orders’ of bishop and deacon; the title bishop is also applied to people called presbyters.
In the Pastoral Epistles the noun presbyters often appears in the plural, bishop in the singular, suggesting that one man was beginning to have a special position in both worship and charitable administration.
For many centuries it was common form for a bishop to address a presbyter as ‘fellow-presbyter’.
The main function of early presbyters was not to preach or celebrate but to give counsel to bishops.
The emergence of the ‘monarchical’ bishop seems to have been more rapid in some regions and cities than others.
The bishop and his clergy formed a visible manifestation of the continuity of the community in consequence of the fact that their due succession was treated with care.
A bishop went to represent his people at the ordination of bishops in neighbouring churches.
He also conducted correspondence with other churches.
He was the normal minister of baptism, the president of the eucharistic assembly, ‘blamelessly offering the gifts’ as the first epistle of Clement put it (before the end of the first century).
The gifts offered no doubt included the alms of the faithful as well as bread and wine.
The Christians soon acquired a reputation even among the pagans for being generous with their money; they thought it better to give than to enquire too closely into the merits of the recipients, and were therefore occasionally easy game for confidence tricksters.
A vivid portrait of a successful charlatan exploiting the second-century Christians is given by Lucian in his Peregrinus .
Of the manner of making clergy, very early texts speak of prayer and laying on of hands, by which was conferred a charismatic gift appropriate to the office (2 Tim.
1: 6).
In antiquity no insignia such as cup or Bible were handed to the person ordained, and the clergy did not initially wear special vestments; they were simply instructed to see that what they wore was ‘wholly clean’.
By the third century it became common for at least some clergy in at least some places to wear either white or black — black being the more penitential.
One group in fourth-century Asia Minor was distinctive in that all, both clergy and laity, wore an extremely uncomfortable black sackcloth.
But the garments modern Christians think of as Western ecclesiastical vestments developed from the ‘Sunday best’ of late Roman aristocrats, which the clergy (always the guardians of the old tradition) continued to wear after their barbarian congregations had put on trousers or Lederhosen.
A particularly striking feature of the early Christian communities is that they were urban, and only slowly penetrated rural societies.
(We hear of farmers alarmed to learn from 1 Cor. 9: 9 that ‘oxen are of no concern to God’.)
The plebs elected their bishop but because their community was part of the universal or catholic church, they needed the consent and the consecrating hands of neighbouring bishops.
Episcopal elections were not always peaceful, especially if tension arose between influential families or groups.
Popular suffrage meant that rival factions would shout for their own candidate.
At Rome in the mid-third century the presbyter Fabian found himself elected bishop because a dove settled on his head.
The Lord had promised his presence to two or three agreeing in his name: consecrations by only two bishops occasionally occurred, but three were usually thought the minimum, all the bishops of the province being desirable.
To restrain partisan appointments, the great Council of Nicaea called by Constantine in 325 invested the bishop of the metropolis of the civil province with a veto.
Simultaneously the council affirmed that just as the bishops of the great cities of Rome and Syrian Antioch exercised jurisdiction beyond the confines of their own diocese and province, so also the bishop of Alexandria should hold jurisdiction throughout Egypt and Libya.
This canon marks the first and crucial step to the creation of ‘patriarchates’, a dignity soon to be shared by Constantinople (founded 330) and Jerusalem, giving the Greek East four patriarchates to the West's one.
Rome
Combating second-century Gnosticism, Irenaeus appealed to the ‘public’ doctrine taught in the churches of apostolic foundation by the successive bishops, and especially cited the succession-list of Rome, ‘the very large, ancient, and universally known church founded by the two glorious apostles Peter and Paul’— for (Irenaeus adds) all believers everywhere in every church are necessarily in agreement with Rome as an apostolic foundation with a cosmopolitan membership and extensive dealings with other churches.
The Christian community in Rome was Greek-speaking until the mid-third century, and had frequent contacts with churches of the Greek East.
Towards the latter part of the first century, Rome's presiding cleric named Clement wrote on behalf of his church to remonstrate with the Corinthian Christians who had ejected clergy without either financial or charismatic endowment in favour of a fresh lot; Clement apologized not for intervening but for not having acted sooner.
Moreover, during the second century the Roman community's leadership was evident in its generous alms to poorer churches.
About 165 they erected monuments to their martyred apostles, to Peter in a necropolis on the Vatican Hill, to Paul on the road to Ostia, at the traditional sites of their burial.
Roman bishops were already conscious of being custodians of the authentic tradition or true interpretation of the apostolic writings.
In the conflict with Gnosticism Rome played a decisive role, and likewise in the deep division in Asia Minor created by the claims of the Montanist prophets to be the organs of the Holy Spirit's direct utterances.
The earliest known example of the Roman bishop exercising jurisdiction is painful.
In Asia Minor Easter was celebrated on the date of the Jewish Passover festival, that being the date of the crucifixion in St John's Gospel (a work closely associated with the tradition of Ephesus).
But the gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke make the Last Supper the Passover meal, and place the crucifixion a day later, which affected the calculation of the date for the Easter festival elsewhere.
In Rome Easter was celebrated on the Sunday following the full moon after the spring equinox, and was a memorial of the resurrection.
In the 150s Polycarp of Smyrna visited Rome; no agreement was reached.
In the 190s it seemed intolerable to the then bishop of Rome, Victor, that the churches in Asia Minor celebrated Easter on a different date, and to the distress of many he threatened excommunication on those who did not adopt the Roman date.
Since the churches of Asia Minor in all probability had the more ancient observance, they refused submission, and the difference continued.
In the mid-third century Bishop Stephen of Rome asserted that all should observe the tradition of Peter and Paul: viz. those baptized outside the church by schismatic clergy should be readmitted as penitents by imposition of hands, but not treated as if the majesty of Christ's name had never been pronounced.
The sacrament was Christ's, not the minister's.
Bishop Cyprian of Carthage vehemently dissented, and had the support of the Greek East.
Cyprian thought it absurd to suppose that where there is no true eucharist (in schism), there can be valid baptism.
The debate was to mark a lasting difference between East and West.
It was also the first occasion on which the bishop of Rome is known to have invoked the text of Matthew 16: 18 to justify his primatial jurisdiction.
The Roman church was exercising leadership long before anyone appealed to this text.
Most ancient exegetes take the ‘rock’ on which Jesus will build his church to be St Peter's faith.
The Latin papa , or Greek pappas , ‘Daddy’, was used by early Christians of a bishop to whom they stood in a filial relation.
North African Christians called the bishop of Carthage papa , but his colleague at Rome was ‘bishop of Rome’.
From the sixth century the title papa became especially Roman in the West.
Until the fourth century his authority lay in being ‘successor of Peter and Paul’.
The influence of Matthew 16: 16 led to the dropping of Paul.
Not until Innocent III (d. 1216) is the title ‘successor of Peter’ replaced by ‘vicar of Christ’.
Montanism, the Easter controversy, and the debate about baptism were all complex issues which required consultation between bishops.
In Acts 15 scripture recorded the apostles meeting in synod to reach a common policy about the Gentile mission.
The ‘synod’ or, in Latin, ‘council’(the modern distinction making a synod something less than a council was unknown in antiquity) became an indispensable way of keeping a common mind, and helped to keep maverick individuals from centrifugal tendencies.
During the third century synodical government became so developed that synods used to meet not merely at times of crisis but on a regular basis every year, normally between Easter and Pentecost.
Synods were not like the parliaments of liberal democracies.
On fundamental questions of doctrine or canon law their decisions were expected to be unanimous.
Cyprian of Carthage repeatedly upheld the principle that ‘a bishop is responsible to God alone’.
But he did not mean that a bishop was utterly free to act and think as he thought fit.
He had obligations to the universal episcopate which had to act in harmony for the unity of the church.
In Cyprian's conception of the church, it also followed that the bishop is the vehicle of sacramental order, and to be authentically Christian is always to be in communion with the catholic bishop.
To go into schism is to break that love between believers which is constitutive in the church.
‘He cannot have God for his Father who has not the Church for his mother.’
To be outside the one visible communion is to be outside the Ark drowning in the flood.
‘Outside the Church there is no salvation.’
The Social Role of the Clergy
‘We Christians’, said Tertullian, ‘have everything in common except our wives.’
The church of the apostolic age sought to identify itself with the ‘poor’ whom Jesus had declared blessed (Luke 6: 20); or had he meant the ‘poor in spirit’(Matt. 5: 3), the humble-hearted, who could hold their property without pride as means to support the destitute?
The churches in the great cities like Rome acquired resources to maintain the clergy, initially paid on a dividend basis from the monthly total of offerings, and the very poor or oppressed.
The absence of endowments before the time of the Emperor Constantine inevitably meant that well-to-do Christians had much influence on their local communities, which could be decisive when a new bishop was being chosen.
But care for the poor remained a prime task of bishops.
The Roman empire was no welfare state, and before Christian times in the West (unlike the East) care for the poor was rare.
Poverty is a relative term.
The Latin pauper means a person of modest means rather than someone without food, roof, or clothing; Ovid defined him as ‘a man who knows how many sheep he owns’.
The Christians sought to protect the destitute, or those who had fallen in status and resources like widows and orphans.
They provided hospices for the sick or for raising the innumerable foundlings.
In the mid-third century the Roman church was feeding 155 church officials of various grades, and more than 1,500 widows and distressed persons.
At Antioch in Syria late in the fourth century, the number of destitute persons being fed by the church had reached 3,000.
It became common for a register or matricula of names to be kept.
Church funds also came to be used in special cases to buy the emancipation of Christian slaves, but the church did not have a general programme for the abolition of slavery.
Christian preachers could declare how wrong it was for an individual to be dominated by another so as to be his legal property, and to be bought for much less than the rich would give for a racehorse.
But slaves in good households were far better fed, clothed, and housed than the free wage-labourers who formed the majority of the labour force.
And the freedom of the emancipated slave was relative rather than absolute.
The principle long continued to be agreed that Christian aid to the destitute should not discriminate in favour of church members, but had no criterion other than need.
When the plague struck Carthage in 252, Bishop Cyprian sent his people out to nurse the sick and bury the dead.
More than a century later the emperor Julian ‘the Apostate’ was complaining that the Christians look after ‘not only their own beggars but ours as well’.
The clergy did not only minister word and sacraments; they also performed social roles for their flock.
Pagans were accustomed to using temples as safe-deposits for their treasures.
So the Christians came to use their clergy as bankers.
Although the Old Testament disapprobation of usury continued within the church (above all when people of slender means took out loans on the security of their house or smallholding and ended by being evicted — a situation liable to cause urban riots), even the clergy were willing to make loans for Christian merchants.
The Council of Nicaea (325) forbade them to charge more than 12 per cent a year.
The ordinary commercial rate, at least for maritime loans, would have been far higher.
Certain occupations were held to be unfitting for baptized believers; magic, idolatry, eroticism, games in the amphitheatre ranked as unsuitable occupations.
There was controversy in the second-century churches whether a Christian could be a magistrate or bear public authority, activities which might require apparently compromising with idolatry or condemning criminals to execution.
Capital punishment was unacceptable to the ancient church.
Sex and Marriage
The church found it hard to enforce chastity within marriage when a pagan man took it for granted that he had the right to sleep with his slavegirls.
But we must not suppose that the rigid Christian sex ethic was shaped by reaction against pagan debauchery.
The characteristic Christian theme was most at variance with pagan assumptions in that bishops asked husbands to be as faithful to their wives as they expected their wives to be to them.
That was news.
In the second century the medical writer Galen was impressed by Christian continence and especially the fact that many were celibate.
Justin in 150 presented his fellow-believers as heroes of restraint, rejecting remarriage after divorce, even discouraging second marriages for the widowed.
Tertullian wished well-to-do Christians to take widows into their houses as ‘spiritual spouses’.
The Christians were strongly opposed to child exposure, actively rescuing foundlings, and deplored abortions which they did not think defensible except with arguments that equally justified infanticide.
A striking difference between pagan and Christian attitudes to sex and marriage appears in a curious duality.
On the one hand, many pagan religious and philosophical moralists frowned on sexual activity as carnal and obstructive to the higher aspirations of the soul; yet the reproductive impulse ensures the survival of human society and its exercise must be good when directed to procreation rather than pleasure.
On the other hand, the Christians (who could also echo the philosophers' sentiments) read the story of the Fall of Adam and Eve as implying a flaw in human sexuality, not necessarily as a cause of sin but as a prime expression of selfish egotism.
Attached to many early Christian communities were groups of ascetics, both men and women, some of whom demonstrated the supernatural character of their chastity by the sexes cohabiting, yet without sexual contact.
Despite episcopal censures, the practice continued for a surprisingly long time; measures were taken to stop Irish clergy so cohabiting as late as the sixth century.
John Chrysostom was declaiming against the practice at Antioch in Syria in the 380s.
Writing to the Corinthians who thought sex in marriage incompatible with the spiritual life, the apostle had insisted that marriage and procreation are no sin, while conceding to his opponents that, though good, marriage is not as good as celibacy.
St Peter was certainly married and on apostolic journeys took his wife with him.
Philip the evangelist begat four daughters.
But in the mid-second century the apocryphal ‘Acts of John’ presented St John as a lifelong virgin.
Jerome was confident that even married apostles lived in mutual continence, after the example of their unmarried Lord and his ever virgin mother.
For bishops, then for presbyters, finally for deacons, Western churches came to expect and ultimately to require celibacy (though the canonical compulsion was not seriously enforced until medieval times and even thereafter in parts of Europe, like Southern Germany or Wales, it was common for village priests to have a consort and a family, with the support of their flock and the connivance of their bishop who derived income from the annual fee or tax to allow the arrangement).
The Church and the ‘World’
The Christian community inherited from its Jewish matrix a strong sense of being ‘called out’(the root meaning of ecclesia ) from the surrounding society which they felt to be possessed by different values.
The ‘world’ was, in terms of nature and by creation, a great good, a gift of the omnipotent and good Creator.
Yet the ‘world’ is also a term in Christian usage for something alienated from God and hostile to him, corrupted and, apart from the sustaining hand of grace, hellbent for chaos and destruction.
In this aspect the world's values find expression in the driving lust for power, wealth, and sexual indulgence.
The inexplicable weight of cumulative malevolence in the human race made it natural to personify the power of evil as Satan, ‘the adversary’, in Greek diabolos or ‘slanderer’, a cosmic ‘god of this world’(2 Cor. 4: 4).
From the devil's power, from planetary fate, Christ is redeemer, and his values as expressed in, for example the ‘Beatitudes’(Matt. 5) are a reversal of those current in society.
The Jewish–Christian tradition identified the gods of polytheism with subordinates of the devil, malevolent spirits entrapping their worshippers, impelling them to worship the created order (hence the images in temples where polytheists believed their gods to be resident) rather than the Creator.
Both St Paul and his elder contemporary, the Jew Philo of Alexandria, saw in sexual perversion and disorder a symptom of idolatry.
Endeavours to enforce assimilation to Graeco-Roman culture upon the Jews had provoked fierce resistance.
‘Hellenism’ meant not only speaking Greek as the main language of communication in the eastern half of the Mediterranean, but also games, gymnasia, theatres, and the diffusion of polytheistic cult.
The Maccabees fought rather than acquiesce in the placing of a statue of Zeus in the Temple.
Caligula proposed to put his own statue there, and the resulting furore is echoed in the New Testament (e.g. 2 Thess. 2: 4).
The imperial cult was to Jews and Christians sacrilege.
Insensitive Roman government provoked the Jewish revolts of ad 66, 116, and 132–5, the last ending in their expulsion from Jerusalem and its transformation by Hadrian into a wholly Gentile city, Aelia (Hadrian's family name) Capitolina (because a shrine of Jupiter of the Capitol was built).
The Temple Mount was left in ruins.
The Roman empire was not experienced by the Jews as a regime of toleration, and pagan society was in some degree anti-Semitic.
Educated Greeks and Romans thought strange the Jewish religion without images and with no sacrifices except at Jerusalem, with bizarre food laws excluding pork, with circumcision, and a distinctive calendar.
The acceptance of the Gentile Christians without a requirement that they keep the Mosaic law seemed to the rabbis an excessive liberalism, and relations between church and synagogue after their separation had become final (probably about ad 85) were not comfortable.
The infant churches experienced from the synagogues persecution which, when full grown, they were to be in a position to return.
Martyrs
But persecution mainly came upon the church from the Roman government.
The precedent was set by Nero at Rome in ad 64.
St Paul had been sent to Rome a prisoner, and suffered eventual execution.
The precedents guided provincial governors.
The crime was paradoxical, namely, the mere profession of Christianity, the name itself, rather than any crimes that might be attributed to the name by association.
A Christian defendant could gain release by offering incense on a pagan altar.
The external act sufficed.
So the prime offence was a refusal to acknowledge respect to the gods, including the emperor, by whose favour the empire was preserved.
An oath by the emperor's genius (tutelary spirit) seemed simple enough.
To refuse it was to suffer imprisonment, torture, being flung to wild beasts in the amphitheatre, or, in the case of a Roman citizen, being beheaded.
The Christians called such heroes of integrity ‘witnesses’, martyrs.
(Why this word was specially chosen has been the subject of scholarly controversy; the probable answer is that the Christian who died for Christ was believed to be uniquely united with his crucified Master, thereby linking the concept of witness with sacrificial dying; but in martyrdom the cause is primary, the dying secondary.)
The Christian neglect of the gods, indeed the propensity of the more militant to hiss in disapproval as they walked by a temple, offended polytheists, who feared that heaven would not be propitious: floods, plagues, famines, earthquakes were sent by angry spirit-powers who had not been placated with the customary offerings.
Barbarian invasion or civil war could also bring vast unpopularity on the Christians, cast as scapegoats.
In the second and early third centuries persecution was often haphazard, caused by mob violence or by delation to the local governor who might be quite reluctant to react to the information handed in by complainants.
Threats to the survival of the empire and resentment at the Christian attitude to the celebrations of Rome's millennium in 248 precipitated persecution on the initiative of the Emperor Decius in 250; he began his brief reign with a fierce and lethal attack, especially on bishops.
The government was well aware that the very survival of the church had been in no small degree due to the coherence and discipline imparted by the episcopate.
Moreover, by 250 the church was freely penetrating the upper levels of Roman society; at Carthage Cyprian was well-to-do, with his own villa and private resources which he devoted to his church.
His fellow bishops addressed him as ‘lord’(a compliment he did not reciprocate).
The severest of persecutions under Diocletian, from 303 for a decade, was caused by fear of Christian penetration into the army, including even officers of the high command, and into the higher echelons of the Civil Service.
Some enthusiastic Christians courted martyrdom by smashing religious images or, under cross-examination, appearing contumacious, dissident, and disrespectful to the governor.
What was a Roman proconsul to do with a Christian who explained that he paid his taxes not in the least because the emperor's laws and edicts required that, but because it was the command of the Lord?
Or with another who, when asked for his ‘home’(patris ), answered that it was the heavenly Jerusalem?
The radical other-worldliness of such people seemed incomprehensible to the authorities.
The church discovered in persecution, provided that it was inefficient (as most of it was), that even if some pagan observers thought the martyrs merely theatrical suicides (so the Emperor Marcus Aurelius), many others were led to ask questions.
The church became the subject of incredulous and not necessarily friendly discussion, but it was a kind of publicity from which the church came to gain recruits.
‘The blood of the martyrs is seed’(Tertullian).
On the other hand, the unpopularity of the Christians was also caused by unpleasant stories that at their nocturnal meetings they indulged in cannibalism and incest (charges easily explicable from misunderstandings of language about the eucharist).
Some of honest and good heart would not even speak to a Christian as late as the mid-third century, by which date the Christian story and way of life had become well known, because they suspected them of enormities.
In Asia Minor about 110 the younger Pliny, the governor of Bithynia, asked Trajan whether the profession of Christianity was in itself culpable or ‘the vices associated with the name’, especially since after investigation by torture he had discovered that there were no frightful vices: the accused said their custom was to meet before dawn on a particular day to sing a hymn to Christ as a god and to take an oath (sacramentum ) to abstain from wrongdoing.
Two ‘women servants’(ministrae ) were found to confess to nothing vicious and to hold only ‘squalid superstition’.
Group sex in the dark simply did not occur.
Pliny was astonished.
But the obstinacy seemed intolerable.
The effects of persecution on the Christians themselves were various.
In North Africa a Christian militancy developed, and the supreme ambition was to be granted a martyr's crown.
In Numidia (southern Algeria) zealous believers greeted one another with the wish ‘May you gain your crown’.
The anniversaries, called ‘birthdays’, of the martyrs were carefully remembered, and so came to create the earliest church calendars (so that the historian can know on what day of what month a martyr died, but not necessarily in what year, that being of no liturgical significance).
By about 200 ad there were Christians in Rome celebrating the memory of St Peter and St Paul on 29 June.
(During the third century they were celebrating Easter and Pentecost, which were inherited and then modified from Judaism and so dependent on a lunar year.
By 300 the West added the birth of Jesus integrated into a solar calendar by being placed at the winter solstice.
A rival distraction was needed to the pagan festival at this time when presents were exchanged and much liquor consumed.
Christian preachers attempted, without much success, to persuade their congregations to fast while inebriated pagans feasted and to give alms to the very poor who could give no present in return.)
There were internal arguments about the honouring of martyrs and about the proper way of ensuring that the honours did not become confused with old heathen practices, such as offering food and wine at the tombs of ancestors.
In Carthage an inveterate schism (Donatism) originated when a devout and wealthy lady who treasured the relic of a martyr was rebuked for lavishing kisses on it at the commemoration of the faithful departed at the eucharist; ‘she went off in a huff
‘, we are told, and when the archdeacon who rebuked her became the next bishop of Carthage she had her majordomo appointed as a rival, with the support of the main body of Numidian bishops.
The issue was not merely personal, however.
The question was whether, when a pagan government forbade Christian meetings for worship and required the surrender of Bibles and vessels and vestments, any kind of compromise was morally possible.
Rigorists rejected compromise: they would surrender nothing and understood it to be of the essence of their Christian allegiance that every Lord's day they would unfailingly celebrate the eucharist.
Compromisers, such as the archdeacon, disapproved of confrontations, and wanted to lie low until the storm was past.
The police were not uncooperative, and were willing to accept heretical or medical volumes in lieu of Bibles.
During the persecutions those who had most to lose in terms of this world's goods were the rich Christians, whose property was liable to confiscation unless they ‘apostatized’.
Naturally this had immediate consequences for the destitute fed by the church chest that rich believers funded.
But the number of those who compromised their faith was largest among the propertied and those well up in the social hierarchy.
When persecution died down, many wished for restoration, and there were sharp disagreements about the terms, conditions, and proper authority under which restoration could and should be granted.
At Rome in the 250s a split occurred between the rigorists led by Novatian who believed that for apostates there could be no restoration in this life, and those who saw no restriction in the Lord's committal of the power of the keys to bind and loose.
At Rome there had been some disagreement and even contention for more than a century on the possibility of restoration for believers who committed adultery, murder, or apostasy (participation in idolatrous rites).
A subtle tract, the Shepherd of Hermas, early in the second century sought to undermine the rigorist position as inhuman, yet without surrendering the church's obligation to maintain moral standards among its members.
Sanctity could easily merge into separation and censoriousness.
In the debate about restoration scripture could be quoted both for rigour and for mercy.
Since it was desirable that penitents should not be treated with rigour by one bishop and with mercy by a neighbouring bishop, a common policy was needed.
Canon law originated in the agreements of third-century church councils concerning the terms of restoration of the lapsed.
Mercy should be shown to the contrite, but the community needed to be reassured that the contrition was genuine.
Cheap grace was to be avoided.
Moreover, there were degrees of culpability.
How should one estimate the faults of those who offered incense without any torture, those who gave way only after cruel torture by rack and fire, and those who had not actually offered incense at all but had bribed a friendly official to sell them a certificate to say they had done so?
In 303 a Christian named Copres from the Nile valley, engaged in a lawsuit over property, went to Alexandria to present his case and was disconcerted to discover that he would be required to participate in some act of idolatry, such as a sacrifice or an oath by the emperor's genius, as a condition of litigation.
He was able to give a pagan friend power of attorney to act on his behalf, and so found an elegant way of keeping his conscience clear and his standing with the church unaffected.
His letter home to his wife discloses the inconvenience, but not more, which the persecution caused him.
For others it became an issue of life or death.
The martyr's conflict was seen not as a fight against duly constituted authority in government, but against Satan.
It was a struggle in which the heroic confessor of the faith was understood to be uniquely assisted by the Spirit of God, and more than one account tells of the ‘victims’ being granted visions to strengthen them.
In fact the extant Acts of the Martyrs (where based on contemporary records and not legends) do not portray the martyrs as human heroes, but as very frail mortals who are being given supernatural strength.
In the visionary revelation granted to him in exile on Patmos St John saw the martyrs beneath the altar crying ‘How long O Lord?’
(Revelation 6: 9–10).
By the fourth century, relics of martyrs would be placed beneath the altar in the Christian basilica.
Surely they were interceding for the faithful on earth.
Their acceptance by God was symbolized by the fact that while the ancient churches prayed for God's continuing grace for the faithful departed, they did not pray for martyrs.
The martyrs prayed for them.
Defenders of the Faith: Justin Martyr
The Christians found themselves under attack not only from the Roman government but also from Greek philosophers and representatives of high literary culture, orators, historians (but not natural scientists).
From the middle years of the second century the converts included some philosophically trained minds, at least the equal of most pagan contemporaries.
Justin came from Nablus in Palestine to Ephesus where, according to his own account (which may not be plain prose), he studied with teachers of several different schools — Stoic, Aristotelian, Pythagorean, Platonist — expecting from the last named not only clarity for his mind but light for his soul.
One day, however, walking by the seashore he met an elderly Christian who told him about the Hebrew prophets, undermined his naïve confidence in the moral guidance of philosophers, and converted him to Christianity.
Justin moved on to Rome where he offered lectures in his own school on the Christian philosophy.
This brought him into conflict with a pagan critic, and the exchange of argument can be deduced from the defence (Apologia ) for Christianity which Justin composed and which he later supplemented with a further appendix.
We have also from his pen a long Dialogue with Trypho the Jew .
In a style modelled on the Platonic dialogues, Justin here interpreted Old Testament prophecies which he saw fulfilled in Jesus and in the present life of the church, already spreading throughout the known world.
Justin was convinced that in the highminded Stoic ethics of human brotherhood, and especially in the other-worldly Platonic metaphysics, there was much for a Christian to welcome.
With varying results the divine Sower had sown the seed of truth, admittedly not always in wholly fertile ground.
Plato was surely mistaken to think the soul inherently immortal by nature rather than in dependence on God's will, and to suppose it capable of reincarnation.
Yet Justin's list of what Plato said aright is long and serene.
He regretted that Plato had not broken with the gods of the old cults and myths even though he had evidently known them to be false.
For Plato perceived God to be immutable, incorporeal, nameless, transcendent beyond all time and space.
In debate with Trypho, Justin exploited this principle: because the almighty Father is transcendent, the God who appeared to Moses at the burning bush cannot have been the Father but his Word and Reason (Logos ) who is therefore ‘other than the Father in number though not in will’.
In the universal reason of the divine Word all rational beings share, and both Abraham and Socrates are ‘Christians before Christ’.
Christ's ethical teaching proclaimed the way to true happiness, for he was not only man but God, acknowledged in the manger by the magi, vindicated by his wonderful acts, by the fulfilment of prophecy in the gospel story, and by the astounding diffusion of the gospel in the world.
So the truths only partially apprehended in the aspirations of the greatest classical philosophers of Greece find their fulfilment, and correction, in the framework of the Christian faith.
Should any one ask how Plato's discernment of divine creation and even of the divine Triad could be so close to the now known truth, the answer is that he had read the books of Moses on his visit to Egypt.
To one pagan philosopher of Justin's age Plato was only ‘Moses in Attic idiom’.
Justin had such confidence in the rationality of the gospel that the phenomenon of unbelief had to be explained on the hypothesis of evil spirits spreading misinformation and prejudice in the interests of polytheism and superstition.
Indeed, in the mystery religions such as that of Mithra, the worshippers shared in a kind of sacramental meal by which evil spirits had parodied the Christian eucharist.
Justin held in abhorrence the Gnostic mixing of myths and cults to make an unpalatable bouillabaisse of religions.
He wrote not only to defend the faith against persecuting governors, sceptical philosophers, and combative rabbis, but also to uphold the authentic tradition against Simon Magus' followers (Acts 8: 9) or the adherents of Marcion and the Gnosticizing Platonist Valentine.
Their rejection of the Old Testament set aside the argument from fulfilled prophecy which had played a notable part in his conversion.
Justin saw Adam as prefiguring Christ, Eve as a ‘type’ of Mary, and called the correspondences of Old and New Testament figures the principle of ‘recapitulation’; that was to say that redemption is not from the created order but of it and within it.
Justin's themes here became important to Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons in the Rhône valley c. 180, where his Greek congregation had close links to the churches of Asia Minor.
Irenaeus asserted the unity of the two Testaments in his Refutation of the Knowledge falsely so called , a work principally directed against those heretics standing close to orthodox Christianity and therefore offering a dangerous threat to orthodox congregations.
Picking up from St Paul the idea that the Old Testament law was a kind of ‘tutor’, Irenaeus saw the relation of the Testaments as a progressive education of humanity.
This way of thinking allowed him to concede some shortcomings of moral insight in the Old Testament.
An unfolding of the divine purpose he also discerned in the revelation that in relation to the world God is active by his word and wisdom, like ‘two hands’ shaping the world and guiding the church.
Neither of the two principal works of Irenaeus to survive complete is extant in his original Greek.
The anti-Gnostic treatise as a whole is preserved in a Latin translation made in North Africa c. 395.
His Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching is preserved only in Armenian.
His understanding of the faith is strongly biblical.
His ideal theologian was a person submissive to authority through the tradition authenticated by the apostolic Bible, not someone with bright new ideas, certainly not someone claiming to offer fresh revelations.
The Father and the Son
Justin's language about the distinction of the Father as God transcendent from the Son as God immanent, which Irenaeus had made his own, precipitated sharp debate (the so-called monarchian controversy) at Rome c. 190–225.
In combating Gnostic dualism orthodox writers had insisted on the divine monarchy: there is only one ultimate principle.
But Justin's language about the otherness of the divine Word suggested a dyarchy.
What had St John meant when he said that the Word was ‘with God’?
The distinction of the Son from the Father was a theme vehemently taken up by the Roman presbyter Hippolytus.
Hippolytus fell out with Callistus, the archdeacon in charge of the cemeteries in the catacombs, and found Callistus' election to be bishop more than he could endure, so he became bishop in rivalry.
Callistus had publicly accused him of being a ditheist, and used language offering cover to those (soon associated with a presbyter named Sabellius) who held that Father, Son, and Spirit are names for one God under different aspects.
Callistus also offended Hippolytus' moral rigorism by asserting that the power of the keys entrusted by the Lord to his church did not exclude authority to restore to communion penitent adulterers.
Hippolytus composed a strange book entitled the Refutation arguing the dependence of a row of Gnostic sects upon a row of pagan philosophers, and finally turning his weapons on Callistus, who seemed to him the abomination of desolation sitting where he ought not.
The cantankerous tone of Hippolytus cannot be denied.
Nevertheless, he was certainly a learned man.
He wrote a substantial commentary on the book of Daniel, to discourage fervent apocalyptic expectations of an imminent end to the world which had lately led one bishop to lead his flock out into the desert to meet the returning Lord, requiring a rescue operation by government authority.
He compiled a chronicle of world history, fitting together the calculations of Greek chroniclers with the indications of date found in the Bible.
He composed an Easter table.
Admirers of his scholarship dedicated a statue in his honour, inscribed on the base with a catalogue of his writings.
One, entitled Apostolic Tradition , has been plausibly conjectured to be a church order (directions for liturgy and the proper ordering of the community) certainly of the early third century and probably from Rome.
Whether or not the work is by Hippolytus, the document is a major source for early liturgy and is the first text to witness to liturgical patterns which have remained in use.
Tertullian
The most important and eloquent theologian in the West at the end of the second century was Tertullian, a lay Christian of Carthage.
A brilliant polemical writer, he overwhelmed his opponents (heretics, Jews, pagans, and, after he became a Montanist, orthodox bishops) with a combination of rapier and bludgeon.
The earliest writer of Christian Latin (and a fascinating witness to the emergence of a specifically Christian Latin vocabulary), he coined the terminology which was to dominate Western theology — for example,trinitas , ‘three persons in one substance’, or of Christ ‘two substances or natures in one person’.
A particularly influential and characteristic tract is his Against Praxeas , a Christian who came from Asia Minor to Rome to express opposition both to the pluralistic theology of Justin and Hippolytus and to any recognition that Montanist prophecy might be an authentic work of the Paraclete.
In Tertullian's trenchant phrase, ‘he accomplished two bits of the devil's business: he put to flight the Paraclete and crucified the Father.’
For Tertullian stood with Justin in defending the distinctness of Son and Father.
Among other works Tertullian composed a riveting tract On the Soul , its nature and origin, and the problem of ‘its inherited flaw’.
In some of his tracts he is outspokenly hostile to philosophy as mother of heresy, strident in his insistence that for a true believer everything is decided by the authority of the apostolic rule of faith and scripture so that further enquiries are superfluous.
In other tracts he is strikingly positive to the ‘naturally Christian soul’ and its rational powers.
Aristotle once recommended to the would-be polemical orator that paradox could be effective.
Tertullian enjoyed paradox.
To him the divine character of Christianity was vindicated not by its reasonableness but by the very fact that it was the kind of thing no ordinary mind could have invented.
The crucifying of the Son of God sounds ridiculous and scandalous: ‘I believe because it is outrageous.’
To the east of Carthage in Libya sharp disputes between the monarchian followers of Sabellius and upholders of the Logos theology occurred half a century after Tertullian's time.
The Libyan quarrel was referred to Bishop Dionysius of Alexandria, a very well-educated man, who sided with those theologians who stressed the distinctness of Father and Son; they should not be said to be of one being but to be as distinct as the husbandman and the vine.
The Sabellian group complained to the bishop of Rome who reproached his Alexandrian colleague for careless language, and proclaimed that in God unity is prior to all plurality, which is found not in God as he is in and to himself, but in God in his providential relationship with the world.
In making his defence Dionysius of Alexandria found useful matter in the pages of Tertullian's Against Praxeas .
Tatian
Justin's pupil Tatian from Mesopotamia developed with a sarcastic pen the philosophers' dependence on Moses, which he argued with elaborate synchronisms from ancient chroniclers proving the priority of Moses.
Tatian was also influential for making a harmony of the four gospels which in the Syriac-speaking churches of the East long remained the standard lectionary text.
He wrote a book expounding 1 Corinthians 7 to imply that the apostle was not really defending marriage, since his arguments fatally conceded that it was not the most perfect state for the believer, and no true believer could aspire to less than the perfection to which God called.
A number of Gnostic themes also entered his theology so that his reputation suffered.
Nevertheless, his chronographic calculations were gratefully exploited by Clement of Alexandria,c. 190–200.
Clement
Clement of Alexandria's principal achievement was his trilogy:(1) an Exhortation to conversion (Protreptikos ), in the style of ancient homilies commending the study of philosophy to men of affairs inclined to think it a waste of time;(2) the Paidagogos or Tutor, providing a guide to ethics and etiquette, which is a major source for social history of the age;(3)Stromateis , or Miscellanies, a deliberately rambling work, constantly changing the subject, but from which the discerning reader can reconstruct a remarkable, carefully thought out system.
Clement's prose puts him in a higher class than any of his extant pagan contemporaries, and he was able obliquely to refute pagan critics (such as Celsus, writing 177–80) who thought Christians an anti-cultural lot, by decorating his pages with a rich variety of quotations and allusions taken from classical poetry and philosophy.
At first it looks like name-dropping until one finds the same sort of thing in Athenaeus or Aelian.
Clement's purpose was to make cultured persons under instruction for baptism, called ‘catechumens’(by contrast with ‘the faithful’ who are the baptized), feel that they would be at home in the church.
He wanted to show that one could be an educated and intelligent believer without abandoning the apostolic rule of faith and life.
The by-product of his work is to vindicate the proper place of the Christian intellectual within the community.
After all, bishops could not announce the correct date for Easter if they had no mathematicians to call upon.
Thanks to their extensive plagiarism from the Old Testament, Clement argued, Plato and the Greek philosophers had found out many true things and expressed them in beautiful language.
Clement combined his highly positive evaluation of culture with a severe puritanism towards any concessions to polytheistic myth and cult.
He was wholly against eroticism in art and literature, and thought that, in the event of any conflict, aesthetic value must yield to morality.
He wrote an exposition of Jesus' saying to the rich young ruler that to be perfect he must sell all.
He explained that the Lord required a strict use of wealth for the service of God, but did not condemn mere possession.
In this distinction between possession and use, Clement picked up language from St Paul in 1 Corinthians 7, recommending that married couples treat sexuality as a means to a higher end, not as an end in itself.
Clement wrote the third book of his Miscellanies to attack the Gnostic denial of the goodness of the created order, which lay at the root of their contradictory attitudes to sex, either as a repulsive carnality or as a source of phallic ecstasy.
So too wealth should be used as a means to good ends, but never be sought or enjoyed for its own sake.
A rich Christian would wisely put himself and his purse under the guidance of a prudent and austere spiritual director, pointing him along the path to perfection.
Almost all philosophically minded people of Clement's age, except for only a tiny handful of Epicureans, took it for granted that the order of the world reflects a designing providential hand.
Platonists and Stoics in different ways expended much effort, therefore, in accounting for the evils of experience.
Pagan Platonists, however, could not stomach the Christian notion of incarnation which they understood to imply change in God.
Clement circumvented the difficulty by interpreting the incarnation in one particular corner of the world as a specially significant moment in a universal care for all humanity at all times and in all places.
A general, diffused providence which has no particular manifestations whatever is an inherently problematic concept.
For Clement, God does not change his will by the incarnation; he wills a change in humanity.
The incarnation is therefore an extreme instance of divine immanence within the creation.
Origen
Clement was a convert from paganism.
His Alexandrian successor Origen (184–254) was the son of Christian parents.
The martyrdom of his father in 203 left him with a cold antipathy to the pagan establishment, whether in government or in high culture.
This lasting antipathy coexisted in his mind with a rare mastery of philosophical debate and classical literature.
There are intricate philosophical and logical disputes of the Hellenistic schools which we now understand only because Origen gave a clear account of the points at issue.
A steely ascetic renunciation marked his character, and Eusebius of Caesarea reports a tradition that in the zeal of youth he had subjected himself to castration to free him to instruct female pupils without scandal.
The story may be true since instances of such zeal are well attested for Christian antiquity.
When, however, Origen himself came to write a commentary on Matthew 19: 12 he strenuously opposed a literal exegesis.
His ascetic determination led him to sell his non-Christian books.
But a prodigious memory enabled him to retain to the end of his life a total recall, whether of a text of scripture or a line of the Iliad or a passage in Plato's Dialogues .
Learning by heart was standard procedure in ancient and medieval education.
After his father's death he was taken into the house of a rich Christian lady of liberal sympathies — for Origen too liberal since she had a Gnostic chaplain.
Soon he set up his own lecture school.
An anti-Christian riot (215) made him take refuge in Palestine; but the bishop of Alexandria, Demetrius, recalled him to be head of the catechetical school (217).
There he delegated elementary instruction to an assistant, while he took advanced students, following the example of Jesus (Mark 4: 34).
Out of his advanced lectures emerged a powerful refutation of the entire Gnostic world-view and principles of biblical interpretation, a work entitled On First Principles .
However, the book, which as a whole survives only in a revised and partially expurgated Latin translation by Rufinus made in 398, damaged his reputation for pure orthodoxy.
This was mainly because of his belief that, if God is pure goodness, so that divine punishments are always therapeutic, not merely retributive, and if freedom is alienable in all created rational beings, then ultimately even the most wicked will be purified by divine love and fit for salvation.
Then Christ will deliver up the kingdom to the Father, and God will be all in all.
This ‘all’ includes even Satan himself, for he felt that to concede that any rational creature is irredeemable would be to surrender to Gnostic dualism.
‘One could pity but not censure a being totally deprived of all capacity for recognizing goodness and doing what is right.’
The fuss these ideas created, and a storm when the bishop of Caesarea in Palestine ordained Origen presbyter without reference to the bishop of Alexandria, moved Origen to migrate to Caesarea (231).
His universalism seemed to offer unending real misery punctuated by periods of illusory bliss.
To interpret the Bible Origen exploited the Platonists' tripartite division of the cosmos into matter, soul, and mind.
Origen first launched the theme, developed in the eighteenth century by Joseph Butler and Isaac Newton, that revelation is to be understood on the analogy of nature.
There is no difficulty in the former which is not met in the latter.
Scripture accordingly has three levels of meaning corresponding to the three levels of reality:(a ) a literal historical sense,(b ) a moral meaning, and (c ) a spiritual interpretation.
The existence of (b ) and (c ) he thought proved by the presence of some biblical texts where the literal sense seemed absurd or contradictory; such texts must have been placed there as signposts to a spiritual allegorical exegesis.
An axiom is that nothing unworthy of God can be intended.
Just as the believer in Christ seeks to rise through the historical Son of man to the Son of God, so also in scripture the literal sense is the first rung on the ladder to the eternal spiritual meaning.
The exegesis of scripture by homily or commentary became Origen's main life work, the commentaries being on so vast a scale that none survives complete.
The transmission of the majority of the homilies depends on Latin translations by Rufinus and Jerome.
Origen also compiled a huge edition of the various Greek versions of the Old Testament.
The purpose was to give solid ground for disputations, especially with rabbis who would not recognize the canonical authority of books which, though in the Septuagint (the Bible of the Gentile mission), were absent from the Hebrew canon.
The overplus of the Greek over the Hebrew was not regarded by Origen as less than fully canonical; the suggestion that the overplus should be read for example of life and instruction of manners, but not to establish disputed doctrine, was left to Jerome.
For Origen that was no more than a matter of tactics in controversy, not one of principle.
Origen's doctrine of God bequeathed a legacy of problems (and some solutions) to his successors.
He insisted that Father and Son must be distinct realities or hypostases, not mere adjectives of one personal divine substance.
A vehement reaction against this view came in Syria in the decade after his death.
Paul of Samosata
Paul, a native of Samosata on the Euphrates, became bishop of Antioch-on-the-Orontes, third city of the empire, at a time when Syria ceased to be under Roman control but was briefly part of the kingdom of Palmyra under Queen Zenobia (266–71).
Paul distressed other bishops by offensive remarks about ‘dead exegetes’, and especially about Origen's notion that the pre-existent divine Word, a kind of second-level God, became incarnate by the Virgin Mary.
He preferred to explain divine presence in Christ on the analogy of inspiration: Jesus was a man, essentially like all others except in being perfectly good.
In him the Word and Wisdom of God dwelt in a unique degree.
Disturbed bishops gathered in synod at Antioch to express their disapproval.
They also disliked changes Paul had made in the liturgy, and his encouragement of enthusiastic audience-participation in sermons.
They heard accusations that his manner of life in public and private affairs was secular.
He had women not only in his church choir (it is the first known instance) but also in too close association with the life and pastoral work of the clergy.
It was also alleged that he amassed wealth by exploiting his high credit with the Palmyra court, accepting douceurs from citizens wanting favours.
Paul's opponents found it easier to agree in synod on his unworthiness for office than to eject him from the episcopal residence.
The Palmyra authorities gave them no assistance.
But the fall of Palmyra to the Emperor Aurelian (271) re-established Roman power in Syria.
If St Paul could appeal to Caesar, so could the bishops opposed to Paul of Samosata.
Aurelian ruled that the latter's continued occupation of the bishop's residence was a matter to be decided by the bishop of Rome and his Italian synod.
Diocletian and the Rise of Constantine
In the middle decades of the third century, political crises, a drastic trade recession, inflation, civil war, and barbarian invasions almost produced the collapse of the Roman empire.
In 257 the Emperor Valerian ordered the harassment of the church.
He was soon to be taken prisoner in battle against the Persians.
In 284 the Emperor Diocletian, a soldier from Illyricum (Dalmatia), took power with army support.
He massively reorganized the empire on a military basis, splitting provinces to prevent ambitious governors from becoming too powerful, attempting to control inflation by fixing prices by edict (and thereby driving goods off the market).
He enhanced his own powers, reducing those of aristocratic senators, and poured out a huge volume of edicts to establish law and order.
He divided the government between East and West, taking the East himself.
For the first nineteen years of his reign persecution of the church was not his policy, and the church prospered in numbers.
But the infiltration of Christianity in high places, mainly through governors' wives, and in the high command of the army caused alarm.
Apollo's oracle at Didyma near Miletus recommended an attack on the church.
Persecution severely affected the East and North Africa.
Disagreements in the church about the point at which one could not compromise left a legacy of schisms in the Nile valley and in North Africa, where the rancour of the Donatist schism persisted until the Muslim invasions swept them away four centuries later.
But in Gaul and Britain no one was martyred under the rule of Constantius Chlorus.
He died at York in July 306, and the army at once acclaimed his son Constantine.
Constantine's mother may have had Christian sympathies.
Before a battle where the odds were much against him, Constantine successfully invoked the aid of the God of the Christians.
He won.
He had put a Greek monogram of the first letters of the name of Christ (CHR) on his standards, and it had been a talisman of victory.
In 313 Constantine, having eliminated other rulers in the West, was able to persuade his eastern colleague, the pagan Licinius, to join in a general policy of toleration for all cults including Christianity.
It became legally possible for the church to own property.
In 323–4 civil war ended with the elimination of Licinius, and Constantine was at last sole ruler.
He was persuaded that disunity in the church was displeasing to heaven and bad for the empire's success and prosperity.
The embittered schism of the Donatists in North Africa from 311 onwards brought him sharp disappointment.
In 324 on arriving in the East he felt sure that soon he would go to the Holy Land to see the sacred sites and to be baptized in Jordan.
But that romantic plan was abruptly aborted.
He found the Greek churches of Egypt, Palestine, Syria, and Asia Minor seething with controversy about the opinions of an Alexandrian priest named Arius.
Arius had been excommunicated by his bishop, Alexander, for denying that Christ is on the divine side of the gulf between the Creator and his creation.
Arius
Arius was not a fool.
If one affirms that there is and can be only one ultimate and self-sufficient principle, the transcendent Father, and also that the divine Triad is three distinct realities (as Origen had taught), it is not easy then to affirm that the Son and the Father are in being identical or ‘of one substance’— not at least without fairly complicated explanations.
Origen had himself felt the difficulty.
He mitigated the problem by saying that the Son's generation by the Father is no event in time but is eternal.
In other words, the Father-Son relationship is intrinsic to the divine life.
Arius differed from Origen in seeing the coming forth of the divine Word as a service to the inferior created order.
He reasoned that the Lord who was physically born of Mary, grew in wisdom, suffered dereliction and death, must be less than the unbegotten, impassible, deathless Father.
God is beyond Jesus.
Arius made the coming forth of the Son depend not on the Father's inherent being but on his sovereign will.
It was, so to speak, not something that had to happen.
The theological implication is that the Son must be somewhere midway between the Creator and the contingent creation now in need of redemption.
Arius therefore clashed with a principle strongly stated by Irenaeus: ‘Through God alone can God be known.’
Only one who transcends the world can redeem it.
Arius received support from scholarly and politically powerful bishops, in particular from the learned church historian Eusebius of Caesarea in Palestine, a man for whom Constantine came to have great respect.
An admirer of Origen, Eusebius probably thought he was facing a repetition of the situation of eighty years previously when a learned theologian harassed by a bishop of Alexandria needed support from his church.
So a domestic Alexandrian dispute became a wide conflagration.
A synod of bishops, assembled from several Greek provinces, was already planned for the spring of 325 at Ankara.
There an attempt was to be made to reach agreement on the date of Easter and to end the discord between Egypt and Rome on the one hand and Syria and Asia Minor on the other.
This synod was transferred by Constantine to the lakeside town of Nicaea, not far from his own palace and more accessible for the two priests sent to represent bishop Silvester of Rome.
The Council of Nicaea was the largest assembly of bishops hitherto, and though the great majority of the members were from the Greek East, the presence of Roman legates and the prominent role played by the sees of Alexandria and Antioch made it possible for the council to be given the title ‘ecumenical’.
The title ‘ecumenical synod’ was already in use for a world-wide association of repertory actors.
The council put Arianism at the head of its agenda.
Arius and his friends had suggested that his critics must presuppose the (to him) unacceptable proposition that the Son's relation to the Father is one of ‘identity of being’, language unprotected against the heresy of Sabellius.
Taking the term as a challenge, the council wrote ‘identical in being’ into their confession of faith, to which they appended anathemas on propositions attributed (in some cases rightly) to Arius.
In the notion of sameness there are ambiguities and ambivalences only dimly noticed by few people at the time.
Because of the happy ambiguity Constantine found that all but two bishops were willing and able to sign the creed and canons, including Eusebius of Caesarea who promptly published an open letter indicating in what sense he interpreted the creed and anathemas.
The following half-century saw intense debate revolving round various interpretations of the creed and the possibility of either supplementing or replacing it by something either wider or narrower.
Signs of Constantine's new deal for the church were that the council petitioned and obtained from the emperor a degree of tax exemption for the sake of the church's welfare for the poor, and that exile was imposed on the two bishops who withheld their signature to the creed and canons.
The Alexandrian and Roman dating for Easter was imposed.
All the decisions of the council were notified to Silvester of Rome.
At the time of the Council of Nicaea Constantine was not yet baptized, but his support to the Christian cause was not in serious doubt.
To the assembled bishops he described himself as ‘bishop of external things’— presumably external to the church.
But he certainly wanted the church to be both united and free of heresy.
In the civil war of 324 he had represented his military campaign as a crusade against a corrupt paganism.
From 326 onwards pagan temples began to suffer the gradual loss of old endowments.
The emperor had begun to think polytheistic cult a veneration of evil spirits and therefore perhaps a danger to his realm.
In 330 he inaugurated his new eastern capital, the ‘city of Constantine’ at Byzantium on the Bosphorus, planned as a ‘New Rome’.
The dedication ceremonies were conducted by Christian clergy.
Before about 400 ad it was common for baptism to be deferred until near the end of life because of the formidable nature of the penances and discipline required after the confession of post-baptismal sin.
Constantine finally set aside all hesitation.
On his deathbed at Pentecost 337 he was baptized by a bishop whose sympathies happened to be Arian; much later legend made Pope Silvester bestow the lifegiving baptismal water.
His solemn burial was at Constantinople alongside the cenotaphs of the twelve apostles which he had placed in the church of the apostles on the city's highest hill.
He was to be the thirteenth, the equal of the Twelve.
That his conversion was momentous for the church cannot be doubted.
He had conferred great material benefits, providing Bibles and building great basilicas such as St John Lateran and St Peter's at Rome, the church of the Resurrection (later called the Holy Sepulchre) at Jerusalem, and that of the Nativity at Bethlehem.
Gratitude to him has always been greater in the Orthodox churches of the East than in the West, where his domination of the church has often not been regarded as an altogether unmitigated good, at least in its consequences.
But the Arian controversy was a nightmare to the Greek East and Constantine's role in supporting orthodoxy was not quickly forgotten.
Retrospect
A retrospect on the progress of the church in the two and a half centuries between St Peter and Constantine must include substantial astonishment.
That a movement beginning as a breakaway group within Judaism should end by capturing the imperial palace could hardly have been foreseen by the Emperors Tiberius or Nero.
Tacitus regarded Christianity as one more contemptible superstition, to the pessimist additional evidence of the sad capacity of human beings to believe strange things.
That these people would one day be enthroned in the citadel of power could not have seemed conceivable to him.
Moreover, the Christians were predominantly, if not entirely, world-renouncing.
They were dissenters from and critics of the worldly values of power, pleasure, and opulence, and therefore in the long term the creators of the modern secularizing notion that such pursuits are irrelevant to religion and vice versa.
Yet from Justin onwards, they were seeing the destinies of the empire mysteriously bound up with God's purposes being worked out through his church.
Melito, bishop of Sardis (c. 160–70), reckoned Augustus' ending of civil wars and establishment of peace in the generation immediately before Christ's birth as a providential dispensation to foster the spread of the gospel.
Eusebius of Caesarea discerned in the rise of Constantine the time promised by the prophet when the earth would be full of the knowledge of God as the waters cover the sea.
Augustine would see biblical prophecies of the ending of idolatry fulfilled in his lifetime by the edicts of Theodosius I.
Most Christians had a strong reserve towards that polytheism that pervaded society, which is not to say that there were not quiet compromisers, like the Christians of southern Spain early in the fourth century who held official cultic positions in the worship of Jupiter, or the bishop of Troy who could painlessly apostatize under Julian because he had never ceased to pray to the sun-god.
Origen was convinced that the gospel had brought ‘a new song’ to the world, breaking up ancestral customs.
The egalitarianism by which aristocrats and their slaves shared in one and the same eucharist was extraordinary.
The Christian writers of the Roman imperial period write with a freshness and excitement which is absent from most of the non-Christian authors.
The Christian rejection of polytheism was encapsulated in their argot for heathen cult and myth: ‘paganismus’.
A ‘paganus’ in Latin was either a country peasant or, in the language of the army, a civilian.
The Christians called ‘pagans’ those who had not in baptism enlisted in Christ's militia for the battle against satanic idolatry and superstition.
Thoughtful pagans regarded the ethical demand of the Christian proclamation as too tough to be practicable, and feared that the proclamation of peace and love to enemies would make the empire pusillanimous in self-defence.
The Christian ideal was more the saint than the sage: men and women who made the world to come seem present now rather than those who knew how to live and survive in a stormy and dangerous society.
Origen once remarked that the high moral ideal of the old polytheistic world was one of individual or family self-respect and honour, whereas the Christian ideal was one of service to the community in humility.
The pagan contemporaries of Constantine were not wrong in saying that he had carried through a huge religious and social revolution.
To change the religion of the Roman empire was to change the world.
From Rome to the Barbarian Kingdoms
ROBERT MARKUS
If one were writing the history of Western Europe in the period from about 330 to about 700 ad , there would, inevitably, be two major themes.
The first would tell of the late Roman empire and its fate after the reorganization by the Emperors Diocletian and Constantine, until most of its Western provinces were superseded by barbarian kingdoms.
The second theme would be the story of these new nations, the Germanic kingdoms whose foundations were laid during the years from about 400 to 600 ad .
Within the orbit of the late Roman world, Christianity was primarily receptive; it inherited a set of institutions ready-made, conformed to a social and political structure which had developed over a long period, and learned to live with a culture which it had little part in creating.
Among the Western barbarian nations, however, Christianity could play a more creative role.
Though it still needed to learn to live with the ways of the new peoples, it had its own mature traditions, and cultural and institutional development, encapsulating much of Roman civilization and fitting it to play a decisive role in shaping the new Germanic societies.
If the characteristic stance of Christianity in the Roman world was that of learning, its characteristic stance in the Germanic West was that of teaching.
And a large part of what it was teaching to the Germans it had learned from the Romans.
The Age of Hypocrisy: Christianization and its Problems
Eusebius, the ‘father of church history’ and biographer of the first Christian emperor, commented in his Life of Constantine on the ‘hypocrisy of people who crept into the church’with an eye to the emperor's favour.
Many people doubtless came to embrace the emperor's religion for worthier motives; but Eusebius put his finger on the radical novelty of the condition in which Christians now found themselves.
There had been rich Christians before the time of Constantine, there had been educated or upper-class people to be found in Christian communities, and in growing numbers during the century before Constantine.
But rarely can their Christianity have contributed to their standing in society, their wealth or power.
But, from now on, their religion could itself become a source of prestige, and did so, to the dismay of bishops who, like Eusebius himself, were sometimes inclined to look for less worldly motives for conversion to Christianity.
A hundred years after Eusebius Augustine, bishop of Hippo, looked with anxiety at the hordes of ‘feigned Christians’ driven into his congregations by social pressures and legal compulsion.
To adopt the emperor's religion could promote one's chances in the world.
During the hundred years or so after Constantine Christianity could be a passport to office, power, and wealth.
But by the 430s it had become the religion of most educated Roman town-dwellers.
With only very few exceptions, the ruling élites were Christian.
In 437 one of the last pagan aristocrats allowed himself to be converted on his deathbed by his conspicuously pious niece, perhaps from fear of less gentle pressure from the emperor.
General conformity brought the age of hypocrisy to an end.
Hypocrisy, the tribute paid to the establishment by non-conformity, could no longer flourish in a society overwhelmingly if not always profoundly Christianized, at least in and around the towns, and in the central provinces of the empire.
We cannot be sure either about the speed of this mass Christianization or the means which brought it about.
There can be little doubt that at the time Constantine took control of the Western empire, Christianity can have been the religion of only a minority, though perhaps not so tiny a minority as has sometimes been thought.
Fifty years later, the brief reign of his nephew, Julian (d. 363), allows us a glimpse of the inhabitants and local dignitaries of Eastern towns divided in religion.
Some places welcomed Julian's pagan revival; others, including some large and important cities, were much less enthusiastic about his attempt to reimpose it after a generation of rule by Christian emperors.
Julian's main impact was confined to the Eastern provinces.
Here, however, Christians could be found — at least in some areas — in greater concentration than in the West; socially and culturally they were on a level not very different from their non-Christian peers.
Within a few years of this last attempt by an emperor to rally the Roman empire to paganism, a Greek bishop could speak of Julian's pagan revival as a misguided attempt to introduce ‘novelties’ in place of the traditional religion; but at much the same time in the West, Christians were still regarded as outside the mainstream of respectable upper-class culture, as the foolish minority who rejected the wise and hallowed traditions of their forefathers which had made Rome great.
Christianity was slower to make its way in the West and its adherents slower to assimilate the culture of their pagan contemporaries.
By the 430s this assimilation had come about.
But it had not been a smooth process.
During the preceding fifty or sixty years Christians were often seen as outsiders, especially in Western aristocratic circles.
Here a determined attempt was made in the last decades of the fourth century to uphold the ancient Roman religion along with the classical culture with which it was associated.
The opposition of these pagan aristocrats flared into open conflict with the Christian court in the 390s.
But their sons and grandsons were all won over to Christianity.
By the 430s, the cultural and religious divisions between Christian bishops and pagan senators had ceased to divide.
The Roman aristocracy rallied to Christianity and made common cause with their bishop in turning Rome itself into a city reborn under the protection of its patrons, Peter and Paul, into a Christian version of its former self.
If the urban élites were largely won over to Christianity by about 430, the masses had drifted into it even sooner.
In the last two decades of the fourth century a fair number of cities, scattered all over the empire, experienced riots in which fanatical Christian mobs destroyed temples and ‘purged the idols’.
There were not many pagans left in Roman towns by the middle of the fifth century.
How this came about must remain obscure.
The pressure of legal penalties, not only against pagans but eventually also against heretics, schismatics, and Jews, no doubt had a part to play; but to judge by the extent to which Christian mobs could get their way without restraint years before the emperors' coercive legislation, enacted in the years after 390, it was no more than a minor part.
Other social pressures, chief among them that of patronage in an age in which patronage had unprecedented importance in Roman society, must have had at least as great an importance.
Of the influence of Christian spouses on their pagan families we have a good many examples.
And we must not discount those who became converts to the new religion, whether on account of the superiority of its miracles — especially its apparently superior powers of healing — or of its doctrine or the example of those who taught it.
The mutual support and warmth that membership of a Christian group could provide will also have played its part.
If we cannot really be sure about the way this Christianization of the urban population was brought about, we can, however, discern some of the anxieties that accompanied it.
For the most part these arose from the almost heedless manner in which Christians were prepared to identify themselves with the dominant values of secular Roman society.
So far as the artistic, literary, and intellectual culture of the Roman world is concerned, that was rapidly, and on the whole smoothly, absorbed by late Roman Christianity.
The Christian church had never set up its own system of education to rival or to parallel the available secular educational provision.
If Christians wished to be educated, as some always had, and as more and more inevitably did after Constantine, they shared the education received by their non-Christian fellows.
By the middle of the fourth century, Christianity had gone a long way towards assimilating the dominant culture of pagan Romans.
An easy symbiosis had come into being between the cultivated pagan and the educated Christian.
It could seem as if nothing except attendance at the church's services divided a pagan intellectual such as the professor Marius Victorinus from the educated clergy of a city such as Milan.
Right across the social scale, religion made little perceptible difference to the outward shape of life.
Many Christians continued to take part in traditional Roman festivities; they sometimes shocked their bishops by dancing in church, getting drunk at celebrations in the cemeteries, consulting magicians, or resorting to charms to cure their troubles, just as did other people.
Anxiety on this score became acute during the last decades of the fourth century, and the first of the fifth.
In the 380s and 390s pagan aristocrats such as Q. A. Symmachus, Vettius Agorius Praetextatus, or Nicomachus Flavianus, alienated from the Christian court and from the men newly risen through its patronage into the upper ranks of society, saw themselves as the guardians of ancient Roman values, including Roman religion, literature, and even artistic styles.
Some of the most learned Christians of the time, including Augustine of Hippo and the biblical scholar Jerome, were ill at ease with the culture they were conscious of sharing with these pagans.
Such anxieties, however, were soon dispelled.
They were forgotten, along with the conflict which had, briefly, and perhaps not very deeply, divided the generation of Ambrose and Symmachus in the 380s and 390s.
Within a generation or two aristocratic Christians were pursuing the same interests as their pagan ancestors.
In the later fifth century Christian aristocrats, now frequently bishops, had made their own the literary and rhetorical culture of the pagan aristocracy.
For men such as Sidonius Apollinaris (c. 431– c. 480), the Gallo-Roman aristocrat who became bishop of Clermont, saw his inherited traditional culture as an integral part of his Roman Christianity, distancing him from the barbarian heretic.
The malaise about a shared intellectual and literary culture was short-lived, the product of passing confrontation.
Latin literature continued to be copied by Christian aristocrats; classical learning survived in the teaching available, now in episcopal households rather than public schools; Roman art continued to adorn the walls of churches and the sides of sarcophagi.
Upper-class Christians were indistinguishable from their pagan fellows in their life-style.
This is what worried many of them, especially the more serious-minded.
The heated debates in Western Europe around the year 400 on the meaning of perfection had their roots in the uncertainty about what it meant to be a genuine Christian in a society of fashionable Christianity.
In a world in which outward conformity with the religion of the establishment was hard to distinguish from real commitment, the call to authentic Christianity often took the form of conversion to some form of the ascetic life.
Virginity, voluntary poverty, and self-denial had long been admired.
The leaders of the community and the religious élites differentiated themselves from society at large by adopting these virtues; monastic communities had come into being dedicated to their observance.
From the later fourth century, this ideal offered puzzled Christians a means to define their identity without ambiguity.
The ascetic life, previously most popular in the Eastern provinces, now came to appeal widely to Western aristocrats, men and women, virgins and widows.
The explosion of asceticism worried many churchmen.
Some, like Jerome's enemy Jovinian, saw in the ascetic movement a chasm opening within the church between an élite of the perfect and the ordinary faithful.
Others, notably the British monk Pelagius and his followers, wanted all Christians to be dedicated to an austere struggle with mediocrity, an arduous quest for perfection.
The theological debates occasioned by this crisis of identity occupied the generation of Jerome and Augustine.
From these debates crystallized, eventually, the doctrine of grace and merit, finally in a form which fell short both of the teaching of Pelagius and of the extreme views (ruthless predestination, divine election irrespective of human merits) propounded by Augustine in his old age.
Western monasticism, too, turned away — as had already some Greek monastic founders such as St Basil — from the extremes of asceticism.
With the Rule of St Benedict (c. 550), supremely, the monastic community was launched on the road of catering for ordinary people rather than a spiritual élite.
Its influence was slow to make itself felt, and it did not make a clean sweep of Western monasticism until the ninth century.
But already by the time of Pope Gregory I (d. 604) the monastic movement, widely diversified as it was, was being integrated into the life of the church at large and open to the demands made on it by the church's interests and needs.
Like the monastic calling, marriage and sexuality were revalued in the course of the debates around 400.
It is difficult to assess the impact of Christianity on a sector of experience which was undergoing profound change in the course of late antiquity.
The inequality of the partners was already becoming attenuated during the early centuries of our era, and there are widespread symptoms to suggest the emergence of a notion of the married couple as a partnership of equals.
The relationship of marriage was becoming impregnated by the ideals of mutual affection and respect, and considered as the exclusive area for the partners' sexual activities.
If we can trust the figures which suggest that Christians tended to marry at a notably higher age than their pagan contemporaries, Christianity would appear to have reinforced these shifts towards marriage as a more personal and free partnership of equals.
But equally, it provided a home for some of the darkest forms of distrust of and revulsion from sex and marriage.
In this respect, too, the ground had been prepared by what Michel Foucault has described as a ‘pathologization of sex’ in late antiquity: anxiety about sex and the sexual regime began to dominate the thought of medical writers and the advice they offered to clients intent on achieving balanced lives.
Sex took the place of diet as the main preoccupation of the late Roman valetudinarian.
Among Christians anxiety about sex was intensified, especially in the course of the crisis of identity around ad 400.
The superiority of virginity and sexual abstinence over marriage was generally taken for granted.
But a dark undercurrent of hostility to sexuality and marriage became interwoven with the more benign attitudes towards the body and sexuality current as late as the second century.
Attitudes diverged, and mainstream Christianity became infected with a pronounced streak of distrust towards bodily existence and sexuality.
This permanent ‘encratite’ tendency was given powerful impetus in the debates about Christian perfection at the end of the fourth and the beginning of the fifth centuries.
Pelagius thought Jerome's bitter hostility to marriage akin to Manichaean dualism, and his disciple Julian of Eclanum — with less justice — accused Augustine of the same betrayal.
But, though Jerome's intemperate denigration of the married state met with little sympathy, Augustine did not manage to dispel the sombre cloud that continued to hover over sexual relations.
His name could, indeed, be invoked through the medieval centuries to reinforce the exaltation of virginity at the expense of marriage and to curtail the role of sexuality even within Christian marriage.
In the public realm Christians identified themselves almost without reservation with the political and social order of the Roman empire.
The seeds of the ideology behind this had been sown long before the time of Constantine.
But it was Eusebius who rounded off these hints into an image which came to dominate fourth-century minds.
In his eyes Christianity and the Roman empire were made for each other.
God's providential intentions were realized by Constantine: Augustus had united the world under Roman rule, Christ under God's, and Constantine welded together the two unities in a Christian society which was, in principle, universal.
Church and empire were fused in a single entity; the empire was an image of the heavenly kingdom, its boundaries the limits of Christendom, the emperor the representative of divine authority in the world.
This commonplace became something like an orthodoxy in the Christian empire of the fourth century.
The official imposition of Christian orthodoxy at the end of the century reinforced the tendency to merge church and empire; the Christian emperors became God's agents in bringing their subjects under the yoke of Christ.
Heresy became a kind of revolt akin to treason, and Christian missions within imperial territory a means of securing public order.
Of missions sent by Roman bishops beyond the imperial frontiers we hear nothing until the sixth century.
The empire was the natural home of Christianity; beyond it lay barbarity, all that was un-Roman and uncivilized.
Political, cultural, and religious exclusiveness combined to create a new sense of Romania which was synonymous with civilization and Christianity.
This image of Christian destiny was widely accepted until Augustine of Hippo came to reject it, late in his career.
Before him it had sometimes been questioned by dissident groups.
The Donatists in North Africa upheld the ancient image of the church as a gathered élite, a foreign body in the midst of secular society and an apostate church.
Defenders of the orthodoxy agreed at the Council of Nicaea (325) sometimes denounced emperors such as Constantius II as heretics, and repudiated the authority of secular rulers over the church.
Others, like Ambrose, bishop of the imperial city of Milan (d. 397), were determined to subject the exercise of imperial power to the spiritual authority of bishops.
But until Augustine's City of God (413–27) most Christians unquestioningly accepted the Roman political and social order as the earthly form of the Christian society.
The fourth and fifth centuries saw the wholesale Romanization of Christianity and Christianization of Roman society.
But they were also the golden age of doctrinal clarification.
If, during this period, the social boundaries of Christianity in the late Roman world were vanishing, its doctrinal definition, by contrast, gained in sharpness.
Uncertainties over the church's Trinitarian teaching came to a head under Constantine, who thought himself divinely commissioned to secure the church's unity.
The council held under him at Nicaea in 325 enacted an agreement with the emperor's support.
But its formula of the Son's ‘consubstantiality’ with the Father was slow to gain general acceptance, despite Constantine's efforts to impose it.
It was only after protracted debate, in which Athanasius of Alexandria, Hilary of Poitiers, and others fought a stubborn campaign of resistance to the Eastern court that Nicene orthodoxy finally triumphed, both in the government's legislation and in the creed adopted by the Council of Constantinople in 381.
It was not long, however, before doubts on another central doctrinal issue began to cause deep divisions among Christians.
From around 430, debates on the relation between human and divine in the person of Christ were finally resolved — though further disagreement by no means eliminated — by the Council of Chalcedon (451).
While councils were defining the central doctrines of the faith, the Fathers of the fourth and fifth centuries were bringing the conceptual equipment of antique thought and the rhetorical techniques of classical literature to its exposition and interpretation.
Doctrinal self-definition was accompanied by institutional development.
The church's organization had crystallized, almost from its beginnings, around the urban centres in which the Christian communities were established.
The Council of Nicaea set its seal on the structure that had thus come into being: a network of urban bishoprics, grouped into provinces headed by a metropolitan bishop, usually in the capital city of the civil province.
The ecclesiastical organization thus came to reduplicate the structure of the civil administrative geography, though not quite exactly, and least in the less Romanized areas where the Roman network of cities with their administrative territories was less regular.
The emergence of ‘parishes’ within the area under a bishop's jurisdiction was, however, a much slower, later, and more uneven process, depending on the gradual penetration of Christianity into rural areas.
Adaptation to Roman society and culture; doctrinal self-definition, and organizational solidification: the century and a half after Constantine's conversion was all this; but more than anything else, it was the time in which Christians learnt to live in the new conditions of their existence.
The ‘Constantinian revolution’ was far more than the sudden breaking out of peace over the church and demanded a drastic reconstruction of the framework of experience.
A sense of insecurity and emotional tension had been the permanent feature of Christian existence during most of the previous three centuries.
Even though individual Christians might never have suffered any harassment, their corporate existence and their way of thinking were determined by this condition.
Their miraculous transformation from a persecuted minority into a privileged élite, soon to become a dominant majority, was not an experience for which they were intellectually or spiritually well prepared.
Kairoi: The Christianization of Time
Christians had always lived — like most late antique people — in a universe which included an unseen world as large and as varied as the visible.
They were pilgrims in this world, aliens in the society of their pagan fellows, but they knew they were part of a vast community: ‘this church which is now travelling on its journey, is joined to that heavenly church where we have the angels as our fellow-citizens’, said Augustine, faithfully echoing the conviction of all early Christians.
The worshipping community here on earth was an outlying colony, its prayer a distant echo of the perfect and unceasing praise offered to God in heaven by his angels and his saints.
It was especially in its worship that the apparent distance between the earthly and the heavenly community was bridged.
Angels hovered around the eucharistic altar and carried the congregation's self-offering to the throne of God, bringing back his blessing.
Angels also attended their eating and their drinking.
The Christian community lived in perpetual proximity, even intimacy, with the larger community of which it felt itself to be a part.
The threshold of death was a way of access rather than a barrier between the two parts of the community.
The dead linked heaven and earth.
At their graves their families would unite with their beloved over a memorial meal and a drink, easing their grief in recreating the family intimacy, only transiently ruptured.
Every anniversary was a celebration of the larger family.
Dead bishops and local martyrs received public commemoration by the whole community: this is where the real, large family came solemnly alive.
At the centre of this familiarity of human and divine was the assurance of being linked with a community which stood in God's direct, face-to-face, presence.
The saints were God's friends, but they also remained men's kin.
Together with them, the whole community was in God's presence.
The divine was always there , waiting like lightning to break through the cloud, to be earthed by the conductors of worship, of the altar, the church building, the saint, alive or dead.
It is hard not to view this axiom of early Christian imagination from a post-Reformation perspective.
But we shall mistake its real substance if we begin with the cult of saints and relics seen, as they were seen in the Reformation, in terms of channels through which a distant, concealed world of the holy is made present and accessible.
The holy, rather, formed the permanent context of life, always and everywhere present, animating a community larger than the little group gathered around the altar, ready at any moment to manifest blessing or power, at special moments or special places.
The organization of special moments and places took place in the rituals of communal worship.
The liturgical seasons and the cycle of commemorative festivals defined both a weekly and an annual rhythm of Christian living.
Christian festivals had coexisted for a very long time with ancient non-Christian celebrations.
While the Christian communities occupied a place on the edges of society and kept aloof from most of other people's festivities, their own sacred time was well enough defined.
But with their full entry into Roman secular society in the course of the fourth century, two systems of sacred time came to coexist.
The old Roman calendar of festivals contained a cycle of urban celebrations reaching back to the city's legendary foundation.
Around the middle of the fourth century Christians seem to have observed these traditional festivals along with their own; some ancient celebrations kept their appeal for centuries.
Christians never entirely clarified to their own satisfaction the questions about how much of this appeal they could afford to yield to.
On one hand, they had a vivid sense of a deep gulf between sacred and profane.
Some festivities were irremediably tainted with profanity, while others might just be excused as games people play, devoid of religious significance.
Such a distinction was perhaps the greatest novelty imported into the world of classical antiquity by Christianity: no Greek or Roman would have tried to disentangle sacred from profane in his ceremonials, or even have understood the distinction.
On the other hand, while Christians felt the pressure to make such a distinction and to separate the sacred sharply from the profane, they had no clear criteria to show where the line was to be drawn.
What carried pagan religious significance, and thus had to be shunned, and what was mere urban romping, and might therefore be — just — tolerated?
The choice was put brutally before Christians who saw no harm in taking part, around 490, in the ancient festivities of the Lupercalia.
‘Make up your minds’, the pope urged; ‘either celebrate it in the full-blooded manner of your pagan ancestors’, or acknowledge that ‘it is superstitious and vain, and manifestly incompatible with the profession of Christianity’.
The pope was forcing a choice on his congregation of ‘neither Christians nor pagans’.
Neutrality was, to his mind, impossible; there could be no area, such as his opponents wished to protect, of customs rooted in a pagan past, but now deprived of religious significance.
This frontier between that which belonged to what Peter Brown has described as the ‘neutral technology of civilized living’ and what still carried ‘a heavy charge of diffused religiosity’was shifting and never quite fixed.
For Christians its precise location was a question of supreme importance; but they had no criteria for answering it.
The crucial boundary between what is ‘Christian’ and what is ‘pagan’was set by the limits of official clerical tolerance.
The tolerable was always becoming suspect, and the suspect often tolerated.
The history of clerical suspicion of ‘secular’ celebrations is still only patchily written; it would reveal not only a remarkable — though by no means even — development over time, but a no less remarkable variation from place to place.
Many no doubt sincere Christians continued to celebrate the first day of January in defiance of their clergy's disapproval, or liked to greet the rising sun from the steps into the church, and, most of all, to attend the great festive games and shows.
As bishops like Augustine and Pope Leo I (like their Eastern colleagues such as John Chrysostom) often complained, the people who filled the churches on the festivals of Jerusalem also filled the theatres on the festivals of Babylon.
Their efforts were directed towards drawing more and more of the Christian life into the sacred time of the liturgy.
‘We fast for them on their feast days’, Augustine had said of the few remaining pagans, ‘so that they themselves might become the spectacle’.
Thus Leo I thought it better that his congregation should keep their fasting for the proper liturgical seasons publicly set aside for it, rather than carry it out as a private ascetic exercise.
In ways such as these, late Roman bishops worked slowly, by piecemeal additions and elaborations of regularly recurrent observances, to define a new sacred time in which the Christian life was to be wholly caught up, until the sacred time of the old pagan past was slowly forgotten, or emptied of its charge of religiosity.
The central events of the Lord's life had always been the pivots of the Christian year and the week; the day of the Resurrection and Sunday, the Lord's day, were at the centre of a cycle of festivals.
A second series clustered around celebrations of the Lord's Incarnation.
Both continued to develop; but it was the commemoration of the martyrs that came to swamp the Christian calendar during the fourth century, filling the interstices left in it.
The heroes of the faith who died at the hands of the persecutor had long enjoyed special honour among Christians, as, before them, among Jews.
The cult of the martyr became detached from the general cult of the community's dead members.
He was one of the ‘very special dead’, his tomb a gathering place where the anniversary of his ‘deposition’ would be celebrated by the whole community gathered in his memory.
From the fourth century, popes, bishops, and emperors competed in fostering the memorials of the martyrs, rediscovering or restoring their burials, adorning them with inscriptions recording their deeds, erecting great basilicas in the cemeteries to accommodate the crowds of worshippers.
The celebration of the martyr's anniversary had grown out of the commemoration of the departed dead; but it soon outgrew the limits of its origins and became far more than the expression of that larger family solidarity which embraced heaven and earth.
It helped fourth-century Christians to come to terms with the paradox that the privileged, wealthy, and powerful post-Constantinian church actually was also the church of the martyrs.
The most urgent need for the triumphant post-Constantinian church was to annex its own past.
It had to find a way of being able to think of itself as the true heir of the persecuted church, not its betrayer.
This is the task to which the church historians of the fourth and fifth centuries, above all dedicated themselves: their work, more than anything else, helped to shape a sense of the church's identity with the church of the martyrs, rooted in its own past, continuous and undisturbed by any emperor's conversion.
But these ecclesiastical histories appealed to restricted, educated circles.
For the vast majority, the historical gap between the age of the martyrs and the age of the established church was more effectively bridged by the cult of the martyrs.
African Christianity inherited a particularly exuberant cult, which councils tried repeatedly to restrain.
The Donatists considered themselves to be the church of the martyrs, and kept alive the old posture of the persecuted church in the new, much altered, times after Constantine.
The recurrent celebration of the martyrs' feast days catered for the need to make the church's past present, linked the sacred time of the Christian year into the sacred history of God's holy people, and so helped to reconcile a triumphant faith which had emerged dominant in society, with the tenacious sense that blessedness lay in being persecuted for his name, and it kept alive a sense that Christ's kingdom was not of this world.
Other forms of holiness — that of the virgin and the ascetic — were assimilated to martyrdom.
Isidore of Seville (d. 636) summed it all up thus: ‘many who bear the attacks of the adversary and resist the desires of the flesh are martyrs, even in the time of peace, in virtue of this self-immolation to God in their heart: they would have been martyrs in the time of the persecutions’.
Topoi: The Christianization of Space
Thus the church made its past its own: the martyrs were made present in time; but they also had to become present in space.
Traditionally, their burials lay in the suburban cemeteries.
There the city would, in Jerome's phrase, ‘upheaving itself
‘, turn its back on the ancient temples and civic monuments within the city, to pay its respects in throngs to the martyrs beyond the walls.
By the end of the fourth century the martyrs were coming into the city.
Despite the Roman law prohibiting interference with the grave, and the taboo safeguarding the city-enclosure from pollution by corpses, relics of the saints were being moved into urban churches, ‘translated’, rehoused in splendid buildings, enshrined under altars.
Inhibitions about moving bodily remains survived, sometimes for centuries, especially in Rome itself.
But substitutes for parts of the saint's body would be found no less efficacious in guaranteeing his or her presence.
With astonishing speed, cults such as that of the first martyr, Stephen, spread over the whole Mediterranean world, and, eventually, beyond.
Early in the fourth century the Carthaginian clergy disapproved of a local lady addicted to the habit of venerating a martyr's bone; but a hundred years later we hear of only isolated protests.
The cult of the saints in particular places associated with their memory was transferred to movable relics.
The cult was detached from the place of its own original environment, and thus opened European routes to sacred travel, sacred commerce, and, eventually, sacred theft.
The martyrs' role in turning late antique towns into Christian cities can hardly be exaggerated.
Pope Damasus rehabilitated and adorned the burials of the martyrs in Rome's suburban cemeteries: the army of martyrs surrounded the pagan city like a besieging force.
In 386 Ambrose moved relics he had just discovered in a Milan suburb to one of the new churches he had built to ring the growing city with prestigious sanctuaries; it was a well thought out act.
It met a popular demand, and it gave ‘the church of Milan, hitherto barren of martyrs, the ability to rejoice in its own sufferings’.
The relics under the altar took the place intended for the bishop's burial, so that‘He who suffered for all might be upon the altar, and those redeemed by his passion beneath it’.
In the discovery of its martyrs, the church of Milan had recovered its ancient distinction and gained new protectors.
In city after city the focal points of the martyrs' cults shifted from the suburban cemeteries to the splendid new churches, both in the suburbs and in the town centres; the celebration of their memory was integrated into the normal eucharistic worship of the urban community.
The old African prohibition of multiplying sites of popular devotion to legions of homemade martyrs was turned inside out: every altar now had to have a martyr's relic beneath it.
The first and chief result of the enhanced importance of the martyr's cult was thus the reshaping of the sacred topography of late antique towns.
The Roman town enclosure, marked off from its environment by the foundation rite, had itself been sacred; and it contained temples, the sacred edifices of public worship.
A learned pagan philosopher might occasionally question the necessity for temples or sacrifices: Seneca anticipated many a Christian with his insistence that ‘God is close to you, with you, within you’, so that temples and sacrifices were otiose.
Here, as so often, the protesting voices of the philosophic counter culture became the norm accepted by Christians: for them no place could be inherently sacred.
‘The God who made the world and everything in it, being the Lord of heaven and earth, does not live in shrines made by man’(Acts 17: 24), St Paul had told the Athenians, with one eye on the great shrine of their city's divine protectress on the next hill.
Unlike the pagan temple, the Christians' churches housed no divinity; for they themselves were ‘the temple of the living God’(2 Cor. 6: 16).
Their churches were simple gathering places to shelter the community at worship.
For centuries they were ‘consecrated’ by the first celebration in them of the eucharist: what made them holy was the use made of them.
Until the fourth century, Christians inhabited an undifferentiated spatial universe.
Their God was wholly present everywhere at once, allowing no site, no building, or space any specially privileged holiness.
Christians had a sacred history: in the fourth century they acquired a sacred geography which was its spatial reflection.
A place could become holy through some historical event, a memory of a work of God done at the site at a particular time.
The martyr's grave had been one type of such sites.
Now, the presence of the martyrs in city churches began to create new sites of holiness: churches were no longer simply the gathering places of the faithful for worship, but shrines of the saints, holy places.
The church building was a microcosm of the heavenly kingdom.
To enter a church was to enter a world separated from the work-a-day environment by its interior layout, its decor, all designed to enhance the sense of the saint's solemn presence in his shrine.
To walk the length of a great basilica from porch to apse was to make the journey of salvation and find oneself in ‘a place of perfection, the heavenly Jerusalem, its walls and buildings made in heaven, transferred to this spot’.
The solemnity was heightened at the actual times of worship by the colourful splendour of clerical pomp.
As the inscription over the sanctuary arch told the worshipper in St Martin's church at Tours, ‘How awesome is this place!
This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.’
(Gen. 28: 17.)
As such gateways to heaven multiplied, they came to outline a new map of sacred urban topography.
Christians now had what they had never had before: a network of holy places in their towns.
The transformation of an ancient city into a new Christian city is best documented at Rome.
Constantine had sponsored the building of a cathedral adjoining a palace he had assigned to the bishop, and of some great memorial churches on the edges of the city.
His successors continued the programme.
In the fifth century the popes embarked, in alliance with the local aristocracy, on a programme of urban renewal.
They created a new Christian area centred on some of the great city basilicas, away from the traditional civic centres.
The ancient monumental centre, heavy with pagan memories, was gradually transformed by the erection of churches and the conversion of public buildings into churches.
Eventually a network of humble welfare-stations under ecclesiastical auspices completed the Christian topography of Rome.
Similar developments can sometimes be traced in less detail in less magnificent places, and must have taken place, on a more modest scale, almost everywhere.
The location of the earliest episcopal churches — in the inhabited suburbs, within the walls, near the edge of the walled town, or near the centre?— is often doubtful and in many cases has been much debated.
The pattern was certainly not uniform.
Ancient and well-established episcopal churches tended to stabilize subsequent urban development.
Suburban sanctuaries often became the foci for further urban growth.
Sometimes, as in some Rhineland towns, new settlements came to cluster around them, dislocating the town, turning old centre into suburb and old suburb into new centre.
Whether their sites shifted or not, everywhere towns became transformed by the great churches and the smaller shrines built both near their centres and in their suburbs in the fourth and fifth centuries.
Thus late Roman towns became a web of holy places through the shrines of the martyrs, later of other saints, ‘honorary martyrs’, determining spatial relationships within the town.
But there was another reason why some places were holy — not intrinsically — but through their association with a past even more venerable than that of the martyrs: the sites of the lives of the apostles and the Lord.
Just as the shrines of martyrs and saints came to define a sacred topography of holy places within and around a town, so the sites of the New (and, for that matter, the Old) Testament stories came to define a larger sacred geography.
Jerusalem occupied the centre of this sacred universe, as it had done among the Jews.
Jewish men had been expected — unrealistically in the conditions of the Diaspora — to make regular pilgrimages to the Holy City.
Now, in Christian times, pilgrimage from the ends of the earth, organized and elaborated into regular re-enactments of the episodes of sacred history, carefully fostered by great architectural enterprises, sponsored by bishops and emperors, linked the most distant towns with the sacred sites.
The short pilgrimage from town to the martyr's tomb in the suburban cemetery and the longer routes to the shrines of apostles or of the Holy Land interlocked to create a nexus of sacred topography; pilgrims' tales, literary accounts, guides, and itineraries helped to familiarize Western Christians with a new religious ordering of space.
As saints became ubiquitous, they also changed their functions.
In the early Christian community the living faithful prayed to God for their dead; now the dead saint is asked to pray for the living: a whole new liturgy comes into being.
As the martyr is, literally, detached from the place of his martyrdom and made present wherever his relics have become the centre of a cult, so relics begin to be seen in a new way.
A man as highly educated as Augustine changed his mind about them in the course of his life.
As a middle-aged bishop he was reluctant to believe that miracles still happened in his world as they had in the time of the Lord and his apostles.
His thought had been moving towards an idea of nature, not unlike that found in some Stoic philosophers, as a complex of processes subject to their own natural law.
This conception, however, dissolved in his mind as, towards the end of his life, he came to accept the prevalent belief in the everyday occurrence of miracles.
‘The world itself is God's greatest miracle’, he wrote, defending God's freedom to work miracles at the cost of dissolving the idea of a nature which is subject to its own laws in the freedom of the divine will.
Now he was ready to see daily miracles wrought by the relics of St Stephen, recently discovered and brought to Africa, and to make use of them in his pastoral work among his congregations.
In minds less critical and less sophisticated than Augustine's, relics soon became themselves the seats of holy power, God's preferred channels for miraculous action.
A new nexus of local social relationships came to centre around their shrines; their cult provided ways of securing social cohesion in the locality, and one of the means on which bishops depended to consolidate their authority.
The Order of Society
The chief mutations of Christianity in late antiquity stem from two sources: first, its takeover of the Roman world, second its takeover of the Germanic world.
We have been considering some of the ways in which the late Roman world inhabited by Christians was transformed in fact and in their imagination.
This transformation provided the skeleton for the Christianity which was to take over the Germanic world, to mould it and modify it in turn.
But this second mutation of Christianity was the work more of a change in the nature of the Roman world itself, its social and its political structure as well as its intellectual assumptions and its culture, than of anything we might call ‘the impact of the barbarians’ on it.
It is a collapse into simplicity.
To pass from the world of Augustine and his pagan contemporaries into the world of Gregory the Great (pope 590–604) is to move by imperceptible stages from a world in which the basic question was ‘What is a Christian?’ to one in which it has become ‘How should a Christian live, behave, be a good Christian?’
In the early fifth century, Roman society was still a complex fabric of strands of very varied origin.
Institutions, customs, political and cultural traditions stemming from a long pagan past, were still very much alive in it.
It was within such a milieu that Christians were faced with the task of defining their identity.
The kind of society which came into being in Europe was a more homogeneous Christian society, less differentiated than Augustine's.
The multiformity of late antique culture had collapsed into the homogeneity of a Christian culture.
By the time of Pope Gregory I the world of cultivated Roman paganism had receded into a past now only dimly seen through the distorting medium of legend and folklore.
Augustine's world had still contained blocks refractory to the light of the gospel.
The ‘opaque’ areas of experience, of institutions, and daily living, if they had not disappeared by Gregory's time, had become absorbed into a Christian universe as translucent parts.
In principle, there was nothing that could not be absorbed into this radically Christianized world.
The categories of classification available to a bishop like Gregory the Great, or his contemporary in Gaul, Gregory of Tours, divided mankind into orthodox Catholics, heretics, pagans, and Jews.
A Catholic accepted the doctrines taught by his bishop and his authority over the pattern of his moral and his cultic behaviour.
The existence of imperfectly Christianized ‘rustic’ masses posed no serious problem except the pastoral one of how to improve the quality of their religious life.
Customs and beliefs deriving from a pagan past may have been frowned upon, but they did not necessarily exclude their adherents from the community of Christians.
Baptism turned a pagan into a Christian.
Much work might remain for the clergy both in imposing a code of Christian morals, and in determining where the line was to run between what could and what could not form a respectable part of the Christian life.
What constituted a ‘pagan’ was a matter of definition by clerical authority; in practice it meant what evaded the bishop's control.
Gregory the Great's decision that English converts to Christianity might continue to use their traditional places of worship provided they were sprinkled with holy water was a revolutionary extension of clerical tolerance, with momentous implications for later missionary activity.
But once they had received baptism, the existence of such superficially Christianized people ceased to present any challenge to the self-confidence of a Christian society.
Heretics posed a more serious problem, but, happily, after the elimination of the aggressively Arian Vandal kingdom in North Africa, and the conversion of the Arian Goths and Burgundians to Catholicism, it ceased to be a pressing practical one.
Pagans could not, of course, belong to the community of Christians.
Through the eyes of bishops we can catch an occasional glimpse of little groups of them; but with the conversion of the Franks from c .500 and of the English from c .600 onwards, they could only be found in large numbers on the fringes of Western Christendom and in the outer darkness beyond.
(Their conversion, in part through the work of English missionaries, in the period after c .700, is dealt with in the next chapter.)
There was, however, one troubling group inherited from the Roman past, which remained a permanent feature of the social landscape of Western Europe: the Jews who existed in most Roman towns, in large numbers or small.
In many towns they had for generations lived peaceably with, and often trusted by, their Christian neighbours.
But in a community whose contours were defined by religion more than by Roman law, they were an anomalous, marginal group, who could not, by definition, form part of the ‘Christian people’.
Thus when a Gallic bishop in 576 ‘converted’ the local Jewish community to Christianity, those who refused baptism were expelled from the city.
Gregory the Great, interestingly, seems to represent the survival of an older tradition in upholding the civil rights of Jews within the community defined by Roman law rather than by religion; but such a survival could not long resist the powerful pressures towards conformity where Roman legal inhibitions were less strong.
In practice, toleration and coexistence came under growing threat, especially in later times, with new emphasis being laid on ecclesiastical uniformity.
An ever-larger proportion of the ‘Christian people’ of Western Europe after 500 were no longer the subjects of the Roman emperor.
By about 600 ad his authority was acknowledged only in parts of the Italian peninsula, and even there, in the following century, it became remote and ineffectual.
In areas settled by Germanic peoples and governed by their kings new forms of government and new political institutions often coexisted with older political traditions of Roman origin.
The horizons within which most people's lives were confined became narrower; the far-flung contacts which had linked distant provinces became attenuated, local clerical and military élites came to form cohesive, small-scale groupings with local or regional interests and loyalties, sometimes intense local pride.
It was a world in which clerical power and the military power of the local representatives of secular rulers eclipsed the civilian administrator.
In many towns — including, supremely, Rome itself — municipal authority drained towards the bishop.
At the end of the sixth century a Frankish king complained that all the riches were flowing into the hands of bishops at the expense of the royal fisc, and that royal authority was being eclipsed by that of the bishops of cities.
It was the bishop who had the standing and the resources to carry out work originally incumbent on the local gentry: constructing new channels for a river, securing water supplies, maintaining fortifications, as well as the traditional tasks of organized charitable works: feeding the poor, housing the refugee, redeeming the captive.
If the local standing of bishops could often overflow into effective influence at the court of the emperor or the king and give him influence with them and their officials, the bishop was primarily a leader of the local community: the Christian people of the town and the surrounding countryside.
The town was the focus of the bishop's activities.
His efforts were devoted to drawing the surrounding countryside, the village clergy, the great landowners and the peasants, and the whole area under his supervision into the religious life of his town.
They were expected to attend the urban celebrations of the great festivals and took part in the pageantry and the festivities.
The bishop's authority was deployed to repress ‘rusticity’, to extend the franchise of civilized Christian living.
In countless ways of ceremonial, preaching, pastoral care, and — not least — as the authoritative guardian of the shrine which housed the relics of the town's holy protectors, the bishop maintained and fostered the sense of a community embracing all classes, in and outside the town.
The bishop was not, however, alone in his pastoral work for the Christian people and the work of extending Christianity.
He had his own clergy attached to his cathedral, and gradually he eventually acquired a parish clergy over whom he could sometimes exercise control.
Above all, however, Christianity was spread through the work of countless holy men, monks, ascetics, wandering preachers, and wonder-workers.
Gregory the Great's Dialogues reveal the importance of the work of holy men in drawing the Italian countryside into the main stream of the bishops', the pope's, and the townsmen's Christianity.
The work of monks was everywhere crucial in spreading Christianity, especially in areas relatively lacking in towns, such as parts of Gaul, England, and Ireland.
Moreover, there were many bishops who would have considered themselves first and foremost monks: St Cuthbert of Lindisfarne (d. 687) had a respectable ancestry reaching back to St Martin of Tours (d. c .397).
A Byzantine historian remarked of the Franks in the sixth century that ‘although they have become Christians, they still keep a greater part of their ancient religion’.
The judgement could be applied more widely than its immediate target.
To read Gregory of Tours' History of the Franks or Bede's of the English people, or a poem like Beowulf , is to experience a world in which the new and the traditional, in culture and in religion, in law and institutions, are inextricable.
The early history of Germanic Christianity is dominated by the paradox that mass conversion required some considerable continuity.
The new religion had to be seen to meet existing needs, and not to overtax the courage its converts would need to break with the religion of their ancestors.
But, once converted, they needed to define their new identity: they had to create discontinuities which would draw a line between their Christian present and their pagan past.
The realignment of these societies was necessarily slow, their central value-systems resistant to change.
Gregory of Tours and Bede both knew that the conversion of their peoples to Christianity had done something to the religion to which they were converted.
This is what made them anxious about the attitudes of powerful men in their societies — rulers, great magnates — towards the churches of which they considered themselves the lords.
They perceived that the acquisition of wealth and privilege exposed churches and monasteries to new dangers.
They were also aware of an even deeper change in the texture of Christianity: it had become the religion of a warrior nobility whose values and culture it had necessarily to absorb in the process of Christianizing them.
A century separates the ‘conversion’ of the English, beginning in the years around 600, from that of the Franks, and even more years divide Bede's Ecclesiastical History of the English People (c .720) from Gregory's History of the Franks (c .590).
Yet there is much that these two great historians have in common, and not only their sense of foreboding, their anxiety about the future, and a vision of past greatness; they share, above all, a need to give the Christianity of their compatriots, Franks or English, roots in the Roman past.
Like Eusebius and the other ecclesiastical historians, their great achievement was to articulate a sense of a ‘Christianity’ identical with the ‘Christianity’embodied in societies profoundly different in character from their own.
In the permeation of both English and Frankish society by Christian values the work of Irish monks was crucially important.
Bede was conscious of the debt the English owed to saints such as Columba and Aidan, and loved to contrast their holiness with the ‘slothfulness’ of Christians of his own day.
Gregory wrote before Columbanus and his monastic foundations made their impact on Frankish society; but everywhere monks and nuns — not only of Irish origin — helped to give some moral and devotional definition to the Christianity of royal courts, aristocratic households, and small local communities.
The English church owed much to Gaul, and shared many of its features.
The Roman past lay more heavily over the Iberian peninsula.
Its Gothic settlers were already far advanced along the road of assimilating the culture and the religion of their Roman subjects at the time of their conversion to Catholicism in the 580s.
St Isidore of Seville (d. 636) saw Spain as a Christian land, in which the separate identities of Goth and Roman were no longer of any but historical interest.
North Africa had been reconquered from the Vandals in the 530s, but was never to become securely integrated into the Byzantine empire.
In the sixth century its ancient Christian traditions were strong enough to sustain resistance to Justinian's attempts to dictate doctrine to the church.
It had been singularly successful in achieving a synthesis of local and cosmopolitan, rural and urban, into a religious culture of remarkable vitality and tenacity, even in the seventh century.
Of its ‘underground’ survival after the Arab conquest of the African provinces we have only patchy evidence.
In Italy, soon after the collapse of the Gothic regime under Byzantine attack, the Lombards, a nation largely pagan at the time of its arrival in Italy in the 560s, settled in the northern and much of the central part of the peninsula.
Slowly they came to conform to the Catholicism of their Italian subjects.
But it would be anachronistic to think of Western Europe around c .700 as homogeneous Western, Christian, Latin culture, shared among nations with any definite sense of forming a community aspiring to be ‘Western Christendom’.
True, the foundations had been laid for a cultural revival, a breakdown of the isolation in which individual centres of learning, art, and devotion had existed.
During this period following the collapse of Roman rule in the West, sometimes still called the ‘dark ages’, Western Christians rethought the culture they had inherited from the ancient world.
This rethinking went on in episcopal households and monasteries as well as in some urban schools which survived in some areas well into the sixth century.
Above all, the English in the age of Bede created a vigorous culture whose ripples were to be felt across Western Europe for decades.
The vitality of a pre-Christian Celtic past was fused with the newly discovered artistic and intellectual traditions of the late antique Mediterranean world.
The history written, the gospel books copied and illuminated, in Northumbrian monasteries in the decades around 700 left a permanent mark on Christian art and on history-writing.
This ‘Northumbrian renaissance’, most creative in the cultural development of Western Europe, was not an isolated one.
Throughout the Germanic West, in the decades 680–700, ‘appear the first elements of a renaissance, a forerunner of the great Carolingian renewal’.
The political leadership within this cultural area assumed by the Franks, the alliance of their kings with the popes, and the achievement of Western Christianity under this leadership are dealt with in the next chapter.
Here we may note one fact with an importance in a long perspective which overshadows all others: the conquests by Islam.
For fifty years since the posthumous publication of Henri Pirenne's Mahomet et Charlemagne (1937) scholars have been debating what they have labelled its ‘thesis’: that the ancient rhythms of an undivided Mediterranean civilization had enough tenacity to survive Germanic invasions and settlements, and were disrupted and transformed only as a consequence of the spread of Muslim power, cutting the Mediterranean in half.
From the debate on this ‘thesis’ we may here stand aside.
However we assess the impact of Islam on the economy, the society, and the culture of Europe, its significance for the history of Christianity is immeasurable.
If, looking at the Mediterranean world from our Western and Northern viewpoint, we do no more than take note of the removal of North Africa from the scene of Latin Christianity, we shall scarcely have begun to come to grips with the size of the problem.
Yet even to note this is to identify a radical shift in the shape, not only geographical but spiritual, of Christendom.
The submergence of North Africa beneath the tide of Islam in the seventh century meant far more than the loss of one of the most intellectually vital parts of the Latin church.
For the North African church had long clung to its own traditions of autonomy with a tenacity which made it a power with which the emperors and popes had to reckon.
For the Western church the removal of the African church meant the removal of a permanent focus of fruitful tension.
The Roman see emerged as the sole religious authority and centre of a barbarian West.
The Western church could forget the tensions that had enriched her life while Rome was one among several great sees.
Increasingly cut off from the Eastern churches, and with Carthage eclipsed, Rome could become the unchallenged teacher and mistress of new nations; and they were only too prepared to learn.
Pirenne was undoubtedly right in making Mahomet the creator of medieval Western Christendom.
The West: The Age of Conversion (700–1050)
HENRY MAYR-HARTING
The period which here concerns us is not notable for great theologians, great popes, or great heretics.
The Christian achievement turns less on individual geniuses than in any other period of remotely comparable length in the history of this ever fermenting religion.
The Emperor Charlemagne (768–814) is said to have lamented to the leader of his court school, the York man Alcuin, that he had not twelve learned men like Jerome or Augustine.
This remark did not go down well with Alcuin, who thought he was being criticized, but we can see what it meant to the late ninth-century writer who reported it.
The great constructive developments of this period were missionary (and one can never draw a hard distinction between internal and external missionizing), liturgical, monastic, and political.
The Missionary Church
Missionary drive was virtually a necessity of political security in the early medieval West.
The Rhine was the eastern boundary of the Carolingian Franks up to the time of Charlemagne.
But it was also an artery of their communications in a burgeoning world of churches, palaces, and trade.
Never could they securely hold the Rhine until the Frisians at the lower end of it and the Saxons across it were tamed and Christianized.
The empire of Charlemagne was divided in the ninth century, and its eastern division came to be dominated in the tenth century by the now Christianized Saxons.
From their rule of the eastern Frankish kingdom developed Germany.
Now the same process occurred all over again.
For the eastern border of the Saxons was the River Elbe, and that too was an artery of Saxon communication.
But never could the Elbe be securely held until the Slavs across it, the Danes near the lower end of it, and the Bohemians on its upper reaches, were all tamed and Christianized.
The Danes, and the Swedes, were already perceived to pose a missionary problem in the ninth century; their Christianization was one response to what would become known to historians as the Viking threat.
Similarly, the Hungarians became the principal external threat to the Christianized Germanic peoples of Europe in the late ninth and tenth centuries, particularly in conjunction with the Slavs; and after the former's defeat and settlement on the Middle Danube, it was a natural instinct of the Saxon rulers to draw them into the orbit of western Christian kingdoms.
Further east, Bulgaria eventually became firmly attached to the Byzantine church, but in the 860s Louis the German, king of the East Franks, even tried to become involved in the Bulgarian conversion.
The reason was a familiarly political one: the desire to apply a lever to the other side of the threatening Moravians.
His action only had the effect of helping to throw the Moravians too into the arms of Byzantine Christianity.
A century later, at about the time that Otto I was crowned Holy Roman Emperor (962), he sent a mission (albeit unsuccessful) to Princess Olga of Kiev.
Here missionizing passes almost from the defensive to the offensive.
The Russians 800 miles to the east of the Elbe scarcely threatened Otto I, but the Byzantines could be expected to react unfavourably to his imperial coronation, and Kiev was already in the orbit of Byzantine trade and political influence.
Saxon Christianity in Kiev would have been tantamount to an attack, at least culturally, on the Byzantine flank.
But one can be too political about mission, or the work of preaching, as contemporary churchmen would have called it.
Two formative influences on the early Middle Ages were Pope Gregory the Great's preaching of Christianity to the Lombards and (through Augustine of Canterbury) to the Anglo-Saxons; and the peregrinatio , or self-imposed exile for God's sake, of Irish monks like St Aidan at Lindisfarne, St Columbanus in Burgundy, and St Gall in Suabia, who had a vast effect in spreading Christianity.
The Anglo-Saxons felt the full force of both influences, which made English Christianity from the start strongly missionary in character.
The greatest missionary of our whole period was the Devonian St Boniface.
More than any other single individual, he created the ecclesiastical framework of what would become Germany.
When Boniface was consecrated bishop by Pope Gregory II in 722, it was not to a particular see, but to a very wide commission of preaching to heathens, such as, for instance , the Aquitanian St Amand had had in northern Gaul during the previous century.
Only in the last eight or nine years before his death (754) was he archbishop of Mainz.
Much as he mistrusted almost every Irishman with whom he came in contact on the Continent (Bishop Clement for his disrespect of patristic authority, the priest Sampson for his cavalier attitude to the baptismal rite, Virgil of Salzburg for sowing dissension between himself and the duke of Bavaria as well as for believing that the world was round), Boniface's establishing of monasteries as the learned back-up to missionary work and his devotion to the papacy and to Rome both owed something to the Irish background in England.
More particularly, his sense that his calling as a monk, far from being incompatible with preaching to pagans, positively required it, owes much to the Gregorian influence.
Pope Gregory (590–604) had sent Roman monks to the English.
His writings, particularly his Homilies on Ezechiel , composed while he was pope, show that he thought the contemplative life of monks would be best validated if it bore fruit in action.
Of the two wives of Jacob, whom spiritual writers regarded as the biblical types of the contemplative and active lives, Rachel was beautiful, but Liah was the fertile one.
Gregory himself thought he had married Rachel when he became a monk; but being pope was like waking up in the night to find oneself in the arms of Liah.
It was a shock, but while there were those who still lacked the Christian faith, it was a necessary shock.
The character of St Boniface comes through strongly in his letters.
Notwithstanding his devotion to the papacy, he was an embryonic English Protestant.
He had a strong sense of responsibility to his vocation of preaching and loved to compare himself to St Paul.
He was very aware of his duty to his conscience.
Important as were his contacts with the Frankish rulers for his preaching in Hesse and Thuringia, he could scarcely bring himself to share the company of the fast-living Frankish bishops whom he met at court — Milo of Trier ‘and others like him’, as he said dismissively — until his mentor, Bishop Daniel of Winchester, had to cite to him texts from Augustine and the Bible against separating oneself from sinners and in favour of dissimulation.
But there are moments when we experience the charm and courtesy which drew English men and women to him as helpers in his continental mission.
A monk of Glastonbury called Wigbert, on his way to Hesse, was touched by the distance which Boniface travelled to meet him.
Boniface's devotion to the papacy is shown in his name.
Both Willibrord, English apostle to the Frisians, and Wynfrith, were consecrated bishop by the pope in Rome and were given the names of Roman martyrs whose feasts fell around the time of their consecration: Willibrord Clement and Wynfrith Boniface.
But the one remained known as Willibrord (despite an unimpeachable Roman allegiance), while the other called himself thereafter Boniface.
Before twelfth-century English bishops helped to propagate a canon law based on papal direction by appealing constantly to Rome for guidance, Boniface had done the same in the eighth century.
He consulted a succession of popes on marriage law, on priestly mores, on ordinations, on liturgy, on whether nuns might wash each other 's feet, and on the eating of bacon fat, the last a subject about which the Fathers had remained curiously silent.
Indeed, as Rome and the Eastern churches were drifting apart, not least through the Iconoclastic Controversy, Boniface and his mission were preparing a new Rome-centred area of authority in the North.
Yet Boniface's mission was not simply Rome-centred.
His own ecclesiastical authority as an archbishop and metropolitan, though a reflection of papal authority at one level, was too important to him in itself to allow of such a thing.
He complained at length about a Gallic bishop called Aldebert, who held services at springs and groves instead of in properly consecrated churches, spurned the established saints' cults by distributing his own finger-nails as saintly relics, and invoked the names of archangels which were not to be found in the Bible.
These were all implicit attacks upon higher ecclesiastical authority.
When Boniface wrote to other bishops, he had a way of invariably reminding them that Christian authority meant service.
The service of the pastor was exemplified in Christ's washing of his disciples' feet, and so, whatever little present he might have received from another bishop, back went a towel from a seemingly inexhaustible linen cupboard.
Thus was episcopal authority symbolically reinforced.
Malcolm Parkes has powerfully suggested that an eighth-century Fulda manuscript, containing the Epistle of St James, has been glossed in the very handwriting of St Boniface.
The hand is a strong one, and the sentiments, emphasizing the apostolic succession of bishops, are magisterially expressed.
Some historians have seen St Pirmin's monastic foundations (the most famous at Reichenau), by which Pirmin made an important contribution to the Christianization of the south-west German world in the first half of the eighth century, as an attack upon Boniface's episcopal authority among the Germans, or at least as the creation of a counter-sphere of influence.
There is, however, no evidence that Boniface viewed Pirmin in this way, and in the next generation the followers of Boniface and Pirmin worked in harmony to create the foundations of the Carolingian church.
But in general Boniface was one of the greatest exponents of a high view of metropolitan and episcopal power which would confront the reformers who asserted papal authority in the eleventh century.
In 723–4, soon after his episcopal consecration, Boniface received a letter from Bishop Daniel of Winchester advising him how to argue with pagans.
He should stress, said Daniel, that the creation of the universe and the existence of its ruler must be anterior to the Germanic gods.
The pagans think it important to propitiate gods with sacrifices, yet they have no idea which is the most powerful of them, so that they might be offending the one who most needs propitiating by paying him insufficient attention.
They do not know what sort of sacrifice most propitiates them, so that they might be wasting their sacrifices.
And Boniface should ask them what sort of gods have allowed the Christians to have all the lands rich in wine and oil and other goods, and have left the heathens only with the frozen North.
The arguments were not to be put in an insulting or irritating way, but calmly and with great moderation.
This letter sets a tone for much missionary work in the early Middle Ages.
Its arguments may raise a smile now, but it came from an experienced pastor to an intelligent and dedicated missionary, and was clearly directed to some of the major preoccupations of Germanic and other pagans.
Sir Raymond Firth's study of the conversion to Christianity in this century of the Tikopians, with their gods, their ancestor cults, and their propitiatory sacrifices, has shown how interested these Pacific islanders were to discuss a kind of theology of god-power.
Could the pagan or Christian cults be demonstrated to be the more correct, judged by practical effects in crops, fish, and health?
Another great missionary, St Anskar, had to engage in similar arguments when he preached (under the sponsorship of Louis the Pious) to the Swedes at the prosperous port of Birka in the ninth century.
We know from archaeology that Birka was at the northern end of a flourishing trade route which was beginning in the 830s and 840s to bring in huge quantities of silver from the Muslim-controlled trade routes between Byzantium and China.
The arrival of Christianity in Birka sparked off one of the sternest tussles between Christianity and paganism anywhere in this period.
Some merchants there maintained that the old gods had served them well and would not be pleased by the withdrawal of sacrifices in favour of a foreign and untried god.
But there were others who had traded with the Carolingian West (coins of Louis the Pious and other Frankish objects have been found at Birka), who had come to know Christianity from their trading connections, and who formed the bedrock of Anskar's support.
It should not be supposed from such criteria for choosing Christianity or retaining paganism that pagans were so simple-minded as to think prosperity and material adversity automatic grounds for conversion or retention of paganism as the case might be.
We all have to interpret our fluctuating fortunes in the light of deeper states of mind and in relation to profound and sometimes shifting beliefs.
But missionaries constantly encountered the idea of an interaction between supernatural power and material prosperity, and the complexity of this idea only served to increase the sensitivity which they needed to make an impact on the discussion.
Historical writers have often stressed the greed and economic exploitation, as well as the politics, which motivated much missionary work in the early Middle Ages.
This can easily be overdone; it fails to take account of the inextricably intertwined motives with which Christian societies addressed themselves to their pagan neighbours.
The brutality with which Charlemagne's armies brought the Saxons to enforced Christianity and extracted tithes from them through new ecclesiastical foundations stands clearly revealed.
But it is exposed above all in a letter of Alcuin (796) criticizing the whole policy.
Careful thought, said Alcuin, should be given to the right method of teaching and baptizing.
It was useless to baptize people who had no understanding of the faith, or who had not been persuaded by teaching to espouse Christianity.
The ideal book, he thought, for teaching would-be converts systematically what they needed to know was Augustine of Hippo's De Rudibus Catechizandis .
This would give them the outline: the immortality of the soul, heaven and hell, the Trinity, the saving mission of Jesus Christ, his passion, resurrection, and ascension, his judgement of the world, the gospel.
Alcuin's ideas must to some extent have become Carolingian practice.
Recently, Susan Keefe has listed no fewer than sixty-one treatises on baptism which have come down to us in manuscripts from the Carolingian age.
Time and again when we think that we have nailed the political, military, and economic aspects of huge missionary undertakings, another point of view makes itself apparent, sometimes quite unexpectedly, in the sources.
The foundation of the archbishopric of Magdeburg provides an example.
Otto I founded the monastery of St Maurice at Magdeburg in 937, and from 955 at the latest he intended this church to become an archbishopric, heading the missionary organization amongst the Slavs to the east of the River Elbe.
He endowed it with vast lands and rights, including tithes of silver and other rights of tribute from the Slavs.
Never was economic gain, as well as the consideration of military security which we mentioned earlier, more clearly in evidence.
Yet when the archbishopric finally became a reality in 968, one sees that the emperor also had religious and pastoral considerations in mind.
The first archbishop he appointed, Adalbert (not to be confused with the martyr of that name who preached to the Liutizi Slavs and was greatly venerated by Otto III), was rather a grandee, and not above gratuitously forceful interventions in the feuds of the Saxon aristocracy.
But he also had another side.
He showed a scrupulous concern for the monastic observance of those monks who had formerly composed the community of what became his cathedral church.
Moreover there is a tenth-century manuscript of various patristic writings from the monastery of St Maximin of Trier (Berlin, MS Lat. fol. 759), which contains a short catechism on the Trinity, the Our Father, and the Apostles' Creed.
Here is a sample of it: ‘What is the second petition?
Thy Kingdom come.
What is to be understood by it?
We pray that Christ will reign in us and not the devil.’
St Maximin of Trier was on the other side of Otto I's kingdom from Magdeburg and the Slavs, but this was the monastery from which Adalbert came.
It adds to the interest of the concern for preaching shown in this manuscript that Adalbert was the bishop whom Otto had in 960–1 sent to Princess Olga of Kiev.
Thus Adalbert's monastic background, so far in geographical distance from the Slav missions (but not on that account far from people who needed to be taught the basics of Christianity), shows pastoral awareness.
Quite as striking, for Otto I's approach, is some evidence relating to the appointment of a suffragan bishop.
In the document by which Otto I established the archbishopric, the following words occur: ‘and because the venerable man Boso has sweated much amongst the Slav people to convert them to God, he is to have the choice of election [as bishop]to whichever church as between Merseburg and Zeitz [both new suffragan sees]he prefers.’
The obscure Boso, an alumnus of the monastic school at Regensburg, looks like the perfect exemplar of everything for which Alcuin had argued.
We have said that no real distinction can be made between internal and external missionizing.
The Christianization of early medieval society in depth required constant teaching of Christianity, and that required organization.
The history of parish organization, for that is what is in question here, cannot be written in a paragraph.
A pattern of parishes, as we know it, took centuries to come into existence anywhere in Europe.
One starts with communities of monks or canons or clerics serving a wide area from their church, until aristocrats founded small churches, served by one priest, on their estates, probably from a mixture of religious, social, and economic motives.
This latter development gathered momentum at different times in different places.
There appear to be many small churches, often of wood, served by a single priest, in ninth-century Europe; in England, on the other hand, the first signs of such a phenomenon occur in the tenth century.
Yet this much can be said: that in the research of these days, the evidence of some form of parochial structure is more likely to take one by surprise for its earliness than its lateness.
A list of Cornish saints recently studied in an early tenth-century manuscript, where in several cases the saints are listed according to geographical contiguousness of parochial dedications, suggests that the parochial structure of Cornwall, as we know it today, was already in existence at that time.
On the other side of Europe, a century earlier, researches have shown the monastery of Fulda in the time of its abbot Hrabanus Maurus (822–42) to be administering a large network of parish churches.
Whether these were parish churches in the full jurisdictional sense of the high Middle Ages, with burial rights and established revenues, is a moot point.
But in terms of pastoral provision much development had already occurred long before 1050.
This evidence matches that of the many handbooks of canonical, theological, and liturgical material compiled by (or for) bishops, which shows their determination to teach their flocks.
Christianity and the Political Order
During the eighth and ninth centuries the Christian church effected nothing short of a revolution in the forms of Western politics.
Put briefly, there developed an idea of the pervasive religious and moral responsibility of the ruler.
Christianity enormously expanded the perspectives in which rulers could think of themselves, and these perspectives in turn became an engine of expanded royal government.
If one looks at seventh-century England, as described by the Venerable Bede, it is hard (for all his efforts) to see much difference between the pagan Penda of Mercia and the Christian Oswald of Northumbria as rulers.
Both were marauding, tribal war-leaders whose main aim was to bring military glory to themselves and their followers.
Or, put more sympathetically, both belonged to a Heroic Age whose culture achieved a high standard of the goldsmith's art and fine poetry to commemorate its warriors.
This culture persisted in many aspects into the Christian period.
But already by the late eighth century, Germanic kings, though still war-leaders, had come to think of themselves as much more.
The single greatest genius in this transformation was Charlemagne, king of the Franks and crowned Holy Roman emperor at Rome in 800.
One of his court scholars, Einhard, wrote a biography of the emperor which was very influential as a model of royal biographies in the Middle Ages.
It was a masterly synthesis of the ancient Roman ideal of a ruler (as presented in Suetonius' Lives of the Caesars ) and a new Christian ideal of the ruler as a generous builder of churches and a devout man of prayer (though Einhard was careful to avoid hagiographical over-piety).
But when we move from Einhard to the Christian ideal of rule in general, it is at once necessary to point out an important fact about Christianity: that its book, the Bible, consists of two Testaments, which are very different from each other in ethic.
However much the Christian religion taught of Christ, the Old Testament played a vital part in the reconciling of Germanic society and Christianity.
Charlemagne thought of himself, and was viewed by his court scholars as, a ‘new David’.
That was not in itself a new idea, but its content and significance were greatly enlarged by him.
David was a war-leader of the Israelites (who looked rather like the Franks to Charlemagne), but he was also the builder of the Jerusalem Temple.
Charlemagne's self-image was not confined to David.
In the preamble to his Admonitio Generalis of 789, which above all embodied his conception of a regenerated society based on sound religious worship and a soundly educated clergy with sound mores, he compared himself to Josiah, the Jewish king who had attacked idolatry and reformed the religious worship of Israel.
The rite of anointing kings became important under the Carolingians.
The Old Testament kings had been initiated with unction; and in any case the Carolingians, unlike their Merovingian predecessors amongst the Franks, could not depend for their sacrality upon a long royal genealogy stretching back into the past.
But if Charlemagne had a priestly character as a ruler, it lay more in the duty of a priest to teach and preach, than in any function of administering sacraments.
Later rulers extended Charlemagne's Old Testament concepts.
Both Charles the Bald, his grandson, and Alfred in England, compared themselves to Solomon, ruling in accordance with divine wisdom, and Alfred as a lawgiver saw himself in a succession of lawgivers beginning with Moses.
To focus on Charlemagne is not to say that any one individual could have Christianized the political order single-handed.
The foundations of Old Testament kingship were laid by scholars who wrote on the Old Testament, not least the Venerable Bede in the early decades of the eighth century.
To us Bede is above all famous for his Ecclesiastical History of the English People (731), but his contemporaries attached more importance, judging by manuscript circulation, to his scriptural commentaries.
In these commentaries — on Solomon's rebuilding of the Temple, on Esras and Nehemiah, especially on Samuel — he constantly addressed himself to passages about kings.
It is true that he was not very interested in kingship as such, and treated every passage possible as an allegory of the church.
But to his scholarly readers in Carolingian Europe that probably only served to emphasize the lesson that the interests of good kings and a flourishing church were closely intertwined.
In one way or another Bede helped to concentrate educated minds in the succeeding generations on the Old Testament.
In particular, he was a strong influence on Alcuin, who probably drafted Charlemagne's Admonitio Generalis .
A court school, such as Alcuin led, may be defined as an institution for harnessing learning to political purposes, all kinds of learning including biblical learning.
As Alcuin looked back from the high days of his own collaboration with Charlemagne, which also involved his many pupils who became bishops and abbots, he obviously saw a model of this relationship at the York of his younger days, when Eadbert ruled Northumbria while his brother Egbert was archbishop of York and built up the cathedral library.
York was not a monastic school as was that of Wearmouth and Jarrow in Bede's day.
It has a claim to be considered the first court school of the Middle Ages.
If Charlemagne strove to achieve the regeneration and salvation of the society over which he ruled, this could only be done in association with the clergy.
The Admonitio Generalis was a programme for giving the clergy social power.
It seems to have worked.
The clergy educated under the dispensation of Charlemagne stood at the elbows of his successors like Old Testament prophets advising them how to rule — from the Old Testament.
Smaragdus, abbot of St Michael's, Verdun, in his Via Regia , illustrated many kingly virtues from the Old Testament.
David showed prudence in doing the things committed to him by Saul; Job exemplified simplicity (in the good sense) for it was said of him that he was a simple man; Solomon, in Proverbs, highlighted patience, where he said that a prince is made mellow by patience.
Under Charles the Bald, the most powerful of his bishops, Hincmar, archbishop of Reims, even used the analogy of bishops to suggest, though in a purely theoretical way, that kings who failed to fulfil their coronation oaths might be deposed.
He dwelt on the pondus sacerdotum : the burden of priests, and more particularly of bishops (and especially of archbishops), was that they would be responsible for the souls of kings at the Last Judgement.
The gathering momentum of clericalism under the Carolingians can be seen from the fact that while Alcuin still addressed his learning in many ways to the laity, his pupil Hrabanus Maurus, abbot of Fulda, wrote the De Institutione Clericorum , a compendium of theology and law exclusively for the clergy.
The power of the clergy, and their role in the salvation of society, was central to virtually every issue of theological discussion at this time.
In the 840s, for instance, Charles the Bald elicited two treatises on the real presence of Christ in the eucharist, one (a reissue of an earlier work) from Paschasius Radbertus, abbot of Corbie, which stressed transubstantiation and the corporeal presence; the other from Ratramnus, a monk of Corbie, with a very different emphasis.
The presence of Christ, to Ratramnus's mind, was a spiritual presence; the sacrament was primarily a memorial of Christ's passion.
These two treatises gave classic expression to the opposing arguments about the eucharist, and they have been of great interest to theologians ever since.
Charles the Bald was presumably not seeking to stir up trouble in Corbie.
Perhaps he saw a comprehensive theology, with the great disputes all ironed out, as a necessary basis for salvation through Christian society.
If that is so he might almost be considered the initiator of scholasticism with its dialectic method.
Many intellectual strands of the Carolingian Renaissance, subsequently dropped, were taken up again in the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
For our present purposes, however, one should notice that both writers agreed on the necessity of priestly consecration before Christ could be present in any sense in the sacrament of the altar.
Again, when the Irishman Scotus Eriugena, one of the two finest minds of the ninth century (the other was Gottschalk, close student of Augustine's works and initiator of the controversy on predestination), translated from Greek into Latin the Heavenly Hierarchy of Pseudo-Denis (c .860), he might at first sight have been engaged in something purely academic.
Eriugena himself was never part of the Carolingian ecclesiastical establishment and worked directly under the private patronage of Charles the Bald.
He had an unrivalled knowledge of Greek and Greek theology, and the Heavenly Hierarchy contained much on the orders of angels.
It had been written by a Syrian monk around 500 ad with the idea that contemplative monks were most like the highest orders of angels, closest to the Godhead in heaven.
But it was a book about hierarchy, and that is why it became of interest to Carolingian bishops, as there is evidence that within a decade it did.
Amidst all this, there never was a time when any Carolingian ruler saw the clergy as such in the guise of a challenge to secular power.
The idea of secular power in itself meant little before the propagandists of the eleventh-century papal reform mounted their assault on it.
The idea of church and state as separate entities comes later still, with the development of secular bureaucracies.
Indeed, to suppose that any Carolingian ruler would readily see the clergy as a challenge, as Henry II of England could see Thomas Becket in the 1160s, would be radically to misconstrue his mentality.
The world might end at any moment; the illustrations of ninth-century Apocalypses are charged with innovation and nervous energy.
As time went on, the threat of ferocious barbarians seemed to become more and more intense: the Vikings, the Muslims in the Mediterranean, the Hungarians, not to speak of the internal disorders arising from the division of Charlemagne's empire.
But even under Charlemagne, one sees from his letter to Queen Fastrada (791, when he was fighting the Avars) how constant were the prayers, how ascetic the fasts, how generous the alms, needed to stave off defeat and disaster.
God could never be taken for granted; even by the just.
When one studied the Old Testament closely — and it became almost dangerous not to do so — it was apparent that prayers might not be answered, and that the just might fall in battle.
The learned abbot, Lupus of Ferrières, consoling the layman Einhard on the death of his wife, pointed out that God had allowed Absalom to be killed despite the prayers of David; and Agobard, archbishop of Lyon, writing against superstition, asked Louis the Pious what use it was to suppose that God would always show up the just in judicial ordeals, when he had allowed Josiah to perish in battle against the Egyptians.
It took an advance in political maturity for Germanic peoples to cope with failure as positively God-given.
That is an advance which the Carolingians achieved.
Yet what was certain was that God would strike punitively at the first sign of sin, and the worst sin in a ruler was pride.
Charlemagne thought that the Byzantine emperors had been denied the Roman empire, which had been conferred on him instead (800), because they had shown the pride of Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, not least in allowing images of themselves to be idolatrously venerated.
He allowed no such thing in his court.
On the contrary, he allowed his clergy to criticize him with astonishing freedom, as Alcuin criticized his forcible conversion of the Saxons.
From top to bottom this was a society, which as David Ganz has so well observed in connection with the predestination controversy, ‘was all too aware of its sins, all too uncertain of their forgiveness’.
With sin and corruption, doom and catastrophe, threatening on every side, the only danger from the clergy came if they failed to know or do their job.
Then they would be like professional sailors, who, when the ship was caught in a storm, could not handle sails or rudders.
The business of a ruler was to force them to know their job and do it.
The gravest doubt which has assailed historians about Charlemagne's moral and educational programme is whether it had much effect.
Some would argue that society as a whole was incapable of rising to it morally and that little could be done to enforce it.
It is always salutary to question whether edicts are obeyed, and it is true that many of Charlemagne's do not emphasize sanctions but assume a sense of shared moral responsibility throughout society.
The above is, however, too pessimistic a view.
Charlemagne himself sometimes referred to royal favour as a sanction, and a ruler with as great conquests of territory as his had many rewards to bestow or withhold.
More than that, Charlemagne believed in God's sanctions and there is every reason to think that he was not at all alone in this attitude.
The Capitulary of Thionville in 805, for instance, forbids usury, the kind of usury which involved buying cheap corn in quantity and selling it at excessive profit in times of scarcity.
Old Testament kings had regarded it as their duty to protect the poor, and King David, to whom were attributed all the psalms in Charlemagne's time, was considered very opposed to usury (for example, Psalm 15: ‘Lord who shall abide in thy tabernacle?.
..
He that putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against the innocent’; this psalm is illustrated by one of the most inventive miniatures of the Stuttgart Psalter,c .830).
Now what the Capitulary of Thionville actually says is: ‘When famine or plague occurs, men should not wait for our edict but should straightway pray to God for his mercy; as to scarcity of food in this present year , let each man help his own people as best he can, and not sell his corn at too high a price.’
There was, then, famine in 805 itself; surely this was a punishment of God.
To us, profiteering exacerbates famine; to ninth-century people it caused it, in the sense that God punished all immoralities of a society.
We saw earlier the strong propitiatory element in the religion of the Germanic pagans with whom St Boniface dealt in the 720s.
It had by no means disappeared from the Christianity of their descendants eighty years later.
Between Carolingian times and those of the Saxon (or German) empire of the tenth and early eleventh centuries, the role of Christianity in the public order shifted.
Or rather, the moral and educational aspects continued through the work of bishops, cathedrals, monasteries, and parish churches, while upon the image of the ruler in the West a new ceremonial character was superimposed.
In a famous book (The King's Two Bodies ), E. H. Kantorowicz illustrated his theme of the development of Christ-centred kingship with the depiction of the Emperor Otto III on a page of a gospel book made for the imperial church of Aachen probably in the 990s.
Even scholars who think that Kantorowicz read too much meaning into this picture would agree that it represents the emperor as if he were Christ seated in majesty.
Otto III sought to recreate the image and the empire of Charlemagne.
But Charlemagne would have been horrified by the Babylonic pride and the Byzantine iconodulism of this page.
Only Charles the Bald, certainly influenced by Eastern concepts of rule, would have begun to appreciate it.
As in art so in ceremony the ruler came often to be represented as Christ.
When Henry II of Germany was crowned emperor at Rome in 1014, his procession making its way to St Peter's was joined on the Via Cornelia by twelve senators, six of them clean-shaven and six with beards.
The symbolism here was Christ and the apostles.
One contemporary manuscript shows Henry II crowned by the hand of Christ, while angels invest him with sword and lance.
Christ-centred kingship is totally different in character from Old Testament kingship.
The Israelite kings were actual rulers in the world, some of them good and some bad, exemplifying kingly virtues and actions, rewards and punishments.
They could be used as real models of rule.
Christ was not a worldly ruler, and some of the virtues which he preached, like meekness, would have been extremely dangerous for rulers to imitate.
Christ-centred kingship, therefore, is a liturgical projection of an image, not a quarry of exemplars.
It might be imagined that Christianity would first provide for rulers those ritualistic and magical elements congruent with the expectations of converted pagans, and thereafter, with growing political and religious maturity, the moral dimension.
In fact we have just suggested the reverse order of development.
This implies, in the earliest age of conversion, the great importance of continuity between Germanic social mores and European Christianity.
Adaptations were required of Christianity; biblical colours had to be matched to Germanic ones.
Beowulf is an Anglo-Saxon epic poem of (probably) the eighth century, shot through with Christian learning and allusions, but all about warrior heroes, their feuds, their treasure, their veneration of pagan ancestors.
Of this poem and its cultural milieu, Patrick Wormald has written: ‘Christianity had been successfully assimilated by a warrior nobility, a nobility which had no intention of abandoning its culture or seriously changing its way of life, but which was willing to throw its traditions, customs, tastes and loyalties into the articulation of the new faith.’
Another Germanic epic, the Old High German Heliand , presented Christ the saviour as a great Germanic war-leader with the apostles as his followers in battle.
Its text survives in a Fulda manuscript of c .820–30, and Fulda was a monastery founded by St Boniface as a convenient centre from which to preach to several Germanic peoples including the Saxons.
When the shift of emphasis from moral to liturgical kingship came, it must be seen in the changing political context of ninth- and tenth-century Europe, and the emergence of new dynasties all over the once-unified empire of Charlemagne; one of their principal qualifications to rule was their capacity to defeat external enemies.
Hence an increasingly important function of Christianity was the validation or canonization, through symbol and ritual, of power actually achieved.
Bishops, Monks, and Saints
Monasticism was vital to the impact of the Christian church on society in our period.
Missionaries were trained in monasteries, their schools and libraries were vital to the educational effort (the learning of Charlemagne's court school had been quickly dispersed to monasteries), their rules of life became yardsticks of Christian living which influenced lay people, and their pioneering character as landlords and organizers of economic wealth should not be overlooked.
But when we have said all this, we have said barely half.
To a tenth-century man or woman (and Karl Leyser has shown the great importance of nunneries in the aristocratic social order of tenth-century Saxony), as to a modern monk or nun, the raison d'être of monasteries was their communal worship, their liturgy.
Indeed, this liturgy affected the public order itself.
Can we imagine, for instance, that rulers could effectively have articulated their image through Christ, had there been no religious feeling in society as a whole to which appeal could be made, when they projected the Christ-image of rule?
The acquisition of the sacred relic of the blood of Christ by the important monastery of Reichenau (on Lake Constance) in the 920s, its veneration there, and Otto I's associating himself with that veneration, is an example of this religious feeling.
So are the wonderfully creative cycles of the life of Christ, with lavish application of gold, which illustrate tenth- or early eleventh-century gospel books and other liturgical books, made at monasteries such as Reichenau and St Pantaleon, Cologne.
The Aachen Gospels with its Christ-image of Otto III, has itself also a highly dramatic series of Christ illustrations.
Monastic worship shaped the religious feeling of early medieval society more than did any other single factor.
Early medieval monasticism was largely based on the Rule of St Benedict, at least from the time of St Boniface onwards, but with the liturgical side of the Rule greatly elaborated.
This liturgical elaboration is sometimes considered to be a special feature of the monastic movements of the tenth century radiating from Gorze-Trier, Cluny in Burgundy, Gerard of Brogne, and from Ethelwold of Winchester and others in England.
But the tenth-century reformers based themselves, in Odo of Cluny's case very consciously, on the monastic dispensations of Benedict of Aniane (note the name), Louis the Pious's great monastic adviser (d. 822).
More generally, they looked back to Carolingian times in their liturgical practice.
Ethelwold of Winchester built organs both at Abingdon and Winchester; their accompaniment probably made a dramatic difference to the sound of the chants.
The age of organ-building goes back at least to Louis the Pious, for whom a Venetian priest called George built an organ at Aachen in 826, and it is reflected in the lively illustrations of organs in the Utrecht Psalter, a Reims manuscript of about 830.
The abbey church of St Ricquier, built in the 790s, had galleries in its apses, and choir screens round the area of some of its altars, with the idea (as we know from the ritual order of its Abbot Angilbert) of dividing the monks' and boys' choirs; the building must have echoed to the sound of these choirs as they answered each other antiphonally from different parts of it.
The triforium galleries of the nunnery at Gernrode (960s), perhaps the best preserved Ottonian church, were surely built with the same idea.
While anyone who tests the acoustics of the westwork at St Pantaleon, Cologne, also tenth-century, will be convinced that here, too, sound was a not less important consideration than the visual effect of its cool rhythms.
The sources of Carolingian and Ottonian Europe ring with music, alas! exclusively religious.
The Life of Udalric of Augsburg refers lyrically to the specially composed chants which were performed at the Palm Sunday services on the hill called ‘Perleihc’ by the canons and boys of Augsburg cathedral.
Odo of Cluny, a famous composer in his day, took care that there should be a congruence of meaning and sound in his antiphons.
Another famous composer was an early tenth-century bishop of Liège called Stephen, some of whose chants are first found in compilations of the monastery of St Gall.
This shows one way in which the various parts of Charlemagne's empire could retain their cultural unity even when they broke up politically.
Charlemagne himself was a singer though not a soloist like David; he sang only when the rest of the congregation was singing, and in a low voice.
But he was interested in the chants.
Perhaps the most important stimulus to the musico-liturgical development of this whole period was the introduction of Roman chant under Pepin III, father of Charlemagne, at Metz cathedral where a saintly ancestor (Arnulph) had been bishop in the previous century.
Here it is necessary to make in parentheses a point of some consequence.
Metz cathedral was not a monastic establishment.
Indeed, the cathedral monastery, like Canterbury or Durham, was something peculiar to England in the Middle Ages.
But its bishop at the time of Pepin III, Bishop Chrodegang, a younger contemporary of St Boniface, had initiated a very influential rule of life for its canons which was quasi-monastic.
Within the limits of the canons' active pastoral life, Chrodegang stressed the communal liturgy.
This is where the Roman chant fitted in.
Our point is that not all liturgical development in this period was strictly monastic, yet monastic ideals strongly influenced cathedral life.
The aims of the monastic Boniface and the canonical Chrodegang complemented each other.
But whether we speak of monasteries or cathedral churches, music is a touchstone of the liturgical development (also seen in service-books, ritual orders, hymns, and liturgical sermons) which binds the Carolingian and Ottonian periods together.
When historians contemplate the widespread monastic reforms of the tenth century, they often see these reforms as an ideal instrument by which kings and bishops could counteract the power of the lay aristocracies in the regions.
This is because the need to reform was felt to arise from the normal attitude of aristocrats in the Germanic world that churches which they had helped to establish were a part of their material property.
Such an attitude, though unfavourable to the concept of a universal church, could be of great benefit to cathedrals, monasteries, and parish churches, because it provided them with protectors, and because often a high standard of religious observance could be stimulated by family pride.
But it also had potential drawbacks, because the use of a church's income, or part of it, to provide for members of a family could assume a disproportionate weight compared with religious observance.
Thus reform could involve a clash with the vested interests of local aristocracies.
It could mean the recovery for the communal purposes of the monastery of land which had previously been regarded by an aristocratic family as a private-property share in its endowments.
To take on these powerful vested interests, so the argument runs, the reformers needed the support of rulers and bishops (if bishops themselves were not a part of the local familial nexus), and rulers at the same time gained an opportunity to reduce the power of local aristocracies.
The most general form of this view is that the tenth-century rulers of Germany and England worked the church, and particularly the reformed monasteries within it, into a system of government.
Wide local powers, it is said, were transferred from semi-autonomous secular magnates to wealthy and disciplined ecclesiastical corporations which had a natural interest in sustaining royal power.
But it is easy to exaggerate the conflicting interests of kings and aristocrats in monastic reform.
First of all the tenth-century reformers should not be viewed as if they were eleventh-century papal reformers.
The latter made a root-and-branch attack on lay control of churches.
The former were still happy to recognize lay authority and lay material rights provided that the essentials of communal liturgy and communal living which went with it were safeguarded.
Indeed, laymen were often the best protectors of a truly monastic way of life.
Secondly, the reformed monasteries of the tenth century were of necessity largely aristocratic in composition, and had they been perceived to have no function in aristocratic society, they could not have been as successful as they were.
Therefore, the monastic reforms should be regarded at least as much in the light of co-operation as of combat between king and aristocracy.
Moreover, when we speak of the perceived function of reformed monasteries, we do not mean primarily their economic functions as efficient optimizers of agrarian wealth, or even their cultivation of knowledge and production of books.
There is rather a lot of evidence that what laymen especially valued was the propitiatory function with God of beautiful worship, with splendid chants, vestments woven by the most skilful women, and lavish expenditure of gold on the book covers seen in church and on the altar crosses.
This was a heroic age of gift-giving to reward the soldiers of Christ.
In the reign of Canute, an aristocratic woman called Godiva attending a vigil of prayer to St Etheldreda in Ely, was so kindled in her love towards the Ely monks, because of the ‘beauty of the place and of their devotion’, that she granted three estates to the monastery.
The appeal of liturgical monastic religion can also be seen from the fact that when Ethelwold in the 960s expelled the married clergy from the church of Winchester in favour of celibate monks, three of the former clergy, Eadsige, Wulfige, and Wilstan, returned as celibates to the new communal life.
It is undoubtedly true that in this period when new political lordships and principalities were replacing the Carolingian empire, and Europe was recovering from external attacks, the church was far more an upholder than a hammer of kings and other rulers.
But rule also depended on a degree of common purpose between kings and at least a proportion of the secular magnates.
Tenth-century kings tried to achieve a balance between secular and ecclesiastical power in the localities rather than to crush the former; this was demonstrably the aim of Otto I and Otto II when disposing of the tributes exacted from the Slav peoples.
Moreover, before we speak of the transfer of powers, we should remember that these men were not nineteenth-century constitutional lawyers, any more than they were eleventh-century papal reformers.
The juristic aspects of power were not uppermost in their minds.
Karl Leyser has shown that this was a ‘patrimonially’, not a ‘bureaucratically’, governed society; rule was by the personal presence of an itinerant ruler, the exercise of his patronage, the close bonds which he could establish with his followers, and the ceremonial projection of his sacrality.
No more than kings, did bishops and abbots rule primarily through bureaucracies or closely defined legal powers.
If their power was anything, it was the power of holy men.
Holiness, in early medieval society, was not seen to lie above all in the cultivation of a personal and interior life of prayer, morality, and spiritual meekness.
Mystical writings were much less favoured than hagiographies about famous prelates or nuns who had done great deeds.
There were recluses in this age, like St Romuald who resigned the archbishopric of Ravenna almost as soon as it had been thrust upon him by Otto III in order to lead a life of private prayer and asceticism.
But more characteristic was the visible manipulation of supernatural power by men and women who wielded authority.
A proliferation of hermits tends to occur when Christian society perceives a gap between ecclesiastical and spiritual power.
The eleventh-century reform movement caused such a gap to open up.
In the previous centuries, however, spiritual power was securely earthed in the Adelsheiliger , the aristocratic holy men and women who held ecclesiastical office.
The vast majority of bishops in this age were aristocrats.
Those who were not, but rose by exceptional ability, were invariably the subject of unfavourable comment, and when successful (as in the case of Archbishop Willigis of Mainz, 975–1011), it was because their rule drew on the capital of the Adelsheiliger tradition.
One of the most famous and effective bishops of the Ottonian empire was Archbishop Bruno of Cologne (953–65).
He was Otto I's brother, and his biographer was not slow to apply to him the biblical phrase, ‘a royal priesthood’.
To this writer, one of Bruno's most admirable qualities was a capacity to inspire terror.
His gift of tears in prayer would have counted for nothing without this.
Of course, as archbishop, he could raise quite an army from his estates, and this aspect of a bishop's or abbot's power should not be overlooked.
Churchmen justified it in Augustinian terms.
The citizens of the heavenly city, during their pilgrimage through this earth towards their fatherland of the world to come, had a duty to secure earthly peace in order to facilitate this pilgrimage.
They could not opt out.
That is why Bruno was prepared to be duke of Lorraine and archbishop at the same time.
But he inspired awe not only because of his military resources, but also because of his lavishly spent wealth, his splendid building projects, the perception of his learning, the magnetism of his personality which brought him a following of other ecclesiastics.
The same applies to many other churchmen of the age, in England most obviously to Bishop Ethelwold of Winchester.
In the tenth and early eleventh centuries, bishops developed a sacral image similar to that of kings and very closely associated with theirs.
Archbishop Egbert of Trier had himself represented on the first page of a book of liturgical gospel readings and in a psalter as if he were a Christ-like emperor seated in majesty.
The chronicler Bishop Thietmar of Merseburg has this to say in support of his view that bishops should be appointed by none other than kings and emperors:
Our kings and emperors, who take the place of the almighty ruler in this world, are set above all other pastors; and it is entirely incongruous that those whom Christ, mindful of his flock, has constituted princes of this earth [i.e. bishops], should be under the dominion of any but those who excel all mortals by the blessing of God and the glory of their crown.
Let us look at a holy man in action, and the means by which he could exercise local power in a society where constitutionalism by no means ruled.
Gauzlin, abbot of Fleury (1004–30), was not a bishop.
Indeed, his authority in the Loire region derived partly from the ineffectiveness of both royal power (though he was on good terms with King Robert of France) and episcopal power (he was on bad terms with the bishop of Orléans).
But his example will serve for many an abbot and bishop.
A local knight called Walter had usurped land belonging to the dependent monastery of Fleury at Sault.
Gauzlin rode there, and when Walter threatened to kill any monk whom he found on the land, Gauzlin replied that he had a plentiful supply of confessors at Fleury.
‘If you martyr a single one of my monks’, said the abbot, ‘I shall send two; if you martyr two, you will have four on your hands; however many you kill, I shall double the number.’
Soon afterwards, on Good Friday, Walter was seized by a fever; his house was invaded by impure demons; he just had time to struggle to Sault and make his confession; and at dawn on Easter Sunday ‘he withdrew from his body’.
That is how society was controlled in the early Middle Ages.
It was a well-known fact that not every bishop and abbot could be a holy man, though it is astonishing how many were.
Holy men were needed everywhere, but there was naturally a shortfall in the supply.
But what function had the saints in heaven if not to make good the deficiency?
Particularly was this so, since the Christians of the early medieval West followed their Germanic forebears in locating the holy in physical objects such as stones, trees, groves, and hills.
In a society which drew no sharp line between the natural and the supernatural, a very real presence of the saints in heaven was felt to be where their bodily remains rested.
Indeed, steal the relics and one could steal the saintly power which went with them.
When we look at the lists of saints' resting-places in Anglo-Saxon England, when we see how saints' remains were moved from the outer fringes to the heart of the West Saxon and Mercian kingdoms where they could do more good (for example, St Oswald from Tynemouth to Gloucester, St Judoc from Cornwall to Winchester), when we watch Otto I move the body of St Maurice (the soldier saint) in state from Burgundy to Magdeburg to fight on his eastern frontier, we witness the deployment of heavenly troops on earth as if there were not the slightest difference between the two spheres.
‘Dead’ saints could perform exactly the same function as living ones.
The statue-reliquary of St Faith at the monastery of Conques was carried out to manors which the tenth- and eleventh-century monks claimed belonged to them.
This statue can still be seen in the treasury at Conques in the Massif Central.
Encased in gold and encrusted with gems, the saint sits in a hieratic posture with staring eyes, looking every inch an oriental potentate.
It is an accomplished work of art, and it was made to terrify, and to give noblemen with guilty consciences (especially depredators of the monastery's lands) bad dreams.
Such statues were common in this part of France during the later part of our period, though most have not survived.
It took much longer for a consolidated kingship to emerge in France than it did in Germany after the break-up of the Carolingian empire.
The region of Conques suffered especially at this time from the breakdown of public authority and the rise of an aristocracy exercising local power from newly built castles.
But, as Jean Dunbabin has pointed out, the castellans became vulnerable to the concerted criticism of the communities which they dominated.
In the orchestration of this criticism, and in the curbing of local aristocrats who were quite unrestrained by royal power, no single factor was more important than the veneration of saints' shrines at a local monastery.
This was how the identity of a local community was articulated against its oppressors; this was where local men and women, also, were helped in their illnesses and misfortunes generally; this was a major instrument of social order at the grass roots in an age of political fragmentation.
Not surprisingly one finds a greater number of narratives of the miracles of dead saints in France than in Germany, because they were more needed there.
France could also boast living saints, however, especially in the line of holy men who ruled Cluny as abbots in the tenth and eleventh centuries.
The effect of Odo of Cluny on robbers is comparable to that of Gauzlin of Fleury or of the statue of St Faith at Conques on unscrupulous knights.
Odo's biography was written by a monk who had little interest in the miraculous and much in practical virtues.
Perhaps the greatness which Cluny achieved amongst Western monasteries shows, amongst other things, that in the final analysis living saints were even more effective than dead ones.
This account of Western Christianity in the early Middle Ages may have been rather weighted towards the political, and perhaps, given the political complexion of the discussion, it may be surprising to many readers that more has not been said about the papacy.
The popes pressed their primatial and jurisdictional claims with impressive continuity in this period; using every appeal to them made by Carolingian churchmen seeking to bolster their own positions; making a bid to establish the authority of the papacy over the Bulgarian church; declaring its sole power to establish a new archbishopric as at Magdeburg in 968; and developing the special relationship with the new Polish church at the turn of the first millennium which would ultimately bear fruit in a Polish pope at the turn of the second.
But the political story of the Christian church in this age is a story particularly about bishops.
Bishop Rathier of Verona wrote in the 930s that the church was one in all its bishops; that not Jerusalem, not Rome, not Alexandria, had received a special prerogative of rule to the exclusion of others (he tucks Rome pointedly into the middle).
In the 1080s, when Archbishop Siegfried of Mainz wanted to retire to become a monk, his cathedral clergy wrote to him in horror, stressing a traditional view: ‘Nothing in the world surpasses the life of a bishop; every monk or recluse and every hermit, as being of lesser importance, must give way to him.’
As one looks along the line of great bishops stretching back to Boniface and Wilfrid and the great Gallic and Spanish bishops of a still earlier age, one understands what impressed these writers.
The principal claim to greatness of even the popes themselves, before the mid-eleventh century, lay in their conduct as bishops of Rome, building churches, organizing poor relief, and resisting the attempts of every tinpot contender for the empire to dominate the city and its people.
All that would change with the papal reform to which Pope Gregory VII (1073–85) has given his name.
The reformers' ideal was a world ordered by intellectual logic (which would give rise to fully blown scholasticism), by law and jurisdiction, by a centre at Rome.
Against them stood a world ordered by ritual, sacrality, and magic.
This world was a world of bishops, whose mentality (to use the terminology of Henry Chadwick) was elliptical.
The church was not a circle ruled from a centre, but an a-centralized ellipse, the points on which were the bishoprics of the world.
This old order was not unchallenged by ideas of the universal church, with an implication of a centralized order, already for instance by Ambrosius Autpertus, eighth-century abbot of Volturno, in his commentary on the Apocalypse.
But its character was the natural result of the close intertwining of Christianity with the rule of kings and emperors.