

Blitzkrieg Triumph High Peak of Popularity, 1940–1941
Germany is Hitler, and Hitler is Germany.
Nazi propaganda slogan, 1939
It is safe to say that the entire nation is filled with a believing trust in the Führer such as has never before existed to this extent.
The District Leader of Augsburg City, 1940
By the time of Hitler's last national triumphs before the outbreak of war, the making of the ‘Führer myth’ was almost complete.
Only one major attribute was still missing: that of the military genius.
However, even before war broke out, the regime's propaganda experts were also at work on that strand of Hitler's image.
The 10,000 metres of film recording Hitler at the grandiose military parade and celebrations for his fiftieth birthday in April 1939 consciously sought to portray him not only as a ‘statesman’, but also as ‘the future military leader, taking muster of his armed forces’.
Once in the war, the image of Hitler as supreme war leader and military strategist came to dominate all other component parts of the ‘Führer myth’.
And although, as we saw, initial anxieties about another war were largely overcome by easy and painless victories, the start of the war can nevertheless be seen to mark a caesura in the development of the ‘Hitler myth’.
From the earliest weeks, euphoria about military success was quickly dissipated by the economic restrictions and the material impact on daily life, even though, compared with the later years of the war, these appear in retrospect to have been minor forms of interference.
The psychological basis of Hitler's popularity as a national leader standing above and outside of the troubles of everyday life, was, however, not substantially affected by these material concerns.
On the contrary: emotional attachment to Hitler was rooted in the notion that he represented the ideal of national community and national greatness, that he was leading Germany to greater prosperity, and that, whatever the immediate sacrifices, a bonanza for all was only just over the horizon.
Exactly how this wonderland would be brought about was, of course, seldom systematically thought out.
However, the aura of the military genius paving the way for lasting prosperity through final victory could almost by definition last only so long as one glorious triumph after another — and all without significant material sacrifice and loss — was attained.
As victory turned to defeat, domestic conditions deteriorated, belts had to be tightened and hardships increased, and the vision of utopia turned into the reality of total war and impending disaster, the function of the Hitler image as a compensation for the mounting miseries and sacrifices of daily existence gradually lost its effectiveness then collapsed almost completely.
This second part of the book deals mainly with the progressive phases of this decline and fall, charted through the surviving traces of the changing popular receptivity to the propaganda image of Hitler during the war.
Before turning to the decline of the ‘Hitler myth’, however, we need to sketch it at its absolute zenith, in the years when Blitzkrieg victories brought almost the whole of Europe under Hitler's command.
Most Germans were in expectant but uneasy mood during the first months of 1940.
Despite the surprising ease of the victory over the Poles, the real test, it seemed clear, was yet to come.
Daily life continued much as normal.
Some new measures had, of course, been necessary, but on the whole changes brought about by the war were less incisive than they had been in 1914.
Not least, the absence of any serious rationing of consumer goods, and the large number of exemptions from military service for skilled workers and farmers made it appear that the regime was well in control of developments, did not fear a war on the 1914–18 scale, and was even rather generous in its provisioning arrangements.
Nevertheless, all this could not completely conceal the tension.
There was a feeling that something was in the air, that it was the lull before the storm.
Few imagined at this stage the scale and speed of the German victories which overwhelmed western Europe in the spring and early summer, culminating in such a comprehensive defeat of the old enemy, the French, in June, and prompting the toadying Field Marshal Keitel to declare that Hitler's strategic brilliance in preparing the campaign made him ‘the greatest military commander of all time’.
Hitler himself contributed in no small measure to the further enhancement of his image during these months of triumph.
Between January 1940 and June 1941 he broadcast no fewer than nine major speeches, demonstrating his unshakeable confidence, strengthening morale, and giving further hope for an early end to the war.
In later years, by contrast, he came to speak in public less and less frequently, despite being repeatedly urged to do so by Goebbels and others, evidently realizing only too well how closely the effectiveness of his rhetoric was dependent on being able to report success and to hold out hope for an end to the war.
Already during the uncanny calm of the ‘phoney war’ in the winter of 1939–40, Hitler had hinted at a successful end to the conflict during 1940, and at the same time had further blamed England and France for deliberately prolonging the war through their influence on previously neutral countries.
Such allegations paved the way for justification of the German occupation of Denmark and Norway in April 1940 — justification made all the more credible by the appearance, at almost exactly the same time as the German navy, of British warships in Norwegian waters and of British troop landings at Narvik and Trondheim.
The German explanation that the risky Scandinavian operation had been made necessary by the planned British landing and breach of neutrality had, therefore, the ring of plausibility and seems to have been largely accepted by the German population.
The occupation of Denmark and Norway, carried through with unexpectedly low losses and seen as a major blow for Britain, was celebrated as a ‘great success for the bold, determined policy of the Führer’, whose birthday in April 1940 saw propagandists struggling to find new superlatives to express the ‘unshakeable loyalty’ of his ‘following’.
In the last reports they were able to compile, in April 1940,Sopade observers were still noting that ‘many prefer to keep Hitler than to envisage what could come after a defeat’, that fear of chaos and revolution still predominated among the bourgeoisie, but that ‘there is no doubt that up to now the majority of the people is still convinced of Germany's victory’.
A report from around the same time which reached the London bureau of the Neu Beginnen organization, based on conversations with an elderly, formerly active member of the SPD, living in a central German city, painted a similar picture of opinion.
Most workers, it was claimed, thought that it would be much worse for Germany if it lost the war, that a more draconian Versailles, the dismembering of Germany, and massive unemployment would be the consequence.
German youth stood united behind the Nazis, and ‘believe unconditionally in Hitler’.
They thought him a genuine socialist who had tackled the capitalists — something the SPD had failed to do, and had hopes for a brighter future when the war was won.
And ordinary soldiers, writing to relatives from the Front in April 1940, spoke naïvely of their belief that ‘as long as we have the front soldier Adolf Hitler, there will be only loyalty, bravery, and justice for his people’, and that ‘the most beautiful day in the life of our Führer has still to come’, the day on which ‘all peoples have recovered their freedom, peace, and equality’.
The German explanation for the invasion of Belgium and Holland on 10 May 1940 — that it had been necessary in order to forestall a breach of neutrality by the enemy — carried less conviction than it had done in the Scandinavian operation.
This was in itself, however, of little significance in an atmosphere impregnated with tension, and anxiety that the western offensive could not conceivably go as smoothly as the Polish and Scandinavian campaigns.
The ‘special announcements’ on the German radio of the rapid, almost unimpeded, advance of the Wehrmacht in the west could therefore scarcely be believed.
A month after the offensive had begun, a fairly typical internal report — from the Government President of Swabia — eulogized: ‘All followed the burgeoning world-historical success with breathless tension, proud admiration, and praise for the brave troops and the Führer's genius.
This was even more the case, since our losses were again relatively small.
The Führer's call to fly flags on 5.
6.
1940 met with a joyful response everywhere.
In the peal of bells resound the prayers for Führer and army and for a happy end to the struggle for Germany's freedom and future.’
In his report a month later, when the entry of German troops in Paris on 14 June and the official French capitulation in Compiègne on 22 June — symbolically wiping out the humiliation of the German capitulation in the same spot in 1918 — had raised Hitler's standing to unsurpassed heights, the same Government President of Swabia provided his own description of the mood.
The ‘most glorious and mighty victory of all time’ had brought forth a tide of ‘jubilation, admiration, awe, pride, competitiveness in achievement and devotion, certainty of victory and hope for peace’, as ‘the entire people, together with the Führer, humbly thanked the Lord God for his blessing’.
All ‘well-meaning’ citizens were said to have recognized ‘wholly, joyfully, and thankfully the superhuman greatness of the Führer and his work’, and, confronted with this ‘greatness’, ‘all pettiness and grumbling is silenced’.
The, by contrast, normally sober reports of the District Leader of Augsburg City added that belief and trust in the Führer had reached an unprecedented level, and that ‘if an increase in feeling for Adolf Hitler was still possible, it had become reality with the day of the return to Berlin’ from the western Front.
The function of the victories in providing the regime with even more extensive popular backing seems undeniable.
The SD reported ‘a previously unprecedented inner solidarity’ and close bonds between Front and Heimat following the triumph, which had ‘everywhere removed a receptive ground for the activity of opposing groups’and produced a hostile climate for any criticism.
Opponents of the climate of opinion, and some even admitted that it was hard to remain regime themselves wrote later of the difficulties they faced in this aloof from the jubilant victory mood.
Reports from the Wehrmacht ‘Armaments Inspectorates’ claimed that workers on reserved occupations in armaments factories did not want to be left out of the army and were pressing to join up.
A drop in cases coming before the political’ Special Courts’can also be seen as a reflection of the fall in expression of critical opinion in the summer of 1940.
It seemed clear to many that with the defeat of France a glorious peace was imminent.
A letter to a Front soldier from a citizen of Görlitz in late June or early July 1940 undoubtedly spoke for many in stating that, following the ‘unimaginably great’ events which had been seen each week in the newsreels, ‘we will never be able to thank the Führer and brave army enough for sparing us at home the horrors of war’, and that an ‘immensely great’future awaited Germany ‘in the construction of Europe after the final victory’.
Only the defeat of Britain — now widely presumed to be a matter of course — stood in the way, it seemed, of that final victory, and the intoxication of the triumph over the French mingled with a widespread desire, whipped up by almost hysterical anti-British hate propaganda, for the total destruction of Britain.
For the first and almost the only time in the Second World War, there was what can fairly be described as a generally pervading popular ‘war mood’, disdaining any premature and presumed over-generous peace with Britain, and even somewhat disappointed with Hitler's new and ‘final’ peace offer of 19 July, aimed at assuaging world opinion.
According to one report, people could hardly wait for the attack to start, and everybody wanted to be present at Britain's impending defeat.
And if there had been a degree of sympathy with the other defeated peoples — a doubtful claim, it has to be said, particularly with regard to the Poles — in this case ‘the entire population took the view that England should at all costs be destroyed’.
In the event, of course, the great invasion never took place, and as the second war winter approached, the mood in autumn 1940 began to sag.
Reports still spoke of the impatience with which people awaited the final attack on Britain.
But whatever the extent of anti-British feeling, the impatience was first and foremost a sign that the final peace showed no immediate signs of becoming reality.
The euphoria of the summer gradually gave way to the pessimistic feeling that it might after all be a long war.
Hitler's standing was as yet unaffected.
Most were confident that his military and political genius would once again pick out the correct moment for the decisive blow against Britain, and had no inkling in autumn 1940 that ‘Operation Sealion’ had been postponed indefinitely.
The continued unbroken trust in the Führer down to spring 1941 rested in no small measure on the lack of serious interference of the war in the conditions of ‘everyday life’.
And it was given new nourishment by a series of Hitler speeches in late 1940 and early 1941 which aimed to strengthen confidence in final victory and create the impression that the decisive strike to end the war — people still presumed that it would be against Britain — would take place in the course of the next twelve months.
The function of the ‘Führer myth’ in deflecting from ‘everyday’concerns and in bolstering the basis of support for the regime comes across clearly in reports on the impact of Hitler's speeches, which the SD was keen to monitor.
In November 1940, for example, ‘personal economic worries’ in the light of the coming second war winter were said to be widespread and to have given rise to ‘discontented and sceptical thoughts’.
Reports from all over Germany indicated, however, that Hitler's speech to the ‘Old Fighters’ of the Movement on 8 November had dispelled such feelings and reinvigorated ‘extensive sections of the population’.
One comment from Schwerin, cited as typical, stated that ‘When the Führer speaks, all doubts fall away and one is ashamed of ever doubting whether the right moment for our actions would be exploited.’
Similar reactions were registered by SD agencies in Lower Franconia in early 1941.
Pessimists had been saying that the war could last between four and seven years, and that Britain, which had never lost a war, would not lose this one either.
After Hitler's speech of 24 February 1941, such views were said to have disappeared, and the dominant opinion was that ‘the war would be victoriously concluded in summer 1941’.
Hitler's confidence in early victory made a deep impression, and it was widely believed that the final push would begin in March or April.
One woman, remarking on ‘how wonderful it was, with what faith the Führer spoke’, was reported as saying it took just such a speech to show ‘how faint-hearted one had become through the routine of everyday life’, and that she could now look to the future with confidence again.
After Hitler had again suggested in a speech in mid-March 1941 that Britain would be conquered and the war ended finally in Germany's favour within the next year, people were heard to remark that ‘the Führer had never held out a prospect of something which had not happened’, and that one could therefore unquestionably rely upon the imminent defeat of Britain and end of the war.
The naïve, almost religious basis of belief in Hitler is clearly visible in such reports, which show too, however, that people were above all listening in Hitler's speeches for hints of an early end to the war, and that his popular standing depended heavily upon the fulfilment of such hopes.
The war fever of summer 1940 was a passing phase, which by the end of that year had again been replaced by the dominant tone of impatient longing for the end of the war.
When the coup in Yugoslavia in spring 1941 interfered with Hitler's plans for an attack on the Soviet Union (Britain's last potential Continental ally) and a deterioration in mood set in owing to the threatening extension of the war to the Balkans, SD soundings of opinion again registered ‘with what childlike trust the most ordinary people in particular look up to the Führer and our leadership of state’, convinced that ‘the Führer has taken it into account and will deal properly with it’.’
The Führer’ had become like a drug for the people, needed for reassurance whenever doubts, worries, and uncertainties began to mount.
The SD in the industrial town of Schweinfurt in Lower Franconia reported complaints in March 1941 from the poorer sections of the population that badges bearing a picture of the Führer could only be obtained through a sizeable contribution to Winter Aid collectors, and that there were too few to satisfy the demand.
And there were reports from many parts of the Reich that ‘a newsreel without pictures of the Führer was not regarded as up to standard’.
‘People always want to see how the Führer looks, whether he is serious or laughing,’ and had expressed disappointment that they had not even heard his voice for a long time in the newsreels, for, as one report put it, ‘the words of the Führer are gospel for the people’.
Orders went out for only simple celebrations of Hitler's birthday on 20 April 1941 on account of the war.
Even so, such crowds gathered that in parts of Lower Bavaria and the upper Palatinate halls reserved for the ceremonies were overfilled and had to be closed off by the police.
The tone of the festivities was set by Göring's public eulogy, stating: ‘We…look back to an unbroken chain of glorious victories such as only one man could attain in a single year of his life, one who is not only a statesman and military commander, but at the same time also Leader and man of the people: our Führer…’
Ten-year-olds being sworn into the Deutsches Jungvolk and Deutsche Jungmädelschaft on that day had to pledge an almost religious vow: ‘You, Führer, are for us our command!
In your name, we stand.
The Reich is the goal of our struggle.
It is beginning and end.’
Confidence in Hitler was unbounded.
The central digest of SD reports, soon after the beginning of the Balkan campaign on 6 April 1941, registered ‘unconditional confidence’ that the campaign in Yugoslavia and Greece would rapidly end in victory.
Some thought it might last as little as three weeks, as in Norway; hardly anyone reckoned on longer than six to eight weeks.
And its successful conclusion indeed took less than three weeks.
Though the campaign scarcely gripped the imagination as the victories in the west had done — some reports hinted that the significance of the campaign had not been properly grasped, and that the victories had been unable to affect the popular mood for more than a very short time — it seemed to provide yet another example of Hitler's strategic genius.
But, as it turned out, it was the last instance of a complete Blitzkrieg triumph accompanied by the minimal losses which were once more a central element in the popular response to the Balkan success.
Also more significant than the somewhat diminished jubilation for the victories was the ‘hope and urgent desire that the war can still be ended in this year’.
The extension of the theatre of war to south-eastern Europe had, despite the German triumph, led to increased concern that the war could now drag on for a long time.
The shadow darkened through rumours about worsening relations with the Soviet Union and news of troop movements on the eastern borders of the Reich.
And the fears were not lessened by comments in recent Hitler speeches hinting at a ‘hard year of struggle’ ahead, and promising better weapons for the Wehrmacht ‘next year’.
On the eve of the invasion of the Soviet Union, however, Hitler's popular standing was undiminished, and confidence in his leadership among the great majority of the population unbroken.
The gulf between Hitler's immense popularity and the generally low standing of the Party had nevertheless if anything widened still further in the first wartime years.
While the war certainly strengthened affective notions of patriotic unity, this never remotely matched up to the ideal of the ‘people's community’ proclaimed and preached by the Party.
The field-grey of the Wehrmacht and a new generation of military heroes made the brown-shirted Party functionaries stand out in even more unattractive light than before the war.
The contrast between the enthusiasm for the Wehrmacht and the disdain for the Party was striking.
The Führer, too, had demonstratively donned field-grey at the start of the war, to emphasize his unity with his troops and his image as the first soldier of the Reich, whereas the unpopular Party hacks were often seen as shirkers, avoiding their duty at the Front.
The complaint of farmers in one district of Upper Franconia already in September 1939, about the ‘Old Fighters’ of the Party who were ‘hanging about’at home in Party uniform and occupying ‘unimportant Party offices’when they now had a good ‘opportunity to fight’for something, was not the expression of an isolated sentiment.
Despite frequent references in the press to the number of Party functionaries in leading posts at the Front, such criticisms persisted.
Though they were the inexhaustible propagandists of the ‘Führer myth’, the Party functionaries were unable to bask in the reflected glow of Hitler's own popularity.
While he was perceived to be concerned with the great strategic issues of war leadership, the representatives of the Party had to tackle the tedious, and often unpopular, workaday matters affecting daily life in the Heimat .
And while the Führer and his army could claim the glory for military successes, the increased — and often voluntary — efforts of members of Party affiliates to cope with the social problems of individuals or groups particularly affected by the war tended to bring contact with disgruntled ‘people's comrades’ but few plaudits and little prestige.
The inability of the Party substantially to improve its image despite the personal sacrifices frequently shown by individuals in, for instance, the NSV (the Party's welfare organization), had its roots in the unpopularity of so many manifestations of the Party's social and political role during the 1930s: the alienation produced by the attacks on the Christian Churches, the overbearing arrogance of the ‘little Hitlers’, the hooliganism and loutish vulgarity of the organized mobs, and the irremovable taint of corruption and venality.
All this stood in marked contrast to the, in many senses, basically conservative and pseudo-religious feelings so frequently underlying and characterizing belief in Hitler.
As strange as it sounds, the great popularity of Hitler already before the war had for the most part little to do with fanatical belief in the central tenets of the Hitlerian racial-imperialist ‘world-view’, and even less to do with belief in the Party, whose leader he was.
And during the war, while the Party failed to increase its own popularity, Hitler could benefit as the focus of a widespread consensus between 1939 and 1941 among the vast majority of the population about the successful course of the war and the favourable prospects for an early and glorious peace.
Although in the first war years the Party substantially cut down the number of meetings devoted to ‘training’ in ideological matters — which had never enjoyed much popularity — and concentrated in its regular work in the localities on trying to fulfil ‘the popular demand for a more lively participation in the events of the day’, as one report put it, it was unable to build up much interest in Party work or to enhance the popularity of the local Party organizations.
Party members and SA men, who in 1933 had seen themselves as posing a radical, populist alternative to the conservative Reichswehr, now took a back seat and simply provided the setting for the triumphant reception of young officers of the Wehrmacht, heroes home on leave from the Front recounting tales of stirring deeds which had earned them the Ritterkreuz .
At one function staged by the Party in Schweinfurt in October 1940, for example, the local population turned out in force to welcome U-Boat veterans at a recruiting session for the navy, but the same people ‘were almost entirely missing at the other functions of the NSDAP’.
SD reporters in Lower Franconia referred a few months later to a ‘tiredness’ with ideological ‘education’among Party members as well as the general public, and remarked that the winning over of those people who still stood aloof from the Party was ‘still an unsolved problem’.
People were largely interested only in the Wehrmacht and ‘how things were out there’ at the Front.
In the war, the Party had, in fact, to take on a number of new tasks, some of them important in the context of social welfare and organization, though not necessarily guaranteed to increase the popularity of the local functionaries.
For instance, Local Peasant Leaders or Mayors (who were often also Party functionaries) had to adjudicate on the ‘reserved occupation’ applications of farmers in the neighbourhood.
This was, of course, an open invitation to trivial forms of corruption and bribery, and the decisions, however reached, invariably caused bad blood among the families of those whose applications had been turned down.
Policing of black-out restrictions was another task which fell to local Party representatives and, in the early war years when air raids seemed scarcely a menace, frequently formed another source of irritation.
The undertaking of the welfare of illegitimate children of soldiers who had been killed, the organization of accommodation and support for those evacuated from the western borders of the Reich already in autumn 1939, or the administration of packages to be sent to relatives at the Front, were all tasks which fell to the Nazi welfare organization, the NSV.
However, such activities at best brought some credit to the NSV itself, with little rubbing off onto the main organization, the NSDAP.
Some Party reports interpreted the increased claims on the Party as a sign of growing confidence in its activities.
These seem highly optimistic, however, in the light of numerous reports, especially from country districts, in which the extended interference of the Party in everyday affairs, especially in welfare and economic matters, was subjected to fierce criticism.
And in the big cities — to go from the relatively sensitive and ‘socially conscious’ reports of the District Leader of Augsburg-Stadt — the old attacks on the parasitic existence of Party functionaries gained new strength in wartime conditions; the extravagance of Party buildings was set alongside the slums in which it was said the great mass of the population still had to live; and ‘especially unfavourable note is taken of the feudal life and dwelling of leaders of Party and State’.
The same population which hero-worshipped Hitler would not tolerate ‘little tin-pot gods (Nebengötter)alongside the Führer’, and wanted an end to ‘this glorification of persons who would otherwise practically be nobodies’ and to the uncalled for luxury-living in a Party which had come to power stating that it would wipe out such corruption.
Such strong feelings about the Party ‘bigwigs’, whose life-style was seen to clash so vividly with the austere living conditions of the bulk of the population, were commonplace in the Germany of early 1941.
An indicator of popular views of Party leaders can be seen in the wild rumours which circulated from time to time about prominent figures in the NSDAP.
These rumours were no doubt often started by foreign broadcasts or opponents of the regime within Germany.
But they were evidently believed by a great many people.
In 1940, for example, there were widespread rumours that Julius Streicher, the detestable Jew-baiter of Nuremberg who at that time had to come before Göring — of all people — to face charges of corruption, had fled across the border with 30 million Reichmarks.
Above all, the flight of Rudolf Hess to Scotland gave rise to every conceivable kind of speculation — so much so that one report in Bavaria dubbed May 1941 ‘the month of rumours’, as tales surfaced everywhere about the disloyalty, corruption, theft on a grand scale, and flight abroad of Reich notables such as Himmler and Ley and various Bavarian Party bosses, among them Gauleiter Adolf Wagner, said to have been caught trying to get across the Swiss border with 22 million Reichmarks he had stolen from the confiscated property of dissolved monasteries.
A similar ‘flood of rumours and speculation, such as had hardly been the case after any other event’, also spread like a bushfire in other parts of Germany.
According to different versions, Count Helldorf, Police President of Berlin and later implicated in the July plot of 1944 against Hitler, Julius Streicher, Alfred Rosenberg, Adolf Wagner, and the ‘blood and soil’ guru of Nazi agricultural policy Walther Darré, had been arrested for complicity in Hess's ‘treason’, and some of them already shot.
Lists of ‘intolerable’ local leaders of Party, Labour Front, and NSV were also rumoured to have been drawn up.
Clearly, the Party's public standing was extraordinarily low, even in this victorious phase of the war.
It was evidently widely felt that its representatives were capable of more or less any form of major misdemeanour.
In contrast, a basic component of the Hitler image was his presumed innocence of any of the corruption and self-centredness with which his underlings were tainted.
It is remarkable, for instance, how seldom allegations of Hitler's material corruption occur in the 1,400 or so cases among the Munich ‘Special Court’ files in which people stood specifically accused of a wide variety of insulting comments about the Führer.
The continued belief in the ‘untainted Führer’ alongside the castigations of Party corruption blinded people now as earlier to the fateful path of destruction along which the institutionalized undermining of constitutional and legal norms in the ‘Hitler State’and the fanatical pursuit of the Führer's ‘selfless’goals was taking Germany.
Compared with such an inexorable path to disaster, still camouflaged by the ‘Hitler myth’, the self-seeking aggrandisement of Party bosses, however much it offended social and political sensitivities, was only of fringe importance.
In the euphoria which had followed the victory over France, there was even some talk that when the war was over the Party would be dissolved by the Wehrmacht and Germany would become a ‘pure military state’.
A few months later, in November 1940, a report from the Würzburg SD agency devoted its attention squarely to the impact of the war on the Party's standing.
It concluded that in the light of the great events of the war, Party affairs had necessarily been forced into the background, and divided reactions into three groups.
The first group, that of ordinary soldiers, had found a new camaraderie at the Front, which had led ‘to a loosening of ties to the Party and its affiliations at home’.
Some soldiers had said that when the war was over they did not want to take up Party work any longer: ‘Many of them think that they have done enough through their service at the Front or also behind the front-lines, and point to those of similar age or younger who were not soldiers.’
The second group, of those — even including some Party members — who had previously been apathetic or negatively disposed towards the Party, thought that the time had now come when they could air their feelings.
Among the things they criticized were the arrogant behaviour of Party leaders, their lenient treatment when misdemeanours came to light, the fact that ‘the awaited purge in the Party had not taken place’, the wringing of money out of the people in constant collections, and the ‘large, elegant cars’ in which Party functionaries travelled to and from work.
The third group comprised the Party activists and functionaries themselves, who were finding it increasingly difficult to recruit new willing Party workers at the same time that their own work-load was being considerably enlarged.
‘Political Leaders’ in the localities, and especially the Block and Cell Leaders (that is, those who most directly came into contact with ordinary citizens and most plainly encountered popular feeling), were, the report stated, suffering from the fact that ‘their work was not properly appreciated and acknowledged either by people's comrades or by superior Party offices’.
An even more devastating depiction of the unpopularity of the Party and of many aspects of the Nazi regime was provided by the Würzburg SD office three months later.
A ‘new illegal Party’, it was somewhat picturesquely alleged, seemed in the process of creation out of all those — evidently disparate individuals and groups — united in their opposition to National Socialism and forming on that basis their assessment of domestic politics and the war situation.
Even some members of the Party and its affiliates were said to be included.
Critics of the regime were reported to be openly venting their displeasure ‘at new laws, announcements of the government about future Party buildings, the planned social legislation, school reform, etc.,’ and pointed to ‘the higher taxes, the restrictions on personal freedom, the ‘threat to the Christian philosophy’, the promotions in the civil service almost solely on the basis of attitude and Party membership without any consideration of ability, the activity of the Gestapo, the ‘reign of terror’(Schreckensregiment), the ‘corruption’’, and the mismanagement of Party hacks and bosses, and were said to be conveying their discontent and doubts ‘to ever wider circles’.
Poor mood and deep distaste for the Party and its representatives were evidently, then, current before the ‘Hess affair’ had its dramatic impact in May 1941.
But as the astonishing news broke of Hess's flight to Scotland, the popular response ran true to type: the ‘Hess case’ was catastrophic for the Party's image, but there were hardly any negative repercussions on Hitler's prestige.
In fact, there was much sympathy expressed for the Führer who had this to suffer on top of all his other worries.
The central SD digest of all the regional reports received at headquarters indicated ‘great dismay’ and, among Party members in particular, ‘deep depression’.
Bavarian reports spoke of ‘paralysing horror’ at the news, and-with typical exaggeration — of a mood comparable to that of 1917, while others commented that workers were thinking it was the beginning of the end of the Party and the Third Reich, and that rumours were abroad about disturbances in Munich.
According to a lengthy and differentiated report from the SD in Leipzig, Party members were ‘completely shocked’ and regarded the affair as ‘a lost battle’, taking the view that the blow to the Party was at least twice as bad as that of the SA crisis of 1934.
Business circles condemned Hess's action as treachery against Führer and people, and regarded press and radio reports — which were universally scorned — as a ‘Party swindle’.
There was sympathy for Hitler himself, who was continually being let down by his old compatriots.
Some saw it as the beginning of the end of Nazism, which had again almost ‘run itself to death with victories’.
The commencement of the major attack on Britain and ‘the complete destruction of the island’ was now seen as urgent; Germany, it was felt, could last a third war winter, but sabotage would increase, and it would not be surprising if another ‘November 1918’was the result.
The reported comments among Leipzig workers also hinted at a possible prolongation of the war through the entry of America into the conflict, and it was seen as vital that the Führer bring about ‘a lightning quick destruction of England — with gas if necessary’.
Finally, the ‘intelligentsia’ and scholarly circles — presumably attached to Leipzig University — in condemning Hess reportedly included some reproaches for Hitler for selecting such a ‘mentally disturbed person as his possible successor’, though it was immediately added that most members of such circles were ‘nevertheless convinced that the Führer no longer hears at all about the actual mood and situation within the Reich itself and that most things are kept from him’.
The essential basis of the ‘Führer myth’— his ignorance of the ‘dark side’ of Nazism — was evidently still functioning.
‘The Führer, yes!
The Party, no!’ amounted to a widely prevailing view on the eve of the invasion of the Soviet Union.
Trust in Hitler was scarcely affected by the lapses in morale, the poor mood, and the daily antagonisms generally predominant in shaping popular opinion during the spring and early summer of 1941.
Hitler's extraordinary popular standing, built up in the peacetime years on the foundations of his perceived personal achievement in overcoming economic and political crisis, ridding Germany of unemployment, and making the nation great again through an astonishing series of diplomatic coups, was maintained in the first phase of the war; it was then even further elevated through the scarcely conceivable run of military victories attained with minimal loss and sacrifice and, not least, through the prospect he continued to hold up of an imminent glorious end to the war.
But, despite initial successes in the eastern campaign, the military setbacks of the first winter in Russia marked the end of the ‘sunny Hitler weather’— the run of the easy triumphs which had formed the corner-stone of the ‘Führer myth’.
It was the beginning of the downward spiral in Hitler's popularity.
The War turns Sour: The ‘Hitler Myth’ starts to crumble
Now it is especially the occupation of Stalingrad itself which will be completed…
. And you can he sure that nobody will get us away again from this place!
Hitler, 30 Sept.
1942
The Führer has also spoken himself about how important Stalingrad is, and now he has gone and lost it.
Augsburg salesman, 3 Feb.
1943
FOLLOWING the eighteen months of German victory and triumph in Poland, Scandinavia, the west and south-east of Europe between September 1939 and April 1941, the next eighteen months from the beginning of the Russian campaign on 22 June 1941 to the German defeat in Stalingrad at the end of January 1943 brought the decisive change in the course of the war and the downturn of Germany's military fortune.
In autumn 1941 the German advance into Russia, which had begun so spectacularly, ground to halt on the approach to Moscow, and a disastrous retreat in the icy wastes of the Russian winter could only be staved off with difficulty and at high human cost, leaving an ill-equipped army to endure the arctic conditions.
On 11 December 1941, Germany declared war on the United States of America.
An early end to the conflict was now hard to imagine.
And in 1942 the first major bombings of German cities were carried out by allied air flotillas, and as the Luftwaffe lost control of the skies many Germans began to experience with dread the sort of terror-bombing which their own airforce had inflicted on numerous European cities since 1939 and which the allies were now returning with immeasurably greater force and concentration.
In this phase, too, the ideological obsessions, the immorality and criminality of the regime, and — as Germany came under pressure for the first time — the draconian repression of the police state, were becoming more and more evident, and could increasingly be recognized by the ordinary civilian population.
Information filtering back home from soldiers on leave told of the unparalleled barbarity of the ideological warfare on the eastern Front, where Soviet commissars were being shot on capture and Jews massacred in their thousands.
Inside the Reich, worrying stories leaked out about the mentally ill and incurably sick being gassed in asylums; the regime's anti-Christian thrust was unmistakable again in the reopened struggle with, especially, the Catholic Church; and attacks on the conservative forces in army and State, and the defamation of civil servants and judges, reflected the strengthening of the forces of naked power and repression as ordered administration and the remnants of the constitutional State were undermined by the expanding network of the Security Police.
Only the very perceptive and those with clear information and a wide perspective over events could fully grasp the interrelationship of these developments.
And given the brutalizing effect of the war itself and the undeniable impact of at least parts of the ideological message which had been hammered into Germans for years, by no means all of what was taking place and would lead Germany into the abyss was unwelcome or unpopular.
Nevertheless, though the currents of genuine popular opinion are now even more difficult to evaluate than they had been earlier, given the intensified persecution from 1942 onwards of even relatively trivial ‘offences’ of criticizing the regime or ‘subverting’the wartime ordinances, every sign points towards the growth in this period of a ‘silent majority’increasingly critical of the Nazi regime — even if the criticism was often only obliquely expressed — and ready to blame it for the mounting miseries of the war.
The tightening net of repression and the increased care taken to avoid ‘risky’ remarks naturally had a direct effect on expressions of opinion about Hitler himself.
Negative comment about the Führer had, of course, always been dangerous, but now it was tantamount to high treason and was punished accordingly.
This has to be taken into account in assessing the significance of the recorded attitudes towards Hitler in the ‘opinion reports’ of the regime's agents.
The usually veiled criticism contained in the report material, and the open comment coming to light in denunciations and court prosecutions, have necessarily to be regarded as the tip of the iceberg.
Nevertheless, the dominant impression to be gleaned from all the available evidence in this period is that, despite the decisive transformation in the balance of military power and the massive worsening of the mood of the bulk of the German population, the ‘Hitler myth’— though unquestionably starting to crumble and lose its aura of untouchability — still retained much strength and potency.
Since trust in Hitler had owed a great deal to the belief that he would lead Germany to a rapid and glorious peace, since despair of an early end to the war was the essential reason for the waning morale, and since the failure of the Blitzkrieg in the USSR and the declaration of war on the USA made it difficult in logic to hold anyone other than Hitler responsible for the prolonging of the war, it is worth enquiring why the ‘Hitler myth’ did not collapse more quickly than was evidently the case.
The first part of an explanation would be the extent of belief in Hitler which had built up in the years before 1940.
Although the extremes of the personality cult had probably gripped only a minority of the population, it was a minority with power and influence.
Moreover,elements of the personality cult had attained far wider resonance and, as we have seen in earlier chapters, can be said to have affected the vast majority of the population, leaving completely untouched only sections still wholly anchored ideologically in left-wing philosophies of life, those totally alienated by the attacks on the Churches, and a few exceptional individuals among intellectuals and members of the upper bourgeoisie who despised the irrationality of the Führer cult, were entirely nauseated by the populist vulgarity of Nazism, and could see national disaster looming.
For most of the remainder, Hitler stood for at least some things they admired, and for many had become the symbol and embodiment of the national revival which the Third Reich had in many respects been perceived to accomplish.
He had evoked in extreme measure and focused upon himself many irrational, but none the less real and strong, feelings of selfless devotion, sacrifice, and passionate commitment to a national ideal — emotions which had developed enormous, elemental force during and after the First World War.
As such, Hitler had become in a way the projection of national aspirations to greatness which reached back into the imperial ambitions of the Wilhelmine era, and which in added strength under Nazism had found an echo among much of the German population, not least as a compensation for a far greyer reality.
Given the size of Hitler's following and the level of confidence in his leadership which his ‘achievements’ and the outpourings of propaganda had built up, it would have been remarkable had the ‘Hitler myth’collapsed completely overnight.
Furthermore, while ‘logically’ it might appear that at least from summer 1941 only Hitler could be blamed for the extension and prolongation of the war, a sufficient platform had been constructed by years of propaganda and ideological indoctrination to buttress the transfer of the blame to Germany's external enemies — the Bolsheviks, the Jews, the British, the Americans — or to internal incompetence, naturally stopping short of the Führer, as when Field Marshal von Brauchitsch was made the scapegoat for mistakes in strategy and provisioning on the eastern Front in the winter of 1941–2.
Moreover, trust in Hitler was not simply based upon an early end to the war, but on an early victorious conclusion, and all the indications are that before late 1942 and early 1943 — centring around Stalingrad, the North African reverses, and the mounting allied air supremacy — only a minority of Germans (around a third of the population according to American surveys carried out in 1945) were prepared to concede that the war was lost.
Around the same proportion of the population, according to the same surveys, never thought of giving up the struggle to the end — or recovered from such defeatist notions — and it is fair to presume that for them Hitler remained the symbol of continued hope and determination.
Here, too, Nazi propaganda had succeeded in good measure in inculcating into large sections of the population the fear of what a new defeat would bring.
Certainly, many imagined life after a defeat would be substantially worse than under Nazism, and this notion continued to form a negative base of Hitler's support.
Finally, the material as well as the affective side of the ‘Hitler myth’ has to be taken into account.
Hitler's rule had provided golden openings for armies of opportunists to ‘better themselves’ by pulling on the Party uniform and obtaining the profits and trappings of minor office.
Such petty apparatchiks had burnt their boats with Hitler, and were as dependent upon his continued popularity — upon the continued retention of the ‘Hitler myth’— as were the leading figures in the Party.
And for the mass of the petty bourgeoisie, which had from the beginning provided a backbone of the ‘Hitler myth’, the period when, materially, the Third Reich turned to unmitigated disaster only seems to have set in from 1942 onwards.
For all these reasons, the ‘Führer myth’ could not be dismantled instantaneously, but underwent a lengthy process of decline accompanying the gradual but chequered disillusionment and alienation of the mass of the population.
In the context of the rapidly deteriorating popular mood, already visible in the winter of 1941–2, the slow deflation rather than the swift puncture of the ‘Hitler myth’ becomes all the more evident.
Unlike the case in earlier phases of the war, the German people were not systematically prepared by propaganda for the opening of the war against the Soviet Union.
The Russian campaign started, in fact, while most people were still expecting the final show-down with Britain to begin in the near future.
The Armaments Inspectorate at Nuremberg, commenting on the successful concealment of preparation for the invasion, noted that ‘the concentration of numerous troops in the eastern areas had allowed speculation to arise that significant events were afoot there, but nevertheless probably the overwhelming proportion of the German people did not think of any warlike confrontation with the Soviet Union’.
One woman, writing to a relative at the Front on the day of the invasion itself, said she had been ‘speechless’ as, wholly unawares, she had turned on the radio and caught Hitler's proclamation about the campaign in the east.
But on reflection, she had realized that no one had taken the friendship with the USSR wholly seriously, and now the realization of how much worry it must have caused the Führer and ‘the greatness of his diplomacy’ made her feel ‘quite small’.
Immediately following the invasion and on the basis of reports from all over the Reich, the SD registered ‘the greatest surprise’ and ‘a certain dismay’(though no major shock) at the news.
People were aware of the hard struggle ahead and of its significance, but were generally calm and confident, apart from a few nervous expressions of the difficulties involved in conquering ‘these vast spaces’.
Just how little the opening of a new Front in the east matched the widespread desire for a rapid end to the war, and how risky the extension of the conflict was felt to be, can be seen in the admission, a few months later, by Adolf Wagner,Gauleiter of Munich and Upper Bavaria, at a meeting of Party functionaries, that if Hitler had consulted the German people before the start of the war in the east about its readiness for the Russian campaign, the vast majority of the population would have said: ‘My God, keep your hands off, my dear Adolf Hitler.
You are our dear Führer, but for God's sake keep your hands off, don't undertake the campaign.’
Early anxieties about the Russian campaign were soon dispelled by the growing confidence arising from the rapid and impressive successes of the Wehrmacht in the initial advances.
The first ‘special announcements’ about the encirclement and capture of huge numbers of Soviet prisoners and the seizure of Russian war material seemed to support the propaganda line that the superlative German troops would swiftly destroy the inferior Red Army, and that a new Blitzkrieg victory was already in sight.
It seemed as if the Führer was right yet again, and that the end of the Russian campaign was only a few weeks away.
Hitler himself provided encouragement for such opinion when, in his major speech in the Berlin Sportpalast on 3 October 1941, he not only defended the invasion of the Soviet Union as a preventive war, pre-empting in the nick of time a planned Bolshevik assault on the Reich, but also gave the impression that the back of the Soviet fighting capability had already been broken.
Anyone with ears to hear must have noted Hitler's words, that ‘we had no idea, how gigantic the preparations of this enemy were against Germany and Europe, and how immensely great the danger was, how narrowly we have avoided this time the destruction not only of Germany, but of the whole of Europe’.
But the most significant phrases appeared to denote that Russia was ‘already broken’ and would ‘never rise again’.
The conclusion was drawn that the ‘war in Russia can be regarded as over already’, and the coming major offensive, which Hitler had announced, could be viewed as the decisive ‘strike of the German Wehrmacht against the last Bolshevik armies still capable of fighting’.
The Reich Press Chief, Otto Dietrich, also conveyed the impression, in comments made on 9 October, that the end of the Russian campaign was imminent, and newspapers carried banner headlines such as‘Eastern Campaign Decided — Bolshevism militarily finished’.
Many were amazed that the war against Bolshevism was already more or less over, but no less a person than the Führer himself had again lent support to such notions with his proclamation to the soldiers on the eastern Front on 2 October, in which he spoke of ‘the last mighty blow to smash the enemy even before the onset of winter’.
One non-commissioned officer, writing home, said he presumed that by the time his letter arrived ‘the bells throughout the whole of Germany would be announcing the victory over the mightiest enemy of civilization.
For it cannot last much longer, and for us the words of the Führer are gospel.’
The premature declarations of imminent victory and raising of empty hopes contained the germ of the inevitable decline in confidence which set in during the following weeks, as the news from the eastern Front told a different story.
Already in November 1941, the SD was reporting ‘disappointment that the final smashing of Bolshevism is not taking place as rapidly as hoped and that no end of the eastern campaign is in sight’, a dampening of optimism at the news of the first falls of snow and the feeling that further advancement might be extremely difficult, puzzlement at the failure to advance further when the Russian troops were allegedly so poor and so badly equipped, concern at the reports of continued tough resistance of the Soviet army, and pessimism that ‘the way to the Urals was still a long one, and the partisan war could still last a good while’.
In discussions about the military situation in the east, the SD noted, the question was constantly being raised about how an end to the war against Russia would be possible at all.
There were complaints when Hitler's speech to the Party ‘old guard’ in Munich on 8 November was not broadcast, for it was said that in the disappointment about the unfulfilled expectations from the Russian campaign many people ‘had felt the need to hear the voice of the Führer again and to derive new strength from his words’.
The reaction to the sudden call, just before Christmas 1941, for a collection for winter clothing for the German troops in the east was one of profound shock and bitterness.
It seemed scarcely conceivable that the leadership had not made sufficient provision for the troops wintering in Russia.
The simultaneous news that the Commander in Chief of the Army, von Brauchitsch, had been relieved of his duties and that Hitler himself had taken over the direct military leadership of the army, together with the undeniable fact that the German advance had come to a halt and the Soviet counter-attack close to Moscow could only be staved off with partial retreats, and, not least, the entry of the United States into the war, combined to produce the first major shock to the German population during the Second World War.
One report spoke of ‘a low in public opinion’.
Another, already in November 1941 explaining the drop in morale, remarked that ‘the hope of an early peace had been too general’, and, within a few weeks, that ‘the hope of an early end to the war has been abandoned’.
The Party, of course, touted the line that ‘the Führer had been badly informed by his generals in the east’.
But, even though direct criticism of Hitler seldom surfaced, the excuse must have sounded somewhat hollow.
The conclusion could hardly be avoided that the Führer, who only a short while before had been speaking so confidently of imminent victory, had been mistaken.
His extraordinary run of successes had been halted, the links of his apparent infallibility for the first time broken.
But recognition of this dawned only slowly on the still immense proportion of ‘Hitler believers’ among the population.
The set-back was hardly sufficient to dent their faith, though the number of doubters was beginning to grow.
The sagging morale and worsening of mood in the second half of 1941 was not solely determined by the changing fortunes on the eastern Front.
Events at home were also playing their part.
The gathering force of worrying rumour about the killing in asylums of mentally sick and incurably ill patients was one factor which, especially but not solely among practising Christians, was giving rise to grave concern and threatening to alienate support for the regime In August 1941, news of the courageous open denunciation of the ‘euthanasia action’ by Bishop Galen of Münster spread rapidly and seems to have persuaded Hitler to halt the killing, at least inside the Reich itself.
Some reports by the Nazi authorities on the unrest which had arisen claimed that it was having an impact on confidence in Hitler himself.
It may even have been the case — a suggestion emanating, admittedly, from a piece of post-war testimony — that the Reich Propaganda Ministry deliberately started off a rumour that the Führer, on discovering what was taking place (in an ‘action’ which, in reality, he himself had authorized in writing), had given the order to halt it immediately.
According to this interpretation, the protection of the ‘Führer myth’— of the legend that Hitler was kept in the dark about the misdeeds of the regime, and acted promptly on learning of them — was a crucial component in bringing the ‘euthanasia action’ to an end.
Opinion in Catholic parts of the Reich in particular was greatly influenced by the new wave of attacks on the position of the Church which had begun in spring 1941 and gathered momentum during the summer and autumn.
They appear to have been initiated by the head of the Party Chancellery, Martin Bormann, probably under pressure from anti-Christian activists at Gau level, for whom the apparent strengthening of the Church's hold over the population during the war was a notable provocation.
New measures against the Church — including the confiscation of monastic property, further restrictions on provision of religious instruction and on publications, the removal of the last nuns from any form a social or educational work, and interference with holy days and with the form of school prayers — were guaranteed to stir up antagonism and unrest in Catholic regions.
In Bavaria, most of which was overwhelmingly Catholic, by far the greatest unrest was provoked by the crude attempt to remove crucifixes from school classrooms.
On this highly emotional issue, an extraordinary wave of protest forced the Nazi authorities into retreat.
The episode casts interesting light on the ‘Hitler myth’ at this juncture, where the Party had made itself unpopular as never before.
Hitler was by no means altogether excluded from the angry storm of criticism which arose from the ‘crucifix action’.
An anonymous letter sent to one Local Group Leader of the NSDAP, castigating him and his District Leader, threatened that ‘if our Führer lets such scoundrels rule, it will soon all be over with Heil Hitler’.
Farmers in Lower Bavaria and the Upper Palatinate were reported to have removed pictures of Hitler from their houses in reaction to the ‘crucifix action’.
From an Upper Bavarian town, it was noted that anti — Church measures had prompted ‘the wish for the reconstruction of the monarchy and the formation of a State comprising Bavaria and Austria’.
Similar sentiments could be heard elsewhere, too, and people in Munich were arrested for saying they preferred ‘Wilhelm by the grace of God’ to the ‘idiot from Berchtesgaden’.
The ‘crucifix action’ was one of the first indicators that massive criticism of the Party no longer necessarily excluded Hitler.
Nevertheless, there are clear signs of the continued exemption of Hitler from blame and the belief — as it happens not altogether misplaced in this particular case — that he had had nothing to do with the ‘action’ and would disapprove of it.
For example, one woman who was prominent in a demonstration against the removal of crucifixes was heard to shout out: ‘I am a hundred per cent Hitler supporter and have been a National Socialist since 1923.
But this is going too far.
The Führer doesn't want this, and certainly knows nothing of this removal of the crosses.’
Like so many others, this woman was acting purely on the basis of her naïve belief in Hitler's good intentions and ignorance of what was going on.
Others even took the view that the Party was deliberately exploiting the situation, with the Führer away at the Front leading the struggle against Bolshevism, to destroy the basis of Christianity at home ‘behind his back’.
A Catholic woman — and evidently a Hitler fanatic — in the Berchtesgaden vicinity wrote, in a crude anonymous letter to the local mayor and Party leader: ‘…
You wear brown shirts on top, but inside you're Bolsheviks and Jews.
Otherwise you wouldn't be able to carry on behind the Führer's back.
…
For what you cowardly heroes are doing isn't helping Adolf Hitler.
Our Führer doesn't order such things.
He's bothering daily about his soldiers in the field and not about the crosses in the school…
Heil Hitler…
.’ Another woman, repeating with incredulity that such things could happen while the Führer was standing by his soldiers at the Front in the fight against Bolshevism, said blessings would go out from the crucifixes in the schools ‘not only for the children themselves, but also for our Führer and his soldiers, who are our sons, fathers, and brothers’.
And in one village, a protest demonstration of thirty to forty inhabitants, ended in the local school, where in front of the crucifix and a picture of Hitler they prayed for ‘the warriors, the fallen warriors, and for Führer, people, and Fatherland’.
The fact that Hitler was out of Germany, at the Führer Headquarters in the east, and engaged in the conduct of the war against the Bolshevik arch-enemy — a war which he had long prophesied as inevitable in order to defend Christian Europe — evidently made it unthinkable for many that he could have anything to do with the ‘godless Bolshevism’ of the brownshirts at home.
The Government President of Swabia formulated what was undoubtedly widely felt in September 1941, when he wrote that ‘from here, the proceedings in the homeland must appear ‘Bolshevistic’, the blatant contradiction incomprehensible; people cannot believe that the Führer approves of this.’
The ‘crucifix action’ illustrates how strong the ‘Führer myth’still remained.
That was again demonstrated in 1942, as Germany's fortunes in the war deteriorated still further, despite some success in specific military operations, and the prospects of an early end to the war receded rather than improved.
After the first winter of the war in the east, Hitler's popularity was unbroken, if not completely unscathed.
The ‘Bolsheviks’ had proved a far tougher enemy than German propaganda had led people to expect; German losses had mounted alarmingly; material restrictions on the home front were beginning to bite; and the end of the war was nowhere in sight.
The basis for the easy triumphs which had over and again given new nourishment to the ‘Hitler myth’ was gone, even if trust in the Führer was still generally strong.
Also, the direct experience of ‘contact’ with the Führer through his major speeches, which for years had served as the ritualistic form of plebiscitary ‘meeting’between the Leader and his people, to be repeated at regular intervals, took place only infrequently after 1942.
Withdrawn into the isolation of his headquarters in the east, Hitler became an increasingly distant figure.
Without new triumphs to proclaim, he appeared less and less in public, and seldom made speeches.
The Führer was no longer present among his people; he played the part increasingly of a deus ex machina , turning up every now and then in Berlin or Munich, but mostly a distant war-lord conducting military affairs in faraway parts but scarcely having any real further contact with the German people themselves.
Such contact was still wanted.
An SD report at the end of January 1942 noted that ‘the pictures from the Führer Headquarters were felt to be the high-point of the newsreel’, and that ‘not enough pictures of the Führer could be shown’.
Comments such as‘A smile of the Führer.
His look itself gives us strength and courage again,’ were said to have occurred in almost all reports received.
But the earlier propaganda image of a ‘human’ and even ‘family’Hitler, coming from the people, sharing its worries and cares, and understanding ‘the little man’seemed to have less and less to do with reality.
The propaganda had to be adjusted accordingly to the new, and more distant, relationship with the Führer which the Russian campaign had brought about.
Early in 1942, and in conjunction with the première of the new film The Great king , Goebbels depicted Hitler as a modern Frederick the Great, isolated in distant majesty, conducting a heroic — and against all odds ultimately victorious — struggle far from home on behalf of nation and people.
This monumental image was designed to stir up emotions of awe and respect, but could scarcely evoke feelings of warmth and affection.
Hitler was increasingly the war-lord, at first seen in a positive and ‘heroic’ sense, but later more and more in terms of an unyielding, scarcely human harshness which was out of touch with the interests and problems of ordinary people.
Despite the reported ‘need to hear the voice of the Führer again’, Hitler's traditional speech on 30 January 1942, the anniversary of the ‘seizure of power’, left some feelings of disappointment, since people were looking for comforting or encouraging words about the state of the war in the east and not for just another stereotype repetition of the Nazi Party's glorious history.
The SD in one Catholic locality in northern Bavaria reported that ‘the population did not listen to the Führer, but went to church’ and held a rosary.
Nor could Hitler's speech on ‘Heroes’ Memorial Day’— the nazified remembrance of the dead of the First World War — on 15 March do much to improve morale.
People were more preoccupied with rumours about an imminent sharp reduction in food rations than by the speech of the Führer, noted the SD.
And from previous experience it was for some no longer a matter of automatic belief when Hitler declared that ‘the Bolshevik hordes…will be smashed into oblivion by us in the coming summer’.
More optimistic and uncritical comments, that the Führer would not say something he was not sure about, could also be heard.
But they sounded more hollow than they had done a year earlier, and were certainly less widespread.
Jokes circulating in Bavaria at the time told a different tale.
One joke had a candidate for the Waffen-SS being asked at the muster whether he was willing to sign on for the duration of the war; to which, he replied: ‘No, at first only for twelve years.’
Another joke posed the question about how long the war would go on, to which the answer ran: ‘Until Goebbels's trousers fit Göring.’
Hitler's most dramatic speech in 1942, following the surprising recall of the Reichstag, took place on 26 April that year.
After a long-winded description of the historical background to the war, and survey of the situation in the east — hinting that the war would continue to drag on over the coming winter — Hitler, in the part of the speech which attracted most attention, demanded full powers to act immediately and ruthlessly ‘independent of person and status’ where anyone was found not to be fulfilling his duties to the ‘people's community’and failing in the war effort and promised an ‘inexorable challenge to every form of corruption and omission of duty’.
In an astonishing verbal assault on the justice administration and on the civil service, Hitler — allegedly voicing the exact sentiments of a great proportion of the population — made it clear whom he thought the main culprits were, and threatened to remove their privileged position and ‘well-established rights’ and to dismiss offenders instantaneously.
The speech provoked varied and in part contradictory, reactions, which cast light on Hitler's popular standing and image in early 1942.
First reactions, the SD had to admit, contained disappointment at what Hitler had to say.
Rumours had been rife about the recalling of the Reichstag, and what dramatic events were to be disclosed.
As it was, people felt left in the dark about what the weighty causes of such an unusual step might have been, and remained worried about the seriousness of the situation in the east and that in the Reich itself ‘something is not right’, suggesting conflict in the leading positions within the Wehrmacht and dissatisfaction of the Führer with prominent figures at home, whose life-style did not match the gravity of the times.
There was also disappointment that no immediate action had followed such strong words, and lack of comprehension that Hitler needed any further powers to be granted.
Further disappointment arose from Hitler's promise of retaliation for the bombing of German cities, when, in the days that followed, only English towns such as Bath, Norwich, and York were reported as bombed.
Few results were expected ‘from the bombing of these British spa and provincial towns’ which were not seen as fitting retaliation for the destruction in Germany.
Above all, there was disappointment at Hitler's remarks that he had made full provision for the coming winter — the logical conclusion being drawn ‘that the struggle in the east, in contrast to the hopes entertained up to now by the overwhelming majority of the population, cannot be ended before the next winter’.
Even Party reports had to accept that the speech, at least in this point, had ‘not found everywhere the response it deserved’.
‘Despondent souls,’ it was said, ‘and there are not a few of these, seem to have been struck only by one part of the Führer's speech: where he spoke of the preparations for the winter campaign in 1942–43.
The more the homeland has become aware of the cruelty and hardship of the winter struggle in the east, the more the longing for an end to it has increased.
But now the end is still not in sight.
Many wives and mothers are suffering as a result.’
By far the most popular parts of the speech, to go from the reactions reported by the SD, were those in which Hitler, claiming new plenipotentiary powers, attacked judges and civil servants and threatened draconian measures to root out corruption and parasitic privilege whatever the rank and status of those involved.
The enthusiastic response of the ‘great mass’ of ‘ordinary’people to such populist rhetoric recalls in some ways the popular reactions to Hitler's actions following the ‘Röhm Putsch’of 1934.
This time, however, conservative, bourgeois, and intellectual circles were said to be voicing ‘still carefully expressed fears about a certain legal insecurity in future’.
And among those in the front-line of attack — the civil servants, lawyers, and judges — there was deep shock and dismay.
While the shame of the public defamation felt by the typical Nazi lawyer was allegedly almost enough to drive him to suicide, reactions of astonishment, disbelief, anxiety, and criticism can be read between the lines of the responses from judges and the justice administration, and the most outspoken reaction was that the Führer had been badly misinformed and his ‘wholly unexpected attack on justice’ much ‘discussed and criticized’.
It was the first time during the Third Reich that a Führer speech had provoked such direct criticism in the reportage of upper civil servants.
In attempting to deflect opinion from the disappointments of the previous winter and the lack of prospect of an early end of the war and to revamp morale through blaming others for Germany's misfortunes — much as he had done in the years before 1933 — Hitler had lifted a corner of the veil of the ‘Führer myth’ and revealed a glimpse of the arbitrary, dictatorial, and irrational way he responded to the first reverses he and the nation had had to suffer.
The speech of 26 April 1942, held against the theatrical back-cloth of the summoning of the Reichstag, had not lived up to expectations.
It illustrated the diminished effectiveness of Führer speeches where no successes could be announced.
And it demonstrated that Hitler's instinctive grasp of the ‘gut feelings’ of the population, on which his effectiveness as a speaker greatly rested, was also beginning to leave him as a result of his isolation in his distant field headquarters.
However, Hitler's popular base of support was still massive.
An anonymous letter from an opponent of the regime in Franconia, condemning the ‘puppet show’ of the Reichstag and claiming ninety per cent of Germans shared his own desire, that Hitler ‘disappear from the face of the earth as fast as possible’, was an absurd exaggeration.
The offensive which began in summer 1942 on the southern wing of the eastern front and carried German troops over the Crimea and into the Caucasus, and the successes of the Afrikakorps and U-Boats in the Atlantic offered new opportunities to admire the exploits of the Wehrmacht.
Many hoped and believed that Hitler would prove right in his prophecies, and that the decisive blow to the Russian colossus was imminent.
And the Japanese advances in eastern Asia nourished the hopes that the United States would be completely tied down in that theatre of war.
The ‘easy’ times of war were over, however, and even the still notable military successes could no longer evoke untrammelled enthusiasm.
The human losses mounted rapidly, and the extension of recruitment to those just eighteen years old and those already forty-five extended the worries about loved ones at the Front into almost every family, while at home their losses to farming and industry had to be made good, as far as possible, with more prisoners-of-war and ‘foreign workers’.
Shortages of foodstuffs and consumer goods were also making themselves felt, and the bombing — now affecting south-German cities, too — was causing widespread and constant anxiety.
In this initial phase of allied bombing, it was less the material damage than the psychological shock of the helplessness of the Luftwaffe either to prevent the attacks or to retaliate in due measure which was harmful to morale.
This touched upon a sensitive nerve with regard to confidence in the leadership.
Göring's popularity in particular suffered as it became evident that, whatever successes German troops were having in distant parts, as head of the Luftwaffe, he was unable to guarantee the protection of the homeland.
Gradually, too, Hitler's own massive prestige began to suffer under the ceaseless bombing-raids.
For the time being, however, Hitler was able to exploit the successes of the summer offensive to raise spirits at home again in his next major speech in the Berlin Sportpalast on 30 September 1942.
The speech came generally as a surprise, and many presumed, when it was announced that Hitler would speak, that he would report the capture of Stalingrad.
In the absence of anything so spectacular, the most impressive parts of the speech were those which declared how Germany had successfully surmounted the most severe test in the previous winter, and those indicating the exploitation of the material resources of the occupied territories and giving rise to hopes of improved foodstuff provisioning at home.
A further boost was given to these hopes by Göring's speech, four days later, at the Harvest Thanksgiving Festival, promising an improvement in the availability of foodstuffs.
Since, for much of the civilian population at home, material conditions were more directly relevant than distant military events, Göring's remarks were regarded, according to some reports, as even more significant than those of the Führer himself.
Hitler's speech, in fact, though according to one local report in Bavaria said to have brought about a ‘direct miracle’ and from SD soundings to have prompted the standard wish that the Führer would speak to the people more often since his words provided greater stimulation than anything else, was reported as provoking less discussion than usual.
Nor did it have any lasting effect on morale.
A month later, its impact had gone; ‘the war weariness is just too strong.’
The SD agency in Würzburg even reported criticism of the fanaticism shown by Hitler and Göring which dispelled any hope of coming to terms with the enemy and meant the continuation on all sides of the ‘war of annihilation’.
In almost all reports in 1942, this ‘war weariness’ and longing for peace, now by no means always linked to expectations of glorious victory and often highly pessimistic, dominates much more strongly than it had done a year earlier.
Frank reports from Bavarian localities where the government and police agencies were in closer touch with reality than many of their superiors give a clear impression of the mood.
People were ‘especially despondent’ ran one report in early 1942.
Another, compiled in June, stated that no one believed any longer in an early end to the war in Russia, and that soldiers on leave had said they would not go through a second winter there.
The population, it was added, was for the most part interested only in their daily problems of work and getting sufficient provisions, and there was little talk about military events.
From the same area — around Garmisch-Partenkirchen in the Bavarian alps — it was said that the mood was getting ‘noticeably worse by the day’ on account of the provisioning difficulties.
Two reports from Oberammergau heavily criticized the German leadership, implicitly including Hitler even though his name was not directly mentioned.
The war could not be won because so many irredeemable mistakes had been made by a leadership unwilling to accept expert advice; recent decrees and ‘many speeches’ were said to have contradicted the ‘true will of the people’; and the leaders had underestimated Russia and other countries.
The war had not been necessary at all, and could have been prevented.
It was pure idiocy for countries to destroy each other on account of the few responsible for causing the war; ‘there was always talk of a long peace, and things were only really being made ready for this war.’
How little pacifist or humanitarian feeling was behind such notions is revealed by the concluding remark that ‘it is only worth while waging war if the enemy can be destroyed with the first blow, which we did not manage.’
But these and similar reports indicated that, at any rate in such traditionally Catholic conservative areas where Nazism had only partially penetrated the existing sub-culture though where approval of Hitler had for the most part been completely unreserved between about 1938 and 1940, the gulf between propaganda image and actual reality was now rapidly becoming blatantly obvious.
In spring and summer 1942, the number of cases brought before the Munich ‘Special Court’ as a result of alleged critical remarks made about the regime also increased sharply.
People were accused of spreading rumours about soldiers with weapons at the ready standing watch at stations in Munich and other big cities because of popular unrest.
Others had been saying that nobody wore the Party badge any longer in Munich and that ‘for a long while not a single person had believed anything the Führer had said’.
Here, as elsewhere, Hitler was dubbed ‘the carpet-biter’ because of rumours of his blind fits of rage.
Stories that he was physically or mentally ill had, in fact, spread rapidly in summer 1942.
Even the previous November there had been isolated rumours that he had suffered a nervous breakdown.
Now the rumours were widespread about Hitler's fits and frenzies of rage, that he had to be accompanied everywhere by a doctor specializing in mental illness and Himmler had given orders to allow no one to see him, and that he was wounded and in hospital.
It took his appearance and speech on 30 September 1942 to dispel such rumours, only for them to recur in the winter of 1942–3 and especially after the Stalingrad disaster.
Such rumours suggest at the very least a readiness to believe that the highest leadership of State and military was — to put it mildly — no longer in control of the situation.
The ‘Führer myth’ was now plainly on the defensive.
Another indicator of this — long before Stalingrad — is provided by an interesting source: the death-announcements for ‘fallen heroes’ which from autumn 1941 filled longer and longer columns in the German newspapers.
Within limits, the family of the dead soldier could form the wording of the announcement without censorship, making the death-columns (alongside advertisements) the only non-‘co-ordinated’ parts of German newspapers (though the SD kept an eye on them, apparently aware of their potential as an index of opinion).
In practice, a number of conventional formulations were regularly used.
People commonly chose between the two most frequently cited phrases —‘For People and Fatherland’, and ‘For Führer, People, and Fatherland’— to praise and justify the sacrifice of their loved ones.
Sampling of three prominent Bavarian newspapers shows that mention of the Führer sharply declined in private death-announcements between 1940 and the end of 1942.
In the Fränkischer Kurier , for example, a newspaper with extensive circulation in and around Nuremberg and Fürth in Franconia, the Führer was mentioned in 41 per cent of the death-announcements for ‘the fallen’ between May and August 1940, in 25 per cent between July and December 1941, and in only 12 per cent between July and December 1942.
In the Augsburger Nationalzeitung , the main Party organ for the region of Swabia, 62 per cent of announcements mentioned the Führer in June 1940, only 29 per cent in November and December 1941, and only 11.5 per cent in the last two months of 1942.
And in the Münchner Neueste Nachrichten , by far the largest ‘bourgeois’ newspaper in the Munich area but also with much wider circulation, the 44 per cent of May and June 1940 had dropped by June and July 1941 to 29 per cent, reached 15 per cent for the period October to December 1941, and sank to only 7 per cent by October and November 1942.
While such figures cannot, of course, be seen as precise indicators of opinion, the downward trend apparent in all of them does suggest that devotion to the Führer — or at least the readiness to declare such devotion in public — had fallen rapidly by the time of the Stalingrad débâcle.
Presumably in order to counter even such indirect expressions of opinion, the free c ice of wording for death-announcements for fallen soldiers was abruptly ended in September 1944.
Instead, from now on all ‘heroes' deaths’ were placed in the newspapers under a uniform heading at the top of the columns, reading: ‘For Führer, People, and Reich gave their lives…’
In the preceding weeks, the figure of those mentioning the Führer in death-announcements in the Münchner Neueste Nachrichten had been around 4 per cent.
Though clearly, whatever the logic of the situation, Hitler could still rely upon substantial bonds of undying allegiance among his most loyal supporters, especially of course those who for years had been exposed to the full brunt of Party organization and indoctrination, there seems little doubt that the mass base of unquestioned trust in Hitler was already in 1942 beginning to give way.
The most fundamental reason was evidently that Hitler was proving incapable of bringing about the fervently desired end to the war, either victoriously or even through a creditable compromise peace.
It was not the catastrophic defeat at Stalingrad, as often presumed, which saw the turning-point in Hitler's popularity.
Rather, it was his inability to end the war which, already in the first months of the Russian campaign and ever more strongly during 1942, began inexorably to undermine the image of the far-sighted, infallible, and well-intentioned Führer.
The contribution of the massive shock unleashed by ‘Stalingrad’, and the enormous loss of prestige accruing to Hitler as a result, was to open the flood gates to the criticism which was already present just below the surface and which — despite the obvious risks involved — now openly allotted blame to the Führer himself.
The loss of confidence which set in after Stalingrad was not least a consequence of the totally misleading and outrightly mendacious German propaganda which had preceded the catastrophe.
For propaganda as well as for the military effort, Stalingrad was a débâcle.
The facts of the Stalingrad drama are well known.
At the beginning of September 1942, the German 6th Army under General Paulus had reached Stalingrad — a city whose capture would have had symbolic significance; on 19 November a major Soviet counter-offensive had begun and led, within only a few weeks, to the encirclement of the 250,000 men of the 6th Army; by Christmas 1942 the situation was as good as hopeless; on 10 January, the last Russian assault commenced; on 31 January Paulus — disobeying orders of the Führer that the troops had to fight to the last man — surrendered, and almost 90,000 survivors entered Soviet captivity, from whom only a small minority were to return.
The story told by German propaganda, however, betrayed nothing of the mounting hopelessness of the 6th Army's position.
Early press reportage, in fact, raised hopes of imminent German victory.
The people of Augsburg, for example, could read in their local press on 18 September 1942 that the fate of the Russians in and around Stalingrad was sealed; the hour was near ‘in which the city of Stalin with its surrounded great Soviet armies and with enormous quantities of war material will be doomed to destruction…
. The finale of one of the greatest epics in German history has begun.’
Not surprisingly, the mood in the area — as elsewhere — was full of optimism.
The SD station at nearby Friedberg noted that people were ‘convinced that the fall of Stalingrad could take place any day’, even if with a presumed heavy toll of German lives.
Hitler himself had lent support to such optimism, as we saw earlier, in his speech on 30 September 1942, by stating emphatically that German troops would ‘overrun Stalingrad and take it’.
‘You can depend on that!’, he added, ‘Nobody is going to get us away from this place again.’
Goebbels instructed German press representatives on 19 October that ‘it would still be a few days before the fall of Stalingrad’ and recommended caution in reporting.
He was critical of the ‘illusions’ and false optimism which the Wehrmacht reports were prompting.
Only two days previously, the Supreme Command of the Wehrmacht had suggested lines of propaganda to be carried out after the expected triumph in Stalingrad ‘in the next days’, and took pride in the excellent planning of the Reich's military leadership after the mistakes of the previous winter.
But when no announcements of conclusive victory emerged in the following few weeks, people began — as was reported towards the end of October — to express their impatience that the struggle for Stalingrad was taking too long and costing too many lives.
The theme of Stalingrad was becoming rapidly a major embarrassment to the propagandists, especially those on the Wehrmacht staff, who had prematurely whipped up the victory atmosphere in September.
From the time of the Russian counter-offensive in mid-November 1942, the Wehrmacht reports — seen and amended by Hitler himself — were largely silent about Stalingrad, and Goebbels, probably not fully informed of the true situation, confined himself largely to warnings about the severity of the struggle and the need to avoid the impression that a decisive stroke was imminent.
The Russian counter-offensive was not mentioned.
However, the more ‘realistic’ mentioning of the hard fighting taking place gave rise to deepening depression in November and December, and despite the silence of the official media rumours could be heard by the end of the year about the encirclement of the 6th Army.
After a lengthy silence, the report of the Supreme Command of the Wehrmacht spoke ominously on 16 January 1943 about the ‘heroically courageous defensive struggle’ of German troops against an ‘enemy attacking from all sides’.
Goebbels learnt the grim truth about the situation in a visit to the Führer Headquarters on 22 and 23 January.
And on 23 January, the Reich Press Chief, Dietrich, gave instructions to the press which spoke suddenly, and without any prior warning to the public, of ‘the great and stirring heroic sacrifice which the troops encircled at Stalingrad are offering the German nation’.
A day later, he spoke of the imminent ‘heroic epic’ of Stalingrad.
Finally, on 3 February, to the accompaniment of the opening bars of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, came the now dreaded ‘Special Announcement’: ‘The struggle in Stalingrad is over.
Loyal to their oath down to the last breath, the 6th Army, under the exemplary leadership of General Field Marshal Paulus, succumbed to the superior force of the enemy and the unfavourable conditions.
…
Generals, officers, non-commissioned officers, and men fought shoulder to shoulder down to the last shot.
They died so that Germany might live…’
Even here, the propaganda had to lie.
News of the surrender of Paulus and 90,000 soldiers of the 6th Army — which would have provided some relief for their distraught relatives — had to be kept quiet to maintain the legend of total and selfless sacrifice for the nation in the ‘greatest epic in German history’.’
This, too, proved to be a mistake.
Rumours were soon in circulation about the surrender, and a few days later it was announced that 47,000 wounded had been saved.
Stalingrad was the greatest single blow of the war.
Deep shock, dismay, and depression were recorded everywhere.
It was correctly viewed as the low point of wartime morale on the home front.
There was lack of comprehension at how it could have happened and why the 63th Army could not have been relieved, and little consolation for bereaved relatives in the official interpretation of ‘heroic sacrifice’.
Psychologically as well as militarily, Stalingrad was a turning-point in the war.
It also gave a decisive boost to the decline of the ‘Führer myth’.
Reports at the turn of the year 1942–3 referring in the usual glowing terms of undiminished confidence of the people in ‘its beloved Führer’ and claiming that ‘the person of the Führer was as always put beyond criticism’had been speaking in the conventional exaggerations of the regime's apparatchiks.
Even so, it seems evidently to have been the case that before Stalingrad the voicing of direct criticism of the person of the Führer and his leadership was a rarity.
With the defeat at Stalingrad this altered abruptly.
Already towards the end of January, when it was made known that German troops were encircled in Stalingrad, the unease registered in numerous reports merged into critical comment expressing fundamental doubts about the necessity of the war with Russia and now also about the truth of Hitler's explanations for the war.
Many spoke with respect and admiration for the soldiers of the 6th Army, but took the view that the losses suffered had been in vain.
Whereas on earlier occasions where bad news or unfavourable developments had occurred, the view had prevailed — at least in public utterances — that the Führer had been badly counselled or had been kept uninformed, in the case of Stalingrad Hitler was directly implicated in the catastrophe.
The former ambassador to Rome, Ulrich von Hassell, executed in July 1944 for his involvement in the plot to kill Hitler, wrote on 14 February 1943 of the crisis ‘symbolized in the name ‘Stalingrad’’:
For the first time Hitler was not able to get out from under the responsibility; for the first time the critical rumours are aimed straight at him.
There has been exposed for all eyes to see the lack of military ability of ‘the most brilliant strategist of all time’, that is, our megalomaniac corporal.
This was concealed up to now by a few intuitive master strokes, the lucky results of risks that were in themselves unjustified, and the short-comings of our enemies.
It is clear to all that precious blood has been shed foolishly or even criminally for purposes of prestige alone.
Since strictly military affairs are involved this time, the eyes of the generals were opened, too…
. It is significant that Hitler did not dare to speak on January 30!
Who would have believed this a short time ago?…
According to Albert Speer, Goebbels referred around this time not just to a ‘leadership crisis’, but to a ‘Leader crisis.
Party reports — usually more coloured and ‘loyal’ than any other type of report in their avoidance of criticism of the leadership — from all parts of Germany confirmed the ‘especially dangerous’signs that people were now ‘daring to express open criticism of the person of the Führer and to attack him in hateful and mean fashion’.
The head of the regional justice administration in Bamberg had also observed ‘a sharp increase and intensification in criticism of the political and military leadership’ and, ‘what had never been the case before, to a growing extent of the person of the Führer, who is made responsible especially for the events in Stalingrad and in the Caucasus’.
Rumours spoke of Hitler ignoring all warnings, and of major differences between him and his military advisers.
An Augsburg salesman was brought before the ‘Special Court’ in Munich for spreading one such rumour.
He was accused of asserting that Hitler had rejected the army's suggestions of an airlift to remove the encircled troops, and of saying: ‘The Führer has always spoken himself about how important Stalingrad is, and now he's gone and lost it.’
Reports from local officials in numerous districts leave no doubt that the blame for risking, then losing, the 6th Army was attributed to Hitler.
His earlier much-fabled ‘ruthless determination’ and fanatical single-mindedness were now becoming to be regarded as a major liability, and the command to the 6th Army to fight to the last man was seen as its fateful demonstration.
Stalingrad was being interpreted as the consequence of what was now becoming to be widely viewed as Hitler's catastrophic policy and leadership.
The Landrat of Ebermannstadt in Upper Franconia, frank as usual in his comment, reported that people in his area Were too careful to say such things as ‘Hitler will give us no peace till everything has had it’, but said instead ‘there won't be any peace before…’, and meant the same thing.
It was squarely concluded that Hitler, through the over-estimation of his own strength and rejection of all overtures for peace from neutral states, ‘bears himself in the last resort the blame for the retrograde development which has now set in’.
Opponents of the regime took new heart from the Stalingrad disaster, and their limited revival resulted in a spread of illegal broadsheets and surreptitiously daubed graffiti, attacking Hitler ‘the Stalingrad Murderer’.
In Munich, the Stalingrad disaster prompted the group of students who, largely inspired by moral and religious idealism, had the previous year formed the ‘White Rose’ movement and circulated anti-Nazi leaflets in Munich University, to stage a suicidally brave public demonstration of their detestation for Hitler and Nazism in a defiant manifesto displayed all over the university buildings:
Fellow Students!
The nation is profoundly shaken by the defeat of our troops at Stalingrad.
Three hundred and thirty thousand Germans have been senselessly and irresponsibly led to death and destruction through the cunning strategy of a corporal from World War 1.
Our Führer, we thank you!…
Fellow Students!
The German people look to us!
As in 1813 the people looked to us to destroy the Napoleonic terror, so today in 1943 they look to us to destroy the terror of National Socialism.
Beresina and Stalingrad are burning in the east; the dead of Stalingrad adjure us…
Though open opposition, as the ‘White Rose’ showed, was futile against the might of the Gestapo and resistance groups were necessarily compelled to continue their work in secrecy and isolation, their hostility to the Nazi regime was now far less out of touch with the climate of opinion than had been the case even a few months earlier, before Stalingrad.
Reports were now reaching the SD that people — especially those attached to the Churches — were expressing the hope that the Wehrmacht would take over running the State, and that there would be a final victory for Germany but not for National Socialism.
The ‘White Rose’ itself evidently gave rise to rumours, widely circulating in Bavaria and in many other parts of Germany ‘about large demonstrations of Munich students’, unrest, and even revolutionary feeling in Munich, ‘and people were talking about graffiti and fly-leaf propaganda with a Marxist content on public buildings in Berlin and in other cities’.
In a play on the official Nazi designation of Munich as ‘Capital of the Movement’, it was now dubbed unofficially the ‘Capital of the Counter-Movement’; it was said that propaganda advocating the restoration of the monarchy was increasing, that it was no longer advisable to use the ‘Heil Hitler’ greeting or wear the Party arm-badge, and that ‘sooner or later’a revolution could break out in Munich.
Various reports confirmed that the ‘German Greeting’ was indeed seldom used now in southern Bavaria, and was sometimes demonstratively refused by relatives of ‘fallen’soldiers.
Jokes and witticisms about the Führer proliferated.
One man was brought before the ‘Special Court’ for saying Germans had no need to fear starvation in this war, because Hitler had the biggest farm in the world ‘followed around by 90 million cattle and running an enormous pigsty’.
To the popular hit melody with the first line, ‘It all passes by, it all fades away,’ people added a second line: ‘Hitler falls in April, the Party in May.’
And there was a new outpouring of rumours about Hitler's health: that he was ill, mad, blind, had suffered a nervous breakdown, or that as a result of mental illness he had been forced to hand over the leadership of the State to the military, and had been shot.
Rumours about Hitler's health and mental condition had been further prompted by the rescheduling of his speech on ‘Heroes’
Memorial Day’, 14 March, to the following week, 21 March.
According to the central SD digest, the speech dispelled the rumours about his health.
This was an exaggeration.
The SD station at Kitzingen in Lower Franconia, for example, which in its special report directly on the speech had declared that ‘the rumours about the Führer are presumably disposed of’ mentioned in its regular report a few days later that some workers had been heard saying that, from the speed and tone of voice, it had not been the Führer himself, but a substitute who had spoken, and Hitler himself had suffered such a shock from Stalingrad that he had to be kept under closely guarded house arrest on the Obersalzberg.
The speech, an undeniable disappointment, had indeed been given in an unusually dull monotone and at great speed.
It was criticized as rhetorically poor, depressing in its tone, and not matching the occasion — especially in the absence of any special reference to the dead of Stalingrad.
Above all there was rank disbelief at the figure of 542,000 dead which Hitler gave as the total German losses for the whole war.
Some thought the Führer must have meant only the losses on the eastern Front, not including Stalingrad and those missing, and put the real figure at something like one and a half million.
A letter to the Reich Propaganda Ministry from a former employee currently in a military hospital, dealing with the mood among soldiers, stated that he had yet to meet a single one who accepted the Führer's figures.
Their own experiences at the Front, and the fact that in many of their villages and townships heavier losses had already been recorded than in the First World War, contradicted what Hitler had had to say.
The letter concluded: ‘Convinced Nazis who are really inwardly certain of our final victory don't seem to be too plentiful even among people who have otherwise courageously held their own at the Front.
Their doubts can be seen over and over again from their words.’
That hardly anyone was prepared to accept the Führer's word on the losses suffered by Germany is a clear indication of how far the decline in confidence had reached.
The mood was despairing, despondent, and war-weary — apathetic rather than rebellious.
But the great national hopes built around the figure of Hitler were now falling in ruins; fewer and fewer looked to a future under his leadership.
Outwardly much appeared to remain the same.
Hitler's birthday was celebrated with most of the usual trappings and in ‘dignified and serious fashion’ as befitted the war situation.
It was said to have brought new expressions of trust and gratitude for the Führer, ‘the greatest gift for the German people’.
But the SD added that in the areas tormented by allied bombing the trust of the people was expressed ‘with more reserve’, and non-attendance at the celebrations was carefully excused by saying ‘that it shouldn't be taken amiss if, despite all our love for the Führer, we can't celebrate his birthday this year with the usual joy’.
Where it was still highly risky and dangerous to speak negatively of the Führer, people frequently vented their wrath on the Party and its representatives.
Here, too, of course, a misplaced word could result in a denunciation and draconian ‘punishment’, but plainly the massive growth in the number of critics of the Party made possible a wide range of devastating comment.
Relatively ‘self-contained’ and cohesive social groups such as peasants and church-going Catholics, generally knowing whom to trust and with a low level of organization in the NSDAP, were now often unrestrained in their attacks.
The hope that at least the disappearance of the Party might be one thing to emerge from a lost war was said in one report to be more widespread in rural areas than appeared to be so on the surface.
Aware of their worsening position, many local functionaries no longer felt as sure of themselves and were less anxious to emphasize their Party loyalties.
Goebbels's rousing ‘total war’ speech on 18 February 1943 stirred the Party faithful again for a short time.
But outside their ranks its reception was a mixed one; some, in circles of the ‘intelligentsia’, reportedly labelled the speech a piece of ‘theatre’ and a ‘comedy’designed for those who had always screamed ‘Ja’to everything.
And what impact it had made was soon dissipated when it was realized that the ‘total’ war was still only partial after all, and that the well-to-do and high-and-mighty were still able to avoid the burdens which fell on ordinary people.
Some wits even suggested that the answer to the labour shortage which the ‘total war’ measures were seeking to combat was to be found by closing down the Propaganda Ministry and combing out Party offices.
By March and April morale in the Party had fallen again, and a wave of propaganda meetings aimed at reviving the post-Stalingrad gloom were practically a total failure.
The propaganda was described as ‘ridiculous’ and attendance was frequently ‘catastrophic’.
A report from the Lower Franconian town of Kitzingen in May 1943, dealing particularly with opinion among academics, salespeople, and the bourgeoisie — groups which had earlier tended to be pro-Nazi in their sympathies — stated that ‘a disgust about the Party was building up among the people, and a rage which would one day boil over’.
The same report, reversing the earlier legend excusing the Führer because he was being kept in the dark by his underlings in the Party, added: ‘Even the Führer has lost much sympathy among the people because he has apparently let himself be taken in by his Party people and does not seem to notice what things are like in the State today.’
The images of Führer and Party, which for almost a decade after the ‘seizure of power’ had been largely separate and even diametrically opposed, were now starting to blur in public consciousness.
But a diminishing, though still powerful, minority ensured that the ‘Hitler myth’ was kept alive and could even be temporarily revitalized from time to time when there was a transient upturn in Germany's fortunes or the promise of suitable retaliation for people's miseries.
The total collapse of the ‘Hitler myth’ was reserved for the last phase of the war.
Defeat and Disaster The ‘Hitler Myth’ collapses
The Führer has it easy.
He doesn't have to look after a family.
If the worst comes to the worst in the war, he'll leave us all in the mess and put a bullet through his head.
A woman in an air-raid shelter in Schweinfurt, April 1944
If people had imagined in 1933 that things would have come to such a pitch, they'd never have voted for Hitler.
An anonymous German, March 1945
ACCORDING to Max Weber's ‘model’‘charismatic leadership’ could not survive lack of success.
And indeed, as we have seen, as ‘his’ astonishing run of victories turned gradually but inexorably into calamitous defeat, the tide of Hitler's popularity first waned rather slowly, then ebbed sharply — a decline accelerating decisively after Stalingrad, when Hitler's personal responsibility for the catastrophe was widely recognized.
The German propaganda machine — and Hitler himself in his speeches — continued, of course, to hammer home the theme that, in contrast to the First World War,Front and Heimat were indivisibly united, and the bonds between leadership and people unbreakable.
However, the reports on morale and popular opinion which were reaching the regime's leaders painted a different picture.
Only a minority of the population, it seems, as yet contemplated capitulation.
Fear of the consequences of defeat and the absence of any clear alternative but to continue fighting, especially following the allied stipulation of ‘unconditional surrender’, were sufficient to ensure that.
But, as Stalingrad showed, even fewer were moved by the notion of heroic self-sacrifice in a glorious Götterdämmerung along the lines that Hitler and Goebbels had lauded as the fate of the 6th Army.
The desire for peace was the increasingly dominant and constant theme of popular opinion.
In the face of mounting defeats, personal losses, misery, and sacrifice, Hitler's earlier successes began to be seen in a new light, and he was now increasingly blamed for policies which had led to the war, and for his failure to terminate the war and produce the desired peace.
And the gap which had to some extent been there from the beginning in popular consciousness between ‘Hitler's war’ for racial empire and territorial aggrandisement, and the patriotic defence of the ‘Fatherland’was widening.
Whatever the distressing news coming from afar, from the battlefields in Russia, North Africa, and elsewhere, for growing numbers of people in cities and towns on the home front the latter half of the war was increasingly dominated by the threat from the skies, as Luftwaffe defences crumbled and allied air supremacy became as good as total.
A key component of Hitler's image had formerly been that the buildup of Germany's military might would bring the strengthening of defence against outside threat: a policy of ‘peace through strength’.
Now those enemies were pouring through non-existent defences and laying waste the cities of the Reich.
Mastery of the skies over large parts of Germany had already passed to the allies in 1942, and heavy raids, chiefly by the Royal Air Force, had been carried out on cities mainly in northern and north-western Germany (Hamburg, Lübeck, Rostock, Cologne, Essen, Bremen, and others).
Smaller raids which followed on the south-German cities of Munich, Augsburg, and Nuremberg, had a disproportionate psychological effect in demonstrating the extent of allied air supremacy in the capacity to reach so far south, and in illustrating that few could now consider themselves immune from the dangers of bombing.
After the directives following the Casablanca Conference of January 1943 had linked the British ‘area bombing’ by night to the American daytime ‘precision raids’in a ‘round-the-clock bombing’strategy, which formed the allied combined-bomber offensive, the raids — described, in this case aptly, by German propaganda as ‘terror-bombing’— escalated rapidly in extent and ferocity.
A total of 41,440 tons of bombs were dropped on Germany in 1942, rising to 206,000 tons in 1943, and 1,202,000 tons in 1944.
The first four months of 1945, which brought the total devastation of the city centres of Nuremberg, Würzburg, and Dresden, saw a further 471,000 tons dropped.
Roughly a third of the population are estimated to have suffered directly from the bombing: more than a quarter of homes in Germany were damaged in some way; fourteen million persons lost some property through bombing; between seventeen and twenty millions were deprived at some time of electricity, gas, or water; nearly five millions had to evacuate because of‘air terror’; 305,000 people were killed.
As the above figures show, the year 1943 brought a major stepping-up of the bombing campaign.
Now, as before, the industrial heartland in and around the Rhine-Ruhr area bore the heaviest brunt of the attacks, as British Bomber Command launched a series of forty-three major raids in the ‘Battle of the Ruhr’ between March and July 1943.
An SD digest of reports on the effects of the raids of late May and early June 1943 on towns and cities in western Germany, culminating in a devastating incendiary attack on Wuppertal-Barmen on 30 May, provides an indication of the impact on political attitudes.
Many people were said to said to have lost their nerve in the ‘catastrophe’ and in the heat of the moment to have given voice to ‘comments hostile to the State’.
One man in Düsseldorf allegedly remarked, even in the presence of a member of the SS, that ‘we have the Führer to thank for this’.
Here, as was reported in many other bombed areas, people were making a point of refusing or avoiding the ‘Heil Hitler’ greeting, which had almost disappeared.
More damaging still were the many tales of the poor morale and ‘hostile attitude’ of the bombed-out population.
Among other stories, it was rumoured that a gallows had been set up in Düsseldorf with a picture of the Führer hanging from it.
And a joke doing the rounds in various parts of the Reich had a Berliner complaining about the severity of a raid which caused all the glass to fall out of window-frames as much as five hours later and his partner from Essen retorting that that was nothing at all: pictures of the Führer were still flying out of the window fourteen days after the last attack on Essen.
When, at the end of July and the beginning of August 1943, four RAF raids practically wiped out the centre of Hamburg — Germany's second city — in fire-storms, killing some 40,000 people, rumours spread that unrest had had to be put down by the police and SA or Wehrmacht, and that there was a ‘November mood’— an allusion to the revolutionary mood of November 1918 — in the Reich which would rise up against the unbearable air raids.
In the light of such reflections of opinion, stereotype reports that people ‘with insight’ were saying the Führer could not be aware of the extent of the damage, otherwise more extensive rescue operations would have been deployed, or that people were looking ‘full of trust’to the Führer and expressing the wish that he should stir them up and strengthen their faith, have a hollow ring to them.
Although their ‘defeatist’ tone was highly unwelcome to the regime's leadership, the SD central digests were usually milder in their statements than many of the reports which were coming into headquarters from the provincial SD stations.
The reports of the SD station in Würzburg and its subsidiary agencies in the area offer an opportunity to explore the changing mood of the population of Lower Franconia in the light of the five air raids on the local town of Schweinfurt, an important centre of ball-bearing production, so crucial for the armaments industry, between August 1943 and April 1944.
Already after the first raid in August 1943, SD agencies in Lower Franconia reported widespread shock and depression among the population, even among the previously ‘reliable’ sections who had been convinced of German victory.
Party members themselves were now avoiding the ‘Heil Hitler’ greeting, and the Party badge was being worn less and less frequently.
More serious than the actual material damage in Schweinfurt itself were the psychological effects of the first raids.
These were made worse by the tales and rumours which had been spread by evacuees about the devastation in north German cities, especially following the destruction of Hamburg.
The ‘most dreadful’ feeling was being completely exposed to the bombing, powerless to do anything about it, and with no sign of any retaliation.
The second raid on Schweinfurt in October 1943 prompted many inhabitants of the town to take flight and seek accommodation in nearby villages.
Some people in Würzburg saw the raid as revenge for the pogrom against the Jews in November 1938, and ‘intellectual circles’ reportedly took the view that Germany ‘should stop the war, if one was not in a position really to prevent attacks on towns and industrial centres’.
People in Schweinfurt itself who had suffered directly from the bombing were said to be completely demoralized and had declared that they would not hold out much longer in ‘such nerve-racking days’.
Women from the ‘lower classes’ demanded an end to it all, saying ‘1918 had not been so bad, and things would now too surely not be so bad’.
The SD regarded the ‘terror raids’ and the rumours about them as ‘a negative morale factor of the first order’which had unquestionably produced ‘a danger for the will to resist’, especially among women.
Fear and panic gripped people in the nearby countryside and small towns, too, and many took flight into fields and woods at the air-raid warning.
The impression in one village was that foreign broadcasts were being listened to everywhere, and that the ‘text of leaflets, accusing Hitler of having started the war with every country, was approved, and the Führer cursed and damned’.
Since enemy planes had been over the village, ‘they have all lost their heads’.
According to rumours circulating in Würzburg, Party representatives in Nuremberg were finding it difficult to carry out their functions following the recent raids on the city.
Their uniform ‘acted like a red rag to a bull’ on the population; people had lost all respect for them held them to blame for their plight, and vented their anger o At the beginning of September, the SD agency in Kitzingen felt that the loss of confidence in the Party and the regime's leadership was rapidly moving towards a dangerous level.
Göring was a particular target of popular displeasure for allegedly neglecting the build-up of the Luftwaffe, but the criticism extended to ‘the person of the Führer’ himself.
This was the case, too, after the heavy raid on Frankfurt in October 1943.
Inhabitants of the stricken city taking refuge in adjacent parts of Lower Franconia, where many had relatives, asked ‘how it was possible for the Führer to allow a systematic destruction of our German Fatherland’.
He must know, they added, that German industry would be left in complete ruins if the raids continued unhindered.
If the weapons for a retaliatory strike were to hand, then it was ‘damned high time’ to hit back.
But if — and that was the general fear — that was not the case, then it was time to stop all the futile talk of coming retaliation and to end the war as soon as possible.
After the fourth and fifth raids on Schweinfurt on 24 and 25 February 1944, a new wave of criticism of the Party functionaries arose.
It was greatly taken amiss that they were not to be seen in the bombed vicinities.
In mid April the SD in Schweinfurt reported: ‘The people curse quite openly.
If the District Leader and Landrat or the Mayor can't be torn to pieces any more, they go on to the State leadership and the Führer himself.
Thus, a woman with two small children in the air-raid shelter is said to have commented: ‘The Führer has it easy.
He doesn't have to look after a family.
If the worst comes to the worst in the war, he'll leave us all in the mess and put a bullet through his head!
He's always said himself that he won't experience defeat!’
This interpretation of the words of the Führer was frequently voiced.’
One of the last extant reports of the SD agency in Schweinfurt, from May 1944, attributed the defeatist attitude of the population, especially of the workers, directly to the effects of the bombing.
Workers were reported as saying: ‘Our government ought to reach a peace before our entire villages and towns are destroyed, since we can't do anything about it anyway.’
By this time, according to the findings of the United States Strategic Bombing Survey , more than three-quarters of the German people regarded the war as lost, and for a large proportion of these the raids played a major part in their loss of hope.
It is commonly assumed that the strategy of ‘area bombing’— indiscriminate attacks on largely civilian target ‘areas’, usually in city centres — failed in its express aim of undermining and destroying the morale and will to resist of the German people and instead merely stimulated such an intense hatred of the enemy that the bonds between regime and people were strengthened, not weakened.
Of course, German propaganda was keen to emphasize that the ‘gangsters of the sky’ had only made the resolve and unity of the people stronger than ever, a point indeed underlined in some SD reports.
And no doubt some ‘inner cohesion’ of the ‘community of fate’was stimulated by the intensification of feelings of hatred towards the allied bombers and especially the thirsting for retaliation against Britain.
The majority of opinion reports from the SD and other agencies of the regime reaching the Nazi leadership point nevertheless towards conclusions about the impact on morale similar to those we have witnessed for the Schweinfurt area.
And Goebbels's own diary jottings leave little doubt that he thought morale was severely shaken by the bombing, and the will to resist potentially weakened.
Post-war interviews carried out by the United States Strategic Bombing Survey , confirmed such impressions: one out of three Germans indicated that his morale was affected by bombing more than any other single factor; nine in ten of those interviewed mentioned bombing as the greatest hardship they had to suffer in the war; three in five admitted to war-weariness on account of the bombing, and the percentage not wanting to go on with the war was significantly higher in heavily bombed than unbombed towns; more than two-fifths said they lost hope in German victory when the raids did not stop; and the percentage of people with confidence in the leadership was fourteen per cent lower in heavily bombed than in unbombed towns.
In twelve per cent of cases people volunteered comments such as: ‘In the bunker, people cursed the Führer.’
The overall conclusion was that bombing did not stiffen morale, but seriously depressed it: fatalism, apathy, defeatism, and other psychological effects were all more strongly encountered among bombed than  umbombed sections of the population.
And much of the hate and anger aroused by the bombing was channelled against the Nazi regime which was blamed for its failure to ward off the attacks.
It seems clear, therefore, that demoralization caused by the bombing raids was considerable, the damage inflicted upon the standing of the German leadership substantial.
The mistake of allied strategists was in imagining that such a regime could possibly be brought to a state of collapse by a decline in popular morale.
Apathy and a ‘retreat into the private sphere’ rather than mounting opposition characterized the mood of the vast majority.
And escalating repression by the Nazi State — according to one calculation, roughly one in every 1,200 Germans was arrested by the Gestapo for a political or religious ‘offence’ in 1944 — was a heavy deterrent to any ‘deviant’activity.
What political integration still remained had now for the most part little to do with Nazi idealism or belief in the genius of the Führer, but in the common fear of the consequences of defeat and hatred of the enemy coupled with reserves of patriotic defiance.
In three important — and partially overlapping — groups, however, the ‘Führer myth’ was still disproportionately strong, even if here too there were distinct signs of its decay.
A large proportion of the younger generation, growing up during the Nazi era and highly impressionable, had been fully exposed to the suggestive force of propaganda and had succumbed more uncritically than any other section of the population to the emotional appeal of the ‘Führer myth’.
The ‘socialization’ in school and in the Nazi youth movement — eleven-year-olds were told on their induction in the Jungvolk that ‘from today onwards your life belongs to the Führer’— kept alive the heroic image of the Führer in many young Germans even when their parents were becoming increasingly critical of Hitler.
An SD report on youth in August 1943 suggests a continuation of the old detachment of Hitler from the Party.
The report painted a bleak picture of attitudes towards the Nazi Party.
Members of the Hitler Youth itself allegedly saw the Party already as a piece of history, had no feelings of loyalty towards it, and had no reservations about criticizing it.
Hitler's image, however, stood apart from this: ‘For many of these young ones, the Führer is not the representative of the Party, but in the first instance Führer of the State and above all Supreme Commander of the Wehrmacht.’
Even so, there can be little doubt that by the middle of the war, the hold of the ‘Hitler myth’ was among German youth, too, in a process of disintegration.
Though the majority of youth continued outwardly to behave in a conformist manner, the growth in numerous big cities of deliberately non-conformist and sometimes actively oppositionist youth groups delighting in physical as well as verbal attacks on Hitler Youth brigades, wearing ‘western’ clothes, aping English mannerisms, and listening to jazz, showed that Nazism was losing ground among what had been its strongest area of support.
These youth cliques, with picturesque names like Edelweisspiraten or, based on their taste in music,Swing , were regarded as a political menace by the regime, and for the most part their behaviour did contain a distinct political dimension — rejection of the Party, the Hitler Youth, the regime, and the Führer himself and the lack of freedom and dull uniformity which his rule represented.
Even among the great majority of youth who bowed more readily (or with forced conformity) to the demands imposed on them in wartime conditions, the ‘führer myth’ was losing its potency.
The findings of a recent sociological study, based on retrospective reflections of former ‘flak helpers’, then fifteen- or sixteen-year-olds and called up from their schools from the beginning of 1943 to assist in the manning of anti-aircraft batteries, suggest that the ‘Hitler myth’ was in rapid decline from 1942–3 onwards.
The ‘flak helpers’ had been little more than children at the time of Hitler's great ‘triumphs’, and in the hail of bombs, the destruction, and the retreating armies, the remaining image of the Führer as the military genius bore scant relation to their daily experience of reality.
The ‘Führer myth’ remained relatively strong in a second important group — that of ordinary Front soldiers.
Based on letters from the Front, the SD station in Halle reported in June 1943 on the strong morale among soldiers compared with that at home, and on the critical attitude of many soldiers to the poor morale in the Heimat .
Such assertions have to be viewed with some scepticism.
Because of the censorship, and the obvious need to avoid dangerously critical comments about the regime and the war, the correspondence to and from the front provides no easy guide to political attitudes.
However, it was not necessary to be elusively positive about Hitler or the regime in order to escape the censor's wrath, and it seems significant, therefore, that many letters home continued to emphasize trust in the Führer, often accompanied by outrightly Nazi sentiments.
Interrogations of German prisoners-of-war captured in 1944 and 1945 on the western Front also revealed surprisingly high rates of continued trust in the Führer, almost down to the very end of the war.
On the other hand, the soldiers' correspondence demonstrates, too, in spite of the known censorship, some highly critical comments about Hitler.
One soldier, in June 1943, spoke a growing indifference among his comrades.
More than half of the men, at a recent inspection, did not know when Hitler had come to over and ‘nobody cares any longer about it’.
Among the ordinary soldiers, he said, everything could be spoken about: ‘The time of fanaticism and non-toleration of the views of others is past, and gradually one begins to think more clearly and coolly.’
Another letter, from February 1944, asked how many would still be alive to enjoy the day the Führer had always promised them, when ‘the sun would shine again’.
By mid-1944, a fifth to a quarter of the ‘Front correspondence’ was negative in tone.
The third group, and the one where the ‘Führer myth’ still prevailed most strongly of all, was that of the Party activists themselves.
For those ‘Old Fighters’ who had been enthusiastic Hitler supporters even before the demise of the Weimar Republic, for the direct beneficiaries of Nazism — the careerists, power-seekers, and apparatchiks who had the Third Reich to thank for their offices and careers in Party and State, and for the ideologically committed who had ‘burnt their boats’with the Nazi regime, the belief in the Führer's powers to bring about a miracle and achieve final victory in the face of all the odds was the blind faith rooted in self-interest and fear of the future.
Morale among the Party faithful declined more slowly than among the rest of the population.
The process of disillusionment with the Führer also took place only gradually, and was subject to temporary reversals when the war situation momentarily seemed brighter and to stubborn remarks of wholly irrational but unshakeable belief even when the odds were hopeless.
In the six months following Stalingrad, Germany's fortunes worsened still further as a result of the reversals in the east, the allied landing in Sicily and Calabria, and the fall of the Mussolini regime in Italy.
The last of these in particular sent shock waves running through those still loyal to Nazism, produced new hope among illegal opposition groups in Germany, and stirred up more widely the feeling that the seemingly impregnable Nazi regime might after all suddenly be toppled.
‘The argument that in certain circumstances a similar development could take place in Germany can be heard constantly’, reported the SD in August 1943, and ‘the idea that the form of government thought in the Reich to be unshakeable could in Germany, too, suddenly be altered, is very widespread.’
As usual, the finger was pointed at cases of corruption among leader figures in the Party, the State, and the
The reactions to the speech were an indication of reserves of ‘charisma’ which Hitler still possessed.
A craftsman in Kitzingen (Lower Franconia) commented: ‘It's remarkable what power the Führer has.
The same people who said on Tuesday morning that Germany was defeated didn't want to know any more of this on Tuesday evening.’
However, the strong suspicion seems justified that the speech, and the one before it in September, mainly warmed the hearts of the depressed Party faithful, and that the central SD digests were mainly recording reactions from the dwindling number of Party diehards.
The crudity of the ‘opinion research’ of some SD agents was not designed to elicit critical comment.
In one recorded instance, the agent approached a farmer (and Party member) with the question: ‘Well then, didn't the Führer speak well?’, and received the reply: ‘Things must be tough in the east.’
And given the extensive fear of denunciation for critical or defeatist comment, it is hardly surprising that negative remarks about the speeches rarely came to light.
One local SD report stated frankly that after the November speech hostile opinion could hardly be registered because of the fear ‘of being brought to reckoning’.
The conclusion that the speeches largely appealed to long-standing victims of the ‘Führer myth’ also seems justified on the basis of an examination of the more nuanced reports from local SD agencies, which, while generally positive, provide a somewhat more varied picture of reactions.
The September speech was said to have disappointed many in the Würzburg area because it provided no comforting words about the situation on the eastern Front.
A sizeable proportion of the population did not even listen to the speech.
Schweinfurt people who had suffered from the bombing avoided the speech, saying they ‘didn't want to know any more of the war’ and that ‘the Führer is mentally disturbed and megalomaniac’.
Those attached to the churches also boycotted the speech.
The same section of the population remarked in November ‘that the Führer had spoken more than normally about God’, that ‘apparently even among the old Nazis there's nothing more doing without God’, which accorded badly, however, with the way the Party was treating the Church.
Hitler's remarks stressing the work of ‘Providence’ on Germany's side prompted only shaking of the head among ‘academics’and the ‘higher circles’of society.
Others interpreted the troop withdrawals in the east not as the tactical manoeuvres devised by Hitler, but as moves ‘dictated’ by the Russians, and many were disappointed that no precise details were given about retaliation.
In any case, hardly anyone in the countryside was said to believe in ‘the so-called retaliatory strike against England’
Though the morale of the Party faithful had been temporarily resuscitated by Hitler's rhetoric, it is clear that rhetoric alone was no longer sufficient to restore the confidence of the considerable sections of the population who had only superficially been won over in previous years by the magnitude of Hitler's seemingly undeniable ‘achievements’ and who had suffered irreversible disillusionment since 1941–2.
For these, Hitler's words were little consolation for the increasingly depressing outlook for Germany in the war.
Only a fundamental improvement in the military situation, the implementation of drastic retaliation against Britain, and the creation of an effective defence against allied bombing — a decisive transformation in war fortunes, in other words — could have refurbished Hitler's tarnished popularity.
In fact, however, new disappointments followed on Hitler's confident promises: the bombing, almost unimpeded by German defences, intensified; the situation on the eastern Front worsened almost by the day; and in the west an invasion was expected at any time.
Accordingly, Hitler's credibility suffered still further.
No central SD reports were compiled on the celebrations for the Führer's birthday on 20 April 1944.
Local reports from Bavaria, however, especially from rural areas, mentioned very sparse flagging.
It was especially noticeable that no swastika banners were to be seen on houses where news of fallen relatives had been received.
Goebbels's rhetoric that ‘the German people has never looked up to its Führer so full of belief as in the days and hours that it became aware of the entire burden of this struggle for our life’, and that far from being discouraged ‘it stood all the more firmly and unerringly behind his great aims’, sounded even emptier than usual.
Goebbels's propaganda had by this time in any case lost practically all credibility.
Even some Party functionaries were heard to say that it would be better if Goebbels stopped writing and speaking altogether.
The overwhelming majority of the population now accepted that the war was irretrievably lost, and some voiced the feeling that its continuation, with the inevitable accompanying great losses, served only the interest of the leadership of the Reich, since it was obvious that the coming catastrophe would mean their own destruction.
In May 1944, the mood was shaped above all by the expectations of the invasion in the west.
Everyone was aware that the war was now about to enter its decisive phase.
When, on 6 June, the allied operation ‘Overlord’ finally commenced, there was a remarkable short-lived phase of almost euphoric relief after the tension of the previous weeks.
And new hope —‘utopian expectations’ according to one report — arose again following the announcements on 16 June that the long-awaited retaliation had begun with the firing of the first VI missiles on London and parts of southern England.
It was the last temporary lifting of morale in the final phases of the war.
Already after a few days it became clear that the German troops had not succeeded in repulsing the Normandy landing, and that the deployment of the V1 — rapidly dubbed ‘Versager I ’(‘Failure No.
I’)— could not live up to the high expectations created by German propaganda.
The mood immediately sank back into deep depression, especially in the light of the Soviet summer offensive, which had pushed as far as the Vistula, and, in August, the accelerating advance of the western allies through France.
The allied advance in Italy, and a new wave of massive air raids on German cities in June and July, added to the demoralization.
In this situation, the bomb placed by Oberst Claus Graf Schenk von Stauffenberg exploded in the Führer Headquarters near Rastenburg in East Prussia at 12.45 p.m. on 20 July 1944.
The reactions to the attempt on Hitler's life provide a veiled reflection of the Führer's popular standing at this low ebb in Germany's fortunes.
In view of the rapid drop in morale in the first half of 1944 — with a short interruption in the first half of June — and the evidently growing unpopularity of the Nazi regime, the registered popular response to news of the plot against Hitler appears surprising.
The two central summary reports compiled by the SD, based on observations of reactions in all parts of the Reich immediately following the attack, provide a more or less uniform picture of deep shock, dismay, anger, and outrage about the attempt on the Führer's life, and immense relief at the outcome.
‘Very many people's comrades’, continued the SD digest, ‘connect directly mystical, religious notions with the person of the Führer.’
No comments whatsoever could be found in the first soundings of reactions ‘which even provided so much as a hint that some or other people's comrade was in agreement with the attempted assassination’.
Even parts of the population known not to be well disposed towards the regime, such as workers in the northern districts of Berlin, were said to be horrified at the attack.
Hatred of the ‘officer clique’ responsible, and shock that such treachery could occur were equally common responses.
Three days later, in marginally more restrained tone, it was said that ‘only in absolutely isolated cases, was there an instance of the attack not being vociferously condemned.
In several cities — Berlin and Königsberg were specifically mentioned — women were seen to burst into tears on the streets in their joy at the Führer's safety.
‘Thank God, the Führer is alive,’ was a sigh of relief which could be heard everywhere.
The same picture is supported by a mass of reports from many different localities, where, within a few days, the Propaganda Ministry had organized well-attended demonstrations of the ‘spontaneous expression of will of our people about the foul attempt on the Führer's life’.
The bonds with the Führer were said to have been deepened, the trust in the leadership strengthened.
Given the state of the war, the undeniable growth of anti-Nazi feeling, and the rising criticism of Hitler himself, which we have been able to document for the years 1942–4, such reports can hardly have been an accurate reflection of existing attitudes.
Intimidation was, of course, at its height with regard to comments on the attempt on Hitler's life, an act of ‘high treason’ for which those involved, and their families, suffered the most draconian reprisals.
Remarks coming to the ears of SD agents were, therefore, to a large extent self-selective in their conformity.
Long before the assassination attempt, in fact, reports of the SD and other agencies had pointed out that people were becoming more wary about voicing their opinions in public.
With regard to the events of 20 July 1944, the silences were frequently more evocative than the comments which the reporters were allowed to catch.
Finally, of course, the regime's agents often added their own unctuous gloss to the popular mood they were reporting, anxious, in the light of the conspiracy against the Führer, to put their own unswerving loyalty beyond question.
Given these reservations about the nature and value of the reportage, it is not surprising that any dissenting opinion has to be found ‘between the lines’.
Local reports in Bavaria do, however, apart from registering ‘loyal’ opinion, provide some indications that the reactions depicted in the central SD reports were not the only ones to be observed.
Even the Government President of Upper Bavaria felt compelled to admit that the relief about Hitler's survival was not unanimous, but that ‘part of the population would have welcomed the success of the assassination attempt in the first instance because they would have hoped for an earlier end to the war from it’.
Such people, he added, were dominated by the notion of ‘an end with horror, rather than a horror without end’.
The view that the assassination of Hitler would have brought the end of the war was reported as the opinion of many inhabitants of the town of Bad Aibling in his administrative region.
Other reports in this district spoke of the reluctance of the population to express any opinion; in one place, farmers, hearing the news of the attempt in a pub, sat ‘dumb at the tables’ and ‘no one dared to say anything’.
A police report from a village in the Garmisch-Partenkirchen area stated: ‘While the failure of the assassination attempt has unleashed enthusiasm among Party comrades and those sections of the population who sympathize with the Party and the National Socialist State, the other section of the population refrains from any comment or opinion.
The wish for a quick end to the war is expressed generally.’
In the Berchtesgaden district, most recorded comment — as elsewhere — was loyal in tone, but there were difficulties in getting anything out of the rural population.
The view that ‘the war might have been over today’ was said to be common among women in country localities.
And the report included one directly negative remark.
From the darkness of an air-raid shelter, a woman's voice was heard, saying: ‘If only they'd have got him.’
The difficulties of reaching an unequivocal evaluation of the impact of the bomb-plot on attitudes towards Hitler can be seen, too, from a consideration of letters of ordinary soldiers from the Front, where evidence can be found both of a revival, if temporary, of faith in Hitler, and of extreme anti-Hitler feelings expressed despite the censorship.
The report of the censor for August 1944, based on an examination of 45,000 letters, ran:
The high number of joyful expressions about the salvation of the Führer, which is emphasized as a true stroke of fortune for the German people, is not only proof of the devotion and loyalty of the soldiers to the Führer, but of the firm determination of the soldiers to fight and conquer for him, which is also brought out in the letters…
. The treachery of the conspiratorial clique is rejected by all as the greatest crime against the German people…
. The letters of all good soldiers show that the military duties of the soldier and his good military bearing are indivisibly bound up with the loyalty to the Führer and thus with a genuine National Socialist attitude in general…
Extant letters provide ample evidence of wholly loyal, nazified sentiments of officers and men.
While anti-Hitler remarks were obviously dangerous, it was not necessary to write in glowing praise of him, or even to mention him and the attempt on his life at all.
The examples of strong pro-Hitler feeling cannot, therefore, simply be ascribed to the need to conform and the censorship control.
Indeed, other evidence also points to a revival of faith in Hitler among soldiers following the bomb-plot.
For example, belief in Hitler among German prisoners-of-war captured in France increased from 57 to 68 per cent between mid July and early August 1944.
The trend was not, however, all in the same direction.
The censor recorded an increase from 20 to 25 per cent of negative comments in soldiers’ letters between July and August.
And despite the censorship, some letters were bold to the point of foolhardy.
One private soldier wrote home on 4 August: ‘You write in your letter of the attack on the Führer.
Yes, we heard of it even on the same day.
Unfortunately, the gents had bad luck.
Otherwise there'd already be a truce, and we'd be saved from this mess.’
This letter passed through unnoticed.
A lance-corporal who wrote the following letter was more unlucky: ‘Last Sunday when I was in church, the preacher actually thanked God that He had graciously protected and safeguarded the Führer.
I'd have liked best of all to have stuffed his mouth with hay.
Our people doesn't see how it is run by satanic power.’
The letter was marked down to be followed up; the death sentence was the likely result.
We can infer from the available evidence, unsatisfactory though it is in many respects, that, as had been the case in 1939, the attempt on Hitler's life polarized sentiments.
It seems a justifiable inference, too, that, even more than had been the case in 1939, a sizeable proportion of the population would not have been saddened by Hitler's assassination, and viewed his survival as a hindrance to the ending of the war.
Even so, the evidence is consistent with a short-lived, but still powerful, backlash of support for Hitler, especially but not only among the Party faithful.
Substantial reserves of support for Hitler still remained.
Given the circumstances, the ‘Hitler myth’ still retained a remarkable potency.
Members of the conspiracy were themselves well aware in advance that their attempt would have little popular backing.
Many clearly accepted the propaganda version of events and, even if they had begun to have their doubts about Hitler, regarded the plot as a sacrilegious and treasonable act against the head of State, and an attempted sabotage of the war effort.
Certainly, a successful coup would have offered potential for a dangerous new version of a ‘stab-in-the-back’ legend.
As it was, the objective function of the massive shows of loyalty to Hitler, however contrived they were, was to reveal to waverers that the ‘Führer myth’ was still very much alive, that the regime still enjoyed a formidable degree of support, focused as ever around the bonds with the Führer.
Combined with the drastically increased level of control and repression, the size of the Führer's mass following continued to act as a deterrent to further thoughts of active resistance.
Hitler was never again to be at the centre of public attention as he was for a while following the plot of 20 July 1944.
In the months thereafter he sank almost completely from view.
In most opinion reports from the last months of the war, there is little or no mention of the Führer and the attitudes of the population towards him.
He had become for most a distant, shadowy figure, only seldom to be seen now in newsreels, hardly ever speaking to the nation, and no longer being seen in public.
Complaints from the regional Propaganda Offices that neither press, nor radio, nor newsreels were reporting anything about the Führer any longer were to no avail.
The continued silence about him gave rise to new rumours about his health and mental condition, and that he had been relieved of his duties by Himmler and Goebbels.
Some still claimed the Führer was not being told the truth by those around him, and received a far too rosy depiction of the situation.
But even the heavily biased reports from the Propaganda Offices were obliged to admit that criticism of Hitler and grave doubts in his alleged ‘strategic genius’ were mounting sharply, and that those still believing his words that 1945 would bring a ‘historic turning-point’in Germany's fortunes had a hard time against the doubters.
And though some reports, particularly from higher officials, absurdly continued to state that the belief in the Führer, despite all setbacks, had not diminished, SD regional and local reports provided a much more devastatingly realistic impression of the Hitler image in the last phase of the war.
A number of reports of the SD station at Stuttgart provide a particularly frank account of Hitler's standing in the period between August 1944 and January 1945.
The report of 8 August 1944 pointed out bluntly that apart from a tiny proportion of the population and Party activists, no one believed in victory.
Only a miracle could save Germany, and belief in miracles was a thing of the past.
Hitler's speech on 20 July after the attempt on his life was turned into a criticism of him and the regime.
The Führer's claim that his work had been sabotaged for years, and that the German war machine could run at full stretch now that the last plot had been foiled, was seen to demonstrate that the people had long been lied to in earlier statements that time was on Germany's side and war production increasing.
Either the Führer's statement, the report went on, meant that he had allowed himself to be badly deceived and was not, therefore, the genius he was always alleged to be; or he had intentionally lied to the people about rising war production, knowing all the time that saboteurs were at work.
‘The most worrying aspect of the whole thing’, it concluded, ‘is probably that most people's comrades, even those who up to now have believed unwaveringly, have lost faith in the Führer.’
Two months later, the growing recognition of the terrible price people were paying for their belief in Hitler — that the ‘hope of millions’ had become Germany's ruin — was reflected in bitter allusions to the Führer's ‘mission’.
The SD at Stuttgart recorded a comment, said to be frequently encountered in differing variants: ‘It's always claimed that the Führer has been sent to us from God.
I don't doubt it.
The Führer was sent to us from God, though not in order to save Germany, but to ruin it.
Providence has determined the destruction of the German people, and Hitler is the executor of this will.’
By early January 1945, observers in the Stuttgart area were pointing out that Mein Kampf was being — rather belatedly — cited to prove that Germany had itself to blame for the war, that Hitler's expansionist aims which he had laid down twenty years earlier were the cause of the war, and that it was therefore clear that ‘the Führer has worked for war from the very beginning’.
Goebbels's eulogy of Hitler in an article in Das Reich on 31 December was said to have been well received by ‘only a few people's comrades and naturally the old loyal fighters’.
‘Hardly ever has a Goebbels article stood so much in the public eye as this one,’ added the report, ‘but his articles have probably never been so criticized.
The human virtues of Hitler, a side of the ‘Führer myth’ which Goebbels had always particularly stressed, were now scorned.
The lauding of Hitler's modesty was compared with the tone of self-praise with regard to his own work and effort which had been a feature of his New Year address.
Great exception was now also taken to the mystical aspect of the Hitler image.
It was claimed that Goebbels had raised up the Führer to be the ‘German god’.
The statement of the Propaganda Minister that Hitler had a ‘sixth sense’ for seeing what remained hidden to ordinary mortals was sarcastically said by a young secretary to explain his choice of Italy as an ally.
With regard to the war itself, Hitler's ‘sixth sense’ ought to have enabled him to foresee that other countries would not simply bow down to German expansion.
Therefore, he was not the genius depicted by Goebbels, and had ‘intentionally unleashed this world conflagration in order to be proclaimed as the great ‘transformer of mankind’’.
Special reports from the regional Propaganda Offices on the echo of Hitler's New Year address admitted to a little disappointment about the lack of details of deployment of retaliatory weapons or the combating of the bombing, but otherwise resorted yet again to the usual empty clichés about restored morale.
Many people were said to have had tears in their eyes at hearing the Führer's voice again.
No sarcasm was intended.
Again, the picture from local SD reports is a contrasting one.
In Berchtesgaden, where Hitler had his home on the Obersalzberg, and where he had enjoyed special veneration in former days, the SD reported that his speech on New Year's Eve merely elicited the response that it ‘brought nothing new’, and there was ‘hardly any credibility worth mentioning’ left for his last broadcast speech on 30 January 1945.
The last public declaration to his people on 24 February 1945, the anniversary of the promulgation of the Party Programme, was not given by Hitler himself, but was read out as a Führer Proclamation by his old Munich comrade, Hermann Esser.
With its tirades against the ‘unnatural alliance’ between capitalism and Bolshevism, it appealed to the last remaining hope — the belief in the miracle of a split between the eastern and western allies and a new alliance between the Reich and the West against Bolshevism.
However, people were heard to say that only the Führer himself now believed in a miracle.
‘Among the overwhelming majority of people's comrades,’ reported the SD in Berchtesgaden, ‘the content of the proclamation whistled by like the wind in the empty boughs.’
The greatest demagogue in history no longer had an audience.
Numerous reports from all over Germany make clear how little the German people in the last months of the war was attuned to the heroic strains of the message preached above all by Goebbels.
‘The people has completely lost its nerve and is dreadfully wound up and frightened’, ran a report from Upper Bavaria in March 1945, as once again an ‘enemy air armada’ in full flight formation crossed the skies completely unimpeded.
Other reports spoke of ‘lethargy’ and ‘disconsolate mood, bordering on apathy’.
Even the highly coloured reports sent in to the Propaganda Ministry had to accept in March 1945 that the crisis of confidence in the leadership did not stop at Hitler, and the point was underlined much more forcefully in final reports from the ‘opinion research’ office of the SD.
Since the beginning of the year, Germany's enemies had penetrated the borders of the Reich in east and west.
For many, the worst agonies of the war were now beginning.
The horror stories about the Red Army transported by thousands of refugees from the east whipped up new anxieties.
‘If only the Russians don't come here, we could bear everything else’, was a commonly heard sentiment.
But few were ready to engage in heroic resistance to the last.
A Goebbels article in Das Reich at the beginning of March, in which he had emphasized ‘the great honour of the victims and of holding out for the new Europe’, for which it was worthwhile ‘fighting to the last man in order to go down in history’, met with heavy criticism.
An SD report from Berchtesgaden noted: ‘The broad mass couldn't care less what the future Europe looks like.
It can be gathered from every conversation that the people's comrades from all walks of life want a return to the living standard of the pre-war era as soon as possible, and don't lay the slightest value on going down in history.’
The attempt to ‘educate’ the people to heroic self-sacrifice for historic deeds and ideological aims had led ultimately to an even stronger yearning for material satisfaction and personal happiness.
What was said by a single inhabitant of Berchtesgaden in March 1945 was a sentiment undoubtedly close to the hearts of most Germans at this time: ‘If we'd have imagined in 1933 how things would turn out, we'd never have voted for Hitler.’
The moral condemnation of the Third Reich emerged for the most part only after the end of the war when the most barbaric crimes of the regime were fully exposed.
In the first months of 1945, the German people regarded itself as Hitler's gain victim.
The potency of the ‘Hitler myth’ had vanished.
Silent bitterness replaced the earlier adulation of the Führer.
Eloquent testimony is provided by a report on a remembrance ceremony at the war memorial in the little Bavarian alpine town of Markt Schellenberg on 11 March 1945:
When the leader of the Wehrmacht unit at the end of his speech for the remembrance called for a ‘Sieg Heil’ for the Führer, it was returned neither by the Wehrmacht present, nor by the Volkssturm, nor by the spectators of the civilian population who had turned up.
This silence of the masses had a depressing effect, and probably reflects better than anything the attitudes of the population.
Anyone going beyond silent forms of disaffection had still to be prepared for the worst from the servants and supporters of a regime now in extremis .
Genuine ‘believers’ in the Führer might now be few, but it was dangerous to ignore their presence.
A shopkeeper in Nuremberg who said to a customer what ‘in these days was common to almost everybody in Nuremberg’, that Hitler was set on continuing the war, tried to deceive the people into thinking that he still had a miracle weapon, and was ‘nothing more than a criminal’, was denounced by the customer, taken away by the police, and shot for ‘subversion of the military power’.
In the absence of any ‘situation reports’ for a country now almost entirely under enemy occupation, there are no indications of popular reactions to the news of Hitler's death on 30 April 1945.
It is hard to imagine that it was the cause of much sadness.
With the end of Hitler, the outward signs of National Socialism also disappeared, seemingly overnight, from the face of the earth.
Pictures of the Führer and Party emblems, uniforms, and literature had been thrown away or burnt before the arrival of the Russian, American, or British troops.
Like the ‘Führer myth’, they had outlived their purpose even before the end of the Third Reich and were now a liability.
The new Landrat of Gunzenhausen, a former Franconian bastion of National Socialism, wrote in his first monthly report after the end of the Third Reich, in August 1945: ‘Although the war has only been over for a few months, National Socialism is hardly ever spoken about, and when at all, only in a negative sense.
There's no sign of any emblems of the National Socialist State in any form whatsoever among people who had displayed them in their homes.’
The ‘Hitler Myth’ and the Path to Genocide
Hitler's Popular Image and the ‘Jewish Question’
HITLER'S twin ideological obsessions, it is universally recognized, were Lebensraum and anti-Semitism.
Paranoid hatred of the Jews was the dominant strain, though the two themes fused in Hitler's mind in the vision of Jew-infested Bolshevik Russia, ripe for German expansion.
We saw in earlier chapters that there was a substantial disparity between Hitler's actual expansionist aims and what his public image suggested he stood for.
Certainly there were affinities between popular aspirations favouring a growth in Germany's national prestige and power, and Hitler's racial-imperialist aims.
Expansion of German's borders, especially the incorporation of ‘ethnic’ German territory into the Reich, was massively popular, as long as it was attained without bloodshed.
But enthusiasm for war itself and for an apocalyptic struggle for ‘living space’ was difficult to raise outside circles of nazified youth, the SS, and Party fanatics.
And once the war had come, the overriding sentiment was the desire for an early peace, desire the readiness to benefit in every way possible from the acquisition and exploitation of the occupied territories.
There were affinities, therefore, but nothing like a total identity between the Hitler version of Lebensraum -expansionism and the hopes and expectations of the mass of the German population.
A parallel disjuncture can be claimed with regard to anti-Semitism.
Certainly, dislike or suspicion of the Jews was widespread even before Hitler took power.
Jews had to experience forms of discrimination in many walks of life.
And among a minority of the non-Jewish population, though a growing one which after 1933 came to occupy positions of power, dislike of Jews became vicious and violent hatred.
In the climate of the Third Reich itself, it goes without saying that the barrage of Nazi propaganda could not be without effect in extending and deepening already prevalent anti-Semitic attitudes.
Many, probably the great majority of the population, were convinced by 1939 if not before that the Jews had been a harmful influence in German society, and that it would be better if those still remaining left (or were forced to leave) as soon as possible.
But prevailing attitudes towards the Jews at this time among all but a small proportion of the population, discriminatory though they were in different degrees, did not remotely match the anti-Jewish paranoia of Hitler and the activist Jew-baiting elements within the Nazi Movement.
In fact, much points towards the conclusion that, despite its centrality to Hitler's own thinking, anti-Semitism was for the most part of no more than secondary importance as a factor shaping popular opinion in the Third Reich.
This raises the difficult question about the place of anti-Semitism in Hitler's popular image.
Could anti-Semitism, so pivotal in Hitler's ‘world view’, have been of only minor significance in forming the bonds between Führer and people which gave the Third Reich its popular legitimation and plebiscitary base of acclamation?
Was the Hitler image, in this centrally important area, again largely detached from reality?
And what function do we accord, then, to Hitler's public persona in explaining the process which led to Auschwitz?
The evidence available for trying to answer such questions is, it has to be admitted, difficult to assemble, and even more difficult to interpret.
The conclusions arrived at in the brief analysis which follows have necessarily, therefore, to be seen as no more than tentative and hesitant deductions.
The recent publication of all known speeches and writings of Hitler between 1919 and 1924 provides for the first time an opportunity to observe the self-image profiled in his public statements.
In the present context, what is significant, if not altogether surprising, is that hardly a speech or publication went by between 1920 and 1922 without the most concentrated vitriol being poured upon the Jews.
In the first speeches, the Jews were above all at the heart of Hitler's ferocious attacks on war ‘profiteers’, ‘racketeers’, and ‘parasites’— an expression of his brand of populist anti-capitalism.
From mid-1920, possibly influenced by Rosenberg, Hitler became preoccupied in his speeches with Bolshevik Russia.
The picture of the brutal rule of the Jews, for which Social Democracy was said to be preparing the way in Germany, provided the catalyst in the link-up of anti-Semitism and anti-Marxism.
In February 1922, Hitler told his SA that the ‘Jewish Question’ was the only thing that mattered, and a few months later he summed up the entire Party Programme in the one point: that no Jew could be a ‘people's comrade’.
The ubiquity of the Jewish theme in his public addresses at this time makes it impossible to imagine that early converts to Nazism could fail to regard violent anti-Semitism as a leading feature of Hitler's image.
From late 1922, however, extreme anti-Marxism — now often without the express linkage to the Jews — began to take over as a dominant theme of his speeches.
He now declared the aim of the NSDAP to be simply the ‘annihilation and extirpation of the Marxist world view’, and during 1923, as the notion of a heroic, final struggle between two opposed Weltanschauungen seemed to grow in his mind, the Jews played a less overt role in Hitler's public statements, whereas the sole, mortal enemy of the Nazi Movement was now proclaimed to be Marxism.
When the press noted the change in tone, Hitler agreed that he had altered his stance, but only to the extent, he said, that he had earlier been too mild, and had realized while at work on Mein Kampf that the ‘Jewish Question’ was one not solely for the German people, but for all peoples, ‘for Juda is the world plague’.
There had been no change of basic thinking, then, merely an adjustment of emphasis.
But even at this date the alteration in emphasis can only have been a conscious attempt to attune to the wider audience, if still at that time mainly within Bavaria, which was beginning to show interest in Hitler in 1923, and an awareness that anti-Marxism had a wider potential appeal than the mere repetition of anti-Jewish paroxysms of hate.
We know little in any systematic fashion about the ideological motivation of the rank-and-file membership (approximately 55,000 strong in November 1923) of the pre-Putsch Nazi Movement.
Since anti-Semitism was such a prominent feature of the Party's public image, and that of its leader, whom many must have heard speak in person in the Munich beerhalls, it seems certain that the ‘Jewish Question’ ranked highly as a motivational factor at this date for the Movement's recruits, often coming to the NSDAP from other anti-Semitic organizations and völkisch groups.
Impressionistic evidence provided in a number of s–dies of the early Nazi Movements supports the suggestion that those entering the Party earlier rather than later were more likely to be strong anti-Semites.
It is unlikely that anti-Semitism was as powerful in its motivational force for recruits in the Party's ‘mass phase’ after 1929–30 as it had been for the early activist core of the NSDAP.
A striking feature of the Abel material — and more than half of the sample came from members who had joined the Party before its ‘take-off’ in 1930 — is indeed that even among ‘Old Fighters’of the Movement — according to Merkl's ranking of ‘main ideological theme’— only about one-eighth saw anti-Semitism as their most salient concern, while what he calls ‘strong ideological antisemites’comprised only 8.5 per cent of the total sample.
Merkl summarized his findings as follows: ‘A breakdown by dominant ideological theme…shows about one-third to be primarily preoccupied with the solidaristic Volksgemeinschaft and over one-fifth to be superpatriots.
Nearly that many are devotees of Hitler's personal charisma.
About one-seventh appears to be motivated mostly by their antisemitism…
. Ranked by the chief object of their hostility, Abel's early Nazis by two-thirds turned out to be anti-Marxists.’
Merkl pointed out, of course, that these other categories by no means excluded anti-Semitic feelings, which were encountered in around two-thirds of the ‘biographies’.
In fact, one could go further and claim that the negative image of the Jew provided a common denominator which was able to combine and provide justification for all these ideological themes.
However, the figures are certainly compelling enough to suggest that features other than anti-Semitism dominated the image of the Nazi Party in the eyes of its pre-1933 membership.
If we accept that Hitler was regarded by most if not all as the embodiment of the Party, it would seem that, for most new recruits to the Nazi Movement during the rise to power, his own undoubted extreme anti-Semitism formed a secondary rather than primary component of his image and appeal.
In the absence of modern opinion-surveys, the motivation of Nazi voters can only be inferred.
But if we extend the above argument, drawn from the motivation of ‘Old Fighters’ of the Party to the wider electorate, we would have to conclude that here — probably to an even greater extent — Hitler's image was not dominated by his obsession with the ‘Jewish Question’.
This inference gains some backing from the comparison of the content of Hitler's speeches — revealing his self-profile — in the early 1930s, when the Nazi Movement was making huge electoral gains, with the early 1920s, when it was a fringe völkisch sect.
Examination of election propaganda before the 1930 ‘breakthrough’ poll has indicated that attacks on Jews provided more of a background than a main theme, and it appears that Hitler's speeches tended not to tackle the ‘Jewish Question’, especially if dealing with an upper middle-class audience.
By 1932, when Hitler was running for Reich President and the Nazi Movement was gaining the support of over a third of the population, the ‘Jewish Question, scarcely featured in Hitler's public addresses.
Jews and the ‘Jewish Question, were mentioned as such neither in Hitler's New Year exhortation to his Party at the beginning of 1932, nor in his notorious speech to the Düsseldorfer Industrieklub in January, nor in his ‘Appeal to the Nation’, sold as a record in July and typical of his election addresses in the first half of the year.
The main target was clearly ‘Marxism’ and the Weimar ‘system’, and the main message that he alone and his Movement offered the hope of salvation from these and from the disaster which they had brought upon Germany.
Of course, for Hitler himself — and for some of his oldest and most fanatical supporters — all these ills were reducible solely to the ‘Jewish Question’, a point of dogma which was a fundamental premiss within the Nazi Movement.
But the public image of Hitler at this time did not reflect the pre-eminence of the ‘Jewish Question’ in his own thinking.
Though his popular image undoubtedly embodied the broad ideological prejudices and aspirations of the masses — including anti-Semitism — it appears hard to argue that at the time that Hitler was gaining his widest electoral support the ‘Jewish Question, was the decisive element in his growing appeal.
The absence of verbal onslaughts against the Jews is also a striking feature of Hitler's public speeches in the years 1933 and 1934.
The ‘Jewish Question’ is not touched upon in a single major public address by Hitler in this period of the ‘seizure’and consolidation of power — a time, as we saw earlier, in which his popularity was greatly extended and the ‘Führer myth’massively enhanced.
Only the exhortation to ‘all Party organizations’ on 28 March 1933 to carry out a nation-wide boycott aimed at Jewish businesses, goods, doctors, and lawyers, starting on 1 April, concentrated explicitly on the ‘Jewish Question’.
Proclamations to the Party after the ‘seizure of power’ generally went out under Hitler's name.
In this case, however, though the style is recognizably Hitlerian (apart from the accompanying specific instructions for implementing the boycott, which seem to have been composed by Goebbels), the ‘appeal’ was signed collectively by ‘the Party Leadership’.
No one, of course , could have imagined that the boycott was proceeding without Hitler's express support.
But the wording of the ‘appeal’ couched the action solely in terms of justifiable retaliation for the ‘campaign of agitation’and ‘lies’in the foreign press allegedly initiated by Jewish emigrants, and the claim that ‘hardly a hair had been touched’on Jewish heads in the course of the ‘national revolution’was meant to suggest that the Party Leadership (including Hitler) was ignorant of the daily maltreatment of Jews which had taken place at the hands of the Party rank-and-file.
It was possible, therefore, so far as Hitler was specifically linked to the boycott at all, to see him only in connection with presumed justifiable action, and detached from the ‘unfortunate excesses’ of Party activists.
As is well known, the boycott was less than a resounding success in terms of popular reactions, and, as an organized nation-wide affair, was called off after only a single day.
The relative lack of resonance of the boycott can only have indicated to Hitler that he had been right to keep a fairly low public profile on the ‘Jewish Question’.
For the lack of overt reference to the ‘Jewish Question’ in his major speeches, and the omission of his name as a signatory to the boycott ‘appeal’can only be seen as a deliberate policy to detach the Führer himself in his public image from the violent anti Jewish rhetoric and actions of which he privately approved.
As we have seen, it appears that, despite his own obsessions, Hitler was politically aware from an early date — perhaps as early as 1923 — that a wider currency than anti-Semitism was needed to distinguish the NSDAP from the purely sectarian politics of other völkisch groups, to extend the Party's appeal, and to make a serious bid for power.
The closer he came to attaining power, the more, purely for presentational purposes, anti-Semitism had to be subordinated to or subsumed within other components of the Hitler image.
And once he had become Head of Government, the need to detach himself in public from the distasteful gutter tactics of his activist anti-Semites was prompted above all by foreign political considerations as well as by the necessity to avoid gratuitous alienation of the conservative German establishment around Hindenburg, whose own ingrained anti-Semitism nevertheless stopped short of arbitrary open violence.
Moreover, by 1935, if not before, it was being made abundantly clear that anti-Semitic outrages and terroristic hooliganism aimed at Jews by Party activists were generally unpopular among the public at large.
Nevertheless, by this time the violence provoked by the new anti-Semitic wave and incited by propaganda had put the ‘Jewish Question’ back in a high place on the agenda, and pressure was mounting from within the Party for anti-Semitic legislation to fulfil the aims of the Party programme, and from the public for regulations to put an end to the ‘individual actions’which had characterized the summer of violence.
Hitler could no longer remain aloof from the ‘Jewish Question’.
In his address to the assembled Reichstag at the Nuremberg Party Rally on 15 September 1935, Hitler took up the ‘Jewish Question, in a major public speech for the first time since becoming Reich Chancellor, recommending acceptance of the three laws placed before it — the ‘Flag law’ and the two notorious anti-Jewish ‘Nuremberg Laws’(the Reich Citizenship Law, preventing Jews from becoming citizens of the Reich, and the ‘Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour’, banning marriage and sexual relations between Jews and ‘aryans’).
As in 1933, he accused the Jews abroad of stirring up agitation and boycotts against Germany, and claimed that this had made an impact on Jews inside Germany itself, whose public provocative behaviour had stirred up countless complaints and calls for action by the government.
He justified the ‘legal regulation of the problem’ as the only way of heading off the likelihood of spontaneous ‘defensive actions of the enraged population’, and claimed the German government had been compelled ‘by the idea of being able, through a once and for all secular solution, of perhaps creating a basis on which the German people might possibly be able to find a tolerable relationship with the Jewish people’.
If this hope was not fulfilled, and international agitation continued, he threatened, the situation would have to be re-examined.
In subsequent speeches the same day, Hitler exhorted the Party and nation to maintain discipline, and not to depart from the path of legality in the matter.
He emphasized that the laws opened up to Jews the possibility of their separate existence within Germany in all spheres of life, and renewed the command forbidding all ‘individual actions’ against Jews.
The hypocrisy of Hitler's expressed sentiments needs no emphasis.
But in terms of his public image as seen at the time, he had been careful to distance himself from the unpopular anti Jewish terror of the Nazi mobs and had placed himself on the side of legality.
Reactions among Party members varied.
Some activists were disappointed at the emphasis on legal measures and discouragement of ‘direct action’ and felt that legislation did not go far enough in tackling the ‘Jewish Question’.
Others suspected the truth: that Hitler's public stance did not represent his real feelings on the issue.
A situation report from Hesse in March 1936 expressly mentions the opinion, allegedly widely held among the population in the area, though undoubtedly reflecting above all the views of Party activists, ‘that the Führer had for outward appearances to ban individual actions against the Jews in consideration of foreign policy, but in reality was wholly in agreement that each individual should continue on his own initiative the fight against Jewry in the most rigorous and radical form’.
Outside the ranks of the Party activists, the most common reported positive responses to the promulgation of the Nuremberg Laws were of approval for the formal legal framework for segregating Germans and Jews and regulating the treatment of the ‘Jewish Question’.
Negative reactions were recorded among church circles, ideological opponents of the regime, the liberal intelligentsia, and some businessmen who feared the economic consequences of the laws.
The image Hitler portrayed of himself at the Nuremberg Rally was clearly consonant with the wide acceptance of the broad principles of legal discrimination and racial segregation, and with the satisfaction generally felt at the ending of the open brutality and pogrom-like anti Jewish disturbances of the vulgar anti-Semites.
For two years after the Party Rally of 1935, Hitler again scarcely touched upon the ‘Jewish Question’ in his major speeches.
Even following the assassination in February of the leading Nazi functionary in Switzerland, Wilhelm Gustloff, by a young Jew, the proximity of the Winter Olympics and foreign policy considerations confined him to a single and, in his terms, relatively ‘moderate’, speech at the funeral, attacking Jewry in generalized terms as the stimulus behind practically every political ‘martyr’ of the Right since the Revolution of 1918.
In his speech on 1 May 1936, he merely spoke of ‘elements’ sowing the seeds of international unrest, but his hints were immediately recognized by the audience, which howled: ‘the Jews’.
Hitler's next words, ‘I know’, were followed by applause lasting minutes.
A few months later, on 30 January 1937, he referred briefly to the beneficial effects for German culture which had been derived from the removal of Jewish influence, and at the opening of the ‘House of German Art’ in Munich the following July he again scorned the Jewish contribution to the arts.
However, it was only in September 1937, at the Party Rally, that he returned to a frontal attack on Jewry, framed in general terms, in connection with his main attack on Bolshevism, which he explicitly dubbed a Jewish creation.
With characteristic phraseology, he alleged that eighty per cent of Soviet leaders were Jews, that the former leaders of the Bavarian Räterepublik , the Spartakus League, and the Communist Party, had been Jews, and that the Jews were now plotting to plunge the whole of Europe into ‘Bolshevik chaos’.
Despite this glimpse of vintage anti-Semitic paranoia, setting the tone for the new wave of anti Jewish action and propaganda which began in the last months of 1937 and continued throughout the following year, the ‘Jewish Question’ was scarcely touched upon in Hitler's speeches throughout the critical year of 1938.
Once more among his Party faithful in Nuremberg in September 1938, his proclamation contained the usual cliché about the infant Nazi Party beginning the fight against the greatest enemy threatening the German people, international Jewry, and a few days later, still at the Party Rally, he attempted to justify Germany's attempts to rid itself of its Jews by the stereotype reference to an over-populated country.
Other than this, he hardly mentioned the Jews in his public statements in 1938.
His speeches were, of course, dominated by the great foreign political issues of the year, but there can be no doubt that Hitler was deliberately steering clear of the ‘Jewish Question’, and that there was a continued conscious attempt to dissociate his public image from the seamier side of anti-Semitism visible in the renewed growing violence of Party activists.
Press directives in 1938 prohibited discussion of the ‘Jewish Question’ in newspapers in connection with Hitler s visits to various parts of Germany.
Above all, Hitler's deliberately intended low profile with regard to action against Jews is demonstrated by the total absence of any public statement with regard to the Reichskristallnacht pogrom of 9–10 November 1938.
Although the attack by a young Jew on the German Legation Secretary in Paris, Ernst vom Rath, had taken place just the day before his usual address to the Party ‘old guard’ in Munich on 8 November 1935, Hitler avoided all mention of it in his speech.
Nor did he refer to it in his address to new SS recruits at midnight on 9 November, and not a word relating to the pogrom was contained in his confidential speech — not meant for public consumption — to leaders of the German press on the evening of 10 November, less than twenty-four hours after the burning of the synagogues and the destruction of Jewish property throughout the length and breadth of Germany.
The violence and destruction of the pogrom aroused much criticism, but the unpopularity was mainly incurred by Goebbels and the Party rather than by Hitler — even if, according to one Sopade observer from Saxony, Hitler himself, ‘whose name had formerly scarcely been mentioned in such discussions,’ was ‘increasingly reproached with having to bear the main responsibility because of his silence, his toleration, or even his blatant backing for all the events’.
During the 1930s, then, in the years when his popularity was soaring to dizzy heights, Hitler's public pronouncements on the ‘Jewish Question’ were less numerous than might be imagined, and, while certainly hate-filled, were usually couched in abstract generalities in association with western plutocracy or Bolshevism.
Where he did intervene in public, it was generally to lend support to ‘legal’ discriminatory measures — for the most part popular and meeting with widespread approval — excluding Jews from German society and the economy.
But as we have seen, he was extremely careful to avoid public association with the generally unpopular pogrom-type anti-Semitic outrages.
If considerations of foreign diplomacy, unquestionably influenced by his personal fears of the international power of world Jewry, were paramount, the protection of his prestige and standing among the German public was clearly also a matter of concern to Hitler.
In the peacetime years of the Third Reich, the ‘Jewish Question’ did not rank prominently on the scale of priorities of most of the German population.
At certain times, notably in the spring of 1933, the summer of 1935, and above all in the autumn of 1938, the ‘Jewish Question’ had a high profile.
But for the most part interest in it was relatively low — except for Party activists — and subordinated to other far more pressing matters in the formation of popular opinion.
There is no doubt that Hitler's anti-Semitism, perceived as it was chiefly in connection with legal discrimination against Jews, was acceptable to the millions of his admirers.
But it is striking how little, either in internal reports or in those of the Sopade , the ‘Jewish Question’ figures in remarks about Hitler's popular standing, and it seems unlikely that it formed, for most ‘ordinary’Germans, the main reason for their adulation of the Führer.
Between the pogrom and the start of the war, Hitler dealt with the ‘Jewish Question’ in only one speech.
This was, however, his notorious Reichstag speech on 30 January 1939, when, in far more menacing fashion than ever before, Hitler made his threatening ‘prophecy’ that a new war would bring ‘the destruction of the Jewish race in Europe’.
It was the first in a series of brutal references to the ‘Jewish Question’ which Hitler came to make during the following years.
Hitler's speech had its background in Germany's strengthened position since the Munich settlement, in his determination to force the pace in foreign policy in 1939, and — in its tone of heightened aggression towards the Jews — in the anger he felt at the increasingly strong anti-German feeling in the USA and in Britain which the Reichskristallnacht pogrom had greatly fuelled.
Hitler's threats against the Jews, whose hand he of course saw behind the British and American ‘war-mongerers’, were an attempt to retaliate at what he regarded as Jewish-provoked anti-German public opinion and, by depicting Jews in the position of hostages as the certain victims in any new war, to exert pressure on Britain and the USA to leave Germany a free hand in Europe.
Hitler's ‘prophecy’, a brief moment in his two-hour speech, was singled out as the central point of the newsreel coverage on 3 February.
Remarkably, however, neither internal opinion reports nor the reports of the Sopade mentioned the passage on the Jews in their comments on the impact of Hitler's speech.
The SD report for the first quarter of 1939 mentioned the speech only in the context of factors influencing the German press to fix attention firmly on foreign policy developments, and made a brief reference to Hitler's remarks on the ‘Church problem’.
The reports of the Bavarian Government Presidents all record the resounding impact of the speech — one called it ‘mighty’, another ‘epoch-making’— but interpreted this solely in terms of anxiety about an imminent war being eased by Hitler's emphasis on his desire for peace.
The Sopade reports also centred on the implications of the speech for war or peace, but, in contrast to internal reports, asserted that it had substantially increased the fears in Germany of war in the near future.
According to an observer in Silesia, the speech focused the general discussion of the population, even in Nazi circles, almost exclusively upon the coming war.
But again, there was no mention of the passage on the Jews.
The lengthy section in the same report on the persecution of the Jews in Germany began by stating that what was currently taking place was the ‘irresistible extermination of a minority’, comparable to the genocide against the Armenians by the Turks during the First World War but carried out in Germany against the Jews ‘more slowly and in more planned fashion’, adding accurately that ‘in reality a lawless situation has long prevailed, through which every act of force against the Jewish minority is sanctioned’.
Again, there was no direct reference to Hitler's ‘prophecy’ about the destruction of European Jewry, though the whole section of the report was placed under a quotation from the speech which led up to the passage on the Jews: that in the light of the suffering of the Germans at the hands of others, people should ‘keep well away from us with their humanitarianism’.
Recorded reactions suggest that the German public was preoccupied not with Hitler's remarks on the ‘Jewish Question’, but with the implications for war or peace contained in his speech.
The threats against the Jews were no doubt correctly ‘read’ in government and Party circles as an indication that a war would somehow bring about a final show-down with the Jews.
But Hitler's prophecy, highly significant though it appears in retrospect, was at the time probably taken much for granted by most ‘ordinary’ Germans in the context of the ever more overtly radical anti-Jewish policy of the regime — a ‘prophecy’so commonplace in its sentiments that it scarcely prompted the need for exultant expressions of praise, just as it failed to stir up any animosity or repulsion.
What is, however, abundantly clear is that, unlike the 1930s, Hitler was prepared, indeed anxious, to be publicly associated during the war with the most radical steps in the ‘Jewish Question’, even though, of course , his horrific statements remained couched in vile generalities, avoiding any specific reference to the details of the ‘Final Solution’, which were intended to remain entirely secret.
The nauseating ‘documentary’ film,Der ewige Jude (The Eternal Jew ), receiving its première in November 1940 — a year which also saw the production of two other anti-Semitic films,Jud Süss and Die Rothschilds , in a concentrated attempt to ‘educate’German opinion and harden attitudes on the ‘Jewish Question’— provides an illustration of the way in which propaganda was now directly linking Hitler himself with the need for a most radical ‘solution’to the ‘Jewish problem’.
It also reveals some of the difficulties in relating this to the popular reception of Hitler's image.
The film, which concentrated on depicting the ‘real’ ghetto Jew behind the ‘mask of assimilation’, and, using trick photography, likened the migrations of Jews to the spread of a plague of bacillus-carrying rats, closed ‘in shining contrast’, as the film programme put it, with a clip from Hitler's Reichstag speech of 30 January 1939, ‘prophesying’the annihilation of Jewry.
The aim was to ‘fill the viewer with a feeling of deep gratification for belonging to a race whose Führer is fundamentally solving the Jewish problem’.
The film ran in every major city of Germany in late 1940 and early 1941, and simultaneously in no fewer than sixty-six Berlin cinemas.
An SD report, summarizing reactions to the film from numerous cities, noted an overwhelmingly positive reception.
According to the report from Munich, enthusiastic applause broke forth at the scene from Hitler's Reichstag speech.
Interestingly, however, the SD went on to note that after unusually large audiences, prompted by heavy propaganda, had attended the film at the outset, the numbers rapidly dropped off, and there were comments that the film would bring nothing new, that people had had enough of the Jewish theme, and that many were nauseated by the depiction of ritual slaughter scenes — some fainting, and others leaving the cinema in disgust.
It was added that ‘the typical film public’ was avoiding the film and even engaging in ‘verbal propaganda’against it, while in a number of cities — including Munich — it was expressly stated ‘that frequently only the politically more active section of the population attended the documentary film,.
It would seem from these comments that Hitler's association with the solution of the ‘Jewish problem’ was regarded as a highly positive attribute in the eyes of mainly the ‘politically active’part of the population which formed the bulk of the film's viewers, but that among ‘ordinary’Germans there was also a considerable degree of disinterest in the ‘Jewish Question,.
From 1941 onwards, and particularly so in 1942 when the ‘Final Solution’ was in full swing, Hitler repeatedly harked back to his ‘prophecy’of 1939, which he consistently misdated to the day of the outbreak of war, 1 September, not 30 January.
This in itself could scarcely be accidental, and reflects Hitler's own identification of the war with the destruction of the Jews.
Hitler reminded his audience of his grim ‘prophecy’ for the first time in his Reichstag speech on 30 January 1941, and in 1942 returned to it in no fewer than four major addresses, on 30 January, 24 February, 30 September, and 8 November, as well as hinting at the destruction of the Jews in the war in his ‘New Year Appeal’.
In his most dire reference to ‘the extermination of Jewry in Europe’, in his November speech to the Party ‘Old Guard’, he stated: ‘I've always been scorned as a prophet.
Of those who laughed then, there are countless numbers who are no longer laughing today, and those who are still laughing now, will perhaps also not be doing it any longer in the time to come.’
Twice more, on 24 February and 21 March 1943, Hitler repeated his threat that the war would bring about the extermination of Jewry, and came back to it again in one final reference — which produced ‘lively applause’— during an address to generals and officers at Berchtesgaden on 26 May 1944.
It has been rightly said that these remarkable statements can only be seen as Hitler's wish to make manifest his work in the eyes of history.
At the same time, however, he had agreed with Rosenberg in late 1941 that it was inappropriate to speak of extermination in public.
And by late 1942 Bormann was anxious to end rumours circulating about the ‘Final Solution’ in the east.
The striking contrast between Hitler's deliberate flaunting hints — barbaric, but nevertheless generalized and abstract — of the dire events unfolding in the east and the suppression of ‘hard’ information about the actual mechanics of mass murder, mirrors the manner in which Hitler, as the driving force behind genocide, even privately combined massive threats against the Jews with a taboo on the details of extermination.
The reactions provoked by Hitler's chilling public statements about the coming end of Jewry cannot, of course, be established with precision.
A few days after Hitler's repetition of his ‘prophecy’ on 30 January 1942, the SD reported that his words had been ‘interpreted to mean that the Führer's battle against the Jews would be followed through to the end with merciless consistency, and that very soon the last Jew would disappear from European soil’.
However, it seems likely that the open expression of opinion on such matters coming to the ears of the SD informants was over-representative of the overtly nazified section of the population.
Moreover, Hitler's vicious but unspecific remarks about the Jews were clearly not the centre-point of the speech for most people.
According to the SD report itself, the main interest of the population in Hitler's speech lay in his assessment of the military situation in the east, and the generalized response to the ‘prophecy’ passage was summed up in the single sentence quoted above.
For the majority of the population, it seems that, now as before, the ‘Jewish Question’ was of no more than secondary interest.
The point seems reinforced by the fact that the SD reports following the further repetition of the Hitler prophecy in the speeches of 24 February, 30 September, and 8 November 1942, and 24 February and 21 March 1943, make no mention of any reaction to the passage about the Jews.
Hitler's proclamation on 24 February 1943 was, in fact, hardly noticed at all by the population, while reactions to the low-key speech on 21 March 1943 were dominated by the speculation over the astonishingly low figures for German war casualties which Hitler had given.
The suspicion must be that for all their draconian nature, Hitler's comments on the Jews were regarded as stereotype repetition, and of little interest compared with his assessment of the war situation.
There are, nevertheless, sufficient indications to suggest that attitudes towards the Jews hardened during the war, and that among those Party members and others who shared radical Nazi views on the ‘Jewish Question’, Hitler's pronouncements were welcomed as endorsement of the most ruthless destruction of the ‘racial enemy’.
The climate had worsened significantly for the remaining Jews in Germany following the invasion of the Soviet Union, in a period of stepped-up hatred towards the ‘Jewish-Bolshevik’ arch-enemy and heightened tension, as Party activists agitated with renewed pressure for action in the ‘Jewish Question’.
The introduction of the ‘Yellow Star’, publicly branding the Jews as outcasts, in September 1941 — a direct outcome of such pressure — and the beginning of the deportations in the autumn that year, brought the ‘Jewish Question, temporarily into the limelight.
In this climate, Goebbels's essay, ‘The Jews are Guilty’, in Das Reich , with its express reference to Hitler's ‘prophecy’, was said by the SD do have ‘found a strong echo’ in the population, with critical comments coming from church-going circles.
A few weeks later, the exportation of Jews from Minden in Westphalia provoked reported mixed reactions from the local population, ranging from sympathy for the Jews to outrightly nazified comments thanking the Führer for freeing the people of the plague of Jewish blood, claiming that had it been done half a century earlier the First World War would not have been necessary, and including rumours that the Führer wanted to hear by 15 January 1942 that there were no more Jews in Germany.
These and other reports make it plain that attitudes were divided on the ‘Jewish Question’, now as before.
Whether positively, or — in a minority of the population — negatively, it seems plain that Hitler was now, to a far greater extent than in the pre-war period, directly associated with the radical anti Jewish actions of the regime.
And for those, especially within the Movement, for whom it ranked as a burning issue, Hitler's words were clearly taken as a signal and sanction for further radical action and were increasingly treated as a literal description of what was actually taking place.
The extreme anti Jewish sentiments expressed in letters from soldiers at the Front, though evidently a small minority of the overall services’ mail, also sometimes included direct references to Hitler's stance on the ‘Jewish Question’, interpreting the war in classical Nazi fashion as a struggle brought about by the Jews and destined to end in their destruction.
One, stating that ‘the great task imposed on us in the struggle against Bolshevism resides in the annihilation of eternal Jewry’, went on: ‘Only when you see what the Jew has brought about here in Russia, can you really understand why the Führer began the struggle against Jewry.
What sort of suffering would not have fallen upon our Fatherland if this beast of mankind had retained the upper hand?’
Another, this time from a lance-corporal serving on the western Front and evidently of an extreme Nazi mentality, expressly referred to Hitler's ‘prophecy’ in a malevolent tirade, thanking inter alia the Stürmer for remaining true to its principles on the ‘Jewish Question’and applauding the introduction of the Yellow Star now also in the western occupied territories: ‘…
Things have now finally reached the point which our Führer at the outbreak of this struggle prophesied to world Jewry in his great speech: ‘…should Jewry once more succeed in again plunging the nations into a new world war, it would be the end of that race, and not ours.’
Gradually, therefore, this race is being ever more reminded of these words…
. All its efforts won't any longer be able to alter its fate.’
Other soldiers sent letters with similar sentiments direct to the Stümer , which, with its circulation during the war estimated at still over 300,000, continued as before to publish a selection of the most repulsively anti Jewish readers' letters.
When, under the hail of bombs in the last phase of the war, some Nazi cranks and fanatics sent letters to the Propaganda Ministry, extraordinary even for the Third Reich in the depths of inhumanity they plumbed, suggesting the shooting or burning of Jews in retaliation for allied air raids, it was occasionally specifically requested that the ‘suggestions’ be sent on to Hitler.
Others addressed their propaganda ‘suggestions’ directly to the Führer himself.
The evidence we have considered, patchy though it is, suggests a number of generalized conclusions.
The growing barbarization of the war, especially following the invasion of the Soviet Union, led to an increasing dehumanization of the abstract image of the ‘Jew’ and a corresponding ‘internalization’of the justification of the need to search for a radical solution to the ‘Jewish Question’.
As the forthright proponent of the ‘destruction of European Jewry’, Hitler's image was enhanced among a minority — though a growing and powerful minority — of the German population (especially, though by no means exclusively, those ‘organized’ in the Nazi Movement and, presumably, those who already before the war had been active, whole-hearted Nazis and convinced ideological anti-Semites) by his open association with extreme anti-Jewish measures.
For the committed exponents of Nazi rule, Hitler's public statements on the destruction of the Jews provided sanction and legitimation for their own ‘private initiatives’ taken against Jews, backing and support for their own involvement in the escalating criminality of the regime.
For another, smaller and by now entirely powerless, minority, the barbarous anti-Jewish measures and policies were one component in their criticism or outright rejection of Nazism.
Practising Christians were the most visible group, singled out by many Nazi reports as voicing objections to the treatment of the Jews.
But many anonymous individuals whose traits of basic humanity had not been eradicated even by years of Nazism revealed through small acts or gestures of kindness of sympathy that they were out of step with mainstream Nazi attitudes towards the Jews.
For these, it seems obvious, Hitler's public association with the radical ‘solution of the Jewish Question’ and the linking of the Führer to the widespread knowledge and rumours of the extermination of the Jews in the east, can only have been a further negative feature of his image.
The same can probably be claimed for those who for reasons which had little to do with humanitarian concern — fearing Jewish revenge in the event of a lost war, or blaming Hitler for bringing on the war through attacking the Jews, attitudes which of course themselves betrayed the influence of Nazi ‘Jewish conspiracy’ propaganda — were voicing criticism of Nazi anti Jewish policy.
The identification of Hitler with the ‘struggle against the Jews’ was most probably seen in a more positive light by the far wider sections of the population, who, though never rabid or violent anti-Semites, had accepted the basic justification of discrimination and expulsion of Jews, and who were largely persuaded of the responsibility of world Jewry for the war.
At the same time, although feelings towards the Jews undoubtedly hardened in such circles during the war years, it would be easy to exaggerate the significance of the ‘Jewish Question’ in the formation of popular opinion.
The evidence suggests, in fact, that, during the war as before it, the ‘Jewish Question’ did not rank highly, relative to other factors shaping German popular opinion.
There was, it seems clear, much deliberate or subliminal exclusion of the treatment of the Jews from popular consciousness — a more or less studied lack of interest or cultivated disinterest, going hand in hand with an accentuated ‘retreat into the private sphere’ and increased self-centredness in difficult and worrying wartime conditions.
As has been aptly stated, the fate of the Jews ‘was an unpleasant topic, speculation was unprofitable, discussions of the fate of the Jews were discouraged.
Consideration of this question was pushed aside, blotted out for the duration.’
This conclusion is supported by the replies which Michael Müller-Claudius, formerly a psychologist, received to his unique, camouflaged small sample of opinion of sixty-one Party members (all of whom had joined either the NSDAP or the Hitler Youth before 1933) in 1942.
In response to his prompting remark that ‘the Jewish problem still hasn't been cleared up’ and ‘we hear nothing at all about what sort of solution is imagined’, only three Party members (5 per cent) expressed open approval of the right to exterminate the Jews, with comments such as : ‘The Führer has decided upon the extermination of Jewry and promised it.
He will carry it out.’
Thirteen persons (21 per cent) showed some signs of ethical and moral sense, though accepting much of the Nazi claim that the Jews had caused Germany harm.
Their replies also revealed resigned attitudes — washing of the hands for whatever brutalities were taking place.
Three persons (5 per cent) revealed what he called a ‘clear detachment from anti-Semitism’.
Finally, 42 of the Nazis (69 per cent of the ‘sample’) provided responses which could be classed as ‘indifference of conscience’, and pointed to disinterest or internal suppression of knowledge and responsibility for the fate of the Jews.
Characteristic replies included: ‘There's no point in thinking about it.
The decision lies with Hitler alone.’
‘I prefer not to speak of it.
It's simply not possible to form an opinion on it.’
‘Have a cigarette instead.
I'm busy twelve hours a day, and can't be concerned with at as well…’
And ‘I'm just about up to here with the war.
I want a regulated situation.
What part the Jews play in that isn't my concern.’
Though of course Müller-Claudius's ‘sample’ was hardly a representative one, the responses have more than a ring of plausibility about them, and, coming from Nazis who had been in the Party since before Hitler's ‘seizure of power’, can be extended a fortiori to ‘non-organized’Germans.
It would seem fair to conclude that while for the bulk of the population Hitler's image was no doubt related in an abstract fashion to finding a ‘solution to the Jewish Question’, this was an issue which people either gave little thought to or deliberately turned their minds from, and that, correspondingly, Hitler's public attacks on the Jews were something absorbed with little deliberation, forming no central part in explaining either the high peaks of his popularity or the collapse of the ‘Führer myth’ in the last years of the war.
Returning to the questions we posed at the outset of this enquiry, we would, therefore, have to conclude that anti-Semitism, despite its pivotal place in Hitler's ‘world view’, was of only secondary importance in cementing the bonds between Führer and people which provided the Third Reich with its popular legitimation and base of plebiscitary acclamation.
At the same time, the principle of excluding the Jews from German society was itself widely and increasingly popular, and Hitler's hatred of the Jews — baleful in its threats but linked to the condoning of lawful, ‘rational’ action, not the unpopular crude violence and brutality of the Party's ‘gutter’elements — was certainly an acceptable component of his popular image, even if it was an element ‘taken on board’rather than forming a centrally motivating factor for most Germans.
Clearly, the Hitler image, in this fundamentally important area, was again largely detached from reality.
Though at the very beginning of his political ‘career’, Hitler had emphasized the need for anti-Semitism derived from ‘reason’, not pure ‘emotion’, there were — as is well known — no measures in the ‘Jewish Question’ which were too extreme for him, except on occasions where tactical considerations prevailed.
His consistent defence of Streicher and Stürmer anti-Semitism, together with his sanctioning of the Goebbels initiative to unleash the November pogrom of 1938 — to which he never publicly admitted — demonstrate the extent of the gulf between image and reality.
And the replacement of anti-Semitism by anti-Marxism as early as 1922–23 as the main ‘hate-theme’ of his public addresses, and the relatively low profile of anti-Semitism in his speeches during the 1930s, can again only be explained in terms of a conscious decision to limit the public expression of his own phobias and paranoia for political and diplomatic purposes, to provide a wider appeal and to avoid gratuitous alienation at home and abroad.
His Reichstag speech of 30 January 1939 marks the point at which public image and reality started to approximate, although during the war, too, however violent his rhetoric, he avoided any explicit connection with the actual processes of mass murder.
The third question to which we sought an answer was the function of Hitler's public persona in an explanation of the radicalization of the ‘Jewish Question’ and genesis of the ‘Final Solution’.
Here it seems important to distinguish between Hitler's image as portrayed to and perceived by the mass of the population, in which anti-Semitism was no more than a subsidiary component of the ‘Führer myth’, and his image as viewed from within the Nazi Movement and sections of the State bureaucracy, where his ‘mission’ to destroy the Jews functioned as a symbolic motivating force for the Party and SS, and an activating and legitimating agent for government initiatives to ‘force the pace’in finding a ‘radical solution’to the ‘Jewish Question’.
It is in this last capacity that Hitler's image as perceived by his loyal ‘following’— functioning within the framework of ‘charismatic politics’— played its crucial role, as not only the leaders of Party and State, but those in responsible intermediary positions — whether for ideological reasons or for a variety of careerist or other motives little related in essence to principled hatred of Jews —‘read’ Hitler's vaguely expressed ‘intent’as a green light for radicalizing actions which developed their own dynamic and momentum.
For the top and intermediate Party leadership, Hitler's image stood therefore in far closer relationship to reality than it did for the broad mass of the population.
In private or semi-private conversation and ‘confidential’ addresses to the Party faithful, Hitler left no doubt of his feelings on the ‘Jewish Question’.
A case in point was his speech to Party Kreisleiter , the indispensable link with the Party activist base at the district level, at Sonthofen in 1937, in which, in contrast to the carefully cultivated image portrayed in his public addresses, he spoke openly and frankly about his methods and aims.
With direct reference to the ‘Jewish Question’, and in response to a ‘demand’ for more radical action which he had read in a newspaper, Hitler made clear that he had at the time to proceed tactically and in stages, but that his strategy was to manoeuvre his enemy into a corner before destroying him completely.
In such ways, Hitler set the vicious tone for discrimination and persecution, providing the touchstone and legitimation for initiatives which largely came from others at various levels of the Party, the State bureaucracy, and not least the SS-SD-Gestapo complex, where the ‘Jewish Question’ had a key functional role.
Hitler's image functioned, therefore, on two different levels.
Within the Nazi Movement and the coercive apparatus of the State, symbolizing the struggle to rid Germany of its Jews, and increasingly the struggle to destroy Jewry itself once and for all, it had a significance which can hardly be overrated.
But outside the Nazi Movement, the objective function of the ‘Führer myth’ was rather to integrate into the Third Reich, through association with the far more popular and attractive aspects of Nazi rule symbolized by Hitler, the mass of ‘ordinary’and ‘non-organized’Germans for whom the ‘Jewish Question’retained only a relatively low level of importance.
This in itself distracted attention from Hitler's involvement in the ‘seamier, side of Nazi policy.
Hitler's massive personal popularity enhanced at the same time the readiness to accept uncritically his proclaimed struggle against the immense (but anonymous) power of world Jewry, and to welcome the increasing levels of ‘legal’ discrimination against Jews which he publicly advocated.
This in turn ensured at least passive acquiescence in if not outright approval for the escalating inhumanity of Nazi anti Jewish policy, and provided the regime with an extensive sphere of autonomy, free from any constraints of popular disapproval, in adopting ever more radical measures towards providing a ‘final solution’ to the ‘Jewish Question’.
CONCLUSION
WE have explored the main components of the popular image of Hitler and their blending into a leadership ‘myth’ of remarkable potency and resilience.
The gulf between the fictive figure, manufactured by propaganda on the foundations of pre-existing ‘heroic, leadership ideals, and the genuine Hitler is striking.
Difficult though it is to evaluate, the evidence of the receptivity to the portrayal of Hitler's image which we have examined has pointed to seven significant bases of the ‘Hitler myth’.
In each case the contrast between image and reality is stark, the ‘mythical’ content unmistakable.
Firstly, Hitler was regarded as the personification of the nation and the unity of the ‘national community’, aloof from the selfish sectional interests and material concerns which marked the normality of ‘every-day life’ and created the damaging divisions in society and politics — the selfless exponent of the national interest, whose incorruption and unselfish motives were detachable from the scandalous greed and hypocrisy of the Party functionaries.
Secondly, he was accepted as the single-handed architect and creator of Germany's ‘economic miracle’ of the 1930s, eliminating the scourge of mass unemployment which continued to plague other European nations, revitalizing the economy, providing improved living standards, and offering a new basis of lasting prosperity.
Thirdly, as shown most clearly in the popular reactions to the massacre of the SA leadership in 1934, Hitler was seen as the representative of ‘popular justice’, the voice of the ‘healthy sentiment of the people, the upholder of public morality, the embodiment of strong, if necessarily ruthless, action against the ‘enemies of the people’ to enforce ‘law and order’.
Fourthly, as the example of the ‘Church Struggle’ showed, Hitler was widely viewed — even by prominent Church leaders with a reputation for hostility to Nazism — as personally sincere, and in matters affecting established traditions and institutions as a ‘moderate’opposed to the radical and extreme elements in the Nazi Movement, but largely kept in the dark about what was actually going on.
Fifthly, in the arena of foreign affairs, Hitler was commonly regarded as an upholder and a fanatical defender of Germany's just rights, a rebuilder of the nation's strength, a statesman of genius, and for the most part, it seems, not as a racial imperialist warmonger working towards a ‘war of annihilation’ and limitless German conquest.
Sixthly, in the first half of the war Hitler appeared to be the incomparable military leader who, nevertheless, as a former Front soldier and one distinguished for bravery knew and understood the ‘psychology’ of the ordinary soldier.
Even after the war turned sour he continued to be seen by many as the epitome of Germany's unwavering will to certain victory.
Finally, there was Hitler's image as the bulwark against the nation's perceived powerful ideological enemies — Marxism/Bolshevism and, above all, the Jews.
This image presumably registered most strongly among those sections of the population whose exposure to ideological ‘schooling’ was greatest — particularly, therefore, among committed members of the Party and its affiliates.
Fear of Bolshevism and the prevalent anti-Marxism in the German middle classes, made even more acute through the shrill tones of Nazi propaganda, unquestionably formed a wide negative base of Hitler's popularity.
But, strikingly, Hitler's personal preoccupation with ‘the struggle against the Jews’ does not appear to have figured as a leading component of his image for the bulk of the population.
That the crass inversion of reality caricatured in these aspects of the popular image of Hitler was in large measure a product of the deliberate distortions of Nazi propaganda has been made abundantly clear in the preceding chapters.
Even though at best only partial success was attained in ‘imposing’ this image on the still unbroken socialist/communist and catholic subcultures, where there were strong ideological counters to acceptance of the ‘Hitler myth’, and on sections of the upper classes whose status-conscious élitism provided a continuing barrier to the appeal of populist leadership images, there can be no doubt that the penetration of the propagated ‘Hitler myth’was deep, especially, but by no means only, among the German middle classes.
After 1933, Nazi propaganda, largely uncontested now that opponents within Germany had been silenced, could almost deify Hitler.
Goebbels, as we saw, ranked his creation of the public Hitler image as his greatest propaganda triumph.
Yet, cynical though its ‘manufacture’ was, the excesses of the Führer cult after 1933, and the extent of its penetration, are inconceivable without the realization that, in the crisis conditions of the early 1930s, it had touched upon and articulated (even if in extreme and distorted fashion) long-standing and pervasive elements of the bourgeois political culture in Germany.
Of these, the most crucial arose from the disparities between the superficial attainment of national unity and the internal divisions of the German nation-state since its creation in 1871, and the gulf between the immense world-power aspirations and the modesty of Germany's actual achievements in international relations.
From Bismarck's time onwards, ‘national unity’ in the new nation-state not only received exaggerated emphasis, but was focused on the rejection of internal enemies of the Reich’(Catholics, socialists, ethnic minorities) and, increasingly under Wilhelm II, was linked to varying notions of German expansionism.
The internal divisions grew more rather than less apparent, however, enhanced by the populist politics from the 1890s onwards, and the imperialist ambitions, though more and more strident, were gravely disappointed.
The ideological basis was there for the fundamental divides which the war, defeat, and revolution openly exposed, and which provided the Weimar Republic from its inception with an extremely weak base of legitimation, especially among the bourgeoisie and élites.
The extensified fragmentation of Weimar politics and eventual decline into little more than interest politics in the face of mounting internal crisis, entirely delegitimized the State system itself, wholly discredited pluralist politics, and paved the way for a full acceptance — already by 1932 of around 13 million Germans — of a new basis of unity represented in an entirely novel political form personalized in Hitler's ‘charismatic’ leadership.
In such conditions as prevailed in the last phase of the Weimar Republic, of the total discrediting of a State system based upon pluralist politics, the ‘functional’ leadership of the bureaucrat and the Party politician as the representatives of the impersonal ‘rational-legal’form of political domination, imposing laws and carrying out functions for which they are not personally responsible and with which they are not identifiable, lost credibility.
Salvation could only be sought with a leader who possessed personal power and was prepared to take personal responsibility, sweeping away the causes of the misery and the faceless politicians and bureaucrats who prevail over it, and seeming to impose his own personal power upon the force of history itself.
In reality, of course, the fascist variant of ‘charismatic leadership’— there are obvious parallels in the Mussolini cult — was not only superimposed on existing bureaucratic power, but created new, extensive apparatuses of bureaucratic administration, and led not to diminished but to massively increased bureaucratic interference in all spheres of daily life.
In this paradox, we see the essence of the heightened detestation of the new breed of Party ‘functionaries’, the agents — along with the traditionally disliked State civil servants — of this bureaucratized control, and the popularity of the Führer, whose personal power was idealized and elevated to a plane where it seemed to be executed outside the realms of ‘everyday life’.
An extract from a speech to the Reichstag in April 1939 illustrates well the personalized claims Hitler made for ‘his’ great ‘achievements, and how far these rested on ‘national’rather than specifically Nazi ideals and aspirations.
These ‘achievements’ provided the basis on which Hitler, more than any politician before him, had been able to integrate not only the German middle classes, but the vast majority of the population who, on particular aspects of policy, could often reveal heated antagonism to the specific manifestations of Nazi rule affecting their daily lives.
In his speech, on 28 April 1939, Hitler provided the following catalogue of achievements which, in the view of most ordinary Germans, could only be taken as a breathtaking list of personal successes:
I have overcome the chaos in Germany, restored order, massively raised production in all areas of our national economy…
I have succeeded in completely bringing back into useful production the seven million unemployed who were so dear to all our own hearts, in keeping the German peasant on his soil despite all difficulties and in rescuing it for him, in attaining the renewed flourishing of German trade, and in tremendously promoting transportation.
I have not only politically united the German people, but also militarily rearmed them, and I have further attempted to tear up page for page that Treaty, which contained in its 448 articles the most base violations ever accorded to nations and human beings.
I have given back to the Reich the provinces stolen from us in 1919.
I have led back into the homeland the millions of deeply unhappy Germans who had been torn away from us.
I have recreated the thousand-year historic unity of the German living-space, and I have attempted to do all this without spilling blood and without inflicting on my people or on others the suffering of war.
I have managed this from my own strength, as one who twenty-one years ago was an unknown worker and soldier of my people.
For the great mass of Hitler's audience, the political and economic recovery of Germany, which he was trumpeting as his own personal achievement, was a goal in itself.
For Hitler and the Nazi leadership, it provided only the base for racial-imperialist conquest and a war of annihilation.
It remains for us to ask how the popular Hitler image we have examined contributed towards the growing strength of the regime and towards making possible this war, which, from what we have seen, most Germans — though prepared to fight if necessary — had been only too anxious to avoid.
The ‘Hitler myth’ can be seen as providing the central motor for integration, mobilization, and legitimation within the Nazi system of rule.
Its functional significance has to be examined in the context of its importance for the ‘non-organized’ masses, whose image of Hitler has been the central concern of this work, for the Party faithful, and for the Nazi and non-Nazi élites.
No one was more aware of the functional significance of his popularity in binding the masses to him, and hence to the regime, than Hitler himself.
He pointed out that the strength of the regime could not depend on ‘the laws [!]of the Gestapo alone’, and that ‘the broad mass [of the population]needs an idol’.
On another occasion, he commented that the ruler who was dependent only upon executive power without finding ‘the way to the people’ was destined to failure.
His well-documented fear of loss of personal popularity and the corresponding growth in instability of the regime is further testimony of his awareness of the centrality of the integratory force of his role as Führer.
This integration was largely affective, for the most part forging psychological or emotional rather than material bonds.
But its reality can scarcely be doubted.
And at moments of internal crisis — such as in June 1934 — the regime was stabilized and its leadership given extended room for manoeuvrability through the surge in Hitler's popularity and the strengthening of bonds of identity between people and Führer.
In his portrayed public image, Hitler was able to offer a positive pole in the Third Reich, transcending sectional interests and grievances through the overriding ideal of national unity, made possible through his necessary aloofness from the ‘conflict sphere’ of daily politics, separating him from the more unpopular aspects of Nazism.
Hitler recognized that enthusiasm and willingness for self-sacrifice could not be conserved, and were bound to fade when confronted with ‘the grey daily routine and the convenience of life’.
He saw, therefore, that the masses could be bound to him only through constant psychological mobilization, demanding ever recurring successes.
Until the middle of the war, the successes came, and spectacularly so, especially in the arena of foreign policy and military affairs, bringing many Germans who were far from Nazis into close identification with Hitler, revamping sagging morale, forcing open acclaim, prompting active participation — if shallow and largely ritualized — in support of‘his’ achievements, disarming potential opponents, making objections to Nazi policy difficult to formulate.
This was, for example, undoubtedly the effect of the plebiscites staged in 1933, 1934, 1936, and 1938, in which the massive acclamation, though the product of intense propaganda and coercion and obviously in no sense a true reflection of the state of opinion, nevertheless reflected genuine widespread approval and admiration for Hitler's accomplishments and persuaded waverers to fall in line.
The plebiscitary acclamation which could always be mobilized by Hitler provided him with an unassailable base of popularity, and as such offered the regime legitimation both within Germany and in the eyes of foreign powers, allowing the scope for further mobilization and a gathering momentum of Nazi policy.
The massive popularity of Hitler, recognized even by enemies of the regime, formed therefore a decisive element in the structure of Nazi rule in Germany.
It goes far towards helping to account not only for the high and growing degree of relative autonomy from non-Nazi élites enjoyed by Hitler and the Nazi leadership, but also — as the counterweight to terror, repression, and intimidation — for the weakness of resistance to the regime.
The ‘Hitler myth’ and terror were in this sense two indispensable sides of the same coin, ensuring political control and mobilization behind the regime.
It is no coincidence, therefore, that terroristic repression escalated wildly in the final phase of the waning regime as the binding force of Hitler's popularity weakened and collapsed.
For the mass of ‘non-organized’ Germans, the ‘Hitler myth’functioned through the stimulation of popular acclaim — recurrent but always temporary — fur faits accomplis , for coups which had been brought about, successes already attained, rather than for a clear set of policies in train.
One main role of the Party was to ensure that the appropriate degree of acclamation was produced.
But for the activists in the Party and its affiliates, the integratory and mobilizing functions of the ‘Hitler myth’ were not confined to support for current attainments, but rested on the incorporation in Hitler of the ‘idea’of Nazism itself, determining future utopias to be won as well as past glories achieved.
The centrifugal forces of the Nazi Movement were held together in great measure by the ideals embodied in the image of the Führer; social disappointments and disillusionment could be transcended and overcome by participation in the Führer's great ‘struggle’ and ultimate satisfaction in the brave new world to come.
For the activist and ‘committed’ core of the Movement, especially for the younger element, the perceived Führer image stood symbolically for ideological precepts — preparing for a show-down with Bolshevism, acquisition of Lebensraum , ‘removal of Jews’— which were ‘directions for action’long before they were realizable objectives.
Without such ideological precepts bound up in the ‘representative figure’ of the Führer, the dynamism built into the permanent mobilization of the Party and its affiliates is largely unthinkable.
Not detailed plans of a Party programme, but his role as the embodiment of a cosmic struggle against irreconcilable internal and external enemies of immense power and magnitude ultimately bound the Party faithful to Hitler.
And where the coming mortal conflict with Bolshevism sharpened among Nazi activists the preparedness and taste for uncompromising and brutal struggle, and the idea of Lebensraum and limitless German expansionism provided a future panacea for all national ills and current personal dissatisfactions, the ‘removal of the Jews’ offered a current, existing target to be attained, even if the road to the goal was unclear.
Based as it was on principles of race, with the figure of the Jew as the focal point of all hatred, and with the Führer as its ideological and organizational fulcrum, the Nazi Movement needed no regular orders or directions from Hitler to step up the pace of anti Jewish actions and discrimination, pushing the government and the State bureaucracy into action, and always therefore increasing the radicalizing momentum of racial policy.
In such ways, the Führer image functioned, in integrating the potentially disintegrative forces within the Nazi Movement on a different plane among the Party ‘faithful’ than among the broad mass of ‘non-organized’Germans, in mobilizing the boundless energy and misplaced idealism of the fanatics and activists through orientation towards long-term ‘cosmic’and ‘utopian’goals, and through offering legitimation for action undertaken against ideological and racial ‘enemies of the State’.
The significance of the ‘Hitler myth’ has to be seen, finally, on a third level which preceding chapters have not sought to explore systematically: that of its function for the élites — both the non-Nazi ‘national-conservative’élites and the power-groups within the Movement itself.
For non-Nazi, ‘national-conservative’ power-élites in the economy and in the army, Hitler's ‘charisma’had in itself never been a decisive factor, even though by the early 1930s it seems clear that substantial sectors of especially the ‘intellectual élite’had succumbed in varying degrees to the Führer cult.
For the traditional élites, it was not charisma but pragmatic power considerations which aligned them with Hitler.
The erosion of their political and social ‘basis of legitimation’, stretching deep into the pre-war era, had reached a critical level during the Weimar Republic.
Hitler was able to offer them a new mass base for the apparent consolidation of their leadership positions within the framework of an authoritarian system, together with the prospect of Germany attaining a position of hegemony within Europe and even world power status.
For his part, Hitler needed their support to gain and consolidate power.
This was the well-known basis of the entente between the dominant forces of the traditional ‘power-élite’ and the Nazi leadership in January 1933.
However little ‘charisma’ had come into these considerations in 1933, there seems no doubt that the ‘Hitler myth’— or significant elements of it — played an important role in shaping the behaviour of the conservative élites in the following years in at least two ways.
Firstly, misplaced conceptions within the élites of Hitler as a man whom they could trust and ‘work with’, in contrast to the Party radicals, integrated the disparate sectors of the élites and mobilized their support behind the Nazi leadership in the critical early years at the same time that Hitler's popularity provided the mass base of legitimation for the presumed reassertion of their own spheres of domination.
Important figures from within the ‘national-conservative’ élites who later played prominent roles in resistance to Nazism — such as Ernst von Weizsäcker in the bureaucracy, Carl Goerdeler in the economy, and Henning von Tresckow in the military — were all prepared to distance Hitler in the early years from their mounting criticism of the radicals in the Movement.
Their path into fundamental opposition was, partly for this reason, a hesitant one, and their objections to the regime for long less than fundamental.
Secondly, their underrating of the ‘caesaristic’ elements of Hitler's mass charismatic base meant that, far from providing a new foundation for the power of the traditional élites, as they had hoped, the plebiscitary acclamation of the Führer enabled Hitler's own power to detach itself from its likely shackles and develop a high degree of relative autonomy, at the same time reducing former dominant groups like the army from ‘power-élites’proper to merely ‘functional élites’, unable to check Hitler himself and the ‘wild men’of the Nazi Movement, even when wishing to do so.
In cementing the basis of the Führer's pivotal position, the ‘Hitler myth’ had been instrumental in establishing a situation in which the traditional élites could become outflanked by the specifically Nazi élites.
Unlike the position in classic ‘Bonapartist’ theory, therefore, the Dictator and his entourage could not be edged aside by the traditional ‘ruling class’once the economy had been stabilized.
The dynamic driving-force of the ‘Hitler myth’ allowed, in fact, no stabilization or ‘normalization’, but rather conditioned circumstances in which the traditional ‘ruling class’became ever more subsumed in and dependent upon the ‘behemoth’of the Nazi State which it was no longer able to control in its mad rush to destruction.
From the early 1920s onwards, Hitler had built up his power base in the Party above all on the strength of the bonds of personal loyalty with his ‘paladins’, the second-rank Nazi leaders and Gauleiter .
Hitler's personal magnetism, his unique demagogic talents, his strength of will, apparent self-confidence and certainty of action, and his indispensability to the Movement (which had fractured without his leadership following the ill-fated Putsch of 1923), all provided the foundations of charismatic authority of extraordinary strength within his own entourage, resting upon bonds of personal loyalty.
For his part, Hitler always felt most at home in the company of his closest group of ‘fellow fighters’ from the ‘time of struggle’.
He realized that their loyalty was the firmest basis of his own personal power, that he needed them as they needed him.
His hatred for those who crossed him having once shared the bonds of mutual loyalty was unbounded, but equally he never forgot old services performed, and, apart from the ‘Night of the Long Knives’ in June 1934, he did not resort to purges within the Party.
The institutionalization of Hitler's charismatic leadership, first of all within the Party during the 1920s and then within the State after 1933, served a crucial function in sealing the bonds between Hitler and the subordinate Party leadership.
The integrative function was the decisive one here.
The fragmentation of the Nazi ‘élite’ groupings had shown itself plainly in 1924, and the inner-Party factionalism and opposition in the early 1930s had been countered only through the strength of Hitler's personal position.
After 1933, too, the ferocious personal enmities and political conflicts within the Nazi élite, which otherwise would have torn the system apart, were resolved only in Hitler's own charismatic authority — in his indisputable position as the base of Nazism's popular legitimacy and the embodiment of Nazism's ‘idea’.
These Party leaders were of course closer to the real Hitler than were the mass of ordinary Germans or even the mass of Party activists.
What is striking, therefore, and of importance for the drive and dynamism of the regime, is that the undiluted ‘Hitler myth’— the fully-fledged cult of the ‘superman’ Leader in all its glorification — embraced the Nazi élite almost in its entirety, and was not simply regarded cynically as a functional propaganda manufacture.
If the glorifying speeches and writings of subleaders during the Third Reich itself are no proof of this, the behaviour of Nazi leaders arraigned at Nuremberg and post-war memoirs (for all their obvious apologetics) demonstrate it conclusively.
Even after the war and the revelations of Nuremberg, Alfred Rosenberg called Hitler the ‘driving force and untiring motor of the great achievements of the National Socialist State’.
For Hans Frank, the Führer had been ‘a sort of superman’ in whom he had believed ‘without reservation’and whom he regarded as being right ‘in all decisive matters’.
Albert Speer, the ambitious, calculating, and rational power technician who had climbed to the top of the ladder, and who distanced himself most clearly from Hitler at Nuremberg and in his memoirs, admitted that he had seen in the Führer something approaching ‘a hero of an ancient saga’ and, after the victory in France, as ‘one of the greatest figures in German history’.
And the former head of the Hitler Youth, Baldur von Schirach, who retained even at Nuremberg a naïve attachment to Hitler, indicated in his memoirs the effect on Hitler himself of the constant toadying and sycophancy which surrounded him, shielding him from rational criticism or genuine debate, and bolstering his increasing detachment from reality.
Von Schirach pointed out that ‘this unlimited, almost religious veneration, to which I contributed as did Goebbels, Göring, Hess, Ley, and countless others, strengthened in Hitler himself the belief that he was in league with Providence’.
As these memoirs (in which the element of self-defence based upon complete submission to the Führer does not contradict the apologists' genuine belief in his power and the extreme personal devotion to him) clearly suggest, Hitler's own person gradually became inseparable from the ‘Führer myth’.
Hitler had to live out more and more the constructed image of omnipotence and omniscience.
And the more he succumbed to the allure of his own Führer cult and came to believe in his own myth, the more his judgement became impaired by faith in his own infallibility, losing his grip on what could and could not be achieved solely through the strength of his ‘will’.
Hitler's capacity for self-deception had been profound ever since the mid-1920s, if not earlier, and was vital in order to carry conviction among his immediate entourage about the greatness of his cause and the righteousness of his path towards attaining it.
But as his success within the Movement, within the German State, and on the international stage grew until it knew no bounds, so the self-deception of the ‘conviction’ ideologist magnified to the extent that it ultimately consumed all traces of the calculating and opportunist politician, leaving in its place only a voracious appetite for destruction — and ultimately self-destruction.
In this sense, the ‘Hitler myth’ was a fundamental component of the underlying instability of the Nazi regime and its untrammelled dynamic of destruction.
It would have been expecting too much to imagine that the once-mighty ‘Hitler myth’ might disappear overnight in 1945, disintegrating along with the mortal remains of the Führer himself and being scattered with the ashes of the Third Reich.
Not only had its hold been too strong for that among considerable sections of the population, but the conditions of the immediate post-war era were miserable enough for many to compare them unfavourably with the peacetime era under Nazism.
An early post-war opinion survey undertaken by the United States occupying forces in October 1945 among a representative sample of the population of Darmstadt suggested differences in attitudes towards Nazism among those under nineteen years of age and older Germans.
As many as 42 per cent of the youth, compared with 22 per cent of the adults, thought the reconstruction of Germany could best be carried out by ‘a strong new Führer’.
According to the report, ‘…a considerable difference appeared in the attitude towards Hitler, the majority of the youth offering an opinion being ready to excuse Hitler as a good man with bad advisers, while the majority of the older people condemned Hitler as an evil individual.’
The Nuremberg Trials lifted the scales from the eyes of many Germans, and later OMGUS surveys reported that only one in eight (12 per cent) of those questioned in the American Zone recalled trusting Hitler as Leader up to the end of the war, while 35 per cent claimed never to have trusted him and a further (6 per cent to have kept faith in him only until the outbreak of war.
Nevertheless, around one in two Germans in both the American and the British Zones — and a percentage on the increase — thought that National Socialism had basically been a good idea, badly carried out, and were far more favourably disposed to it than to communism.
Good social conditions, good living conditions, full employment, unified State and government, and order and security were the attributes, in that order, picked out as the best thing about National Socialism.
As late as 1950, 10 per cent of a nation-wide opinion survey sample in West Germany regarded Hitler as the statesman who had achieved most for Germany — second only to Bismarck.
In summer 1952, around a quarter of the population had a ‘good opinion’ of Hitler.
A tenth of those questioned thought that Hitler was the greatest statesman of the century, whose true greatness would only be recognized at a later date, and a further 22 per cent thought that, while he had made ‘some mistakes’ he had nevertheless been an excellent head of State.
Around a third of those questioned still opposed the attack on Hitler's life on 20 July 1944.
In 1953, some 14 per cent still voiced their willingness to vote again for a man such as Hitler.
A sample of youth in north Germany interviewed in the late 1950s still revealed significant traces of the ‘Hitler myth’: he had done much good in abolishing unemployment, punishing sexual criminals, constructing the motorways, introducing cheap radio sets, establishing the Labour Service, and reinstating Germany in the esteem of the world.
He had been an idealist with many good ideas at first, only later making errors, turning out to be basically evil, and becoming insane and a mass murderer.
The decisive drop in the level of Hitler's posthumous popularity came during the era of the ‘economic miracle’ under Adenauer and Erhard.
By the mid 1960s, only four per cent were reporting that they might be willing once again to vote for someone like Hitler.
By this date, only about two or three per cent thought Hitler had achieved more than any other leader for Germany.
(Adenauer had, by now, far outstripped Bismarck as the favourite in these stakes.)
Even so, the number of those who believed that Hitler would have been one of the greatest German statesmen of all time had it not been for the war remained relatively high, though this figure too had fallen sharply (from 48 per cent in 1955 to 32 per cent by 1967).
By the mid 1960s, admiration for Hitler was almost entirely confined to the residual extreme radical Right, the neo-Nazis.
During the first years of the Federal Republic, from 1949 to 1953, when the Right was staging something of a recovery, attempts had been made to distinguish between ‘insane Hitlerism’ and the positive aspects of National Socialism.
But as this phase of radical Right optimism died away from 1953, it was replaced in the hard-core by professed adherence to the Nazi past and outright glorification of Hitler.
The basic tenor of the publications of the extreme Right has scarcely altered since that date.
The short-lived revitalization of the neo-Nazi
Right which saw the temporary rise to prominence of the NPD between 1966 and 1968 brought a very minor revival of positive views about Hitler and Nazism.
In 1968, six per cent of the West German population (compared with four per cent in 1965 and 1967) reported their willingness to vote again for a man such as Hitler.
The ‘Hitler Wave’ of publications during the 1970s appears to have contributed to renewed and open glorification of Hitler on the extreme Right.
Hitler is still today regarded there in ‘heroic’ terms as a ‘great statesman’and ‘significant personality’, whose foreign policy achieved German power and autonomy, while his failure and the loss of the war are put down to sabotage from within, and the war itself attributed not to Hitler but to the meddling of the western powers in a German-Polish conflict.
Systematic sampling of West German voters carried out in 1979–80 indicated that 13 per cent of all voters in the Federal Republic had a consolidated extreme rightist ‘world view’; 14 per cent responded positively to the statement that ‘we should again have a Leader who would rule Germany with a strong hand for the good of all’.
Though these figures shock, they need to be put into perspective.
Since 1945, West Germany has become a ‘normal’ liberal democracy, with close affinities to the political systems of other western countries.
These countries, too, have their unreconstructed fascists and nazis, their residual lunatic right-wing fringe, and their broader bands of sympathizers with various aspects of rightist thinking.
And apart from the peculiarities of the relationship with the German Democratic Republic, the structural problems of the West German State are in the main those common to most (and less acute than in many) advanced capitalist industrial societies of the present: problems of social equality and distribution of wealth, and of maintaining in an era of world-wide recession the economic growth so central to the legitimacy of post-war liberal democracies; problems of the exploitation (and often ruination) of limited natural resources in the interests of the economy; problems of national defence in a nuclear age; and the corresponding problems of containing and absorbing often justified social and political protest without destroying civil liberties and undermining the very essence of the liberal democratic state.
The socio-economic problems in West Germany as elsewhere have given rise to an inevitable resurgence of hostility towards ethnic and other minorities, and have put some pressure on the political system itself (reflected in the emergence of the part ecological, part anti-nuclear, part general social protest ‘Green Party’).
But the specific features and structural characteristics of the German socio-political culture in the short-lived and ill-fated nation-state, which conditioned the manufacture and appeal of the extraordinary ‘Hitler myth’, were largely swept away in the whirlpool of change arising from total defeat, and were completely banished in the process of long-term change deriving from post-war reconstruction.
Unlike the 1920s and 1930s, the current socio-economic problems, acute though they are, have not seen a marked upswing in the political fortunes of the extreme Right.
Crucially, they have not produced, nor do they appear likely to do so, a damaging crisis of legitimacy for the State.
Only such a crisis, of almost inconceivably devastating proportions — such as might follow a major war — could so undermine and destroy the existing pluralist political structures that a new form of fascist-style charismatic leadership might appear to sizeable proportions of the population to be a viable and attractive solution.
Without wanting to appear too sanguine, and without trivializing the persistent phenomenon of right-wing extremism and the need to maintain vigilance against it, the full realization of the responsibility which Hitler bears for the untold agonies suffered by millions has so discredited everything he stood for in the eyes of sane persons everywhere that, except in circumstances beyond the scope of our realistic imagination, it is difficult to see that there could be a resurrection or a new variant of the once-mighty ‘Hitler myth’, with its power to capture the imagination of millions.
Old myths are, however, replaced by new as the combination of modern technology and advanced marketing techniques produce ever more elaborate and sophisticated examples of political image-building around minor personality cults, even in western democracies, aimed at obfuscating reality among the ignorant and gullible.
The price for abdicating democratic responsibilities and placing uncritical trust in the ‘firm leadership’ of seemingly well-intentioned political authority was paid dearly by Germans between 1933 and 1945.
Even if a collapse into new forms of fascism is inherently unlikely in any western democracy, the massive extension of the power of the modern State over its citizens is in itself more than sufficient cause to develop the highest level possible of educated cynicism and critical awareness as the only protection against the marketed images of present-day and future claimants to political ‘leadership’.