

PART I
Pictures on a Screen
We live in a world of perceptions, not reality.
North PROF note to Poindexter, 15.7.86
I find much of what I've heard is implausible.
Perhaps I'll come to the conclusion [that]…that is because it was real.
Senator William Cohen, hearings, 30.7.87
Even as the operations were in the making, between 1984 and 1986, they were dogged by an air of unreality and self-delusion.
They were secret, but not professionally so.
They were policy, but of a highly odd and experimental kind.
Large numbers of people had wind of them, indeed opposed them, but did not wish to admit that they even knew what was going on.
From the very beginning, therefore, witnesses to the operations and players within them suspended their disbelief.
In this cloudy world, where so little seemed dependable or real, moral values were frequently suspended too.
This chapter investigates how that world appeared to the players and the lookers on, both at the time and afterwards.
DAMMIT, NANCY, THESE CLOWNS ARE ROLLING THE CREDITS AND WE'RE NOT EVEN HALFWAY THROUGH THE SECOND REEL!
The President — Ronald Reagan The Vice President — George Bush The Ayatollah — the late Gabby Hayes Robin Hood — Lt. Col. Oliver North First National Security Adviser…
Dick Allen Second National Security Adviser…
Bill Clark Third National Security Adviser…
Bud McFarlane Fourth National Security Adviser…
Admiral Poindexter Fifth National Security Adviser…
Frank Carlucci The Hostages…
Themselves
The Politics of Illusion
TWO illusions lay at the heart of Iran-contra.
The first was that the Iran of Ayatollah Khomeini could, in some sort, be reasonably dealt with; the second was that a band of rag-tag guerrillas, the Nicaraguan contras, could save the West from Communism.
Both illusions were shattered in ways that underlined how fragile and ramshackle the policies were, and they were shattered within a month of each other.
A supply aircraft, carrying weapons to the contras, was shot down by the Sandinistas at the beginning of October 1986; and on November 3rd a Lebanese magazine,Al-Shiraa , broke the story of American dealings with Iran.
Once they were revealed, it seemed extraordinary that either operation should have borne the stamp of the American government; they seemed to be bad dreams.
But that same quality, of political self-delusion, was also clear as they were in the making.
Al-Shiraa's was a small piece, about the clandestine visit by McFarlane to Tehran in May.
McFarlane was then no longer in government; he travelled to Iran on Reagan's orders, accompanied by North, Amiram Nir of Israel and half a pallet of missile parts that he hoped to exchange for hostages.
The trip was to become the epitome of the affair: misconceived, well-meaning, disastrous, courageous, deceptive and surreal.
The group had false Irish passports.
A copy of McFarlane's was produced by the Speaker of  the Iranian parliament, Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, at a public news conference in January 1987; it was displayed by a man with short, dirty fingernails beside a spray of plastic flowers.
Beneath the unmistakably hangdog face of the former national security advisor was his Irish alias, Sean Devlin; born in Dublin, 14th August 1937; colour of eyes, hazel (’ cnodhonna’in the Gaelic).
Rafsanjani displayed this more in mystification than anger, as if the purpose of McFarlane's mission was still unknown to him.
Indeed, when the party had arrived at the bleak airport in Tehran in the middle of Ramadan, hoping to find a government delegation of equal weight, nobody was there to meet them.
It emerged afterwards that nobody in Iran had known who McFarlane/Devlin was.
‘It may be best for us’, McFarlane reported back at the time, ‘to try to picture what it would be like if after nuclear attack, a surviving Tartar became Vice-President; a recent grad student became Secretary of State; and a bookie became the interlocutor for all discourse with foreign countries.’
An expatriate Iranian satirist, Hadi Khorsandi, later claimed in fun to have had the ear of Rafsanjani, who told him that his discussions with McFarlane ‘were meant only for him to practise the English language…all the contacts he had had with Americans over the past year had been made for the purpose of learning irregular verbs.’
McFarlane was said to have taken a cake and a Bible on the trip.
There was no Bible except North's own, which the pilot with some surprise spotted him carrying onto the plane; an official Bible, autographed by Reagan, went on a trip in October.
But there was a key-shaped chocolate cake — a ‘joke’ between North and the Iranian middleman, Manucher Ghorbanifar, ordered by North from a kosher bakery in Israel — and a pair of Colt pistols in a presentation box.
The cake and the Bible were linked ever after with McFarlane, although neither was even his idea.
Whatever larger and higher purposes the trip may have had, they were subsumed in circus.
McFarlane knew it, and resented it.
He was reduced to saying stiffly to one interviewer: ‘Simply put, there was a cake on the mission.
I didn't buy it, bake it, cook it, eat it, present it, or otherwise get involved with it.’
He had little chance; the Revolutionary Guards at the airport, famished by Ramadan, took it away and ate it.
As North later described the first approaches to the Iran idea, Israeli officials talking to Americans in the spring and summer of 1985, it was a ‘philosophy’ rather than an operation.
The philosophy presupposed, first, that the Iranian regime contained officials of reason and moderation with whom America could do business, and that these officials would intercede with the terrorist Hizbollah to release the American hostages they held in Beirut.
Yet  nobody knew for certain who these moderates (sometimes called ‘pragmatists’) were; or, if they existed, how much influence they had.
‘Are there any pragmatists in Iran?’ asked Clair George, the CIA's deputy director of operations, putting the question rhetorically; ‘Does anyone play the piano in the Fiji Islands?
Yes, somewhere.’
The man who organized the aircraft to get 1,000 TOWs to Israel in February 1986 (and 500 TOWs from there to Tehran) thought that ‘if the government wanted to establish relations and there were modernists, we should do what we could to assist.’
Modernists and moderates were probably as numerous as one another, as Charlie Allen of the CIA reported to Casey as late as November 1986.
He had notionally divided up the Iranian government into a fanatic wing, an extremely fanatic wing, a bridge group and a ‘right-wing group’ that leaned towards the West.
But it was not this group, as Allen knew, with which America had been dealing.
At best, he knew of only one moderate who was waiting to meet some senior American somewhere in the ‘foggy’ councils of Tehran.
Michael Ledeen, an academic and consultant who did much to promote the Iran venture, took heart from the fact that when an arms shipment went disastrously wrong, in November 1985, the Iranians still gave the crew caviar on their flight out of Iran.
But the reality was stated by Nir to George Bush, quite plainly, in July 1986: ‘We are dealing with the most radical elements…we've learned they can deliver and the moderates can't.’
The American policy also assumed that if TOWs were bartered for lives, as North put it, the transaction could be passed off as something other than ransom, neatly tied up without the stakes being raised.
George Cave, who went on the Tehran trip to translate, was soon disabused of that.
Cave was older than the rest of the party, and the only one with knowledge of Iran; he also suffered from a bad back, and must have landed with a fierce combination of jet-lag, suspicion and pain.
At the very first meeting in the Tehran Hilton, renamed the Independence, one of the Iranians (’ a rug merchant’) complained that the spare parts the Americans had brought were second-hand.
Cave replied, furious, ‘You know you weren't supposed to unload them until after the hostages showed up.’
The Iranian snapped back: ‘You've only brought a very small amount of spare parts.’
‘Well, that's all we could fit on the airplane.’
‘Well, it didn't take up hardly any space.’
•A shoulder-fired anti-tank missile.
‘Yes, but we could only take a certain amount of weight.’
And so on and so on.
Cave later discovered that the box of parts had not been opened at all; another conversation premised on something that had not occurred, designed to raise both the bidding and the temperature, and a chimera.
A political gamble was taken too: that if hostages were released, Americans would not greatly mind what the price or the means had been.
This might have been the case in France or West Germany; but, as the administration rapidly found out, it was not the case in the United States.
Some sensed the danger early.
Caspar Weinberger, the secretary of defence — a small, determined, beaky man, best-known for cutting any budget but his own — first heard of a possible Iranian operation on June 18th, 1985.
It came in a memorandum with a covering letter from McFarlane; the premise was that unless the United States changed its policies towards Iran, America's position in Tehran would never improve.
The regime was highly unstable and about to fall; conservatives inside it might be cultivated and, as a sign of good faith (’ bona fides’), they might be sold arms.
Weinberger believed none of that.
He was less bothered by the thought of arms sales, however, than by what he saw as the fundamental unreality of the proposal.
There was nobody in a position of power in Iran, he believed, but ‘irrational lunatics’, with whom ‘we didn't have the slightest possibility of getting any kind of an improved relationship’.
He passed the memo on, as requested, but scribbled in the margin: ‘Almost too absurd to comment on.
It's like asking Gadhafi over to Washington for a cosy chat.’
So absurd was the idea to Weinberger that he seems never to have understood the hold it acquired over other people, including the President.
Although Weinberger opposed it, he did not often do so with force: partly because, it seemed to him, nobody was foolish enough to propose it with much vehemence.
George Shultz, the bluff and portly secretary of state, evidently thought much the same.
He had received word of the Iran scheme in a stream-of-consciousness memo from McFarlane, delivered to ‘Secretary Shultz personally and to no other for him’, aboard his aircraft on July 13th, 1985.
McFarlane, having spelled out with caution the Israeli arguments and the Iranian blandishments, admitted that ‘the concept raises a number of imponderable questions’, including ‘where this might lead in terms of our being asked to up the ante on more and more arms and where that could conceivably lead…
Clearly that is a loser.’
‘George’, he concluded, ‘I cannot judge the equities on this.
We need to think about it.
But I don't think we should tarry.’
Despite that dazzling contradiction, typical of the affair, Shultz said he agreed  with him.
There could be ‘a tentative show of interest…
I do not think we could justify turning our backs.’
There were certainly ‘imponderables’, however, and Shultz had a shrewd solution for those: ‘Given the nature of this matter, I am inclined to think it should be managed by you personally.’
Yet it was not simply a matter of proposing; the policy was soon enough carried out.
Arms were shipped by Israel with American acquiescence in August and September 1985, and the Israeli stocks replaced.
(’ The people who sold the soap for us want to replenish their supply’came the typically slippery message to McFarlane; his secretary described how, when such messages came, he would look at her with a puzzled expression.)
But as a result of the September shipment one hostage, Benjamin Weir, came out, and from then on American misgivings were countered by another thought: the scheme had worked.
In all, three hostages — Weir, Lawrence Jenco and David Jacobsen — were successfully traded for arms.
Three more — Joseph Cicippio, Edward Tracy and Frank Reed — were seized in 1986 by kidnappers newly alerted to their value in Hawks and TOWs, giving a net result of zero.
The releases, however, were crucial.
They saved the scheme from being dismissed as nonsense.
Heartened by the sight of Weir standing beside Reagan on the South Lawn, the administration allowed itself to be drawn further into the Israeli-Iranian manoeuvres.
In November 1985, arms were sent with American participation.
That shipment was a classic of incompetence.
North called it ‘a bit of a horror story’ and, for once, he understated: it went wrong from start to finish, and ended with the wrong missiles, still with their Israeli markings, piled on the ground in Tehran.
The story of the operation, in all its farcical mystery, was best told by the officers and crew of the CIA proprietary airline called in to help on November 22nd.
Three flights had to be made to fly missiles into Tehran.
The air branch officer thought it all ‘very nebulous.
Based on my experience, I thought it would go away overnight.
They usually do.’
This one did not.
The captain did not know what the craft was carrying, though that was not unusual, and the line was under contract partly for its discretion.
‘It is sort of like a tramp freighter, sort of plodding round from point to point’, said the air branch officer; ‘and you don't ask too many questions when you are doing this.’
At most, they might enquire whether the cargo was dynamite or something explosive, ‘but then you have to worry about thunderstorms, you know.’
•A tripod-fired anti-aircraft missile.
The pieces, 80 of them, were an odd shape, and difficult to load.
The crew grumbled about them.
They heard at first that these were industrial spare parts, then medical equipment, then mining equipment, then oil-drilling gear.
The cargo had no manifest in any case, so there was no telling what the stuff was.
It was simply described as ‘sensitive’.
The pilot thought the size of the gray-green boxes, ‘seven metres long and one meter wide’ was familiar, somehow; but ‘as long as you don't open the boxes, you don't know what you have…it is blessed by the government when it is being loaded, so I couldn't care less what it is.’
One of the crew, having his wits about him, joked that whatever was in the boxes should probably be fired into Iran, not sent; the project officer thought he might well be right.
The aircraft was American-registered, anyway; it could not fly into Tehran.
The Israeli contact, Al Schwimmer, offered to paint on a new registration and forge some new papers, but was politely turned down.
Schwimmer then suggested formation flying with two 707s, one hiding behind the other to conceal its American colours.
‘I told him you have to be kidding’, the project manager remembered.
‘I can't fly a 707 formation flying down to Tehran, you know, I mean…the longer it went on the more I had the feeling I am dealing here with lunatics.’
When the aircraft took off, at last, with a mere 18 missiles, no clearance had been given for overflights between Tel Aviv and Tehran.
The pilot, with no diplomatic clearance number, made one up; air-traffic control did not believe him, but he managed to weave his way towards Iran even as he argued with them.
For crossing the border into Iran, he had a code (’ I am coming for Mustafa’), but no-one asked for it; and so they landed in Tehran.
While the aircraft was unloaded the crew was spirited away by car through the back roads of the airport by a civilian with a machine-gun, who took them to the old Sheraton Hotel and offered them cakes and coffee.
The crew had done wonders, but back in Washington the project officer was furious.
He had never, he wrote to his superiors, seen an operation so badly planned or so amateurishly organized; ‘at the CIA, we really do run a better show than that.’
But then, of course, it had not been the CIA in charge of ‘the show’.
It had been the NSC.
The Americans (and North in particular, who had been pitched by McFarlane into handling the Washington end) had stumbled into the operation before they were ready, either practically or legally, to handle it.
A presidential authorization for a covert operation, a ‘mini-finding’, was rushed out at the end of November, so secretly that hardly anyone knew of it; this made good what had  happened already, which was not supposed to have happened at all.
On December 7th too, when the matter was raised at a meeting of the President and principals, the operation was presented by McFarlane as essentially prospective, something that had not happened yet; but the purpose of the meeting was also to justify policy after the fact.
Half the people there did not know that.
Those who did kept quiet.
Don Regan, the blustering ex-Wall Street chief of staff, had attended the crucial meetings of the previous August and September; but he had apparently spent the September meeting more bothered by McFarlane's pronunciation of ‘bona fides’ as ‘bonerfydies’than by anything he picked up about weapons shipments.
(As ‘an old Latin scholar’, he was appalled that people could mangle words that way.)
On December 7th, it was Reagan's particularly flashy plaid jacket that distracted him.
Weinberger found himself, allegedly to his surprise, arguing against the policy again.
McFarlane said he had made contact, through the Israelis, with a group of Iranians who seemed ‘different’.
Not different at all, countered Weinberger: still fanatically anti-American and virulently anti-western; America could not do any business with them.
McFarlane did not argue back to any degree.
As Weinberger complained, ‘He was very, very close-to-the-vest type of approach in almost everything.’
The President, sitting with his feet up beside the coffee table, also did not say much.
When he did, he seemed to agree with Weinberger and Shultz.
Weinberger told his deputy, after the meeting, that he thought the initiative had been ‘strangled in its cradle’; his deputy noted later that Weinberger ‘also believed that nothing was really dead in Washington’.
And so it turned out.
The decision had come down in favour of illusion: the President's dream of triumphant new diplomacy and the hostages home.
There was even a business fantasy, probably injected in the President's ear by Don Regan after the others had left.
‘In my other capacity as head of Merill Lynch, I opened an office in Tehran…during the 70s…and I thought that that country had quite a future.’
Once the policy was authorized, in a proper finding of January 17th 1986, Weinberger and Shultz both let it go.
They hoped to be spared the details.
In large part, they were; the government now stood back from the operation, and the ‘private’ middlemen and cutouts took charge of it.
But on January 22nd Shultz got word of the latest version: ‘a proposal by Lieutenant-Colonel North to seek the help of the Pope and Cardinal O'Connor, and to trade some Shia prisoners held by General Lahad in South Lebanon.’
This, according to White House officials later, was North's ‘pipe-dream’, proof that he lived ‘in a Peter Pan world’.
Shultz treated it  accordingly.
A week later, however, Charlie Allen of the CIA sat down with an undercover agent in North's office to hear North read from his notebook
A very detailed schedule, starting one date after another…
And that schedule…later became a printed schedule and he had a very finely developed scenario where eventually a certain amount of equipment, particularly TOW missiles, would be sent to Iran,(and) hostages would be released…
At some point Ayatollah Khomeini would step down.
And I recall that I laughed aloud at that stage and I believe (the agent) joined me in that.
We didn't think that was terribly plausible, but he was quite serious
Ledeen said he would remember ‘to his dying day’ these entertaining sorts of discussions, the search for a ‘magical simultaneity’in horribly complex events: aircraft full of missiles entering Iranian airspace, money at that moment jumping by electronic transfer into the right account, hostages at that moment sprung from their prisons, ‘and all kinds of things of this nature.
North found a similarly cynical audience among the Iranians, too.
For them, the discussions were basic business; they wanted ‘every missile known to man or beast, Ledeen said, or at least everything they could find in a catalogue.
For America, the talks were high diplomacy.
The terms of reference were diametrically opposed; in more sober moments, even North would agree that the meetings might represent ‘only a limited, momentary, tactical coincidence of interests.’
Yet the parties continued to keep sitting down together in hotel rooms across Europe and America, resuming their dialogue of the deaf.
A decision was also taken, early on, to deal through a middleman who was a fabricator.
Manucher Ghorbanifar, alias Ashgari, alias Nicholas Kralis, alias Nick the Greek, familiarly known as ‘Roddi’, was a shrewd, extravagant businessman, the Iranian director of Star Shipping, a joint Iranian-Israeli concern ‘with heavy intelligence overtones’, as Cave put it.
He was a charming, thick-bearded man with faintly hooded eyes; he came with Israeli recommendations, ‘the best thing since bagels’, and had, at some time past, worked with the CIA.
The arrangement had been terminated.
As Clair George recalled, a ‘burn notice’ had been issued, advising members of the agency to have no truck with him.
When listening to Ghorbanifar, as a CIA man reported in December 1985, it was ‘extremely difficult to separate the good from the bad information.’
Ghorbanifar claimed to be intimate with the government of Iran, close enough to know that a ‘terrorist war’ would ensue unless the United States reached a rapid agreement cemented with arms.
He claimed to have links with Gadhafi, and inside knowledge about Libyan and Syrian backing for terrorists.
Ledeen, with no trace of irony, thought him ‘altogether too good to be true…he magically appears…
I do not believe that things like that normally happen in a lifetime.’
‘This’, he told McFarlane in July 1985, as the Ghorbanifar-engineered arms deals began to gel, ‘is the real thing.’
The real thing, subjected to a polygraph test, showed deception on every question except his name and nationality.
On the other hand, Iran was not an area the CIA knew much about.
Lacking reliable counter-sources, the Americans had to rely on the world as constructed by Manucher Ghorbanifar.
A rich flavour of the exchange comes from a tape recording of Charlie Allen, his CIA ‘minder’, and Ledeen talking to Ghorbanifar on January 25th, four days before North had read out his grand scenario for the end of the regime.
Ghorbanifar : Here is where they have to pay us.
I mean to our organization.
Why we, we need this money, we need for the bringing of reform in Iran.
To help Ollie for his costing in South America (laughter ) and, to rout all terrorism network in Europe and in Iran.
Allen : Yeah…
I have some, some fresh fruits.
I'll get some grapes if I may.
That my, my little daughter and I eat grapes a lot.
Apple will be good too.
Thank you, Ghor.
Ghorbanifar : Here.
(sound of pounding …
If you agree with this operation…the new terms he was ready to pay $10m cash and all these things.
You remember I gave Ollie to tell you the new terms of…
Allen : He didn't tell me this.
Ghorbanifar : He forgotten it?
Allen : Yeah.
I'll, I'll check.
Ghorbanifar : Yes.
The general new terms he, agreed to pay $10m in cash now.
Besides for 10m barrels of oil two, two below the market.
Allen : How, how much in oil?
Ghorbanifar : 10m barrels.
Two dollars below the market price …and it turns out that we agreed that we do the whole operation for him in the United States…and he will supply another $10m for this start for bombing and, uh, assassinate in US.
Ledeen : You said bomb and assassinate in the United States?
Can we go to the State Department first?(laughter ) Listen, I'll give you some offices on the sixth floor.
(laughter )Allen : This has got to be a long-term plan.
We have to go over our plan.
If we enter this relationship to work with you…trying to find a way to bring back…the kind of government that you want then we have to establish…basic rules of order.
Ghorbanifar …
This is going to work very well.
But the step is this step now…
You know the Khomeini has decided to step down…on the 11th of February.
And to, to resign and to bring the new leader in charge to settle for a time.
You know, he wants everything be fixed when he dies…
These are the most sensitive days in our history.
Where are our friends American?
And we need a lot of stuffs. (laughs )
‘There were no illusions’, wrote Casey later, referring to the overture to Iran; but there were many.
Not least, the CIA was induced to help before it realized that the man with whom it would be dealing was one it had already discarded.
‘We never played with a full deck’, complained Clair George.
‘I'm running around saying hey, here is my burn notice, this guy is a loser, and Christ, he is working with the government of Israel, he had already arranged a flight — it's sort of would you please get out of the way,
Even when the Ghorbanifar channel was closed down and a new one found, in mid-1986, negotiations seldom rose above the level of the fortune teller and the bazaar.
Hakim, left behind in Frankfurt in October to arrange some sort of deal, ended up with a promise of 1 ½ (sic) hostages in exchange for 1,500 TOWs and pressure for the release of 17 terrorists held in Kuwait.
The exchange was approved by Poindexter, apparently after informing the President.
By then, the initiative with Iran had snapped any moorings in the real world.
The Americans knew they were being led a dance, but the urge to rescue hostages — premised on high emotion and some amount of electoral calculation — drove the policy forward.
In these circumstances, the oddest schemes found some sort of currency.
North apparently devised, and the attorney general approved, a scheme to ransom two hostages for $2.2m in bribes; extra hostages could probably be bribed free, North believed, for $1m each.
The bribes were to be paid in instalments through two  narcotics agents, men from the Drug Enforcement Administration, seconded to the NSC for the purpose.
Meanwhile, the hostages were to be transferred to a safe house in Cyprus and then spirited away by sea.
North wanted them taken on ‘his ship’, the Erria , a Danish freighter, for which several starring roles were intended, but the DEA men were scathing: the Erria was ‘a filthy boat, filthy…a potato boat’, and ‘an old tub that couldn't do 10 knots’.
Ross Perot, a Texas billionaire, advanced $1m as a down-payment, but no hostages appeared off Cyprus where Secord was waiting for them.
Perot was furious; instead of chasing chimeras, his money could have been earning interest in the bank.
Another scheme, devised by the FBI and the CIA and co-ordinated by a counter-terrorism group headed by North, actually involved the disintegration of money.
A bribe of many millions of dollars was to be paid for a hostage, Peter Kilburn, by giving the captors a suitcase full of chemically treated bills; after a few days, the bills would moulder away.
The plot was not quite foolproof.
The captors were demanding the money in small-denomination bills, so huge numbers of notes had to be treated.
Besides, it took time to get the formula right; one dose began to work on the notes alter only 24 hours.
In the end, the notes were still being painstakingly dipped and dried when Kilburn was killed, apparently in revenge for America's raid on Libya in April 1986.
Another failure, but it is hard not to appreciate the subtlety of the thought behind it: if the cash paid as ransom disintegrates, there is no cash paid as ransom.
This was the Iran operation in a nutshell.
A policy that could not work was presented as one that could, and a scheme that stood American policy on its head was elaborately argued to be otherwise.
To the end — or at least to his testimony in Poindexter's trial, in 1990 — Reagan maintained he did not believe that he had been trading arms for hostages.
As the Iranians quickly discovered, there was always someone willing to be duped.
From the Reagan administration's first decision to listen to what the Israelis were saying, the Iran-contra affair had found its firm foundation in political and diplomatic illusion.
If the Iran operation took predicates that were illusory — in sum, that arms could be bartered for hostages with an enemy regime, and it would not look like that — the operation to support the Nicaraguan contras had an equally doubtful premise.
This nasty, foundering covert war was supposed, by itself, to bring down the Sandinista regime and save the hemisphere from Communism.
The contras had been supported, through the CIA, since 1981; in 1984, in order to get round the Boland amendments (which forbade the  administration to spend appropriated money on the contras) management of the war was brought into an office on the third floor of a building beside the White House.
McFarlane did not think of this as war management: it was a matter of encouragement, ‘smoke and mirrors.
North, at the public hearings, denied that he ran a war from his desk, but he told his aide Craig Coy that he was doing so in so many words.
(Coy was puzzled, reflecting that there was ‘a whole Pentagon’ to do things like that.)
Clair George, listing the things that had to be done —— finding private money, transferring it out of the country, buying arms, shipping them, procuring boats and aircraft — noted that North had been obliged to do all this ‘with a gum band and some balsa wood’.
It was, he said, ‘the most complex foreign policy I have ever beheld’; and if the impossible quickly went embarrassingly wrong, nobody should have been surprised.
This was, of course, a covert operation (of which North, in McFarlane's words, was the ‘visible sign’).
American diplomats remained in Managua, providing an illusion of reasonable discourse.
The private money and foreign contributions were handled by a network of cut-outs and dummy companies so complicated that even North had trouble keeping track of it.
But for all the cover, this was an operation that was sometimes surprisingly visible, and visible as a shambles.
From the hub of the operation, the Ilopango Air Base in El Salvador, creaking aircraft flew supplies to the contras' northern front  billetted in Honduras.
CIA officers at the air base knew the aircraft were not theirs.
They also knew they were not connected with the humanitarian assistance programme (NHAO) that was eventually run for the contras by the State Department, since those aircraft were ‘beautiful brand-new L-100s, the most beautifully painted things’.
Still, the limping aircraft, which were assumed to be carrying arms, were not challenged.
They were objects of interest, to a degree even their crews did not understand.
One kicker-out-of-loads, Iain Crawford, enlisted for the effort by his mother-in-law and obediently incurious about the cargo he was handling, remembered how the crew camped one night at Ilopango, cooking a barbecue beside the crates of plastic explosives; and a group of men approached them, led by ‘Ambassador Duemling of the State Department’, and winked at what they were doing.
The CIA man at the airport said he did not see any winking going on; but the NHAO humanitarian flights, of which Duemling was in charge, routinely allowed ‘10 percent lethal’.
Illusion was paramount here, too.
The contras' southern front, a struggling enterprise sheltered by a reluctant Costa Rica, was even more ramshackle.
Supply flights had  to be made at night; the aircraft had no radar or proper navigation equipment, could not get information even about the weather, and had to find drop zones in thick jungle by the light or smoke of bonfires.
Often they could not find them at all.
The flavour of this front was best given in the imperfect English of the ‘military commission’ which tried to examine its chances in 1984: ‘The intent of an irregular operation having characteristics of heterodox struggle and design, prevented because of its audacity and little tangibility, adequate following of the SOUTHERN operation, which is out of the control of the most acute analysis.’
To put it mildly.
The supposed hub of this resupply operation was a top-secret overgrown airstrip at Santa Elena, in Costa Rica, said to have been the landing strip for Somoza's aircraft when he stayed at his farm nearby.
There was no road for 20 miles, so that fuel would have to be brought in by sea-barge; a quarter of a mile away was a place where turtles came to lay their eggs, as the local CIA man pointed out with gentlest concern.
A river ran through it, wearing down the gravel and making mud into which aircraft, especially aircraft loaded with weapons, tended to sink.
The first cover story for the airstrip was that a group of businessmen wanted to start up a tourist resort there.
The second was that it was a farm, run by Americans, on which various types of crops were being grown experimentally.
Peons were even brought in sustain the illusion by prodding at the land, and a bulldozer chugged about.
Agricultural details were a nice reciprocal touch: the Hind helicopters, with which the Sandinistas were destroying the contras, had allegedly been shipped in by the Russians in crates labelled agricultural produce.
Joseph Fernandez, the local CIA man, tried not to have too much to do with the local airstrip/farm, once he had helped start it; but the cover was sometimes blown in definitive fashion.
One of the ‘cattle men’ turned up one day at Costa Rica's legitimate airport and had to be rescued by Fernandez: in his cattle-man's briefcase were $5,000 in cash to pay for workers on the strip, a spare cassette from North for Fernandez's KL-43 encrypting device, and brown manila envelopes from the White House containing photographs of Fernandez with Reagan.
Happily, no official had thought to open it.
The illusion of peaceful agricultural enterprise was also blown by Elliott Abrams, the State Department's Latin America man, in front of Fernandez and two unknowing officers.
(Abrams was a young, bright, sharp lawyer, always well-tailored, and with an air of fierce  aceticism ; he will reappear often in this story as a man trying to keep at the edge of it, and usually succeeding.
On a casual visit to Costa Rica he blurted out the code name of the secret airstrip, Point West, and asked how it was doing.
‘Obviously, this was  something that everybody in Washington knew about’, said poor Fernandez, ‘and here I was, thinking I had a real secret.’
I said sir, up until now I thought that in Costa Rica there were only four or five people that knew about this place.
Now, because of your question, these two officers, who had no need to know, now know.
Oh, he said, I apologize.
I'm sorry.
As it went along, the hapless operation was partly sustained by a propaganda machine in Washington that produced hopeful and sentimental briefings and films.
What the contras could not achieve in reality, they would seem to achieve on celluloid.
This was natural enough, and the Sandinistas countered with efficient propaganda of their own; but it increased the element of illusion in the exercise.
In the course of two years North developed his own slide show, part accurate, part exaggeration, part emotion, and this representation was the bedrock of the domestic campaign for the contras: the world in 57 pictures of blurry military bases and Communist  commandantes , utterly simple in its division between good and bad, and curiously believable.
At one point, too, the producer David Wolper was approached to make a film about Central America ‘to tell the story better’, but he demurred; he had ‘the Statue of Liberty coming up.’
The best idea of all, according to Rob Owen, North's courier to the contras, came from another film producer, a Mr Spivey.
He wanted to shoot a mini-series — not only produce but be involved in the actual ending.
Q. You mean the end of the story of the resistance in Nicaragua?
A. Right.
Q. What was the ending to be?
A. That they would be successful.
When they were asked afterwards, both Owen and North admitted that they had never imagined ‘a victory march down the streets of Managua’.
But the illusion of success within the contras, reach, a success that was in the world's interests, was fostered most carefully and covertly.
It was not only on Central American airstrips that winking went on, but all over Washington.
Representatives of foreign governments were persuaded to give large sums to the contras, but were not asked directly, so the story went, and so were not solicited.
As Senator Cohen put it, a sort of metaphysical exercise went on ‘to define how many foreign leaders can be made to  dance on the head of the President's contra programme without calling it a solicitation,
Thus Prince Bandar of Saudi Arabia, walking in a garden with McFarlane, could hear — naturally as birdsong — that the contras needed $1m a month; he could pass the word to his uncle, the King; the King could give the money; and Reagan would release the Stinger anti-aircraft missiles needed by Saudi Arabia, not in explicit exchange (nothing so crude), but as a reciprocal gesture of princely generosity.
There was, in McFarlane's words, ‘no cry for solicitation…and if anyone with any gumption could manage without being led or asked, then a contribution would have been welcome.’
Reagan was apparently a master: after a private meeting with King Fahd of Saudi Arabia in 1985 the king doubled his contribution to the contras to $2m a month, the subject never raised.
Richard Secord was less adept.
Secord was North's operations manager, a stocky ex-general in his early fifties, much decorated, and with a notable bluntness of manner.
Trying for a second time to get something out of Prince Bandar, he was told ‘You can stop twisting my arm’ or, in out-of-hearings language, ‘Fuck it, stop pestering me.’
Elliott Abrams, smoother-tongued, entered the dream-world of non-solicitation on August 1986 in Hyde Park, in London.
Under the name ‘Mr Kenilworth’ he walked in the park with General Ibnu, an aide to the Sultan of Brunei.
‘He asked me how much money’, Abrams testified.
‘I said: ‘Ten million dollars.’
I tried to explain to him why I thought they should, just because they should be interested in the security of the United States.
He said to me ‘What do we get out of this?
What's in it for us?’
Abrams, having mumbled about ‘the gratitude of the secretary (of state) and of the President for getting us out of this jam’, was asked by Ibnu again: ‘But what concrete do we get out of this?’
‘You don't get anything concrete out of it,’ he replied.
Nonetheless, some weeks later, the Sultan promised $10m.
It was deposited by mistake — as unreality would have it — in the wrong bank account, and subsequently found its way back to Brunei.
What concrete do we get out of this?
Ibnu had asked.
But this was not a world of the concrete; it was one of winks, illusions and intimations.
As McFarlane so aptly and untruthfully said of the Saudi contribution, ‘the concrete character of that is beyond my ken.’
According to Judge Abraham Sofaer, Brunei was picked especially because it received no assistance already, and would seem to be returning no favours; it was never intended to get anything beyond appreciation.
But few countries were in such neutral condition, and very much later the subtle signs of appreciation  became known: extra aid for Guatemala ‘enhanced’ military aid for Honduras, a veto of a damaging import-limitation bill for Taiwan, and goodness knows what quiet back-scratching for China and South Africa.
Unacknowledged when it was received, the contra money was also unacknowledged when spent.
If the help of foreign governments was even suspected, the rebels might not get money from Congress.
As North wrote to Adolfo Calero, the chief contra leader, on May 1st 1986, ‘source of funding (this was the Saudi money) must not become known.
Congress must believe there continues to be an urgent need for funding.’
When the first $1m came in, followed by more, Calero therefore had no idea who it was from, and did not ask.
Nor did he make a note of it.
He was simply ‘happy’.
His testimony presented the weird picture of a man receiving weapons and money from nowhere, as if the clouds opened and rained them down, and even rotten service did not inspire his curiosity.
‘The service was lousy,’ he said of the private resupply, ‘but I didn't ask who was providing it…
This war that I was in, you know, was supposed to be clandestine…
Sometimes I would purposely not pay attention to detail or to nothing.’
It was magical; it was illusory, as indeed was the idea that Calero could save the West with the weapons he was getting.
As in Iran, the political imperative in Nicaragua was scarcely more substantial than a dream.
Unseen, Unknown
FROM their very beginnings therefore, and increasingly as they went on, the Iran and contra policies departed even from the strange norms of covert operations.
They were run not by professionals in the CIA, but by amateurs on the NSC staff.
They had such unwieldy purposes — restoring relations with Iran, saving the hemisphere from Communism — that technical details, such as finding aircraft that could fly, sometimes went by the board.
Most of all, although they were meant to be secret, these were secrets that were fairly indifferently kept; if, indeed, they were kept at all.
Those on the sidelines tried not to see them or know about them, but it was difficult.
No sound was more typical of Iran-contra than the dropping of a secret, like a stone, into otherwise peaceful conversation; at which the other participants would carefully get up and walk away.
People especially did not wish to know about the administration's private efforts to prop up the contras.
Thus during the period of restrictions the contras grew, and occasionally even thrived, apparently on air: or on nothing more than the scattered largesse of rich Americans.
Even those on the ground, by their own admission, were puzzled.
As the Ambassador to El Salvador said (munitions piled round him), ‘I didn't say ‘Hey, how is all this stuff getting in here?’
It's logical that somebody had to bring it in.’
There was,
North had told him mysteriously, ‘an untold story here,’ and Ambassador Corr was quite happy if he never heard it.
‘We knew there was another side to the house,’ said an NHAO man; ‘somebody was doing it.’
And theirs not to ask how, or why.
In August 1985 Newsweek ran an article, marvelling
The influx of $500,000 to $1m a month — some funnelled through secret bank accounts in Panama and elsewhere — has reportedly helped double the contras’ numbers (to more than 16,000 men) and upgrade their arsenal.
They now have Soviet-made SAM anti-aircraft rockets and AK-47 automatic rifles, and their air force has grown from one ancient DC-3 transport called the Rusty Pelican to a small fleet of light planes and copters…
Conservatives have decided to do for the freedom fighters what the American left of the '30s did for the Communists in Spain.
The improvement was considerably overstated (it may, in fact, have come from North, who sometimes leaked to Newsweek ) but it was remarkable, even so.
At the CIA, the Central American officers realized at the beginning of 1985 that something was up: not precisely that the contras had money, but ‘Oh my, look at that, they are not starving to death and they are operating.’
The officers had been plotting a map, in changing colours, to show how the contras were fading out of Nicaragua; suddenly it reversed its trend, and they were back.
It was a ‘sliding process’ said the CIA man, with the caution expected of his craft: signs of ‘activity that reflected money.’
In the vice-president's office too, Sam Watson, George Bush's aide, marvelled at how the contras were doing.
Although not yet an impressive fighting force, they were a force, and getting supplies from somewhere.
He assumed that someone was contributing; it was ‘in the air’ and ‘in the atmosphere’; but he was too busy to ask questions, and, besides, you never knew what might be ‘compartmented or committed or authorized’.
Watson's ignorance was widely presumed to extend to his boss, later the President; but Bush seems to have perfected the art of attending meetings, talking to North and even encountering some of the fieldworkers of the operations without ever being tainted by what was occurring.
This did not mean he did not know.
At Thanksgiving 1985, Bush sent North a postcard thanking him for his work ‘with the hostage thing and in Central America’ and exhorting him to get some turkey; North read it out at his trial four years later as evidence of approval, but it was all delightfully vague.
North remembered, too, how 
Shultz had put his arm round him at a party and told him what a remarkable job he had done, keeping the Nicaraguan resistance alive: ‘I knew what he meant.
He didn't have to say ‘You did a great job on the L-100 resupply on the night of the 9th of April.’
He knew, in sufficiently eloquent terms, what I had done.’
But North was wrong.
Shultz swiftly put out word, through a spokesman, that he had not known at all.
The master-class in knowing and not-knowing was given by William Casey, director of the CIA.
Casey had become director in 1981, at the age of 68.
An Irish Catholic, raised in New York, he had been a gung-ho member of the OSS during the second world war.
He was scholarly, shrewd and literate; but few people entirely trusted the ends to which that scholarship and shrewdness were applied.
Physically he was a large, shambling old man, flabby-faced and buck-toothed, with a mumbling fashion of speech.
In a sense, therefore, his body provided a cover for the sharpness of his mind, and the cold balefulness of his stare a cover for his crusades.
Casey did nothing without reason, and his reason was to keep the world safe from Communists; subsidiary principle was often unnecessary.
To many his shrewdest move was to die, of brain cancer and pneumonia, in May 1987, before he had been called on to give an account of the role he had played in the affair.
‘Maybe I ought to go have (done) to me what Casey had done,’ North told a friend bitterly; ‘take my brain out, and leave me alone.’
He added: ‘If only they knew what old Casey knew.’
Casey knew much; but he was also careful not to know.
He kept open a line to North, but made sure that he appeared to have no truck with whatever he was doing.
When John Singlaub, a retired military man also engaged in anti-Communist operations, visited Casey in his office while the Boland amendments were in force, he would sometimes — inadvertently — mention Nicaragua.
‘He threatened to throw me out of his office,’ he remembered.
‘I would try to say, You are the chief of intelligence.
Aren't you interested in knowing what is happening down there?
No! he would shout, and make it clear that we would not discuss it…he used an expletive that I have not used, indicating that he did not want me to raise that subject with him.’
When Joseph Coors, the beer millionaire, told Casey that he wanted to help the contras, Casey simply said ‘Ollie North's the guy to see’; even old friends could not drag the secret from him.
Strangest of all was the lunch he had with Poindexter on November 22nd, 1986, the ruins of both Iran and contra all around them.
Poindexter remembered that Casey invited himself, that they ate sandwiches, and that they discussed what Casey had said in his briefing of Congress the previous day.
Both men knew the ‘deep, dark secret’ at the heart of the affair, the diversion of funds from the Iran arms sales to the contras; neither mentioned it.
‘It's ironic that indeed he knew’, Poindexter said afterwards.
‘I wish I'd known that.’
Within the agency, too, Casey gave nothing away.
In February 1986 a retired CIA agent, asked by North to help him with the contras, mentioned the request to Casey.
I said what's Ollie involved in, and he says I don't know and I don't want to know.
Q. And then he said?
A. But he's a good guy.
Q. Which you took as encouragement to continue?
A. No.
On Iran — another operation from which the CIA officially kept its distance — Casey played the same game.
Sitting in Casey's office with a group of people sometime in the autumn of 1985, John McMahon, his deputy, suddenly said: ‘You won't believe what Bud McFarlane just told me at the White House.’
‘What, what?’ chorused the others.
‘The Israelis have an operation that involves the Iranians, which could possibly lead to the release of the hostages.’
Casey said ‘Who knows?’
Clair George, who recorded the conversation in his usual bombastic way, noticed a twinkle in Casey's eye as he said that, and wondered if his leg was being pulled.
Casey went on: ‘I don't know what the hell he's talking about.’
Testifying two years later, George thought that meant: ‘You won't tell the CIA; they must not know about it.’
At the time, however, he believed that Casey truly did not know what was going on.
Other cabinet members made sure they were in the same position.
Shultz, for all his opposition to the Iran operation, merely told Poindexter not to inform him of details he did not need to know; and the admiral, needing no encouragement to hold things close, took that line with other members of the cabinet.
Receiving a recommendation from North before the Tehran trip that he should arrange a meeting with ‘RR, Shultz and Weinberger’, Poindexter tapped back testily: ‘I don't want a meeting with RR, Shultz and Weinberger.’
And he seldom did.
What they knew, what they didn't know, and what they did not wish to know tied people in some terrible knots.
The classic remark came from Abrams at the public hearings: ‘I never said I had no idea about most of the things you said I had no idea about.’
As Noel Koch of the Pentagon described it, talking about Iran:
We could sit in a meeting in the Sit(uation) Room and be discussing these other activities, and fall into almost a kind of, you know, warp in which you wouldn't know whether you were talking — I mean, the use of shorthand and so forth in the discussions you couldn't tell whether we'd suddenly slipped into this question of selling arms to get them back this way or whether we were still discussing the other thing.
And it was the most intricate interweaving of subjects and half-meanings and innuendos and so forth, and it was like something out of a Pirandello play.
At his deposition, North's aide Robert Earl offered a breakdown of those who knew about the Iran operation, those who did not know and those who knew a bit of it, like a game of Chinese boxes.
Allen, North, Poindexter and his assistant Paul Thompson were all ‘in the box, in the compartment’.
And those, he thought, were the only people in the NSC who were fully in it.
There were others (such as Howard Teicher, who had gone on the trip to Tehran and had seen the spare parts in the back of the plane) who were ‘not in all the boxes within the boxes but some element of the box’.
And where did the diversion of funds fit in?
‘It may have been the innermost box or it may have overlapped with other sub-boxes, but it was within the compartment, yes.’
So people who were generally in the big box knew about it?
Not necessarily: ‘I don't think I meant that even the people who have no caveats attached implied that they knew absolutely everything in the box.
Everyone had their own small measure of deniability, the lid unopened, the box left locked.
It might have been better, in Poindexter's view, if no one had ever known.
Nonetheless, knowledge seeped out; not least because both the Iran and contra operations, however much compartmented and closely held, were run by a man who could not resist talking about them.
Numbers of people at North's level at the NSC, the State Department, the CIA and the Defense Department knew that ‘Ollie was up to something’: something hyperactive, makeshift, slightly off-centre, not to be looked into.
‘Everybody had their suspicions about him,’ said Jonathan Miller, who worked with him; ‘A lot of it you would discount because he had a tendency to engage in rhetorical hyperbole.
If I discounted 75 percent of what he intimated, there was a lot to suspect but it was nothing hard and fast.’
The prize for suspicions that never hardened into knowledge belonged to Craig Coy, North's junior aide.
Until the end of May 1986 Coy, like Earl, had no office of his own, and the two men would sit on North's couch.
Sometimes he would ask them to leave; more often they stayed, and let the welter of codes and commands and  memos and messages accumulate round them.
Earl, a classmate of North's from the Naval Academy, was privy to quite a lot, including the diversion.
Coy tried to pick up as little as he could, tactful as a secretary.
If messages came over the secret encoder about military supplies for the contras, ‘I would scan it and pass it on.
It was nothing that I was responsible for.’
Q. You were not involved?
A. I was not involved.
I knew it was military equipment for Central America, pass it on.
Coy had no idea how far North was involved either, and did not want to know, except on one occasion.
He could not help overhearing, in April 1986, that North was about to go to Tehran, and asked Earl about it; considering they were sitting side by side on the sofa, he said, it was bizarre to have one man briefed and the other not.
Earl reluctantly asked North to bring Coy ‘into the box’, and it was the last one he was brought into.
He seldom let his curiosity get the better of him again.
Even those who were most curious, or who had bosses who would have been extremely interested to know, forbore to ask North questions.
Even as it was, they heard more than they wanted to know.
Watson, sniffing the atmosphere from Bush's office, was once teased horribly by North at a meeting.
North sat down beside him and whispered, ‘Max has shut down the resupply of the pilots.’
Watson said he asked him what he was talking about; North brushed him off.
‘Don't bother me; it's none of your business.’
Watson, wondering whether to pass it on, quickly concluded that North was ‘playing a game of being important and secretive’, and decided not to bother.
He joined many others.
‘I think it is fair to say’, mused Abrams, that everyone involved in the RIG (the Restricted Inter-agency Group that met regularly to discuss policy in Latin America) knew that Ollie was somehow connected with this but didn't know why…
I think most of us were careful not to ask.’
Abrams himself, North remarked with some heat, did not need to ask; he knew; but at a certain point, knowledge became uncomfortable.
Asked by Shultz one day to ‘monitor Ollie’(Shultz himself, it should be remembered, not wanting to be too exhaustively informed), Abrams asked North a few cursory questions.
Once, apparently unsolicited, North told him that ‘there was a big network out there of people and companies and bank accounts.’
Abrams, who said he had never heard of such a thing before, asked him no more about them.
Why, wondered Senator Rudman at the hearings, had he not taken North  into his office and closed the door and put him up against the wall and pushed him and pushed him and pushed him?
Well, said Abrams, almost visibly squirming, he was not in his department, and things are not done that way.
Besides, ‘with respect, I think you're playing the movie backwards from the end.
You know the end, and I know the end, now we know what happened, now we know what I should have done…but I was not at the end of the movie, I was in the middle of the movie and I didn't know the ending.’
Abrams knew much of the plot, however; it was precisely because he knew so much that he recognized when to hold back.
Besides, he was not dealing with someone who was altogether cryptic.
As a CIA section chief described the two sides of North,
One is secret and compartmented, and another is sort of boyish and boastful, and it would be in character for him to say, I won't be here tomorrow, I will be down south, and then for him to say, Yes, it was a quick trip and I flew all night and I came back and I haven't slept for 48 hours, always complaining about how busy he was and how terribly overworked.
It is from that kind of what the Germans call fingerspitzen Gefühl — just from the smell of it — that I had a pretty good idea that North was spending a lot of his time on Central American things.
Even the most secret aspects of those ‘Central American things’ seemed to buzz in North's head insisting to be spoken.
General Robert Schweitzer, visiting his office one day to talk broadly about contras, heard North say, alluding to his pet name for the resupply operation, ‘And then there is, of course, my Project Democracy…’
‘And his sentence then trailed off’, said Schweitzer, ‘with a series of…almost visible ellipses, and he didn't finish the thought.’
On the first leg of the flight to Tehran, courtesy of one of the aircraft that also helped with contra resupply, North told Cave ‘This is Democracy Airlines,’ and laughed; Cave had no notion what he meant.
Poindexter remembered a meeting one day in the Oval Office, discussing sources of contra money, when he had to move quickly to stop North blurting out that there was money available in places he knew.
It was not the only time Poindexter had to shut North up: partly because North genuinely did not know how widely the secret was known, but partly because he could hardly resist it anyway.
North understood what was expected of people entrusted with secrets.
They were meant not to infect other people with ‘unnecessary  knowledge’.
On the other hand he was proud of what he was up to, and it was exciting and in a good cause; so he talked about it.
At one fairly general meeting in December 1985, with people from the CIA and the FBI and the State Department, he dropped in the passing remark: ‘even if the last hostage that came out was traded for 80 Hawk missiles’.
The CIA major who heard him was dumbfounded, as were the others; dead silence fell.
Carefully, the major turned the conversation to an Iranian editorial he had seen, and they laid down the subject.
‘Ollie's talking too much at these meetings,’ snapped Charlie Allen later.
He did so again not long afterwards, again in front of Allen, mentioning how pleased he was with the mini-finding of December that had retroactively authorized the arms sales.
He had taken it to the President, and he had liked it, and he had signed it.
All this was highly secret; and North said it not merely to Allen but to Bernard Makowka, a lawyer for the CIA general counsel's office.
Makowka, as it happened, had worked on the Finding, but he and North were strangers to each other; he was amazed that ‘he would be mentioning something as sensitive as that in this sort of context’.
On North went: ‘I'm really worried because I have the only copy and it's in my safe, and I could cross the street tomorrow and get run over by a truck and so no-one would ever know.
And so if anything happens to me, it's here.
I want you to know that.’
Perhaps the clearest demonstration of the need to conceal and the compulsion to reveal, the need to bring the always-denied and never-happening into the light of day, was seen in North's attitude towards the diversion of funds.
This, he told Meese in his interview on November 23rd 1986, was something above all he hoped could be kept secret; this, Poindexter had told him, ‘had better never come out.’
Yet North also thought it was ‘a good idea’, ‘a right idea’, ‘a neat idea’.
When he had told Casey about it, his mentor and guardian and sponsor had supposedly called it ‘the ultimate irony’.
North found the idea of the Ayatollah unwittingly subsidizing the contras deliciously ironic, and also perhaps trifling by the standards of some of the secrets, still unrevealed, with which he was entrusted.
He therefore leaked his deepest, darkest secret, but selectively, to those half-way in the know already; and he made it deliberately dramatic, so that there was still a good chance it would fall within the wide range of hyperbole or blarney that his listeners already allowed for.
He would make a casual remark, often to cheer someone up, just a joke really; wait for the penny to drop; relish the reaction (it was always astonishment)— and walk away.
Richard Armitage, an assistant defence secretary, heard the tale in mid-November 1986:
I called Ollie on the black phone, the secure phone, to find out  what was going on, to fill in my knowledge a little bit more.
And I think…
Ollie was concerned that I was very upset about (the Iranian arms deals), and he said basically, Rich, don't worry.
It'll all be all right when the Vice President goes to Riyadh to sit down with the Iranians and they find out that our hostages come home, and the Ayatollah is either helping us in Central America or the contras.
…And I said, Ollie, wow.
And then he and I stopped the phone conversation.
McFarlane heard the tale on the tarmac at Ben Gurion airport in May 1986, as he and North were returning from their disastrous clandestine trip to Iran.
North told him not to be downhearted, ‘that the one bright spot is that the government is availing itself of part of the money for application to Central America.’
He then walked away, leaving McFarlane stunned, though not stunned enough to report it.
Charlie Allen of the CIA did not report it either, for a long time; but he heard about it more than anyone else who was supposed not to know.
The first time it came from his charge, Ghorbanifar, thrown out casually, that $25m of the money from the arms sales could go ‘to help Ollie in his work for South America (sic).’
Allen thought this ‘a very ingratiating-type comment’ with no substance and no meaning; he did not even make a note of it.
Central America was not his patch, anyway.
Having discounted that source, Allen next heard it from the horse's mouth.
Discussing with North in September 1986 how the arms-sales creditors could be paid off, he was alarmed to hear him say ‘Well, maybe we'll have to take it out of the reserves.’
Allen thought the statement ‘devastating…little wheels clicked in my mind, that all my fears were probably true.’
Nonetheless, he tried to find some comforting way to explain it: maybe the Israelis had set up some sort of contingency fund.
Not until three weeks later did he pass on to colleagues in the CIA, and to Casey, the thought that ‘perhaps we are overcharging…to send money to the contras.’
The first reaction of Casey's deputy, Robert Gates, was to laugh, ‘because it sounded absurd’.
When Gates heard it next, at the end of a three-man lunch with Casey on October 9th (North made ‘a cryptic comment about Swiss accounts and the contras’), he took it slightly more seriously, and asked Casey about it.
‘And it appeared to me that Casey hadn't even picked up what he had said.
He kind of looked at me quizzically and he had either not heard it or it hadn't made any impact on him…and he basically just kind of waved it off.’
No one pursued it.
North once told Secord that he had gone so far as to mention to  the President that the Ayatollah was helping the contras.
This was not quite a true story, he admitted, just a joke to raise Secord's morale.
He had made the remark, or something like it, ‘to the back of Admiral Poindexter’ as they came out of a meeting with Reagan, and Reagan could not possibly have heard it.
But North would doubtless have liked him to; for even Poindexter confessed that he could hardly hold back from revealing, just once, the glorious ruse with which the president's dearest cause was being supported.
North seems to have intimated and exaggerated and hinted because, although he was engaged in secrets, he desperately wanted to be noticed; and part of him, too, needed rescuing.
To Clair George (who had been involved in managing the contra operation before the congressional restrictions, and was keeping well clear of it), ‘he kept saying I have got to get out of this thing, I have got to get out of this thing.
And I kept saying, I don't want to hear about it.’
Between those who did not want to hear and those who did not want to know, North was left, as George understood, alone.
So, too, was McFarlane, carefully endowed by his cabinet colleagues with the managerial responsibility for both Iran and contras; so, too, was Poindexter.
At some point in February 1986 Poindexter apparently made a decision, crucial to the story, not to tell the President about the plan to divert Iranian arms money to the contras.
He did so very quickly, in about five minutes, while North was standing in front of his desk.
And he did so, he explained at the hearings, to give the President ‘deniability’.
This was not ‘plausible deniability’, the provision of a believable cover for someone who already knew the facts; it was, Poindexter agreed, ‘absolute’ deniability, ‘the ability of the President to deny knowing anything about it, and be very truthful in that process.
He didn't know anything about it.’
Nor, by their own account, did dozens of others.
They had seen something, they had heard something, they had smelt something, but all those various sensations added up to nothing solid: nothing that was known, for certain.
Secret Agents and Mystery Papers
SO Iran-contra did not happen much, except to certain people; and even those people often felt caught up in events that were exceptionally odd and different, adventures they might have watched on television, and in which they especially did not expect to find themselves.
They were actors in a world of secret agents, codenames and mysterious papers: a place where ordinary values and rules were possibly suspended, although they could never be quite sure of that.
North's principal emissary between the White House and the contras was a brawny and cherubic graduate from Stanford, Robert Owen.
Owen had been working for a consulting company in Washington before deciding to devote himself to the contras, sitting at North's feet; despite his deep immersion in murky affairs, he still took a wide-eyed view of the world in which he operated.
It was fun, in a way.
He found himself walking through Denver Airport one day with a hollowed-out Brazilian hand-grenade fitted with a Zippo lighter, a present from Singlaub to Calero: ‘one of the scary things was that I walked right through…and I never set off the alarms.’
Another day he was sent from Washington to a Chinese vegetable stand on the Lower West Side in Manhattan, where he was told to ask for a person with the code name ‘Mooey’; Mooey went behind the counter, rolled up his trouser-leg and pulled out a wad of hundred-dollar bills, which Owen thought ‘I had better count  anyways.’
Having counted them (there were 95) and gone back to Washington, he handed them in a rolled-up newspaper to Secord in the lobby of the Sheraton Carlton hotel.
After he had told this tale at the hearings, Representative Tom Foley asked him: ‘Those were not normal public actions, were they?’
Owen .
Sir, we used to joke that truth is always stranger than fiction.
In this case, it is true.
Q. You found yourself somewhat surprised to be in this sort of environment?
A. Quite frankly, when I was approached in the Chinese market, I looked around and wondered where the cameras were.
I said, ‘This is more a movie set than real life.’
Owen was not alone in treating his escapades as an adventure, half funny and half thrilling.
Michael Ledeen was also new to the world of covertly shipping arms.
Disapproving as he was, he still seems to have found vicarious excitement in talking weapons.
In November 1985, when he had heard there was going to be another Israeli shipment to Iran, he called North.
‘How many Hawk missiles can you get into a 707?’ he asked him.
And he said something like twelve and I said, what do you mean, twelve?
He said, well, they come in big cases and big wooden boxes and packing and so forth.
I said so that's interesting.
And I remember saying to Schwimmer at one point, what are you going to do, have a caravan of 707s for those Hawks of yours?
And he said no, we'll send a couple of planes.
And I remember saying to him, but you can only get twelve Hawks on a 707…
Q. Why did you ask Colonel North how many Hawks can you get in a 707?
A….
Just because Hawks were going to go to Iran and I was wondering how many planes it was going to be this time.
It had been so exciting the last time with one plane.
I wondered how many adventures we were going to have this time.
Albert Hakim wondered too.
Hakim was the grand treasurer of ‘The Enterprise’, the web of companies that lay behind both the Iran and the contra operations.
He was an Iranian who had fled Iran but maintained grey connections there; a balding, smooth-skinned, soft-spoken man with brown protruding eyes.
He  already found the Iran operation bizarre in any number of ways.
The government had to ‘have participation in it’, but it was also structured so that‘the government was not supposed to have participation in it’.
Hakim was used to transactions where ‘all parameters are not known, you leave it for the times that things are known’, but this business proceeded on a plane that was ‘intangible’.
From time to time he would try to pin Secord down on it, but Secord had no more sense of a plan than he had.
‘And he went to the degree of saying, when I pressed him, how are we going to stay in this business; he said, Albert, for all I know right now when I am talking to you, we could be finished with the business; I don't know.’
Just before a meeting with the Iranians in Frankfurt in late February 1986, Hakim was brought in to pretend to be a translator.
He took the part with manifest reluctance; he did not want to be recognized by Ghorbanifar.
His alias was Ebrahim Ebrahimian, a name variously mis-spelled by the players, which Secord supposed to be Turkish.
Deputed to get his own disguise, he went off fuming to a wig shop: ‘And the lady started to go through all kinds of salesmanship to sell me the wig and if I wanted to swim, I didn't want to swim, and I'm sitting there knowing that this meeting is going to start very soon and I cannot — lady, let's get on with it, I don't give a damn, just give me a wig.’
The wig he finally chose needed modification by a barber; but he got it done, put on a pair of folding spectacles he carried in his briefcase, and had the satisfaction of astonishing his colleagues when he walked back into the hotel.
So convincing was he that Amiram Nir, the Israeli counter-terrorism man — whose presence at the talks was even more risky — decided he should change his hair too.
Iranians had more respect for people with graying locks; North, already tipped off by Ghorbanifar, had put more white in his; so Hakim and Nir went back to the shop and had Nir's hair sprayed, Hakim all the while keeping his identity firmly under his wig.
‘And that was a challenge,’ he recalled, ‘to spend 45 minutes with a guy and act like a spy.’
Spies were all around; they were literally in the wiring and the woodwork.
If Owen looked round for the cameras, North acted throughout as though he was sure they were there.
He was convinced he was being both watched and listened to; by the Russians, if by no-one else.
Owen confessed that it became something of a joke to say, at the end of telephone calls, ‘Say hello to our friend Ivan.’
Around the Old Executive Office Building, where the NSC staff had their offices, North was remembered as a man who seemed always caught up in some dark drama: leaving for the airport, constantly being paged in meetings, ‘looking like a ghost’ in  the corridor.
One colleague, Jackie Tillman, got wind one day of a piece of the drama in which North and Owen were engaged; she heard that Owen, standing in the rain outside the White House, had handed $2,000–3,000 in cash to a Meskito Indian leader passing by in a car.
Alarmed, she tried to tell Poindexter about it; but she knew there was no point in raising the matter with North.
There was a screenplay unfolding, and she, and others, had no more than bit-parts.
As Larry Speakes, the president's press spokesman, put it, ‘I always had the impression that…as (Ollie) flew across the country he could visualize a camera on him, and although nobody knew who he was and his mission was secret, the whole thing was being made into a movie.’
North had charge of several covert operations, many of which are still secret; his brief included counter-terrorism, as well as the sending of arms to Iran and the resupply of the contras.
All played directly to his love of the theatrical.
The old master-spy, William Casey, was said, not least by North, to have masterminded both the Iran and contra operations, and that may well be true of the broad canvas; but the marks are those of an enthusiastic amateur in espionage, a man who had learnt his craft of secret agent more from the cinema than from the CIA handbook.
When Liman, the Senate Counsel at the hearings, suggested that it had been ‘on-the-job training’, North thought that rather a good description.
Equivalent-ranking officers at the CIA knew North had no experience in operations.
The chief of the Near East Division had sat him down one day to try to teach him about Iran, but he doubted it had gone in.
CIA men looked askance at him, particularly since he dealt directly with the highest officers in the agency, preferably Casey, rather than with them.
One agent in North's employ remembered being over at CIA headquarters one day when a call came in to him from North, ‘and everybody in the room gave me a dirty look.’
‘No-one in the Marine Corps taught me how to run a covert operation’ said North, ruefully, at his trial.
Untaught, he did what he could; and it seemed to many of his colleagues, professionals or not, that he sometimes played at it, doing the things he thought secret agents did, even when they were unnecessary.
Because of his other highly classified projects, his office already contained all the paraphernalia of necessary secrecy: the code-block and buttons on the door, the gaggle of different-coloured telephones, the five-thousand-pound safes, even the tempered glass in the windows, as his lawyer noted at his trial, ‘so that enemies of the country can't beam through the windows and pick up the sound’.
Merely by shutting his door if it was open, North would add to the intrigue of meetings: ‘and when the meeting was over, I still couldn't  understand why the door was shut and what the intrigue was’ said a visiting official, puzzled; ‘it was in my mind's eye a social call.’
And sometimes, leaving his office, he would close his door in such a way that there seemed to be something or someone intriguing behind it, as Richard Miller noticed when he went to talk to him about banking for the contras; it was deliberately stage-like, impressive.
Inside the sanctum, Miller was once made to sit down with the words ‘Let me show you how a covert operation is set up.’
Earl brought in a yellow legal pad with a number of acronyms on it in boxes, and North put it down on the table; at that point, his secure telephone went off, and he had to ask Miller to leave.
Miller never did find out how to set up a covert operation.
Spooks in films could pass unrecognized through airports, and North sometimes gave out instructions that if he was spotted at such-and-such a place, he should not be acknowledged.
He once told Earl delightedly that he had spotted Abrams at an airport but Abrams (perceptiveness not his strong suit) had not spotted him, and that ‘his tradecraft of observing was better than Elliott's’ Secret agents carried gadgets with which they could speak to headquarters from the most unlikely places; once, at a party, North was said to have produced a scrambler-telephone from his briefcase, together with a half-eaten sandwich, and to have gone out into the garden to dial the house.
Owen, Calero and various agents would meet him in Lafayette Park, opposite the White House, to avoid checking into the OEOB, and pieces of paper would pass between them.
North also managed to slip a piece of paper (’ Next time you are in Washington please contact me, my name is Oliver North’) into the hand of Alfonso Robelo, a contra leader, in a reception line; Robelo then had the problem of transferring it invisibly to his pocket.
A favourite North place for secret conversations was the Old Brogue Country Inn in Great Falls, Virginia, not far from where he lived.
This was a pub with an Irish band, but North, who had Irish blood, may not have chosen it out of sentiment; the music was so loud that it frequently, and perhaps providentially, drowned out the conversation.
One agent went there with Allen, following him blindly ‘away from Langley and way out into the woods’ to talk about finding the hostages.
When they arrived the place was empty —— it was early evening — except for‘two street toughs in camel-hair coats’ sitting at a table; ‘and they were fairly easy to distinguish, and I think we walked up and asked them if they were — and —, and they said yes.’
When the two sides had carefully sounded each other out, and all parties had ordered two rounds of drinks, they had what the agent called ‘a very in-depth substantive discussion about  very sensitive material’, which grew louder and louder as the band did; in the end they could scarcely hear each other when they leaned across the table and shouted.
One of the ‘street toughs’, actually a DEA man, later wondered what the point of it all had been.
‘It was a Friday night.
We couldn't discuss anything in the place.
What we went out there for I haven t the slightest idea.
Another agent was recruited to the effort in Charlie's Restaurant in Washington, where he arranged to sit at the bar with two packets of cigarettes in front of him, so that Secord and North could recognize who he was.
Genuine covert work, perhaps; but not without an element of cinema.
At the hearings, North hotly denied that there was any element of play involved.
His elaborate codes, for instance, were not some joke or ‘some childish code from Captain Midnight .
We were talking on open telephone lines.’
He told Calero he ought to find himself a code-name — a suggestion Calero virtually ignored — because ‘the Soviets listen to everything on the east coast’.
Codes were certainly necessary; but North's more experienced colleagues knew they were not necessary to the degree he insisted upon.
One set used in hostage negotiations, rapidly superseded by another set, listed the names of English towns and counties: Gloucestershire (United States), Warwick (Cuba), Norfolk (Iran) and Sevenoaks (Jerusalem).
Washington was Ladbrooke, but it was also, in the same list, Cleveland and Canada: the multiplication of codes suggesting either that they were readily broken, or that people were changing them more or less as they fancied.
Poindexter, although he had cautioned North not to ‘talk in plain language’, confessed that he had never used the three-by-five cards covered with codes that North had given him; he just carried them in his briefcase.
‘Who wrote Sampson Secord?’
Liman asked.
‘I did,’ he admitted.
‘Did you think of Secord as Sampson?’
‘No, not really —— what are you calling him?’
Even Owen, adventurer as he was, thought the codes a bit of a waste of time.
‘We always tried to talk somewhat in codes,’ he said, remembering Calero talking to North about arms on a pay-phone from San Francisco, ‘so whoever was listening wouldn't quite be able to understand it; but if they had any common sense, they probably could.’
The last flourish on codes belonged to George Cave, translating again at a September meeting with the Iranians in Washington, who ended his memorandum of record thus.
US PARTICIPANTS: George Cave as ‘Colonel Sam O'Neil’ Oliver North as ‘Colonel Goode’Dick Seacord (sic) as ‘General Kopp’(sic)
The make-believe Goode and O'Neil were not colonels, nor was the make-believe Copp a general; it was a bit of fun.
So it appeared at the public hearings.
Noel Koch was the deputy assistant for international security affairs at the Defense Department when North was at the NSC; he had been given a code-name, and it was ‘Aaron’.
To his embarrassment, the lawyer at the hearings then obliged him to go through a whole code-sheet to get the names into the record, or perhaps just to entertain the audience.
Missiles were ‘dogs’, the airport was ‘a swimming pool’, Iran was ‘apple’(in another code sheet it was ‘Tango’, as in ‘it takes two’) Israel was ‘banana’, the United States was ‘orange’, hostages were ‘zebras’.
‘I want you to know we didn't use any of this nonsense’, Koch protested between the titters; ‘…you would sort of start down that road and get so self-conscious you couldn't do it.’
Maybe he could not; but North's notebooks contain the entry ‘IF THESE CONDITIONS ARE ACCEPTABLE TO THE BANANA, THEN ORANGES ARE READY TO PROCEED’.
North usually picked the code names.
(An exception was Secord's name, ‘Copp’, which Secord found ‘not in the usual way, looking though the telephone book’, but took in a hurry from a thriller he was reading Gorbanifar, as a result, thought he was Polish.)
North's names for himself are revealing.
In one cultural set, in which Poindexter was ‘Schubert’ and Shultz ‘Molière’, North called himself ‘Wagner’, invoking the flames of Götterdämmerung.
Some letters to Adolfo Calero, the chief contra leader, were signed ‘Steelhammer.
His preferred code names, however, show him acting out yet another part, that of an agent for good; even, perhaps, God's agent.
In the January 1986 negotiations he was ‘Paul’.
From time to time he was ‘Mr West’(definitely opposed to the East).
But the alias he preferred, and for which the State Department gave him his false passport, was William P. Goode.
This prompted a famous exchange at the hearings, when John Nields, the House counsel, began to question North on a document headed ‘from Goode’: ‘I take it you are Goode?
I was very good.
North himself sometimes forgot who, or which, he was.
William Walker, an official from the State Department, remembered seeing him rush to catch a flight to Central America, having just got off a flight from Europe, unkempt, a flight-bag over his shoulder.
His name was not on the passenger list.
‘Try Goode or something’, Walker recalled him saying; ‘and I think he even threw out a third name…
So Ollie had to change his passport and hand up another passport and I remember saying this guy plays in the big leagues.
Fascination with code names went well beyond operations, reaching even the contra supporters and fund-raisers.
If North was  running the contra war vicariously (’ from my desk’), the smooth organizers of the private pro-contra network and their rich, mostly female, mostly elderly contributors were even further removed.
Their contact with war was to sit in the dining room of the Hay Adams Hotel, or the Petroleum Club in Dallas, or by their own swimming pools, sipping on cocktails and going through lists of guns and launchers and grenades.
One of the high points in the life of Ellen Garwood, a wealthy Texas widow and author, was the day she sat with Reagan in the Oval Office (’ we had Sanka’) and told him that he ought to get rid, first, of the Sandinistas, and second of the secretary of state.
Barbara Newington from Connecticut remembered shaking hands effusively with Reagan at the beginning and end of her audience, and each of them saying thank you to the other; but precisely what she was thanking him for, and what he was thanking her for, neither said.
(Both subsequently maintained, too, that they did not know.)
North frequently talked to these contributors, whipping them up with his slide show, and they, too, developed a code-name for him.
They called him ‘Mr Green’, a vaguely Marine idea.
Carl Channell, the chief fundraiser — a slight, foxy man from West Virginia —— admitted it was ‘sort of crazy’ to call North Mr Green, or ‘our special person’or nicknames of other sorts, but his employees ‘loved to do that, because that was exciting…
I know Ellen Garwood loved to call him Mr Green, and when she would write me letters thinking that Mr Green was her real son, I got the impression that she was talking to me on the telephone underneath her bed, about the fun she was having.
She always used Mr Green religiously.
Channell's organization also used a code name for the weapons account; it was ‘toys’.
Towards ‘toys’— principally mortars, grenades and AK47s — the old ladies, among others, donated their savings.
Some expressly did not want their money to go for weapons; others were said to be so thrilled that they wanted their names on the missiles.
(Ellen Garwood got hers on a helicopter.)
One contributor, reckoning that ‘his’ missile had shot down a Sandinista helicopter, pestered Channell for a piece of the wreckage as a souvenir.
For favoured contributors, the mystique of secret war could be taken further.
They were given briefings by North or sometimes by Abrams in the Old Executive Office Building, shown photographs of airports and harbours, and made privy to mysterious movements of Soviet aircraft and ships.
‘The contributors we had are all kind of double-0-seven, cloak-and-dagger types’, explained Krishna Littledale, one of the enticers of funds; ‘…if you talk very quietly and tell them they can't tell anyone about this conference, they will give  you a lot more money.’
One contributor, William O'Boyle, was particularly impressed by the covert aura of it all.
An oil and gas businessman, down from New York, he was one of Littledale's ‘bloody types’; so much so that he had celebrated his donation for weapons, to the dismay of Channell's PR lady, by going to the Hay Adams and ordering steak tartare.
Channell told him that supporters who gave $300,000 or more could meet Reagan for 15 minutes, and that their visits were not logged on: ‘the implication being that this was so secret that the President wanted to keep it so not everybody at the White House knew what was going on.’
He also told O'Boyle that he had been ‘checked out’ with the government computer system to see if he was reputable enough to join the group.
‘I don't know whether this was a fund-raising ploy or whether this was for real,’ O'Boyle said, ‘but I thought it was for real at the time.’
In April 1986 O'Boyle received his true initiation into the covert world.
He was entrusted with what he called a ‘secret plan’.
Wild horses would scarcely drag this plan out of him at the hearings, even though all he had been shown was a wall map of Central America: nothing classified, no black programmes, no code words.
It was enough that a government official in the OEOB, with its mock-French, slightly creepy grandeur, right beside the White House, had told him not to tell anybody.
The plan turned out to be North's own favoured ‘final act’ for the contras: that if Congress did not approve any more money for them they would seize a piece of Nicaragua, establish a provisional government and there make a last stand, while the American Navy blockaded the rest of the country.
This was the plan which, according to Abrams, was dismissed by the CIA and the Defense Department as ‘the craziest idea they had ever heard; totally implausible and not-doable’.
But North insisted at the hearings that not everybody had scorned it, and certainly it sounded plausible enough to O'Boyle; it was a state secret, and he had been allowed to share it.
Nevertheless, he felt uneasy.
Here he was, a civilian, suddenly being made privy to enormous affairs of state.
Possibly world war III was brewing up in Nicaragua — he mentioned that to North, though North doubted it, thought the Russians would never fight for the place — and here was he, O'Boyle, being told about the innermost strategic details.
He felt he was exposing himself ‘to some danger from hostile forces, one might say, while at the same time having no training or no institutional support…
I mean, obviously you're playing in a rather…or driving in the fast lane when you're doing this sort of thing.’
O'Boyle eventually became so worried by the secret nature of 
North's work that he tore out from his diary the corner of a page on which he had written North's name, and threw it away.
There was a limit to the amount of drama in which he would involve himself.
And he would not be incriminated by a paper; but North was.
Appropriately enough, in this strange world of not-so-covert agents and hackneyed dramatic devices, it was a secret document that gave the game away: a document that was never meant to be there at all.
Appropriately, too, the discovery of that document was attended by all sorts of dramatic flourishes.
Even the bureaucrats involved took to playing games and devising ruses, for all the world like secret agents themselves.
On November 22nd, 1996, a five-page memorandum turned up that mentioned, at the top of one page, the diversion of funds to the contras.
North had written it, apparently sometime in April, and had somehow failed to shred it.
It was an office memorandum much like any other, entitled ‘Release of American Hostages in Beirut’: closely typed in best office prose, and with no cover sheet.
(Without a cover sheet, there was no knowing who might have read it or seen it.)
The first paragraph on the fifth page read, in part.
The residual funds from this transaction (a proposed April 1986 shipment of 3,000 TOWs and Hawk missile parts to Iran) are allocated as follows…$12m will be used to purchase critically needed supplies for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance forces.
The discovery of this memo brought the scandal to a head.
Within two days of the discovery that funds had in fact been diverted, Poindexter was obliged to resign; North was fired; and the open-mouthed press descended like locusts.
Within ten days, a special prosecutor had been appointed to look into criminal misconduct.
The finders of this bombshell were two Justice Department officials, Brad Reynolds and John Richardson, who had been sent to North's office to look through papers relating to the shipments to Iran.
This was their initiation into the NSC world of secrecy, and they entered into it with a will.
Sitting at the table in North's office, they communicated by passing notes to each other, even notes that merely inquired when they ought to meet up again.
There was always someone at North's desk, they explained; it seemed safer that way.
The memorandum turned up when they were about three folders into the search; North, as it happened, had not arrived yet.
Reynolds  came across a slim manila folder with the letters ‘WH’ marked in red ink on the flap.
He drew out the document inside, read it through.
Under his breath, so that Earl could not hear him, he murmured ‘Holy cow!’(’ or it may have been a little more graphic’).
Richardson looked up.
He either kicked me under the table or something and we were sitting across from each other…just a foot or two, and he passed it over, directed me to the top paragraph and had an expression of this was a surprising entry.
So I read it and I gave a similar look back and I think I probably said something like that didn't happen or something along those lines, that's hard to believe that had happened and passed it back to him and then that was it, we did not discuss it at the time…
My first impression was this is too spectacular to think it happened.
Nonetheless, it was ‘the most interesting’ document they had seen.
Reynolds had come across two others like it in all respects, but not in the same folder, and not with the incriminating paragraph; that too was odd, in retrospect.
So he marked it with a paperclip for copying, put it back in its manila folder, ‘wiped off all my fingerprints’, and hid it ‘out of an abundance of caution’ in the stack of other papers to be copied.
Good secret-agent tactics.
The two men then left the office to lunch, as arranged, with the attorney-general.
On the way out they ran into North coming in.
‘He said Where are you guys going, have I missed it, or something like that, and we said…we were going out and have a bite of lunch.’
At the Old Ebbitt Grill, on K Street east of the White House, the attorney general was waiting.
Meese was in his fifties, solid, plump and pink-faced; a California prosecutor who seemed shocked by nothing, a ‘taciturney general’, as one lawyer described him.
He talked about various meetings to do with the Iran inquiry, and the others listened; when he was finished, he asked Reynolds and Richardson whether they had found anything interesting.
Reynolds mentioned the memorandum.
Meese ‘visibly said something like, oh, a curse word’, said Richardson (the curse word was variously reported as ‘Holy Toledo!’,
‘Oh, darn’ and ‘Oh, shit’), ‘and sort of squinted his eyes and that sort of thing…and (he) said, Be sure you bring a copy of that out when you come.’
But it was still ‘very much incredible prospect’, as Richardson put it; and Reynolds thought that the mention in the same memo of Colonel Ghadaffi's attempt to buy the hostages was just as interesting as what might have gone to the contras.
They discussed it, he supposed, for no more than five minutes.
At about 3.30 Reynolds and Richardson went back to North's office.
He let them in.
The papers lay on the table, as they were, with the addition of some folders from 1985 that North had promised.
Richardson said they wanted to make some copies, and he and North and North's aides copied the stack between them.
Reynolds was quite sure, however — excess of caution prevailing again — that he purposely kept the diversion memo out of North's hands.
As Reynolds and Richardson worked on, the diversion memo now in duplicate on the table, North wandered about, relaxed and friendly, at least to all appearances.
He read the newspaper, commenting aloud on the accuracy or inaccuracy of the stories about himself.
He took a call from an Israeli (real secret-agent stuff, this), and they slipped into code, Reynolds thought, after about ten minutes:
And then all of a sudden he said ‘Poindexter’ and then said ‘I mean Beethoven.’
I damn near fell out of the chair and looked at John and go like that and John went like that…it was really quite amusing.
I mean I assumed he wanted me to know Poindexter's name was Beethoven…it didn't just slip out.
North also offered them coffee, ‘real strong military coffee’, and Richardson went off to brew it with him.
At one point North suddenly remarked, ‘Well, I'm not worried, soon I am going to be back commanding a Marine battalion.
Someone is going to have to take the hit for this.’
At another point, he came over and sat down at the table with them.
‘All right, fellows,’ he said, ‘shoot.
I'm ready to answer your questions.’
Reynolds, perhaps a little taken aback by all the dramatic military talk, explained that it was Meese, not themselves, who would talk to him.
Meese did in fact call while they were there, to set up an interview with North for the next day, Sunday: the interview in which he was to be confronted with the memorandum.
He asked if it could be arranged for the morning.
North, wanting to go to church, deferred it.
The interview was set, the browsing went on, and sometime after six everybody left.
Richardson drove to his ‘one-room place’ in McLean with the photocopied papers, including the rogue memorandum, locked in the boot of his car; took them out, put them under the bed ‘within arm's reach’(as secret agents would) and went uneasily to sleep.
So the day ended.
The next day, at two o'clock, everyone assembled at the Justice Department.
Meese began the interview with his usual little speech  underlining the importance of telling the truth, not putting a good spin on anything to protect the President.’
They then worked slowly through the chronology, all the parties sitting informally round a small table; so informal, in the mythology, that the subsequent TV docudrama put Meese in a startling pink-and-lavender tracksuit, drinking coffee from a mug.
According to Richardson, there had been no discussion of tactics beforehand.
Meese had simply said, ‘All right, we want to go through the 1985 shipment…well, how the initiative began…then talk to him about this memo of the diversion of funds.’
‘But it was very obvious to me once he began the questioning what he was doing,’ said Richardson.
‘He had been a prosecutor for eight years.’
The form, in fact, was one beloved of prosecutors both on the screen and in literature.
This was precisely the way in which Inspector Porfiry in Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment homed in on the culprit Raskolnikov, a man who was also damned by a paper: an article he had written for the Periodical Magazine , months before, offering justifications for certain sorts of crimes.
Meese even resembled Porfiry, aimiable and unhurried, ‘his fat, round little figure…rebounding from every wall and corner’ as he strolled up and down the room.
Like Meese, Porfiry was most fascinated by the final part of Raskolnikov's paper, in which ‘you hint…at the existence of certain people who…are, as it were, above the law.’
Like North, Raskolnikov was appalled that such a small thing, so long ago, so distorted by his interrogator, should have incriminated him.
When Meese handed North the memorandum, he at first showed no surprise.
He looked at it for a moment.
A few questions about general financial transactions were asked and answered, and Meese then pointed out the paragraph about the diversion.
Reynolds remembered ‘a noticeable change’ in North's demeanour: his answers became halting.
Richardson recalled him saying ‘You found this in my files?’
Meese said, ‘Yes.
Did this take place?’
Charles Cooper, also there for the Justice Department, remembered that North paused for a moment, silent, before he responded.
He said yes.
‘And you could see him sort of recline back in the chair…he was visibly surprised.’
That night, North telephoned Poindexter to tell him the memo had been found.
Already the story was becoming melodrama.
North said he had spent ‘all day’ with the attorney-general, explaining ‘everything’.
Poindexter, weary, did not really want to know and had no memory of the memo at all; he told him he would see him at the office in the morning.
On that morning, North dropped by Paul Thompson's office, beside Poindexter's, to tell him the gist of his  conversation with Meese, ‘that it did not go well’.
The drama was then relayed in detail:
He spent like four hours or something with the attorney general and with these three other staff over there…and they spent most of the time talking about all aspects of the Iran initiative and so forth , and then at the very end Meese pulled out that April memo…and said, ‘what about this?’
And North said, ‘Oh geez, I didn't realise you had that,’ or, ‘I don't know where that came from’…
Q. Did he tell you that he had told the attorney general about the diversion of money?
A….
He was more interested in telling me about the tactics of the attorney general.
North told the story to Bob Earl, too, to whom he was closer, and with whom the story could slip still more bonds with the world of facts.
There were several people present at the interview, he told him, and ‘at least one of them was an FBI agent.’
When, at the end of two hours, they finally showed him the document and he acknowledged what had happened, ‘there was a sigh from the assembled people.’
At the end, everything explained in detail, North turned to the attorney general and said ‘Since you haven't read me my rights, does this count?’
The mystery paper had brought the ceiling down; on the telephone to McFarlane two days later, when he had been fired, North's only explanation was ‘I missed one.’
How he had missed it, on its own in its distinctive folder, no-one understood.
Nobody understood, either, how it had come to be there at all.
Poindexter said he had told North repeatedly not to put anything in writing about the transfer of funds to the contras.
North, uncharacteristically, disobeyed.
He wrote not one memo about it but, by his estimate, as many as five, and sent them up the line.
He never got one back with a check-mark, but he kept copies in his office until, in October 1986, he started to destroy documents to cover his tracks.
On November 21st he told Poindexter, who was advising him that the Justice Department ‘fact-finding mission’ was about to descend on his office, that he had got rid of them all.
‘Don't worry,’ he said; ‘those documents are gone.’
But he was wrong; there was one left.
By Poindexter's trial, in 1990, he thought he must have told the admiral that: he was going to destroy that one, and then they would really all be gone.
That one paper had to be left, for it could not have turned up otherwise.
Indeed, just before his interview with Meese, he had dropped in to  see McFarlane in his office precisely, McFarlane thought, to agonize over the fact that the diversion was a matter of record: ‘I put it in a memo to the Admiral.’
Yet North said he did not remember that conversation, either at the hearings or later; nor did he remember the memo in question, or not with any conviction.
This was a memorandum that seemed to have taken on a life of its own: now here, now there, now one, now several, now alone, now gone, now lurking.
‘And you destroyed it, didn't you?’ asked Poindexter's prosecutor.
A. Yes, I think so.
Q. You thought that by doing that you had wiped out every document that existed that would reflect (the diversion), didn't you?
A. I thought I had, yes.
Q. But one shows up later, doesn't it?
A. Yes.
When it turned up, it was both horrible and useful; a mind-boggling twist to the Iran story (Pelion piled on Ossa, indeed), but also a magnificent diversion from the Iranian debacle to the Nicaraguan controversy, from approved Policy to possibly freelance meanderings, and from Reagan to North.
That, indeed, was how Reagan himself seemed to see it.
Apprised of the memo, Iran went completely out of his mind.
My memory of Mr Meese's participation was when, after all of that thing had broken, that he was the one who located a piece of paper in some office that indicated that there was additional money.
And…his participation was as attorney general in case there was something untoward that was waiting there to haunt us.
And that was where I got the knowledge about the extra money, and that is the only thing that I remember about from him.
By itself, the ‘diversion memorandum’— soon to be ‘Exhibit 1’ in the congressional inquiries — dictated the shape of the subsequent investigation.
Nothing became more important than whether the President had added his approval to this ‘very strange’ piece of paper, as Poindexter called it: a memorandum Poindexter said he had never seen before, and which Thompson found him reading the next morning over breakfast.
And yet the memorandum was almost pure hypothesis.
The transaction described in it had never occurred, though smaller versions had.
The scheme had been  aborted, like many such schemes, despite their minute and endless delineation; the $12m had neither been generated nor shifted to the contras.
In that narrow sense, Reagan was right when he insisted at his testimony, as on every previous occasion, that ‘no-one has proven to me that there was a diversion.’
North himself seemed to take it almost lightly.
The Case of the Mystery Memo had become, within a day, a little drama he could act out for his colleagues.
He had planned for it; it had been expected; it was just another episode of the unreal bureaucratic adventures in which he seemed to picture himself.
‘I am, indeed, a Marine officer in real life,’ North had told an audience of contra supporters in Nashville in May 1986, ‘and Washington is not real life…it is not the real world, but a veritable vacuum.’
Real life, North's listeners could learn by inference, was the hour of crisis or the field of battle.
During his description of the interception of the terrorists who had seized the cruise ship Achille Lauro in October 1985 — his best moment at the NSC, and his fiercest crisis — North, who hardly ever used the word ‘real’, suddenly peppered his account with it.
‘Very, very real time intelligence’, ‘very real courage’, ‘the very very real direct and immediate assistance of the government of Israel’.
Reality was to be up against the enemy and the clock, with lives at stake.
Reality was quick and did not brook negotiation; in ‘that sad swamp on the Potomac’, as North later liked to call Washington, reality passed over like a flare of marsh gas, too swift for most of the inhabitants to catch.
That North should have been caught by a memorandum, one of the common plants of the swamp, was especially ironic.
Memoranda made concrete and factual — real, as the world understands it —— operations that were often meant to stay in the world of abstraction; schemes that Congress, and most members of the government, were not supposed to have the slightest inkling of.
But North's memoranda were also aspirations, plans, dreams and imaginings, as much as schedules of facts.
McFarlane talked of a ‘ Rabelasian cast to messages’ and of ‘the creation of romantic kinds of activities’; he had four or five years' experience, he noted wearily, ‘of reading things which I knew not to be compatible with the realities of things.’
The typical North memo, according to General Galvin, implied that ‘a whole lot more is going to happen that was really intended to happen in there’; a colleague said they were North's equivalent of a Potemkin Village, set down in unreal Washington.
This was also the reality of the covert world, fuelled by information others did not know relayed by carriers whose real identity was hidden; a world of secret agents, mystery papers, dreadful imaginings and improbable suspicions.
It was a world that  would never solidify, would never be understood, unless it was named; as philosophers knew, only the naming of an object could make it real.
Yet several weeks into the scandal, the New Yorker complained that the mess had so far mocked all attempts to baptize it.
The New Republic ran a competition, won by ‘Iranamok’, and bravely stuck with it when nobody followed.
(Runners-up included ‘Contraversions’, ‘Ronnybrook’ and, with a nod to Hitchcock, ‘North by Mideast’.)
The Economist introduced ‘Iragua’, which lasted a fortnight.
Some thought the scandal might have done better, in terms of audience ratings, if the name had not been the leaden ‘Iran-contra affair’ but something with panache, cloak-and-dagger stuff.
But such a name never appeared, perhaps for the reason the New Yorker itself suggested: you cannot fix labels on a world of shadows.
THE SCANDAL AS CINEMA
IT was Hollywood, aptly enough, that came to the rescue of those who wanted to pin the scandal down.
Many of the players, as we have seen, had been wandering already in a nether world of two-dimensional heroes, villains, adventurers and fall-guys.
When the scandal broke the media too placed them there, confirming how odd and ungraspable it all was; confirming, too, that this was not just a political morass, but cinema, and fun.
Had not Reagan told North, when he called him after he was fired, that it would all make a great movie one day?
The Lebanese press had obligingly produced a comic version of McFarlane; but the film versions of both Reagan and North were also set as early as November 1986, and did not much change thereafter.
Reagan, largely as the result of a disastrous speech ‘explaining’ the Iran operation on November 13th and an even more discombobulated press conference on the 19th, became the Man Who Was Not All There; the very man, in fact, whom he himself had played in his Hollywood B-movie days,Knute Rockne: All American .
Rockne, waking from an operation in which he has lost his legs, asks ‘Where's the rest of me?’
Reagan had already used the phrase (he was ever good at self-deprecation) as the title of his campaign biography.
Now, with Iran-contra, it summoned up the snoozing president; a leader who, despite all appearances, put no  more of his substance into government than the man behind the curtain in The Wizard of Oz .
Although on every side people tried to raise the old Watergate question, ‘What did the President know and when did he know it?’, it seemed curiously flabby and unsatisfactory; as Elizabeth Drew wrote in the New Yorker , ‘When one talks about what Reagan ‘knew’, one could be dealing in metaphysics.’
It seemed that not only the president, but the whole country, might have been in some delightful lotus-sleep for the past few years.
When the White House lawyer first tried to debrief Reagan on what he knew of the affair, the president was said to have told him stories of Hollywood; when journalists badgered him about the deals he had half-wittingly struck with Israel and Iran in August 1985, he replied amiably: ‘Everybody that can remember what they were doing on August 8th 1985, raise your hand.’
If Reagan was the Great Delegator, the sleeping man with his hand in the jelly beans, North was quickly characterized as the secret agent.
For some days after the scandal broke, the press could find out nothing about him.
The New Yorker of November 24th lamented that the NSC would not reveal even the age or the precise employment of this man, ‘who seems to be called on to act as a secret surrogate for something like the entire United States government’.
Nor did they know what he looked like.
The press had been given nothing but ‘blurry, distorted photographs culled from television shots of occasions in the past at which North happened to be present’; at best, ABC News had shown ‘pictures of the back of a man's head that may or may not have been North's as the man got into an Embassy car in Cyprus on the occasion of the homeward flight of one of the hostages’.
Again and again the film was aired: into the car, back turned, head forward on arms.
Even on such slim sightings, however, the cinematic myths began to gather round North.
‘A 20th century Paladin’, cried US News World Report, a magazine that seldom let itself get too excited; ‘He stands alone as the sacrificed knight in the Iran-arms gambit, a true believer steeled and scarred by a lifetime of have-gun-will-travel missions.’
His colleagues at the NSC, John Lang continued, had given him the nickname ‘Knight Rider’, after the television hero (’ one man and his machine, dedicated to the righting of wrongs’), for his disappearances to confer with the contras.
Insight , a conservative magazine, began its December analysis of the debacle with the litany from the television series Mission Impossible : ‘Should you or any member of the I(mpossible) M(issions) force be caught or killed, the Secretary will disavow any knowledge of your actions.
Good luck, Jim’— and noted that the luck of the ‘real-life Jim’, North, appeared to have run out.
Even Shirley Christian's relatively cosy interview with North for the New York Times on December 1st — an interview that gained in suspiciousness and oddity because it was the last North gave for two years — plunged suddenly into an action-man world.
‘In the midst of the conversation at his house in the wooded hills of Northern Virginia’, she recorded, ‘a neighbour's horse came galloping down the road, riderless.
The colonel ran out into the road, blocked the animal's path and guided it into his own yard, where his children calmed it.’
North was also said, early on, to have worked out of the basement of the White House.
Evil things crawled out of basements, and plots were hatched there by the half-crazed.
Cartoonists showed the White House half-askew on this basement, noxious odours rising from the grates, while the President snoozed upstairs.
After the Tower Report was published in February 1987, and the PROF notes revealed that had passed by computer between the characters, the basement became home to a band of five-o'clock-shadowed Boy Scouts delighting in their own secrecy.
In vain did North point out that he had worked, always, on the third floor of the Old Executive Office Building (’ the only third-floor basement in Washington’).
Long after the hearings, even after the trials, ‘the White House basement’ remained the place where the awful miasma had started.
By mid-December, with the scandal in the news barely a month, a Hollywood producer, Jay Weston, already had his eyes on it.
He announced that he wanted to make a biopic of North, with Mel Gibson or Treat Williams in the title role.
It could be a movie; it could be a television series.
‘It's almost impossible to sell anything to do with politics’, said Mr Weston, barely containing his excitement; ‘but North touches a deep wellspring in the American spirit.
You think ‘my country right or wrong’, but you never know until you've done it.’
Several titles had already occurred to him: ‘American Hero Gone Wrong’, ‘The Flawed Hero’, perhaps ‘Carrying Patriotism Too Far’.
Irving Lazar, a literary agent, also made North an offer before the year was out, estimating he could sell his story for $5m.
‘North is right out of John le Carré’, he said; ‘one of those fascinating mystery people you don't meet in life or in government.’
Not often, anyway.
North's screen persona, which appeared suddenly to seize the country by the throat when he testified on television in July 1987, had therefore been set at least seven months before.
When he testified, he had already been characterized as Batman, and Superman and, most frequently, Rambo (but ‘a Rambo with all his clothes on’, as The Spectator put it); he had been a composite Clint Eastwood type, part-lonesome cowboy, part Dirty Harry; he had  been James Bond and James Dean, ‘the rebel with a cause’.
This was, in all probability, the first scandal to be shaped to such a degree by references learned from the screen.
The effect was to make Iran-contra only half serious, and only half real.
The public hearings in the spring and summer of 1987 were, of course, stern stuff: the required full-scale inquisition and explanation.
But they were also billed, in America, as ‘Ollie's Follies’, in Europe as ‘the latest American soap opera’.
One particular missing element had been provided in March with the emergence of North's secretary, Fawn Hall.
Fawn was an unlikely combination of the femme fatale and the dutiful organizer, a well-brought-up girl from the Virginia suburbs who was also a part-time model.
She had long legs and a mane of blonde hair; as she laboured at her typewriter on classified memoranda she drew into North's office a little stream of besotted admirers, and she was to be spotted after the scandal broke driving round Washington in her red sports car (FAWN 1), blowing smoke out of the windows.
The discovery of Fawn turned the story from an impenetrable imbroglio into a juicy tale, and set the appetite for whatever show, or film, could be made of it.
‘Almost all of human drama is there’, cried the London Daily Express ,
except for one thing.
SEX.
Enter, stage right, the beautiful Fawn…
Now for the book, the film, the mini-series, Irangate II, Irangate on Ice and so on and so forth!
Who better to play Colonel North than North himself?
And who better to play Ronald Reagan than that old B-movie actor, the president?
They could always write his lines on his shirt-cuff.
An absurdly large raft of congressmen and senators was set to question the witnesses, sitting on a specially constructed double dais draped with burgundy cloth; none wished to drop out of the committees and forfeit a screen appearance.
Witnesses beneath the principals were picked for their ability to present a simple, and therefore televisually satisfying, picture of the case.
In Time magazine on the eve of the hearings Walter Shapiro offered advice for congressmen wishing to become stars, as Sam Ervin had at the Watergate hearings: they should play to the cameras, should not be afraid to wear their hearts on their sleeves, and should never make the mistake of reading their questions.
This advice was taken most seriously.
On the day itself, Norman Mailer, then a juror at the Cannes film festival, was asked what he thought of the movies on  offer.
‘Movies?’ he replied, ‘What movies?
I've been watching General Secord on CNN in my hotel room.
It's as addictive as cartoons.
I may never see another movie for the duration.’
Secord, indeed, opened boldly.
So too did John Nields and Arthur Liman, the two star congressional lawyers.
The Guardian reporter praised their ‘soft man/hard man routine: Nields offers the witness a comfortable chair and a cigarette, Liman slaps him round the face and kicks the chair out from underneath him.’
The show, however, went up and down.
It was often tedious; and for every senator disposed to find it fun, there was another whose face would be set in grim outrage.
Several were undecided.
Near the end of Hakim's disturbing testimony — bakhshish, back-scratching, dedicated bank accounts — Senator Trible of Virginia said he found it ‘part James Bond and part Jimmy Durante, and it would be very laughable, but for the consequences for people and policy.’
Senator Inouye was sterner: he realized that ordinary citizens thought Hakim's testimony ‘fascinating and exotic’, and chuckled at it, but he himself found it ‘rather sad…to say it is stranger than fiction is an understatement.’
It was only when Fawn Hall testified, flicking back her hair in a fetching manner, that Inouye joined in the spirit of the proceedings, holding a piece of paper over his eyes to see her better in the glare of the television lights.
By then, the cinematic apogee of the hearings was near.
It was midsummer, and hot.
After Fawn Hall, a break was arranged before the second act in which, after excursions by a few minor players, North was to appear.
The witnesses immediately before him painted a picture of an elaborate liar, one whose testimony could probably not be trusted under oath, and of a petty thief who bought lingerie, so it appeared, with money meant for the contras; some committee members considered him such a ‘wacko’, in the patois, that his testimony would be next to useless.
The word favoured by headline-writers was ‘tarnished’, although any lustre North had had in the media was not much more than the borrowed glow of stars whom he superficially resembled.
Moreover the Washington Post , having taken the lustre away, was plainly only waiting to give it back again.
‘Comes now the star performance’, began the lead editorial on July 7th, the day North began to testify, before a word was spoken.
And it was right.
For six days North passionately defended everything he had done, right and wrong alike.
Everywhere, his testimony was a ‘show’: one that played in dentists' surgeries to relieve the pain of extraction, in bars to give a purpose to drinking, in aeroplanes criss-crossing the country, and in television stores to crowds of people pressing against the windows.
A salesman at the Crazy Eddie appliance store on 
West 45th Street, in Manhattan, said he had not seen so many people intent on a show since the Mets had played the Houston Astros in the sixth game of the playoff for the National League pennant, and even then they had not stood so close up to the screen.
By chance, North's testimony coincided with the Oscar nominations; he was popularly nominated, and pranksters turned Hollywood's hillside sign into ‘Ollywood’ in the second week of the hearings.
The testimony also coincided with the British release of Commander Bond's latest venture,The Living Daylights ; in one of the nicest reversals of reality, some reviewers compared Bond to North, rather than vice-versa.
North himself was compared to Burt Lancaster, Jimmy Stewart, Charlton Heston, John Wayne, Lilian Gish, Groucho Marx, Steve Martin and ‘all the Barrymores put together’; his performance was the most stirring and patriotic display Congressman Hyde had seen ‘since the first time I saw Jimmy Cagney singing ‘Yankee Doodle Dandy’’.
By the second day, more viewers were watching North than were watching the daytime soap operas,As the World Turns and General Hospital .
On the third day, the three networks abandoned the soap operas altogether.
By the end of his testimony, North had become a haircut, a logo for T-shirts, a doll, a cocktail, a hero sandwich (’ red-blooded American beef, a little bologna, shredded lettuce, Swiss cheese’), a hamburger (’secret sauce from an old Iranian recipe’) and a design for boxer shorts; vigils were held for him, and the hamlet of Ollie, Iowa (population 230) was besieged with fascinated enquiries.
North-for-President T-shirts were presented by members of the congressional panels to each other, and everyone laughed sportingly.
Quite why ‘Olliemania’ happened as it did, and with such intensity, confounded almost everyone.
Part of it was simple force of personality, buttressed by a Marine uniform; part of it was expectation, a slow series of teasing appearances and an avalanche of peculiar facts, built up over many months.
Part of it, some writers supposed, was a longing for heroes in an age without them, for cleavers of Gordian knots (as the Wall Street Journal called North) possessed of simple and shining certitudes; at the end of North's testimony even Inouye concluded that he had become another man destined for some piece of important marble in Washington, alongside Lincoln.
On the other hand, the ‘hero’ label seemed a red herring, something the media themselves had dreamed up.
An ABC poll of July 12th asked whether North was ‘hero, villain or victim’, as though those three possibilities encompassed all he was; or as though, indeed, they were mutually exclusive.
Caught up in the performance, few people seemed to wonder  whether what they were hearing was an accurate account of the affair.
Few, indeed, seemed to be listening for sense at all.
Having waited so long to hear from the ‘one man’ who knew what had happened, when he appeared they could do nothing but gaze on him; having made him into a celluloid star, there was no reason at this point to spoil it, and make him real.
For its issue of August 3rd The New Republic hired David Denby, the film critic of New York magazine, to look at the cinematic qualities of North's face.
After wandering over the ‘handsome’ mouth and the ‘bad-boy's’ears and the hair (’a masterpiece’), Danby concluded that North was a type of composite mythological figure, ready to step into a set constructed from ‘200 years of American archetypes and 50 years of the cinema’.
Small wonder that people were star-struck by this ‘deeply anti-democratic mind’; or that even the most serious commentators, like William Safire, could not resist having cracks at the screenplay
The nickname ‘Ollie’, in itself, had much to do with the way the scandal was treated.
Could anything be serious that had at its centre this lovable, rogueish , bumbling figure (’ That's another fine mess you've got us into, Ollie’)?
As Gore Vidal pointed out in Newsweek , ‘Like Tom (Sawyer), Ollie is essentially fictional.’
Even after North's sentencing, the blundering charmer now a felon, both Time and Newsweek called him ‘Ollie’ on their covers.
To ask ‘Should Ollie go to Jail?’ seemed automatically to suggest the answer no: soap-opera heroes, diminutives, household names could no more be put behind bars than Ronnie could.
North himself seemed to know how he might go over, if not precisely the scale of it.
Asked by Congressman Jenkins whether he could persuade his superiors, simply because of his eloquence, to run against the wishes of the Cabinet, North replied ‘I have no doubt about that.’
Within a minute or so he modified his cocksureness ——‘The good Lord gives us all certain gifts’— but not much.
This was not, after all, a secret agent blinking as he was flushed into the light, as the New Yorker said it had supposed.
This was a man who understood the uses of spotlights.
Carl Channell could never forget the first North briefing he saw, one of his contra slide shows in the White House.
He was not mad about slide shows himself, it was a wet day, the rich contributors had to be helped in with their umbrellas; he was sceptical that North could do anything arresting.
But ‘the room was very dark and Colonel North was sort of spotlighted because he was very close to the slides.’
And at the end, when they flipped on the lights, ‘everyone was just riveted to him.
And I decided it was a successful briefing, you know.
I mean, this had really worked.’
To those who actually sat in the hearing room, it was difficult to grasp the degree to which cinema had taken over.
Before the double dais sat a small, slight, unimpressive man who frequently could not recall, sometimes could not hear and peered at the briefing books through wire-rimmed glasses.
The screen, however, romanced him, and the screen ruled.
Photographers even took pictures of banks of screens, each flickering with North's identical face.
These had a being and authority of their own, like the sets seen by the French philosopher Jean Baudrillard left playing in deserted motels off highways in the west.
You would no more turn them off than you would extinguish life.
This was the sign, the image, the real thing.
Yet when, after Poindexter's first day of testimony, the story-line reached its conclusion — no, the president had not been told of the diversion of funds to the contras — viewers fell away.
As cartoonists had predicted, there was no ‘Poiniemania’: no vogue for the admiral's sempiternal pipes or balding head, but a sobering up, like a sluice with cold water.
Poindexter's expression all through his testimony was one of mystification, shrouded in patient smoke, as if he really could not think why all these people wanted to ply him with questions.
When he had finished the hearings quickly wound up with no incisive questioning of the last three witnesses, Shultz, Weinberger and Meese, although their tales would have been worth hearing; the committees, after all, had contracted to finish by early August, whether or not the full story had been told.
By then, Iran-contra was no longer a good movie, even if the livelier parts had been preserved on the videotapes that were hastily rushed out.
It had become an older, slower, more exacting entertainment, if indeed it was still entertainment of any sort: no longer Mission Impossible but, as Senator Warren Rudman put it, ‘like sitting on a winter night in New Hampshire with a blizzard raging outside and reading a Robert Ludlum novel’.
If Iran-contra had lodged in the nation's mind at all, it was in terms of North and his testimony: that piece of film everyone had seen and talked about, like the shooting of JR in Dallas or the opening on Geraldo of Al Capone's secret vault.
As the search began in January 1989 for 12 people who had never watched his testimony to sit as a jury at North's trial, one cartoonist imagined it would have to be composed of mujahedin from Afghanistan; a satirist announced that the first two jurors selected were Hsing-Hsing and Ling-Ling, the pandas from Washington Zoo.
The 12 jurors who eventually emerged, acquitting themselves both responsibly and wisely, were mocked all through the trial for their necessary ignorance.
When the hearings came on, they explained, they would run upstairs and lock the door, or try to switch channels, or read the  comics, or tidy the house.
One elderly juror, whose house had burned down eight months before North appeared, said she tuned in a little to the hearings as she tried to sort everything out, but ‘it was just like I was focussing on ‘The Three Stooges’ or something.’
And there was perhaps not so much to laugh at in that; for by North's trial, two and a half years after the breaking of the scandal, the overwhelming majority of Americans had come to feel much the same way.
The trial had been supposed to provide a dramatic climax of sorts.
At least it was in a courtroom, where in Perry Mason or LA Law the witnesses cracked and the truth came out; at least it might sort out whether the central figure was hero or villain, and point to how far up the culpability went.
Yet, perhaps because it was not televised, it produced mighty little stir.
On the first day of jury selection, the Washington Post's man was disappointed.
Despite the ‘fine cast of characters…assembled for a morality play, even a tragedy, that once promised to rival the Watergate scandal’, only twelve people sat in the public seats.
The star, too, appeared to have gone.
North had now retired from the Marines and, in his blue suit and ‘rather bright’ red tie, he seemed to have shrunk, becoming ‘forlorn’and ‘pathetic’.
The great storm of Irangate, as Le Monde lamented, had blown itself out; there remained nothing but ‘a draught or two, like memories, blowing from time to time across the praetorium.’
The jury deliberations in April coincided with the showing of a real CBS television drama —Guts and Glory: The Rise and Fall of Oliver North.
Sequestered that weekend in sealed hotel rooms, without television, the jurors themselves could not enjoy it; but the trial judge comforted the prosecutor, who was growing anxious about the delay, with the thought that he could watch it if he wanted, to pass the time.
The film's director and producer promoted it as a serious and responsible piece of work.
He had even provided, as an antagonist to North, a fictional member of the NSC, ‘Aaron Sykes’, whose job it was to give flesh and voice to those invisible and voiceless colleagues who had presumably tried to dissuade North from what he was doing: to appear, as the Laws appeared to Socrates, ‘humming in his ears’, about the offence he would cause to country, friends and laws if he did what seemed to him the right thing.
Sykes was, the director confessed, a dramatic device, but the story could not be properly told without one.
It was crucial to the development of the plot to have a character — in this case balding, in a mackintosh — who would defend the prerogatives of Congress, rehearse the finer points of democracy and say, in answer to North's ringing endorsement of the theory that the end  justified the means, ‘But that's not what America is all about, Colonel.’
In this case, as in others, television docudrama set itself up as the tidier and balancer of history.
No story without Sykes; but with Sykes, in real life, probably no story.
And whichever way it went, in any event, the public did not greatly want to know.
On the first night, most of them were watching Bionic Showdown: The Bionic Woman Meets the Six-Million Dollar Man on a rival channel.
They were content to leave North, for good or bad, as they already knew him.
They were also content to leave the whole affair as far as they knew it, understood it or had allocated the blame for it.
Had they not, after all, watched the movie already?
Iran-contra, however, had always had another star, a more retiring one; and he had not given anything like a full performance yet.
An appearance by Reagan,Le Monde suggested, might still save the show, even two and a half years after it had started.
But Reagan did not appear at North's trial, much as North and his lawyers tried; he did not appear until Poindexter's, in the spring of 1990.
As he gave his evidence for videotape, ‘genial and twinkly, relaxed in the red eye of the TV camera’, as Newsweek described him, reporters noted that in an adjacent courtroom Stevie Wonder was appearing in a case about the authorship of a song, and that across the street another crew was filming an episode of Thirty Something .
It was back to show business, as if the scandal had ever really left it.
Reagan's testimony was indeed a dramatic summation of sorts, and the most bizarre of all.
Here was the scandal seen through the eyes of an old man, its central figure, but now powerless, toothless and thoughtless; easily tired, and probably over-cautioned on the dangers of speaking in courtrooms.
The videotape was appropriately blurry, like the man; the stuffing had gone out of him.
And really, he said, the Iran and contra operations had not been central to his life.
There had been so many meetings; 80 a day, someone had told him.
There had been so many pieces of paper; 50 million at least, someone else had told him, generated during his eight years as President.
When he talked of the hostages or the contras something of the old fire returned, together with the old emotional lines from cabinet meetings and television speeches.
But of the policies themselves — in other words, of the ‘affairs’— he remembered almost nothing.
Gamely, his questioners tried to encourage him.
Perhaps he remembered the meeting about Iran in August 1985 when he was in the hospital, or the decision to assist the shipment in November, taken ‘in the bedroom of the little guest house’ in Geneva?
No, nothing; or else the memory of a meeting, ‘but I can't recall what the outcome was or what we were discussing.’
All he  could remember was that TOWs were shipped at some point; that ‘the price asked for the military was twelve million two’; that the aircraft could turn round and abort the delivery if the hostages were not released, which he thought was ‘a most unusual thing’; and that it was definitely not ‘the Khomeini’ with whom he had been doing business.
He added, alarmingly, of the November shipment: ‘I know that that is in my memory that I had heard of France being connected with such a thing.’
With contra policy, matters became vaguer still.
Reagan was shown a picture of Calero meeting him in the Oval Office; he did not know who he was.
Bursting to help the freedom fighters, he was reduced, he said, to lecturing his staff on staying inside the law.
As for the matter of the diversion of funds, he still believed that there had never been such a thing.
He had appointed the Tower Commission, he said, specifically to find out whether money had been generated from the arms sales beyond the ‘twelve million two’, and, if so, who had done it; but no one had come back with an answer.
He was still waiting.
Refusing to credit that story, he was obviously not much moved by the excitements that flowed from it.
He had not read the Tower Commission's report, evidently; did not know that McFarlane had pleaded guilty to misdemeanours; did not know the substance of the charges against Poindexter; had not altered in any particular the mythology created when the edifice had first crashed down, in November 1986.
Wrapped up in his agreeably muddled versions of events, he might have been speaking from Mars: and with this last screen show, this cinematic oddity, the scandal sank away.
PART II
JUST CAUSE AND HOLY WAR
David said to his brothers when they challenged his right and ability to fight Goliath: ‘Is there not a just cause?’
I will ask all of you, is there not a just cause?
Robert Owen, Hearings, 19.5.87
Extraordinary as the two operations were, they were propelled along by the belief of many players — both principals and walkers-on —— that the ends were just.
However dark the operations seemed, or however wrong they went, they could be proclaimed as something good; even, at times, as something holy.
The unabashed commercial instincts of several of the players were mitigated, as they believed, by the noble purposes that went along with them.
Conversely, there was not much high-mindedness that went unmixed with greed.
This chapter examines those purposes, both high and low.
OUT OF THE WAY, YOU SWINE…
PATRIOTS ARE COMING!!
Constitution's Checks and Balances
Mascot
FLAG, COUNTRY, CAUSE
MORE than any other scandal in recent years, Iran-contra was posited on patriotism.
Secord was a patriot, North reassured Owen when Owen began to have his doubts.
Hakim was a patriot.
Aid for the Southern Front was coming from ‘private patriotic Americans’, or ‘the good Americans’, some of whom, on giving more than $100,000, received a mahogany box with the Stars and Stripes folded inside it.
The whole contra operation was ‘for God and Country,’, Owen said North told him in the beginning; at its end, it had all still been done ‘in the best interests of the United States of America’.
Herblock, the Washington Post's cartoonist, took to drawing the principals wrapped entirely in the flag, only their boots showing.
Even after his indictment — perhaps particularly after it — North held his press conferences beside the flag, gave his lectures (on God and country) against flags 900 feet square, and was photographed for Life magazine guarding the flag, gazing heavenwards, under a sky ferocious with lightning and clouds.
Nor was this simply patriotism Post hoc .
Ghorbanifar remembered how sometimes, driving with him in Europe, North would catch sight of Old Glory: ‘and when he sees the American flag you can see the change in his eyes.
It is a mystical experience for him.
He becomes like a tiger, his eyes glistening.’
Emerson noticed this propensity of flags to make ordinary people ‘poets and mystics’, to set off a tingle in the blood; and flags were festooned round Iran-contra like bunting, exceedingly hard Brought to trial, the players could not believe that their love for their country had caused them to commit crimes; and the light penalties handed down to all these men, with only Poindexter receiving a jail sentence, suggested that the judges, to some degree, accepted patriotism in mitigation.
Perhaps these really were ‘men who had high purposes’, as North described McFarlane and Poindexter, men who ‘were trying their level best to make this world a better place.’
Remarkably, the first sighting of Dr Johnson's ‘Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel’ was in The New Republic in March 1989; by which time such a bedrock of well-meaning patriotism had been wedged under the case that it proved difficult, if not impossible, to shift.
‘Operations in the national interest’ was a favourite phrase; good and sharp, and carrying the implication that if you needed to know what the national interest was, you did not deserve to be told.
‘The national interest’ was also a rebuff to congressmen, who could not afford to be critical of it, even when they already knew it as grounds to keep them in the dark.
Few ever defined this amorphous thing, or scrutinized it.
Although all kinds of questions were asked about the means of these operations, the ends were usually accepted as ‘worthy’.
During the hearings political protests, as such, were most gentle: one patriot inquiring after the patriotism of another.
At the end of Owen's testimony, Senator Inouye said he had received the impression that to be against the President's policy in Central America was to be ‘less than patriotic’.
No sir, said Owen.
It is my belief that the people who are willing to put their lives on the line, we, are patriotic.
That does not mean to say those who are against the President's policy are any less patriotic…
Sir, you are a great American.
And I fully believe that.
Inouye : I just wanted the record to be clear, because somehow I felt like something less than a patriot all day long.
At best, it could be agreed that some people defined the national interest one way and some defined it another way, and each side was equally well-meaning; only some had pushed their patriotism beyond the law, so keen were they, while others had stopped and thought.
Just as few tried to grapple with ‘the national interest’, so nobody defined — let alone sought to question —‘high purposes’.
High  purpose was something that could be recognized in someone, like a gleam in the eye or a tone of voice; it meant that even when that person dabbled in something doubtful, they undoubtedly had good reason for doing so.
Since McFarlane was an honourable man, North was not unduly worried when he asked him to alter official documents; and when McFarlane sat down at North's computer on November 18th to type in ‘additional input that was radically different from the truth’, North still considered he must have had ‘a darn good reason for not putting the straight story out’.
Similarly Fawn Hall, asked by North to alter memoranda to conceal his work for the contras, remembered feeling uneasy: ‘but I believe in Colonel North, and I know that there must have been a good reason why he was asking me to do this, and I — I did as I was told.’
Considering his love for the country, her queasiness had to be ignored.
The key word was ‘belief’.
Belief in each other, however little was really known about that other, and belief in the cause, however nebulously described.
One visit to North's office, and the man from the Drug Enforcement Administration — no soft touch — was convinced that the wild plan to ransom the hostages was a moral imperative.
‘I believed in what I was doing,’ he told the lawyers, smarting at the implication that maybe he didn't; ‘Once I talked to Ollie the first or second time, man I believed.’
Secord and Hakim told Secord's lawyer that they thought they were doing ‘the Lord's work’.
Even Casey, according to Bob Woodward's highly contentious description of his last days, answered Woodward's query about the propriety of the diversion to the contras with the remark —— uttered not once, but twice —‘I believed.’
‘This is also a story of courage and compassion’ said Owen, objecting to the fact that Inouye had called it ‘sad and sordid’: ‘caring and sharing’—‘of doing what is right, and dying for a cause’.
The wonder of this, the danger and seduction of it, were well caught by William Safire in a piece in the New York Times , written while Fawn Hall was testifying.
Safire too had worked in the OEOB for a while, as a speechwriter.
‘Speechwriters never make it to secret agent,’ he observed, perhaps wistfully,
but I know the feeling of being a member of a brave band of right-minded guys and gals, charged with responsibility no outsider can imagine, working all hours, with bright minds often in good-looking heads, growing ever more contemptuous of the villainous  obstructers out there with little faith, less vision and a paucity of patriotism.
It stirs the youthful soul and warps the impressionable mind.
What begins in justifiable enthusiasm for a good end (stopping Communist penetration of this hemisphere is a good end) can easily overlook the need to proceed by ponderously lawful means.
At this point, the tight little band — loving the cause, loving this country, loving each other, loving every exhausting, exhilarating moment — is in desperate need of a boss with a large wet blanket.
But there was no large wet blanket to be had.
McFarlane, former boss, eagerly kept contact with the cause on his home computer, aching to be part of it again: North, in reply, urged him to ‘keep the faith’.
Both Ghorbanifar and Hakim, expecting to find in North the usual grey apparatchik, were amazed at the world of fervour in which they found themselves.
‘I saw a man dissipating so much affection for his country and his associates’, said Hakim, struggling to explain to a New York lawyer his bad case of ‘love at first sight’, ‘that the radiation of that love — it really immediately penetrated through my system.’
Far from wet blankets, even the most shrewdly commercial member of the Enterprise was touched, at least for a time, by unworldly enthusiasms.
Like all fighters in tight little bands, the players in Iran-contra often felt that they were not understood:nos contra mundum .
‘My part in this was easy compared to his’, North tapped out one night to McFarlane, talking about Poindexter's handling of the pre-Tehran manoeuvrings; ‘I only had to deal with our enemies.
He had to deal with the cabinet.’
The enemy in the contra case was supposed to be the Sandinistas; but North's enemies were evidently domestic, political and unarmed, except with bothersome statutes.
In the eyes of the principals, Congress and the prying media had already lost Vietnam; now, with their spineless voting first for and then against aid to the contras, they were in the process of losing Nicaragua, too.
Men fighting in the field depended on the votes of men splitting straws in Washington.
In public, McFarlane and North often gave the impression of patient negotiation with politicians who did not take their view on the contras.
There was a certain amount of talking, since congressional votes on the contras were so finely balanced; but in private this was war.
The more North built up the contras in secret, the more he fretted that liberal Democrats in Congress (’ Kerry, Barnes, Harkin et al .’)
would become too inquisitive.
McFarlane once discovered a good way to kill curiosity, like the cat.
When Michael Barnes of Maryland, in the summer and autumn of 1985, made a series of discursive investigations into whatever North might  be doing, McFarlane gathered in a large stack of papers, many of them germane, and invited Barnes into his office.
Would he care to look at them? he asked.
Barnes, who had no staff with him and not enough time, demurred.
He never got the chance again.
Owen came up with an interesting interpretation.
The resupply effort was probably kept secret from Congress and the public precisely because it was just; the general run of men could not be trusted with fine things.
Equally, the Iranian operation could not be explained because, in its respectable long-term aims, it was complicated; and most people would doubtless insist, as they did, that it was just a piece of barter.
Among those who could not be trusted were colleagues even closer to home, right inside the NSC, who believed in presenting the President with ‘ranges of options’ for his policies in Iran or Central America.
The President might not want them, but sense, and democracy, required it; so while part of the NSC was on fire with the President's wishes, another part was turning out position papers of a hopeless and reasonable kind.
Constantine Menges, who shared the Central American account, constantly elbowing and shoving, with North, remembered unsettling conversations with him.
He himself, by his own self justifying account, was giving the President the facts and pointing out the alternatives; North, speaking the language of military tactics, was for ‘boxing him in so there's only one way he can go — the right way.’
Right against wrong.
The bureaucracy was wise to balk, if only to protect itself; the NSC, after all, was not meant to be caught up actively with either hostages or contras, and it was difficult to keep crusades covert.
Poindexter tried, more than once, to take North off the contra account, but North fought back with all the tactics — bureaucratic manoeuvres, leaks to the press, heartbreaking petitions — of which he was capable.
In one long PROF note, written in response to goodness-knows-what upbraiding from Poindexter, he offered to move on, since Poindexter evidently thought him ‘too emotionally involved…to be objective.’
North knew ‘in my heart’, that this was not so, but the note from start to finish was an admission of total emotional entanglement in a cause.
It ended: ‘Nonetheless, I consider myself to have been blessed to have had the chance to so serve for as long as I did.’
Poindexter (one can almost imagine the slow shaking of the head, the sigh through the pipe stem) wrote back: ‘Now you are getting emotional again.’
And kept him on.
The emotion was predicated on one particular hope: that one day the high purposes would be recognized, and the actors justified.
Indeed, they might be honoured.
Reagan thought that if the hostages came out, the cabinet in toto would be heroes (adding, with  prescience, ‘If we don't, we will have a significant problem.’)
North thought Reagan might qualify, like Teddy Roosevelt, for the Nobel Peace Prize for ending the Iran-Iraq War, and that Secord was directly in line to get the Medal of Freedom.
When the Iran operation was blown, North was struck by Secord suddenly remarking, in his terse way, ‘I don't know why this is the problem that it is.
Somebody ought to stand up and acknowledge what we have done because we are on the side of the angels.’
North wrote it in his notebook, by that time wearily misspelling it: ‘Ultimately on the side of the angles’.
Bob Dutton, the aviation boss of the resupply, would never get a medal, North candidly told him; but one day the President would shake his hand and thank him.
As for North, ‘he would either go to jail or be decorated’, Secord used to say to Hakim; and McFarlane told him — as he sat jet-lagged and exhausted in his office the night after a gruelling Iranian session in Frankfurt — that ‘if the world only knew how many times you have kept a semblance of integrity and gumption to US policy, they would make you Secretary of State.’
The world could not know, of course.
But North had at least a half-promise of another honour: Adolfo Calero revealed that the contras had plans to put up a statue of him in Managua, just as soon as they had won it back from the Sandinistas.
Talk of this sort was mostly to raise morale, as McFarlane was at pains to say when his ‘Secretary of State’ remark was thrown back at him at the hearings.
Yet it also hid a serious point.
Whatever their basis in nefarious dealings, misunderstood intelligence, or dreams, noble things were being attempted, and if they came off the world would have cause to be grateful.
If the Iranian operation worked, the hostages would be freed, terrorism would cease, Iran and Iraq would make peace (the grand climaxes were often not connected, but somehow self-generating out of the golden atmosphere), and Iran would be secured in the American, rather than the Soviet, camp.
If the contra operation worked, Central America would be saved for democracy and Communism stopped at the doorstep of the United States.
As North pointed out, these objectives were almost universally wished for.
It was simply that most people, while wanting the ends, preferred to walk away from the means: especially when they were distasteful, and most especially when they failed.
The golden objectives were, in fact, unlimited.
The Enterprise, that shadowy sump of money, weapons and operatives that lay behind both policies, was intended to operate in other places too, in fact to be ‘pulled off the shelf, as North said Casey said, any time it was needed, with Congress kept well in the dark.
Hakim said he never knew what it was going to be used for next; on an organisation  chart he left a column for Africa, since North had hinted that he might one day do something there too.
‘The Enterprise’ was a fine label for the monster as far as Hakim was concerned, because it was a business generating a particularly arcane and subtle set of accounts; but for North this was ‘Project Democracy’, available anywhere and at any time for freedom-fighters of any description.
He so detested the word ‘Enterprise’, with its ring of commerce, that at Poindexter's trial he scolded the prosecutor every time he used it.
He was scornful, too, of the humanitarian-aid programme run for the contras by the State Department through the NHAO, which Owen familiarly called the ‘no-way, no-how’ and the ‘no-hope programme’; the State Department itself turned up on local code-sheets as ‘wimps’, the CIA as ‘assholes’, the portly Shultz as ‘Nancy’.
No way, no how, no hope had to be countered by a passionate belief in justified struggle.
The contra war struck a particular patriotic chord.
It reminded its supporters of America's own struggle in the War of Independence, and this sentimental analogy was drawn again and again.
On one side were the Marxist  commandantes , puppets of a giant colonizing power, in their camouflage fatigues and their designer sunglasses, carrying foreign ideology like a loathsome bacillus; on the other the indigenous peasants, barefoot, in straw hats, driven to the point of taking up arms.
Once more, it was David against Goliath: on the one hand, as Reaganite statistics liked it, 65,000 well-drilled troops, the largest army ever amassed on the soil of Central America; on the other (subtracting the stragglers, the wives, aunts, babies, cousins) about 12,000 simple folk, determined to stop Communism as it seeped outwards towards Honduras, El Salvador and Costa Rica.
Calero gave their motto at the hearings, quoting Benjamin Franklin:
‘Hostility to tyrants is obedience to God.’
Franklin's name did not appear in isolation.
Reagan called the contras ‘the moral equivalent of our Founding Fathers’, a notable effort to cloak with democratic virtue a body of guerrillas neither democratic nor virtuous.
It caught on.
Calero mentioned that the American revolutionaries too had front companies like those set up under the Enterprise, established in Europe to take in money from France and Spain.
Both he and Owen seized the chance to quote at congressmen the words of Thomas Jefferson: ‘I have sworn upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man.’
Calero had ‘made his Jeffersonian Oath’ after studying at Notre Dame, when he became ‘a knight in democratic armour, imbued…in the ideals of representative government and free enterprise.’
Owen made his on a December day in Washington at the Jefferson Memorial, a grim day, when he had discovered that  his father was dying: ‘And I don't know whether many of you know, but around the ceiling, engraved in the marble, is a statement that was made once…and I guess I took that to heart.’
McFarlane took it to heart also, but only up to a point.
To support people wanting pluralism and democracy, he explained at the hearings, was ‘in keeping with our own history, the roots of our own revolutionary experience’.
He then drifted gloomily away, noting that this could not be ‘an open-ended matter that you do in an idealistic whim’.
You had to be ‘circumspect in identifying where such people that are aspiring to democracy…are…important to us.’
Possibly the contras were in that category, but possibly not.
By May 1987 McFarlane was describing them to the Baltimore Sun as ‘incompetent Coca-Cola bottlers and clerks’.
They were patriotic, certainly, and ‘terribly well-meaning’.
But they needed to be ‘popular, truly popular, not some CIA-sponsored rag-tag bunch of ne'er-do-wells’, he said, getting surprisingly near the bone; they needed to be ‘vital’ and ‘competent’.
He had felt misgivings for a while.
Why, then, had he not shared them?
Because the cause could not be doubted.
To cast aspersions on the new revolutionaries was to put his own patriotism in question: ‘if I'd done that, Bill Casey, Jean Kirkpatrick (the Ambassador to the United Nations) and Cap Weinberger would have said I was some kind of a commie.’
So too would North and Owen, to whom the revolutionary parallel opened up all kinds of opportunities.
When North tried to set up a tax-exempt corporation to take in contributions to the contras, he thought it should acquire ‘a Post Office Box 1776 in Gettysburg, Philadelphia or Yorktown’.
Owen wondered whether the contras should change their name to the Revolutionary Contras or the New Revolutionaries; perhaps they could change the name of the cause, too, to ‘Revolutionary Counter-Communism’, and the leaders of it (same old leaders) could give a press conference in Philadelphia, in front of the Liberty Bell.
They could have a country-and-western song, something like The Ballad of the Green Berets (’ Hokey, but it could sell,’said Owen modestly); and a symbol too, perhaps a torch raised high by a shackled hand, ‘like the Statue of Liberty's’.
North had already thrashed out a democratic manifesto for a unified opposition in Nicaragua, the leaders and himself scribbling it out in a cramped hotel room in Miami; at the hearings, he proudly compared it to the sweaty wranglings in Philadelphia over the Constitution.
The manifesto was something he had been ‘blessed’ to work on, ‘honoured’to have been asked to help with.
It was not mere public relations, but a paper with near-mystical historical antecedents.
The grandest idea of all, however, was never attempted, even though, according to North, Reagan had thought it ‘great’.
In 1985 a smooth man’, a ‘sophisticated hustler’ appeared in Washington and approached North, saying he wanted to do something for the contras.
He turned out to be a Hollywood producer.
His plan was for the contra leaders to set sail with their manifesto, or a version of it, to Philadelphia from Nicaragua.
North would charter a Caribbean cruise ship, the Sea Goddess , for half a million dollars; the contra leaders would come on board, declare their independence from the regime in Managua, adopt a constitution and seek recognition from Washington; the ship would then sail up the east coast, turn up the Delaware river and dock in Philadelphia, and cameras would record it all.
There was a snag.
The contras, of course, had no constitution.
They had their manifesto — 20 pages of it, what Beatrix Potter might have called ‘appropriate moral sentiments wrapped up in paper’.
But Calero, for all his ‘democratic armour’, wished more to fight wars than to play at politics; the fragile political coalition of leaders did not survive, and there was no constitutional cruise.
The contra cause was fired by reverence, both among the rebel leaders and their American sponsors, for democracy in its raw form, not far from anarchy: for freedom of action and impulse, for the right to take up arms and set up companies, but not for the constraints of legislatures or even, much, for the damp blanket of different opinions.
Cloaked with the panoply of democracy, hung about with the flag, the only result was to make the cause look grubbier and smaller.
JUSTIFYING NICARAGUA
PERHAPS the contra war could not be decked persuasively in red, white and blue; but its sponsors were obliged to justify it somehow.
Nicaragua was an American obsession and a dream, a proving-ground for ideology, and had been so for more than a century.
There was no need to understand it.
Neither Owen nor Dewey Clarridge, the chief CIA man assigned to the contras, spoke Spanish; North knew a bit from school.
Nicaragua was one of those places where freedom was ‘at risk’, together with Afghanistan and Angola and even Poland, and these places made one disparate crusading territory.
As one pro-contra advertisement put it, appealing for 53 cents a day to support a mercenary called ‘Charley’ and his machine-gun, ‘There is no ‘country’called Nicaragua, only a nation of people living under a totalitarian regime.’
The scandal's single and notorious poem, read out by Owen as his last word at the hearings, was supposed to be about Nicaragua, but again this was no real country.
It was all cause, all justification.
Today on the fertile plains of Central America cattle graze peacefully.
On the wooded hills and green valleys, monkeys play, parrots fly by, and songbirds send forth their music that echoes over a troubled land.
In this far corner of the Third World, we have known  darkness and despair that at times seems almost too much to bear…
We have held the hands of our gallant fighters and prayed with them and for them as their life's blood seeped slowly into the dark damp earth of the jungle.
And so on.
The author was John Hull, a secret sustainer of contras and allegedly a facilitator of drug runs; he kept a ranch on the Costa Rican-Nicaraguan border, where his favourite sport was to shoot alligators from his veranda.
No doubt his poem, which congressmen listened to with deepest embarrassment, sounded better late at night, after a beer or two.
It was a common enough way to talk about Nicaragua.
Ernesto Cardenal, the Nicaraguan minister of culture, also made political use of birdsong and jungle in his poems; it brought out the symbiosis between the land and the cause.
There was nothing, even Nature, that did not take a side.
‘ Armadilloes are very happy with this government,’ he wrote, ‘Not only humans longed for liberation.
/All ecology groaned.
The revolution/ is also for animals, rivers, lakes and trees.’
In the Nicaraguan setting all motivations became elemental, and their very primitiveness — together with their drama — perhaps commended them to dramatic and imperfectly democratic Americans.
But Hull's stumbling poetry suggested that the contra war could also be made transcendent: an ideological and moral imperative, part of the ‘manifest destiny’ of America to civilize the hemisphere, as earlier adventurers had phrased it, under the eye of God.
It had to be made a crusade, and so it was.
‘You will win’, Reagan told Calero at a White House reception in March 1986, ‘because God is with you.’
Calero passed the message on confidently to a rich supporter in the suburbs of New Haven, Connecticut: ‘God wants freedom in Nicaragua.’
This, then, was a holy war, with the Antichrist firmly in sight.
Owen, feeling at last that he ought to retire from contra matters —— but remembering what he had sworn ‘on the altar of God’— hoped that he might still be of use to North ‘against another group of Godless communists.’
Barbara Studeley, a beauty queen and Miami talk-show hostess, began to broker weapons for the contras after receiving ‘a commission from God’; the initials of her company, GeoMiliTech, also stood for ‘God's Mighty Team’.
General Robert Schweitzer, who told this story to the congressional lawyers, was a trifle envious that after 58 years of daily Mass and ‘desperate messages to the Almighty’ he himself had never been woken up at  night ‘with lights on the wall’and a vision of saving Nicaragua; he was not sure Ms Studeley had either, but he gave her the benefit of the doubt.
For North, too, Nicaragua was holy.
It was Vietnam again; when asked at the hearings what the difference was between the two battlegrounds, he replied ‘Ten thousand miles’.
Vietnam was the war his classmates presumed he had prayed to go to, in his near-daily Masses at Annapolis, in the uniform of the Marines.
In Vietnam, according to his chaplain, he would always put on a crucifix before he went into battle.
When fellow platoon-members wondered why they were there, fighting primitive jungle wars nobody at home seemed to care for when men were walking on the moon, North could not understand them.
Were they not fighting Communism?
Were they not under the Cross?
Even when the moral failings of America's Nicaraguan and other campaigns had been laid out before him clearly, many times, his Manichaean view of the world was undisturbed.
In his first public speech after he left the Marines, in May 1988, he painted a picture of the people his audience should keep in mind if they were tempted to think that the Soviet Union was changing: children huddled in the Gulags, dock-workers in Poland, and contras.
‘Round their necks there is a cross, and in their hearts there is a prayer: ‘’ Do not forget us!’
In North's briefing on the contras, given widely to donors and politicians when he was at the NSC, the emphasis was striking.
The last of his slides showed a wooden cross on a grave.
‘And when he got to the last slide,’ Channell recalled, ‘he suddenly became so powerfully emotive it was just like his whole spirit exploded.
He became tremendously emotional and…compelling in his language…about the need to save Latin America, to save freedom, that these people were sacrificing for America and for freedom all over the world.’
But this was also the side, North was saying, of God against the Godless.
As he explained it at the briefings and again at his trial, three years later, ‘The only people in the conflict in Nicaragua that are today buried beneath a cross are those that fight for the resistance.
Those that die in the EPS, the Sandinista People's Army, get buried beneath the plain stone slab at a military cemetery.
But the resistance buries them beneath a cross.’
‘These Catholics, they'd be pretty strong against Communists, wouldn't they?’ asks Pyle in The Quiet American ; and there was a simplistic equation of that sort to be made, too.
To Catholics raised in the church immediately after the Second World War, as North was, Communism was the all-too-apparent enemy, the work of the devil.
Pius XI had sanctioned for recital after Mass a special prayer to St Michael ‘for the conversion of Russia’, imploring him to thrust  down to hell ‘Satan and all wicked spirits who wander through the world for the ruin of souls’.
To those who heard and believed that, unvarying in their belief as the years passed, the contra cause was morally obvious.
St Michael could not do it on his own.
As Patrick Buchanan, a pugnacious supporter of both North and the contras, described it in his autobiography, the world divided neatly in those years into ‘us’ and ‘them’.
Catholics in America were relatively few, often strangers and outsiders, but they possessed the truth.
‘Either men are, or they are not, children of God, with immortal souls, destined for eternity, and possessed of God-given rights no government can take away.
If they are, Communism is rooted in a lie…
We were taught that, and we believed that then —— and we still do.’
Having been taught that, at a time when priests were not disagreed with, it is small wonder that John Kennedy should have involved himself, and thousands after him, in an anti-Communist crusade in Vietnam; that Joseph McCarthy should have conducted his anti-Communist witch-hunts; or that Casey should have made the fight against Communism his life's work, even asking that money should be given after his death not for flowers, but for the contras.
This was, of course, a faction among Catholics, and one that dangerously found itself outnumbered and outmoded as the years went on.
More moderate Catholics found these crusades vulgar, intolerant and immoral; they could not understand them, and they in turn were not understood themselves.
As Bishop John McGann pointed out boldly at Casey's funeral Mass in May 1987 — the Reagans in the front pew, conservative heavyweights in rank behind, North somewhere — Casey found a ‘fundamentally moral purpose’ in American actions in the world, specifically against Communism, and particularly in Nicaragua.
He simply could not fathom ‘the ethical questions raised by me as his bishop’.
‘And I'm equally sure,’ McGann went on, ‘that Bill must have thought us bishops blind to the potential for a Communist threat in this hemisphere…
Given the world as he saw it, Bill was seeking to do what was best for the United States.’
Indeed he was; for Casey, Nicaragua was the great hemispheric test of the forces of good against the forces of evil.
As Reagan put it early in 1985, ‘the struggle here is not right versus left; it is right versus wrong.’
This was how North presented his case at the public hearings, never doubting.
Shadows of it still remained at his trial, two years later; although his lawyer had evidently advised him to tone down the certitude of righteousness, it would slip out.
‘Did you think,’ his prosecution pressed him, ‘that what you were doing, what you were being asked to do or what you had done might be  wrong?’
North replied, without a second thought, ‘Not for one fleeting moment.’
It was in this spirit that he conducted, round the back of the law, the contra operation.
His Central American agents and contacts were patted on the back, or sent into the field, with the words ‘Vaya con Dios ’,(Go with God); Calero remembered that he never left him without them.
The call sign North arranged to answer fellow-Catholic Fernandez in Costa Rica (’ Force unable find 5 bundles after two-day search.
Now do not believe bundles dropped.
Force taking heavy casualties, numbers captured rising’) was DV,Dominus Vobiscum .
The contra operations had to be continued, North told his congressional questioners, ‘for the love of God and the love of this nation’.
This, he wished it to be understood, was a duty to God incumbent on him personally, one that he couched in the words of the Confiteor: ‘And I pray to God that you will not stop because of what I have done or what I have failed to do.’
If the cause was abandoned — as ultimately it was, not least because of what he had done — he would have ‘the greatest burden of all on my soul’.
North also spoke the religious language of evangelicals.
Miraculously cured of back pains just before he had joined the NSC, he had joined a charismatic Episcopal congregation, in which he kept the church manners of a Catholic; and where appeals for the contras were concerned he could take either voice, as necessary.
At Love Field, a tin-pot airport outside Dallas, very late one night, he made what can only be described as a solicitation by prayer.
Channell introduced him to a friend, Ralph Hixon, ‘a very devoted Christian’, and discreetly left them together to pray; Channell watched a bit through the glass.
The substance of the meeting can be gathered from the telegram North sent to Hixon later.
Dear Ralph It was a blessing to have met with you Wednesday night to share a few moments with a fellow Christian who like I has stumbled on the walk.
The cause of the brave men and women who call themselves the Christian guerrillas is just.
The sacrifices they are making are crucial to the freedom of millions…as is the sacrifice you contemplated.
They're in a crucial period and you can help see them safely through it.
Your help is invaluable and timely, may God bless you for your vigilance.
God be with you.
Little other evidence existed, besides North's, that the contras thought of themselves as ‘the Christian guerrillas’.
The only other reference, alarmingly, came in a notorious CIA ‘assassination  manual’ which was distributed to the contras in 1984, in the section on justifications for shooting civilians: ‘The commando tried to stop the informant without shooting, because he, like all Christian guerrillas, advocate(s) non-violence…to cut down the lives of their Nicaraguan brothers…hurts our Christian feelings.
Here the word ‘Christian’ seemed drained of any meaning at all; but North quoted the passage in mitigation of the manual, as if he for one believed it.
North lent a good deal of encouragement to Thomas Dowling, ‘the priest for the contras’, who was called in by Calero to say Mass in the camps in Honduras; but Dowling found the contras drifting, rather than committed.
When he ministered, there had been no Masses in the camps for a long time; regular priests would not go in.
Dowling himself was an irregular, a member of the Old Catholic Church, a splinter group that did not recognize the supremacy of Rome; he was drawn into the cause as a result of saying house Masses for expatriate Nicaraguans in San Francisco.
What he noticed in the camps, however, were large numbers of evangelicals, presumably converted by American missionaries while the Catholic priests were away.
Ernesto Cardenal, in his poem The US Congress Approves Contra Aid , had also noticed an evangelical quirk in a contra raid:
The cottage destroyed
by a barrage of grenades and mortars.
The hamlet desolate.
When the contras left
they scattered Christ propaganda.
Individual rebels, talking much later to the American press, would sometimes profess to be ‘born again’, and this was presumably the hint North was taking.
His holy cause was being fought not only under the cross but according to the rules of ‘spiritual warfare’, the particular battle of charismatics and evangelicals, confident of their closeness to Christ, against the wiles of the devil in the world.
To suggest that there was any prayer on the other side, any divine sheltering or confidence in God, was almost unthinkable.
The most effective put-down of North during his testimony came from Senator George Mitchell of Maine, stung by the colonel's constant juxtaposition of God with the contras.
He reminded North that it was possible for an American to disagree with him on that particular, ‘and still love God, and still love this country just as much as you do’; although He was regularly asked to do so, ‘God  does not take sides in American politics.’
North listened to this impassively; when it was over his eyes filled with tears, but these were not necessarily tears of compunction.
Asked in February 1987 what he had to say about the conclusions of the Tower Report, the first detailed inquiry into the affair, he referred reporters to ‘the eighth Beatitude of Matthew 5’: ‘Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.’
There is no knowing what he would have made of Cardenal's reading of Matthew, somewhat further on.
And I think of Matthew nineteen verse twelve: And there are those who do not marry for the sake of the kingdom of heaven, Communism.
Reagan found understanding of the other side every bit as hard.
Channell remembered a curious phone call from him — not an everyday occurrence, and Channell was on respectful tenterhooks —— in which the president began: ‘I just do not understand Tip O'Neill.
I don't know what's wrong with him, why he doesn't see the need to be supporting the freedom fighters.’
Channell countered with something shocking:
Mr President, I need to tell you something.
Every night Tip O'Neill drops by his bed and prays to the same God that you do and he prays for the strength that's necessary the next day to defeat everything that you believe in.
And that's the way he is.
And you must fight him as an enemy and you must defeat him.
‘There was this long pause,’ Channell remembered.
‘And he ended by saying, Spitz, I just don't understand Tip O'Neill.’
The cause was not only good in itself; it was also a statement of loyalty.
These people had been encouraged to fight by the United States; by keeping them going, when Congress was keen to abandon them, at least some Americans were keeping faith.
The contras were, after all, almost neighbours: two hours’ flight from the Rio Grande, virtually knocking at the door.
America's loyalty to them was going to be interpreted, the players insisted, as a token of its loyalty to allies everywhere: certainly to rebel groups in Asia and Africa, perhaps even, North thought, to NATO.
Besides, the contras were friends.
Even in the formality of the 1984 National Security Planning Group meeting that started the whole alternative propping-up programme, the scheme to find alternative money for the contras was described as ‘next steps to keep our friends together’.
They  were also children: ‘boys and girls’, as the boyish Owen called them, ‘fighting, bleeding and dying’.
The suggestion of fatherly closeness was essential, even if it seemed awkward and difficult to illustrate.
Contra children would come to Washington to be held aloft by Reagan at banquets, the little girls in lipstick and party dresses; North would visit the camps, trying to talk to the children, and taking pictures to keep in a shoebox in his office.
‘No little girls,’ said Channell to Richard Miller before another of North's briefings; there were too many children in the slides, and the audiences were ‘tigers’, preferring ‘blood and guts’.
For North, however, to be seen among the local people, to be seen to be doing good generally, even if vaguely, was an essential ingredient in a just war.
McFarlane, who in his more sober Methodist way felt much the same, tried to explain it at the hearings.
North had apparently asked himself whether it was worth it, to die in Vietnam:
And for him, it was an easy determination that, yes, it was, because there were enough daily shows of evidence by the Vietnamese people, young and old, children, others, of their satisfaction that he was there.
And yet, that personal justification was in very sharp tension with the reality that we were losing.
Now in the wake of his service there, having to cope with the vivid reminders of how worth it it was and how tragic a loss of life of Vietnamese…
I believe that he committed himself to assuring that he would never be party to such a thing again if he could prevent it.
‘These people were glad I was there,’ North would say of his time in Vietnam, in sharp contradistinction to the way most Americans seemed to feel about it.
If they were not glad, how could the war be justified?
It was North who, by his own account, rushed into Reagan's television room during the evacuation of American students from Grenada in 1983, desperate that the students might forget (on network television) to be grateful for the American invasion that had freed them; when the first student said ‘Thank God for America’, Reagan hugged him, and told him he ought to have faith.
But North still went in fear of ingratitude.
He told a friend of a dream he had had, ‘a terrible nightmare’— perhaps apocryphal too, but there are no Secret Service logs of dreams — in which America's support of the contras had failed.
Nicaragua had become a second Cuba, and the President had ordered an invasion.
North, back in the Marines, found himself landing on a beach; there  facing him, with a rifle, was Calero.
He did not want an American invasion.
He wanted Nicaraguans to save their own country.
As it was, however, the administration had taken over responsibility for this war; and it had to work with what it had, making a just cause as best it could.
It was not easy.
After North became the contras' overseer, in October 1984, he tried, according to Rafael Quintero, to inculcate some honesty into them: taking Calero's brother Mario off the contract for ponchos and boots (the ponchos leaked, anyway) and putting control of the contras' foreign money in the hands of Secord and ‘the company’.
This particular move towards ‘honesty’ was seldom so kindly interpreted; but at least it was then Americans, not contras, who could play hard and fast with the money.
North tried, too, to encourage the rebels to fight.
That was harder still.
The contra leaders, sitting for much of the time in Miami in their well-cut lightweight suits and their gold watches, had purposes in view, some of them not especially noble; the rebels in the field were mostly tired, variously motivated, and confused.
Some gave themselves fierce noms de guerre , ‘Rambo’ and ‘El Negro’, as if their only purpose was fighting for its own sake, though even that purpose was largely wishful thinking; much of their time was spent hanging round in the camps, doing nothing.
North took that badly.
He wanted the contras to be seen to be dying for their cause, emphasizing both how desperate it was, and how just.
His own grand plan for them, as O'Boyle had heard in his ‘secret briefing’, was a sort of wholesale, slow martyrdom, based loosely both on the Alamo and on Khe Sanh, a last-ditch stand by Marines in Vietnam.
North was proud of his plan; but then he himself, as several associates noticed, seemed to be desperate to die for his country, even in the course of ‘Project Democracy’ if all else failed.
The contra leaders were considerably less keen.
North once offered Calero a bullet-proof vest —‘the same sort the President wears’— Only to find Calero shocked at the implication that he ought to be looking danger in the face.
One of the field commanders, Edgar Chamorro, continually nagged by Fernandez to get into Nicaragua and fight, at last decided to venture 30 metres inside to attack a border post; heavy fire drove him back and, retreating to a pay phone, he called the CIA in Langley, Virginia and asked them to send mortars.
The agency did not oblige him.
North tried, for appearances' sake, to present the rebels as an effective force, but he was up against higher-ranking military men who disagreed with him.
General Paul Gorman, a friend, actually gave rival briefings explaining how dim the contras' chances were.
There was ‘enough sentiment’, he admitted, ‘enough fire…to lead  people to put their lives and their families on the line for the cause’, but the cause was a mess; too many different groups, no means of making political capital out of them, and ‘guys running around in the hills…illiterate, ignorant campesinos’.
North, badly wanting to shut him up, tried to convince him it was otherwise.
You know, he would keep citing statistics on how their recruiting was going and what they were doing.
He had pictures in his office that he would show me of well-equipped armed bands that he said were taken down in the middle of Nicaragua.
And I kept telling him, yeah, Oliver, but the day that, you know, some Nicaraguan unity group appears and it's evident that it's got everybody in it…that's the day I'll begin to believe that this thing has a future.
North could not convince Gorman; Gorman, equally, could not convince North.
‘It was very clear to me,’ said the general in the end, ‘that Oliver had a thing about the contras.’
The ‘thing’ led him to a certain way of thinking.
If the contras could be neither saints nor crack troops, their appeal had to lie in romantic desperation: the ‘fact’ that they had been forced into exile, like the ‘little old lady’with her hair in a bun and her dress ‘held together by safety pins and string’whom Owen had met in a camp in Honduras; the ‘fact’that the soldiers were without food or uniforms, their hospitals nothing but hen-coops, lacking even mosquito netting; the fact that there was never enough money for anything.
Ghorbanifar and Secord both remembered North at his wits' end, pacing back and forth, describing how the contras were dying; Secord was pestered continually, and admitted that he never sent the rebels ‘as much as Ollie thought we should’.
Contributors had their hearts broken.
At private meetings over meals or in his office North would produce his spiral notebook or pieces of yellow legal paper, asking ‘how in God's name we can expect these young men and women to fight against Communism when this is what they're up against’, and often breaking into tears.
His listeners were drawn in irresistibly.
Soft-hearted Mrs Garwood recalled being told at Dallas airport that food procured for the contras was simply rotting in the warehouses, just as the food sent to Ethiopia in the famine had never reached the starving.
She gave $2m.
The mythology of this just cause was not inevitably tragic, though usually so.
Myths of triumph sprang up too.
One concerned the Monimbo , a ship carrying a load of rifles from North Korea to the Sandinistas.
(Both sides bought weapons wherever they could get them, from the furthest provenance and under the strangest flags.)
North wanted the Monimbo seized or sunk; Poindexter wanted ‘measures taken to make sure ship does not arrive in Nicaragua’; McFarlane seems to have choked over the legality of piracy, and the ship and the rifles got through.
Calero said he had never heard of it, except to read about it: ‘Was that the one we were supposed to blow up on the high seas?’
It reminded him of another mad suggestion from a man in California, offering the contras $50m if they would go and take over Malta.
North, however, maintained that the ship story ended quite differently, even victoriously, with the Monimbo ‘on its side on the beach’.
There is evidence that the whole Southern Front operation, for which North pushed particularly, was justified in retrospect with successes that were invisible at the time.
Even the damp little airstrip at Santa Elena was glorified with hindsight.
At North's trial, the prosecutor twitted him with a glowing memorandum he had written to Poindexter, claiming that the airstrip had played ‘a vital role’ from July 1985 to February 1986.
The land for the strip had not even become available, Keker reminded him, until January 1986, and the only aircraft that had ever landed there had stuck in the mud; but North could not be persuaded that his memo was ‘incompatible with the realities of things’.
In the same way he lauded the pilots, calling them ‘some of the bravest people I've ever met in my life’, apparently not noticing that much of their fortitude was required simply to fly the shocking aircraft and the hapless missions with which he had entrusted them.
When two of the pilots were eventually, inevitably shot down in October 1986 — their pockets full of incriminating business cards —— the resupply operation collapsed.
It was technically already unnecessary, for money for both lethal and humanitarian aid had been voted by Congress a matter of days before.
The line had been kept open just long enough.
So death, too, gilded the operation: the useless martyrs' deaths of the pilots on a scrubby hillside, and the simultaneous death of the whole elaborate scheme.
But the cause had been kept going; and that was its own justification.
Indeed, if all else had failed — if the supplies had seldom been delivered on time, if the contras had declined to fight, if the money had gone astray, if the planes had crashed — the cause was still something that was simply right, whatever sort of mess had resulted.
‘It is morally the right thing to do,’ said McFarlane, dropping it like a swift brick in among the parentheses and qualifications and regrets.
‘We believed very much in the significance of what we were doing,’ said Secord, leaving for a moment the sticky operational details.
North needed no parentheses.
‘Thank God’ somebody had done something.
Yet even as North spoke, the contras were collapsing under the very impact of his half-secret operations; and by the time of his trial, less than two years later, the new administration had turned its back on them.
The contras, demoralized beyond any more fighting resumed their preferred occupation of lounging in the camps in Honduras, and in June 1990 the war was officially ended.
No longer revolutionaries, no longer a just cause — no longer, after all that, a cause at all .
BARTERING FOR BODIES
NICARAGUA, therefore, was the administration's just cause; but so, in its way, was Iran.
Although the Iranian operation was stumbled into almost accidentally, even that policy evolved emotional and patriotic selling points as it went along.
To those who argued that the policy was deluded, its sponsors could answer that it had good aims in view; indeed, the more glaring the disappointment, the more glowing the colours in which those aims were painted.
Unlike Nicaragua, however, Iran was a relatively cool subject.
Poindexter discoursed on it at the hearings, tamping his pipe, with the aid of the sort of brightly-coloured maps usually found in school atlases.
Iran was certainly strategically vital, threatened by Russia on its flank; but abstract because it was so many miles away, politically eccentric, and hard to place.
Besides, the issues were complicated.
Iran had once seized American hostages, and was an enemy; but the American hostages at issue in 1985 and 1986 were held in Lebanon by Hizbollah, a fanatical group merely sympathetic to Iran, and Iran's good offices were necessary to deal with them.
Some bile had to be swallowed.
There was also a war on, between Iran and Iraq, in which America was officially neutral.
Israel, on the other hand, was eager to restore relations and intelligence contacts with Iran; Israel leaned towards favouring Iran in the war; and what Israel wanted, America  rarely resisted.
The administration therefore got involved with Iran again not out of conviction, but with a strong prod from Israel, whose emissaries kept turning up in London and Washington with their slightly unnerving proposals for rapprochement.
American policy towards Iran always had two strands.
One was a simple urge to get the hostages out.
The other was a great plan for improved relations: sometimes going no further than better intelligence on a crucial country, sometimes an all-embracing scheme for encouraging moderate successors to Khomeini and saving the country from the Soviet camp.
First hints of that occurred almost casually, when Michael Ledeen, the first American into the swamp, was chatting with ‘an intelligence official of a West European country’ early in 1985.
Ledeen noticed that the official was looking unusually tanned; perhaps he had been skiing?
No, said the man, he had got his tan in Iran.
The situation there was fluid and interesting; perhaps America should take a look at it.
Ledeen agreed, went, and returned converted.
America might indeed do something there.
Not the first scandal, but perhaps the most comprehensive, provoked by a suntan.
The grandest exposition of the Grand Iranian Design was given on November 14th, 1986, just after the operation had been disclosed.
Neil Livingstone, a terrorism expert, was having breakfast with North in the Hay-Adams Hotel, that perpetual nest of intrigue.
North, carefully distracting Livingstone from the thought that hostages might have been ransomed for arms, gave him the Whole Picture.
The Soviet Union had designs on Iran.
To further these designs (primarily, to reach a warm-water port), the Russians had persuaded the Iranians to over-estimate their strength against Iraq.
Iran was now in a poor state in the war, and was about to be wiped out as the Russian Army had been at Tannenberg in 1914: a disaster that had led to the rise of the Bolsheviks.
Russia's allies within Iran were already preparing to seize power, and delegations from Japan, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Pakistan — and Israel — had all visited America to implore Reagan to do something.
The ‘something’, after much thought, turned out to be making contact with ‘moderate’ Iranians and selling them arms in concert with Israel.
‘Far from constituting ransom to achieve the freedom of American hostages,’ North assured Livingstone over the cooling coffee, ‘the military goods provided Iran were part of a rapprochement process designed to deliver Iran from the clutches of the Soviet Union and to block the Soviet drive to the Persian Gulf.’
Nothing much there about hostages at all.
Indeed, to the straight Grand Planners (of which North was not one), hostages were better left out of the picture entirely.
Ledeen always thought it self-evident  that America should re-open contacts with Iran; it could profit from the political fissures there, and could perhaps exploit the chaos that would undoubtedly follow the end of the Ayatollah's rule.
What he could not understand, he said, was how this idea got so muddled up with hostages and the necessity to sell arms.
Once arms sales were introduced — originally, ingenuously, as a sign of ‘good faith’ between the countries — there would be no end to the escalation of demands.
With great reluctance, as he maintained, Ledeen carried the message from Israel's prime minister, Shimon Peres, to McFarlane in the summer of 1985, asking him to approve the first shipment of arms from Israel to Iran; McFarlane replied ‘Okay, just that one shipment and nothing else’, words that soon acquired a hollow, awful sound.
Once the hostages were introduced, something even more dangerous happened: the whole bargaining process became emotional, heavily political, and less than sharp.
Ghorbanifar told Ledeen that he thought it would be much better to ‘leave the hostages aside’.
Ledeen agreed, but by that point — in November of 1985 — the operation was out of his hands.
When Poindexter somewhat curtly told him so, Ledeen asked if he could still keep the elements of the Grand Plan simmering along.
Poindexter gave him a blank stare.
By then, of course, the hostages had become the chief cause.
With Reagan, they had been the chief cause all along.
He had become president largely because his predecessor and opponent, Jimmy Carter, had failed to resolve a hostage crisis, and he did not forget it.
Long-term Iranian strategy never much interested Reagan, North told Meese in November, implying he had sometimes bravely tried to explain it: ‘terrible mistake to say RR wanted the strategic relationship b/c RR wanted the hostages.’
Colleagues heard that Reagan pestered North about the hostages two or three times a week; McFarlane, probably the transmitter of the pestering, remembered that he would barely open his mouth at the 9.30 briefing before the President would ask, ‘Anything new on the hostages?’
Noel Koch of the Defence Department came across North one day in the corridor, frazzled; it was the same story.
‘He's driving me nuts about it, and he wants them out by Christmas,’ North confided.
‘Can you do it?’
Koch asked.
North's answer was a sigh: ‘I hope so.’
Even sanguine members of the Cabinet dreaded the return of the taunting yellow ribbons that were tied to trees in Carter’ s time, and feared especially the visits of grieving relatives to the White House.
Staff members tried to keep them away from the soft-hearted President, consigning them to the Vice-president not because Bush  was more callous, North explained, but because it was Reagan who had to make the policy decisions.
It was ‘an unfair burden on the heart of our President’ to look people in the eye and tell them that ‘your government can't, try as it would, can't do anything about it.’
Reagan had tried to meet the families once or twice, the first time in a school library in Chicago Heights; the relatives furiously demanded help from him, boxing him in with a semi-circle of school chairs.
He had come out moved and horrified.
As he tried to explain it later, when the ruins of arms-for-hostages were all around him, ‘his heart and his best intentions’ had ruled him.
The most cynical of his detractors did not doubt that; the President had got carried away.
The usefulness of the Grand Plan, even if it had few subscribers, was that it provided a cover.
The fate of seven ‘Amcits’, a Frenchman and two ‘Brits’ was not compelling enough to be seen to be driving policy; something much more portentous was needed.
But neither could the players talk too much about the Grand Plan, for fear of looking like busybodies in another nation's affairs.
The solution, as it evolved in practice, was to argue for a sort of grand amalgam, almost a fit of good feeling, in which war would be ended and hostages exchanged and where men would tenderly understand each other.
Something of the flavour appears in a cryptic note sent from North to Rafsanjani late in 1986, when Ghorbanifar had been dropped from the equation and replaced by a more promising-seeming young Iranian official, the ‘Second Channel’.
North asked the Second Channel to act as his courier ‘as a personal favour for the cause we both believe in’; the note was a draft of a speech for Rafsanjani to make to the Iranian parliament.
Its contents seem to be lost to history, but one wonderfully inappropriate phrase survives: ‘His Holiness the Imam and his Christian peace.’
Indeed, as the operation wore on, badly in need of justification, peace became one of the chief pretexts for it; and not entirely a pretext.
‘Sincerely believe that RR can be instrumental in bringing about an end to Iran/Iraq war — a la Roosevelt w/Russo Japanese War in 1904,’ North wrote to Poindexter in September 1986.
He was just back from giving the Second Channel a tour of the White House at night, something he often did, and with a proper historical reverence.
They had gone all over the place; peeking into the Oval Office (but the little rope was across, Hakim said); stopping on the stairs to look at a picture called The Canine Cabinet , in which North  pointed out a drowsing member and said it was Casey; and into the Roosevelt Room, where North showed the young Iranian the Nobel Prize won by Theodore Roosevelt for negotiating peace between the Russians and the Japanese.
•The identity of the Second Channel has been given as Ali Hashemi Bahranani, Rafsanjani's nephew, He is kept as the Second Channel here, for simplicity's sake.
Some of this desire for peace seems to have been genuine, and not connected merely with the glory it might bring the President.
Poindexter kept in his study a poster with the words ‘Blessed are the Peacemakers’ though possibly it had been put there by his minister-wife; North was a member of an officers' prayer group that prayed regularly for peace, particularly in the Gulf.
‘Any soldier who has ever been in a war,’ he said at the hearings, ‘truly hopes he will never see one again.’
All the same, this concern for peace in one part of the world, or even generally, sat oddly with a hot disposition to war in another.
In the middle of the negotiations with the Iranians in October 1986, North mentioned, laughing, that he had managed to talk to the Kuwaiti foreign minister about matters of mutual concern ‘in my spare time between blowing up Nicaragua’.
By his own accounts, he could hardly keep himself away from the battle lines in Central America.
He told his friend Andy Messing — also an aficionado of Central American wars — a fantastic tale of piloting a small plane into the battle zone in El Salvador to evacuate two wounded men, almost crash-landing, losing his windshield to a machine-gunner, and all while on a secret trip for the NSC; his face was covered with cuts from the shattered glass.
Messing was never able to find out whether the story was true, but the spirit was North all over.
In negotiations with the Iranians, however, North maintained that his enthusiasm for war had no place.
The President himself had transmuted it into a grand desire for peace.
That Saturday when (the Iranian contact) was in Washington, I flew up to Camp David to talk to the President, and I showed him the (weapons) list, and he said, ‘Why are you thinking so small?’
He took the list, that list right there, and he went like this with it — I was sitting across the table — and he said, ‘For someone who has seen so much war as you have, North, you should understand that I want to end the war on terms that are acceptable to Iran.
‘I don't simply want to help go out and kill more Iranian youngsters.
What about the 2 million people without homes?
What about the oil industry which is already in ruins?
What about the industrial base of Iran which is being destroyed?
Stop coming in and looking like a gun merchant.’
And he banged on the table.
‘I want to end the war!
Even if this had been so — and Reagan worrying about Iran's industrial base has the true ring of fantasy — the bartering was not to be turned so easily away from war, on either side.
The Iranians, concerned by what Reagan seemed to have done with their wish-list of missiles, wanted to be convinced that they had ‘something in hand’.
The Americans, called on to prove their sincerity, could only do so in terms of the number of Hawks and TOWs that had already been shipped.
Poindexter was not too perturbed by this: arms, as he explained, were often ‘the currency of any sort of business in the Middle East.’
Provision of the means to wage an atrocious war had been agreed on as a sign of good faith.
After one sign of good faith the magic was supposed to work, the hostages out, friends all round; but somehow 500 TOWs was not enough, 1,000 TOWs was not enough, a big shipment of Hawk parts was not enough.
In March 1986, the Iranians wanted Phoenix missiles; in October they wanted 100 Howitzers plus 500 barrels, for which, as Cave told them, any country in the world would have to open a production line.
To measure sincerity in weapons proved very difficult, and so, from time to time, the American delegation would fall back on the mantra of peace, peace to which only Iraq was the obstacle, peace in which all these obsessions about the latest arms and the best would be redundant.
When, in Frankfurt in October, the talks were foundering, North called it ‘a great tragedy for those of us who live on this Planet Earth’; nothing less than the misalignment of two spheres that had been about to dance in harmonious orbit.
At the end of the negotiations, as he prepared to run off to salvage what he could from the wreckage of the crashed aircraft in Nicaragua, North told the Iranians he had failed in his mission ‘to start the process of healing between our countries’; the two nations, Iran and America, were about to pass each other like ships in the night.
Among themselves, however, as the tape-recorder wound on, the Americans did not talk about peace.
They talked about the difficulty of getting food in, when all they could find was Chinese takeaway; about strange knocks at the door of the hotel room, and why the Iranians sometimes left unexpectedly, and who the hell they were really dealing with; about North's pressing need for aspirin; and about getting the hostages out, for which the only foreseeable currency was arms.
The hostages mattered terribly.
Although so little was heard from them, those who kept tabs on them were convinced that they were slowly fading away.
Occasional letters and photographs would come from Terry Anderson, an AP journalist captured in 1985; the face grew more haggard, the eyes more accusing and staring.
Of William Buckley, the CIA station chief in Beirut, his captors sent back  videotapes as he died, slowly, of the effects of pulmonary oedema and neglect.
North found these ‘awful’.
Buckley was a man in possession of secrets, and a 400-page confession had allegedly already been extracted from him under torture.
When it became apparent that he must be dead, Casey gave orders to recover the body for proper burial; this became another item in the wish-lists exchanged with the Iranians.
At almost any cost Casey wanted him back, but this was almost a private, rather than a public, duty.
The secrets were probably gone, passed on to the Russians.
There remained a duty of compassion to the man.
So it was with the other hostages.
None was a security risk; none knew much, or anything, and there was no compelling national interest to be served by rescuing them.
The matter boiled down, in part, to simple morality; innocent prisoners ought to be freed.
Calero remembered how he and North would discuss the hostages ‘continually’, and how he himself considered them another sort of liberation struggle, like the contras.
He even gave North precious travellers' cheques to ransom them, although the ransom did not work out.
But hostage releases were no public crusade.
Both obligation and justification were, in the end, private, as it was with Casey and Buckley, or with members of the families for each other.
North told his colleagues that the release of the hostages was a personal obligation on himself, and that seemed not to put it too strongly.
Fernandez remembered North breaking down as he told him, sitting in a parked car one night, that Buckley was dead; David Jacobsen, the last hostage to be released as a result of the arms transfers, recalled North in tears on the aeroplane to Germany, wishing that the other hostages had been freed with him.
To Peggy Say, Anderson's sister, it seemed that some particularly keen sympathy compelled North never to turn down her requests to see him, when all she would do was sit at his desk upbraiding him and complaining and crying; and when all he could do was repeat, cryptically, infuriatingly, that the government was doing everything it could possibly think of.
It fell to North, McFarlane and Poindexter, as also to anyone else roped into the policy, to carry out a private crusade with a crippling double imperative.
The whole operation was for Reagan's sake, as well as the hostages'; it was a present for him, preferably one to be delivered by Christmas, or by the State of the Union address in January, or by the elections in November.
It was made the more difficult because the Iranians were at one remove from the hostage-takers; even at best, all they could promise was to lean on Hizbollah and ask for a favour.
But North himself, on the point of abandoning the operation, begging to be moved on ‘to other things’, made plain  the point of everything that had gone before: ‘Wd very much like to give RR two hostages that he can take credit for.’
The compassionate side of the Americans found the Iranian body-bargaining awful.
‘Like you and Bud,’ North wrote to Poindexter, ‘I find the idea of bartering over the lives of these poor men repugnant.’
Yet the political imperative made the bargaining essential, indeed urged it on.
McFarlane had come back from London in December 1985 disgusted with the bartering, repelled by Ghorbanifar and wanting to abandon the operation.
The Tehran trip in May, in which he was humiliated, made him all the more certain that however good the ends, ‘this was not the kind of exchange that was proper.’
Poindexter, too, occasionally wanted no more of this ‘half-delivered, half-released crap.’
But neither man could entirely ignore North's fevered memoranda, insisting that without the awful procession of weapons shipments the hostages would die; and both men, while they were in office, had to go each morning to a president who would ask them what they were doing and importune them to try harder.
‘I thought we agreed no more after first 500 unless get all captives,’ read Alton Keel's notes, quoting Weinberger at the end of the day.
‘Just, always came back Pres, he always agreed go ahead,’ replied Poindexter.
At times, when they were tired and worn down by Iran's ever escalating requests, the Americans were ready to promise almost anything to get the hostages out.
In pursuit of the end, any means could be tried.
North said he would have offered the Iranians a free trip to Disneyland or a ride on the space shuttle; George Cave, the interpreter, offered to send the Second Channel to Miami Beach.
The Iranians, of course, had little interest in vacations, but North could also make them wonderful offers in the currency they understood, TOWs: ‘If you get the hostages out, we'll send you a million of them.’
Extravagance grew as hope faded, and soon every offer or deal, in whatever currency, was fantastical.
Left to themselves in Mainz, the four Americans consulted.
‘Ollie,’ Hakim said, ‘if you get the hostages out, how many shish would you be prepared to eat?’
(Clearly, as Frankfurt overdid the Chinese, Mainz overdid the kebabs.)
‘I'd eat shish till the cows come home’, North answered.
Told by Secord that the Second Channel was going to solve the hostage problem, ‘but we don't know how,’ North replied, ‘I don't care how, right now.’
‘I don't care how either’ said Secord.
But no one had any suggestions; almost everything had been tried, or asked for, or abandoned.
Part of the difficulty was that the cause, so sentimentally longed for, could not be expressed in sentimental terms.
The President's desires, which weighed so heavily on the negotiators, could not be  admitted except in code.
‘The head of our company is most displeased with Mr Goode and me,’ Cave said in June, talking on the telephone to an Iranian who was unenthusiastic about weapons prices that had been marked up 300 percent; ‘He said if they don't want to deal, break it off.’
By October, the patience of the CEO was clearly exhausted.
If the effort failed, Secord explained to the Iranians, Hakim, ‘the interpreter’, would be shot, ‘because somebody had to go.’
He and North would be lucky: ‘They won't shoot us.
We'll just go to jail.’
North : Fired.
Secord .
The President may shoot North.
The hostages, too, could not be described in sentimental terms.
They were a mere handful of men, hardly worth worrying about.
Around 52,000 people had died in car crashes in America in 1985, North pointed out, and 130,000 had died of lung cancer; in perspective, the hostages were nothing.
Why not let them out?
What face could possibly be lost by Iran, doing so small a thing?
The hostages were ‘this hurdle’, ‘this obstacle lying in the road’, a dark huddle of rags in the foreground of a vista of peace.
They were something that had to be removed, like flammable rubbish, so that the president could be ‘fireproofed’ from the fury of his own people when news of the secret contacts with Iran hit the newspapers.
Cave, on the telephone again, called the hostages ‘the four boxes’.
They were also less than that, ciphers, as in a famous North equation of December 1985.
H+hr: 1 707 w/300 TOWS — 1 AMCIT
H+10 hrs: 1 707 (same a/c) w/300 TOWS — 1 AMCIT H+16 hrs: 1 747 w/50 HAWKS & 400 TOWS — 2 AMCITS H+24 hrs: 1 747 w/2000 TOWS — French Hostage.
The front of indifference was hard to keep up.
The ‘fundamental perpetual change in the world’ that North insisted the Americans were aiming for was tied, in fact, to a general and international release of hostages, and the Iranians knew it.
‘You say you're here to discuss something very big and important,’ said one in Frankfurt; ‘but when I read everything…the focus and the only thing that is being discussed is the issue of the hostages.’
In Mainz, the same perceptive man offered to go back to Tehran with news of what ‘the real motivation’ was, and clear up both the confusion among the
Hostage-hour: 1 707 with 300 TOWs — 1 American citizen  Iranians and the various ‘different thoughts’ in the minds of the Americans.
Different thoughts, but one thought: Secord would suddenly explode to the interpreter, ‘He's still not talking about the god-damned hostage thing!’; or, in North's exasperated words, ‘if we're really sincere about this whole friggin' thing…they ought to be exercising every possible amount of leverage they've got to get those people out.’
The Americans had offered arms, and they had offered peace, in an attempt to salvage something from ‘this whole friggin' thing’.
There was another gambit too: to raise the Iran operation on to an altogether different plane, to make it a sort of crusade, as Nicaragua was.
In the same memorandum of April 1986 that eventually brought down the whole house of cards — the memorandum that mentioned the diversion of funds to the contras — an extraordinary phrase appeared: ‘The Iranians have been told that our presence in Iran is ‘a holy commitment’.’
Whether those words were pronounced or not, something like them was.
Because the Iranians represented a theocracy, because they argued that their revolution was ‘totally depending on God’ and that the Americans, opposing them, were the Great Satan, the American negotiators did their best to answer them in kind.
Secord remembered how they would get ‘sermonized’, and how ‘we had a lot to live down before we could do business.’
Part of the business was to build on Iranian fears of Russia, but even that would draw forth rich theological arguments.
Sitting in the dreary Independence Hotel in Tehran late at night, McFarlane fuming in his room, the rest of the party had got on to a conversation about radars.
But there was no point in merely comparing weapons, said the Iranian advisor on foreign affairs:
The will of the Iranian people is greater than the Soviet people.
I myself have a sister with two sons who were martyred in the war…
Martyrdom (shehadat) is great.
We congratulate the family of martyrs with congratulations and sorrow.
During Ramadan we ask God to let us be a martyr if we are to die.
Ramadan is the night of fate and power.
At first, the Americans did not try too hard to meet the Iranians on this uncomfortable holy turf.
To listen to ‘a load of shit on shehadat ’, as Cave called it, was part of the side-business of negotiating; the Americans would do their best to try to steer their interlocutors back to the subjects at hand.
Only North, according to his notebooks, tried to counter in Tehran with something similar.: ‘Because I am a Christian, I understand and believe that when one  dies in faith he will spend eternity in a far better place.’
But the atmosphere then was too cool for much of that sort of talk.
Circumstances changed at the end of the summer of 1986, when matters, and men, were becoming desperate, and when North also seemed to think he had found a soulmate in the ‘brave young soldier, who was the Second Channel.
On his first visit to Washington in September, the Second Channel demonstrated his piety by asking for a rug to pray on on the Friday evening; Craig Coy, wonderingly, lent him his gym towel.
(Coy remarked afterwards that he had become ‘quite a good distance runner, since his towel was knelt on.)
Yet the Second Channel's devotion also seemed to have substance.
He noted that the taking of hostages was utterly banned by a fatwa of the Ayatollah, and was contrary to the Shia religion.
‘From the standpoint of humanity,’ he said, Iran was even a little sympathetic towards the United States.
North took his cue.
Placing his office Bible on the negotiating table, he said solemnly: The President strongly believes in the words of the Holy Book as do you.
He believes deeply in the teachings of the God of Abraham.
Thus, he is very popular here and should be popular in the world of Islam.
North also said that biblical verses were brought up in conversation, though they do not seem to have made it onto the surreptitious tape.
One was the passage from the fifteenth chapter of Genesis in which Abraham cut up a heifer, a goat and a ram and laid them out at the Lord's command, driving the vultures away, falling at last into a deep sleep with ‘a horror of great darkness’.
‘And it came to pass, that when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces’; and Abraham in his dream heard that his seed would rule over ‘the Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.’
He was to be, in fact, the common progenitor of Jews, Muslims and Christians, as North explained in a note to Reagan later.
The passage was not some ghastly simile of war or territorial domination (though heaven knows what the Iranians would have made of it), but just a pictorial explanation of the passage North said he read them next, from the third chapter of Galatians: ‘Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.’
The Iranians, not to mention the other Americans, heard these things with some astonishment.
Secord thought it was good, it was trumping them.
After all they had been force-fed about the godliness of the Khomeini regime, here was Reagan as a ‘man of God’(North's words) who had gone away for a ‘whole weekend’ to pray about the Frankfurt meeting and had come up all by himself with an inscription for a Bible to be given to the Iranians.
Secord's outfit, in fact, purchased the Bible, and there was a bit of a quiz round the office (’ ask the secretary’) to find a fitting inscription for it.
But North had one up his sleeve already, right there in the next verse of Galatians, soon to become exceedingly well known in the loopy, spidery hand of the President.
And the Scripture, forseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying, ‘All the nations shall be blessed in you.’
‘This is a promise that God gave to Abraham,’ North said Reagan had told him, in the slightly hectoring tone he always had in the North dreams; ‘Who am I to say that we should not do this?’
The religious element was a ploy, as was everything else.
Both sides had an incentive, when negotiating, to link God to their endeavours, and both fell out of godliness fairly quickly once the talks broke up: North desperate to eat and to get more tape for ‘the freakin' machine’, the Iranians telephoning round to try to get call-girls to come out to their hotel.
Yet even on the tapes of the talks, considerably less gilded than the memoranda, it let in a little light for a moment.
And, as Secord noted, it kept the Iranians confused.
During one of the breaks in the Washington meetings, one of the heads of the Iranian delegation took Secord aside and asked, in Secord's words, ‘What's with this guy North?
We just left a country full of mullahs, and what do I find here but another goddamn mullah.’
North reported back that the line was working; the Second Channel had noted to Cave ‘that RR being a man of God had removed the only argument they had — that Allah was on their side.’
A strong religious element also naturally coloured the hostage story.
Two of the captives, Lawrence Jenco and Benjamin Weir, were clergymen (Jenco a Catholic priest, Weir a Presbyterian minister); Terry Waite, a lay advisor to the Archbishop of Canterbury, was trying to organize their release until he himself was kidnapped in 1987.
North worked with Waite, helping him with transport, using him as a cover, to an extent that is still not public.
He also worked with the Cardinal Archbishop of New York, John O'Connor, in ways that are still not known; his notebooks are full of calls to and from the archbishop's office.
On occasion he tried to recruit the Pope into his efforts, and the Americans in general could never understand why the Pope-like Ayatollah (’ His Holiness the  Imam’) could not with a snap of his fingers, get the hostages released.
America might be a superpower, as the Iranians kept saying, but Iran — as Hakim put it — was a ‘super religious power’, one that might easily find the pretext of some religious occasion to persuade Hizbollah to set the captives free.
All the Bible readings, therefore, the quotations and claims and aspirations, could be seen as part of the religious boilerplate current in the Middle East: as current as lists of arms.
But North also had his ‘personal obligation’.
Release of the hostages, he jotted down in his notebooks, was ‘the greatest Christian task’.
God was not brought into his messages about Nicaragua, the burning public crusade; but the release of the hostages was evidently something that needed frequent and private intercession, by Poindexter and McFarlane too, at the least.
Even complete outsiders such as Pat Robertson, an evangelical minister with no security clearance, were asked by North to pray for him because he was going to Beirut to get the hostages out.
‘Pray to God that this works,’ he told Charlie Allen in an update of the latest equation from the White House Situation Room.
‘Lord willing,’ Shultz would sign on to the operation; ‘with the grace of God’the hostages would be home by the summer.
The Iranians had to keep their part of the various bargains, and both sides had to keep to punishingly complicated timetables; after everything possible had been organized, the rest had to be put in God's hands.
It is suggestive that North, in his weary notes, was never quite sure that the Lord would help.
Perhaps His seal of approval was never quite so firmly over this operation as it was over the contras; perhaps that was why he needed to be importuned.
The one time North thought He had really come through (’ Thank God — He answers prayers’), was a cruel tease.
In exchange for most of a shipment of Hawk parts worth $6.5m, no hostages appeared; and the hopelessness of the enterprise was laid out as clearly as if a hand had drawn it in the heavens.
Indeed, as even North acknowledged at the end, it was an operation that was damned.