

Events
The autonomy of committees and of people
After the Popular Revolution of 1973–4 the districts of Libya in theory became autonomous and sovereign; in practice they did not because a more or less restricted elite in the centre created the budgets, policies and political institutions.
Although that elite might hear advice from vigorous and tactful committee chairmen, and had personal informal contacts in the districts, it remaining the final and authoritative decision-making body.
Oil revenues were state revenues, and in Libya — depending on the price of oil — the petroleum industry created between 50 per cent and 80 per cent of gross domestic product: budgets for the distribution of this wealth could scarcely be other than central budgets.
In these circumstances, most Libyans, being realistic and pragmatic, did not apply those elements of Qaddafi's ideology which asserted the independence of local communities, the abolition of central government, to resolve practical problems.
Politically speaking the issue of local autonomy and sovereignty scarcely ever arose: people recognized popular committees as valuable means of access to resources; in their democratic aspect most educated Libyans thought of them as rhetorical devices, not really conferring power on a community, but representing curious elaborations of ideology in what was really a simple and straightforward problem of administration of services.
The younger enthusiasts of revolution, those who fervently accepted the ideals of The Green Book , seemed not to recognize the hard political work of the administrators nor to pay much attention to such discrepancies between ideology and practice as forced themselves into the consciousness of Libyans with wider experience of the ways of government.
So it was only on rare occasions that the issue of  local sovereignty arose: usually when a person — a single individual — got carried away by indignation or by enthusiasm to raise points which prudent men, a little weary of what they considered to be rhetoric, tended to suppress.
The 1979 local Assemblies throughout the country debated Libya's relations with Malta; they were to advise on the question whether Libya should give economic aid to her ally.
In Ajdabiya a young man, Wunis Abdulhadi, the brother of the lawyer Abdulsalam Abdulhadi, pointed out that The Financial Times had already announced the formation of Libyan-financed joint enterprises and that the government had given months ago; he concluded there was no point in discussing the issue.
He made a similar point about a rise in salary for municipal employees: there was no possibility of seriously debating that unless the local Assembly knew what they might otherwise spend the money on, and what the total budget for the municipalities was — and information on both points was not forthcoming.
Wunis, a young oil company official, was to some extent moved by indignation about the deceitfulness of the government; he was also perhaps self-consciously applying those notions of good efficient management which he had gained from his oil company training: decisions about expenditure have to be made in a context of opportunity costs, of an overview of expenditure as a whole.
It is a waste of time to debate issues which are already settled.
Whatever his motives, his contribution was unwelcome: he was, he said, taken to one side and told so; he seemed to suffer no other reprisals.
Another incident which raised sovereignty as a public and formal issue was more complex: the formal cause was not indignation but the pertinacious enthusiasm of an Ajdabiyan municipal policeman.
In the autumn of 1978 the manager of the canteen at the Occidental Petroleum plant at Zuwaitina —— a canteen run by a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan Hotels Ltd — received a consignment of fifty-five gross of tins of processed milk.
This milk, virtually the only kind available for purchase in Libya outside the major cities, was imported and distributed by the Food and Dairy Products Committee in Tripoli, a national organization.
The Jordanian canteen manager noticed that the expiry date stamped on the cases by the Dutch manufacturers had already passed; he sent a telex to Tripoli explaining his reasons for refusing to accept delivery, and then went on holiday.
His deputy, a Scot, later received a  circular from the Food and Dairy Products Committee which extended all expiry dates by a few weeks.
He used the milk in the canteen and also put it on sale in the shop used by resident employees of Occidental and by Libyans and others who held passes to enter the compound.
One such was an Ajdabiyan municipal policeman, one of the body of men employed to enforce local traffic and marketing regulations, rules about the disposal of garbage — all those minor matters which make for such amenity as the growing towns manage to achieve.
The policeman, seeing the expiry date on the cartons of tinned milk, promptly issued a summons against the Jordanian manager for selling milk which was unfit for human consumption.
Shortly afterwards the Jordanian returned from holiday.
His defence, to start with, was the circular from the Tripoli Committee extending the expiry date on the milk.
The municipal police argued that the manufacturer's expiry date was the true one, so the Jordanian asked Tripoli to intervene to tell the local police that they had no power to override the decision of a national committee.
The issue thus escalated: the chairman of the Municipal Committee (the ‘Mayor’) received messages from the Food and Dairy Products Committee which he discussed with his Chief of Police, who in turn had a word with his subordinate.
The police became adamant: they had the power to decide what was fit, what unfit, in Ajdabiya district.
Moreover, Ajdabiya was sovereign: the Mayor should point out to Tripoli that Tripoli committees had no power to dictate to Ajdabiya.
Sometimes even junior Libyan officials dug their heels in on particular points of practical application of rules, and rejected all attempts by their colleagues and superiors to persuade, cajole, order, bully them into expediting business.
Individuals took initiative and unexpectedly applied rules which others had ignored in the interest of speedy administration.
(Foreigners, when it happened to them, sometimes considered it a manifestation of xenophobia; but such evidence as there is suggests it was indiscriminate, an endemic propensity to sudden rigour which overcame individuals from time to time and afflicted everyone in contact with the official thus possessed.)
At first, the Zuwaitina canteen milk seemed to everyone concerned an instance of just such a letter-of-the-law possession ,The realization that it was an issue of constitutional  principle came slowly, when the Jordanian's lawyer (Abdulsalam Abdulhadi) outlined his defence.
The Mayor then faced the prospect of the defence arguing in open court that Ajdabiya was not autonomous, was indeed subject to the authority of Tripoli, while his prosecuting policemen argued that Ajdabiya was independent and sovereign.
If he lost the case the Mayor's standing in Tripoli — an important asset to any committee chairman — would be damaged; he would have been even worse off if he won, and the judges decided that Ajdabiya really was independent of Tripoli.
In the event Libyan pragmatism prevailed and neither defence nor prosecution raised the constitutional issue; for it was unexpectedly discovered that the Jordanian's deputy had signed an acceptance of legal responsibility for the canteen while his superior was on holiday.
The police had summonsed the wrong man, and the court dismissed the case against him.
The police did not bring a prosecution against the Scottish deputy manager.
Although people occasionally discussed questions of local autonomy in private, they rarely raised them, even obliquely, in public .
For some Ajdabiyans the cases of Carnation Milk provided an amusing commentary on official inconsistency without having any practical consequences.
One town in eastern Libya did, briefly, assert its sovereignty by formally refusing to implement legislation based on chapter II of The Green Book intended to limit retail trade and to outlaw landlordism.
But this seems a unique case; and while other towns may have had their equivalents of Ajdabiya's tinned milk lawsuit, most places seemed to practice autonomy rather than to assert it.
The farther away they were from the centre of authority the easier it was.
And the farther away they were, the more likely it was that one tribe would dominate the district.
In Kufra, for example, Zuwaya cadres drew back from imposing the full rigours of socialist regulation on members of opposed Zuwaya groups; but in Ajdabiya — closer to Tripoli, more heterogeneous because swollen by immigration — Magharba cadres did not refrain from threatening Zuwaya landlords with expropriation (although by 1979 they had not put their threats into action).
In Ajdabiya Zuwaya did not consider the possibility that they might need to sink their differences with the Magharba in order to confront a common enemy.
Indeed some Zuwaya, deeply disappointed by the 1979 election results, said that if the Egyptian army invaded, they would join it to overthrow  the Magharba.
By contrast in Kufra people did acknowledge circumstances in which they might have to unite with their enemies; in 1978 they did in fact do so.
Again, the police (who had only a marginal role in enforcing the new order, and who sometimes perhaps accepted it with less than utter enthusiasm) were more likely to have diverse tribal allegiances in the larger settlements nearer the cities or in strategically more significant places.
In Kufra the police and, so far as it is possible to know, the secret police, were all Kufrans; in Ajdabiya the officers reflected the tribal composition of the local population (although their deputy chief was an outsider on temporary assignment for a few years).
Autonomy, sovereignty of local communities in this non-constitutional sense, was a common practice: it was an effect of distance and of tribal homogeneity.
Elections in Ajdabiya in 1979
So community autonomy was a contingent achievement of those who were more distant from central power, and who had a potential common loyalty against outsiders, even if it was not active all of the time.
But although Ajdabiya and Kufra were theoretically sovereign, it would be a mistake to think of their independence as deriving directly from central policy.
Whatever the outcome, in Qaddafi's ideology community sovereignty was a means to an end: he intended the abolition of central government to liberate individuals, to enable them to exercise power directly and to bypass intervening agencies which obstructed the will of the people.
The Green Book thus proposed that each ‘individual member of the people’ will have his or her sovereignty maintained only in regimes  established according to‘The Third Universal Way’.
The great stress placed upon personal sovereignty makes the way of The Green Book more democratic than any other.
For the chief defect of parliamentary democracy is that it is representative: when a person elects a representative he necessarily surrenders part of his sovereignty to him.
Moreover, candidates for election form parties: the purpose of a party is to win an election, or, in Qaddafi's words, ‘to rule over non-members of the party’(chapter I, ‘The party’).
Parliamentary democracy, no less than one-party state democracy, is a usurpation of personal sovereignty.
‘Thus it becomes clear that Representation is fraud ’(chapter I, ‘Parliaments’).
Similarly with proletarian dictatorship: ‘under genuine democracy there is no excuse for one class to crush other classes for its own benefit’(chapter I, ‘Class’).
And in any case the dominating class will come to be internally differentiated, and will necessarily exhibit features of class stratification.
Domination and usurpation of sovereignty are not democratic; true democracy consists in the exercise of personal sovereignty directly, or through rigidly mandated delegates: in short, the only just government is one which is non-representative.
How unexpected, therefore, that Libya should have had such frequent elections — events which are the typical political rituals of party democracies.
Indeed, with elections to popular committees and the executive committees of the local Assembly, Libyans went to the polls every eighteen months or so.
True, Qaddafi does not call these events ‘elections’.
He writes that people ‘choose’yakhtaru ) members of committees (see chapter I, ‘Popular congresses and people's committees’); but everyone else called these choosings ‘elections’(intikhab ): older people had experience, younger ones the tradition of elections under the monarchy; and they assimilated these procedures.
They talked of elections.
How else could you get representatives?
Why else would you hold an election?
It may be helpful to describe an election, the general procedures and the contingent events.
For Libyans chose their non-representatives without formal political debate, and without ballot boxes, which made their procedures different in important respects from those of a Western democracy.
Moreover, since Libyans voted (sata : ‘to give voice’) without benefit of attendant hustings, they had no illusion that the outcome was determined by the multiple decisions of individual  minds concerned with policy or ideology.
Ajdabiyans expected to go to the polls in the winter of 1978–9, and in anticipation their political activists had drawn up two lists of candidates for each of the fifteen popular committees.
One was the work of Abdulnabi al-Hatash and his Majbari assistant in consultation with the leaders of their dependent groups; the other was the work of the shaikhs of three of the five Zuwaya sections, who had consulted with Sulaiman Musbah and his brother Bil Qasim and other young men.
Tripoli postponed the elections until February; Ajdabiyans confidently expected them on 1 February, and after that day the chairman of the local Assembly telephoned Tripoli each afternoon to ask if he should hold the poll.
On the evening of 6 February Ministry of Information landrovers toured Ajdabiya announcing the ward committee elections for the next day and that Ajdabiyans were to elect the popular committees on the day after.
So on 8 February the voters of Ajdabiya town assembled on the football pitch, together with a television crew, some police and a commission headed by a Captain Awud from Benghazi, and staffed by members of Ajdabiya's own local Assembly.
Each voter who entered showed his identify card for an official to check his right to vote and to record his name and number.
At ten o'clock the gates were shut to prevent a sudden influx of new voters — anyone could leave, no one could enter.
The turn-out on that day was about 2300.
Captain Awud then presented the candidates for the first committee — as it happened, the development committee.
They were a young primary school teacher from Awlad Shaikh who appeared in the Magharba list and a professor of economics from Benghazi University with a United States doctorate, who unfortunately  was unable to be present himself, but was supported by the Zuwaya.
Captain Awud proposed that, since everyone knew the total of voters, they needed to count the votes for one candidate only.
He asked the voters to divide into two groups.
The supporters of the primary school teacher should go to the northern half of the pitch; those of the professor, to the southern half.
The people divided: Magharba to the north, Zuwaya to the south; and the committee marshalled the Magharba into the northwesterly quarter; they set up a teller's desk near the goalposts, and the voters walked behind the goal-posts; past a clerk, returning to the pitch where they watched, chatted, and listened to the count.
The clerk touched each elector on the head, and counted each poll aloud over a megaphone.
After one hundred polls he started again from one, and the teller marked off the hundred votes.
A police-officer kept an independent check.
When the teller announced the Magharba vote at 1235, implying a Magharba majority, the Zuwaya immediately protested that Magharba were present who had no right to vote: after a check of identity cards some men left and they began the vote again, this time counting both groups of supporters as they passed behind their goals.
The time was 1.30 p.m., three hours after the first count began.
Near the end of the second count a fight broke out at the Zuwaya goal because the teller, the secretary to the local Assembly and technically above suspicion, but also Maghrabi and therefore watched very carefully, claimed to have recorded 900 votes.
The Zuwaya thought it should be 1000 and so did the policeman.
The teller then offered to accept their count, but the Zuwaya objected that he might have stolen more than a hundred votes.
Some people began to throw stones, the police hustled the teller off the pitch into a police car and drove him hurriedly away.
In the discussion which followed the Zuwaya argued that five hours had passed and they had elected no one: in view of the late hour and the irregularities (another Magharba member of the local Assembly, doubling as an electoral officer, was suspected of cheating and was escorted out by police) it would be better to hold the elections another day.
The Magharba leaders resisted this: they thought they were in the majority, and feared that after such a confrontation the Zuwaya might muster more voters for a second encounter.
The captain left the  pitch to telephone Tripoli, and returned saying that he would call new elections on Saturday.
Later that evening, however, loudspeaker vans cruised the town, announcing the election for Friday, the next day.
And on the next day the Zuwaya did indeed muster a majority of 117 votes in the first count.
This time the Magharba protested, and did so with such vigour that the electoral commission's table was overturned and Captain Awud broke his arm.
He went to hospital and the police put a cordon sanitaire across the pitch while the Chairman of the Popular Congress phoned Tripoli to find out how to conduct the proceedings when the returning officer had retired hurt.
After an hour, and for no comprehensible reason, the police removed their cordon.
A fight broke out within minutes, and lasted for several hours.
Shots were fired — by civilians everybody later agreed; fighting spread to nearby streets, several people were wounded, and the event was once again abandoned.
During the night the police sealed off the hospital so that no one might know precisely who was wounded or the number of casualties.
A rumour spread that an unidentified victim had died of his wounds.
(As it turned out, the rumour was false.)
For the next few days Ajdabiya was extremely unsettled, and men showed all the conventional signs of being in crisis, and on the verge of further violent action.
Impromptu discussion groups formed whenever a man sat outside his house.
Young Zuwaya talked with anger and shock, lips and hands trembling, about the perfidy of the Magharba.
Some older men went into quasi-mourning: unshaven, heads wrapped in scarves, eyes red, serious and withdrawn.
Twenty or so young adults armed with pickaxe handles set up a road-block sealing off Sidi Hasan, the Zuwaya ward in the south-west of the town, for two days.
Amarabout, a Zaidani, turned up and toured the streets in his Mercedes; Sulaiman Musbah and his brother and some other Zuwaya went to Benghazi to protest about the irresponsible withdrawal of the police.
Discussions took place in the street behind the barricades, and in private houses, about future tactics.
Magharba reinforcements from Bishr turned up and camped in a clump of trees a few kilometres west of town.
The original Zuwaya list had included men from other groups.
For instance, although the Farjana tribe generally supported Magharba, one section was in dispute with the  others over land rights: the Zuwaya nominated a man from this dissident section.
The Sidi Hasan ward committee, chosen on 7 February, had also included two men (an al-Khaldi and a Farjani) married to Zuwaya women and resident in the ward.
This, Zuwaya argued, showed their good faith, their lack of obsession with archaic loyalties, and their reluctance to dominate Ajdabiya.
As a result of the unprovoked attack by Magharba they decided to raise the stakes, and drew up a new list of candidates who were all Zuwaya, and all possessed of doctorates.
(‘Doctor’ was a title which people used somewhat freely when the heat of argument led them to assert their tribal group was the one most qualified by objective criteria of modernity to rule a district.)
On 14 February there was a third attempt to hold the election.
An entire commission came in by bus from Benghazi and changed the locale from the football club to the playground of a school which had one entrance, telephones and offices where any necessary discussion could be held in private.
Troops from Benghazi lined the perimeter of the playground, and were posted with machine-guns on the roofs of buildings overlooking the election.
Soldiers searched all voters as they entered the school gates and relieved them of pocket-knives, heavy belts, walking-sticks and a few more obviously offensive weapons.
Zuwaya and Magharba tellers also counted them unofficially as they went in.
What happened next is uncertain, but at some point — either after they had completed their own private count, or after the first vote — the Zuwaya protested to the commission that they were outnumbered by four votes (1261 to 1257) because the Magharba had infiltrated voters from the outlying districts of Bishr and Marada.
The commission overruled them, and the Zuwaya left the playground en bloc .
They sat in the streets near the school listening to the amplified announcements of successive unanimous votes for Magharba candidates, men — as one bank manager said indignantly and exaggeratedly —‘without a school-leaving certificate between them’.
Some Ajdabiyans expressed discontent at the muddle and disorder of that troubled week.
ft was undemocratic; it was not how an election should be run.
They saw it as a series of  failures, lapses from the ideal procedures by which a community ought to make its political decisions.
Zuwaya said they would not have wanted to win an election that way; and some Magharba — admittedly few, the majority being unquestioningly jubilant — said that just ends had been achieved by improper means.
Perhaps they compared what had occurred with elections in the Libyan past, or in other countries, and found their proceedings undignified when measured against an American presidential campaign, or the decorum of a Moscow election.
But those are ceremonial events in which citizens reaffirm their surrender of sovereignty and their carelessness of their personal autonomy.
The Libyan system was ostensibly designed to preserve those natural attributes of humankind: some of its elements can be explained by the intention to create a non-representative direct democracy.
For example, each Libyan citizen was answerable for his performance of his democratic duty.
Therefore there was no secret ballot, and Libyans voted as members of a parliament or congress do — publicly and in theory answerable for their actions.
But when a system precludes counting papers, heads must be counted instead; and when sixty people contest thirty seats each voter would have to be polled, physically, thirty times.
That is one reason even a smoothly-run and uneventful Libyan poll took some time to complete.
Another aspect of Qaddafi's theory of democracy is that parties were forbidden because they could only represent, and could represent only sectors of the people.
For this reason there were no candidates' addresses, no attempts to persuade the voters that one candidate's policies were better than another's.
For to choose a man on the ground that you agree with him more than his rivals is quite clearly to choose a representative; moreover, the set of people who agree with a candidate comes to look very like a party as soon as they concert their actions.
It therefore seems directly consistent with the theory that candidates were forbidden to try to persuade the voters that they had better policies or attitudes than other candidates: a directive which had distinctive consequences for the pattern of the contest.
In a parliamentary party democracy a large part of the electoral contest is the campaign: the candidates confront each other and  attempt to persuade the individual members of the electorate to cast votes in their favour.
The ballot becomes the test of the candidates' success, and it involves a contest — for example, a contest between the party machines to get their voters to the polls.
But the voting itself does not bring large numbers of voters into open confrontation: a secret ballot is also an individual ballot.
Since the Libyan system allowed no formal campaign with a beginning and a pre-announced end, the agonistic element was concentrated in the ballot which became much more a contest between voters than one between candidates.
Polls in medium or small communities were not often violent; but it is probable that the same tensions were present as in Ajdabiya, and that they were exacerbated by the absence of campaign, by the necessity of choosing among ideologically undifferentiated candidates, and by the prolonged confrontation of voters in a confined space.
These features seem to be directly related to the theory of non-representative democracy.
Other aspects are more indirectly related.
The turn-out was about 16 per cent.
No women voted at all, which mainly accounts for the low proportion.
But in addition it was very difficult for unaligned voters to participate.
Some merchants and shopkeepers in Ajdabiya, immigrants from other regions, had no affiliation with either the Magharba or the Zuwaya.
Given that the majority was aligned on grounds which had nothing to do with policy, it was difficult for strangers to vote so publicly and at the same time to hold aloof from an alignment in which they had no personal interest, and which might even have damaged their commercial interests.
Some Zuwaya and Magharba also thought that the postures adopted by their fellow tribesmen were undemocratic and retrograde, and so they too stayed away.
For they would have had either to vote for all the candidates on one list (implying a commitment they rejected) or they would have had to switch from one list to  another during the voting.
Even if they had political or ideological grounds for doing so, the heat and publicity of the contest, the expectations of fellow-tribesmen and of the opposing side, and the subsequent social sanctions, would indeed have made it difficult to cross from one end of the pitch to the other in the middle of the ballot.
As they had no policy grounds for changing sides during the ballot, had they done so people could have only interpreted their action as a betrayal of tribal identity.
For these reasons Magharba and Zuwaya who were not tribally minded stayed away: voters who regarded themselves as modernizing were silent, and the turn-out was somewhat lower than would otherwise have been the case.
But it does not follow that all those who did attend went with the intention of demonstrating tribal solidarity.
All young Libyans had learned that the Libyan political system was nearer than any other to Athenian popular democracy of the classical period, and they had learned a highly idealized version of the calmness, rationality and dignity of the proceedings of the ancient Greeks.
On the first day of the Ajdabiyan ballot many young men went to some length to insist that what was about to occur was closer to Athenian practice than anything that could possibly occur in Britain; their disappointment at the outcome of the day was movingly transparent.
Certainly some people, particularly those who drew up the initial list of candidates, tried to gain advantage by appealing to tribal loyalties, but that led them to include candidates who were not Zuwaya, or not Magharba, in the hope of widening their mass appeal.
However, it is the fact of opposition itself which calls forth solidarity: opponents oppose you because you are Zuwaya (or Magharba), and that leads you to rally to your own people.
ft is the essence of such a system that the other side is always the one to start trouble.
Elections in Kufra in 1979
In Kufra the struggle was between two sections of the Zuwaya: the Mannaia and the Awlad Amira.
A third section, Jlulat, divided its support between these two groups.
Tibbu further complicated electoral contests there.
They constituted an ethnic minority, had a tribal organization independent of the Zuwaya, and an identity and language which linked them with Chad.
Within Kufra they were conspicuously absent from the extensive public housing scheme, from public employment and from the retail and wholesale trading sector.
Most Tibbu lived in Zawiya, the central administrative settlement of Kufra; but there were still some fifteen households at Qadr Fi, a marginally cultivable area which possessed Kufra's only remaining palm-fronded houses, the only houses which did not have electricity and, in the central group of oases, the only ones without running water.
Relations with Tibbu played some part in conflicts between Mannaia and Awlad Amira.
In 1975 Abdulkarim Ihsan al-Abairsh, a nephew of Umar al-Abairsh, died in fighting between Mannaia and Tibbu, and three Tibbu youths died in the reprisals which followed.
When Awlad Amira took control of the popular committees a few months later, ousting Mannaia from office, Umar al-Abairsh and his supporters alleged that they could have done so only with Tibbu support; they said only Awlad Amira, poor and unenterprising, would stoop so low to get their hands on the administration: Awlad Amira denied establish the truth of such allegations: Awlad Amira denied them, as they would; Tibbu pointed to their political inactivity, their poverty and lack of numbers, and their peacefulness (except under provocation), suggesting that Mannaia were scarcely dispassionate when they talked about the results of elections.
What is clear is that under an Awlad Amira administration Tibbu did not seem to have acquired any of those ordinary benefits which were available to Zuwaya.
Ahmad Delo then began his recruiting drive among travelling Chaddians who were passing through Kufra.
All this occurred during the first months of the Awlad Amira administration, while Mannaia still smarted from electoral defeat; and at that time some lineages did not exclude the possibility of further Tibbu reprisals after the earlier fighting and homicides.
Umar al-Abairsh, therefore, took a grave view of the  activities of Ahmad Delo and his presumed army.
‘The Awlad Amira are arming the Tibbu against us.’— But is it not the government which is responsible?
‘Awlad Amira are deceiving the government.’
— But surely only Chad nationals are recruited?
‘Nobody can tell the difference: Awlad Amira are deceiving the government into giving arms to our enemies.’
By all accounts relations between the two Zuwaya sections were extremely tense; some Mannaia lived in continual expectation of violence.
About this time Zuwaya shaikhs and cadres attempted a reconciliation among Zuwaya sections: they held an assembly of shaikhs in Ajdabiya, including Zuwaya from Sebha and Tripolitania.
A Zuwayi poet printed a poem celebrating Zuwaya unity and solidarity.
The Awlad Amira administration paid the travel costs of all the Kufra delegates, including Mannaia shaikhs.
About this time, too — that is to say, between 1976 and 1978 — it was established on impeccable authority to everyone's satisfaction that the Tibbu were Jews.
The news provoked among Zuwaya an instant recognition of necessary truth: they had always suspected something of the kind.
In this period the Awlad Amira secretary of the Kufra Assembly executive committee fell from grace and left office, becoming night watchman in a school.
The circumstances were far from clear: they involved Ikhwan, land formerly held as religious endowment (waqf ), Tibbu, Ajdabiyan kinsmen of the Ikhwan, the army, and a united Zuwaya front.
It was difficult to ask some months later about the events and personnel: most Zuwaya were understandably reticent and those who were more ready to talk were not always obviously reliable.
The account which follows is pieced together from different sources: uncorroborated details are excluded and some motivations remain obscure.
Mannaia said that the Awlad Amira secretary had planned to unite Ikhwan and Tibbu behind Awlad Amira.
What he himself claimed was that he wished to enfranchise the Tibbu: he proposed to give land to Tibbu from the expropriated  endowments of the Sanusi order.
This land did not belong to the Ikhwan, but perhaps the secretary thought to confer an aura of legitimacy on the grant by getting the consent of the erstwhile administrators of it.
At any rate he persuaded an Ikhwan to offer land (which neither of them owned) to a Tibbu.
The land in question was in that part of northern Zawiya which is called Mannaia, and it seems beyond doubt that the Mannaia had granted it to the Sanusi order in the 1870s.
Even though Mannaia also had no serious claim to it themselves, the prospect of such an offer was deeply offensive: an Ikhwan prompted by an Amiri giving Mannaia land to a Tibbu.
In any case the proposed grant violated the more general principle that the Zuwaya corporately owned Kufra.
Most landowners were Zuwaya or their assignees: people who were not Zuwaya and who owned land were (Zuwaya said) either clients or descendants of Zuwaya slaves, or affines incorporated into the Zuwaya genealogy.
The Ikhwan (Zuwaya said) benefited from the general protection the Zuwaya gave the Sanusi order and its officials.
Hence, all the land was owned by Zuwaya.
So, when an Ikhwan (widely understood to be fronting for the Amiri secretary) proposed to make a grant to a Tibbu, ‘all Zuwaya’, including at least some Awlad Amira, protested.
He felt threatened.
He was one of those Ikhwan who had re-established links with their tribes of origin following the abolition of the order in 1969.
As it happened, the links he had remade were with the Magharba in Ajdabiya.
They responded eagerly to the plea for help from their re-attached and perhaps rather intimidated kinsmen.
Some of them came to Kufra, and a deputation of Zuwaya went out to meet them in the desert, inviting them to turn back.
They refused.
When they arrived they attended a mass meeting at the Kufra sportsclub to discuss the issue.
Perhaps because the authorities thought the police were too closely involved, as individuals, in the business of the meeting (in Kufra they were Zuwaya to a man), army units turned out from their camp to supervise the meeting.
Zuwaya claimed that a nervous young conscript lost control and began firing his submachine gun; if that was not the case, Zuwaya said, at any rate the fighting had begun accidentally.
Some Tibbu and a soldier died.
No Tibbu got land.
The secretary lost Awlad Amira support and became a night watchman in a school.
It was rumoured that an army officer was transferred because of the events.
In the elections that followed about a year later in 1979 the Awlad Amira (who had ousted the Mannaia from office in 1976) lost control of thirteen of the fifteen popular committees.
The group of Mannaia lineages most closely involved in the earlier bloodshed and the anti-Tibbu movement provided six committee members of whom two became chairmen, a high proportion given their numbers, and a high ratio of chairmen to members.
The results thus apparently conformed to the pattern of alternation between Awlad Amira and Mannaia, those groups in the vanguard of internecine struggle and ethnic oppression getting disproportionate office.
But lineage pure and simple was not the only consideration.
Mannaia seem to have taken care to propose people who were indeed from the active lineages but who lived in Tazarbu, and were therefore not personally involved in the conflict with Awlad Amira: while insisting on the principle of unrelenting solidarity, they tacitly mitigated the provocation by proposing candidates who had themselves not been active in the dispute.
The most important chairman (of the municipality) was a Jlulat from Tazarbu, that is to say from the category of people least involved in the Kufran disputes.
Although Mannaia were the largest single group of committee members, most of them (about two thirds) were from Tazarbu and from lineages not associated with the struggle.s Moreover, the more important policy and spending chairmanships went mostly to people from this group or to Jlulat.
So, under a surface appearance of Mannaia victory (‘We have eaten everything’, a shaikh's son commented) were signs of a more conciliatory spirit, perhaps reflecting Zuwaya awareness that they ought not to fight among themselves: a solidarity only partly abstract or ethical, related in some degree to the unity they had achieved against the menaced Tibbu-ownership of their land.
Information and argument
Kufrans and Ajdabiyans did not conform to any stereotype of simple, backward tribesmen: it would be wrong to assume from their voting patterns that they were simple mechanical products of a tribal model of society.
They were lawyers and  engineers, cadres and traders, as well as peasant-gardeners and herdsmen.
They were, generally speaking, well informed about international politics and had a sceptical attitude to news; they discussed their government's internal policies and decrees, in particular relating them to different conceptions of government, freedom and justice: their talk of socialism, democracy, dictatorship was by no means purely theoretical.
Qaddafi once sought to demonstrate the new well-being and prosperity of his country by quoting statistics to show that Libya had imported enough radios for each man, woman and child to possess three of them.
Not all of these were re-exported, not all of them junked: Libyans were passionate virtuosi of the shortwave band selector.
For instance, Abdulraham Bu Riziq spent most of the year in camp about twenty miles from Ajdabiya.
(Why?—‘The last time a policeman came here was in 1936; very few people know what happened to him.’)
He had a few animals, got a small catch-crop of grain, but probably lived mostly off government pensions, grants and subsidies to agriculture.
Even the most positivist anthropologist, knowing the statistical significance of categories of population, would not have been immune from a romantic curiosity, would perhaps have spent more time visiting this wastefully subsidized relic of the past than a cool assessment of scientific value could warrant.
You might go hoping for some insight into the goat-hair experiences of Professor Peters or Evans-Pritchard, but, after the initial polite questions, you are asked if you have heard the news from Iran.
You would search your mind for some suitably graphic bulletin snippet: ‘The BBC says the Shah left in tears.’
‘That was this morning’: the afternoon broadcasts from Tel Aviv and from Kuwait had each displayed some fear of the future; he had never expected to hear them agree; but at least Palestine (i.e. Israel) had no Shi'is (and so need fear no internal threat).
People who write about the stultifying effects of mass media, the bias of news reports, seem to derive their evidence mostly from industrialized countries where people have a greater trust in the accuracy of the few stations readily available.
When national stations broadcast chiefly in the shortwaves the range of different newscasts available is immediately wider; when people have every expectation that all broadcasts will tell some lies, they use different broadcasts as if they were radio beacons for navigators of truth: knowing the position of  each, they can calculate the co-ordinates of reality with an acceptable degree of certainty.
Zuwaya heard on the BBC Arabic Service that President Sadat had made a speech about Libya: they switched on to Radio Cairo in the evening to listen to it.
Moroccan radio first reported that Libyan troops were supporting Idi Amin Dada's regime in Uganda.
The news was repeated by Radio Monte Carlo's Arabic Service later that day and led to increasingly worried speculation among Libyans, whose own news service remained silent.
People who continued to hope that their government would do nothing to help a black regime were only silenced by rumours that a Russian Ilyushin, laden with Libyan dead and wounded, had refuelled at Kufra airport.
Libyans seemed to listen most to broadcasts from Libya, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Saudi Arabia, London, Monte Carlo and Kuwait.
Many knew the times of news broadcasts from particular stations: they were able to say, ‘It's 4.15: let's listen to Saudiya.’
It was not a uniformly creative search for reality: some people did not listen to news, and others did not interrogate the shortwaves with the sharp skill and interest exhibited so unexpectedly in the tent outside Ajdabiya.
But such sharpness, reminiscent of relaxed but acute questioning of a chance-met traveller to establish intentions and credentials, was not a prerogative of the educated, nor even of the literate.
Many of the radios used in Ajdabiya and Kufra incorporated cassette-recording devices, and it is worth mentioning (because it reinforces the point that the machines were used creatively, actively) how cassettes played a part in the diffusion of information.
Few cassettes were pre-recorded — a result of the restricted importation of foreign, particularly Western, music.
Nevertheless people could listen to Egyptian, Syrian, Lebanese musicians, and the political speeches of Colonel Qaddafi were available cheaply.
They also bought blank cassettes, and Zuwaya used them at least as much to record poems and songs as to re-record other cassettes or broadcast music.
At weddings of the unpretentious kind it was usual for one or two singers to perform songs of their own composition, epic epithalamiums sung to an accompaniment of gentle clapping, interspersed with an antiphonal falsetto nasal chant from another singer.
People usually recorded these performances; indeed sometimes two or three glittering stereophonic radio-cassette recorders would be placed within microphone distance.
People would play the tapes back afterwards and would sometimes send them to distant relatives.
Two or three Zuwaya had reputations as excellent poets and would record their poems if pressed: indeed, one made a charge for doing so, a practice not approved by all.
The poems were then sent to Zuwaya in other settlements.
It was emotionally captivating to see a truck laden with consumer goods draw up at Tazarbu, to hear the driver announce that he had a new poem from Muhammad Dabub in Ajdabiya, and to see shopkeepers, customers and driver sit in the shade to listen to the poem.
When it was over the truck was unloaded and normal business resumed.
Some poems were conventional love poems; others were historical, recounting well-known stories about the Zuwaya past; still others were comments on contemporary events (sometimes compared to the historical) which informed, and also helped to create a consensus of opinion.
It would have been difficult to estimate the extent of this use of cassettes even if the events had not been so emotionally charged.
One Kufran shopkeeper stocked as many blank as recorded cassettes in the period before Western recordings became scarce, but it is difficult to say with certainty that his practice reflected sound commercial sense.
What is certain is that the creative use of recorders was a general expectation: the saintly and amiable Ahmad Bu Aziza, asked to record an account of Zuwaya trading, refused to do so on the spot, but made an appointment for two days later ‘to give me time to make the poem’.
It was as difficult to record the casual speech of Zuwaya as it was to take an unposed photograph.
Television did not provide the same variety of stations as the radio: in Ajdabiya and Kufra the only accessible signals were broadcast from the state television station.
Fewer people had receivers: perhaps one in twenty or twenty-five households in Ajdabiya, and perhaps only one in a hundred in Kufra.
In Tazarbu in 1979 two households had television sets, with twenty-metre aerials.
Programmes were mostly serious; entertainment was mostly a cartoon for children (‘Sindibad and Ali Baba’) which also had some following among adults; people much enjoyed a Syrian comedy series, and owners of video-recorders would tape it, to replay it for friends and visitors.
A  Libyan-made police-detective thriller also came into the category of light entertainment.
After the early evening entertainment there was usually a religious programme, with a break for people to say their prayers, and then an interlude in which a beautifully calligraphed page or two of The Green Book was shown while a voice-over, basso profondo through an echo-chamber, intoned the words.
The news itself was usually good: the dispatch or receipt of telegrams of congratulation or support; the arrival of a foreign head of state or minister showing Qaddafi acting as head of state, reminding viewers that Libya has its place in the world and is respected.
Protests against the Iranian regime before the fall of the Shah were also shown.
Although in 1978–9 Libyans could time in to Cairo's radio broadcasts to hear abuse of their leader, Libya's news services did not air the quarrels with neighbours.
A magazine programme showing the achievements of the Libyan nation usually followed the news.
Occasionally there were special programmes: a political rally; World Cup football; the arrival of Palestinian fighters into Libyan asylum; an encounter between Qaddafi and the planners, geographers and economists responsible for some major new project; a discussion of chapter III of The Green Book ; a People's Court hearing of charges against President Sadat (in absentia).
These sometimes interrupted the schedules, as did extensive reportage of elections, of local Assemblies.
The National Assembly was transmitted in its entirety.
Television sets were rare and people watched in groups; in the oases of the south it was customary to watch television out of doors in the cool of the summer evening, where any person who happened to pass by could sprawl on the sand.
In the towns this did not happen — people watched indoors, in a guestroom.
Even so, it was not unusual for friends and kinsmen to drop in for a few minutes, an hour, to see the news or a comedy.
In wealthy households women had a second set inside.
Any group of intimate Libyans, in such circumstances, would respond aloud to what they saw and heard: at ease, politically interested and informed, talking back at the set was the rule.
Men tried their wits, and their wit, against the set and its perhaps unvarying message.
Those who had video-recorders also showed films for their friends.
Discussion of politics, political argument, was thus well-informed and critical.
People listened to their radios with  scepticism, repeated what they had heard, and argued about it.
They used cassette-recorders to circulate poems and songs, some of which were about current affairs, others political in the sense that they recounted events in which Zuwaya acquitted themselves well.
They watched television with pleasure, but treated its political messages with much the same scepticism as they did ordinary speeches and broadcasts: it did not seem that television had greater persuasive power to mould Zuwaya minds than other media.
The style of discussion — Zuwaya rhetoric — was generally subdued and relaxed, governed by two apparent rules: first, it was shameful to display personal interests openly; and, secondly, it was impolite to disagree with guests or hosts.
People were nevertheless quick to identify an interested argument and they did not feel disagreements less keenly because they understated them.
In a guestroom or in a group of friends and kinsmen the characteristic devices of discussion were the pithy interjection and the rhetorical question.
When someone spoke at length he imposed unstated opinions or principles on his audience by assuming that they shared them.
This was not an unconscious result of everybody's inability to be value-free, but an achieved conventional politeness, consciously assumed to avoid giving offence: it also, incidentally, put the burden of being disagreeable on anyone who wished to oppose the unstated assertions.
Conversation thus tended to be laconic and allusive and it sometimes scarcely seemed to possess a thread of connection between one remark and the next: this was however an illusion, seductive enough to a stranger ignorant of background, all the more so to a stranger not fully in command of the language.
The illusion was shattered when someone turned the conversation with an interjection, laying out the assumptions of the speaker, imposing others which seemed as good or better.
When this was done briefly and gently, people laughed, shook the speaker and each other by the hand (with a slap of palm against palm) then continued conversation on the new course.
A man who wished to resist such turning could insist on keeping to the subject; and forceful men who had the character of genial good nature could get away with open rebuttal of this kind; but not all people who interrupted with open rebuttals acquired or maintained that character.
People muted their disagreements, incorporated counter-assumptions and  interpretations into statements of fact.
Zuwaya style and etiquette required that people in polite company should not set out arguments of principle, arranged in a hierarchy of priorities, so that they might read off right courses of action from agreed schedules of value.
Which is not to say that statements of fact had no implications of principle.
Zuwaya youths, for example, could bring grim reprisals on their heads by taunting Magharba youths with resonant facts: ‘We killed Pasha Naiz.’
A man who was very friendly with another, or his senior kinsmen, could adopt a more expository technique: he would sit facing him and take his left hand; as he made his points he would take his friend's little finger, move it away from the others and hold it: ‘first…‘then the next finger: ‘second…‘; until he had moved the digits all to one side, like beads on an abacus.
Then he would envelop the whole hand in his, clenching it into a clinching argument, a QED fist.
Sometimes there were only two or three points and the quick QED had something of prestidigitation, of a sleight of hand; even so, it was a compelling way of stating affectionate and didactic disagreement, especially before an audience.
A young man, drafted into the army for an indefinite period, was in despair, and he voiced to a group of eight or nine men his resentment of the army, the government, Colonel Qaddafi, the low military pay, his forthcoming separation from his family and friends.
His mother's brother took his hand.
First, he began, and said that Qaddafi did indeed have faults: that was inescapable, all men have faults; but it was wrong to believe that everything Sadat said about him because Sadat too had faults, and he also had a purpose in saying what he said.
Second, he continued, life was indeed bad — but it used to be much worse.
Qaddafi had done good things: they had schools, hospitals, policemen who behaved themselves.
Libya had no corrupt ministers, everybody had a motor vehicle, and other countries took notice of Qaddafi in the world.
Third, to preserve all this, Libya needed to be strong: they needed an army of a million men, and…
A very much older man, himself conscripted into the mujahidun,(a part-time militia), interrupted: ‘And fourth: everyone's going into the army.
We'll all meet in Uganda.’
The man's efforts to comfort his young nephew collapsed in laughter, men slapping their hands together.
‘True, true.’
Perhaps they thought of the militia fighting in Kampala; perhaps they recognized that an  awkward and in any case grandiose assumption had been pinpointed and pricked.
The youth's uncle, slightly pink, also laughing, accepted the turn in the argument: Idi Amin might be black, he said, but he was a Muslim and he had asked for Libyan aid.
Libya could not be strong unless Islam was strong.
The discussion continued, more or less obliquely and allusively, to weigh the pros (the unity of Islam; the need to fight injustice) against the cons (chiefly, the blackness of Ugandans; the need for Libya to strengthen itself internally, not to waste money and lives abroad) of the foreign adventure.
The boy was forgotten.
Another device of guestroom rhetoric was to ask questions into the air, not directed at anyone, which expected and received the answer sahha !
(‘True’ or perhaps ‘Hear, hear’).
This answer was conventional, comforting, not wholly logical, again allowing the questioner to insinuate his views without having to defend them.
Usually, no doubt, the audience shared the unstated assumptions, but even if they did not, it would have been a solecism to answer the question.
People sometimes asked questions of their television sets.
On one occasion, a group watched a prayer meeting held in Martyr's Square in Tripoli: row upon row of men stood before long carpets spread on the tarmac and performed their prayers: it was an impressive sight.
As the time for the sermon came, the camera moved to reveal that the prayer-leader and preacher was Colonel Qaddafi (in mufti).
‘Is this a mosque or an Assembly?’, the host asked, and switched the programme off.
Perhaps one of the younger men present, a member of a popular committee, could have argued that there is no real distinction: religion and politics are not separate, ‘Islam and socialism’, as the Libyan slogan had it, are one.
But the young cadre made no such move.
It would have been an impolite breach of the conventions of discussion.
More than that, it would have constituted a breach of rules of respect for elders, a denial of social hierarchy inculcated throughout infancy, boyhood, schooldays.
The cadres had not escaped from the precept that even when confronted with error, ignorance, stupidity, a person should treat elders and guests with respect and politeness.
So — in Kufra and Ajdabiya, but perhaps not in Benghazi or Tripoli — it remained difficult for even the most devoted young revolutionary to intervene in such conversations to propagate the doctrine.
A speaker who asked questions expecting the answer ‘True’ sometimes incorporated an elaborated irony by which he attacked the revolution for its failure to uphold principles and policies to which he was, and was known to be, utterly opposed.
A man who wished to build a villa in Benghazi, but was frustrated by his expectation that, if he did, he would have no protection strong enough to prevent immediate expropriation, explained the collapse of his hopes for a more elegant and civilized life.
‘And yet,’ he added, ‘there are builders on that plot now, with an Egyptian engineer, building a palace for an army captain.
Is this socialism?’
‘True, true.’
In 1978 the government abolished private import businesses, and set up its own agency responsible for all international commerce.
Libya imported a high proportion of its food (60 per cent in 1982) and virtually all its consumer goods —— soap, insecticides, shoes, and so on.
Some shortages were inevitable; among them was a dearth of ‘brylcream’(a term used for any pomade) used chiefly by women to make their hair glisten.
One trader happened to have a case of brylcream in stock and over the course of several months he saw the retail price of his 144 jars increase: it doubled, trebled, eventually quintupled.
He was delighted.
Quite apart from the money he eventually made, he had a new argument to use in the continual discussions among traders about the justice and Koranic authority of the government's policy toward commerce.
Are socialist bureaucrats better at supplying a market than private traders?
Are prices lower under this regime?
Would a trader have dared to raise prices so?
He came to his triumphant conclusion: ‘Could socialism be right if such profits fell into his lap through government negligence?’
‘True, true’.
From an avowed anti-socialist such an argument was by no means entirely free of complexities; indeed he seemed aware of them, even to draw pleasure from the difficulty they posed for an opponent who would have to sort out the tangle.
But consider the effect of such conversations on the young man of the revolution, listening to his father chatting with their guests after a pleasant meal.
He was helpless; he was not convinced, but he lacked the self-assurance and moral authority to go back to his office to use his official powers to requisition the people's  promade .
Not all discussion subverted the revolution.
But effective pursuit of some of the revolutionary goals was the province of  older men — of respected ‘average Libyans’, who used their position and influence, their kinship connections and the respect they had earned, to persuade others to do things they thought desirable.
Such a man was Salah Muhammad, of Huaiwiri, who pursued a campaign to get the girls there to attend school after puberty.
Salah was devoted to his school.
It was perhaps more important to him than any abstract notion, such as‘socialism’ or ‘revolution’.
He certainly talked about such things, defended them against some of their critics; but his business, what engrossed him and what he knew well, was the school.
When his own daughter passed the age of twelve, Salah kept her at school and persuaded the parents of six of her contemporaries to do the same.
In the following years other small cohorts followed, and twenty or so girls above the age of twelve attended the school in 1979.
As the first group approached sixteen years Salah tried to get the authorities to open a branch of the primary-school teacher-training college in Huaiwiri so that the girls could continue their education without leaving home.
He argued, quoting The Green Book,that all children should have the opportunity of education, and he thought it most improbable these girls would have this if they had to travel to Zawiya.
Salah said it was much easier to persuade people in a small community: Huaiwiri had only twenty-seven households and girls could continue schooling after puberty because everyone knew everyone else, because in any case no house was closed to any other, and everyone knew that the girls would come to no harm.
Nevertheless Salah's achievement was the result of a complex exercise in oasis politics: first, he had to establish the general principle that women are worthy of education.
This was a modified account of chapter III of The Green Book which argues that justice demands women should be free to fulfil their nature.
In Huaiwiri, as well as Ajdabiya and Benghazi, it was impolitic to speak among men of women's ‘freedom’, as this caused misunderstanding; but it was possible to speak of a condition (that is to say, of education) as a principle and as a practical measure.
Salah argued that lack of education debarred more than half the nation from paid employment and from contributing to Libya's future.
The Green Book recommended that women should be equipped for the tasks which their nature fits them for, and that therefore they should be educated.
When people objected that The Green Book was ‘just words’— a strong condemnation in Huaiwiri — Salah said that of course some parts of it were not as good as others, but it was foolish to condemn everything in it just because some parts of it were wrong.
On education, for example, and speaking as a headmaster, it seemed to him that Qaddafi had written sensible things.
And so the debate continued.
Discussion of the principle of education for women was interminable, oblique, recurring at every social gathering in Huaiwiri — not a dominant or sole topic of conversation but always liable to crop up.
Salah had succeeded in creating a hot issue.
He used three kinds of diplomacy to achieve his aim.
The first was to make the six teachers more acceptable.
They were foreigners; they lived in squalid housing; they cooked and washed for themselves; they were mostly unmarried; they were poor; they were disgruntled at their posting; they were desperately bored mercenaries of the intellect.
There were very few respects in which any of them were even slightly prepossessing.
They kept open house, and in the evenings half a dozen Zuwaya neighbours regularly visited them to play cards and to gossip after supper.
Salah also invited them to his house, to his guestroom, to eat meat at  id al-kabir and other feasts.
No one else did, and Salah was careful to stagger the entertainments so that the foreign teachers (for whom he had a certain distaste) should arrive and leave before the other guests.
But he had made the gesture: these were people for whom you could safely slaughter a sheep.
The next diplomatic process concerned the men who were responsible for the girls.
The first cohort of seven was as follows: a daughter of Salah Muhammad, headmaster; a daughter of teacher Fawzi, the Egyptian who had brought his family to Huaiwiri; a daughter of Muhammad Hammad the oasis nurse; a sister of Hammad Haiba, a trader, head of his household since their father died; a sister of Abdullah Muhammad, a conscript soldier, head of his household since their father died; a daughter of Abdulrahman Yadm, a gardener; a niece of Abdulkarim Faraj (daughter of his widowed sister), a trader.
Salah did not need to persuade himself; and his Egyptian  teacher was also anxious that his daughter should continue —— but he did not want her to be the only one.
Hammad Haiba and Abdullah Muhammad also presented little problem: both were young men, educated, both willing, with proper care and precaution, to allow their sisters to be pioneers.
Abdulrahman was a member of a lineage which had a reputation for learning, and hence was vulnerable to arguments that his children (he had one son and six daughters) should go to school.
Muhammad Hammad was a literate and qualified person, and his eldest son (a clerk in the municipality until he joined the army) was similarly in favour of education.
Finally, Abdulkarim Faraj was a descendant of a slave brought to Huaiwiri by the Bu Matari lineage.
It was notable that Zuwaya from underprivileged lineages, at any rate in Kufra district, were more aware of the opportunities for social mobility through education, and more open to them, than men of longer pedigree.
Slave lines showed a propensity to innovate; and in any case Abdulkarim seemed to think it would not matter crucially what his widowed sister's daughter might do.
All these men, excepting Fawzi, were Zuwaya, and all were therefore related —— they could be shown on a single genealogy.
Sometimes the links were remote or fictitious; but Salah Muhammad invoked them to explain why these particular men should trust him, and he based his approach to them in part on common descent and kinship.
More important to his diplomacy, however, were the links through women, and that was the third line for his diplomacy.
It would be wrong to suggest that women were a liberated force for female emancipation in Huaiwiri.
They were, nonetheless, a sociable and solidary regiment of some strength and purpose, able to evolve a view of issues and to maintain a consensus.
This was largely because of the influence of Salha Mahmud, from Salah's own lineage.
Salha was a woman of strong, open and reassuring character whose links with the women of nearly every household in Huaiwiri through her own daughters and her mother's sisters' descent in the women's line ensured that she had influence in all households.
Her house was a meeting-place for her daughter and their husbands, and conversation and gossip there formed reputation and opinion.
She was in a position to control judgements about marriageability.
Salah himself had no problem about deciding; but his wife no  doubt welcomed authoritative outside opinion: she was the granddaughter of Salha's father's sister, and Salah himself was the grandson of Salha's mother's sister.
His cousin, similarly linked to Salha, married Abdulrahman Yadm's brother.
He had access to Hammad Haiba whose mother's sister was Salah's wife's sister-in-law; and with Salha on his side he could redouble the pressure: Hammad was Salha's grandson.
Similarly with Abdullah Muhammad: he had married Salha's granddaughter; another sister had married Salha's grandson; and yet another sister was mother of another of the girls who had stayed on at school.
That was Salah's third line of approach.
In brief: Salha was directly related to five of the seven households whose girls were in the first cohort, and her acceptance of the headmaster's plans was influential in persuading the mothers of the girls that they should agree.
It is difficult to speak with precision of the details of his diplomacy; but certain general points are clear.
The chief immediate control on women's actions and opinions was other women; and girls who wished for one reason or another to do unusual things needed the tolerance, perhaps even the support of their mothers and their mothers' friends.
Salah persuaded the fathers or brothers of the girls to consider the schemes and these men were reassured to know that women had discussed the matter and had achieved some consensus.
Huaiwiri was in some ways exceptional: Salha was in a formidably strong genealogical position, and the oasis had a small population.
Every piece of indirect evidence suggests that in Huaiwiri control was more concentrated than it was elsewhere.
All the same Salah Muhammad did not have a clear run.
Apart from doubts and hostility toward the notion of education for women, one incident threatened the whole venture.
In 1978 a teacher slapped a girl of the second cohort, then aged fourteen or fifteen.
That would have caused outrage if she had been an infant, since Zuwaya do not slap other people's children.
Discipline was ideally internal to households (where there was legitimate authority): from outsiders, discipline implied social superiority, an authority over people which Zuwaya did not accept from one another, still less from foreigners.
Slapping a nubile girl on the edge of marriageability offended against additional etiquettes and susceptibilities, connoted sexual assault, even sexual rights.
Zuwaya men, for instance were  extremely careful not to touch the marriageable daughters of their kin, friends and neighbours.
To use violence against them was an offence of extreme gravity.
When a foreigner did so, unmarried, poor, with no connections, he added unimaginable presumption to an already serious matter.
In the uproar which followed it was no help at all that the other teachers signed a statement that the girl had been continually insolent and had provoked the teacher beyond reasonable self-control.
Who is he, to be provoked by one of us?
Would he have ‘lost his self-control’ if she had not been a mature person?
Are they saying, they only have control up to a point?
And should we send our daughters to that school?
Schools imply a structure of education, and an authority other than the family and household.
Boys should go to school because they need the skills to get on in the world, because they will spend their lives moving between household and family and the institutions of state and nation.
The teacher's slap, and his colleagues' support, served notice that women, too, would in future be subject to the disciplines of institutions outside the family, that fathers and husbands would have to share their authority over women.
In every practical sense, in Huaiwiri, they already shared that authority — at the least with women, but also on occasion with the law, the army and the health service.
In every symbolic aspect, the professional solidarity of the teachers in asserting their right to discipline nubile girls was a jarring, discordant event which made plain that other authorities would increasingly interfere in the privacy of the family.
The incident provided excitement and argument for some weeks in Huaiwiri, and much work for Salah Muhammad, even though the girls of the first cohort were nearing the end of their course.
The outcome was a victory for household over institutional authority: the teacher, transferred to an even smaller school, in an even remoter oasis, was seen to have been punished.
The teachers were taught a lesson.
But Salah's programme continued.
Salah Muhammad got seven girls to stay at school by using his position as headmaster, by his qualities of character — his fundamental reasonableness, his doggedness in persuasion —— and by his skill in diplomacy.
What he wished to do was, in broad outline, in accord with the principles of the Libyan revolution as well as with what he thought right.
To achieve it  he had to work on individuals, exploiting relationships which were not open, public ones: he could not have called a meeting to appeal to everyone's obligations as a relative by descent and by marriage, as if these were of the same kind as those of a citizen, an Arab or a Muslim.
It may seem that an account of politics in a revolutionary state has strayed far from its main theme when it discusses the education of seven adolescent girls in a remote oasis.
But for one category of revolutionary decree — that which urged or recommended changes in attitude and practice without creating penal sanctions — the government had to rely on individuals who had vision and who could persuade others by example and argument.
The Libyan government was indeed anxious, as a matter of principle, that girls should go to school after the age of twelve.
But it did not provide enough segregated schools and enough women teachers to educate the girls separately from the boys in all cases, and it did not have the strength to insist that girls should be educated in mixed schools by male teachers: most Libyan parents would have objected strongly to laws compelling mixed education.
In any case, the ideology of the RCC was that women should not be treated exactly the same as men: women are human beings, and therefore equal to men, but they are also more delicate, more beautiful and gentler — they are like flowers, and should not be compelled to be manlike and false to their nature.
So, the government was not inclined to insist on equal treatment.
And, finally, it seems likely that the government accepted that mixed schools for adolescents created opportunities for improper romantic and sexual activity.
For all these reasons, the education of women came in the category of voluntaristic innovations strongly desired by government — into the category of social improvements which relied on the example and inspiration of individuals.
Many other desiderata of the socialist revolution came into the same category, but women's education was of particular interest because it ran counter to widespread expectations shared by most men and probably most women.
That is to say, the majority of those who had domestic power in Libya were inclined to see the emancipation of women as a threat to their interests.
And they were inclined to see education (even in a system which treated women as delicate flowers requiring special provision) as the first step to emancipation which, in  Libya as elsewhere, insinuated sexual as well as political and economic freedom.
Salah Muhammad no doubt found his task relatively easy because opposition to women's education was not organized in any formal way.
Reluctance was a diffuse prejudice rather than a lobby, and he could deal with the people who expressed reluctance one by one.
Whatever his motives, Salah was careful to underplay the contribution education might make to the emancipation and liberation of women.
His arguments and the pressures he brought to bear had little to do with abstract concern for justice and that salvation which comes from just action.
He appealed to a certain nationalism; he appealed to worldly motives, and to the knowledge that girls elsewhere were earning money with their education and were perhaps more marriageable as a result.
Most revolutionaries outside the Libyan cities had to operate as Salah did, by persuasion of individuals, knowing them and what may influence them.
In effect, the revolution in the oases required continual persuasion and minute knowledge of individuals.
This was so even when the Libyan masses expressed spontaneous enthusiasm for some measure or decree of the government.
At first sight it is absurd to propose that Islamic socialization of the economy required the nihil obstat of everyone's mother-in-law.
But even the grand measures had their component parts, were made up of a multitude of successes and failures: the outcome of the co-operative movement in Ajdabiya depended on a variety of judgements — by officials, by shopkeepers and by customers — and hence on the social relation which affected them.
The outcome of the development schemes depended on Libyans coming to think that farming could be a worthwhile occupation in an oil-rich country.
Even the institutions of popular democracy depended on the participation of disinterested and honest personnel.
Salah's success was part of a process which Qaddafi, and some others, would call the liberation of Libyan womanhood.
Such a campaign depended on the efforts of several hundred Salahs, each with his persuasive skills and his connections with the parents of the girls.
If these multiple oasis decisions contributed to the success of a major programme of the social revolution, so too did others contribute to failures: indifference, resentment and subversion of government plans were also found in the hearths and dunes of Huaiwiri and Hawari, of Tazarbu and Rabiana.
People formed their opinions and judgements in discussion with others whom they knew and who considered the implications for related aspects of their lives.
Will your educated daughter get a husband?
Will a merchant kinsman take offence if you buy goods from the co-op?
The consequences of the revolution were ramified, and the outcome rarely depended on Qaddafi's decision to issue a decree, or on a cadre's negotiations with a shaikh over its implementation.
The General Assembly in Kufra
Ajdabiyans and Kufrans argued successfully, by fair and foul means, and variously supported and subverted their revolution.
Huaiwiri got its girls on the path to education, but in Kufra no cadre expropriated a landlord or socialized a business.
In Ajdabiya, closer to government, with a more heterogeneous population, the effects of revolution were more obvious.
But to the men of Kufra whose fathers or grandfathers had settled there because it was so centrally placed on trade routes, or because it was so remote from Ottoman, Italian or British control, ‘central government’ appeared indeed as a real force, but as one located — so to speak — in the extreme northwestern corner, in Tripoli.
The outcome of revolution, therefore, was a product of negotiation and discussion among Kufrans rather than a simple consequence of revolutionary decrees.
In some cases the inspiration from Tripoli created opportunities which coincided with the interests and enthusiasms of men like Salah Muhammad who then set about persuading people, one by one, to take advantage of them.
In other cases, the decrees seemed to provide an opportunity for insurance against other possible future decrees.
But in all cases the revolution was filtered by discussion — those long, intermittent, laconic, joking conversations in shops and in guestrooms of private houses.
Of course people did discuss public matters in public.
But the more public settings, events, demanded other styles, other kinds of reticence than these.
People hid their self-interest more closely when speaking before relative strangers; they sometimes also feared reprisals and so censored their opinions.
In 1978 the Kufra Assembly met for a couple of hours each evening for a week.
The meetings were in the playground of the Bu Bakr school in the central settlement, Zawiya.
A  colonnade along the west side above a raised pathway provided a sheltered dais for the chairmen of the popular committees who sat behind a table with two or three microphones.
In front of them stood a microphone on a stand, and then several rows of school chairs filling about a third of the area, though most people sat on the ground.
Boy scouts attended, serving bottles of Greek orangeade to the participants.
At the entrance was a table for a member of the local Assembly executive who checked people's names and wrote down their identity card numbers as they came in.
The number of participants varied from evening to evening: attendance was higher at the beginning of the week than at the end.
And in the course of each evening numbers rose from a dozen or so to a hundred, and then diminished as people wandered away to supper.
No women attended, and only a handful of Tibbu.
Isa, the chairman of the local Assembly executive committee, began proceedings at about 5.30 p.m.; at sunset the audience moved to the east end of the playground and, the glowing sky colouring their white clothes, said their prayers; at about 7.30 Isa adjourned the meeting.
The agenda, sent from Tripoli, had fifteen items.
The chairman introduced them, and then invited the chairman of the appropriate popular committee to speak.
The general discussion gave individual members of the people the chance to criticize and to question the actions of their local popular committees, allowed the chairmen to explain and to justify themselves.
Discussion was amiably wide-ranging, enabling people to bring up points related to the issue, and then points related to those points.
What would seem bad chairmanship at a board meeting or a university senate was here a deliberate policy: people, The People, should have their say.
And they did.
In discussion of the proposal to Islamicize Libyan law, both old and young took their turn at the microphone, the older men serious, sometimes passionate, arguing both sides: they set their approval of particular measures — the prohibition of alcohol, for example— against their fear of further state interference in religious affairs, derived from unstated resentment of Qaddafi's arrogation to himself of the power to determine what Islam might be.
Younger men, on the whole, demonstrated a greater concern with the nature of the state than with the purity of Islam: Libya is Muslim and should therefore have Islamic law.
Nobody opposed the proposal outright, but the audience was not silent: local discussion broke out  continually, and people shouted comments from the floor ——‘What about cigarettes?’
‘What about motor cars?’— but such pseudo-theological objections to Koranic purity were, everyone agreed, below the general level of discussion.
Another item on the agenda, relating to the site of a proposed hospital-clinic, suggested how one might covertly raise one of the burning issues of the day, of practical concern directly and indirectly to a large proportion of Kufrans.
The government had decided that there should be a clinic.
It had provided the money, and had earmarked it: the local Assembly could not have changed the plans to one for a new school or slaughterhouse.
The question was one of site, and the Health chairman proposed to build it near Huaiwiri, the small outlying Mannaia oasis close to the route of the new road destined to link Kufra to the Mediterranean; also close to Hawari, the larger Jlulat oasis.
This drew protests from residents of the Awlad Amira oases, which were indeed more populous but which were within easier reach of the hospital in Zawiya.
The Health chairman was unmoved (leading Awlad Amira to remark later that everything had already been decided, there was no true democracy) and was about to raise another aspect of the question when a speaker at the public microphone began to talk about the roads, mentioning the present high cost of transport across the Sahara.
Someone else got up to reply, with some indignation, and said that private individuals transported goods and passengers much more cheaply that the government could manage; government garages were scrap-heaps for vehicles which any private individual could repair in half an hour.
There was a pause; the Health chairman began to talk about the need for hospitals near roads; accidents would happen, victims would need care.
Discussion had ventured into dangerous territory.
People indeed talked privately about the waste of government money, the lack of respect for public property, and it is possible that government might have regarded a discussion of that issue alone as constructive  criticism: Kufrans were not sure.
But the speaker had raised waste as a defence of private enterprise, as an implicit attack on government economic policy, suggesting that the state could only better a free market by open or hidden subsidies.
The chairman's tact prevented the nearly explicit discussion of socialist principle from becoming more so.
Another discussion seemed to raise an issue of local self-interest and prejudice.
It concerned naturalization: under what conditions should people, born abroad and not of Libyan parents, be allowed to take Libyan nationality?
The proposal from Tripoli was that five years' residence and good behaviour should suffice.
In Kufra district many of the foreigners were black, and Tibbu-speakers from Chad were the majority, a presence which alarmists saw as overwhelming because they counted as resident those who paused for a week or a month on their way north or south.
That was one consideration which certainly affected some Mannaia opinion on the question.
Another consideration requires a discursive exposition.
Libya relied on foreign labour: apart from khafirs, unskilled manual labourers were mostly foreigners.
In all skilled occupations other than agriculture and gardening foreigners also played a major role: government agencies were the main employers, but private firms also needed foreign bricklayers, carpenters, electricians, bulldozer drivers, surveyors, accountants.
In Kufra, the barber, the hotel cooks, some shop managers, tailors and garage mechanics were non-Libyan, as were some of the workers in those larger gardens which produced for the market.
Foreign labour was cheaper than Libyan, and it was excluded from the benefits of socialist legislation, in particular from the provision that workers could take over the private businesses for which they worked.
ft was wrong, one Kufran Islamic socialist explained, that a man who owned a drilling machine should keep 80 per cent of what it earned each month while those who worked it should share only 20 per cent.
So the drill should go to the workers, who would pay the depreciated value of the machine to their new partner, their former employer.
That did not happen to the drill in question, used for bringing up deep water, because the workers were foreigners, excluded from the provisions of the law.
In the north, the question of naturalization was not so black-tinted: Egyptian, Tunisian and Moroccan immigrant workers were a higher proportion of the labour force; and Libyans did  not fear many American or European employees would apply for Libyan nationality — petroleum and foreign companies were in any case outside the scope of legislation.
In the south, however, foreign workers did present a narrower spectrum, and those from the more disadvantaged countries were prominent.
The additional possibility that, having acquired Libyan nationality, they could take partnership with their employers, would have frustrated the intention of at least one employer who had taken on foreign labour to protect his enterprise from socialism.
These two considerations, ethnic mépris and self-defence against socialism, rather that any abstract concern with the principle of descent, seem likely to have determined Kufra's mandate to its delegates to the National Assembly, that there should be no possibility of naturalization whatever.
Other people's gut reactions are often inaccessible; but the notion that only birth should confer Libyan nationality, in spite of its apparent coincidence with Qaddafi's view of nationhood, was sufficiently inconsistent with the notorious opportunism of the Zuwaya in recruiting new members, to suggest that, on this occasion, questions of politics rather than ethnicity were uppermost in their minds.
The Kufra agenda had fifteen items: discussion of the first two was leisurely, so generously chaired that the assembly had to discuss the rest hurriedly in the last two evenings.
Although some speakers urged everyone who agreed with some proposition to show their hand, at no time was a vote taken: the chairman summed up the sense of the meeting after each item, announcing what he thought Kufra's delegates were mandated to say at the National Assembly.
In this respect at least, the procedures reflected those of a lineage or tribal meeting of elders and shaikhs.
The style of discourse, however, was very different.
Pithy and allusive interjections worked well in a shaikh's guestroom, but less well when a speaker had to queue for his turn at a microphone to make himself heard.
Speakers required a certain formality and elaboration, even explicitness, if the audience were to seize a point.
Committee chairmen had greater microphone power: they could and did interrupt speakers, overriding their speeches with voluble and sometimes lengthy rehearsals of facts and figures; they intervened to answer rhetorical questions or to explain that they were irrelevant.
People who had had experience of the National Assembly, where much the same procedures were followed, or who had picked up the style from televised broadcasts of it, were at a decided advantage.
So: a new style in which the young cadres controlled a new technology of discussion.
And because the domestic style was unsuited to amplified discourse, the domestic rules of politeness also went by the board.
The young men holding office were still tactful, and even complicity helped people to avoid saying the wrong things; but they spoke with the authority of government, and informed their elders of the facts of cases and the truths of matters.
As the requirement to speak plainly replaced domestic allusiveness, and ordered paragraphs of thought replaced the one-sentence interjection, so people became more reticent.
Isa recorded the proceedings — no doubt simply to refresh his memory of the sense of the meeting — but men found the recorder inhibiting, said they feared secret police, reprisals, a black mark.
The Assembly hovered on the brink of the regime's attack on traders, but shied away from discussion of other economic policies, relations with Egypt, or conscription.
People were also inhibited by their sense that the government and the cadres had already decided everything, that citizens had no contribution to make.
Colonel Qaddafi's reported displeasure at the outcome of local debates on naturalization shows that is not always true.
On the other hand, the question of aid to Malta had been decided beforehand, and did go through the National Assembly.
Plans to build hospitals in particular places, or schools, appeared on the agenda because committee chairmen had canvassed opinion and had advised the secretariats in Tripoli: they went through smoothly enough, suggesting that the occasional displeasing reverse was more the result of failure to plan and to prepare the ground in advance, to carry on  the ordinary business of politics, than a result of failure in some mystical process, such as interpreting the general will by introspection.
Indeed, Qaddafi was more experienced in government than in politics.
The case of the Carnation Milk, bringing an Ajdabiyan policeman into conflict with the Dairy Products Committee in Tripoli, threatened to raise the issue of local sovereignty in an acute form — one, that is, which demanded a decision by independent judges.
For the most part people did not take the question seriously; it was the characteristic passion of young men in the grip of recent learning, or policemen temporarily possessed by the Libyan officials' variety of amok.
Most Ajdabiyans, most Kufrans, thought that government took decisions and exercised authority independently, of their will.
They ignored the prior consultations, the use of friendship between secretariat officials and local chairmen which ensured that the business of government was carried on in ways which often responded to local needs.
They ignored, too, the more subtle ways in which Tripoli set the terms of discussion.
The shopkeeper who berated the regime for its brylcream policy accepted its definition of him as a capitalist, an entrepreneur: that did not seem justified by any sensible criterion of capitalism.
Zuwaya exchanges, methods of saving, accounting and investing were far removed from those which are used to scourge and oppress workers.
Amongst themselves the Zuwaya did not divide into classes, nor did any inter-tribal division mark a class division.
Zuwaya certainly exploited foreign labour (the general tendencies of ethnic prejudice reinforced by the characteristic labour market of hydrocarbon society).
And the central government's socialism, it's restriction of socialist rights to Libyan nationals, set the seal on the discrimination between foreign and national labour because it encouraged Libyan employers to employ foreigners.
The division between labour and capital was therefore a nationalist and ethnic one rather than a class one, even though Zuwaya cast themselves in the role of capitalist entrepreneurs, for example when they defended free markets against state-controlled ones.
That was because Tripoli settled the terms of the defence; and those savoured jokes, the involuted ironies of domestic debate were as much influenced by Tripoli as the more openly controlled agenda of the local Assembly.
Just as it would be inexact to draw an absolute contrast between the agendas of private subversion and public conformity, so too it would be a failure of record not to point out the relation between electoral behaviour and discussion of policy and government.
At first sight they seemed distinct: voting patterns were not related to policy issues; people spoke of their voting intentions in terms of fraternal solidarities, while they conducted a subtle and nuanced assessment of the effects of government on their own lives and on national prestige.
Of course, it was forbidden to form parties: but in Ajdabiya and Kufra people did not consider giving support to another, voting for him, because they agreed with his ideas.
Of course, people did agree with each other , and they did disagree, and they argued, persuaded, insinuated.
But electoral blocs had little or nothing to do with divergencies of opinions.
People aligned on grounds of lineage and domestic solidarities, and clearly regarded mere opinion and policy as insufficient, transient bases for granting loyalty.
The same principles, in essence, regulated those discussions in which differences of opinion were salient: rules of deference and trust among lineage members and friends permeated after-dinner conversations, or gossip among friends in a shop.
The young cadres had authority to explain the facts of cases to their elders, and this was a new feature of political talk.
So too was the rhetorical advantage conferred on them by their command of microphones.
Nevertheless they also took care to ensure that no one made himself vulnerable, no one put himself at risk by careless speech in public assembly.
And that too seems related to the solidarities of kinship and to the training in respect which comes with belonging to a lineage: in a sense, both cadres and ordinary Libyans seemed to share the assumption that loyalties of descent and domesticity were more important than differences of opinion.
Moreover, that assumption was to some extent reinforced by the official ideology of The  Green Book : it is not simply that parties were forbidden and elections arranged in such a way that people had no policy grounds for voting one way or another.
Rather, Qaddafi argued that rational association of people was less valuable, less stable, intrinsically less just than association on natural bases; and by ‘natural’ he meant ties of descent and kinship.
So the negative measures (abolition of parties, abolition of parts of the state) and the positive ideology had elements in common with the principles which underlay both private and public discussion, and which informed people's decisions when they went to the polls.
The events of Libyan politics — elections and Assemblies, decisions taken by cadres, by parents of daughters, by shoppers — are the actions of men and women with real and ramified social relations, not of people with a political vocation, living and acting in barracks or other specialized arenas.
They were people with connections, interests, obligations and they had to weigh up the advantages and disadvantages and to take other people and other possible futures into account.
It is easy to assume that people were therefore pursuing their own interests, were unprincipled when they went about their politicking.
But that was not how they saw themselves: by asserting the importance of lineage and kinship, and contrasting it with the ideology of their state, they thought to claim attachment to eternal values of universal worth.
They said that Qaddafi, Qaddafi's ideology and men, were transitory; what was permanent and natural was family and friendship.
They argued about freedoms not in terms of immediate advantage, but in terms of absolute justice.
Of course they did not produce an abstract treatise on Freedom, in which they laid out principles of action in deductive orderliness.
Rather, they argued ad hoc : their arguments about eternal truth were generally stimulated by resentment at some threat to their direct interests, when they were presented with dilemmas, with conflicts of loyalties.
Without such a stimulus, Libyans lived comfortably enough with Truth; that is to say, they took it for granted, and ignored it.
It is difficult, as so many failures show, to describe ‘the values’ of a society without making them appear more  systematic than they are, or (the reverse danger) making them appear time-serving and meretricious.
The path has to be found between making an exquisite distillation, using a chemistry wholly the property of the observer and his audience, and presenting arguments as they occur, fragmented, irregular.
Arguments of principle which have consequences for the wellbeing and future happiness of the disputants are very easily shown to be really about profit and interest.
But it is unrealistic to take an excessively puritan position, such that the only disinterested arguments are those which damage the speaker's well-being, the only good actions those which are done for no reason at all.
In a revolution, where any decision may suddenly raise questions about freedom, justice, in a new form, and where every aspect of life may be brought under scrutiny, it could follow that all action, all weighing of pros and cons, is unprincipled.
That is not how it seemed to people in Ajdabiya or Kufra.
They did not have such consistent and coherent schemata of ranked hierarchies or principle as are found in clandestine cells or academic seminars.
Rather, they lived in practical uncertainty, often felt threatened, and then argued about the justice and permanence of the new order created for them.
From an observer's point of view this ad hoc approach to eternity and salvation poses acute problems of description.
But the reader now knows something of the general setting of Libyan politics; of the people involved and their problems, and it is possible to approach the topic of ideas and principles in the aftermath of the revolution.
Ideas and Arguments
Tribal rejection of government
Early in 1981 Le Monde reported that a tribe in the area between Benghazi and Sirte had demanded compensation from the government for lives lost in the Libyan war in Chad.
Such reports stir the mind to speculation.
‘A tribe’: so not individuals, but a group.
And they had asked for compensation: so not war-widows' pensions, in any case readily forthcoming in the Libyan welfare system, but perhaps bloodwealth, that compensation exchanged between groups to ensure peace between them.
‘The area between Benghazi and Sirte’: the road from the one to the other is 400 kilometers long, and so the area implied is very large.
Nonetheless, the half-way house on that road is Ajdabiya, the largest town in the region, and people from three large tribes live there: Magharba, Majabr, Zuwaya.
A reporter, a correspondent, who sends in such a story does not get it from an official news-agency but from gossip — no doubt checked, reliable and trustworthy, simply marked by its lack of official confirmation.
So, a correspondent hears gossip: ‘The x have demanded bloodwealth from the government’——‘Who or what are the x ?’—‘Oh, they're a tribe in the area between Benghazi and Sirte.’
If that reconstruction is plausible it is likely that the story refers to the Magharba.
The Majabr are too few; the Zuwaya more likely referred to as ‘a tribe between Ajdabiya and Kufra’.
The conclusion is that perhaps the Magharba, in the month or two before the report appeared, may have demanded bloodwealth from the government, or (only slightly less plausible) from the al-Qadhadhfa — the tribe to the east of Sirte, providing the command of the garrison there.
The reader knows enough about the political skills and  sophistication of the Zuwaya and their rivals to resist the perhaps supercilious stereotype contained in Le Monde's use of ‘tribe’: the people far from backward or atavistic, the demand for bloodwealth (whoever made it) contested rather than misunderstood; it opposed one particular notion of government with another.
That elusive and incomplete report tantalizes in its suggestion that the conflict between two sets of ideas and institutions of government had crystallized, had produced a confrontation of philosophies symbolized with quite adequate drama in the request that the state should compensate the tribe for its fallen conscripts.
The report is fascinating because the Magharba (if it was them) probably directed their demand to the government.
People usually make such declarations of opposition to other lineages, other tribes — not to entities which claim superiority.
When someone asks a government for bloodwealth, they not only threaten bloodshed if it is not forthcoming, but do so in an idiom which denies the government's claim to superiority, puts it on an equal footing, treats it as just another tribe.
Equally, if they ask the tribe of their head of state for compensation, they locate the claim to sovereignty where it cannot be.
In either case they appear irreconcilable to government, and that is immediately satisfying: the spirit of considered rejection of authority lives ‘in the area between Benghazi and Sirte’.
The question is, what is going on?
What does this gesture of defiance mean?
And then: why do Libyans express their opposition to their government in this and not some other way?
The demand for bloodwealth is not an isolated event (although it is striking).
The elections in Ajdabiya and Kufra were the same kind of apparently inappropriate action; the demands for autonomy, for independence of the state made by people of whom two thirds are employed by it, seem also to require some explanation.
And in their relations with each other, Libyans show the same rejectionist spirit: the taunt, ‘We killed Pasha Naiz’, means that Magharba were irremediably tainted by their submission to Turkish government; Zuwaya had been, and continued to be, irreconcilable.
But it came oddly from the throats of people who by 1979 were as involved in government and state as the Magharba.
When Abdulrahman Bu Riziq  explained why he lived in a tent he remarked the absence of policemen.
But he had a well-appointed town-house, took government pensions and subsidies to agriculture.
Were these simple inconsistencies?
Weak irrationalities?
Forms of political opportunism?
Anthropologists are necessarily translators: they ‘translate culture’ in an attempt to make exotic experience intelligible to others who have not suffered or enjoyed it.
The task usually involves explaining the meanings other people's actions have to them and, because these are rarely isolated or intelligible in isolation, re-creating other mental worlds.
The job is not only to describe, to say for example‘Sixty-four per cent of the land was planted with maize on 30 June’, but to make meanings and intentions plain.
This has both humane and practical interest.
If a development economist can understand why people plant so much maize, or why they plant on 30 June, his work of persuading them to plant cotton, or to plant earlier or later should be more successful, if not simpler.
The anthropologists' work of reconstruction carries with it a major temptation, which is to try to show that every part of an exotic culture is coherent and consistent with all the other parts.
He shows that the maize is an important political symbol; that people use it in ritual exchanges; that its by-products are useful in ways unique to it; in short, that it is effective in areas of life other than nutrition.
And he shows that 30 June is the only date possible because the ritual, political, economic calendar is so full of appointments deemed (in that culture) to be pre-conditions of successful cultivation, that really 30 June is the only possible day for planting maize.
And then, terribly pleased with that demonstration, the anthropologist goes on to try to fit in everything: and a good anthropologist is one who completes the picture and appears to have no pieces left over at the end.
Of course, anthropologists know that they themselves do not belong to cultures of this kind; but rather to ones which present a jumble of themes, in which any impression of overall coherence is produced kaleidoscopically — that is to say , patterned arbitrarily with mirrors.
But they seem happy to attribute orderliness and completeness to others, and indeed seem to be made happy by doing so.
But Libya presents rather few temptations of that kind.
The Libyan polity was one of the more rapidly changing, the more  uncertain ones in the world: to argue that at any moment each Libyan had a coherent world view and that his actions were (within a reasonable tolerance) consistent with it, would be exceptionally blinkered.
On the other hand it is not enough simply to say that Libyans were inconsistent because they could not change their ideas fast enough to keep up with their changing society.
Elsewhere in North Africa people have accommodated the state; tribal affiliations and loyalties are generally in decline; solidarities of class, party and neighbourhood apparently supplant those of descent and brotherhood.
Libya had a wealthier, more urbanized, more stably employed population than any of them and, by every canon of development science, Libyans ought to have been less influenced by atavism than other North Africans.
Yet it was Libyans who demanded bloodwealth from the state.
Start from the demand for bloodwealth, or from ‘We killed Pasha Naiz’, and ask: What does this mean?
The short answer is that it connoted a radical alternative to the state, an image of statelessness which was a partial, nostalgic and polemical distillation of history.
Then ask: Why was this image potent?
The short answer is that the image covered the intersection of official rhetoric and popular nostalgia.
Nostalgia drew strength from, was nourished by Qaddafi's ‘abolition’ of the state; and in turn it nourished opposition to the leader's state-like actions.
In other words, the ‘tribalism’ of many Libyans was not a simple survival, an inability to adapt, to change, but was a self-conscious contestation of a government and its works.
It arose in argument and action concerned with freedom, retributive and distributive justice.
The Zuwaya image of statelessness
Zuwaya did not sociologize about statelessness, nor did they argue its value from first principles.
They said, ‘this is how we were in the past’, and they made their image out of historical  facts.
And they added to this evidence from contemporary institutions which were ‘how we have always done things’.
The Zuwaya had not settled every part of their historical record, nor was there a corpus of historical knowledge they had to study for its guidance and understanding.
The history consisted of genealogies (which were different in their emphases and resonances from place to place and from person to person) and of anecdotes, poems, stories, all of which were similarly variable.
The events they referred to can be verified from other sources: the battles of Kawz and Hawaria also appear in Graziani's work, for example, and are thus authenticated (Graziani, 1932).
Some people had old contracts and documents, and these too often confirmed some item in a piece of history.
One man, Hamad Hasan al-Harash, had a notebook in which he wrote down important events as he came across them: some were reports of what very old men had told him thirty or forty years ago; others were things he had read; others still were things which had happened to him.
These were all historical facts, facts about the past which men cited to authenticate or justify their or other people's actions: they were the chief source of the Zuwaya image of statelessness.
The result was a record based on events rather than on reason: things people said or did on particular historical occasions and in particular circumstances.
It was not essentially a narrative: the battles, the poems about incidents in the struggles between Zuwaya of Ajkharra and Berbers of Awjla, or Tibbu of Kufra and Rabiana, served to show how Zuwaya acted in the past, and how a tribe should be in order to survive without government and authority.
Clearly, this sort of material needs careful analysis: it is too easy to impose patterns on it which may not correspond to much that Libyans thought or said.
It is therefore fair to the reader to describe the ways in which the information was collected, and to explain the methods by which it was transformed into ‘the Zuwaya image’ of the past.
Methods of inquiry 
From an early stage in fieldwork I found it necessary to make a special index to notes which recorded what Zuwaya said about the past, for it was clear that these references and descriptions were recurrent themes.
For example, the Zuwaya used to own the desert, people said, and explained how they taxed passers-through.
They had documents to prove it, and allowed me to copy them.
Fifty-six shaikhs agreed to live in peace within their historical frontiers (Ajdabiya to Egypt, Sudan, Chad: approximately 900,000 km&sup2;).
Or, dictating a genealogy, men would unexpectedly include the names of women — say, great-grandmothers of today's adults.
They did not often do so, and the women had no recorded daughters, only sons.
Why were these women there?
‘They came from another lineage.
We married them to make a strong peace; their brothers had some women from us.’
A poet recited an old poem: ‘What did you see?
I saw sand, and Zuwaya all round it.’
A man explained that he was called Ibrahim to keep alive the name of his grandfather's brother, killed without issue perhaps at the battle of Yellow Hill, or at Kawz, or at Hawaria; and the same patterns appeared in other genealogies: the names of men without descendants, killed in battle, are recalled for use in a collateral line in later generations.
More than once, in a guestroom after dinner, when the strangers had left, the host produced a copy of Hassanein Bey's book, and found the passage which recounts how other tribes were jealous of the Zuwaya because of their standing with the Sanusi family.
Different people at different times and in different places, over a period of five years, displayed the same interest in the past, and (within acceptable degrees of variation) gave the same account of incidents and conditions, and gave the same weight to it in their explanations of their actions.
Some items were common: several people had copies of the 1946 agreement between shaikhs, and its grandiose pretensions to a territory nearly the size of France.
Most poets could recite the poem about Zuwaya ownership of the desert.
The genealogy of the  other lineages confirmed the exchange of women to make peace, for there were the reciprocal brides, carefully placed, isolated in a line of men.
the items wee common knowledge and there was no arcane or esoteric specialism.
People from other lineages might not know of these particular marriages, but they had similar marriages of their own, similar reminders in their own genealogies that they had made a special and enduring peace with other lineages.
Zuwaya made connections among these snippets and anecdotes, documents and poems.
They were not a shapeless porridge of symbols, for at any rate some of them were consistently connected with others.
Some were juxtaposed in permanent mutual evocation: owning the desert; taxing strangers; taxing Awjla and Jalu was one such set.
Another was peacemaking through marriage, death by homicide, defence of property (or failure to defend it).
A third, resistance to the Italians and support of the Sanusiya, and death in battle (the fighters at Hawari a tied their legs, a band round shin and thigh, to be incapable of running away).
So a conversation would start from one point, and one thing would lead to another.
The clusters overlapped, and the regularity was not perfect, but enough to give shape and pattern to repeated conversations in Ajdabiya, Ajkharra, Kufra and Tazarbu over five years.
Perhaps the commonest phrase people used in their talk about the past was al-hukuma al-  arabiya (which can be translated as ‘people's government’ or ‘Arab government’).
And this, too, imposed a pattern by grouping incidents under a single heading.
It was a category, a catch-phrase, a summation; and it also provided a mild but pleasing joke because it used ‘government’ to refer to its absence, and because the  arabi (‘people's government’) of tradition contrasted with the sha  bi (‘people's government’) of the present regime, seen in this context to be the opposite of what real people's government ought to be.
Zuwaya nearly always used ‘Arab government’ to compare their present unfavourably with the past, to sum up the virtues of a golden age: heroism and independence, autonomy, fraternal solidarities, an absence of hierarchy.
The moral connotation was accentuated by the always at least implicit use of the term to contest, to resist contemporary claims of state.
Other such terms, for example free,as in ‘then we were free’, certainly had reference to the past, but carried direct contemporary reference: a man would say of another, ‘he is a free  man’, and mean that he took no orders from a superior; and a man (asked about his own occupation) might say with some pride that he was a ‘free Zuwayi’(zuwayi hurr),and imply his condition was closer to the old days than that of most of those he saw around him.
‘Free Zuwayi’ in 1979 carried the message, ‘of the old type’.
Certain institutions carried the same message: lineage welfare payments, for instance, and the solemnities of threatening vengeance and exacting a settlement, were  adat (customary), the way we have always done things, living reminders of a time when ‘we did everything in this way’.
Although people used ‘Arab government’ mainly in contrast and opposition, it implied a complete way of life.
Zuwaya used it to evoke absence of government, freedom; but any anthropologist would feel inclined to explore the unstated aspects of this way of life, not brought to prominence in contemporary discussion because they were not much use in argument: ‘In the old days you had no government, but how did you keep peace and order — who settled quarrels? who punished thieves and rapists?’
Or ‘In the old days you had no government but you collected taxes from passers-by: you must have had a treasury?’
Some questions do not simply explore memories and traditions, but test for consistency: ‘How do you reconcile your ancestors’ hatred of government with their willingness to exercise government over Awjla and Jalu?’
Only some Suwaya were interested in this exercise of reconstruction, and the attempt to build up a rounded picture of life under Arab government exposed a certain impatience.
‘How did people look after the sick and helpless?’—‘Just as I do nowadays: I collect money from the people, and I give it to them.
Muhammad has broken his leg and can't work?—— Muhammad's shaikh takes him food.’
Others, however, joined in the exercise: ‘It must have been in such and such a way; I mean, there's a story which says…
‘In either case it is important to realize that the anthropologist's academic and cultural expectations determine in part his notions of what a rounded view of a way of life is.
Dispute settlement and welfare arise because these are important issues in the anthropological literature on stateless societies; questions about money and violence arise in the study of any polity.
One anthropologist who studied an even more elaborately created system of autonomy than the Zuwaya's has been criticized  for ignoring routine and frequent contact between autonomous leaders and state governments: so it is academically important to probe into the actual relations of Zuwaya and Magharba with the Turkish authorities.
The image so constructed is not an indigenous creation; for although its component parts are all from local materials, some of them are solicited and may not have much value or relevance in Zuwaya eyes.
Creating an image, in this sense, is an external systematizing activity; which is not to say that Zuwaya failed to recognize the finished product or failed to enjoy it.
Part of the procedure is to re-present the image from time to time as its shape becomes clearer: ‘In the days of Arab government Zuwaya distributed tax revenues to household heads, so that there should be no treasury; and you did this; and you did that…
‘These attempts to check and control the growing picture often led Zuwaya to correct and modify, to elaborate and qualify the image.
The enterprise sometimes came to acquire the character of an amusing game, not particularly relevant to present-day interests: immediacy was lost as the content was determined by someone else's theoretical concerns rather than by a passionate and resentful, if intermittent, opposition to some particular intrusion of government.
Consequently, if the image came to acquire reality in the minds of Zuwaya this was in part the result of an outsider's effort to discover and describe it, to gather precise information about those connections between elements which made some of them so resonant in modern political life.
Pasha Naiz and his death were evocative in consequential ways; they were part of an idiom which was largely inexplicit (though not unstructured) but which has to be made explicit if it is to be understood by people who do not have it.
This of course creates things which did not exist, and which owe some part of their character to the intruding anthropologist.
The reward is to see more plainly the shape and content of Zuwaya political ideas.
Elements of the image 
The image of Zuwaya past was of a society in which people resisted the temptation to submit to authority, either internal  or external, and in which they took some positive steps to secure that freedom.
They lived at a low level of amenity for, even if they had had the wealth and knowledge to run a specialized judiciary or a hospital service, they resisted the organizational and constitutional consequences of such institutions.
Zuwaya were not prepared to accept that the law is embodied in a person or office, for then it acquires authority, a hierarchy of instances of control and review.
They resisted external governments on several occasions by fighting, sometimes with heroic defiance against overwhelming forces.
But the usual method was to take to the desert: they did not have to go far to become nomads.
The Turks might try to tax, or offer administrative salaries to Zuwaya who were willing to participate in government; but Zuwaya always resisted these attempts to bring them into the reach of government.
Occasionally a tax-gathering patrol would seize a man who had sown a catch-crop in the fertile north and in effect hold him to ransom until he paid up: that would be a temporary recognition of force majeure rather than an acceptance of permanent obligation.
As soon as the harvest was in, he would start south again and, next year, would hope to sow and to harvest without paying tax.
The Sahara was theirs from the southern outskirts of Ajdabiya to the Egyptian border, to Wainat and Sudan, and then to the French conquests in Chad.
Men might travel only by Zuwaya consent, and Zuwaya took fees to guide travellers from water-hole to water-hole on the routes to Kufra and beyond.
They had an exclusive licence as desert guides from the Turkish authorities in Benghazi, and they taxed merchants who passed through Kufra.
The merchants of Awjla and Jalu contested this claim, but after some years of bloody conflict they were confined to the oases: if they wished to travel outside they, too, had to pay a fee to Zuwaya.
No Christian had visited Kufra before the 1920s.
Each year Zuwaya moved between the northern coastal strip of semi-desert (where they arrived in spring for the early pasture) and the oases of the central Sahara.
They left the coast after they had harvested any catch-crops and grazed the stubble, to arrive in the south for the date harvest, feeding their animals on fodder-dates and forage crops until it was time to return north.
Few people lived in the north the whole time and in the south a large proportion of the permanent  residents were slaves.
Each year some men would leave their families on the annual round, and would continue southwards into Black Africa.
They stayed away for a few years, moving between the markets of the Sahel, exploiting differences in prices in different markets, until they had enough camels to go to Cairo.
There they sold half their animals, bought goods with the proceeds, loaded them onto the remaining animals and returned to Kufra, resuming the annual north-south movement.
Some men were particularly successful in Black Africa, and might return direct to Kufra with slaves, spices, even gold, which they then forwarded north to Alexandria for export, they alleged, ‘to Istanbul’.
The proceeds of trade were the profit and property of individual traders and their families.
The taxes (and perhaps the fees of guides which some accounts did not distinguish from taxes) were collective income of all Zuwaya, effectively of Jlulat, Mannaia and Awlad Amira.
They were distributed (quite how was never made clear) among three sections, and then among lineage shaikhs who distributed them to household heads.
No person or officer could hold or spend the collective income.
If Zuwaya needed to make collective expenditure, usually to pay compensation, shaikhs would collect goods and money from households; but it was very rare, perhaps unheard of, for all the Zuwaya to pay compensation: at most, a section might agree to do so.
Most shaikhs collected for welfare purposes rather than for compensation.
People fell sick and died more often than they committed offences against others; in the overwhelming majority of cases lineages collected contributions, and larger entities were not involved.
A shaikh would collect a quantum for each sa'im (or adult male observing the fast of Ramadan), and give goods or cash to the family of the sick person, or contribute animals for the entertainment of visitors at a funeral.
These were almost the only collective activities of the Zuwaya.
Some small groups within lineages might build a shrine at the burial place of a revered grandfather, call him sidi (lord), and visit the shrine in a group from time to time.
But that was generally  the practice of settled people: Zuwaya were scattered over a vast territory, and although they owned land they were not permanently resident on it.
Most shrines were the property of people who could visit them easily, and who might find it expedient to assemble there to show their strength if they had land disputes with their neighbours.
As for justice and peace, the Zuwaya had no judges.
Some men from Muftah were descended from Sidi Hasan, the saint whose tomb is at the centre of the cemetery in Ajdabiya, and they might intervene to bring a quarrel to an end.
In some cases, a Zuwayi who had unwittingly offended someone would constrain that person to forgive him by offering compensation and sacrificing animals to him.
In other cases, Zuwaya threatened reprisals for injuries suffered: they might have to make good the threat, but usually persuaded their antagonists to pay compensation.
In such discussions Zuwaya generally assumed that they had given offence unwittingly, and that malign actions were always done by others, requiring Zuwaya to pursue justice.
They did not speak of permanent hostilities between sections or lineages, but they did speak of peaces between lineages.
Janab quarrelled with Bu Zhawa, Bu Shawq with Usbaq, this lineage with that one.
Perhaps men were killed; perhaps animals were stolen — who knows now why men quarrelled a century ago?
What people remembered was that their ancestors had composed the quarrel: pressures were brought to bear, intermediaries called in, a settlement agreed, compensation paid, women exchanged.
Occasionally people from more than one lineage on each side had made peace, and people spoke then of a peace between some higher order entity than a small lineage: Ujdaid and Talib, Awlad Amira and Mannaia.
In such cases they implied that every Ujdaid or every Amiri had had combatant status.
Underlying such accounts was an image of fraternal and cousinly solidarities and loyalties: if an outsider harmed your brother, you had to come to his support, even if you yourself were in dispute with him.
If some Amiri attacked a Jluli, in theory all Amira and all Jlulat rushed to support their respective members.
In practice, that rarely happened  because, they said, people from Awlad Amira and from Jlulat were travelling in a vast area and so did not often meet; and because, knowing that all Jlulat would unite, Amira refrained from attack, and vice versa.
Zuwaya had a deterrent theory of peace, and stated it in so many words.
In short, Zuwaya answered the question ‘How did you keep the peace in the old days?’ in two ways.
First, they kept the peace by making peace — paying compensation, exchanging women, acceding to the pleas of intermediaries.
Peace was ad hoc .
Secondly, they gave a deterrent theory: the massive support which a man could call on deterred the would-be criminal (unless his offence was unwitting).
What is the historical status of this image ?
The account I have given of the Zuwaya image of statelessness is a composite, created from local materials, arranged in a pattern which is partly determined by academic culture and expectations, partly by the need to translate Zuwaya understanding for non-Libyans.
One analogy which might spring to mind is of an archaeologist who reconstructs a fragmented mosaic.
But that is misleading for it implies a real object now dismembered.
Rather than an archaeologist engaged in reconstitution of broken pictures, the enquirer is like the secretary to a historiographical commission which never meets, and which evolves its consensus through bilateral talks with an outsider.
However true to what Zuwaya said in 1979, the picture corresponds in an uncertain way to the Zuwaya past.
Even in the question of resistance to outside control, the picture was equivocal.
‘We never submitted to the Italians: we went into exile because we supported the Sanusi’ was not a thoroughgoing rejection of government.
And in other circumstances, when Sanusi was not contrasted with Italy, Zuwaya marked the ambiguity: ‘We invited the Sanusi to Kufra because we wanted law — and we got a government.’
The Sanusi episode in the Zuwaya image was sometimes a sign of resistance to the Italians; in other circumstances and discussions it was one of submission.
But since the Free Officers had overthrown the Sanusis, the main evocation was of hostility to the present regime.
Again, still on the matter of ambiguity, Zuwaya claimed to have levied taxes on the oases of Awjla and Jalu (a claim the inhabitants of those oases did not take  seriously at all), and they cited this as an example of their freedom to do what they chose in their Sahara.
Indeed, it is one; but it scarcely shows any principled rejection of all government.
Privilege elides into Freedom,libertas into libertates again; the practical sense depended on who was talking to whom about what, and in which circumstances.
The image omitted almost constant service to the Sanusis; it also omitted what must have been at least intermittent contact with the Turks.
For who could imagine that an early nineteenth-century Zuwayi, involved in a dispute with his brothers, or cousins or remoter kinsmen, would refrain from applying to Turkish authorities if he thought that might help him win?
It is implausible to imagine that a man, or a group, would refrain from winning an argument simply because a principle of statelessness excluded contact with external authority.
Similarly, Zuwaya claimed that they had had a Turkish licence — an exclusive licence, no less — to conduct traders and travellers who wished to cross the desert from Benghazi to Black Africa.
Whether that was true is hard to say; but the principle must surely be right that when people could profit by doing so, they accepted the benefits of government.
Zuwaya, while claiming freedom from (irksome) control for themselves, exercised it over others: they had slaves and they also attempted to tax the inhabitants of Awjla and Jalu.
They served in the Sanusi forces to resist French expansion in the Sahel.
The probability — it can be no more, given the absence of hard evidence — is that Zuwaya used superior government  when it suited them, exercised it over others when they could, and did their utmost to escape it when it threatened their property and privilege.
On this count, the Zuwaya image was not accurate history, even granting that their involvement was at a much lower level than that of, say, the Magharba.
Peace-making and peace-keeping provide another example.
The Zuwaya image implies that on occasion massive numbers of men mobilized in genealogical order, lineage against lineage, to defend (it was always to defend, since an offence given was always unwitting) a smaller number directly involved; and that because men knew that Janab or Bu Zuraiq or whoever would unite against them, they refrained from wrong action.
There is little evidence that people really acted in this way.
But the plausibilities are open to examination.
In particular, the image carried two main implications: that women played small part in relations between men; and that men acted in groups.
Evidence about the past role of women is mainly genealogical: people remembered some marriages because they sealed a peace; others because they bound in a new group of refugees or clients, bringing them into the range of people who belonged to someone, subjecting them to social controls.
These women, later to become signs, reminders of a special obligation to peacefulness, were then no doubt promoters of good relations, channels for negotiation and sociability, and organizers of further marriages during their lifetimes.
Evidence from Huaiwiri in 1975–9 also suggests that women had crucially important influence on men's decisions.
To explain why some men lived there, and not others, it is necessary to invoke their marriages to the women of the place, marriages whose chief architects were women.
Were they less so in the eighteenth or nineteenth centuries?
Any account of the day-today sociability of men in Huaiwiri in the 1970s must pay attention to women: the relations among women were important in forming men's opinions, in leading them to make decisions.
Admittedly, Huaiwiri was a peaceful place, which may reflect the exceptional power of women there.
But the minimal point, that men did not act without taking women's opinions into account, surely holds for quarrels as much as it did for decisions about education, and for the nineteenth as much as the twentieth century.
Evidence from other studies tends to confirm this argument.
Peters' article on Bedouin families contains information about  who lived in particular camps, leading him to suggest that ‘the core’ of a camp was not a male head of tent-hold, but his mother (Peters, 1965).
Peters also argues, more elaborately but in less detail, that women were important links in furthering competition between families.
Herders, occupying fixed territories with uncertain weather, used some of their people to establish marriage alliances with members of distant groups who could offer refuge in times of drought or other scarcity.
They could sometimes persuade those allies to attack or threaten people closer to home with whom the family was prescriptively at peace, actually in direct and continual competition (Peters, 1967).
The link was a woman: she lived with the allies, raised their children, arranged further marriages between them and her brothers' children.
Peters' work concerns mostly the tribes of the Saadi confederation (Barassa, Magharba), rather than the Zuwaya; but no evidence supports an argument that Zuwaya women were less important and active in this regard than women of other tribes.
Lineages and sections of the Saadi confederation occupied single territories, single ecological niches (Evans-Pritchard, 1949; Peters, 1968).
Zuwaya lineages were, by contrast, mobile over a wider area and when they settled they did so in different kinds of territory, part of a lineage in Tazarbu, part in Kufra or Ajkharra.
Their geographical spread may have affected the disposition of marriage alliances since the need for affinal access to other territories was less.
Zuwaya probably used marriages to create alliances with members of other lineages living in the same place, and to maintain connection with members of the same lineage living in different places, even though they did not feel the same ecological pressures as the members of the Saadi confederation.
In general terms, therefore, there is every reason to suppose that women were extremely important in creating relationships among men, in peace and in conflict; and that qualifies the implication of the Zuwaya image, that the actions of men maintained peace.
The other implication is that conflict, when it arose, was between men organized in groups sharing common descent.
This has two aspects: that all the members of a group were obliged to join in the fighting or threats; and that there was some automatic trigger contained in the genealogy which determined the number of the combatants.
It seems possible that people located hostility in groups because they knew that the  others, their opponents, would expect reprisals from any members of the group they opposed.
Just as Wunis Abdulhadi was able to opt out among friends, but knew that in a conflict he could not walk down the street without danger of attack from Zuwaya, so ‘the obligation to fight’ arose from people's perception that their opponents would assume the worst possible case —— that everyone who had a theoretical obligation to fight would do so.
For, even if they knew in general that it was unlikely to be the case, they could not afford to take chances.
The element of the image which suggests that as a matter of principled obligation all members of a group rushed to the aid of, say, an aggressive and irresponsible cattle-thief or rapist, may therefore be the product of the practical consideration that men related to an offender prudently assumed they would be held collectively responsible for his actions.
If an outsider attacks a Zuwayi, then all Zuwaya should unite because they have common descent; if an Amiri attacks a Mannaia, all Mannaia should unite because they, too, have a common descent from a single ancestor — from the brother of the common ancestor who defines membership of Awlad Amira.
Within the Zuwaya, where all men are related, a quarrel should mobilize the descendants of a pair of brothers (see figure 7).
If someone from Faraj comes to blows with someone from Fadhil, all the members of the groups descended from Muhammad should unite against all those descended from Mahmud.
In this quarrel they will ignore their common descent from Ibrahim.
That is invoked in other contexts: if a Faraj is attacked by members of Fahmi, they should unite as Ibrahims, and indeed a Faraj would expect the support of the Fadhils in those circumstances.
The genealogical trigger determining the numbers involved, the extensiveness of the quarrel, is thus the branching of the tree through brotherhood: by tracing the extent of obligation to two brothers (rather than to their father) each disputant secures the maximum of supporters who owe him loyalty and who do not in that particular instance owe loyalty to the other side.
This is what was implicit in statements that Janab quarrelled with Bu Zhawa, Ujdaid with Talib, Mannaia with Awlad Amira, Zuwaya with Magharba.
Was this image of peace-keeping ever a matter of practice?
Some qualifications apply which do not necessarily deprive the image of historical authenticity.
For instance, the descent of one brother may have been prolific, the other's attenuated; and it might be imagined that the smaller group would create less fear of reprisals in the hearts of the stronger.
Again, the Zuwaya did not base their genealogy solely on brotherhood: some groups were written in, recruited for instance when a group had insufficient members by natural means; some were brought in by marriage; one major section (Muftah) was related as half-brothers (through their mother) to Shuaghr, who were related as half-brothers (through their father) to the other sections of the Zuwaya.
Again, it is no fundamental objection to the image to suggest that, from time to time, people reneged on their kinship obligation to fight, perhaps even die, in support of remote cousins (Salzman, 1978).
All these are discrepancies between the structure of their image and the plausible reality.
But such discrepancies are not fatal  to the image.
In real life, no doubt, they presented themselves as dilemmas and uncertainties, but that is a general characteristic of the relation between ideology and reality in any society, and in any social group: it does not deprive the image of its power to inspire action and to settle obligation on individuals.
The difficulties lie, rather, in the fundamental implausibility that a man involved in a dispute would not have used every claim at his disposal to protect himself and his property.
Indeed, he no doubt appealed to members of his lineage who lived nearby or within quick reach.
But, given the size of Zuwaya territory and their wandering habits, it is unlikely he exhausted the manpower of his own group before turning to other groups.
And he surely called on his affines — his mother's people, his sister's husbands, his wife's brothers — for aid in a crisis if they were near to hand.
What success he had depended at least in part on the willingness and vigour with which the women supported his pleas for help: without their backing his affines could well say they had no greater obligation to him than to his enemies, and refuse to help.
The more people a man could interest in his quarrel, the more serious it was, the greater the pressure on the other side to reach a settlement and to make peace.
So the tactic in a dispute was to persuade as many people as possible to lend their voice, to show concern, and to mediate.
The suggestion that a disputant would hold back from making as wide approaches as possible, because he was bound to adhere to a proper genealogical order of call on manpower, is inherently implausible given the distribution of Zuwaya within their territory, and given the assumption that people under threat wish to survive.
Perhaps the groupishness of the image of social control comes not from the way quarrels were conducted but from the way men made peaces.
Fighting, stealing, homicide and rape were usually either individual initiatives or a group of friends on the rampage.
But when the time came to compose a quarrel between people, it was the representatives of the groups to which they belonged who made the peace.
Shaikhs were involved because individual members of their group were.
That is to say, if a person came to blows with another, the shaikhs negotiated peace to contain and settle the dispute, to protect the interests of members of their lineage who were not fighting.
Hence peace-makings were solemn and formal occasions, committing groups of people to restraint.
Quarrels did not  formally engage groups, although each member of a group —— even the most reluctantly involved — knew that the members of the other group would have to assume he was a wholehearted combatant.
This is because it was important to prevent other people on either side from using the quarrel as a pretext to pursue their own ends, to justify their own thieving and homicide.
Then people spoke most easily of a peace between Janab and Bu Zhawa, Ujdaid and Talib, Mannaia and Awlad Amira, Zuwaya and the people of Zliten: groups acting through their representatives made the peace.
The language of peace implied groups, and memories of the peace embodied in marriages which created kinship for successive generations were more enduring than memories of quarrels.
The main source of knowledge that there had been a quarrel was the reminders that people had made a peace; and as the peace was between groups, it suggested that the quarrel was as well.
But it was the peace which people remembered, rather than the quarrel.
Quarrels were generally messy, involving hot tempers, grief, unpredictable actions, passion, outrage, betrayal.
It was, understandably, the peace which was essential information for the descendants, for it influenced their present actions to some extent; and the solemnities were intended to impose themselves on the memory of the participants and witnesses and their children.
Zuwaya claimed that in the past they had recognized no internal sovereign, and in this matter they seem to have been right.
At least, their poems and stories were consistent with this aspect of the image and did not contain the ambiguities or contradictions of their account of rejection of Turkish government.
But the absence of supreme authority did not mean that everyone always rejected orders, always refused to recognize the moral authority of other Zuwayi.
Household heads and shaikhs were both acknowledged sources of legitimate power in Zuwaya eyes.
They had different kinds of power.
In 1979 households were delicately ordered and hierarchical social groups in which the senior man had nominal control of everyone: of the women and children, of the other men and, in the experience of living men and women, of attached client and slave households.
Zuwaya said that property was held in common, with rights of disposal and use vested in the household head.
So, a small boy could speak of ‘our goats’ or ‘our Mercedes truck’, even on occasion, and with startling initial effect, ‘my  Mercedes truck’:vis-à-vis outsiders, a household was an undifferentiated unit.
Internally, people did distinguish personal property.
So, a wife carefully distinguished her property from her husband's, for the marriage could end, requiring a division of goods; or her husband could marry a second wife, or a third, and wives' property had to be kept distinct.
Between father and son, also, some things specifically belonged to one or the other: a child's bicycle was his, not his father's.
But in general economic goods were at the disposal of the household head.
Inside a household, conventions of behaviour also divided the members into ranked categories.
So Zuwaya said it was indecent for a father and his sons to listen together to women drumming at circumcisions, or to go to weddings together — even to speak about weddings to each other.
Zuwaya said they should not watch television together; sons should not smoke in their father's presence, nor try to wheedle or coax money from them; and mostly they did not do those things.
No good reason exists to think that in the remoter past households were more egalitarian or less structured than they were in 1979.
A father's control over his sons could continue when they had left his house.
Muhammad Bu Hantish, who had married several times, had forty-six children altogether.
When he divorced a wife he would set her up in a house of her own with her children; and as his twenty-seven sons came to maturity he directed them into various different occupations, to ensure a spread of enterprise which would be useful to all of them.
Some were builders, some were civil servants, some were truckers, some traders.
By 1979 Muhammad had created a multi-household business of brothers and half-brothers.
Smaller men, less exceptionally prolific and successful, attempted similar control of their sons.
For example, an unmarried schoolteacher, aged thirty-three, was anxious to alter his status.
His salary, like his married brother's, went into a common household fund.
They used it to buy a truck, which earned more money, which they used in turn to create a new farm, with further grants from the government.
He confidently expected to draw on that multiplied income to finance his own marriage.
But his father decided that he himself would marry a third wife, and that his son could wait another year or two.
The son was cross; but if he thought of the possibility of keeping his own salary for himself, he never voiced it.
His father, he said, had the right to make decisions of that kind, and perhaps he was aware of the long-term economic loss he would suffer from withdrawing from the joint enterprise.
Moreover, although his father no doubt knew of his disappointment, they had never spoken on the matter.
It is worth noting how paternal authority overrode differences in occupational status and in income: in this particular case the father was a canteen cook, and Zuwaya generally considered that a lower occupation than one deemed intellectual.
In many similar households, sons of some social prestige and standing were at least nominally subject to their fathers' authority.
The headmaster of a school in Tazarbu lived with his father who was doorman in the same school.
An Ajdabiyan shopkeeper, who was a member of a state-supported co-operative created to diminish the consequences of eventual socialism, was the father of a revolutionary cadre with responsibility among other things for the financial affairs of Ajdabiya.
In all these cases Zuwaya subordinated considerations of relative social position outside to relative positions inside the household.
Fathers took pleasure and pride in their sons' successes, but did not publicly defer to them on that account.
Household implied authority — of men over women, of adults over children, of the senior adult man over all others.
When people wished to resist this ranking they went to some lengths to do so in a symbolic and more or less public way.
So, for example, Salah and Bil Hasan, brothers living with their wives in one household, with their own private rooms and kitchens, always ate in the common courtyard, on neutral territory; and each wife in turn prepared the meal, rigidly observing the rota even if her husband was absent.
In other  households, the normal pattern of seniority was upset by differences in wealth.
Ibrahim Bu Shanna, reaching maturity at a propitious time, had opportunities to achieve success in trade denied to his elder brother, who grew up during the war: the elder brother was a gardener, who lived subordinate in every way except the symbolic to Ibrahim, a successful wholesaler.
People maintained family hierarchy in the teeth of socio-economic differentiation, and they subordinated status distinctions beyond the threshold to the less flexible ones of family and marriage.
Although everyone hoped that the wealth, status, income they had acquired in trade or government service would endure, they were uncertain of them; in contrast they were quite sure that their kinship loyalties and obligations were fixed and permanent.
How long this would continue, however, was unclear.
In Ajdabiya (where, additionally, the layout of houses was less elastic than in the south), the younger and educated sons of Musbah Ifkairin moved out into new houses nearby, leaving the eldest brother with their father.
This probably represents the future, at any rate so long as petroleum-led growth continues to provide opportunities for differentiation.
Households implied authority and hierarchy.
Brothers created elaborate practical arrangements to emphasize their equality; or they divided the household if they thought the implicit pattern of seniority too discrepant with the facts.
It is reasonable to think this became more common after the revolution and after the discovery of oil.
But the general point remains that most people were subject to authority for a large part of their lives, even in the golden age when the Zuwaya had no sovereign power.
Under Italian rule, shaikhs became government officials: they were subject to government approval and backed by government authority.
After independence people said they had despised Italian shaikhs.
Idris maintained the Janus-like character of the shaikh, representing government to the people and people to the government.
Qaddafi abolished the office of shaikh, but the duties still existed: someone was still needed to certify residence and good behaviour, to register or witness certain kinds of contract.
In 1979 a ward leader (al-mukhtar al-mahalli ) performed these tasks, and although he was elected by the local Assembly of his ward, he was nonetheless often the shaikh of a prominent resident group.
Qaddafi had  indeed abolished shaikhs, in the sense of government officials appointed by kin groups, but in every other respect they flourished.
Shaikhs differed from heads of households.
Their appointment was not hereditary, and people could dispute it: in 1975–9 one Zuwaya lineage had two shaikhs.
A shaikh had the right to represent collateral kinsmen, whereas a household head did not, unless they lived in his house.
A shaikh became shaikh by a process of discussion and designation; in effect,when the office became vacant the old men of the lineage discussed possible successors with their kinsmen and family, and then among themselves.
They came to an agreement, and the man designated retained his authority by a leadership which did not offend his fellow lineage members: support could fall away, men could choose another elder to act for them, or fail to contribute to common funds when required.
A shaikh kept a list of households and of adult men in his lineage.
He did not need to consult anyone about expenditure on funerals as these were routine occasions.
But if someone had had an accident and could not work, his shaikh consulted other elderly men before making a levy, or before drawing on the lineage bank account.
Most shaikhs collected contributions ad hoc and sent out messengers to gather in the money.
In Kufra, in 1979, some people did not pay their contribution to the small boy who visited the houses, so their shaikh went in person.
They explained that they were poor and that the sick man was rich and could afford to stay in bed without working.
Rather than arguing that lineage solidarity demanded their contribution, or that he had decided and his decision bound them, the shaikh pooh-poohed their claim of poverty, and disputed the invalid's alleged wealth.
He presented himself as organizer of reciprocities (‘Am I to ask them for a dinar when you are sick?’) rather than as lineage banker: he noticeably did not raise issues of authority.
Although differences in wealth were a potential threat to lineage welfare systems the recusants on this occasion did not want to challenge the shaikh's  authority, at least not on these grounds, and after half an hour's discussion they paid up.
In Ajdabiya, in the lineage with two shaikhs, each organized levies (collected from his supporters) and paid money to members of the whole lineage, regardless of which shaikh they were genealogically closer to.
In theory, a shaikh did not have authority to intervene in quarrels within his lineage.
In practice, he was likely to be related through descent and marriage to any parties to a dispute; and as an elderly and respected man he might try to prevent the scandal of open quarrelling among close kinsmen.
One shaikh said he had never intervened in a notorious internal quarrel because ‘they would say I was a shaikh’.
Perhaps others, more forceful, would not have been so diffident: it is easy to imagine that Abdulnabi al-Hatash would have seen It as his duty to browbeat some sense into his juniors.
Some shaikhs saw no conflict of roles when they were themselves involved in disputes with members of their lineage, and used every means at their disposal to win an argument about, say, rights to land.
Lineage shaikhs designated one of their number to be a section shaikh, to represent them in affairs which concerned them all.
They did so after widespread discussion, usually informal, in the guestrooms of important people in their lineages.
Similarly, section shaikhs designated the shaikh of all Zuwaya, of all Magharba or Majabr.
These higher-order shaikhs had no power to intervene in the affairs of component lineages, although again, as senior and widely connected men, they had other roles which could entitle them to express an opinion.
If men from different lineages in the same section were in dispute, their lineage shaikhs would meet as representatives of the two groups and try to bring the affair to a conclusion; they could, if necessary, collect compensation from their members and receive it on their behalf.
If a section was held responsible for an offence (as it was if someone outside the section was offended) the victims would hold the section responsible; but even though the section shaikh made the peace, he had no power to collect from the lineages in his section: he had to get the agreement of the lineage shaikhs, and they then collected from their members.
(Funerals were lineage matters and did not involve whole sections.)
Similarly, Ibrahim al-Sanusi had no power to collect compensation from all Zuwaya, but only to represent the tribe at peace-makings.
The shaikh of  all the Zuwaya could be the most respected Zuwayi, but he was not the most powerful.
He was, of course, also the shaikh of a section and shaikh of a lineage of that section.
But his lineage got no special treatment for supplying the tribe with its most respected man.
What about the past?
This is all contemporary evidence and it therefore has no direct bearing.
But it is difficult to imagine that shaikhs had more power in the pre-Sanusi period than in the 1970s: if anything, accretions of status increased their authority during the Italian government and the kingdom (so that a shaikh was an obvious candidate for the office of al-mukhtar al-mahalli).
This, together with the fact that his people were more settled and therefore accessible and that there was the possibility of running a lineage bank account, all served to reinforce the position of the shaikhs.
In the past, It is reasonable to suppose, shaikhs had less practical authority than after the revolution.
The Zuwaya image seems correct: there was no internal sovereign power, at any rate up to about 1875 or so.
People esteemed some men more than others, but their influence then was personal, and their command, if it was obeyed, did not depend on formal office and resulted in no treasury.
This was not a small achievement.
Most of the world's population have accepted states and powers, and it is easy to see why: life may not be less bloody or dangerous under a sovereign power, but it is more predictable.
Men who have right, as defined by authority, do not have to put their lives at risk to enjoy their rights.
By attempting to create rules for the exercise of power, the people subject to it have some hope of being able to control it and to make it legitimate in their own eyes.
The number of peoples in the world who knew of these advantages and nevertheless persisted in rejecting them were few: to do so required a tenacity of purpose, an indifference to wealth and comfort which were not given to many.
This was no accidental condition, following wholly from some alleged natural benightedness of the backdunes, but one which required constant vigilance and determination.
Nonetheless, Zuwaya were not immune, in their nostalgia for those not wholly imaginary days, from leaping to the  assumption that, because there was no sovereign power, no person was subject to authority.
And that was not true.
Men were subject to their fathers, to their elder brothers; women were subject to men (though some could influence men's treatment of women, and some could play a political role in relations among men).
Slaves and clients were scarcely free from authority.
Paternal authority was basic to the Zuwaya image, for loyalties depended on ancient domesticities: it was because your ancestors and his ancestors lived in the same household, under the same authority, that you owed another loyalty (unless, as happened, you were in dispute with him, in which case those old fraternities marked the division between the two of you).
This was one principle of organization.
The organization that flows from the office of shaikh was more tenuous, more negotiable, but crucial to making peaces.
Shaikhs were representatives: bound to hear and to heed, bound to persuade rather than to command.
They had no sanctioned power to intervene in the affairs of their members, but only to represent them to outsiders.
The image is an artefact, one made by an outsider.
Zuwaya made it from elements which they knew, enjoyed, celebrated: they recited their genealogies and explained them, they told their stories, made jokes, listened to poems on cassette-recorders.
But they did not maintain an image; or at least, not until an outsider pressed them, assembled one from what he thought were the parts, tried it out on them and modified it to accommodate their comments and additional information.
As nearly as one person can be sure of 18,000 others, the image gained their assent.
They accepted it as a general statement of how things were in the past.
The absence of an internal hierarchy culminating in a sovereign was the most important element in the image as people saw it; and it was an accurate account of Zuwaya political organization until they invited the Sanusis to Kufra.
In other respects, the image is implausible, demands qualification.
Yet men did die; they did resist Turks and Italians by battle and by evasion; they did collect taxes from passers-by, and almost certainly distributed the proceeds to household heads.
They made peaces, and created a fragmented Peace (fragile and ungoverned) from a series of bilateral contracts between groups as well as by reciprocal threats.
The image is not wholly false; but nor is it wholly true.
Perhaps it represents  not a past concrete social reality as it actually existed, but rather the ideas men who lived then had about their responsibilities and claims, their liabilities and privileges and freedom.
This is an utterly tentative suggestion; but the question ‘To what is the image true?’ clearly deserves some sort of answer.
The Zuwaya and the manufacture of history 
It is necessary to consider how tribesmen made history and what social relations underlay their production of knowledge about the past.
Among the Zuwaya history was not a specialized occupation; the relations were for the most part those of patrilineal descent.
The framework of analysis was not narrative nor progressive nor dialectical but genealogical.
And consequently their history consisted of events and lives which carried moral and political precept: of incidents loaded with an interpretation.
In Britain or America or France history making is dominated by professional historians organized in universities and institutes; their institutional loyalties are cross-cut by intellectual allegiances to schools of interpretation and to further specializations by place and by time.
The characteristic products are books or articles, and review articles: these enable members of a scattered community to communicate and to develop knowledge and polemic.
Writing is the essential tool, even when the sources are not written (as they are not for oral historians).
In addition, historians in universities and schools give lectures and classes to train less experienced persons to understand or to turn out characteristic products.
The style of the product is usually argumentative in any or all of three modes: about the truth of assertions about the past; about the typicality of the events and actions described; and about their meaning, the interpretation which historians put on them.
What historians do is a set of activities structured by their social relations, to each other and to their audiences.
What they make is ‘history’— events plus a structure of relations.
Contrast this with the ways tribesmen made history.
The Zuwaya did have two relatively specialized kinds of historian: older men tended to make more history than younger ones, and some poets included historical subjects in their repertoire as well as amorous and religious ones.
Poetry was a specialized  activity, at least in the sense that few people made or recited poems in public.
History in this case was the product of a specialized group; and the arguments about the quality of the product were about its beauty, metre, wit, rather than about its truth, typicality and meaning.
At the same time, however, each Zuwayi was his own historian, and history was the product of ordinary and unspecialized discourse.
The characteristic products of Zuwaya historians were genealogies, incidents in the lives of the people enumerated, explanations of names, and stories of battles, conflicts, heroism, trickery and death.
Some of this history was at a very high level of genealogy: it told of the matrimonial history of Hasan bin Nib and his wives and their marriages; or of the relations and deeds of his sons.
But most was not at such a high level, was concentrated within the last six or seven generations which (as Peters notably argues) was the limit of what a contemporary grandfather could tell as ‘what my grandfather told me’, or ‘what my father told me about his grandfather’(Peters, 1970).
This timespan has significant consequences for the construction of genealogies; it also resulted in an emphasis on genealogically restricted history.
Nomads did not have addresses, did not make the history of territories.
Rather, they had lines of descent, furcating from a common source; the lower down the genealogy, the closer the history.
For reasons Peters (1970) has made abundantly clear, the six-to-seven generation level was where lineages marked their beginnings and defined their separate identities: most Zuwaya history was ‘local’ to lineages.
It is important not to exaggerate this emphasis.
People knew that at Kawz and at Hawaria, their grandfathers had fought and died as Zuwaya; the history in poems, which have a wide audience, was also more general, and concerned Zuwaya as a whole rather than segments of Zuwaya.
Told to an outsider, the history of a lineage stood for the history of the tribe.
Nevertheless, most people who made history, or who instructed juniors how to make it, were concerned with a restricted genealogical range; so knowledge took on a segmentary, even oppositional character: genealogies varied, for instance, from reciter to reciter and from audience to audience.
Some men had books which dealt with events in which Zuwaya had played some part, and others had seen them.
The commonest was an Arabic version of Maresciallo Graziani's  account of his campaigns and government in eastern Libya (Graziani, 1932).
People read it and commented on his interpretation of events, and many were familiar with his version of the battles of Kawz and Hawaria.
One household certainly had the Arabic edition of Hassanein Bey's book about his travels in Libya, from Siwa to Ajdabiya and Kufra, and other people said they knew of it.
Like Agostini's survey of Cyrenaican tribes, it speaks of the Zuwaya and their connections with the Sanusi, and people considered it unwise to advertise ownership.
Agostini, indeed, surfaced only once during fieldwork, in the form of a photocopy of the map of tribes and their landholdings in the Ajdabiya region.
Those were the chief published sources used by Zuwaya.
Court archives included much material of interest, but the people who consulted them were almost exclusively clerks who needed to establish points for cases: they were not used for history-making.
In addition, people had access to other written materials: shaikhs kept lists of members of their lineages, and it was sometimes possible to reconstruct a genealogy from them.
Many heads of households kept small archives of letters, contracts, old permits and licences and photographs.
Some people had copies of public documents (such as the agreement by the shaikhs of 1946) which they inherited or had copied for their own use and enjoyment.
These served to establish claims, to recall old friendship, to jog the memory about old times.
And some of them were once of potential legal and economic importance: a deed of sale or an agreement about water rights; a declaration of constructive divorce, and so on.
They served to date some events, to establish the names of some of the participants, perhaps their ages.
But they did not do much more than that.
In general, these private archives served to make lineage history: a man kept his own papers, and his father's and grandfather's if he inherited them.
Most people kept their papers in tobacco tins; one man kept his in a biscuit tin, and one shaikh stored his in an old suitcase.
But most sources were oral: a man knew what he knew chiefly because his father or grandfather had told him.
And when he made history, he did so by speaking, mostly for members of his own line and for close collaterals.
Sometimes old men sat together and talked about history and genealogy, presenting history to fellow-producers, and discussion could be lively.
But for the most part people recited their descent and  their poems, recounted old events, in the company of people who wanted to be told who their ancestors were, what they did, what heroisms they accomplished.
Zuwaya said, ‘We killed Pasha Naiz’, or, ‘We owned the desert’.
In neither case did they mean they had personally been involved.
The we means ‘someone in my group’, and when a Zuwayi used we in this sense, the reference group was small and was likely to include his own ancestors and relatives, men he could name in a line of descent which included both speaker and audience, which explained the existence and identity of each person, and provided them with a character and loyalties.
In all societies older people tell younger ones about the past, and as they tell it, they transform it: a man's experience is his grandson's tradition.
Even when there are specialist historians, producing approximations to truth which their colleagues test and scrutinize to professional standards, people make home brews from their own lives and knowledge and offer them to their successors.
The ‘history of the common man’(that is, the history unspecialized people make) may be moonshine by professional standards, but it shapes people's understanding of the world, and their decisions about how to act, like any other assimilated experience.
Since history affects people's decisions, it plays some part in producing future history.
Knowledge of the past is one element in the process by which people make current events; and these in turn become the history of future common people.
But the relationship between people of different generations is not uniform.
Lison-Tolosana, for example, has shown that suffering imposed by elders on their juniors leads the juniors to take a more or less hostile and reactive view of history (Lison-Tolosana, 1966).
Zuwaya did express tensions between fathers and sons, some arising from the use of authority; they expressed others in the formal segregation of fathers and sons contained in the word tahashshum : shame or shyness should exclude money, women and relaxed pleasure from their interaction.
But reserve is not the same as contestation, and people linked by descent were bound by their opposition to others, had a solidarity based on common ownership and defence, which seemed stronger than day-today resentments arising from a father's control of his sons.
In these circumstances perhaps, they did not reinterpret history in each passing generation: experience of the relationship did not produce contestatory reformulations of knowledge.
So it is suggested that the Zuwaya image of statelessness was substantially a replica of how their ancestors conceived their society ought to have been, rather than a true and accurate picture of how it was.
Of course this must be tentative: records do not exist of Zuwaya organization and ideology two centuries ago.
It is occasionally possible to check Zuwaya statements, for example against Mason's version of hostilities between the Zuwaya and the Berbers of Awjla.
The Zuwaya account omitted Turkish intervention and described a purely stateless struggle.
The history in this case describes a conflict between neighbours rather than one against the state.
That is expected, but it remains an argument of probability, and opportunities to check other items of knowledge are very few.
So the chief basis of argument must be indirect: when the relations of production are as they were in this case, people will make history of this kind.
The characteristic historical product of a lineage standing against the world is a transmitted ideology.
It is important to make this as plain as possible because it is so tentative.
The first element in the argument is the relative amity and consensus between generations.
Their solidarity against the world overrode internal tensions, and history was not a field in which one practitioner could win renown by criticizing his fellows.
Lineage solidarity was perhaps the reason people told an idealized history, one consisting of the rights and duties a man had and met, rather than the devices he had to resort to, to survive.
Outcomes were the result of lawful and just action, not of a practical struggle to maintain rights and to enforce claims.
Zuwaya did not say, ‘and so we turned to the Turks for aid’, but ‘we won, and our rights prevailed’.
For, among other reasons, Turks did not fit into a Zuwaya genealogy; in theory, it is possible to find all forty shaikhs who appeared from time to time in Zuwaya stories in a genealogy (although it is only anthropologists who are sufficiently naive to ask which men were the victims and where did they fit in lists of ancestors).
The genealogical framework was the narrative, and it was essentially unconnected with any particular time: it was a sequence which had to be in the right order, and it explained how living people and the loyalties which linked them, came to  be.
The narrative consisted of generative acts, and the history was a world-view, a tale of rights and duties, in which Zuwaya linked events to each other as examples of the working of principles.
They were like law reports, cases concerning this or that, rather than a narrative linking events in a chain as cause and effect.
And their content, the principle they illustrated, was autonomy and opposition, the hostilities and loyalties which sustained the Zuwaya and others against government.
In this case, although people were selective about which bits of the past they emphasized (concentrating on state-renouncing), they did not so much reinterpret the past in the light of their present preoccupations; rather, they polished an idealized account of rights, with their ancestors as heroes of duty.
The argument now goes a step further: the process by which Zuwaya made history was substantially the same for all Libyan tribesmen.
That is to say, Libyans whose families had settled in the cities some generations before were perhaps exempt from this process; but the majority of Libyans made their history in the same way, and shared this picture of the past.
In particular, Qaddafi has a similar image; and his statements about the just society incorporate many elements of the tribal image of the past.
Qaddafi and the social factor
When Qaddafi abolished the state he did not expect Libyan society to collapse into fragments.
People are linked to each other by nature, and the abolition of artifice should allow nature to come into its own.
Qaddafi is convinced that nature is better than art; that society based on natural givens is not only more comfortable and just than one based on acts of will and rational choice, but more likely to survive: ‘A flourishing garden or field is one in which plants grow, flower, are pollinated and root themselves naturally.
So also with human society.’
Human society is, or should be based on the family and on kinship: ‘Humanity is naturally embodied in the individual, in the family, not in the State which is alien to it.
The State is an artificial political, economic, occasionally military system, bearing no relation to humanity’(III, ‘The family’).
Such a theory puts the family at the centre of society: it is what gives meaning to culture and responsibility to individuals.
As a theory it is common enough: in the Italian Constitution the family is the only association among people which is designated ‘natural’, and contemporary British conservatives tend to see the family as a possible counterweight to the power of the state.
The habit of mind which opposes family and state, and which gives the family a special position in the organization of a polity, is not solely Libyan: strongly étatique societies have often tried to abolish or limit the institution of the family; and the attempts by government to regulate family life by intervening to increase or to decrease births, by altering rules of inheritance, by inhibiting or encouraging kinship corporations, are so familiar that they are taken to be natural functions of the state.
Qaddafi's expectation is unexceptional: when the necessarily unjust state is abolished and subtracted from the sum of available relationships in society, the remainder will be natural families.
But this is an unimaginative conclusion, for there might be other relationships revealed when the oppressive or shielding stone is lifted and taken away; even if the family — parents and children — will certainly be there.
Nevertheless, if Qaddafi shows himself limited by this commonplace either-or, he has a decided advantage over West European or American anti-statesmen, who are generally at a loss to say how a society with only families will organize itself: what is to make the linkages among families?— the market?— a mafia?— a telephone company?
The families Qaddafi knows are organized, grouped on the natural principles of descent, and provide society with systematic natural and just relationships which necessarily include every individual who has been born.
A tribe is a family which has grown as a result of births.
It follows that a tribe is a big family.
Even the nation is a tribe which has grown demographically.
So the nation is a big tribe.
So the world is one nation which has branched into lesser nations.
The world is therefore a big nation.
(III ‘The tribe’)
The bond is natural; it also makes society simple, for the whole of justice in social relationships is derived from the one principle.
The bond which assures the existence of the individual, and provides him with his basic loyalties to his father and brothers and cousins, is also the bond which assures the cohesion of the nations, and then of the world, ‘but it does become weaker as the numbers become greater’.
The tribe is a natural social umbrella assuring security in society: ‘Because of its traditions it guarantees collectively to its members the payment of ransom and compensation as well as defence and vengeance: in other words, social protection’(HI, ‘Merits of the tribe’).
Nations are big tribes, having the same principle of cohesion and justice, but offering greater protection.
The reader will recognize the correspondences between Qaddafi's account of social organization and the Zuwaya image of the just society.
Both lack the state, although Qaddafi says nations may organize as one; members assure the provision of services (welfare, justice) by the mutual loyalties and cohesions of descent groups.
Qaddafi's account omits all mention of authority, just as Zuwaya do; and neither emphasizes the role of women.
Indeed, in this discussion Qaddafi mentions women only once, in what is in effect a recommendation to endogamy:
In accordance with the natural role of freedom, men and women are free to accept the one whom they want, to refuse the one they do not want.
Nevertheless, marriage within a group surely reinforces the unity of the group, contributing to its total development in harmony with the social factor.
What Qaddafi means here is that people should not make alliances outside the nation (just as many Libyans said it is preferable to marry close — for example, to a father's brother's child).
All humans may well have a place on the genealogy which begins with Adam; but the point where, say, the French line diverges from the Libyan line is likely to some hundreds of generations above the present adult men of Libya and France.
The solidarity of Libya and of France depends on maintaining  that distance, and it is confused if private individuals in the two nations have grandfathers or uncles in common.
This is the only recognition in The Green Book that women play an important part in making links across the tree-like diverging boundaries between groups, and in this respect too Qaddafi's understanding of the way Libyan society works is similar to that of the Zuwaya.
However, in several ways Qaddafi departs from the ordinary Libyan image.
For Zuwaya or Magharba, the largest group which had common descent for practical purposes was a tribe.
Qaddafi speaks of a larger effective grouping, the nation (he does not give much space to the solidarity of the world).
Moreover, Zuwaya and Magharba thought that their larger groupings were temporary: activated to demand compensation, they then relapsed into the noumenon, leaving households to go about their business; revenues from taxes were not kept in a fisc, but allocated to household budgets — and so on.
Qaddafi, however, thinks of nations as permanently active groups in continual session, not disappearing from practice when they are not needed.
They are the chief motor of history, undermining artificial creations such as states which attempt to impose solidarities on people, to claim their lives and property, for political or economic or military purposes.
It must be said that Qaddafi's account of nations lacks clarity.
First, which nation does he have in mind — Arab or Libyan?
The Green Book claims universality, and so names no names; but it is also a book written in the first instance for Libyans, to encourage them to create popular democracy.
Qaddafi's offers of union with Tunisia, Egypt, Syria and Morocco seem to indicate that he thinks of the Arab nation.
But if his practical measures are anything to go by, he may be thinking of the Libyan nation, for he discourages international marriage not only with English or American persons, but with Algerians, Egyptians and Palestinians.
Secondly, Qaddafi is unclear on precisely why states and empires are illegitimate.
Of course, merely artificial creations are unnatural and are therefore unjust; but if there is indeed a common descent from Adam, and the world is a family grown demographically from him and his wife, there must be potential descent groups larger than nations which have no taint of artificiality.
Perhaps Qaddafi thinks that there is no intermediate level of natural union between nations and the world.
This raises problems about the  legitimacy of the Arab nation (or, if not, about that of the Libyan one); and it certainly casts doubt on those proposed unions with Chad, Syria and Morocco.
Thirdly, Qaddafi does not clearly determine the issue of recruitment.
Generally speaking, it is a characteristic of modern nation-states that people acquire or retain citizenship by a rational act of will: people can relinquish membership, or can become naturalized.
Although Libyans recognized that many members of tribes were ‘written’, or attached in other ways, the central notion was that the loyalties and obligations which made the stateless system work were part of a person's equipment at birth.
Qaddafi says that nations are likely to have a greater proportion of written members than tribes generally do (III, ‘Merits of the tribe’, ‘The nation’); and he says that shared experience can forge a common solidarity, a sense of belonging.
Qaddafi's statement, however, does not really dispose of the contrast between the rational state, recruiting members who choose to belong, and the natural organizations of kinship.
What he describes is a series of patrilineal descent groups, each person necessarily belonging to one because he has a father; and necessarily belonging to only one because he has only one father.
While immigrants may come to share the sense of the Libyan destiny, and to acquire Libyan citizenship, they will lack the lineage and tribal affiliations other Libyans have.
Unless they become tribesmen when they acquire national membership they will lack those affiliations and loyalties below the level of nation which are identical in kind to national loyalty, and which sustain and give meaning to the existence of born Libyans: a system which derives nationhood from family and tribe does not easily accommodate immigrants.
The issue of naturalization seemed to perplex some Libyans; this was clear in their discussions at the Kufra Assembly and at the National Assembly which followed it.
Qaddafi himself, although he is prepared to naturalize immigrants to Libya, expresses strong reservations about states created largely by immigration.
His warning to the American President that he would support Native Americans (‘Red Indians’, whom he presumes to be tribally organized) against the federal government is consistent with his view that natural ties are more than just rational ones.
Qaddafi bases a large  part of his rhetoric against Israel on the theme that Zionism has created an immigrant European state on Arab territory.
And if immigration is a problem, so too is emigration.
Many Libyans have left their country and gone into exile since the 1969 coup.
The notion that they can be judged by Libyan law wherever they are, because they are Libyans by birth and cannot alter that by acts of will, seems to underlie the government's policies of clandestine homicide towards them.
The law people are subject to is personal and natural, not territorial and rational.
Given that nations are permanent, they must have permanent officials.
The advantage of the Zuwaya image, from a libertarian point of view, is that the rallying points for groups larger than households are ancestors: dead men, who cannot act ultra vires or be oppressive or unjust, or attempt to keep the group in being when the particular need for it has ceased.
In the image the tribe acts as a unit only when people need it, and at all other times it is only a possibility, a concept in their minds.
But when a group is in a permanent session, it must have specialist permanent officials, men with the authority of their bureaux.
For citizens cannot spend all their time being nationalists: they have to take time off to be members of families, producers, local government councillors and the like.
They cannot live in permanent assembly, to provide the drive for history, but must delegate to specialist office-holders.
The fundamental concept of The Green Book is that any claim on a person which diminishes individual sovereignty is unjust and oppressive.
Hence, the abolition of the state, of representative institutions, of parties and of all loyalties which derive from acts of political will and reason rather than natural kinship.
Qaddafi writes about constraints, compulsion, oppression, but as characteristics of states based on political rather than on social (‘natural’) bonds.
The word ‘authority’ and its cognates does not appear once in The Green Book (which is also silent about police, courts, armies and heads of state).
Qaddafi, at only one point, seems to say that states may be legitimate if they coincide with nations: ‘The nation-state [al-dawla al-qawmiya ]is the only polity harmonious with natural social structure.’
From time to time the Libyan police and armed forces have appeared in these accounts of Zuwaya politics, and it may be helpful now to say something about them in a more collected way.
For the rhetoric of Qaddafi's non-state implies that centralized monopolies of violence are unjust, that the citizenry should police itself.
A casual observer might conclude that the physical presence of police and troops, the centralized command structures, are simple failures of a kind common enough in all human political creations.
But the discrepancy is more important than that: Qaddafi held out the promise of statelessness, of the absence of centralized control, and this failure was therefore at the centre of his political theory.
When Western governments fail in matters of policy (to bring down inflation, or to reduce unemployment) they can blame technical factors beyond their control, or claim that no one really understands how to manage an economy.
But Qaddafi's promise to abolish the state was not a policy in this sense: it was a promise to change the structure of political activity, and to do it in an area over which sovereigns have more or less complete control.
Moreover, as the police and the army had no place in the formal structure of government, they had greater autonomy than in ostensibly centralized states.
The forces of law and order were not constitutionally apparent, the apparatus of state power was hidden from view, and this provided the Revolutionary Command Council with an unregulated instrument of policy.
Libyan police forces were of various kinds (municipal, traffic, frontier, uniformed public security, plainclothes detective, and secret), but they shared one characteristic: the policemen usually lived in their own homes, in the towns and oases in which they had rights to land.
In the smaller places, there  fore, they generally had to deal with people with the same background as themselves; they knew their customers and their family and friends.
The authorities in Tripoli shift ed senior officers around from one post to another at relatively frequent intervals; the officers themselves said that was not because the government was particularly concerned to create an impartial force (such as a Gendarmerie or Guardia Civil), but because their loyalty was suspect: if they worked in their home areas, or stayed for a long spell of duty in one district, they might acquire a following of dissidents.
Apart from these few senior officers, however, policemen shared the loyalties of their population, and had a position which was independent of their membership of the force and their rank in it.
People from Huaiwiri thus went to the funerary rites of the Kufra Chief of Police because he was a Hamdu, a member of a slave line attached to the Bu Matari.
A member of the Kufra trading community would not accept the guarantee of a very senior officer in Benghazi because he belonged to a different section of the Zuwaya.
An officer of the secret police began his interrogation of the anthropologist who had been denounced and brought to his office: ‘Now, tell me about my genealogy — you collected it from my father last week.’
In Ajdabiya a young traffic policeman resisted questions about his lineage: ‘As far as you're concerned, I'm a policeman.
Where are you from?
Where is your driving licence?’
But two days later he was on duty, coloured bright orange from iodine on cuts and bruises got at the elections which he had attended in the Jlulat interest.
Policemen themselves recognized loyalties and interests outside the force, outside those defined as legitimate by the authorities.
If Zuwaya disliked policemen as a category, and took pride in not being related to any, that was in part because in the past ordinary people got their main experience of corruption and venality in the first instance from the police, and that reputation stuck; and partly also because they recognized that policemen had divided loyalties and could not be trusted to be loyal exclusively to their kinsmen.
Just as many Zuwaya resented or rejected the state while they took salaries or subsidies from the government, so they held their hostile attitude to police forces distinct from kinship connections with policemen (though they were pleased when they had none).
In Kufra one policeman (the senior customs officer) was a  stranger, though he had lived there for some decades; in Tazarbu nearly all policemen were from one lineage (Bilal), or had married into it; the senior officer's son was also in the force, a trainee under his father's authority.
In Ajdabiya the force was recruited from the local population and had its complement of Zuwaya and Magharba; only Muhammad Ali, the deputy chief, was an outsider.
The army was a different matter.
It was much more segregated than the police force and people rarely served in their home area.
Some conscripts were able to live at home for at least part of their service, reporting for duty at 5.30 a.m. and returning in the late afternoon — but usually only those who lived near a training depot had permission to commute to it.
With these exceptions, troops lived in barracks, and certainly the officers were rarely posted to their home territories.
A further difference between the army and the police was that the professional officer corps had the task of leading the revolution.
Qaddafi's policy of unlimited universal military service was one element in his plan to educate Libyans to nationhood and socialism.
Officers were quick to accept this role, and tended to see the army as, in the words of one officer, ‘the only selfless people in Libya’, certainly in the vanguard of revolutionary education.
The officer said people should lose their sectional interests, should learn to accept orders and to work for the common good.
The army's pioneering role, its part in the coup of 1969, the military background of the members of the Revolutionary Command Council, were the chief reasons civilians did not control the army: after the first years of the revolution there was no ministry or secretariat for defence or aggression in Libya, and the National and local Assemblies did not discuss military affairs.
Military budgets and procurement were not publicly disclosed and were deducted from national  revenues before allocations were made to departments subject to popular discussion.
Congresses and committees did not scrutinize military funding and expenditure, and they had little opportunity to discuss military actions: the government did not announce the ventures in Chad and Uganda; nor did they disclose training given to Chaddian, Palestinian and perhaps other freedom-fighters (Tunisian, for example).
One issue which the people did discuss, and which did have military implications, was relations with Egypt.
In 1976 the two countries became increasingly hostile, and ministers (as they were still called) visited the major towns of Libya for public meetings at which they explained the issues and solicited the opinions of the audience.
Partly as a result of these consultations Libya modified the tone of the polemic with Egypt, and withdrew proposed measures against Egyptians working in Libya.
The government described the small war which broke out a year later (2–14 July 1977) as an unprovoked Egyptian attack.
If this were the case it would explain why they had not held meetings on this occasion.
But many Libyans argued that the popular consultations of 1976 had had no more than a delaying effect.
Apart from this scrutiny of military matters, of disputed effectiveness, the Assemblies also discussed military, financial and diplomatic support for the Palestinians, which they offered on the condition that the recipients of aid should strive for the unity of the Palestinian forces.
The Assemblies never approved military intervention in Lebanon; the small contingent of Libyan troops there was said to consist of volunteers, and the decision as to which of the groups within Lebanon they should support seems to have been reserved to Qaddafi.
The Libyan contingents seem not to have achieved unity among the various Palestinian factions.
The conclusion must be that the major issues of military commitment outside Libyan frontiers were not generally discussed in public assemblies of any kind, unless it suited the Revolutionary Command Council.
The role of the officers — the vanguard of revolutionary education, exempt from the civilian controls which applied to electricity or water — seemed to have encouraged them in their belief that in their private capacities too officers were not subject to the same rules as civilians.
And certainly some Libyans, fearful of showing themselves in need of education, were willing to accept an officer's definition of the rules which governed their transactions.
‘A military dinar’, one shopkeeper remarked, ‘is worth two civilian dinars.’
Officers seemed to gain easier exemption from building regulations and from restrictions on landlordism; their attempts to influence judges in cases in which they might have only an indirect interest were also reported, in private, by judges.
Military privilege was undefined; civilians did not know what an officer was entitled to, what they could safely refuse, what belonged to the armed forces, and what claims were backed only by an officer's pretensions.
Although there were famous instances of resistance to individual officers' claims, some people who protested suffered reprisals.
People also thought officers sometimes used their power for others.
For example, Zuwaya said they were subjected to discriminatory conscription in Ajdabiya: those youths who shouted ‘And we killed Pasha Naiz’, provoked Magharba to denounce Zuwaya to the commander of the garrison at Sirte.
Magharba said that Zuwaya had flaunted their dissident nature and their resistance to all government.
The commander, as an al-Qadhadhfa and ally of the Magharba, should teach them a lesson.
It was a measure of the opacity of military affairs that, although no Zuwayi had any evidence of meetings, or of any disproportional conscription, most people thought it plausible that men might be pressed into the army because they were Zuwaya.
They also thought it likely that two allies could bring that about — an outraged civilian persuading his powerful military friend.
The apex of military command was the same as the apex of the civilian structure.
The five surviving members of the original Revolutionary Command Council were Colonel Qaddafi himself, Major Jallud, Lieutenant-Colonel Bu Bakr Yunis, Lieutenant-Colonel Kharubi and Major Hamidi.
They controlled both military and civilian action and expenditure.
Although the Revolutionary Command Council consisted exclusively of military men it was not devoted solely to military interests: Jallud, for example, was said to have strong support among the technocrats in the petroleum and development departments.
Moreover, the need to praetorianize part of the army under the command of the head of the Sirte garrison suggests a divergence of interests between the higher military leadership and the Revolutionary Command Council.
Disputes, sabotage, mutinies and attempted coups arose from political or ideological disagreements, from resentment at allocation of funds and procurement policies, and from military reluctance to follow aggressive policies against other countries.
The officer corps had the distinction of being the most executed of any category of the Libyan population.
A Practical synthesis
Whatever happened to segmentary ideas?
They were nurtured by Qaddafi's rhetoric of individual autonomy; they survived and became sources of inspiration in Libyans' conflicts with their state.
Segmentary ideas entailed a view of justice and equality, of freedom, which was a radical alternative to that of the Libyan government.
For the most part, their radicalism did not lead to crisis, and they appeared as complements rather than alternatives to state procedure: for the most part men combined ‘how we have always done things’ with ‘how we are constrained to do things’.
The Zuwaya usually achieved a practical synthesis, but it was nevertheless a synthesis which kept the seeds of contestation alive.
The pursuit of justice 
Zuwaya said that in the past they achieved justice by threat and compensation, by massing lineages to menace vengeance.
During 1975–9 they did settle disputes by threatening violence and by paying compensation, and said that this was customary.
People should not steal, kill, wound gratuitously; when they did, they should pay; and pressure was brought to bear on them to make sure that they complied.
Modern peace-makings seem not to entail marriages between the disputants, as the  historic ones sometimes did; but in all other respects contemporary practice accords with the image.
But they settled disputes within a society which had police, courts, laws and lawyers.
They used courts for private cases: divorced wives whose maintenance had not been paid, and heirs who thought they had been cheated, appear in the earliest court records; they were plaintiffs and claimants whose position was weak in the traditional system.
From early times people also used the courts for declarations, for example of constructive divorce, where a legal document conferred rights.
During 1975–9 Zuwaya applied to the courts, and used court verdicts, as well as pursuing offenders through shaikhs and the confrontation of lineages.
Most Libyan policemen lived at home, were members of the community they served, and hence were subject to conventional pressures of tribe and lineage as well as those professional ones of the force.
The police in Ajdabiya were mostly Magharba and Zuwaya, and senior officers took care in selecting men to police fraught situations.
When someone was hurt or killed in a motor accident, for example, the police chief sent men to watch the victim's shaikh's house to warn and counsel any group of people coming out intending to inflict equivalent injury on the other driver.
He chose a small squad from among those men available who did not belong to any lineage closely involved in the affair.
However, all policemen belonged to lineages, and consequently the police force could not really handle those events (such as the Ajdabiya elections) which resulted in massive mobilization of populations: not because the numbers were too great, but because the police force did not contain enough men uninvolved on either side.
In Kufra, where there were no lawyers, no lay court or magistrate, the police seemed to encourage wherever possible those informal procedures of dispute settlement which relied on shaikhs and negotiation rather than on prosecution and judgement.
In Ajdabiya, too, the police intervened in civil wrongs only as a last resort: occasionally, for example, disputes over water-rights occurred between lineages, even sections of lineages, and one or other party would try to enlist the support of the police.
Muhammad Ali, the Deputy Chief of Police, from a town with no Magharba or Zuwaya, told them they had only a little quarrel: they could easily settle it themselves; if the police intervened it would become more bitter; they would be wise to  make peace (sulh ) and not to call for judgement.
The police, for reasons of economy of control rather than from partiality, accepted, tolerated, even encouraged the solemn formalities of stateless justice; the Zuwaya equally did not reject due process of courts and judgements: these were not exclusive.
So, when a motor accident occurred, the victim eventually collected compensation from the state insurance company, but the offender's lineage, or section, also paid to make peace with the victim's group.
In Ajdabiya a young man, driving his father's car too fast, brushed against a toddler playing in the street, cutting her hand.
The child needed a few stitches.
But two cases of tinned tomatoes, a sack of rice, a sack of sugar and a large quantity of packets of tea were quickly assembled and delivered within hours of the accident as an open and willing admission of the responsibility of the reckless s and silly youth's family.
Both parties belonged to lineages within a major grouping of the Jlulat section.
In 1978 two friends in Benghazi, in their late teens or early twenties, decided to go to Zliten to get some dates: one boy came from there and had family there; the other, Nuri, son of a Zuwayi policeman, was to provide the motor vehicle.
They went to Zliten and spent the night in a guestroom; in the morning the Zliten boy asked to borrow the vehicle for a few moments, drove it away, smashed it and abandoned both the vehicle and his Zuwayi friend who had to find other means to get back to Benghazi.
When they met a few days later in Benghazi they quarrelled and the Zliten boy knifed the Zuwayi in the arm.
The police arrested the offender who was tried and convicted of assault.
The Zliten people formally offered compensation; the Zuwaya invited them to Ajdabiya for peacemaking, and arranged a preliminary meeting of Zuwaya to discuss how much compensation they should demand.
The injured youth, Nuri Mahmud, was from Janab lineage, and so the Zuwaya concerned met in the house of the son of the Ajdabiya shaikh of the Janab.
The whole peace-making took three days.
On the Wednesday  the out-of-town Zuwaya arrived: Nuri's father came from Benghazi; the Kufra shaikh of the Janab came with two elderly members.
They were welcomed and fed, visited by their Janab friends in Ajdabiya, and slept the night in the guestroom.
On Thursday they continued to drink tea and chat during the morning and after lunch.
In the evening more people arrived: members of a saintly sub-lineage of Janab, Sharifa, who were attached by marriage; various senior Janab from Ajdabiya, and a young Janab policeman; and the shaikhs of each of the five major sections of the Zuwaya (Jlulat, Mannaia, Awlad Amira, Muftah and Shuaghra) as well as the shaikh of all the Zuwaya, Ibrahim al-Sanusi.
The senior Sharifi led evening prayers and, after a meal, they began the proceedings.
Muhammad al-Sharifi welcomed everyone present, and then explained the purpose of the gathering: the men from Zliten would arrive, and they had to decide the amount of compensation.
Ibrahim al-Sanusi then spoke: the more serious the offence, the more difficult to make peace, the greater the compensation had to be; it was important to know the offence.
So the young policeman (who had been eating with the other young men in the passage outside the guestroom) came in and read the transcript of the court judgement which had condemned the boy from Zliten.
‘These are the facts.’
Then discussion began: if it had been a man, and if he had died, the peace should be 10,000 dinars; but Nuri was a boy, he had only been stabbed, so 2000 was about the right amount.
On the other hand, someone said, four offences had occurred: theft of the car, smashing the car, leaving the boy in Zliten, all in addition to the stabbing.
Ibrahim al-Sanusi said that this was a peace to be made between tribes (that was why he was there), and it was important to make it well.
He knew of petty quarrels between men of different tribes which, inadequately composed, had grown; in one case thirteen men had been killed.
The discussion continued for an hour or so; some Janab held out for 7000 dinars, others said that was too much.
The gathering ended when one of the section shaikhs said he had business to attend to that evening, they should ask for 6000 dinars, and please would Muhammad al-Sharifi close the proceedings.
Nobody dissented and the company stood to recite the opening chapter of the Koran under the leadership of the al-Sharifi.
On Friday they met in a mosque with the men from Zliten, demanded 6000 dinars (£11,800 at the then official  exchange rate, £6500 at the going rate in the free market), and received assurances of payment.
The money was distributed to the Janab, not to all Zuwaya.
The section shaikhs and Ibrahim al-Sanusi were there because they had to guarantee to the Zliten people that all Zuwaya would accept the peace they had arranged.
Otherwise any Zuwayi might in future quarrels assert that he was justified in aggressive action because there was blood between the Zuwaya and Zliten (though on the whole most people present thought that improbable).
Throughout the proceedings people were conscious that they spoke for all Zuwaya, addressing each other formally as ‘You, Zuwayi there’ and referred to themselves collectively as ‘We Zuwaya’.
On lesser occasions, such as peace-makings within the Zuwaya, or within a section, they were not so formal: people did not say ‘We Jlulat’, or not often.
Most disputes were of this kind, involving traditional sources of conflict: land and water rights or personal injury.
If there was a Libyan involved, the police proceedings were accompanied by self-help action, although the influx of foreigners had created a number of potential offenders and victims who did not fit into the system.
In Tripoli a bank raid was said to be the work of Tunisians.
In Ajdabiya, a number of youths raped a Bulgarian hospital worker and her visiting daughter.
The other Bulgarian workers alleged that the police were desultory in their investigations, and went on strike.
Another source of disputes was government resources.
In 1977, for instance, rumours circulated in Ajdabiya that two lineages in Hawari, from different sections of Jlulat, were in active hostilities.
The Ajdabiya shaikh of one of the lineages involved confirmed the story: he was on the point of departure for Kufra to lend his weight to the representatives of reason and peace.
The other lineage, which supplied the officers to the  local branch office of the department, had unjustly excluded his men from government subsidies to agriculture.
Two men had come to blows, an arm had been broken.
The shaikh complained that he had to leave in a hurry; his opposite number had left by plane, and he had to drive urgently to Kufra for it was essential that as many people as possible should turn up, to emphasize the seriousness of the affair.
Details of this incident are not clear; it happened when Libya was at war, and the movement of foreigners was restricted; and a year later other more striking events had occurred which overshadowed it.
People said it was smoothed over, and that there had been adjustments of personnel in the agriculture department.
The shaikh was concerned because a man's arm had been broken; but the cause of the dispute was the use of government resources to damage the interests of rival lineages.
Zuwaya made peace about once or twice a month.
They did so most often with other Zuwaya, but even then the shaikhs of Ajdabiya and Kufra, Tazarbu and Ajkharra, might have to attend.
For although Ajdabiyans usually had no direct part in disputes in Kufra, and vice versa, all had to make the peace.
In this sense, peace-making was a classic segmentary affair which happened to make use of those modern aids which lay to hand — transcripts of court proceedings, telephones and planes, for example.
Another aid, of more than technical significance, was the existence of the state and of the police.
It is possible that in the past any Zuwayi would have felt free to continue personally the feud with Zliten if he could allege that the peace was unsatisfactory or incomplete.
But in 1979 the creation of peace was clearly a settling of an account: should a quarrel between a Zuwaya and men from Zliten occur in the future, that particular issue could not become a component element of it, for all the shaikhs concerned had agreed that the peace made was a good one.
In that case, at any rate, there was little question of the boys' dispute creating a relationship of permanent hostility between the two groups; and this was in part the consequence of the wider peace, sanctioned by authority, which generally prevailed in Libya.
A procedure for the righting of wrongs which depends on peace-making and on the payment of enough compensation to make the peace hold, implies a different notion of justice from that embodied in a penal code in which offences are offences against the state.
The notion of offence can include ‘unwitting’ offences such as motor accidents in which no one is to blame.
The worth of the person offended affects the gravity of the offence to a greater extent than in penal systems; and the amount of compensation reflects the social distance between the parties.
In Libya the peace which flowed from state justice, impersonal, universal, was not enough for the Zuwaya: they added to it peaces of their own manufacture, tailored to the social personalities involved in particular breaches of the peace, guaranteed by specific and contingent undertakings made between Muslims.
Nonetheless, stateless justice was underwritten by the state's justice with which it coexisted; and the officers of state justice, for economy of control and to avoid conflict within the force, encouraged groups to make their ad hoc settlements when they could.
Distributive justice 
Zuwaya asserted in political discussion that no man was better than another (a principle used in argument, rather than as a guide to action); but when they spoke about distributive justice they put little emphasis on economic egalitarianism.
Shaikhs collected money from members of their lineages to support those who had no other support, or who had heavy expenses of certain kinds (educational or medical, but not business expenses) which they could not meet; but these were in no sense an attempt to redistribute resources.
Lineages also contributed to the expenses of funerals: members made a collection toward the cost of feeding the guests; if the dead person was a well known and respected man, the household might have to provide two meals a day and continual tea for up to a week for a hundred or so visitors (who sometimes brought a contribution of a sheep or tea or sugar).
Some rich men took utterly destitute people into their houses, where they performed menial services, and it was usual for even the moderately well-off to invite poor men and strangers off the street to eat meals at home.
Hosts did not always know the names of such guests and considered it impolite to ask, at least until the meal was over.
Such invitations and sharings of food were virtuous, and could be interesting, giving rise to good conversation.
But the notion of virtue implicit in such hospitalities did not include any expectation of a permanent elimination of differences in wealth.
On the other hand it is a mistake to think of the Zuwaya as differentiated by class: differences in wealth were not a basis for any marked or self-conscious social discrimination.
The rich were not a hereditary class, for most wealthy men were self-made.
Their style of life was not much different from the ordinary Zuwaya: they had perhaps recently acquired better housing, but the new villas were not segregated; food was no more generous, nor more delicate in a rich man's house; schooling and medical treatment were uniform.
Still, rich men had motor vehicles in greater number and in better condition than middling men; poor men had none at all.
Rich men had television receivers and videos, middling men had receivers only, or no television at all.
Differences in wealth were not easily transmuted into self-conscious social distinctions, but they did require certain forms of expenditure.
It was a criticism to say of someone ‘he is only interested in money’: people expected him to provide peace and tranquillity for his family, a guestroom where people might meet; people said a rich man should further his spiritual interests by going to Mecca and, if very rich, by building a mosque.
‘He is wealthy and he doesn't eat better than us and his father works in his garden’ was a comment tinged with admiration, but dominated nonetheless by the thought that a man so obsessed did not lead the full life.
Zuwaya preferred not to employ one another but to enter into partnerships of a kind which created income for the wealthier and capital for the poorer man.
A typical agreement of this kind concerned Mercedes trucks which were expensive (about 70,000 dinars at the official rate of exchange in 1979) and extremely profitable.
The first stage of the partnership was called ‘the third’(al-thalth).
A wealthy man bought a truck and the poorer partner drove it for a wage.
When the net proceeds from trucking (income less running expenses and the wage of the driver) equalled the cost of the truck the driver became owner of one third of the vehicle.
The partners could then decide to sell it and divide the cash or they could decide to continue to the next stage of association (called al-nusf,‘halves’).
In this, the driver continued to drive, but shared the costs; he received no wage but took half the proceeds.
This arrangement sometimes continued indefinitely, until the truck was beyond repair.
More commonly, the partners sold it when the driver had enough money to buy a truck of his own.
The  time taken to complete the partnership was short: initial costs were high, but running costs were low and freight charges were extremely high.
A poor man who entered into a partnership could complete the first stage in a year to fifteen months; he could start a partnership with a poorer man in two or three years.
They could complete the whole process, involving between 150,000 and 200,000 dinars of capital, in five to seven years.
Zuwaya made similar contracts for other kinds of enterprise —— shops, garages or farms.
They did so with relations outside a household (where property was ‘common’) and within the Zuwaya tribe; only a few Tibbu and other non-Zuwaya had partnerships with them.
Magharba and Majabr also made contracts (al-thalth, al-nusf ), again confined mostly to members of their own groups.
The contracts were an interesting way of moving capital.
It would be possible to say of one Kufran ‘He owned fifteen trucks’: but twelve of them were in transit between partners.
It is difficult to characterize such relations as ‘capitalist’, or to regard them as oppressive: most of the rich men of the Zuwaya managed their businesses in this way, getting a good return on money laid out, but creating wealth for poorer fellow tribesmen and a few others in the process.
So economic egalitarianism was not a dominant theme in Zuwaya talk of the just society: people approved of wealth used properly, hoped to acquire it themselves, and when they were successful regarded wealth-sharing arrangements within the tribe as a no doubt prudent, but also morally desirable, way of making money grow.
Although Zuwaya merchants defended themselves against government socialism by claiming that free enterprise worked, they were not capitalists in any reasonable use of the term, the defence forced upon them by Tripoli.
Relations of production were in some cases clearly oppressive, but that was more attributable to the nationalism of the government and the ethnic prejudice of the employers than to their capitalism: relations of wealthy to poor Zuwaya did not constitute class relations, and secondary characteristics of class — segregation in housing, schooling and medical care —— were absent.
Zuwaya enthusiasts of the revolution did sometimes speak of the injustice of unequal distribution of wealth, but like those who attended the Intellectual Seminar in 1970, they had difficulty in identifying any particular groups of Libyans who suffered as a group, or who had a common  interest in pursuing distributive justice: in Benghazi they said, there were Libyan workers who were oppressed, or perhaps Tripoli.
At any rate, so far as Zuwaya are concerned, it was those men who were fifty to sixty years old in 1979 who had created in the previous three decades the marked differences in wealth which did exist.
They were not then a class which had consolidated its position through marriage and inheritance: the combination of their own practice and of national policy made it unlikely that they would ever be able to do so.
Zuwaya saw no harm in government support for the sick, old and others unable to support themselves — such as war widows.
The provision of state pensions for such people was a welcome addition to the incomes of the extended households they almost invariably belonged to; it supplemented and sometimes replaced the help which lineages would otherwise have given.
Zuwaya used the same word (mus  adat ) for both state and lineage welfare transfers.
Care of the unfortunate was a general duty which people met with generosity and tenderness, and they were not surprised when the state did the same.
Nevertheless, Libyans in Kufra and Ajdabiya resented the government's attempts to secure social justice by altering the permitted range of economic activities, by changing the rules of participation in production and by introducing quantitative limits into the notion of property.
That was understandable.
A man who lost his agency for imported electronic equipment, for example, did not praise nationalization of the import business.
Nobody in Kufra had ever owned a factory, but many were able to imagine what it would be like to find that the workers had become partners.
Few Kufrans were  employees in private companies, and when they spoke about the drive to create partnerships, they imagined themselves owners rather than workers.
Landlords were not pleased to find that their apartment blocks had overnight become the property of the tenants.
Nevertheless there were some curious aspects to Kufran and Ajdabiyan resentment.
Traders and shopkeepers there were not capitalists, although they accepted that definition of themselves in their defence of free enterprise.
At most only four Zuwaya employed more than ten people on a regular basis, and most wealthy Suwaya entrepreneurs, say seventy men altogether, had placed their money in partnerships rather than in wage-paying firms; employees were generally foreigners excluded from the right to take over factories and workshops.
Few Ajdabiyans had been expropriated by late 1979, and not a single Kufran — although many men had transferred property titles to close family members in the months of discussion preceding the publication of measures against landlordism.
In 1978 they already expected the measures, not announced until 1981, to restrict quantities of money held by individuals.
It was, of course, difficult to estimate the extent to which people were hit by these evolving programmes.
Many Libyans especially in the smaller towns had been able to move out of the path of oncoming measures of social justice: many would not have been affected in any case; some had no doubt been caught.
But one aspect of Libyan popular democracy was that the political air was clear, visibility high; most new controls could be seen coming.
So, for example, in 1978, quite small traders were already moving money out of Libya for their close kinsmen as well as on their own account.
Even the moderately well-off were able to take some precautionary steps to avoid expropriation and the effects of the introduction of limits on wealth.
It was inconvenient; the prospects for private accumulation in the future was slimmer; the expectation that public enterprise would be less responsive to needs than free traders gave rise to fears of a general decline in wealth and amenity,
But resistance to government reorganization was not simply based on self-interest; what a person's self-interest was, was defined by institutions and economic expectations, by a social framework which was to some extent traditional and entrenched.
‘Defence of self-interest’ was linked to defence of ‘traditional institutions’, for Zuwaya economic activity in the past had not been anarchic and unbridled, but subject to both social and religious controls over the acquisition and use of wealth.
The household, still the main private economic unit, was not only a carefully regulated institution, it was also (like the extra-household partnerships by ‘thirds’ and ‘halves’) an institution which resulted in the transfer of wealth between individuals.
Most traders offered extensive lines of credit, without interest, to their friends and kinsmen — a wealthy Kufran, for example, reckoned that he had about 30,000 dinars on loan to his friends at any one time — apart from commercial credit.
Social expectations regulated household expenditure: marriage, charity, social amenity and religious duty were all approved and sanctioned expenditures; most others were not.
Within these limits of acquisition and expenditure, Zuwaya admired and enjoyed wealth.
It is perhaps not appropriate to insist that Zuwaya, resisting government regulation, had an image of a different kind of economic order, consistent with or derived from their image of Arab government, and opposed to the principles of Islamic socialism.
The quantity of wealth and the range of differences were so great and so new that it was difficult to assimilate it to any picture of how Zuwaya had done things in the past.
Nevertheless, the new wealth was subject to some control through institutions which were central to the image of Arab government (household, lineage) even if the wider groupings were likely eventually to break down under the pressures of differentiation.
The lineage was never a group without internal distinctions of wealth, but they had become much greater than ever before.
Issues of freedom 
Zuwaya usually gave one of three short answers to the question, What is that man's occupation?
‘He's a servant’, ‘He's a free Zuwayi’ or ‘He's a teacher’.
Servants were people who worked for the government or for a company: in Kufra 68 per  cent, in Ajdabiya 52 per cent of men were government servants, about one third of them conscripts.
When pressed —— Which department?
What rank?— Zuwaya said he was a doorkeeper in the municipality, director of the local hospital, a diver at the oil terminal.
A free Zuwayi could be a wealthy trader, a shopkeeper, a poor herder.
Teachers were government employees, as everyone knew, but nobody called them servants.
The contrast between ‘servant’(tiba  a ) and ‘free’(hurr ) was primary and evaluative.
‘Servant’ was the word people also used for client groups attached to Zuwaya lineages; it generally implied dependence, a conditional existence or belonging.
People did not usually describe themselves as servants (clients did not, nor did government employees).
What do you do?—‘I'm a clerk’, or, ‘I'm Director of Agriculture.’
And when someone said of a close relative, ‘He's a doorkeeper’, he was careful to make plain that his father or uncle did not need to work, but liked to get out of the house to chat with other old men and to draw a salary for it, rather than a pension.
The word ‘free’ carried positive evaluation.
A builder, a farmer, a trader of whatever standing, a herder: these were all free men distinguished not by their wealth or learning or any other quality except their independence.
They took no orders.
The word contrasts, therefore, with tiba  a (‘servant’) and also with   abd (‘slave’).
A free (white) Zuwayi was one who had no enslaved male ancestors.
A shopkeeper from a slave line might describe himself as a free Zuwayi without incongruity; but other people would usually call him  abd, a black with an enslaved grandparent somewhere in his line.
In this sense, ‘free’ carried a load of genealogical history: a free man was one with an authentic Zuwaya ancestry.
In the 1950s, Peters records, people used the word hurr to distinguish owners of land and water rights from their clients.
This again indicated whose who lived unconditionally on their own resources and distinguished them from men beholden to someone for their livelihood.
Twenty-five years later Zuwaya would say with some pride ‘I'm a free Zuwayi’ implying ‘of the old kind’.
They always coupled the words free and Zuwayi (or Magharbi or Majbari) in this context: not a free  lawyer or a free farmer, but a free Zuwayi.
To state the identity of a free person made clear that he was not an asocial person but a member of a group of free men.
Similarly, ‘free’ was a concept which attached to persons: it was not an abstraction.
An assault on freedom was an assault on the rights of a group of persons, rather than on some abstract quality residing in institutions.
Zuwaya spoke of free people rather than of freedom.
The word hurriya had different connotations.
It was a government word used, for example, in the 1975 slogan ‘Socialism and freedom are one!’(later to become ‘Islam, socialism and freedom are one!’), painted on walls and on the triumphal arches set up over main roads.
Freedom signified the absence of undesirable qualities of life, the elimination of ignorance, of foreign domination, of sickness and discrimination; even, some Zuwaya said, the elimination of free people.
For one of the easier semantic slides from ‘free Zuwayi’ was toward ‘privileged Zuwayi’(or Maghrabi): free Zuwaya, when they were able, would control the activities of others.
Government policies to achieve freedom from want, oppression, ill-health and ignorance implied a hierarchy of controls and commands, a central imposition of limits on action administered by government servants and enforced by police and the army.
These were inconsistent with privilege, and also with the more central connotation of Zuwayi hurr : that such a man accepted no orders.
Libyans had not resolved such contrasting usages.
They saw them as contradictions, occasions for elaborated ironies, for indignation and anger.
In their lives they adopted various practical courses of action which accommodated rather than resolved their dilemmas.
The shaikh Abdulrahman bu Riziq represented the rejectionist horn: he lived in the desert where an Italian policeman had been murdered, and took sardonic comfort from the reminder.
He also took government subsidies for agriculture, applying them to his catch-cropping enterprise.
He contrasted sharply with the acceptance horn, exemplified by career policemen.
Although in the oases they made gardens, perhaps even carried on other spare-time occupations, they were forbidden to trade and did not have the time to be truck drivers.
So Abdullah Muhammad was a policeman in Tazarbu, and in 1978–9 used his spare time to build a mosque in Wadi district, for which the landowning lineage  paid him.
He also grew fruit and vegetables for domestic consumption.
Abdullah was the equivalent of a constable, the most junior career rank, almost on a par with conscripts.
More senior men had perhaps less freedom to diversify, although in the south they all kept gardens and sometimes worked them themselves.
These men did not describe themselves as Zuwayi hurr,but even though their activities were largely circumscribed by their police work, they maintained some activities which were typical of a free Zuwaya.
Moreover, many of them had brothers or fathers or sons who were free: it was part of a household deployment of people to spread them among occupations for mutual security and utility.
This worked as a strategy at least for as long as the persons involved lived in the same household and shared their resources.
Most Zuwaya were servants of government, but were not so restricted as policemen.
Hamad Hasan al-Harash, for example, was a senior official in the Agriculture Department in Kufra (Zawiya), had two well-established irrigated gardens worked by Egyptian labourers in 1975–9, and was one of the few people who supplied fruit and vegetables to the Kufra market on a regular basis.
He also owned a shop on the main street, selling hardware and tinned foods and some garden produce.
He planned to acquire one of the Agricultural Project smallholdings, and although he was not eligible, he had some hopes since those who were qualified were not applying.
Hamad Hasan did not describe himself as a free Zuwayi, but his ventures into gardening and trade, and his use of his agricultural knowledge and skills, were characteristic activities of free men.
Gardening and agricultural production, unlike trading, were safe from government intervention, and his mixture of activities gave him some security should his job or his shop come under threat.
Hamad was exceptionally enterprising: most government employees produced only for their own consumption, and their shops were sometimes very much spare-time activities.
Amjawr Haiba, a schoolteacher, for example, opened his shop only out of school hours, to sell exercise and text books, pencils and erasers and rulers.
It is unlikely that he made much money, but he had an activity and his shop was a meeting-place for other young men who dropped in to discuss the events of the day and to plan entertainments and visits for the evening.
Free Zuwaya suffered unequally from government intervention in the economy.
Gardeners and herders were mostly  immune from controls on marketing since they marketed relatively little, often only on a casual basis.
Typically, a gardener sent surplus dates to the cities, or trucked onions from Tazarbu to Ajdabiya.
People sold smaller surpluses in the local markets: a gardener with spring onions or olives or melons needed no licence to sit in the market-place.
One man in Kufra specialized in producing silq , a form of spinach used for wrapping the spiced ground meat which is a traditional Ramadan delicacy.
He was able to sell the leaves for high prices, and people said he earned enough in one month to meet his annual needs for cash.
Traders, on the other hand, and to a lesser extent truckers, thought themselves endangered.
During the period 1975–9 many among them anticipated government controls and the abolition of private retail trade.
Most shopkeepers joined the co-operative movement, and big traders, wholesalers perhaps with their own trucks, diversified their businesses, or withdrew money from their businesses to send it abroad or to build houses for themselves and their families.
Economic independence, especially in trade, was central to the term ‘free Zuwayi’, and it was this which government intervention most threatened.
These were the areas of life where the conflict between notions of free man and free society, at the margins between privilege and social justice, most preoccupied Zuwaya.
Other aspects of freedom did not affect them so much.
Libyans knew of civilians imprisoned, officers hanged or shot for voicing opinions contrary to the regime, and they took care not to expose themselves by expressing hostility or opposition in public.
They knew that the government censored radio and newspapers.
Some Libyans were afraid of secret police, and took precautions when criticizing the government in private conversation, for example when talking to an anthropologist.
In general it seems fair to say that rather fewer Zuwaya were concerned with freedom of speech or opinion than with the threats to economic independence, which in their view was more closely bound up with identity and belonging.
Images and the polity
The Zuwaya maintained an image of statelessness and an identity as free persons which from time to time became an active force in their politics.
It is not enough to explain this, as some outsiders and many insiders did, by invoking some theory of social inertia, to the effect that Libyans still had a Bedouin mentality.
The Zuwaya and their rivals were not inert, but were participants in a national economy which presented more modern features than other nations (Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco) in which nonetheless tribal affiliations were of decreasing importance.
Moreover, to maintain a tribe in being has always required acts of will, occasionally of violence, and to think of tribes as in some sense natural phenomena, inert until a civilizing, modernizing process is forced upon them, is to succumb to ideology.
It is tribesmen who tell themselves that tribes are natural groups based on primary bonds of kinship and descent.
So it is necessary to try to find an explanation for the continued existence of the stateless image among Zuwaya, and for its periodic episodic salience, its power to determine action in a modern state.
One facilitating cause was the way Zuwaya settled in the 1950s.
Camps of herders became suburbs of shopkeepers and clerks, their villas set out then much as tents in a camp.
The correspondence between camp and suburb diminished as children grew up and married, as old men died, as men moved away to new cities and new occupations.
Nonetheless, in the late 1970s it was easy to see the divisions of Zuwaya into sections and lineages reflected in the street map of Ajdabiya, much as the oases of Kufra or Tazarbu were subdivided into tribal territories.
When Zuwaya held a wedding or a funeral, when men met in a shaikh's house to discuss reprisals or bloodwealth, they could say to themselves, ‘This is how we have always done things.’
For various reasons they were wrong; but illusion of continuity was easily available because they had at least some of their kinsmen at close quarters, met them and socialized with them each day.
The argument is that  it was easier for them to maintain the part of their image of statelessness which consisted of ‘how we have always done things’, than it would have been if they had individually moved into town and settled into a bidonville.
The argument might be taken a step further.
The obligations of stateless organization, the solemn ceremonies of making peaces, perhaps worked better in 1979 than they ever did in the stateless age.
Good communications facilitated statelessness.
An Ajdabiya shaikh needed in Hawari could fly there from Benghazi in a few hours.
A journey which once took weeks by camel lasted half a day in a fast motor such as a Range-Rover, rarely more than four days in the most heavily laden truck.
People could send telegrams, telephone each other, and transmit information much more quickly than ever before.
Meeting an obligation to threaten, or to make peace, took much less time than before.
Using cash and bank accounts to collect and disburse contributions for welfare, was easier than collecting animals on the hoof, grains or sugar in sacks, and it was much easier to transfer the payments.
Arguments about the quality of particular animals in a payment scarcely arose when the payment was in a standardized currency: no one asked, ‘Well now,which of these dinars do you promise me?’
If the costs were lower than before, so too were the risks: the police force was well informed because it had members who were also members of the local lineages; and it was ready to intervene to prevent escalation of disputes into further bloodshed.
For the most part, a kinsman asked to give aid in a dispute did not have to fear he might lose his life; peaces were easier to make in a society which also had Peace.
For these reasons — their pattern of settlement, the ease, low cost and low risk of meeting obligations — Zuwaya were able to still think of themselves as nomads: they were wrong, but from time to time they could and did regard some of their social arrangements as unchanging, inert.
That this should be a political force is also explained in part by Qaddafi's rhetoric of individual autonomy and the social factor.
He shared the image with Zuwaya, was no more sophisticated or historically perceptive than they.
Zuwaya found that those elements in their image which depended on solidarity among kinsmen — on the massing of cousins, on the exclusion of women — had rather more than an echo in the words of their head of state.
Qaddafi's rhetoric elevated individual  autonomy to the touchstone of justice in political organization: ‘Representation is fraud!’
Another required part of the explanation is the institutions Qaddafi introduced to eliminate representation.
For, on the one hand, they dispensed valuable resources: opportunities for lamb-barrel politics were an incentive to people to participate in popular democracy, to stand for election to a committee, even if they doubted its suitability for managing a complex hierarchical organization.
And, on the other hand, the system prohibited all canvassing of opinions and management strategies.
Hustings were forbidden.
People could not persuade voters that some policies were better than others, for this would lead to the creation of parties, representative bodies whose purpose is to dominate those who are not members.
Given that people had no rational basis for choosing among candidates, it was scarcely surprising they used one they deemed natural.
The stateless image automatically provided Zuwaya or Magharba with a group they had to oppose —— not exactly at all costs, but certainly at every opportunity.
Zuwaya had no access to practical or ideological groupings, and they relied in politics on those which followed from their day-to-day sociability and loyalty.
Their participation in elections, in congresses and committees as a tribe was not directly in opposition to the government, even though the government did not approve.
But they did serve to give a contemporary use for the institutions of statelessness and therefore, perhaps, to reinforce the image with fibres of relevance.
Grand gestures of defiance — such as the demand for bloodwealth, considered rejections of the state made to the state itself — seem to require very little further explanation.
They were born of frustration and powerlessness, expressed resentment at contradictions between rhetoric and practice in an idiom which was sustained by modern technology and strengthened by its effectiveness in legitimate affairs.
Whoever made the protest did so against a state which proclaimed its non-existence, and against the state's claim to lose citizens' lives in a war whose existence was not officially announced within Libya.
What else should they do?’