

6
Evelyn trailed back into the scutching room and stared hopelessly at the huge basket.
‘If I ever move that, it'll be a miracle,’ she sighed.
Something scratchy nudged against her calves and made her jump.
It was the head of a gigantic besom.
She skipped out of the way as the broom flicked itself busily in through the door.
Two small fists appeared gripping the far end of the long handle, and Sam Kettle's grimy muzzle thrust itself into the room.
He gave a gappy grin.
‘How you doin'?’
Evelyn made a gesture of defeat.
Sam sized up the basket.
‘I'll give you a hand — if you'll give me the story.’
She knew at once what he meant and looked nervously round at the others.
No one so much as raised an eyebrow in their direction.
‘Go on,’ said Sam.
‘I've had a horrible morning.
I might be able to help.
I'd like to do something to…to make amends.’
‘Make amends?’
‘I don't want to talk about it.’
She hesitated, then plunged in.
‘I came to Hambury to look for someone.’
‘Who?’
‘My brother.’
Well, that sounded reasonable.
‘Have you seen him yet?’
She picked up a handful of cotton fluff and pulled at it.
‘I don't know what he looks like.’
This was a bit of a problem.
Sam flexed his brains.
‘When did you last see him?’
The raw cotton disintegrated between her fingers.
‘That's the trouble.
I've never seen him.
Or at least, if I have, I was too young to remember.’
‘Then how d'you know he's here?’
‘Because my fa — his father came and took him away to Hambury.’
She caught hold of Sam's arm and drew him behind the skip.
Not that anyone could hear much of any conversation in that place unless they came within inches.
But he could feel her trembling with excitement, even through the incessant and stupefying vibration of walls, floor and ceiling.
‘Did you hear what Mr Thacker said this morning about the mill owner?,
‘Mr Harker, was that his name?’
‘Yes!’
She looked at him expectantly.
‘So what?,
‘Don't you see?’
He certainly didn't.
Harker begins with a —‘
‘Oh, that stuff again!’
Sam tried to be patient.
‘Look, this ring of yours.
It was in your family, I suppose?’
‘Well —‘
‘There you are, then.
Like I said before…’
‘No, no!
You don't see !’
‘What doesn't he see?’
Thacker was leaning against the skip, The Gaffer dangling menacingly from his fingertips.
‘Erm — er — I don't see how I'm going to get all this sweeping done before dinner time, if I don't get a move on!’
Sam started wielding the broom enthusiastically.
‘Then what are you doing here?’
‘The skip was too heavy for her, sir.’
‘Was it indeed?’
‘It is a little heavy, sir,’ faltered Evelyn.
‘But I think I can manage.’
‘That's what you're paid for,’ reminded the overseer.
Sam hovered, waiting to see what would follow, but Thacker seemed to be in a good mood.
‘It's not easy work,’ he remarked curtly, ‘but you can get used to anything.’
He looked as if he was about to say more when someone shouted his name.
Swallowing an  oath he turned on his heel and cuffed Sam out into the passage.
‘About your business, both of you, or there'll be trouble.’
And he swung off to sort out the problem.
Sam put the besom to work and Evelyn tried once more to shift that awful basket.
By leaning her back against it and pedalling with her feet she could move it forwards inches at a time.
When she finally reached the scribbling engine, she felt as if she had been broken in two and glued back together again all wrong.
But oh, how lovely it was when it was empty!
And then the scutching began again.
And so the morning crawled on.
The wheel never stopped turning, the machines rattled backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards, never slowing, never slacking, never tiring; backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards, ever anxious, ever urgent, ever eager; full of anger and ambition with a rhythm so consistent, irresistibly insistent, ever beating, never cheating, beating, beating through the brain.
Iron jaws and iron claws, opening the cotton, chewing it, champing it, throwing out the cotton, spewing it, stamping it, backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards in a ruthless and remorseless inescapable refrain:
‘Never let the wheel stop,
Never let the profits drop,
Someone's got to mind the shop,
Keep the mill-wheel turning, turning.
Never let the frames be still,
Cotton has an iron will,
Nothing stops the cotton mill,
Nothing stops it earning, earning.
Comb the fibres through and through,
Twist them till they're strong and true,
Till your body's twisted too,
And your brain is burning, burning.
Past and future all forgotten,
Nothing matters, only cotton,
You've been twisted something rotten,
That's the truth you're learning, learning.'
Was it the voice of the machines?
Or a muddle of words in her own head?
Or did the thin, eerie song come from that lopsided, blue-eyed elf sitting on top of a cotton bale and staring down at her?
‘I never forget a face,’ said Jackie Tiptoe, ‘and yours is definitely familiar.’
Brown and blue eyes searched each other.
‘I hope he's not my brother,’ thought Evelyn and was instantly ashamed.
Jackie Tiptoe's face was scrunched in concentration.
Then it relaxed.
‘I give up,’ he said.
‘For the time being.
But don't tell me.
I'll work it out.’
‘I don't know what you mean,’ said Evelyn.
‘Met one of your lot before,’ asserted Jackie.
‘Sure as eggs isn't bacon.’
He gathered his bunch of limbs together and dropped off the bale.
Evelyn shuddered as she watched him crouch for a second, then spring up and take off jauntily like a half mangled insect.
He seemed to sense her distaste for he shot a glance back over one lumpy shoulder and his blue gaze sent the blood rushing into her face.
Sam Kettle wasn't the only person to hate himself that morning.
Dazed with the heat and noise, sickened by the stink of oil and sweat, eyes, ears and throats filled with a soft clogging dust like the seeds from a million dandelions, they toiled on and on.
And on and on went the machines, backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards, never slowing, never slacking, never tiring, backwards and forwards, back —
‘One o'clock!
Dinner time!’
It was bread and cheese.
Sam took his out into the sunshine.
Rose ate hers by the machines which by now were hungry fur oil.
By the time she had fed them with the filthy stuff, she was covered in oil and stuck all over with cotton fly.
Like a baby who's been rolled in warm lotions and talcum powder.
Only she didn't smell half so sweet.
Joy Prentice was flagging visibly.
Her arms had dropped to her sides and her head drooped.
She looked like a discarded puppet.
Only the tightly clenched line of her jawbone revealed the enormous effort it was taking her just to stand upright.
Biff had drawn up a stool nearby and was drinking from a hip flask enjoying the spectacle.
Evelyn did not dare approach, though she longed to offer the girl a mouthful of water or a corner off her shrivelled lump of cheese.
She went outside in search of Sam.
Mother Bombie was on guard, hands on hips, the ancient black pipe jutting from her gums.
‘Now I don't want no half inching from out the bins at the back.
Disgusting, that is.
That's meant for farmer Dawkins' pigs, You remember that, Euphemia!
Caught you out there more than once.
Keep that up and your tail will go curly!
Oi, you — Josie!
Don't gobble yer food so fast — you've chewed off half yer own hand already and not even noticed!’
She cackled and slapped her knees, bent double and wheezing with delight at her own witticisms.
Evelyn bit into the tallow coloured cheese and looked around.
She spotted Sam in a corner and hurried over.
He made room for her beside him.
‘Now then,’ he said.
‘Begin at the beginning this time, and maybe we'll get some sense out of you.’
She hesitated for the merest fraction of a second.
After all, what more could she possibly stand to lose?
And then she began.
‘My mother was a seamstress.
She worked for a while in a shop, then she began to have trouble with her eyes and took in work at home.
My father — he worked as and when he could.
Sometimes he was away from home for months at a time.
‘I remember she used to tell me stories of a wonderful place where she'd had a job once as a lady's maid.
When I got old enough I used to add my own bits to the story — it was sort of a game we played — an escape.
Where we lived wasn't much of a place — there were fourteen families in the one house and as mother's eyes got worse, less work  came in and we had to move into smaller and smaller rooms.
Eventually we ended up in the basement.
But when we talked about ‘The House’— that was what we called it, there was never a name — we could imagine that just at the top of the stairs would be the Great Kitchen with its rows of gleaming copper pans hung up next to pheasants and hams and bunches of strange herbs — and through the kitchen window we'd be able to see the long lawns of the garden where stone lions crouched with their heads between their paws and real peacocks screeched up at peacock shapes clipped out of hedges…
‘But father didn't approve of the game, and if ever he came in when we were playing it, we'd stop at once and pretend to be talking about something else.
‘You'll turn the child's head,’ he used to say, ‘filling it up with all that nonsense.’
He didn't like her teaching me to read either.
I suppose it was because he couldn't.
‘Then there was the big typhus epidemic when I was about six and she died.
I wasn't there — a neighbour took me into her room while…
But before she died she had fits of delirium.
She talked about ‘The House’ all the time and then she'd cry out: ‘William.
I want to see William.
Why did you take him away from me?’
‘Afterwards I moved in with this neighbour.
Mrs Grace, her name was.
She had six children of her own.
My father was away, looking for work.
He must have heard what happened because he never came back.
I asked her if she knew who William was but she always said no.
Her other children didn't like me, I suppose there just wasn't enough room.
And they thought she was favouring me.
They'd expected me to bring things belonging to my mother that they could share out, but there was hardly anything.
The girls took her clothes…
Anyway, I decided to go out on my own.
I told Mrs Grace and she said, ‘Yes, dear, 1 thought you would in the end.’
Then she told me to turn my back while she looked in a secret place.
I knew where it was — she kept everything valuable stuffed down the side of an old sofa — but I pretended not to notice.
Then she said I could look and she gave me a piece of cloth with a  few coins in it which my mother had saved for me — and the ring.
—‘I might as well tell you what I know,’ she said, ‘for all the good it'll do you.’
‘It was very muddled because she'd pieced it together out of bits of gossip picked up here and there.
She couldn't give me times, dates, anything.
Apparently my mother had worked at a big house somewhere and fallen in love, but it had all gone wrong.
So she came back to London and married the man I called my father, but she never really cared for him and she still saw this other man sometimes when he came to London on business.
This was where Mrs Grace started to get a bit coy.
‘Well, you don't look a bit like Mr Harris,’ she said, ‘so we can only assume …’’
‘And she left me to work it out.
I must say I never felt very close to my father, we just didn't seem to have anything in common.
Then Mrs Grace said something really wonderful: ‘You're not the only child of course.
She had another kid as well, you know, but his father came and took him away when he was a baby.
Well naturally he'd want to keep a boy , and your ma's husband wouldn't have been too keen to have him around.’
‘But when was it?’
I asked.
‘Why don't I remember?’
‘Well, he was only a baby, they say, poor little thing.
Broke your mother's heart they tell me, she was never the same after.’
‘That might explain, mightn't it, Sam, why she and my father were so distant with each other?
That is, the man I called my father.
I'm pretty sure that I was the reason she left the big house, though I hadn't actually been born then.’
She blushed.
‘Where does Hambury come into it?’ asked Sam.
‘Well.’
She held Sam's eyes with her own, willing him to understand and believe.
‘Mrs Grace put the ring into my hand.
‘It was a love token to your ma,’ she told me.
‘It came from Hambury , wherever that is.
Or was it Hamwell?
Anyway, it's obviously something to do with your real family, and maybe your brother will have one the same.’
‘So that's why I've come to Hambury to find out.
To find a little boy who looks like me and maybe has a ring like this one.
What d'you think, Sam?
Am I mad?
Or do you  think there's a chance?’
Sam thought long and hard.
‘You can't remember any of this happening?’
‘No.’
‘You don't remember any strange man coming to visit your ma — when your dad was away?’
‘Well — lots of people came.
She took in sewing.
Nobody special.’
‘So this William is probably not much younger than you, or you'd remember seeing him around.’
‘Not if he was taken away as soon as he was born.
And that could have happened when we were in the workhouse.
We had to go in there several times when I was little and mother was sick, and they'd never let us stay together, so anything could have happened.’
‘It's possible,’ conceded Sam.
‘So if you were six when she died, William can't be more than five years younger than you, right?’
She nodded.
‘So that means we're looking for somebody between five and eight?’
Sam was getting into his stride now.
‘That narrows it down.
We know it's none of us new boys, so —’
‘Wait a minute, Sam,’ she interrupted gently.
‘Why should we be looking in the mill?’
‘Where else should we look?’
She gave an embarrassed smile and looked down at her hands.
‘In a big house?’
‘Where we going to find one?’
‘Well…
I expect Mr Hacker…’
‘The mill owner?’
Of course.
He was bound to have a sumptuous place.
‘You mean, you think that's where she was working when they met?’
Evelyn nodded.
‘Doesn't help much, though,’ reflected Sam.
‘Your father — your real father, that is — might have been working anywhere.
He might have been in the mill.’
There were a number of skilled adults at Hambury operating the machines.
‘Or he could have been somebody local, a farmer, or…or anything.’
‘I don't think so, said Evelyn with quiet determination.
‘Why not?
‘Haven't you forgotten something, Sam?’
He didn't know.
‘The ring .
H is for Hambury and…’
She studied her hands again more intently while a pink glow crept over the back of her neck.
‘And for Harker.’
Sam saw daylight.
‘You think Mr Harker might be your —?’
Ignoring his look of disbelief, she rushed on.
‘It would explain everything, Sam.
Why she was sent away in disgrace, why he wanted his son back and not me — so he could have an heir.
Why he couldn't marry her.
If he'd been an ordinary man, there wouldn't have been any problem.’
That rankled.
Sam was as ordinary as they come and proud of it.
‘I see!
You're not just looking for a brother.
You want the lord of the manor to come and carry you off as his long lost daughter, is that it?’
‘I didn't mean that.
I meant — I don't know exactly, but —’
‘You know something?
You did get your head turned if that's what you think.
There probably isn't a big house at all.
Your ma probably worked here same as everybody else and fell for somebody who let her down, and that's all there is to it.
She just made up a load of stories to cheer herself up.’
‘Oh, Sam!’
She looked horribly near to tears.
Embarrassment made him awkward.
‘Come on, finish your dinner.
It's time to go back to work.’
She got up quickly.
‘You can have mine.
I don't feel very hungry.’
She thrust the remains of her cheese at him and rushed jerkily away, hiding her face.
Sam felt like biting himself.
But it wasn't his fault she'd built herself a dream and was looking for somewhere to make it happen.
Well, didn't you do that yourself on the way  here? a voice whispered to him.
All right, so I did, muttered Sam, but I can make mine come true if I work hard.
It's impossible that Evelyn could be…but was it so impossible?
She could easily have noble blood, she looked the sort.
The story could be made to fit.
A man like Mr Harker was bound to have a big house.
And go up and down to London.
A man like that couldn't marry a servant.
But supposing that servant had a son?
And Mr Harker's proper wife couldn't have one?
Wouldn't he go and find that child and bring it up as his own?
He wouldn't bother about a daughter, but a son …
Sam's brain was still whirling when the triangle clanged and the afternoon shift began.
7
‘Mr Thacker?’
Biff took a long swallow from his flask and looked round sourly like a dog disturbed at its bone.
He wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
‘Oh, it's you, Rose.
What do you want?’
Rose jerked a grubby thumb at the broken figure of Joy Prentice buckling under the weight of all her responsibilities.
‘Don't you think she's had enough?’
‘What's it to you?’ drawled Thacker, tilting his head back further for another swig.
The flask was a deal emptier than it had been before the dinner break.
‘You'll do her a damage,’ said Rose.
‘Will I?’ he frowned.
‘Well now, there's a problem.
What do you suggest I do?’
Rose shrugged, sensing defeat, and turned to go.
‘I didn't give you permission to leave.
Come back here.’
Reluctantly, she stepped towards him.
‘I'll offer you a choice,’ smiled the overseer.
‘You know my motto — freedom of choice, freedom of speech.
What is it ?’
‘Freedom of choice, freedom…’
‘Yes, yes, spit it out.’
‘Freedom of speech.’
‘That's right.
So shut up.
And listen.
I'll let her down, if you'll take her place.
Is that fair or isn't it?’
There was no reply.
‘Come on Rose, what's your answer?’
‘I got my work to do.’
He nodded with satisfaction.
‘That's my little Rosie!
A friend indeed.
You're fined sixpence for lip.
Come on, cough it up.’
Rose was about to protest, but thought better of it.
She  turned away, fumbled in her skirts and drew out a gleaming coin.
‘What's this?
A shilling?
Where d'you get that?’
Rose glanced nervously at the door.
The other apprentices were beginning to file back, Evelyn among them.
She bit her lip.
Don't tell me,’ sneered Biff.
‘I can guess.’
He spun it up in the air, caught it and deftly slid it into his shirt pocket.
‘Well?’
He stared at her challengingly.
‘It came from me in the first place, didn't it?
So it's only back where it belongs.’
He patted his pocket.
NOW GET BACK TO WORK!
Jump to it!’
Rose jumped.
The afternoon wore on much the same as the morning, only more slowly.
And it was hotter.
At three o'clock, when Biff's flask was empty, he let Joy Prentice down from her stool and sent her into the scutching room.
She didn't speak to anyone and nobody spoke to her.
Evelyn tried a smile, but it was met with stony indifference.
When she had lugged her third skip up to the scribbling engine, she paused for a moment to watch Rose, who by now resembled a tar baby stuck all over with dirty wool.
During a lull, when for once nothing seemed to have fallen under the machine, she tried to catch her attention.
‘Rose…’
Rose ignored her, keeping her eyes on the rattling carriage, holding herself in a permanent half crouch, like a sprinter at the starting post.
‘How can you stand it?’ implored Evelyn.
‘Don't talk to me,’ snarled the other, through gritted teeth, her eyes never moving from the target.
‘You'll get us into trouble.’
Just then she spotted a loose thread hanging down and catapulted forward.
Evelyn watched her, terrified as she writhed in the dust, twisting the strands together.
When she thought she had it, they snapped again.
The little fingers went back to their task.
It took an interminable time.
The carriage clicked and began the return journey.
‘Rose!’ screamed Evelyn.
‘Hurry up!
It's coming back!’
If Rose heard her, she gave no sign.
Paralysed with terror, Evelyn gaped at the thundering carriage moving inexorably down towards the tiny girl like a horror in a nightmare.
‘Stop the machine!
Stop the machine!’
She felt a hand on her arm.
The little spidery boy was standing next to her.
‘She'll be all right.
Don't panic.’
Evelyn panicked.
She heard herself screaming and screaming and screaming, ‘Stop the machine!
Stop the machine!’
Then someone slapped her face.
Her head rang like a bell.
When the ringing subsided, Biff Thacker was standing over her, with Rose at his side, clutching a bobbin, and the machine was still clattering backwards and forwards.
‘What's going on?’ he bawled.
‘The machines stop for nobody.’
‘It was her,’ said Rose, gibbering with fear.
‘She won't leave me alone, talking to me all the time, distracting me.’
Relief made Evelyn's knees weak.
‘She's all right,’ she babbled.
‘Thank goodness she's all right.
I thought she was going to die.’
‘I've had it up to here with you,’ said Thacker.
The contents of his hip flask were beginning to wear off.
‘You're not a new girl any more, you've been here nearly a day.
It's time you learned a bit of respect for Mr Harker's babies —’ jerking his head at the rumbling monsters all around them.
‘Rose!
What shall I do with her?’
A demon was dancing behind Rose's eyes.
A demon of delight.
And of fear.
For disaster narrowly averted and for disaster to come if she showed any mercy.
And she was thinking of her lost shilling.
‘Knock her teeth out!’
‘What a bloodthirsty little creature you are to be sure!’ said Biff, with a hint of admiration.
Then, almost regretfully, ‘No, no, no, we couldn't do anything so terrible.’
‘Dip her in the tub, then!’
‘Would you like that?’ enquired Biff, indicating a large  and foul smelling vat against one of the walls.
‘You know what that is?
That's for you when you get caught short.
There's no time to go out of the mill when nature calls.
That's your —’ he felt for the word’— facilities.’
He smiled to himself, savouring the phrase.
‘Fancy a dip, do you?’
Evelyn recoiled.
‘I know what we'll do.
We'll hang you up over this machine, teach you to respect it.’
Evelyn's eyes widened in terror.
‘Or I could simply beat you until the blood runs.
Make your choice.
Freedom of choice, freedom of speech.
Those are my mottoes as everyone here well knows.’
‘I don't want to go over the machine,’ said Evelyn.
‘I'm sorry.’
‘Sorry you wanted to stop it?’
‘No.
She might have been —‘
‘So you're not sorry?
So you want a beating?’
‘No —‘
‘The tub, then?’
‘NO!’
‘Then you've chosen.
Tiptoe, tie her hands behind her back.’
She struggled, but the delicate little hands were very strong.
She felt Jackie Tiptoe's breath on her cheek and heard his whisper, ‘Don't fight, don't think, make yourself into a machine, it's the only way.’
Then she was being hoisted in the air.
‘I'll fall in!
I'll fall in and be cut to pieces!’
‘Then you'd better keep very still, hadn't you?’
Biff turned on his heel and was gone.
She did not dare look down, but she could feel the machine moving below her like a maddened metal beast prowling backwards and forwards in a pit, its metal jaws opening and closing, clanging and gnashing with thwarted fury.
Her elbows had been lashed together and she hung from the ceiling like a snared sparrow.
The rope supporting her passed over a beam, slippery with sweat and condensation, and was secured, taut as a cable, through an iron ring in the floor.
Her neck was wedged against the beam, her chin digging into her chest.
She could barely open her mouth to whimper:
‘Sam…’
But she knew he would not come to help her.
He didn't believe her story.
The heat from the room below belched up as if from a furnace.
Terrified of choking and terrified that the rope would give way, that she would fall and be eaten alive by those metal teeth, she screwed her eyes tight and prayed.
Sam did not answer her prayers because he was not near enough to hear them, having been set to work on the floor above, sweeping up.
But he turned her story over and over in his mind all afternoon.
And he wondered…
‘Oi, Biff…’
Mr Thacker had almost nodded off.
It had been one of those days.
He shook himself and focused with difficulty on the small crooked figure standing in front of him.
‘What is it now, Tiptoe?
End of the shift?’
‘It's that new girl crying,’ grimaced Jackie.
‘It's getting on me nerves, whimpering like that.
I can't be doing with it.’
The overseer stifled a yawn.
Really these children were getting so soft .
Two requests for clemency in one day!
Not that Tiptoe could be called a child, by any stretch of the imagination.
Never had been.
Crawled out from under a stone more like.
But it wasn't like him to be such a booby.
‘What d'you want me to do about it?’ he growled, reaching for his watch.
‘There's only an hour to go.
Don't niggle me, Tiptoe, not with the day nearly done.’
‘Let her down,’ said Jackie.
‘Let her down.
She's not used to it.
Not like the others.’
Thacker felt for his flask, then remembered it was empty.
He sighed.
‘You know what that'll mean.’
‘I don't mind.’
‘Well, if you don't mind ,’ Thacker said heavily, ‘what's the point?’
He pondered gloomily for a moment, then with an effort stretched himself as if climbing into an uncomfortable  Sunday suit, and gave judgement.
‘Let her down.’
And thus it was that when the day shift set off back to the Barracks that evening, Jackie Tiptoe remained behind, suspended from the ceiling like a crooked spider snarled up in its own web.
‘How d'you like your first day at work, then?’
Mother Bombie asked Evelyn as they trudged up the shingle path towards the girls' house.
She had taken it into her head to befriend the new lass whom she considered to be a cut above the rest — which is to say, she didn't curse or spit.
Besides, the other girls were already walking along in pairs.
Even Joy Prentice had her arm linked through Caroline's though they were almost too tired to walk.
Rose marched ahead of them all, steadfastly alone.
A lost cause, the old woman reflected sadly.
Evelyn had never experienced such utter despair.
She could think of no reply to the friendly overture, so Mother Bombie supplied her own:
‘Not much, eh?
Well, you're grown up now.
This is what it's going to be like from now on.
Day after day, year after year, for ever and ever, amen.’
She smacked her lips with an air of finality and rummaged for her pipe.
‘You may not care for it much just now, but Biff Thacker will teach you to like it.’
She thrust the pipe between her horny jaws and sucked thoughtfully.
‘He's got your best interests at heart, you know.’
Evelyn gaped at her in amazement.
‘Oh, yes,’ clucked the old woman.
‘He's hard, I grant you.
But that's what you got to be in this job.
He's going to make you hard and tough just like him — but never as good as him of course, because he's in charge.
You'll thank him in the end, you mark my words.’
If this suggestion was difficult to swallow, Mother Bombie's home made soup, which appeared at supper time, presented a real problem.
Chewing on a lump of  gristle in an effort to render it small enough to pass through her swollen throat, Evelyn thought back over her first meeting with Biff Thacker.
How pathetically grateful she had been then.
She had even thought he liked her!
He doesn't like anybody, she told herself bitterly.
He smiles a lot, but underneath he's just like Rose.
Evelyn looked across at Rose sitting in the midst of them all but managing somehow to remain completely apart.
She was wiping a crust of bread round the inside of her dish to catch up the last drops of broth.
From time to time she glanced suspiciously around as if afraid someone might try to grab it off her.
She looked, to Evelyn, like the loneliest person in the world.
Well, not quite.
The second loneliest.
8
‘Biffo!
Hey, Biff!’
‘You talking to me?’
The overseer squinted up at the ceiling.
Jackie Tiptoe grinned down at him and winked.
‘I ain't talking to meself, am I?
I ain't that far gone.’
‘What d'you want?’
‘Let us down.
It's way past me bedtime.’
‘Can't take it, eh?’
‘Come on, let us down.
I done me time.
Me elbows is coming out me shoulder-blades.’
‘You're not up there for the good of your health.’
‘If they come through any further, I'll sprout wings!’
‘Then you can fly away from here, can't you?’
The overseer guffawed.
‘Oh, come on,’ whined Jackie.
‘It's not as if I done anything wrong.
Only spoke up for the girl.’
‘It was your choice,’ came the inevitable reply.
‘Freedom of choice, freedom of —‘
‘Oh, give it a rest.
You won't let me down then?’
‘No.’
‘Then you'll have to come up here!’
‘Eh?’
Thacker lifted his eyebrows in puzzlement.
‘I want to whisper in your shell-like ear.’
‘What about?’
The little fellow leered at him and whispered, ‘Fancy a drop of the hard stuff?’
Biff perked up.
‘You got any?’
‘Might have,’ was the tantalizing reply.
‘Why don't you come up here and find out?’
‘Where is it?’
‘Let me down and I'll tell yer.’
‘Not your usual stuff, is it?’
‘Finest quality gin.
None of your home-made rubbish.’
‘You having me on?’
‘Let me down and find out.’
Biff lowered him to the ground, and untied the rope.
Jackie hopped up and down, squeaking as the feeling came back into his arms.
‘You all right?’
‘'Course I am, guvnor!
Meat and drink to me, this life is!
Now shut yer eyes.
No peeking!’
Obediently Thacker closed his eyes while his curious companion rummaged through one of many hiding places and produced a dark bottle.
‘You can open them now.’
‘Stone me!’
Biff was impressed.
‘Where d'you get that ?’
‘Up the big house of course, nothing but the best.’
‘You never nicked it.’
‘Old habits die hard.
Watered it down a bit, mind.
Make it last.
Let's go outside.
Get away from the noise.’
They found a quiet corner of the yard.
‘You have first swig.’
Thacker took a generous pull at the bottle and gasped.
Then he took another.
‘Come on, come on, pass it back.’
‘You're not a bad lad, Jackie,’ grunted the overseer handing it over, ‘for a cripple.’
’ Don't call me that .'!
The stunted little form became rigid, dangerous.
‘I don't like it, all right?’
‘I only said…’
‘You want some more of this or don't you?’
Biff nodded and took another pull.
He grimaced.
‘I don't know how you can.
It'll do for you in the end.’
‘I'll see you out,, said Jackie.
Biff snorted.
‘You're a wreck, you know that?’
‘See this hand?’ was the retort.
‘Steady as a rock.
Best hands in the business and don't you forget it.
Nobody gets under them machines as fast as me.’
‘Don't worry, I ain't gonna sack you.
Yet.’
He took a long reflective swallow.
‘But I don't know how you stick it.’
‘I do stick it, and that's what counts.’
Biff tilted the bottle, shuddering as its contents ran down his throat.
He shook himself, breathing deeply.
There was a moment's silence while Jackie took his turn.
Then the overseer said, ‘I'm sorry I put you up there.’
‘Don't mention it.’
‘It's not as if I wanted to.
I never want to.
Any of it.
It's not in my nature to hurt people.
I'm always sorry afterwards.
It's the hours.
Anybody got my job, works these hours, you got to let it out.’
‘No question.’
Biff looked at him, suddenly anxious.
‘They don't hold it against me, do they?’
Jackie lifted his shoulders — not quite simultaneously.
‘Ask them.’
‘I mean —’ Biff's tongue was loosening now that he felt the pleasant glow of heat at the back of his skull.
‘I mean, I was an apprentice meself once.
Black and blue I used to be.’
Jackie settled back to enjoy the story.
He knew it well.
‘We had this overseer called Birch,’ began Thacker.
‘Used to call us up to his desk.
‘Long straw or short straw?’ he'd say.
Whatever you picked, you were in for it.
The long straw was this long, thin cane.
Brought the blood out straight away.
Like being whipped with a cheese wire.
And the short straw was this fat thick club.
Used to knock you brainless.
‘Long straw or short straw?’
His little joke.
He was a good old bloke.’
‘Happy days,’ murmured Jackie.
‘He was only doing his job, same as me.
I see that now.
You see, children want a firm hand.
They ain't civilized.
You've got to knock some sense into them or they'd never do a stroke.
They'd fall into wickedness.’
‘Better daft than damned, eh?’
‘You wouldn't understand.
Not till you're older.
I didn't.’
He put down the bottle.
‘What am I saying?
You are old.
How old are you now?’
‘Twelve, and don't you forget it.’
Jackie took a swallow that would have washed a hog out of his pen.
Maybe he  was hoping to reduce his size by another inch.
The overseer gave him a look of grudging admiration.
‘Garn, you're daft in the head without any whackings.
What d'you want to stay here for?
Anyone else would give their front teeth to get out.’
‘What else is there?’ was the simple reply.
‘I know where I'm well off.’
‘Ooh, this is good gin,’ groaned Biff.
‘My head's gone completely.
I can't clench my hands.’
‘You don't want too much of it,’ admonished the other.
‘You'll turn blue.’
‘I thought you said it was clean!’
‘It is mostly .
I just thinned it down a bit with this and that.’
Biff eyed the bottle, weighing up the consequences.
‘What the hell!
Don't stop you swigging it, does it?’
‘I can handle it,’ asserted Tiptoe with characteristic modesty.
Thacker leaned back.
‘You know it's only when I've had a drink I stop hearing those damned machines.’
‘What, you mean you hear them all the time?
Even at home in bed?’
‘Night and day.
Day and night I can hear that wheel turning and the machines going.
It's enough to drive a man out of his wits.
Sometimes…’
He frowned, trying to get the idea clear in his mind.
‘Sometimes I feel like I'm part of the machines, you understand me?’
‘No,’ offered Jackie helpfully.
‘Like they're inside my head and telling me what to do.
Telling me the strangest things sometimes, evil things — till I want to shout out or smash them to pieces.
So if I give someone a bit of a clout now and then, it sort of clears me again.’
‘Why don't you leave?’
The blue eyes looked up at him, unblinking.
‘It's all I know.’
Biff made a vague, helpless gesture.
‘See, I think the machines started to get a hold of me when I was a lad.
And now they'll never let me go.
They all hate me of course.’
‘The machines ?’
‘The children .
They hate me.
I know that.
So do you.’
Jackie looked as if he might have been going to put a hand on Biff's arm.
Instead he thrust the bottle at him.
‘Have another slug, for Gawd's sake.
You'll be weeping gin in a minute.’
Thacker tried to explain.
‘They think I'm the boss, but I'm not.
I've got the responsib — resposi —’ He stopped and clenched his brow, concentrating hard.
‘Responsibility!
That's it.
But I haven't got none of the power.
Old Harker never shows his face.
He's off abroad or swigging sherry in some London drawing-room.
He don't get his hands dirty.
All he wants is results.
And that's down to me.
If I don't get them, I'm for it.
It's a burden, that's what it is.
A heavy burden.’
‘Cheers.’
‘See, what you don't seem to grasp is we've got to progress or everything stops.
The machines stop.
And when the machines stop, the world stops.’
‘Seems to me folk managed all right when there weren't any machines,’ reflected Jackie.
‘No, no, no.’
Biff was becoming emphatic.
‘The whole world's a machine.
One great, big machine.
We're just little bits of it.’
Jackie corked the bottle.
‘I think you've had enough of this.’
‘No.
I can still hear the machines.’
Biff tapped his head.
‘In here.
See, what you got to realize is — there are rules.’
‘I've never met one yet that couldn't be broken,’ chuckled Tiptoe.
‘No,listen to me.’
Biff held up a finger.
‘Rule number one.
There's bosses and there's workers.
Always has been, ever since the pyramids.
The workers make the money.
The bosses spend it.
And there's always more workers than there are bosses.
That's rule number two.’
‘Then the workers ought to be stronger.’
‘Oh, ought to be, ought to be,’ mumbled Biff.
‘Are you stronger than the Boss?’
Jackie shivered and yawned.
Biff was launching into a  long, familiar complaint.
‘Shall we adjourn to your office?’ he suggested, meaning a poky room at the far end of the mill.
Biff shook his head.
‘Not yet.
Still hear ‘em.’
He jabbed heavily at the air with his finger as if to spear and hold still the point he was trying to make.
‘You see, workers are stupid.
I'm stupid.
You're stupid.
If we weren't,we'd be bosses.’
Jackie coughed.
A little tickle, but he knew it would keep him awake all night.
‘You all right?’ asked Biff, focusing on him with an effort.
‘Yeah, fine.
Think I'll go to bed, though.’
Biff nodded, more to himself than to his companion.
Jackie stood up and reached for the bottle.
‘Leave that,’ said Biff thickly.
‘Got some thinking to do.’
The moonlight cast sharp shadows over the hill.
One crooked little shadow, flickering across stones and scrubland, made rapid progress for a quarter of a mile or so.
Then it got slower and slower.
Sometimes it shrivelled into itself like water splashing on hot stones, then flared out again as its owner shrank down in a spasm of coughing and straightened up again.
As near straight as it could ever be.
At last the Barracks loomed into sight, and if anyone had been peeping from the window at that unsociable hour, they might have been hard put to distinguish which was the boy and which the shadow.
9
Mother Bombie's last words before she took herself off to her own quarters had been, ‘Rose — shift over.
Evelyn's to share with you.’
‘Nobody shares with me.’
Rose was adamant.
‘I been here a long time.
I got some rights.’
‘You've always shared,’ somebody muttered.
‘Yeah?
I used to share with Mary.
Look what happened to her .’
The room went silent.
Beyond the door, Mother Bombie's feet in soft felt slippers could be heard slapping angrily down the stairs.
The front door banged.
In the light from her bit of candle, Rose glared at Evelyn.
‘Remember what I said about this bed?
Anybody shares it with me dies , sooner or later, and that's a fact.’
‘It's all right,’ said Evelyn humbly.
‘I can see there isn't much room.
You don't mind if I lie down here next to your bed?’
‘Just shut up and go to sleep.’
Rose pinched out the candle flame and lay down.
Evelyn stretched out on her back and stared into the dark, trying to make sense of the day's events.
All about her in rickety cots, exhausted girls sank helplessly into sleep.
‘Rose?’
The grimy blanket stirred.
‘What?’
‘Why do you hate me so much?’
Silence.
‘Rose?’
‘Go to sleep.’
‘I said — why —‘
‘I heard you.’
There was a long pause.
Evelyn closed her eyes.
Then  out of the darkness: ‘I don't hate you.’
Another pause.
‘I just don't like you, that's all.’
Well, this was better than nothing.
‘Why not?’
‘What you ask so many stupid questions for?
You want old Bombie to come back in here and give you some more of what Biff gave you today?
I knew you was stupid.’
‘Don't you want a friend?’
Evelyn persisted gently.
‘Friend!’
Rose snorted.
‘Everybody needs friends.’
Evelyn knew she certainly did.
‘So why pick on me?’ demanded Rose.
‘Ever since you got here, you been crawling round me.
Why don't you pick on somebody else?’
‘They've all got friends,’ was the quiet reply.
‘You've got nobody.’
‘And that's the way I like it.’
Rose shifted round on the bed.
‘How can you call me your friend?
I've given you Hell from the minute you walked in here, and that's how it'll stay.
What's the matter with you?
You like being pushed around?’
‘No.
But maybe —’ ventured Evelyn, ‘you need to have somebody to push around.’
’ What ?’
‘Because you've been pushed around so often.’
‘Oh, shut up.
Nobody pushes me .’
Rose raised herself on one elbow and addressed the darkness in a fierce whisper.
‘So you lot better remember that, if you're awake and listening!’
Then to Evelyn: ‘And you button it.
I want my kip.’
She rolled on to her back to show that the conversation was finished.
Then a thought struck her.
‘If you're so keen on making friends, why don't you get together with the Human Corkscrew?’
‘With who ?’
‘Jackie Tiptoe,’ sneered Rose.
‘Taken a right shine to you, hasn't he, the little brute.’
Evelyn was perplexed.
‘I don't know what you mean.’
‘Why, going up on the beam instead of you.’
Until that moment Evelyn had not realized exactly what had taken place when she had been let down from over the machine.
She had been in a state of shock.
Now she was horrified.
‘He did that for me ?’
Rose tittered.
‘Yeah.
Must have maggots on the brain.
Here — where you going?’
Evelyn was up on her feet.
Rose grabbed the hem of her skirt.
‘I'm going back to the mill,’ gabbled Evelyn.
‘He can't stay up there all night.’
‘Don't be such a fool,’ said Rose.
‘He'll be all right.
Keeps Biff in his pocket, everybody knows that.
Here — what's this ?’
Evelyn went cold inside and her skin burned all over.
Rose's prying fingers had detected the tiny treacherous lump in the hem of her skirt.
She felt as if her heart had turned into a fist and was trying to punch its way out of her chest.
Terror made her cunning.
She knew Rose well enough by now not to waste her breath protesting, so in her sugariest, most wheedling voice she said:
‘It's a surprise.
For you .’
‘I don't like surprises,’ said Rose.
She had had a few in her short life and none of them had been pleasant.
‘What is it?’
‘It's a ring,’ said Evelyn.
‘It's very valuable.
I want you to have it.’
‘Don't come that with me.
If it's so valuable, what you want to give it away for?’
‘Wouldn't you like to see it?
Go on, light the candle and I'll show you.’
’You light the candle.’
Evelyn did so while Rose picked and tugged at the hem until she found the ring.
‘There!’ said Evelyn.
‘Isn't that lovely!
I knew you'd like it!’
‘What's lovely about it?’ snorted the other.
‘Load of rubbish, that's what this is.’
She showed no signs of giving  it back however.
Quaking, Evelyn pressed on, ‘It's pretty though, isn't it?’
‘ Pretty ? pretty awful, if you ask me.
Where d'you get it from anyway?’
‘I found it in a street in London.’
It was remarkable how easily the lies slipped out once you got started.
Rose was not impressed.
‘Thrown away, most like.
I've seen loads of rings like this, so they can't be worth much.’
Evelyn's heart gave a great clout.
‘You have ?
I mean —, She fought to make excitement sound like disappointment.
‘I mean you can't have.
Where?’
‘Oh, I can't remember.
Round here some place.
The same silly pattern.’
She indicated the scrolled ‘H’.
Evelyn let out a gasp of delight which she just managed to turn into a disillusioned sob.
‘Are you sure?
Oh dear.’
No further information seemed to be forthcoming and Rose still had tight hold of the ring.
Never mind.
How much it costs isn't important.
It's what it means that counts.’
‘Oh yeah?
And what does it mean?’
‘It's a token of friendship,’ replied Evelyn.
‘I want you to have it because it will mean that you and I are friends.’
Rose glowered at her in disbelief.
She was rewarded with a sweet smile.
‘Friends?
With you ?
Not flamin' likely.
You can keep your poxy ring!’
But still she didn't let it go.
Evelyn played her last card: two huge tears rolled down her cheeks.
‘Oh Rose, please, please be my friend.
Please take the ring,please !’
For one awful moment, she thought she had persuaded her, then, with a cry of triumph, Rose hurled the ring as far as she could into the surrounding darkness.
She fell back and pulled the blanket over her face, cackling and wheezing with delight.
‘Nobody makes friends with me!
Nobody!’ she crowed.
‘So you can cry all night for all I care!
And put the flaming candle out!’
Evelyn obeyed.
Much later, when she was sure that Rose  was asleep, she crawled the length and breadth of the room with fingers outstretched, feeling in every crevice, until she had the ring safe again.
Sam spent the next morning poking his broom everywhere it was wanted and a few places it wasn't until he had swept up several titbits of very interesting information.
He could hardly wait for dinner-time when he would have the chance to speak to Evelyn.
Rose contented herself with stealing half of Evelyn's breakfast and stamping on her foot, but her heart wasn't really in it.
Even though the other girl was a head taller than she was, she was far too docile and forgiving to be much fun bullying.
Jackie Tiptoe came in rather late and looking pale.
Biff didn't seem unduly bothered; he was chasing away his hangover with stinging gulps from his flask.
He had an iron constitution, it seemed, though he looked older than his years.
Evelyn reckoned him to be about twenty-six if you allowed for the drink.
Evelyn could hardly wait for dinner time so that she could say something to Jackie.
At one o'clock, she ran round everywhere trying to find him, while Sam ran round looking for her .
She discovered Jackie curled up behind a bale, the blue eyes shut.
He was so pale as to be almost transparent; she could see the bones through the skin.
In sleep he looked delicate, more elf than goblin, almost beautiful.
The repugnance she had felt the day before seemed absurd, unjust.
She hovered, shifting from foot to foot, wondering if it were fair to wake him up.
With reluctance, she decided to let him sleep and moved away.
‘There you are!’
It was Sam.
‘Oh, hello.’
He caught her arm.
His mongrel face was full of concern.
‘I've been worrying about you since yesterday.
I've thought about it and I was wrong and you were right.’
‘That's very sweet of you, Sam, but really —‘
‘No,listen .
I've found some things out.
Mr Harker does live in a big house near here, but he's hardly ever there.
And he has a son, but nobody's ever seen him!
He's always abroad or in London.
I couldn't find out if there's peacocks on the lawn, because nobody knows what one is, but it must be the place, Evelyn, and that means —’
‘It doesn't mean anything, Sam,’ was the gentle reproof.
‘Much as I'd like to think my father was somebody important, there's no real evidence.
As you said yesterday…’
‘Yes, but I been thinking ,’ insisted Sam.
‘You're different.
You are .
Anybody can see that.
You don't belong in a place like this.’
‘I wouldn't like to think my father owned a place like this.’
‘Well, that's just it, isn't it?’
Sam was really excited.
‘He doesn't know what goes on here, because he's always away.
If he was to find out from you , his own daughter, just what Thacker gets up to behind his back —‘
He stopped.
Evelyn was staring over his shoulder at something behind Sam's back.
He turned, following her gaze.
‘Afternoon, all,’ said Jackie Tiptoe, leaning up against the cotton bale and grinning his sunniest grin.
Conflicting thoughts raced through Evelyn's head.
Jackie had rescued her — but he and Biff were friends.
What kind of friend hooks you up on a beam over a terrifying machine?…
Keeps Biff in his pocket, everybody knows that…
He's a sight more slippery than any of you, so don't let him con you…
Sam squared up.
‘How much did you hear?’ he demanded.
‘Everything.
Woke me up, shouting your secrets all over the mill.’
‘Secrets is right,’ said Sam.
‘And you'd better remember that.’
He took a menacing pace towards Jackie who answered with two jaunty, lilting steps towards Sam.
‘What you going to do?
Damage me?’ he enquired.
Sam wavered.
‘You ain't as feeble as you look,’ he asserted.
‘Don't tempt me.’
Wouldn't dream of it,’ was the mocking reply.
‘A poor cripple like me wouldn't stand a chance against a big lump like you — especially when you got the boss's daughter on your side…
Or were my ears playing me up?’
‘Jackie —’ Evelyn moved between them.
He twinkled the blue eyes at her.
‘Don't worry, Evie, I won't tell.
And I should wait to meet Mr Harker before you decide who and what you are.’
He turned as if to go, then added over his shoulder:
‘But there are peacocks.
Real ones and hedges clipped to look like them.’
‘Wait a minute.’
Evelyn made a decision.
She put out her hand and touched the bony elbow.
He studied the hand, then her face for a couple of seconds as if mildly amazed that she should wish to touch him.
Stung, she drew back, then pulled her wits together.
‘Jackie — I owe you thanks for what you did yesterday.
I'm grateful, truly I am.’
Sam frowned, confused.
She went on:
‘If you can help me again, I would be so happy.
And if you would do it without telling Mr Thacker.
You know Hambury better than anyone.
You could help me find out if I've made a terrible mistake coming here, and if —’ She took a deep breath.
‘If I have to make some new decisions about myself and how I'm going to live my life from now on.’
There was a pause in which you could have heard a pin drop — if you could have heard anything over the machine noise which had so invaded their senses that it had the quality of silence.
Evelyn stared into the blue eyes, willing them to give a flicker of understanding, of forgiveness.
Sam stared at Evelyn, utterly lost as to what was going on.
Then the twisty little mouth twitched and the twitch travelled up the cheeks, the eyebrows wriggled and the blue eyes danced like sunlit water.
‘Come on, then,’ said Tiptoe.
‘Give it to me straight.
I love a mystery!’
And Evelyn and Sam rushed in with the  story.
The trio were so utterly absorbed in each other for the next half hour that none of them noticed Rose Williams watching them from some little distance, her face screwed into a sour smile of bitterness and longing.
10
Jackie had no chance to give them his expert advice because the triangle sounded for the afternoon shift, and he was carried off by Biff to his office for the rest of the day and most of the night.
But Evelyn felt quite sure that he would not reveal her secret.
So delighted was she by this new demonstration of friendship, that she decided to have another go at winning over Rose, who was even more sullen than usual at bedtime and blew out the candle before Evelyn was stretched out upon the floor.
‘And don't you start your yapping again tonight,’ she warned.
‘I need my kip.’
‘I won't,’ Evelyn replied meekly.
Rose covered her face with the blanket.
After a few seconds she drew it down again and strained her ears.
‘What's that muttering?
What are you doing now ?’
‘Saying my prayers,’ murmured Evelyn apologetically.
She waited for a rebuke.
None came.
She put her hands together again.
‘God bless mother and father…and Jackie and Sam.…’
‘And Jackie and Sam,’ came a derisive echo.
‘Oh,very cosy, I'm sure.
Two boy friends to giggle and whisper with!’
‘And God bless Mr Thacker,’ continued Evelyn undeterred, ‘and Rose…’
‘You keep me out of your prayers, you hear?’
Rose sat up, furious.
‘Got no business putting me in there.
And don't you pray for Biff Thacker neither.
He's going to Hell or there's no justice.
And I want to be there to spit on him.’
‘You don't mind if I pray for my mother and father?’
Whoever they may be…she added silently.
‘I bet they don't pray for you.’
‘My mother's in Heaven,’ explained Evelyn gently.
‘Eh?’
‘She died a long time ago.
Typhus.’
‘Can't trust nobody, can you?’ sneered Rose.
‘She's watching over us now.’
Rose was incredulous.
‘From up in Heaven?
Sitting on a cloud?
Don't give me that.’
‘She's with the angels,’ persisted Evelyn.
‘They see everything that happens to me.
They're watching over you as well.’
Rose snorted.
‘Garn!
You're soft in the head.
Go to sleep.’
Two long minutes ticked past.
‘Evelyn?’
‘Yes?’
‘You didn't mean that, did you?’
‘That they're watching?
Yes.’
‘Everything?’
‘Everything.’
Rose lit the candle.
‘You shouldn't talk like that.
It's wrong.
Tell them they're not to look at me .’
Evelyn said nothing.
A thought struck Rose.
She brightened.
‘Hey — do you think they can see Biff Thacker as well?’
‘Oh, yes.’
‘That's good!
That'll make a change!
Somebody got their eye on you , Biffo!’
She laughed herself into a fit of coughing.
Evelyn waited anxiously for the heaving to subside.
‘Are your parents dead?’
‘No such luck.’
‘Where are they?’
‘Don't know and I don't care.’
‘What happened to them?’
‘What's it to you?’
‘I'm interested.’
‘I don't know who my father was,’ said Rose bluntly.
‘And my mother —’ she faltered.
‘Was she pretty?’ offered Evelyn.
‘Ha!’
Rose seemed to find this very amusing.
‘My mother looked like an angel,’ said Evelyn softly.
‘But she got so thin …
You could almost see through her.
But her face was beautiful, right to the end.’
‘I only got one memory of me ma's face.’
The other girl's voice had taken on a steely edge.
‘They took me off her
when I was two.’
‘What was it like?
Was it gentle and kind?’
‘It was red and bloated and ugly.’
Rose stared ahead, her eyes on something that was not in the room.
Or visible to her alone.
‘I'm in me cot…and she's looking down on me.
Laughing sort of.
Her face is all twisted up like a snarl.
She leans down to me real close and I can smell it — the gin.
And I can see her teeth…she's laughing.’
Rose shrank back on the bed.
‘She's got something in her hand — a cushion…and then it goes dark ’ Her voice rose, babylike, breathless, panicky.
‘And there's this weight pushing down on my face, choking me, choking the breath out of me…
I fight and kick…’
Her legs stiffened under the blanket.
‘My hands are banging against the side of the cot…
I can't breathe!’
The voice became a high, helpless shriek: ‘Don't do it!
Stop !
But she presses harder …my head's going to burst!
I can't breathe — I can't…’
‘Rose, Rose, it's all right.’
Evelyn cradled the coughing, sobbing bundle.
‘It's all right, I'm here.’
‘They sent her away.’
Rose's voice went flat.
‘To Australia I think.
She done it for the burial club money.
You know, where you put a penny by each week in case your nipper gets sick and dies.
To pay for the funeral.
I suppose she got tired of waiting.
Wanted the money for gin.
Wanted to be happy — Here!’
She wrenched herself away from Evelyn.
‘Get yer hands off me.
Something wrong with you, is there?’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘It's not true, any of it.’
Rose turned on her.
‘You ask Thacker.
I'm the biggest liar in the mill.
Biggest liar there ever was.
Don't you tell nobody what I said, or I'll fix you good.
Got it?’
Evelyn sighed.
‘Yes.’
‘All right, then.’
Rose blew out the candle.
‘Goodnight, Rose.’
She stretched out again.
The floor was even harder and colder that it had been before.
In the darkness, she heard the other girl roll over.
‘Well,’ said Rose.
‘Are you coming in or what?
It's freezing in here.’
‘You mean —?’
Evelyn sat up, delighted.
‘Thanks, Rose!’
‘Just don't touch me, that's all.’
Back to bony back, under the fetid cover, they fell asleep.
The next morning it rained.
Mother Bombie's joints, stiff at the best of times, even after an internal oiling with home brew, seized up completely.
So it was Biff, brandishing The Gaffer, who strode into the girls' dormitory at first light.
‘Everybody up on their feet!
Another bright and beautiful day!
Shift yourself, Caroline, you idle animal!
Euphemia, get them skinny little legs out of bed!
Annie!
Joy!’
Rose was coughing in her sleep.
Evelyn rubbed her shoulder.
‘Rose?
It's time to get up.
Are you all right?’
‘Just getting the lungs clear,’ mumbled Rose, struggling awake.
She blinked at Evelyn.
‘What you doing in here?’
‘Why, you asked me to —’ began Evelyn.
‘I never!’
Rose snatched the blanket to herself.
‘Hurry up, you two!’ boomed Thacker.
‘What d'you think this is?
A meeting of the sewing circle?’
‘Don't you remember?’ whispered Evelyn.
‘You were upset, thinking about —‘
The demon danced back behind Rose's eyes.
She jumped out of bed, screeching with indignation, ‘Ugh!
Mr Thacker!
Come here!’
‘What is it, you little toe-rag?’
‘It's her !’
Rose pointed a furious finger at the other girl who was still sitting bewildered on the edge of the cot.
‘She's wet the bed.’
Dirty little cat!
Ooh!’
Evelyn sprang up as if scalded.
‘I haven't!
I haven't!
Look — there's nothing.’
‘You gonna let her get away with that?’ howled Rose.
‘It stinks ! pooh!’
‘Hold yer noise!’ said Thacker.
‘Ain't you gonna punish her?
Hang on the weights!
Hang on the weights!’
This was too much for Evelyn.
She sprang at Rose.
Sheer surprise brought them both down, winding them temporarily.
Then Rose made a grab for Evelyn's hair and started banging her head against the floor with both hands.
Evelyn flailed and kicked.
A lucky twist rolled them over and Evelyn launched a stinging slap at the other girl's face.
It was the first time in her life she had ever hit anyone.
She was so shocked at herself she almost lost the advantage.
Rose tried to throw her off and for a moment they became an indistinguishable tangle of clawing arms and jerking feet.
Thacker enjoyed the entertainment for a full forty seconds, then stooped and pulled them apart as easily as if they were two bits of cotton fluff stuck together.
‘Simmer down,’ he said calmly.
Evelyn subsided immediately, but Rose carried on struggling.
He shook her as if she were a puppy.
Every tooth in her head rattled.
Then she was still.
‘Evelyn, get down to work.’
She didn't need to be told twice.
Rose watched, open mouthed at the sheer injustice of it as the girls filed out.
She thrust out her lip at Biff.
‘I told you, she —’ But, before she could finish, he swiped the words out of her mouth with the flat of his hand.
This time her eyes rattled as well as her teeth.
She stood, catching her breath, holding her head in case it fell off.
‘You'll get worse than that if you don't stop snivelling.’
Thacker gave her a push towards the door.
‘I don't care what she did.
You can't stink worse than you do already.
Anyway, everybody knows you're the biggest liar in the mill.
You'd make a politician blush.’
He bundled her down the stairs and set off through the rain at a cracking pace.
His last words, flung over his shoulder at her through the cold, stinging spray, were:
‘Little wonder everybody hates the sight of you.’
11
‘Oh, I've been inside the big house hundreds of times,’ boasted Jackie.
‘There's a window at the back on the ground floor that doesn't close properly.’
‘Have you seen the kitchen?’ asked Evelyn.
‘Are there hams hanging up and bunches of herbs?’
‘You name it, they've got it.
And if they've got it,I'll nick it.
But I've never seen a child there…’
Sam chewed on his bit of cheese and deliberated.
‘Could you get us in?’
‘Well, yes,’ was the reply, ‘but what good would it do?’
‘I don't know.
But maybe Evelyn might see something there…’
‘There might be papers of some kind,’ Evelyn put in.
‘papers?’
Both boys looked blank.
‘Documents.
Some kind of evidence.’
‘Hey, look out.’
Sam touched her arm, warningly.
Rose Williams, eating her dinner at some little distance from them, turned away pointedly, curling her lip.
‘D'you think she heard?’ asked Evelyn, paling.
‘Nah,’ said Jackie.
‘She's just jealous.
Take no notice.’
Just then Biff started clanging the iron triangle to summon them together.
‘Bit early, isn't he?’ grumbled Sam.
‘There's ten minutes to go yet, I reckon.’
They assembled at the door of the mill.
Mother Bombie and Biff were standing together, looking important.
‘You'll have to wait for your supper tonight,’ announced the old girl.
‘You've got a visitor coming.
A fine, grand lady who's going to give you a talk all about people what are worse off than you are, so you'll learn to count your blessings.’
‘Who is it?’ ventured Sam.
‘It's Mr Harker's cousin,’ said Biff.
’ Miss Harker.’
Evelyn gasped and peeped at Sam.
‘And she's a real toff,’ warned the old woman, tethering her ragged skirts about her more closely and fingering a few sparse hairs back up under her bonnet.
‘So make sure you mind your manners.
Now, back to work, and sharp!’
‘Toff indeed,’ they heard Biff mutter as they filed past into the mill.
‘She'll be scrawny and down at heel, I bet.
A poor relation.’
Sam dragged his feet, hoping to pick up information.
‘Ought to be married and at home, but nobody wants her, I suppose,’ jeered the overseer.
‘Just some stupid, bad tempered old woman with nothing better to do than poke her nose in where she's no business.’
Mother Bombie motioned him to keep his voice down but he ignored her.
‘Always the same with these spinster types.
They get Causes .
They don't know anything about life, so they come and tell the rest of us how to live it.’
He spat noisily and scrutinized the gleaming gobbet of spit by his boot.
‘Don't suppose old Harker would be pleased if he knew.
She's supposed to be looking after his brat, not his mill.’
He looked up and saw Sam who was rooted to the spot with excitement and quivering like a terrier.
‘You!
What are you doing?
Taking the air?’
‘Just hunting for my broom, sir,’ said Sam.
‘I thought it was out here.’
‘You'll feel it on your backside if you don't get back to work,’ threatened the other.
‘So scamper!’
Sam scampered.
Straight into the scutching room to find Evelyn.
She could hardly believe what he was telling her.
‘Sam, are you sure ?’
‘Yes, yes!
She's brought Harker's son with her — your brother !’
‘Oh, Sam!’
It didn't seem possible that things could have come to a head so soon.
Evelyn was frightened by the strength of her reactions.
She made a huge effort to calm herself.
‘What are you going to do?’ asked Sam.
‘See what she's like tonight, this Miss Harker.
And find out as much as I can.
Then if I think she's trustworthy, I'll ask her to help me.’
Sam considered this.
‘Wouldn't it be better to break into the house with Jackie and see for ourselves?’
‘No,’ she replied, shaking her head, ‘I don't think that was such a good idea now.
Not if we can do things honestly.
Remember, I could still be wrong.’
Sam was more than ever convinced that she could not be.
There was a definite something about her which marked her out from the others.
And that, he supposed, must be breeding.
As for honesty being the best policy — he decided to reserve judgement on that one.
Filled with a restless, fevered energy that set every nerve twangling and pumped her blood full of adrenalin, Evelyn threw herself into her work as if the sheer force of her will could drive the hands of the clock round more swiftly.
In consequence, by mid-afternoon, exhaustion levelled her with a sledgehammer blow.
As she pushed the emptied skip back towards the scutching room for the umpteenth time, her legs simply stopped working and she sagged against the basket, fighting down a wave of dizziness and nausea.
After a couple of deep breaths, she felt well enough to open her eyes, and as the mists cleared she focused on a most peculiar tableau: Jackie Tiptoe sitting on the floor next to Rose Williams, holding her hand and murmuring in her ear.
Then they both got up and Rose walked off slowly towards the machines.
Spotting Evelyn, Jackie limped towards her.
She ignored his smile.
‘What were you talking to her for?’
Jackie looked surprised.
‘No particular reason.
She just wasn't feeling very happy, that's all.’
‘Well, whose fault is that ?’
Evelyn would have been shocked to hear anyone else say the same, but she had  washed her hands of Rose Williams, and a mixture of tiredness and terror that Jackie might give away their secrets made her callous.
‘She hasn't exactly gone out of her way to make anybody else happy, has she?’
Jackie put his head on one side.
The blue eyes searched her face with a dispassionate  curiousity .
He seemed to think it still contained traces of humanity, for he continued:
‘The fact is, she's terrified of going under the machines.’
‘Well that's just too bad!’ snapped Evelyn.
‘Why doesn't she do something else?’
‘She's afraid Biff will punish her if she complains.’
‘I hope he does!’
She turned and put her shoulder to the skip.
She could feel Jackie watching her as she took a step forward, but she resisted the temptation to glance back, thrusting herself away from him, one step after another, angrily trying to justify her uncharacteristic behaviour and telling herself that she had no need to justify it.
Once Mr Harker found out who she was…
Suddenly the skip, even though it was empty, felt heavier than a cartload of corpses being heaved off a battlefield.
‘Ooh, I'm hungry,’ complained Todger.
‘I hope this woman isn't going to stay long…ow!’
Sam had given him a warning kick, but Biff, overhearing the remark, gave a grim smile.
Todger's sentiments were his own.
They were made to wash their hands and faces in a rain barrel outside, before being allowed into one of the empty warehouses.
Then they were sat down in neat rows, boys on one side and girls on the other.
Sam tried to catch Evelyn's eye, but she was more than usually preoccupied.
Mother Bombie settled herself on a crate in the corner and assumed an air of pious resignation.
After a time, when there was still no sign of Miss Harker, she relaxed sufficiently to knock out her extinct pipe against her boot and enquire of Biff as to whether he wanted to sit beside  her.
He barked with laughter and took a swallow from his flask.
‘You must be joking.
I've got work to do.
And I bet she's got a face like the back end of a sheep.’
‘Have I come to the right place?’
Everyone looked round and Biff's jaw dropped.
A slender young woman in a green flowered dress with lacy bits at the neck and cuffs was standing in the doorway.
Her light brown hair was drawn back into rather too severe a knot for the broad serious forehead, but the features were dainty and she had lovely grey eyes.
Sam looked over at Evelyn again.
Brown eyes.
Still, Miss Harker was only a distant relative.
Smiling at Biff — her teeth were a picture, not a black one among them — she walked in.
If gazing could gobble you up, she'd have been picked clean.
The children stared ravenously at her dress as if it had been spun out of sugar.
This was a real lady The girls were suddenly self-conscious, smoothing down their tattered skirts and tucking their dirty feet out of sight.
One or two hid their hands under their aprons.
Sam became aware for the first time how bad he smelled.
Miss Harker seemed to walk in a cloud of fragrance — even the air round her was somehow airier and lighter than anywhere else in the musty room.
Thacker looked her up and down, then dropped his eyes to the floor.
The children had never seen him embarrassed before.
Life was full of surprises.
‘I'm Ellen Harker.’
She put out a slim hand.
There were sparkly rings on it, Evelyn noticed, but none with an ‘H’ on.
‘And you must be Mr Thacker.’
Thacker stuck out a hand, then realized it was wet — he'd just wiped his mouth with the back of it.
Turning a violent red, he snatched it back and rubbed it clumsily against his trouser leg.
Then he just brushed the very tips of his fingers against hers and plunged the offending hand deep in his pocket as if his fist were on fire and the pocket was a bucket full of sand.
‘And are these the children?’
She turned to them with a glowing smile.
It was like being bathed in honey.
‘Get up, you scum!’ rapped Thacker with some of his old spirit.
He was back on home ground, dealing with them 
‘Oh,Please ’ let them stay as they are.
They must be tired after their labours.’
‘Not at all!’
Biff was in charge again.
‘Ready and raring to go, aren't you?
Aren't you , Kettle?’
Sam mumbled something.
‘Will you be staying?’ enquired Miss Harker as if he would be doing her an immense favour.
‘Well, I might just…’
‘Thought you was busy ,’ said Mother Bombie.
‘And so I am, so I am.
The machines, you know.’
He edged towards the door.
‘But I might look in a bit later.
Depends.’
He ducked out into the night.
Ellen Harker seated herself on one of the crates thoughtfully provided by Mother Bombie, drew a gentle breath and began:
‘I want you all to make yourselves as comfortable as you can.
I'm going to tell you a story.
It's a very strange and frightening story…’
Sam's ears pricked up.
What was this?
Could it have something to do with Evelyn?
Had she heard the name, recognized her even?
The lady continued:
‘So I want you to be very brave while you listen to it.
Can you do that for me?’
Quite a few of them thought that they could.
Things were definitely looking up.
It was really delightful to be treated with such consideration after the events of the last week or so.
Perhaps Hambury was about to turn into the place Biff had originally described to them back at the workhouse.
The old hands were less excited and settled down to daydream the time away until supper.
Miss Harker's face had become very pale and serious.
‘Some of you may think this is a fairy story, something I've made up, but every word of it is true .
That's what makes it so terrible.
So listen carefully and take it to your hearts.
Now…’
She gave another of her smiles.
‘You all live here in comfort, protected by people who care about you, who feed and clothe you, and pay you a wage every  week as well as giving you a home…’
Sam looked at her.
The sooner Evelyn tells her what really goes on here the better, he thought.
He squinted round.
Nobody seemed particularly startled by her assessment of their situation.
They were still waiting for the entertainment.
Or just too tired to do anything but enjoy looking at the pretty lady.
But Rose Williams caught his eye and her lips curved in a sardonic smile.
‘What a lovely secure feeling that must be!’ exclaimed Miss Harker.
‘And to know that you are doing something so useful Making cotton thread to be woven into lovely dresses!’
Her dress was certainly a treat.
Evelyn was gazing at it and at the eager face above the frilly collar, but whether in rapture or disbelief Sam could not tell.
‘Now, does anybody know where all that cotton comes from in the first place?’
Todger's hand shot up.
‘America, Miss!’
‘That's right!
It's grown on huge farms called plantations, and it has to be planted, as the name suggests, cultivated and harvested, before it can be packed into great ships and sent to us.
But does anybody know who does all that hard work?
All that digging and cutting and harvesting?’
Nobody answered.
It was not a matter to which any of them had ever given great thought.
‘Well, I'll tell you.’
She paused to give her words maximum effect and let her eyes flit over the assembly.
They rested for a second on Todger, who was doing his best to look cherubic, then on Evelyn.
It seemed to Sam that she looked the tall girl over very intently during those few moments, but then most people looked twice at Evelyn, not because she was especially beautiful but she had a kind of composure unusual in a street girl.
Then Miss Harker lifted her head and addressed them all in solemn tones.
’ Slaves ,’she said.
‘Black slaves.’
If she had been expecting an immediate outcry, she was sadly disappointed, but she was a determined young woman.
‘It must seem impossible for you to believe that in a civilized society so abhorrent a practice as the enslaving of  one person by another still continues, but I will ask you to try and imagine what it must be like.
To begin with, did you know that these black slaves were not even born in America?
They come from a far, far distant land.
Does anybody know which land?’
A hand waved.
‘Africa, Miss!’
The owner of the hand was rewarded with a delicious smile.
‘Very good!’
Her voice became deadly serious again.
‘Now, the white people who own the plantations are much too lazy to do the work themselves and that is why they buy black slaves from Africa to do it for them.
Think of it!’
Her delicate hands lifted in horror.
‘How would you feel if somebody tried to buy you ?’
She was warming to her theme now and did not notice the puzzled expressions flickering across one or two faces and questioning looks being exchanged.
‘as if a person could belong to anybody other than themselves!
Why you wouldn't feel like a human being at all, you'd feel like a thing .’
Sam had a sudden vision of a piece of paper scissored across with jagged strokes.’
But that's exactly what happens to thousands of black people.
They are thrown into the dark hold of a ship…’
Sam thought for a second he could smell damp straw —’…and carried many miles to a place they have never seen before and from which they can never return.
For they belong to the plantation owners from then on and for ever !’
She was nearing the climax of her speech, eyes bright, cheeks flushed, voice rising:
‘And do you know what happens to them if they run away?’
She did not pause for an answer, but bent down and snatched up a roll of paper which she had placed on the floor beside her when she first sat down.
She stood up and let it unroll before her to shout its hideous message for itself.
‘This,’ she said, ‘is a poster advertising a reward for the capture of a runaway slave!’
Except that the face on it was black, it was pretty nearly the same as the one Mother Bombie had put up for Joy Prentice.
It was a crude and contemptuous scrawl.
‘Doesn't that frighten you?’
It obviously frightened her .
Just talking about it made her jittery enough to need a nip out of Thacker's flask in Sam's opinion.
Her eyes blazed.
‘Sometimes they are even hunted down like animals .
Could you ever imagine that happening to one of you?
Wouldn't you want to do something about it if it happened to one of your friends?’
Several boys squirmed uneasily.
Joy Prentice, who had been sitting motionless throughout, reached up and pinched a louse out of her head.
She examined it for a moment, then squeezed it between thumb and fingernail and dropped it on the floor.
’ I want to do something about it!’declared Ellen Harker in thrilling tones.
‘And so do a great many other right thinking people.
We are going to go to parliament to ask the men in power there to force those wicked plantation owners to give up their slaves!’
Just then Ferryman, the big soft lad, came out of a very pleasant day-dream about roast chicken and started to pay attention.
Mother Bombie, too, fixed a glittering eye more keenly on the young woman.
‘We need all the support we can get,’ Miss Harker went on earnestly.
She produced another scroll.
‘I have here a petition and I want you all to sign it to show those men in power that the women and children of this country think that slavery is wicked and wrong!’
Sam wondered what Mr Harker would say if he knew that one of his relatives was so keen to disrupt the cotton industry.
A curious picture was forming in his mind — of a long thread of cotton with the black slaves on one end and himself and the rest of the children on the other.
The slaves grew it and the children spun it and people like Miss Harker were wearing beautiful dresses.
The lady unrolled her petition and in a voice trembling with outrage, she read it aloud:
‘We, the undersigned, wish it to be known that we utterly condemn the evil and inhuman system of slave labour.
We believe that every man, woman and child in the world has the right to choose where he lives, for whom he works, and that his endeavours should be fairly rewarded.
No human being has the right to own another.
We demand that immediate action be taken to force the plantation owners to cast aside profit and personal interest, and surrender their slaves forthwith!’
She looked round, triumphant.
‘Who's going to sign first?’
Well naturally there wasn't a rush.
Nobody could write.
Many hadn't understood a word she'd been saying.
Others had, and were experiencing mixed feelings.
Miss Harker had a kind heart, but was she really in touch with this world she lived in and was so anxious to change?
One person had evidently come to a decision.
She was on her feet and walking unsteadily towards Miss Harker, tears running down her face.
It was Evelyn.
‘Give me the pen,’ she whispered.
Sam quivered with suspense.
What was she going to do?
Was she going to say something?
Now?
Evelyn took up the pen and wrote her name quickly, then looked up at Miss Harker who gave her the briefest of nods and immediately turned her attention back to the rest of the company.
‘Come along!
We must all do what we can to help!’
Evelyn walked quietly back to her seat.
Sam tried to make eye contact but failed.
Then Todger stood up, motivated more by a desire to please Miss Harker than by any interest in the suffering of a bunch of strangers in such a distant place as America.
‘I could make my mark, Miss,’ he ventured.
She blushed, realising.
‘How stupid of me.
Of course.
That will do just as well.
Step up here, I'll put your name over the top.’
She beamed down at him and ruffled his hair.
When he had made his mark, she drew a small packet of fragrant sweets called cachous from her cuff and gave him one.
And that started a landslide of children scrambling and shoving and pushing and pressing all round Miss Harker, almost knocking her over in their haste for a sweet or a pat on the head.
The cachous vanished in a flash and there were sullen looks and mutterings as the last children went back to their places, though one or two, even if they hadn't won  a sweet, felt strangely pleased that they had done something good, though not all were quite sure what it was.
Miss Harker was a little out of breath as she rolled up the petition.
‘Thank you all so much,’ she said.
‘You can congratulate yourselves on having taken a positive step towards ending the evil and pernicious practice of slavery!’
Then Ferryman stood up.
For the last quarter of an hour or so his face had been furrowed with the effort of understanding the information with which he had been presented.
Now it broke into a huge and confident smile.
‘Does that mean —?’ he grinned round for approval.
‘Yes, boy?’
Her beautiful grey eyes shone encouragement.
‘What do you want to know?’
So Ferryman told her.
‘Does that mean we're all going to be set free?’
During the silence that followed, the same thought may well have passed through every head except Ferryman's: ‘We're in for it now’.
Miss Harker was certainly very charming and many had hoped that her arrival might bring them some relief, but not one of them wanted to stand up in front of the boss's relative and complain about the mill.
The Gaffer would have a held day.
Miss Harker blinked at the boy, utterly baffled.
Her pretty mouth was half open like a flower.
There was still a chance they might get away with it.
Maybe Ferryman's question, screamingly obvious as it was, would appear to her just a stupid blunder from a big soft lad with less brains than an ant.
‘Set free?’ she repeated.
‘But surely you've missed the whole point…’
Then something happened to her eyes.
Her delicate hands began to shake.
She was afraid.
That something was about to be revealed that she didn't want to see.
An explosion of sound ruptured the moment.
A sound like a bag of wet sulphur bursting in the middle of a bonfire.
Ma Bombie was laughing.
‘Hoo!
Hoo!
Hoo!’
She rocked backwards and forwards, convulsed with helpless mirth.
Water shot out of her eyes and nose.
Saliva glistened on her chin like brown gossamer.
Miss Harker drew back in alarm and disgust.
In the ensuing chaos, six or seven pairs of hands grabbed Ferryman and pulled him down on to his bottom.
‘Ow!
What you do that for?’
‘Shut up, Ferryman!’
‘You must excuse me,’ croaked the old woman, reaching for her handkerchief — a murky brown item that would not have looked out of place knotted round a leaky sewer pipe —‘But you got to laugh sometimes!
I'm afraid —’ Her bead-black eyes glinted up at Ellen Harker.
‘I'm afraid all this clever talk is a bit over their heads.
I do hope we haven't wasted your time...’
Colour began to come back into the young woman's cheeks.
‘You mean —?’ she looked towards Ferryman.
He opened his mouth.
Todger kicked him.
Mother Bombie tapped the side of her skull with a knotty finger, black as a root.
‘Hasn't got the full shilling,’ she clucked soothingly.
Ellen Harker let out a long breath and relaxed visibly.
‘Well!’ she picked up her petition and rolled it swiftly inside the poster  advertizing a reward for the return of the black slave.
‘I think that will do for today…’
‘And how are my little chickens behaving themselves?’
Biff Thacker lolled in the doorway, the better (in his opinion) for a couple of drinks.
Renewed confidence made him taller and broader.
An insolent smile quirked his good-looking features.
He swaggered across and loomed over her, aggressive and protective at the same time.
She had gone quite pink.
‘Did they enjoy their little entertainment?’
She bridled.
‘It wasn't an entertainment, Mr Thacker, it was a serious discussion.
And I think —’ her eyes wandered doubtfully to Ferryman, who was still grinning, wondering what all the fuss was about —‘they got quite a lot out of it.’
‘Good, good.’
He bared his teeth at her in a friendly way.
‘Heaven!’ she exclaimed, in a high, false voice.
‘Is that  the time?
I've been chattering on far too long.
I really must get back to the house.’
‘I'll escort you,’ said Thacker.
She jumped like a startled rabbit.
‘Really I can manage very well on my own.’
She almost ran to the door.
On an afterthought, she said ‘Thank you very much, children,’ and then paused as if trying to come to a decision.
‘Was there something else, Miss Harker?’
‘Yes.
Yes there was.’
At a safe distance from Biff she seemed to recover a little courage.
‘I'm disturbed that so many of these infants appear to be illiterate.
I'm starting a Sunday school this weekend.
With your permission, they may come to me after church.’
She lifted her head, the grand lady issuing orders.
‘Do I have that permission?’
Biff shrugged.
He knew he didn't have any choice.
She inclined her head graciously and was gone.
‘All right, you lot, supper-time.’
Mother Bombie shuffled towards the door.
They followed her gratefully.
Sam took a long look at her face.
It conveyed nothing.
He had never been to a theatre in London, but he knew now, after the performance she had given a few minutes ago, that Mother Bombie was the greatest actress in the world.
12
There was no sign of Miss Harker when they stepped outside.
Sam caught up with Evelyn.
‘Well?
What are we going to do now?’
‘Oh, Sam, I don't know.’
‘Did you write something extra when you signed your name?
I thought you had a good chance there.’
‘No, Sam, I didn't do anything.’
‘Well you should have done.’
‘In front of everybody?’
‘You could have done it on the sly, like, arranged to speak to her in private.’
Evelyn quickened her step, setting her face against the slanting rain.
‘It wasn't my turn, Sam.
Those poor slaves.
How could I think of myself?
I'll have my chance another time.’
Sam was disgusted.
‘What d'you think you are, a bloomin' saint?’
‘Of course not.
But they'd care about us if they knew.
And I'll be free one day.
They may never be!’
‘Well, you'll have to do something on Sunday.
Say you've written her a poem or something but she's not to read it till she gets home.’
‘I might.’
‘Listen,’— Sam caught up with her.
‘You came here to find your brother.
for all we know he might be locked up in that house against his will —‘
She stopped and looked at him.
‘I think that's a little far-fetched.’
‘Why?
Nobody's ever seen him.
His dad might be afraid of you coining to get him, or something like that.’
‘Then Miss Harker's the last person I should approach.’
‘I don't know what's got into you.’
Sam shook the rain  impatiently off his face.
‘You come all this way and now you seem to have lost interest.
Remember, there's all the rest of us counting on you even though they don't know it.
The only way you can help is by getting yourself where you belong, in the big house.’
She looked so stricken at this that he wished he hadn't said it.
‘Please, Sam,’ she begged.
‘Give me time to make up my mind.
I promise I'll do everything I can to help the rest of you —‘
‘But what about you ?’ exclaimed Sam in exasperation.
‘Please , Sam.
Just leave me alone for a little.
I'll talk to you tomorrow, I promise.’
Sam gave up and stopped walking.
The rain fell against his face as he watched her march out into the dusk, narrow shoulders pulled resolutely back as if she were someone who knew exactly where she was going and what she thought about things.
But after about twenty paces, when she had forgotten that he might still be looking, the shoulders drooped, her footsteps slackened, and she walked like someone in a dream.
‘Evelyn!
Wait for me!’
It was Rose, panting up behind her along the cinder track.
Evelyn's heart dropped.
She gritted her teeth and went on.
‘Hey!
Evelyn !’
There was to be no escape.
‘What do you want?’ demanded Evelyn without looking at her.
‘I don't want anything,’ was the reply.
‘Just walking, same as you.
No law against it, is there?’
‘Not as far as I know.
So if you want to get me fined for talking you're in the wrong place.’
She put her head down and quickened her pace.
‘Don't go so fast.
You got longer legs than me.’
‘Oh, I beg your pardon, Rose.
Is that why you need to eat my food as well as your own?
To make your legs grow?’
‘Keep your hair on,’ muttered Rose.
‘Why should I?
So you can pull it out?
Or get Mr Thacker to shave it off?
Or fix it so it gets ripped out by one of the machines?’
The ugly reproaches spat themselves out of her mouth, so bitter she could almost taste them.
It was like being sick: she loathed herself, but there was an awful relief in doing it.
Rose looked quite shocked.
‘I only wanted to say —‘
’ What ?’
Evelyn heard herself almost scream.
‘That you don't like my face or the way I talk or the way I work?’
Rose faltered.
‘Give us a chance.’
‘Why?
When did you ever give me one?’
Evelyn stopped dead, quelling the other girl with a furious glare.
Rose went alternately red, then white, then red again like a hot little cinder when you get it between a pair of tongs and blow on it.
‘All right, all right ,’ scratched the hoarse voice, very low.
‘I'm —’ She looked round to see no one was in earshot, then mumbled the words quickly out of the corner of her mouth as if they were not really her responsibility:, I'm sorry.’
’ What ?’
Evelyn stared at her, incredulous.
Rose went redder.
‘You heard.
I won't say it again.’
Evelyn had wrought herself up to such a pitch that she was utterly unprepared for this turn of events.
Her anger, newly kindled, needed something to scorch and shrivel before it could be extinguished.
It flamed up now into shrill suspicion.
‘If you think I'll fall for that, you must think me very stupid indeed.
Well you can apologize all you like, because I'll never believe you mean it, and I'll never accept your apology!’
She turned on her heel and stalked away.
Something struck her smartly in the middle of her shoulders and made her gasp.
She turned, and another something whistled past her ear.
Rose was stooped over, digging up stones out of the earth with her fingernails.
Tears jumped into Evelyn's eyes and she started to hurry in the direction of the girls' barracks, ignoring the missiles  which caught her on the back and arms or dropped uselessly on either side.
She was no longer afraid of Rose.
It was herself she was running from.
However clumsily, however grudgingly, Rose had apologized.
Tried to make contact.
And Evelyn had played the grand lady.
If Rose ever tried to communicate again it would be a miracle.
There wasn't any way Evelyn could undo the damage.
Rose would feel bound to reject an apology.
Evelyn had left Rose no choice there.
She had tried to be better than someone else and ended up proving herself even worse.
As she hastened on, something Jackie Tiptoe had said earlier came into her head.
Having no better plan, she decided to act upon it, stopped in her tracks, turned and faced her enemy.
Rose had three big stones filling up her hands.
She held them close to her stomach to keep from dropping them.
Hunched over, with her hair in her eyes, she looked like an old woman caught stealing potatoes, half afraid of the consequences, half afraid to let go of the spoils.
‘Don't think I won't,’ she said, raising the biggest stone.
Evelyn took a step forward.
Rose gave a yelp of rage, her arm shot out and Evelyn gave an involuntary cry as the stone caught her on the left shoulder.
She steadied herself and kept on walking.
The demon that danced in Rose's eyes, peeped out at her, irate, mystified.
‘You asked for it!’
The second stone had more force behind it, but Rose took a half step back as she threw it and it went wide.
Evelyn and she were now barely two yards apart.
‘You're right,’ said Evelyn.
‘I asked for it.
Go on.’
Rose wavered, then steadied herself.
She tossed the missile up and down from one hand to another, trying to look menacing.
She had a terrible urge just to chuck it at Evelyn's feet and run away, but she knew if she did that there was a chance she might burst into tears.
‘I was wondering,’ said Evelyn, ‘if you'd like to swap with me and let me have a chance to go under the machines.’
Rose dropped the stone but caught it in time.
’What did you say?’ she whispered.
‘I'd like to go under the machines instead of you.’
Rose felt her mouth go dry.
‘Why?’ she croaked, trying to sound aggressive.
‘Because I want us to be friends.
You don't like the job, but I mightn't find it too bad.’
She waited while injured pride battled with hope in Rose's surly face.
‘Think about it.’
Then she turned again and started to walk away, waiting for the last stone to strike her.
‘Wait a minute!’
She waited.
Rose's feet pattered behind her and stopped.
‘Evelyn?’
‘Yes?’
‘Don't turn round.’
The nerves in her spine pricked.
‘All right.’
A pause, in which she tried to feet what Rose was struggling to say.
Then the voice came, very soft:
‘Do you hate me?
Like everyone else?’
‘Of course not.’
She heard the sound of the stone falling to the ground.
‘Well, then — if you'll go under the machines for me — I'll do something for you.’
‘What?’
‘I won't tell Biff that Mr Harker's your father.’
Evelyn spun round.
‘How did you know ?’
‘Don't be cross!’
Rose caught hold of her with both hands.
‘I wasn't going to tell anyway.
I hate him.
I wanted to see his face when he found out.’
‘You listened!’
‘I couldn't help it!
Nobody would talk to me.
I wanted to know what it was…what it was…that made everybody like you so much.’
Evelyn looked at her for a long moment.
Then she put her arm round the scrawny shoulder.
‘Come on,’ she said.
‘Let's give each other a chance.’
Supper was even worse than usual.
Turnip water with a  lump of bacon in it.
Euphemia wrinkled her nose at it.
‘I think I've lost me appetite.’
‘Don't be ungrateful,’ said Caroline, who was a bit above herself at the best of times.
‘There's always somebody worse off than you!’
‘Oh, yeah?
Does that mean you want mine, then?
Just for that, I will eat it,’ said Euphemia.
In bed that night, Evelyn and Rose talked in whispers for a long time after they were sure that everyone else was asleep.
And when she said her prayers, Evelyn added:
‘God bless mother and father and Mr Thacker and Jackie and Sam and Rose — and all slaves.
Everywhere.’
13
On Saturday everyone got paid.
Biff marked off their names in a ledger, made rapid mental calculations regarding fines incurred and instructed Ma Bombie to hand out whatever was left, which in most cases was not much.
A bunch of the new hands were sitting together in the yard commiserating when Jackie Tiptoe limped up.
‘What we need is a union,’ he announced.
Nobody knew what he meant.
He explained:
‘It's just putting a bit of money by, in case.’
‘In case of what?’
‘In case of disaster,’ said Jackie impressively.
‘Or injury, or fire, or loss of limb, or getting the sack.’
This last didn't seem very likely.
The Cotton Twist Company rarely sacked anyone if they could wear them out first.
‘The thing is,’ Jackie explained, ‘none of us has much, so we ought to put what we have together in case one of us ever needs anything important.
Otherwise it just gets spent in one trip down at the village shop.’
That seemed fair enough, though Todger wasn't convinced.
‘What happens if there isn't an emergency?’
‘It goes towards having some decent grub at Christmas.’
That was something they could all understand, except Euphemia.
‘I'm hungry now .’
‘Go down to the shop then, and buy the lot — if you think you can get back in time.’
She was beaten, and knew it.
‘How much d'you want, then?’ asked Grimes.
‘Sixpence a week?’ suggested Jackie.
There were howls of protest.
Hardly anybody had sixpence left.
‘Why don't we all give what we can spare?
Might be  more some weeks than others,’ suggested Sam.
Wouldn't be fair.
Not in the final shareout.’
They settled on threepence.
Christmas was a long time away and it would mount up.
Jackie went round solemnly collecting the cash on his porridge plate.
‘I've got a little box I can stow this in,’ he said.
‘And I'll place it in safe keeping, don't you worry.’
‘Where's that then?’
‘Not telling you!
That way we can be sure it's safe!’
On Sunday morning everyone (except Biff, who was far too busy) went to church.
The Reverend Eli Foster, ancient and wild haired, led the singing in a high, quavering voice, thumping the pulpit to keep time.
They coughed their way through All Things Bright and Beautiful , and when they came to the bit about ‘God made them high and lowly, and ordered their estate,’ he waved them to an unceremonious halt and plunged into his sermon:
’ Isn't God wonderful ?’he squawked.
‘Just see how carefully he has ordered the universe for our mutual benefit.
‘The rich man in his castle ,’! that's Mr Harker and his family up at the big house…’
He nodded benevolently at Miss Harker, sitting at the front with white gloves on and a new bonnet.
Then he leaned out over the children.
‘The poor man at the gate ,’ that's you , living here happy as sparrows pecking up the crumbs from his excellent table.
The High…’ he simpered at Miss Harker.
‘And the Lowly…’ he glowered at the rest.
‘God ordered their estate,’ that is to teach you never to question your place in this world, never to envy those who have more than you, for it is GOD's WILL!
He gripped the sides of the pulpit between fingers crooked as claws and leaned out so far over the congregation that he was in danger of falling out and landing on his head.
In his billowing white surplice he looked like a dishevelled old bird struggling to take off in a high wind.
He opened his mouth like a beak.
‘So I say unto you — count your blessings!
Count them, every one!’
He paused dramatically, gazing so intently at each child below  him that Sam thought he must be scanning their heads for lice.
Or perhaps he was waiting for them to start counting their blessings there and then.
He rocked back on his heels and steadied himself.
‘The Deacon will now pass the plate among you.
Give generously, for your donations will go to aid our missionaries in China who are bringing the word of God to the poor heathen children there.’
On Ma Bombie's instructions everyone had saved a small coin.
Sam sighed as he slipped his onto the plate and peered round at Miss Harker who was fishing in a discreet net purse.
He wondered what she'd do if she ever met a Chinaman or a black slave.
Run a mile probably.
Evelyn was deep in thought.
The Reverend Foster's beady eyes fixed on the children fumbling for their donations as if they were a parcel of juicy worms to be swooped on if they tried to wriggle away.
A short hymn of thanksgiving followed and the service was over.
Joy Prentice was supposed to go home on Sundays after church.
Jackie limped with her as far as the crossroads.
‘Are you going to be all right?’ he asked her.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well —’ He scratched his head, embarrassed.
‘Your dad.
You know.’
She gave a mirthless laugh.
‘Oh,that .
I'm used to it.’
The blue eyes regarded her thoughtfully.
‘How many times is it you've run off now?’
She didn't answer, but started to trace an irritable pattern in the dirt with the toe of one battered shoe.
‘Three, isn't it?’ persisted Jackie.
‘What are you getting at?’ she snapped back at him.
‘Nothing, nothing.’
He shrugged his uneven shoulders.
‘It's just I get to wondering…’
‘Wondering what ?
‘Why it is they always catch you.’
She glared at him defiantly.
‘I know what you're thinking.
That it's a set up with Biff  to scare the new bunch.
Well, you're wrong.’
Jackie said nothing, just looked at her.
She held his gaze as long as she could.
Then her lower lip started to tremble.
‘Well, what if it is ?’ she burst out angrily.
‘Who does it hurt but me?’
She thrust out her skinny arms for him to
examine.
They were bruised to the colour of old raw meat.
‘If I get another couple of shillings out of it, haven't I earned them?
And what about your union funds?’
Jackie looked pained.
‘I got everybody's interests at heart,’ he said.
‘You got nobody's interests at heart but Jackie Tiptoe's.
I know a racket when I smell one.
You've said time and again you're only here for what you can get.’
‘You'll see you're wrong come Christmas,’ replied the other.
‘It's a racket !’
‘Call it what you like, but at least I don't get beaten black and blue.’
She gave him a cold little smile.
‘There's nothing Biff Thacker can do to me that will even touch what I get at home.’
She pulled her shawl about her protectively.
‘The first time, I really did run away.
I'd had one week after another when my wages were light, what with fines and that.
You lot without families don't know you're born.
You can go to bed and forget it.
But I know what'll happen to me soon as I put my face round the door.
So one night I didn't go back to the Barracks for supper.
Old Bombie was too drunk to notice.
I just walked off the path and into the woods and started running.
Away from the whole pack of them.
But after a bit I started thinking.
Like what would happen to the family without me?
And it sort of weighed me down and slowed me down till my legs couldn't hardly move.
And then I just stopped.
I lay down in the woods and went to sleep.
And when morning came I found I wasn't half a mile from where I'd started.
Biff found me and thrashed me.
And afterwards he said if I'd do it now and again just to keep the others on their toes, he'd make up my wages.’
She threw her head back, shaking the limp hair out of her eyes and challenged him: ‘Well, would you have turned it down?’
Jackie thought about it.
‘You're the only one bringing anything into your house?’
‘It was better when Mam was alive.
She worked here too, once.
The dust got on her lungs.’
‘Always does in the end.’
Jackie's face tied itself in a knot as he tried to remember his own mother.
Tried to remember how he was supposed to feel.
‘D'you love your dad?’
She tipped her head up and looked at the sky, biting her lip.
‘He used to be so…’
She tried again.
‘When I was little, I thought he was the most wonderful man in the whole world.
He used to swing me up onto his shoulders and carry me round…’
The faintest of smiles touched her lips.
‘He had a great long stride — like he was wearing seven league boots.
And I'd hold on to his ears and yell with terror and excitement.
And pride.
He was a hand-loom weaver then, a real craftsman.
They held out longest of all against the machines, but in the end nobody needed him any more.
They only wanted women and children, so Mam came to work here, and when I was big enough, I did too.
That does something to a man.
To know he can't provide for his family.’
She gave a long heavy sigh.
‘So he started drinking.
Mam wouldn't say anything because she didn't want to throw it in his face that it was her money going down his throat.
I think that was partly what made him do it.
She was thirty-five when the machines wore her out.
Now it's my money he drinks…
I used to think he was so big — and now he's sort of shrunk in on himself.
I hate the machines.’
Her fists clenched and unclenched as she spoke in a low furious mutter.
‘I'd smash them with my bare hands if I could.
And he hates me for giving in to them, and for seeing how he's shrunk.
He can't cuddle me any more and tell me everything's going to be all right, so he hits me to show he's still the boss.
When the little ones get big enough  to come here, he'll hate them same as he does me.
I wish he'd die sometimes.
It would be best for us all if he did.’
She stopped, exhausted by her own grief.
‘Funny thing, that,’ mused Jackie after a moment's pause.
‘What is?’
‘You said he still wants to be boss.’
‘Men always do, don't they?’ she asked wearily.
‘No — what I mean is — if he's sitting at home while you do all the work, why isn't he happy?
Isn't that just what Mr Harker does?
And all the bosses?’
Joy considered this.
‘It's a different kind of work.
Being rich.
And anyway, we're not their children.
I don't reckon they even think of us as people at all.
I bet that's why we hardly ever see them.
Because if they got too close to us, they might start thinking.’
‘Miss Harker nearly got too close the other night, didn't she?’
‘Oh, she'll pull back soon enough,’ said Joy grimly.
‘Get too close and they might start thinking.
Putting themselves in our shoes.
And if that ever happened, they'd start losing money.
Rich folk can't afford to have imaginations.’
She gave another long sigh.
‘I wish our dad didn't think so much.’
A light wind had sprung up, bringing them both out in goose-flesh.
‘I'd better go.’
She pulled her shawl tighter, hesitating.
‘I was wondering, that money you collected…’
Jackie looked at her warily.
‘That's for emergencies.’
‘I've got an emergency at home.’
‘What about the extra Biff gave you?’
‘There's never enough.’
She waited, measuring him with her eyes.
He looked at his feet.
‘Union funds.
For the workers.’
‘All right, I'll join the union.
If you lend me some to tide me over.’
Jackie studied each foot in turn.
The straight one.
Then the twisted.
as if trying to pinpoint the exact  difference between them.
‘What good is it if your dad's just going to drink it?’ he muttered.
‘That money's for the future.’
She wheeled on him.
‘Whose future?
Jackie Tiptoe's?
You rotten little twister!’
‘It's not down to me,’ he protested.
‘Why don't you ask the others?’
‘Forget it.
You can't trust anybody.
Don't worry, I'll never ask you again.’
‘No, look —’ The big blue eyes were full of pain, innocent, apologetic.
‘I want to help you, honest.
But I got plans for this money.
I mean, there's not enough there yet to do any real good with.
Just give me a bit of time and if it works out —,
‘I said forget it .’
‘All right, you two!
This ain't a picnic party.’
Ma Bombie wheezed up the hill towards them.
‘You're supposed to be at Sunday school.’
‘I'm going home,’ said Joy.
‘Not yet, you ain't.
If Miss Harker wants you there, you'll be there.
All of you.
You can go home after.’
‘But my dad — he's expecting me.
‘He'll have to wait.’
14
‘And mind out,’ Ma Bombie warned them as they lined up outside the classroom.
‘I'll be sitting at the back and I don't want anybody showing up the firm, asking questions, telling tales, you get my meaning?’
They did.
Ferryman was absent.
Thacker had set him a spot of overtime and he was hard at it in the mill.
Ma Bombie checked caps and aprons were straight, and repeated her warning.
‘After all,’ she reminded them, ‘she's only a wee bit of a thing.
Don't want to upset her, do we?’
They trundled in, promising that they would do nothing to distress or intimidate poor little Miss Harker.
‘That doesn't apply to us, though,’ whispered Sam.
‘You mean it doesn't apply to me ,’ Evelyn whispered back.
‘I don't want any of you others to do anything , even if you do mean it for the best.’
‘Wouldn't dream of it,’ Jackie assured her.
Rose pursed her lips but nodded agreement.
She still felt somewhat on probation within the group: Sam hadn't looked too keen when Evelyn had brought her in.
He was looking annoyed now, but it was at Evelyn.
‘So long as you do something,’ he said.
The classroom was the warehouse they'd been in before.
Ma Bombie had scratched round it with a broom as ancient as herself and with slightly fewer bristles than she had on her chin.
She had found and erected a blackboard at one end.
Miss Harker removed her bonnet, a beautiful item with long blue ribbons, and looked round for somewhere to hang it.
‘Shall I hold it for you, ma'am?’
Jackie Tiptoe could turn himself into a proper gent when it suited him.
Miss Harker recoiled from the small spidery apparition, but recovered  quickly and granted him one of her smiles.
‘How kind of you.
Thank you.’
She repressed a shudder as he took the bonnet and curled himself down onto the floor holding it daintily between his long fingers — which she had been careful to avoid touching.
Everyone else sat down as well.
Miss Harker took a piece of chalk and held it up.
Her rings sparkled.
‘Shall we begin?’
An hour later, when the board had been filled and emptied a hundred times and the duster was whiter than Rose's hair after a day under the machines, the children sat back, dazed by the splendour of Miss Harker's academic prowess and not a whit the wiser for it.
She had sketched symbol after elegant symbol in a gracious, flowing hand, embellishing them with lovely loops, arabesques and curlicues, and invited them in turn to imitate these mystic outlines.
One after another they stepped up and gripped the stump of chalk which snapped in their fingers as soon as it was pressed to the board, sputtered and crumbled when they tried to move it, or let out a squeak to turn the teeth round in your gums.
Each of their slovenly scrawls was greeted with gasps of admiration from the kindly tutor, whose dress and hair grew paler by the minute as they showered her with dust.
Sam, Rose and Jackie waited for Evelyn to volunteer.
She did not.
At last she was the only one left.
‘You — the tall one.’
Miss Harker held out the chalk.
Evelyn didn't move.
‘Come along, don't be shy.’
Evelyn got up.
She had decided on her plan of action.
She walked out to the front and took the chalk.
‘Now, give me a letter ‘A’, ' commanded the teacher.
Evelyn hesitated fractionally, then reached up and executed a perfect capital ‘H’.
It was an exact copy of the one on her ring, down to the double twist in the bar joining  the two upright strokes.
Three of the seated children tensed, fixing on Miss Harker to assess her reaction to this bold move.
‘No, no,no !’
It was quite the nearest she had come to losing her temper.
‘I said an A, dear.
The first letter of the alphabet.
Surely you can remember that much?’
And she reached up and rubbed out the two upright strokes, replacing them with diagonal ones leaning in and touching each other at the top.
’ That's better!’
Then she frowned and made a tutting noise.
‘And this is quite superfluous.’
She rubbed out the twisting horizontal line and put in a short straight one.
‘A ,’ she repeated and handed back the chalk.
‘Now copy it.’
Evelyn took a deep breath and drew exactly the same H as before.
Jackie, Rose and Sam knew what was going on but nobody else did.
Miss Harker, if she had any inkling, was giving nothing away.
She glared at Evelyn as if she had committed some extraordinary prank.
‘Didn't you understand what I asked you to do?’
‘Yes, Miss Harker,’ said Evelyn, looking her right in the eye.
It had anything but the desired effect.
‘Are you being insolent?’
‘No, Miss.’
‘Then you must be very stupid indeed.’
And she positively curled her lip with disdain.
It had after all been a long morning.
Evelyn's eyes flashed.
She rubbed out the H with a single furious sweep and began to write out the entire alphabet in order, one impeccable letter after another.
Miss Harker went rigid with astonishment.
In the flying dust she looked like a frost-shocked tree.
She put out a white hand.
‘Stop!
Stop!’
Now we're getting somewhere, thought Sam.
He sneaked a thumbs up sign at Rose who was baffled by this latest manoeuvre.
Miss Harker wasn't just baffled, she was incensed that this chit of a girl should dare to make a fool of her in front of the whole class, but she managed to smother up her rage in tones of exasperated concern.
‘My dear child, if you can write, what are you doing here ?’
This is it, thought Sam.
‘I need a job,’ said Evelyn.
‘But you've been educated .’
‘At home, yes, by my mother.
Her name was —‘
‘But don't you see ?’
Miss Harker clapped her hand to her head.
A cloud of dust shimmered up.
‘You don't belong here at all.’
Sam nearly cheered.
‘You have the skills to rise above the narrow confines of a labouring job.’
‘Then what you teaching us for?’
Everyone craned round.
It was Todger.
No cherubic smile.
He was perfectly serious.
She frowned at him.
‘What was that?’
‘Are we all going to rise up — like you said — if we learn to read?’
‘Anyone who puts his mind to it can rise to the top,’ was the confident reply.
Sam had heard all this before and it seemed mightily irrelevant to the business in hand.
Todger, however, knew what was relevant and what wasn't.
‘Then where you gonna get your workers?’
That stopped her in her tracks.
She looked at him in bewilderment.
He looked right back, very cool, and her cheeks began to glow pink through the chalk-dust.
Some of the other children were sitting up, alert now, as they caught the drift of what he was saying.
Evelyn seized her opportunity.
Wiping the board clean, she began to write on it in bold letters something that would be comprehensible only to herself and Miss Harker: PLEASE HELP ME
Miss Harker wasn't looking at the board.
She turned to Ma Bombie for assistance but the old woman was asleep with her mouth open.
She looked out over the rows of eager faces waiting for her to justify her educational policy, and she couldn't think of a word to say.
Evelyn carried on writing: I THINK MR HARKER IS MY FA 
Miss Harker made an attempt to rally.
Shrugging her slim shoulders, she mustered an even slimmer smile and stammered feebly: ‘You're not my workers.’
Evelyn finished the last letter of the last word and stood perfectly still, ready for the moment when the teacher should turn and see.
PLEASE HELP ME I THINK MR HARKER IS MY FATHER
But at that moment she became aware that there was another person in the room.
A stranger.
He was older than Miss Harker and he didn't look like a mill worker, nor yet a wealthy man.
He filled up the doorway with his uneasy bulk and there was defiance in his eyes.
There was something not quite right about his unblinking stare.
He swayed slightly and the children knew what it was.
The pretty schoolteacher straightened up and put her hands together.
‘May I be of assistance?’
‘I come for my girl.’
The voice was slow, thickened.
‘Joy Prentice.’
‘Perhaps you'd like to take a seat among the class, Mr Prentice?
The session is almost over.’
‘I'm not waiting for any session to finish.
She's supposed to be home.’
He must have been wondering what had happened to his Sunday dinner, if they had such a thing in Joy's house.
Miss Harker, flustered already by her experiences with Evelyn and Todger, bridled at his tone.
Joy stood up.
‘Sit down, please, joy,’ said Ellen Harker.
‘I haven't quite finished.’
This wasn't strictly true as they'd all had a go on the board.
She was obviously (it seemed to Sam) racking her brains to think of something.
It came to her.
‘No, stand up again.
I want you to show your father what you learned today.
Evelyn, wipe the board and return to your place.’
Evelyn goggled at her.
She hadn't even looked at it.
Shrugging at Sam, she started to walk back to her seat.
‘I said wipe the board!’
Miss Harker's voice, suddenly shrill, struck Evelyn like a knife in the back.
Impaled by the command, she froze.
Then she turned, willing Miss Harker, who was holding out the duster, to look at the board.
Miss Harker flapped the duster angrily.
The class was not giving the kind of demonstration of good behaviour she would have liked.
‘Hurry up!
Hurry up!
And you, Joy, come along, dear.
Give us the letter C.’ Joy Prentice looked as if she would have liked the earth to open under her feet.
She trudged slowly behind Evelyn, who took the cloth and started to rub out the first word with painstaking precision.
‘Oh, for goodness sake, can't you do anything ?’
The duster flounced out of her hand and in seconds Miss Harker had the board clean.
She hadn't read a word.
‘Now sit down.’
She glared at Evelyn as if she were an imbecile, then handed the chalk to Joy Prentice.
‘A C,’ she said in confident tones.
Of course Joy hadn't the first idea what it was.
She lifted her hand to the board and let it drop.
‘Come along!’ snapped Miss Harker in the most understanding snap it was possible to make — she was acutely aware of Prentice though she did not look directly at him.
‘Make an effort!’
Joy raised her hand hopelessly and drew a wavering line down the board.
The chalk splintered.
She dug it in deeper and it gave a horrific screech.
Somebody tittered.
‘Stop that!’ rapped Miss Harker.
‘Try again, Joy.’
Out of the corner of her eye she saw Prentice moving closer.
Joy made one last desperate attempt and produced the most horrendous squeak ever, like a hare caught by a harvest scythe.
There was a general gasp and Todger let out a nervous shriek of laughter that sounded horribly like mockery.
Joy went crimson and tears sprang into her eyes.
Mortified, she turned her face and hid it in the crook of her arm.
That finished Prentice.
He lurched up to the blackboard and knocked it flying.
Miss Harker jumped  back with a stifled cry and put up her hands to protect herself.
He towered over her.
‘Education?
You call this education?
Bloody rubbish, that's what it is.’
He kicked the fallen easel.
‘You want to ease your conscience, do it somewhere else.
Leave my girl be.’
He started dragging Joy to the door.
‘Mr Prentice,’ called the teacher shrilly.
‘The law states that every child…’
‘She ain't no child.’
He turned on her.
‘She's a grown girl.’
‘At thirteen years old?’
‘There's girls wed at not much more.
With little 'uns.’
‘All the more reason then for them to have some knowledge of basic skills —‘
‘Scratching a board with a bit of chalk?
You'd do better teaching them how to cook.
Or don't you know?’
Her lips went white.
‘perhaps, Mr Prentice, as you're obviously out of work, it would be better if you took a course in housekeeping.’
That was below the belt, but instead of stopping there while she was still in one piece, she drove on in a high, hectoring voice, ‘Don't you think your daughter deserves a little rest instead of going home to slave for you after she's been working all week?’
Joy shrank behind her father, praying that she could disappear altogether.
‘What's it to you ?’ he said in a low tone.
So low it was almost a vibration.
The kind you feel through the soles of your feet when there's going to be an earthquake.
‘Doesn't it disgust you?’
There was no stopping her now.
Sam saw what Biff Thacker meant about ‘Causes’.
She'd caught another one there on the spot, quicker than you'd catch a cold.
‘Doesn't it disgust you to be lying around at home while your child works herself into an early grave?’
She d certainly changed her tune from the other day.
Maybe she'd been doing a lot of thinking.
More likely than not, she wasn't thinking at all.
‘Children have no business to work.
Any more than married women.’
‘Is that why you're using up so much energy now?’
The vibration gathered strength.
‘Because you aren't married?
And I wonder why that is?’
‘If I were married,’ she almost screamed at him, ‘I wouldn't send my child out to work if my husband was fit and well.’
‘Talk about what you understand, woman.
These are bad times.
There's a surplus population.
There ain't enough jobs.’
‘And why not?’
She was practically gibbering with outrage.
‘If all the children went home, there'd be plenty of jobs.’
She was really out of her depth now and in shark infested waters.
‘Let the men work!
Let them keep their children instead of the children keeping them!’
She was quoting now, it seemed to Sam, something she'd probably read and never really taken in before.
‘Let the men of this country take home, each one, his wife and his babes, and we should hear no more of shortage of work and lowering of wages.’
Mother Bombie gave a snort like a detonation, and woke up.
‘Men should not be found in sufficient numbers to do all the work there is to be done, and wages would rise as they should do!’
She stopped, panting, her eyes very bright, and smiled at him triumphantly, daring him to answer back.
There was a silence.
Then he took a step forward.
Stopped.
And said, very quietly, very smoothly:
‘That's a pretty speech.’
She gave a short, derisory laugh.
‘So what are you going to —’ He didn't let her finish.
‘For a plain woman.’
Miss Harker seemed to lose height.
He took another step.
The grey eyes blinked, small and frightened.
Perhaps she was short-sighted.
That was why they had seemed so dreamily bright before.
‘If woman's place is in the home,’ he went on, relentlessly, his voice full of venom, ‘then why aren't you there?’
He took another step.
‘Because no man in his right mind would have you.
And that's not just because you're no great beauty.’
Suddenly she really did look quite plain.
Fear can do  that to you, as some of the girls present knew to their cost.
‘You might be quite decent looking if your mouth wasn't always open.
If your voice wasn't so hard and loud and ugly.
No man wants a scold.
No man wants a woman who thinks she's a man.’
They were barely a yard apart now.
She snatched a breath, tried to fight back.
‘Why don't you tell the truth, Mr Prentice?
You like things the way they are, don't you?’
‘What's that supposed to mean?’
She seized any weapon she could: ‘You're terrified of change, because you might just have to get off your backside and do a decent day's work.’
The words seemed to flesh her out again.
The fine grand lady.
This is how they were supposed to talk.
Prentice's eyes were dark with anger.
‘You say that again.’
‘I tell you you're a lazy, idle scrounger, sir!’
She was shaking all over but she held her ground.
‘Don't you talk to our dad like that.’
Joy stepped forward.
Prentice closed the gap between himself and the terrified woman.
‘Keep your distance!’ she shrieked.
‘You stink of beer.
That's something else you'd have to give up if you got a job, isn't it?
Feeling sorry for yourself.
Drowning your sorrows.
Turning yourself into an animal —’ His arm flew up.
Everyone cowered as she screamed at him, ‘Go on!
Hit me!
Hit me!
Hit me if you dare!
And see what Mr Harker has to say about it!’
He seemed to stand over her for an eternity, about to strike.
Rigid, the children watched and waited.
He lowered his arm.
Then he laughed.
Just once.
A sort of vomit of disgust.
‘Isn't that typical?’
He looked round at the class.
‘Of her sort.’
She had horrified herself.
Her face was whiter than the chalk dusting it.
She pressed her lips together, trying to hold back tears.
Prentice swung away and lurched towards the door.
Everyone kept their eyes on the ground, embarrassed and afraid.
And then they heard a soft voice:
‘Dad?’
Joy Prentice caught up with her father and took his arm.
They stood together for a moment in the doorway, linking arms proudly.
Miss Harker gave a little choking cry: ‘Mr Prentice…
Joy…’
Then they were gone.
She turned her back and her shoulders shook.
Rose and Sam looked at Evelyn who was staring straight at Miss Harker, utterly expressionless.
Or maybe her shoulders trembled just a little also.
Then the teacher let out a tiny fluttering gasp — like a goldfish finding itself spilled on a carpet — and sank down, defeated, on a crate with a hand over her eyes.
‘Off you go, now, off you go!’
Ma Bombie cleared the room in seconds.
But Jackie Tiptoe managed to evade her vigilance.
As the dust spun slowly down through the sunlight on to Miss Harker's silent form, he waited patiently at her elbow like a wizened monkey whose master, the organ-grinder, has fallen asleep and forgotten to start the music.
At length, he gave a little cough.
She gasped and looked over her shoulder, pulling her face together.
The blue eyes looked up.
‘Don't forget your bonnet, Miss.’
Seeing the young woman hunched up on a crate, covered in chalk dust and weeping her eyes out, Biff Thacker was rather at a loss what to do.
Weeping females were nothing out of the ordinary for him.
Give 'em a clip round the ear, soon dries 'em up.
But not the ones with class.
He hovered, shifting from foot to foot, wondering what to do with his hands.
In her distress, Miss Harker was not even aware of him until, thrusting his hands into his pockets where they felt much more secure, he discovered a handkerchief.
‘Here…
Miss…’
He dropped it into her lap.
She started and looked up, pressing the palms of her hands to her cheeks.
He cleared his throat and turned away delicately to allow her to use the hanky.
She looked at it, shuddering, and picked it up by a corner.
Remarkably, it was quite clean.
She held it out.
‘Thank you.
I'm all right, really.
It was just something in my eye.’
‘Oh, go on, have a good blow,’ said Biff gruffly.
‘Oh, dear, thank you.
I think perhaps I will.’
His unexpected display of kindness had opened the floodgates again.
She blew her nose as daintily as was possible in the circumstances and handed the handkerchief back with a wan smile.
He received it as if it were a precious relic a saint had just blessed, and folded it carefully.
But he wasn't satisfied.
‘Someone's upset you.
Who was it?
One of them little brats?’
‘No, no!
Really, it was my own fault…’ she petered out, confused.
‘Who was it, then?’
‘I'm upset with myself,’ she tried to explain.
‘That's what it is really.
I said such stupid things to Mr Prentice…’
‘Prentice!’ roared Biff.
‘That drink-swilling layabout!’
He was certainly in a position to know.
He and Prentice frequently got drunk together.
‘please —’ Miss Harker got to her feet in alarm.
‘It doesn't matter…’
‘You wait, I'll sort him out for you, I'll tear him in half!’
‘Stop!
You mustn't!’
Making a lady cry!’
Biff felt better than he had-all day.
Chivalry swelled his bosom.
The prospect of a good scrap had the blood dancing in his veins.
‘I'll kill him!’
‘For the love of God!
Is that the only answer you men can ever come up with?’
She sank down again, despairing.
Biff looked at her, puzzled.
‘What other answer is there?’
She sighed.
It had not been a good day for liberal ideals.
‘I don't know.
Please sit down.
Calm yourself.’
He subsided and pulled up a crate.
‘What was it about?’
‘He didn't agree — or at least I thought — oh, I don't  know what I think any more.
I should never have come here.’
‘Tell me about it.’
For a moment she looked as if she might be going to.
Then she remembered her position.
‘It wasn't important.
You wouldn't be interested, really.’
‘I see.’
Biff stood up.
‘I beg your pardon.
I was forgetting my place.
You'll excuse me.’
Her hands flew to her face again.
‘Oh, why can't I do anything right?’
Thacker put his hands back in his pockets and gave her a pitying look.
‘He's had a hard time, has Prentice.
Tried to get parish relief once.
They gave him a job to do for seven shillings.
Carrying this parcel ten miles.’
He wandered over to the door.
Miss Harker watched him.
Silhouetted against the bright sunshine, he made a striking figure indeed.
Unaware of this, he went on, ‘Half way, he met another bloke carrying a parcel just the same.
So they sat down together and opened them.
Know what was inside?
Big stones.
That's all.
Big stones wrapped in brown paper.
Ask for bread, and that's what you get.
Morning, Miss.’
He ducked his head and made to step out into the sunshine.
‘Wait a minute, Mr Thacker,please !’
He halted and looked back.
The forlorn figure gave an apologetic sniff.
‘May I borrow your handkerchief again?’
15
‘NO!
How many more times do I have to tell you?’
It was several weeks later.
There was a smell of approaching summer in the air.
The Sunday school had closed on its opening day, but everything else was settling into a routine.
Jackie collected union funds whenever the meagre wages permitted, Joy Prentice came to work every Monday with a swollen lip or a black eye, the wheel kept turning and the machines rattled backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards.
And whatever the weather was like outside, inside the mill it was always like a hot swamp.
It's amazing what you can get used to.
Evelyn was finding it difficult to get used to going under the machines, but she was determined not to let Rose see how she felt.
Jackie Tiptoe knew though, and would sometimes run under for her if she wasn't quick off the mark, and then pretend he thought it was his turn.
He was a good sort in some ways, but Joy Prentice never trusted him again.
Nobody did really apart from Evelyn and Sam.
You never knew which way he was going to turn.
And he spent a lot of evenings with Thacker, drinking and — well, they found out later what else he'd been up to.
What none of the trio could get used to was Evelyn's continued refusal to make a move to clarify her situation.
On this particular occasion, one of their dinner-time meetings, she simply burst into tears and stormed off.
‘I don't know what's the matter with her,’ complained Sam.
‘She's afraid,’ said Jackie.
‘What of?
Of finding out she isn't old High and Mighty's heir and long lost daughter?’
‘Maybe of finding out she is .’
‘You could be right,’ put in Rose.
‘She was really upset about the way Miss Harker treated her.’
‘Well I'd want to get my own back,’ Sam insisted.
‘She did try to explain once,’ said Rose.
‘She said it was the way Miss Harker looked at her when she thought she was nothing.
Really nasty.
And then when she thought she was something , she didn't seem to like that any better.’
‘The only thing to do,’ said Sam, ‘is go to the house ourselves and see what we can find out.
If we could meet this brother at least.’
Rose nodded.
‘put her out of her misery either way.’
‘But how do we do it?’
They looked at Jackie.
‘Well, I can get me and Sam out at night easy enough.
There's a hole under the stairs in the Barracks I can get out of and I can open the door from the outside if Sam's too big to squeeze through.
But I can't get you out of the girls’ house.’
‘Typical!’ said Rose angrily.
‘Well I'm coming with you, so you'd better think of something.’
‘Couldn't we all get ourselves onto the night shift?’ suggested Sam.
‘Jackie could make sure Biff was pickled and we could all sneak out together.’
‘But how will we stop Evelyn knowing about it?
She's bound to volunteer as well.’
Luck was on their side in the matter.
Two days later Joy Prentice discovered a rash on the back of her neck and was sent home with the measles.
Within a week fifteen children had it, including Evelyn, and Biff was only too glad to accept volunteers for extra shifts.
There was no quarantine area, so Evelyn simply remained in the female Barracks during the day.
And of course at night.
And it was on one of those nights late in May that Sam, Jackie and Rose made their assault on the great house.
‘All clear?’ asked Rose.
‘All clear,’ affirmed Jackie.
‘Where's Thacker?
Out cold?’
‘He's not in his office.’
The other two looked at him.
‘I  don't know where he is.
But it doesn't matter.
Gone to see a girl somewhere.
He needn't worry us.’
It was a little before midnight when they slipped out of the mill.
A three-quarter moon, pale as ivory, hung in the clear sky, sharpening the shadows under their hurrying feet.
Behind them, the huge ugly building crouched like a sphinx, purring through iron tonsils.
Jackie led them through the wood where Joy Prentice had fled and fallen, then along the banks of the stream which fed the water-wheel, to a small wooden bridge.
The bank rose sharply on the other side.
At the top of it was a high stone wall with a rustic door inset.
Jackie hurried past it.
‘Locked,’ he said over his shoulder without looking at Sam who was pausing to try it.
‘Not much further.’
About a hundred yards along, he stopped.
Here, a vast decaying tree whose roots were eaten away from the inside had begun to lean backwards as if longing to sit down, and a massive, arthritic branch had elbowed out several stones from the top of the wall against which it now gratefully rested.
It was a simple matter to walk up the body of the tree and swing over the top.
‘OW!’ said Rose, landing with a bump.
It was further to the ground than she had anticipated.
‘Shhh!’
Jackie was already on his feet, beckoning them to follow him into the starlit orchard.
They ducked under spellbound apple boughs laden with fragile blossom (like the arms of moonstruck washer women all chilly with the suds, thought Sam) and emerged into the vegetable garden, running low as lapwings past the long rows of blue metallic lettuces and the cold wrought iron spirals of rigidly trained runner beans.
A hedge big as a whale blocked their path.
They passed through a tiny hole in its black flank and came out onto the lawn.
Then Sam knew that Evelyn was right.
Seen from the rear, the house was exactly as she had described it, square and imposing with a flight of elegant stone steps leading down onto the grass.
And on either side of the bottom step a stone beast crouched.
Sam could not  see exactly what they were, but he knew that they would be lions with their heads between their paws.
The moonlight glimmered on the great sweep of lawn and on a curious bird standing in the middle of it, the size of a swan but more ungainly, with a little coronet of feathers on its head.
It picked its way forward a couple of mincing steps, dragging behind it what looked like a gigantic bunch of dried up old herbs.
Sam thought of the pheasants hanging up in the kitchen next to the smoked hams, and wondered for a moment whether it was one of those or…
Then it put back its head, opened its beak and gave a screech to rival the Reverend Eli Foster, and he knew it was a peacock.
There too, on either side of the lawn, were the mighty hedges clipped to look like peacocks.
(Some were less successful than others and had the appearance to Rose of blunt and rather insecure rowing boats, which to the end of her life she believed them to be.)
Sam saw them as proud, bold symbols of the wealth and success which Evelyn was shortly to share.
‘Come on !’
Jackie was off again, gliding in and out of the shadows.
They skirted the lawn, keeping close to the flower borders.
Sam breathed in the scents of fabulous nameless blooms, massed motionless, cold and in every variant of grey imaginable in the moonlight.
When they were about twenty yards from the house, Jackie signalled them to crouch down behind a large bush covered in strange waxen blooms, like roses, only they weren't.
‘Right,’ he said, pointing at a first floor window where a light gleamed faintly.
‘See that?
Candle by the bed.
That's where he'll be sleeping, I'll put money on it.’
‘What's that down there?’ whispered Rose indicating another dim light on a level with the lawn.
‘Basement window,’ said Jackie.
‘The kitchens?’ guessed Sam.
‘That's right.
Wonder who's down there having a midnight feast?’
He grinned appreciatively.
‘Not to worry.
Stick behind me and no one will spot us.’
He tensed, judging his moment, then lurched forward and hurtled across the intervening space, flattening himself against the house wall like a spider.
Soon three spiders were inching their way along the wall towards a small window on the ground floor.
Jackie's delicate fingers felt around the frame, applied a light pressure, and the window slid up about eighteen inches.
He was inside in seconds.
Sam and Rose looked at each other and at the dark, empty square.
Then Jackie's face poked out of it.
‘Come on !’ it hissed.
And vanished again.
Sam thrust his leg over the sill.
They were inside a corridor.
Jackie seemed to know his way about pretty well.
He scuttled ahead of them, bunching himself up at the approach to turnings in case anyone was coming the other way, and skimming over pools of polished moonlight with the feverish agility of a small bat.
When they ran out of moonlight, he had a bat's sixth sense in the darkness, a quality not shared by Sam who bumped into him repeatedly, nor by Rose who bumped into Sam.
‘Oh, for goodness’ sake!’he squeaked the third time it happened.
‘Hold on to my shirt!’
Sam obeyed and at the same time felt Rose grasp the tail of his own.
Jackie seemed to float upwards and Sam stubbed his toe.
He realized they were ascending a staircase.
His heart began to make a terrible noise, or so it seemed to him.
He thought its vibrations would shake the pictures off the walls and the vases off the spindly legged tables they had passed in the hall below.
And then the doors would all fly open, footsteps would sound in every direction, lights would blaze and —
‘Here we are,’ said Jackie.
They had arrived at a first floor landing.
Another passageway stretched before them and more shadowy stairs rose overhead.
About half way along the corridor a single candle burned in an iron holder on a small table.
As  they approached it, Sam guessed at the presence of another staircase further on where the passage disappeared back into its own darkness.
Otherwise he had completely lost his sense of direction.
‘This is it,’ said Jackie softly.
‘How do you know?’ hissed Rose.
Jackie indicated the door outside which the candle burned.
‘This is one of the nursery bedrooms.
And look…’
He pointed lower.
Beneath the door they saw a thin rind of light.
Sam and Rose mouthed at each other: ‘Candle by the bed,’ and nodded.
Jackie got hold of the door handle and began, very gently, to turn it.
The other two held their breath, waiting for the inevitable squeak, but the sensitive fingers did not let him down.
There was the faintest of clicks and the door moved inward a fraction.
Jackie motioned to them to help him and all three put their shoulders to it and pushed.
It resisted for a moment, then swung completely open, and they stood on the threshold, goggling in.
It was a room of modest proportions, all of which seemed to curve comfortably inwards like the lines of a shell towards the central and most prominent feature — a splendid and remarkable cot, wonderfully sumptuous, all frilled and canopied in white lace.
Beside it on a table burned a candle, the source of the light they had seen from the garden.
A nearby tray was furnished with a mug and a large plate scattered with the crumbs of a large slice of cake.
The air which was almost suffocatingly warm (the remains of a fire glowed in the hearth) smelled of sugar and boiled milk and the sickly sweetness of fever.
Carpets were thick underfoot and solid velvet curtains hung at the windows, parted just sufficiently to admit a little starlight.
They drew near the bed and stared down at the boy who lay there sleeping in its drifts of tumbling lace.
There was not a great deal to see, as he was curled up on one side with his thumb jammed in his mouth, and four chubby fingers obscured that part of his face not pressed deep into the  bolster.
They had an impression of very red cheeks and moist yellow hair smeared over the scalp like egg yolk.
He might have been about six.
Absent-mindedly, Jackie licked his own fingers and ran them round the plate by the bed, picking up the crumbs which he transferred to his tongue.
They stood there for perhaps a minute, wondering what to do.
Then suddenly the boy rolled over onto his back, opened his eyes — the palest milky blue — and looked at them.
It was a plump face, unnaturally rosy, and sleep-creased like a small cushion.
When he removed the thumb from his lips, Jackie half expected the puffiness to subside with a gush of escaping air.
The boy must have thought himself still dreaming, for he was completely unruffled by the presence of three strangers at his bedside.
He simply enquired, in a high, imperious voice: ‘Have you got anything to eat?’
The trio exchanged glances.
Sam was thinking, ‘He doesn't look anything like Evelyn.
He's far too common.’
Rose thought, ‘Greedy little beggar.
No wonder he looks poorly.’
Jackie wondered how often he had eaten himself to sleep alone in rooms like this and if he had seen much more of Mr Harker than Evelyn, his supposed sister, had.
‘Just what do you think you're doing?’
A whispering shriek of rage and terror behind them made them jump out of their skins.
In the doorway, bleached by the light from her candle but with the eyes frighteningly dark and glittery, blazed the furious face of Miss Harker.
16
Pushing them out of the way, she hastened to the bed.
‘If you've harmed that child!’
She leaned over the lacy cot and put a hand out to smooth the tangled curls.
‘Arthur!
Arthur!
I'm so sorry , I shouldn't have left you.
I, 11 never forgive myself…’
‘Arthur !’
Sam looked at her, astonished.
She wheeled round in a rage, holding the candle high.
With her hair loose on her shoulders and a reflected miniature candle flame dancing in each pupil, she looked like a beautiful wild beast out of a poem Sam had heard once, a ‘Tyger, Tyger, burning bright’.
‘Get out of here!’ she hissed.
‘Get out!
All of you!
Now !’
They fell over each other to get to the door and tangled themselves into a knot of struggling limbs trying to get out of it.
‘Wait downstairs in the hall — and don't you dare run away!’
They hurtled across the landing.
Behind them, they heard her murmuring anxiously to the little boy.
Then they half slithered, half rolled down the wide oaken stairway and found themselves shivering with fright in the moonlit hall; or rather Sam and Rose found each other.
Of Jackie Tiptoe there was no sign.
‘Isn't that typical !’ burst out Rose, anger chasing away fear.
‘He gets us into this mess, then legs it at the first sniff of trouble!’
‘Won't make no difference,’ said Sam.
‘She saw him along with the rest of us.’
‘Good!’ said Rose.
‘I hope he gets a thrashing!’
‘Reckon we all will,’ was Sam's gloomy conclusion.
He was spared further speculation by the descent of  Miss Harker, candle aloft, like a vengeful ghost.
She paused (on the last step but one, to make quite sure of her superiority) and loomed over them, candle and nostrils flaring.
‘Where's the other one?’ she demanded.
They shrugged helplessly.
‘Well he needn't think he'll get away.
He'll be tracked down and caught, and then all of you —‘
‘please, Miss —’ Rose heard her own voice with surprise.
It was all trembly round the edges like her shadow in the candle flame.
‘We never came here to steal anything, and that's the God's honest truth.’
Miss Harker flashed scorn.
‘You expect me to believe that?’
‘But it's true!’
Sam jumped in, casting caution to the wind.
‘All we did was come to see Evelyn's little brother.’
’ What ?’
‘Evelyn Harris.
The girl who can read.’
‘Oh —her .’
Without realizing, Miss Harker stepped down to their level.
‘Well, if she has a relative here, you won't find him in this part of the house.
The servants are quartered…’
She made a vague gesture…‘elsewhere.’
‘But him upstairs — him you called Arthur — we thought…’
Even as he spoke, Sam began to lose confidence in his convictions.
‘What about him?’
‘He's…her brother.
William.
Isn't he?’
He looked to Rose for support.
‘Mr Harker is Evelyn's dad,’ said Rose bluntly.
Miss Harker stared at them uncomprehending for a second.
Then she seemed to grasp what they were saying.
She gave a short, dry laugh like a biscuit breaking.
‘What arrant nonsense!
Arthur is Mr Harker's only child.’
‘That's what he told you .’
Desperation overcame diplomacy.
Miss Harker went very pale.
She seized Sam by the shoulder in a grip that made his eyes water.
‘How dare you?
How dare you, you little monster!’
‘But it's true!’
Rose was almost weeping with fear and frustration.
‘You must believe us!
You must!
You must!’
Miss Harker hesitated.
Sam thought the nails in her finger and thumb were going to meet each other through the flesh of his shoulder, but to his enormous relief, she let go.
‘Very well,’ she said.
‘You have exactly two minutes to explain yourselves.’
Between them, they tumbled out the whole story, the peacocks, the stone lions, Evelyn's mum, Mrs Grace, the notice going up about Hambury — everything.
She stared at them in disbelief.
‘And here's the proof!’ concluded Sam, holding out the ring.
Miss Harker looked at it with distaste as if it were a species of repellent insect wriggling on a pin, then took it carefully between her finger and thumb and held it up to the light of the candle.
The anger and astonishment in her face gave way to something very like pity.
‘My poor child,’ she said.
‘This ring doesn't belong to Mr Harker or to anyone else here.
You can see for yourself it's not worth anything.’
Sam felt the ground sinking beneath his feet.
‘Sentimental value,’ he said stoutly.
‘Evelyn's dad gave it to her mother.’
‘I expect he probably did,’ was the reply.
‘But that doesn't prove anything except that the man probably came from the ironworks.’
Sam and Rose looked at her, baffled.
‘Hambury Ironworks,’ she said gently.
‘It's in the next valley.
It belongs to Mr Harker too.’
‘Well, then —’ began Sam.
‘Well, then,nothing .
These rings are ten a penny.
All the iron men make them for keepsakes.
Half the women in the villages round here have one.’
Sam struggled to hold his ground.
‘But she worked here .
In the big house.’
‘Plenty of housemaids have formed…unfortunate liaisons,’ was the careful reply.
‘Even the most well  brought up ladies can fall victim to…’
She broke off inexplicably and her face went as pink as a fuchsia .
At that moment, Sam noticed something very strange, but he decided to keep it temporarily to himself.
Miss Harker recovered her composure.
‘That poor child upstairs is Mr Harker's only offspring.
And he was born in Italy,not London.
His mother died in the bearing of him.
I know because I was there.
And she was most definitely not a lady's maid.
Her death broke his heart.
He never remarried.
Arthur is inclined to be delicate and it's feared he has not long to live.
Your unwarranted intrusion may have set him back months.’
She was working herself back into a rage.
‘If anything happens to him it will be on your consciences for ever!
I shall tell Mr Harker about this when I next see him and I shall make sure that Mr Thacker knows about it first thing tomorrow!’
‘I don't think you will, Miss.’
’ What ?’
Sam looked at her straight on.
Then, for a fraction of a second he let his eyes drop to the level of the hall table.
And looked back at her again nonchalantly.
She winced and the colour shrank out of her cheeks and then reappeared in two hot spots high on her cheekbones.
Rose noticed nothing.
Miss Harker cleared her throat.
‘I shall make my final decision in the morning,’ she said.
‘It will depend on little Arthur's condition.’
‘Yes, Miss,’ said Sam.
‘In fact,’ fluttered Miss Harker, ‘considering everything you have told me…which I am quite sure you believe to be true even though I am sorry to tell you it cannot be…
I am inclined to take pity on you.’
That's big of you, thought Sam.
‘You must tell your friend,’ continued the lady, ‘that she has made a mistake.
If she wants to find her relatives, I suggest that she looks in the villages.
And in the interests of…’
She searched for a word…‘security ’— and settled on it gratefully like a butterfly landing on the only flower  left in a field.
‘In the interests of security I think it would be better if you did not mention this night's events to anyone.
Is that understood?’
Sam nodded and kicked Rose who was completely lost.
‘OW!
Yes, understood.’
Miss Harker moved quickly to the front door.
‘Then I suggest you get back to the mill as soon as possible, before anyone notices that you're missing.’
‘The front door!’ said Rose, mightily impressed, as they stood at the top of a flight of wide stone steps, flanked by funerary urns, which led down to the drive.
‘I'd have thought she'd have put us out the servants’ door.’
‘She was in a hurry,’ said Sam.
‘And so are we.
Come on!’
But neither of them felt particularly inclined to get back and tell Evelyn the results of their investigation.
They trekked round the side of the house and started a weary trail back over the moon-grey lawn, their feet dragging dark channels through the dew.
The peacock-shaped hedges stared impassively into the distance, seeming to lift their beaks higher in lofty disdain.
‘Wait for me!’
A familiar squeak.
They turned and waited silently as Jackie Tiptoe's distinctive shape, looking in the queer light more than ever like a gargoyle escaped from a cathedral, made its way across the grass with a swift, hiccupping run.
‘Where the bloody hell have you been?’ growled Sam as the trio trudged on together.
‘In the kitchen,’ was the cheerful reply.
‘Anyone for chicken?’
‘Cor!’
Rose's mouth dropped open and she just managed to a catch a string of saliva on the back of her wrist before anybody noticed.
Jackie held out two fat drumsticks.
‘Go on — take 'em!’
Sam hesitated but Rose grabbed hers at once.
Then he couldn't resist.
Jackie pulled another one out of his pocket and all three munched avidly for several minutes.
‘Got plenty more!’ boasted the cripple when his mouth was clear.
‘Nuts and cheese and a big hunk of cake.’
His more than usually lumpy appearance was accounted for by a variety of new bulges about his person, all promising delightful treats.
‘Better eat on the wing, though.’
He glanced back at the house as if afraid that it might pull up an anchor and set sail across the lawn after them.
A breeze had sprung up and moon-silvered clouds raced behind its dark bulk, making it seem to dip and sway, eager to catch the tide.
All three quickened their pace to a near run and nobody spoke until they were on the safe side of the orchard wall.
We'll be in dead lumber when they find all that food gone,’ said Rose.
Jackie shook his head.
‘Nah.
I don't think we need worry ourselves about little Miss Harker.’
‘Why not?’
He smirked.
A superior smirk.
An: ‘I know something you don't’ kind of smirk.
‘Guess who was in the kitchen?’
‘Biff Thacker,’ said Sam.
‘Oh, flamin' ‘ell!’
Jackie stopped dead.
‘How did you know?’
‘I saw his hat on the hall table.’
‘That old felt one?’
Jackie chuckled, his good humour restored.
‘The one he wears for visiting?’
‘That's the one.’
‘I don't understand,’ whined Rose, who was cold and wondering when she would be offered another piece of chicken.
‘What was Biff doing there?
Was he on to us?’ she added in alarm.
‘That's a point,’ said Sam.
‘Was he in the kitchen all the time we were talking to Miss Harker?’
‘Reckon so,’ confirmed Jackie.
‘There was a bottle of wine open and some bread and cheese cut.
He stamped up and down a bit, waiting for Miss Harker to return.
He had his back to me, so I just sneaked in and hid down by the side of the dresser.
After about twenty stamps, he gives a  big sigh, pours out a glass of wine, downs it in one, swings his great leg out of the window and off he goes.’
‘Good,’ breathed Sam.
‘So he didn't hear anything we said.’
Rose stamped her foot.
‘I don't understand !
Why was he waiting for Miss Harker?’
Jackie placed one hand on his heart and raised the other in an elegant declamatory gesture.
He lifted his face to the moon and said, ‘The orchard walls are high and hard to climb…’
Rose gave Sam a sideways look.
‘What's he on about?’
Sam shrugged.
‘How should I know?’
‘Shakespeare,’ said Jackie loftily.
‘I learned it off this actor I was in jail with once.
He was doing time for debt, as I recall.
It goes on:
‘The orchard walls are high and hard to climb
And the place death, considering who thou art
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.’
Sam folded his arms.
‘What's that got to do with anything?’
‘It's some play about love he was in.
‘Romeo and Juliet’ it was called.
He was Romeo.
Little fat man, bald on top…’
‘Get to the point!’
Sam and Rose shouted in unison.
‘The point?’
Jackie frowned.
‘Well, the point was, I'm not surprised he was in debt.
Must have got booed off the stage every night.
Come on!’
They gave up and chased after him through the thin trees.
‘What are we going to tell Evelyn?’ puffed Sam as they drew near the mill.
‘That we've seen her brother!’ said Jackie, exhilarated by the run, but wheezing slightly.
Sam remembered.
‘He wasn't.’
And he explained.
Jackie looked grave.
‘That's bad.
Very bad.
She had her heart set on it.’
‘I'll tell her,’ said Rose.
‘When she's well enough.
But don't worry.
I don't reckon she was so keen on being  related to Miss Harker, though the others might've turned out better.’
Jackie nodded.
‘That's another thing.
I don't reckon we'll be seeing much more of Juliet — I mean Ellen Harker.
Not after tonight.’
17
They were both right.
Miss Harker set off for London with her young charge two days later.
No further mention was made of her by Biff or Mother Bombie.
When Evelyn was judged fit to go back to work, Rose took her aside and gave her the story.
Evelyn was silent for a long time afterwards.
Rose sat next to her, waiting for the tears.
They did not come.
After a while, Evelyn gave a little sigh.
‘So that's that.’
‘Are you very disappointed?’
‘No.’
She smiled at Rose and patted her hand.
‘I think I'm relieved in a way.
I could never have gone to live in that house.’
‘Why not?
It's beautiful !’
‘perhaps that's why.’
She tried to explain.
‘Somehow it was better when it was just a dream.
As it seemed to get closer to reality, I felt myself changing.
Sam kept saying how much good I could do everybody if I had power and money.
And I was thinking awful things — like how I could get my revenge…’
‘On me?’
‘I did think that, yes.
But only for a very short time.’
They hugged each other, then Evelyn continued:
‘Miss Harker worried me.’
‘Because she didn't like you?’
‘She didn't, did she?’
Evelyn gave a rueful grin.
‘No, it wasn't that.
It was what she was .
I admired her at first, wanting to help the slaves.
I think she does have a lot of good in her.
But it's not good that wants to be really tested.
I was scared of becoming like that.
That once I got inside the house and had the dresses and the carriages and everything this mill provides, I wouldn't be able to see you any more.’
‘Nobody would have been able to stop you,’ said Rose.
‘No, I mean see you, like I'm seeing you now.’
The brown eyes smiled sadly.
‘Miss Harker only sees what she wants to.
‘Funny about her and Biff, isn't it?’ mused Rose.
‘I don't know.
Maybe they'd been meeting in secret for a while.
But she ran away, didn't she?
Like she always does.
I wonder if he'll be very hurt.’
‘I hope he is!’
‘Don't, Rose.
He's not a happy man.’
Rose swallowed further mutinous comments.
A new line of thought occurred to her.
‘We can still look for your real brother.
He must be somewhere in the district.’
‘Oh, I don't know.
Maybe I just fooled myself into thinking Hambury was the name, I can't remember now.
Seeing it on the noticeboard at the workhouse made me think…but I can't be sure any more.
And where would we begin to look?’
Rose thrust out her lower lip.
If Evelyn wasn't disappointed,she certainly was.
‘What are we going to do, then?’ she wailed.
‘With nothing to look forward to?’
‘We'll have to make things to look forward to,’ was the quiet reply.
‘What things?’
‘Well, for a start, we must try to make Biff understand that we're people.’
‘WHAT!
Rose burst into mocking laughter.
‘You can forget that, for a start.
He's not human, never mind caring whether we are or not.’
‘Then I shall have to keep reminding him,’ said Evelyn with gentle determination.
‘He'll make your life hell.’
‘Oh, by the way — how did you get hold of my ring to show Miss Harker?’
‘Easy,’ said Rose, brightening.
‘When you had the measles.
You were too feverish to notice.
D'you want it back, then?’
‘Yes, please.’
Rose rummaged through her skirts.
‘Hang on.’
Her face fell.
‘Haven't you got it?’
‘It's here somewhere,’ Rose played for time and lost.
‘You haven't got it.’
‘I don't think I had it last,’ she said defensively.
‘It must have been Sam.
Yes, it was Sam had it back off Miss Harker,’ she concluded with a confidence that she did not feel.
‘We can ask him tomorrow.’
Sam did not have the ring.
He looked for it everywhere, through all his clothes, under the bed, all over the Barracks.
He simply could not remember in the end whether Miss Harker had given it back or not.
Evelyn took this latest blow as bravely as she could, but Sam and Rose felt terrible.
‘I could go back to the house and look for it,’ he offered in desperation.
‘No,’ she answered.
‘perhaps it's for the best.
It's the end of the whole business.
Let's forget about it.’
Secretly Sam vowed that he would find it again if it was the last thing he did.
But Evelyn refused to discuss it further.
She began to put into action her plan to humanize Biff.
As Rose had predicted, it brought her nothing but trouble.
More fines and a not infrequent clip round the ear.
Since the departure of Miss Harker he had become more surly than before and his drinking was on the increase.
One day, when Sam found her weeping in a corner nursing a black eye, he told her she had got to stop.
‘He thinks you're just baiting him,’ he said.
‘You and Biff are never going to get on.
You're complete opposites.’
She was beginning to wonder if he was right.
By then it was too late to try and change her policy, for the overseer seemed to have taken a real dislike to her, watching for any slip she made, so that he could punish her for being high and mighty as he called it.
Perhaps she was still too much  like Miss Harker and her kind for him to feel comfortable.
Anything which smacked of breeding seemed to infuriate him.
One day Sam heard an interesting piece of gossip from some of the adult workers.
He passed it on to the others at their dinner time meeting.
‘Apparently there's something going on called the Factory Commission.
Investigating mills where they think children are being badly treated.’
‘Will they come here?’ was Rose's eager demand.
‘I don't think so.
I heard Rachel — you know, that miseryguts with a face like a reflection in a spoon — saying that they reckoned Hambury was all right because nobody ever complains.
They don't want to work less hours, see, and they're afraid to upset Mr Harker.’
‘Then we'll have to complain, it's as simple as that,’ said Evelyn.
‘How?’ asked Jackie.
‘I'll write them a letter.’
It was an idea terrifying in its simplicity.
And once hatched, devastatingly easy to carry out.
Jackie stole pen, ink and paper from Biff's office and Evelyn composed a simple request that the mill be visited because conditions were very bad and she thought that Biff needed help.
Rose scoffed at this last bit but let it pass.
‘Shall I put all our names at the bottom?’ asked Evelyn.
There was a silence.
‘All right, then, I'll just put my own.’
‘Don't!’ warned Jackie.
‘Supposing it falls into the wrong hands?’
‘It's a risk I'll have to take.’
The difficulty was sneaking it out of the mill.
Sam solved this by getting himself a loading job.
He secreted it in a crate of thread destined for weaving sheds in Liverpool.
privately he wondered if it would do any good at all.
The person who opened it would probably be on the same side as Biff.
But it was better than nothing.
He felt guilty but relieved that he had not put his name to it.
So did Rose.
Jackie Tiptoe wondered what would happen if the mill  should chance to be investigated.
Maybe Rachel was right.
It could do nobody any good.
A week later it seemed as if Evelyn's plan had had a miraculously swift outcome.
Two men appeared at the mill to make what they called ‘Preliminary Investigations’.
Thacker was not overjoyed to see them, but he played along, switching on the charm.
He also made sure they didn't go anywhere near Evelyn or Rose whom he took to be troublemakers.
Sam wasn't privileged to meet them either as he'd been set to work whitewashing the Barracks, which they never got around to inspecting.
One of them was a doctor, a large, unhealthy looking specimen with a huge warty nose covered in broken veins.
He slapped the children presented for inspection on the back and said ‘Splendid!
Splendid!’ in a voice like a belch.
His companion was thin and nervy and carried a notebook.
They didn't appear to care for each other greatly.
The thin man poked the children and asked questions which the doctor dismissed.
Neither of them asked to see a girl called Evelyn Harris and Jackie guessed correctly that her letter had gone astray, though he never said as much to her.
In fact it had been blown away on a gust of wind as soon as the crate was opened in Liverpool and was never seen again.
But to Evelyn, hope remained sweet.
After they'd looked over about ten children, the doctor yawned and said, ‘I don't see any problems here.
Shall we move on to the next mill?’
The thin man fingered his moustache.
‘Don't you think twelve hours’, work a day is a little excessive for children so young?’
Twelve hours! thought Jackie.
If only he knew!
‘They don't look overworked,’ said the doctor, looking at his watch.
‘Your opinion, then, as a medical man, is that a girl of eleven years old might be kept at work constantly, day after day, year after year, with the intermission of Sunday, without injury to her health?’
‘Of course,’ was the reply.
‘Plenty of exercise makes them big and strong.’
The thin man jotted something down in a narrow, cramped hand.
‘What is the earliest time, in your judgement, that a small child should begin work?’
‘Not earlier than five.
Are all these questions necessary?’
The thin man sniffed.
‘Don't you think you ought to be asking some?’
‘I am a qualified physician,’ belched the other.
‘I know the answers.’
‘Is it injurious to keep them working at night?’
‘I have never found it to be the case.’
Nobody supposed he had.
In bed by ten with a bottle of port, no question.
‘Is it harmful to come out of a temperature as high as 76 degrees after working twelve hours, into a cold atmosphere?’
‘I should think it refreshing.’
‘And is it ‘refreshing’ to be inhaling particles of cotton twelve hours a day?’
‘It is not harmful.’
‘Not to the lungs?’
‘No, no.’
He took a pinch of snuff that would have fired a cannon.
‘Should they not take precautions to prevent themselves inhaling this dust?’
The thin man niggled at him like a flea in the hide of a rhinoceros.
‘They could always hold their breath!
Ha! ha!
Spitting will clear it out.’
‘Would not constant spitting be injurious?’
‘Not really.
Not a slight expectoration.’
‘Don't you think the slighter the better, and better still, not at all?’
The doctor waved his hand.
‘A degree of spitting is beneficial.
AH!
What have we here?’
For the first time that morning, he looked interested.
‘Step up here, my little man.’
‘You talking to me?’ said Jackie Tiptoe.
‘I'm not talking to the cat.
Step over here.’
‘Do what he says,’ said Biff.
The doctor pinched Jackie all over, delighted by such an array of deformities.
‘Now, this is something really out of the ordinary.
We don't come across many of these.’
Somewhere behind the flabby face, his brain was composing a paper for some scientific journal.
He saw letters behind his name, a professorship even.
‘Lift your leg, boy.
Yes, yes…
Hmmm.
I believe I could cure this.’
‘You could?’
Biff was impressed.
‘He couldn't cure a side of bacon,’ muttered Jackie.
The doctor rummaged in his bag.
‘What a lucky chance for us both!’
He drew out a monstrous iron calliper.
‘This is my own invention!
Two of you lads, hold him still.
No, it's not hurting, don't be such a coward.’
‘Biffo — do something!’ protested Jackie.
Biff grinned.
The thin man watched the procedure with growing concern.
‘Are you sure —?’
‘Mr Tavistock,’ rumbled the doctor, ‘I am a respected Harley Street practitioner.’
He stood up, mopping sweat from his jowls, and surveyed his handiwork.
Jackie looked like a cross between a convict in leg irons and a pipecleaner man stuck in a pencil sharpener.
‘Now, if this young scoundrel has the moral fibre to wear this apparatus for one month, I can guarantee he'll be dancing the polka with the best of them.’
‘A month!’ wailed Jackie.
The doctor closed his bag with a satisfied click.
‘Was there anything else?’
Biff was looking at the brutal contraption rather more dubiously.
A month seemed a long time to him too.
He contented himself with, ‘He's got a bit of a cough.’
‘Who hasn't?
Fresh air and exercise.’
‘Exercise?’ squawked Jackie.
‘I can't move in this!’
‘Persevere.
It will strengthen the tendons.
Try kicking a ball!’
‘Why don't you fix one on the end of this?
By a chain?’
Biff shot him a warning look.
The doctor beamed condescendingly.
‘I wonder if you might tell us of a local hostelry where I can purchase a good dinner?
Very exhausting, this line of work.’
‘You want to prescribe yourself a tonic,’ said Jackie darkly.
The doctor patted him on the head.
He nearly sank through the floor.
‘Well, you'll have no shortage of iron for the next few weeks!
Ha!
Ha!’
‘I know a decent little joint,’ said Biff, perking up.
‘I'll take you there.’
The three of them set off.
‘What about me leg?’ howled Tiptoe.
‘It'll turn black!’
‘Don't be so silly,’ came back the answer on the crest of a belch.
‘Just keep up the exercise.
I shall be back in twenty-eight days to check your progress.’
And that was the last anyone ever saw of him.
18
‘Ooh, me bones don't half ache today,’ grumbled Jackie one chilly morning towards the end of November as he heaved himself up under his blanket and lit his bit of candle.
Funny thing about Jackie — he was afraid of the dark.
Nobody knew where he got his candles from — they weren't allowed — probably nicked them from the church.
Got them for Rose as well.
He always went to sleep with his still burning, so he got through a lot more than she did.
He slept alone now.
Ferryman had kipped down with him for a while, till one night, turning over in his sleep, Jackie had given him such a clout with the iron boot it nearly took his hip off.
Todger was less than sympathetic to his complaints.
‘What d'you expect with that thing on yer leg?’
‘You could take things easier,’ Sam advised him privately.
‘Biff said you don't have to go under the machines any more.’
‘I'm chief scavenger and piecer and don't you forget it!’
Jackie was very proud of his responsibilities.
‘Fastest in the business, even though I got a handicap now.’
This was patently untrue, but Sam didn't like to tell him.
It was a pitiful sight to watch him scrabbling about under the frames with that horrible thing chewing at his leg like an iron bulldog.
But he was still faster than Evelyn.
Growing taller seemed to sap Evelyn's strength, but she was another one who refused to admit defeat.
The job grew daily more loathsome to her and she understood now the defiant wretchedness which had been devouring Rose when they first met.
With Jackie it was a mixture of pride and the fear of being sent back to London that drove him on.
He still used to entertain the others with stories of his days as a master criminal and boast that he hadn't lost any  of his skills, but it was difficult to imagine him back at that game.
He'd got thinner and the blue eyes were getting watery, but nothing would persuade him to rest.
Everyone coughed most of the time, they couldn't tell the difference between coughing and breathing after a while, but his was a real lung curdler when it got going.
He just shrugged it off.
‘I know what yer after,’ he'd say, ‘you want my job.
Want me to end up making the tea.
Not this boy.
Number one or nothing.’
But on this particular morning it was taking him longer than usual to kindle the cheeky spark that had always singled him out from the rest.
‘Me bones always ache,’ he grumbled to himself.
‘Nothing new about that.
Always have done.
It's like having a tune in yer head all the time that you can't shake out.
You get used to it —‘
‘Well shut up, then,’ came an irritable chorus.
Nobody felt much like an athlete at four in the morning.
Jackie ignored them.
‘You get used to it.
Like a tune.
Some days it's louder than others, that's all.’
HEY, LOOK!’
One of the littlest lads had heaved himself up onto the window-sill and was gazing out in rapture.
‘SNOW!’
Maybe he was still small enough to find it a novelty.
Everybody else groaned, Jackie louder than the rest.
Sam shot him a look.
He was never quite sure how much Tiptoe was putting it on.
One thing was for sure: they weren't dressed for snow.
Their clothes were in a worse state than when they had left the workhouse.
They wrapped old sacks round themselves to keep out the cold.
One or two had boots — Mother Bombie had appeared one day with a collection of assorted footwear donated by some charitable organization, but none of them matched.
The little lad was jumping about with excitement.
‘Does that mean it's nearly Christmas?’
They worked it out.
Not long now!
‘Goose and Christmas pudding!’ slavered Todger.
‘Beer!’ roared Ferryman.
‘How much union fund we got now, Jackie?’ asked Sam.
‘You what?’
In addition to his other troubles, Jackie had gone a bit hard of hearing.
The build-up of cotton fluff, Sam supposed.
‘Can we see it?’ demanded the littlest lad.
‘Let's count it!’ shouted another.
‘We're gonna be late,’ said Jackie, hobbling towards the door.
The iron boot squeaked.
‘Come on, Tiptoe!’
Grimes took his arm.
‘We been saving for months!
Tell us how much we got!’
Everyone crowded round, eager and excited.
Thinking about Christmas was almost as much fun as celebrating it.
‘Where is it?’
‘Let's have a look, then!’
‘Never you mind,’ said Jackie.
‘It's more than you think.
Be a big surprise.
I'll do the Christmas shopping, always have done.
I'll do you proud, just you wait and see.’
They were practically cheering as they raced across the scabby grass down to the mill.
Good old Jackie!
Good old Christmas!
Good old everything!
Sam offered Tiptoe his arm, but as usual he refused.
He loathed the boot and complained about it constantly, but he wouldn't admit defeat.
At breakfast-time they were still talking about the feast to come.
Sam found himself wondering if perhaps it might be best to save some of the money instead of going mad.
You never knew when they might need it.
They might all be out of a job if the Factory Commission came and shut the place down.
But there hadn't been a whisper about it.
Looked like they were just going to have to get along with things the way they were until their time was up.
Maybe at the end of the final year they could keep the money to go away with instead of spending it.
Sam was put on scutching that morning with Todger.
It was a long time since they'd done anything together.
Just grown apart, Sam supposed.
Todger had never been the  same since they got to Hambury.
He was growing tall and his fair hair was going yellowy.
And there was nobody to win over with his now not so pretty face.
He'd got sort of hard in consequence.
Sam was glad that he'd never invited him to share Evelyn's secrets.
It was as well only the three of them knew about her disappointment.
They had to pass Biff's office to get to their pitch.
Sam's porridge bowl was fuller than usual — Ma Bombie's hand being even more unsteady than normal — so he was walking very slowly so as not to spill any.
The office door was open.
Biff was in there, talking to someone.
‘You're going to have to get it from somewhere, Tiptoe,’ they heard him say.
‘The mill's on the way out.
I need every penny I can get.
Gonna have to set up somewhere else.’
Todger and Sam stopped dead.
‘Give us a bit of time,’ whined Jackie's voice.
‘You been cheating, that's what it is.’
‘Cheating!
Don't give me that!
You've lost your touch and that's a fact.’
‘So I've had a run of bad luck.
Happens to the best of us.
Give us a bit of credit tonight.
I'll get it all back for you with interest.’
Just then Mother Bombie came trundling up, so they legged it into the scutching room.
‘What was he talking about?’ asked Todger.
‘What did he mean about the mill?’
Sam could think of a number of answers.
Maybe the Factory Commission were coming.
Or maybe something worse.
‘We'll have to ask Jackie.
Sounds bad.’
But they didn't see Jackie all day and he didn't come back with them again that night.
They decided to have a meeting.
It turned out that some of the others had heard things too.
About how Mr Harker was going out of business, which was why they'd all been pushed harder than ever the last few weeks.
‘Does that mean we're all going to be out of a job?’ was the question everybody wanted an answer to.
‘You know what happened to the apprentices at Daffley  Mill?’ asked Grimes.
‘The bosses went bankrupt, so they sold the whole place, auctioned it off, and threw in the apprentices as well.
They ended up down the mines.’
Everyone shuddered.
Hambury was no paradise, but being buried alive wasn't much of an improvement.
‘I ain't going to go underground,’ said the littlest lad stoutly.
His name was  Bartholemew Burton, but everyone thought of him as the little 'un.
‘Nor me!’ said another.
‘Nor me!’
‘Well, what we going to do, then?’
‘We got to run away,’ said Todger.
They looked at each other.
‘Look what happened to Joy Prentice.’
‘But she was on her own,’ said Todger.
‘If we all went, they couldn't catch all of us.’
‘When we gonna go?’
‘First thing tomorrow.
Before the weather gets too bad.’
‘How?’
‘Knock over Biff and tie him up!’
Didn't seem a bad idea.
Sam had a mental vision of a handful of ants thrown at a charging bull, but upbraided himself for cowardice.
‘What about the girls?’ he wanted to know.
‘We'll knock over Ma Bombie as well!’
The idea of that drunken old package wriggling on her back in the snow unable to get up, had them all in fits.
But Sam was still for caution.
‘Don't you think we ought to wait till we're sure?’
After all, it might be good news.
The Factory Commission might find them all better jobs, or change the way the mill was run.
Or something.
‘I mean, we only heard a bit.’
‘I heard enough.’
Todger's mind was made up if nobody else's was.
‘We wait any longer, we'll be snowed in.’
‘But what about Christmas?’ wailed the little 'un.
‘Never mind Christmas.
We can have that when we get to where we're going.
We could have it in London!’
‘If we ever get there,’ put in Grimes gloomily.
‘With no money.’
‘But we've got money!’
Todger's eyes were very bright.
‘The Union funds!’
There was a shout of approbation.
‘But they was for goose and plum pudding,’ protested the nipper, near to tears.
He was taken aside, comforted and patted, and his objections gently but firmly quashed.
Everyone was beginning to realize the seriousness of the position.
‘Maybe we ought to go now.
Get a good few hours before light.
If we all bashed it together we could do in that door.’
‘Or the little 'un could get out of the hole under the stairs,’ said Sam before he realized.
‘What hole?’
‘Oh, just a hole,’ he blustered.
‘It's too small for any of us, but he might be able to get out and have a go at the door from the other side.’
He was getting in deep now, though he was experiencing grave and gnawing doubts about the whole affair.
‘But we still can't help the girls.
We'll have to wait until Jackie comes back.’
‘Where is Tiptoe?’ growled another boy.
‘We can't do nothing without the money.’
‘He won't be back till dawn,’ said Grimes.
Gloom descended.
One or two started to prepare for bed.
‘I know where he keeps the money.’
You had to hand it to Ferryman.
He didn't say much, but when he did it knocked you off your feet.
‘Well why the flamin' hell didn't you say so?’
Ferryman looked blank.
‘Ain't we going to wait for him?’
‘What do you think?’
Todger practically had him by the throat.
‘Now, where is it?’
Ferryman led them over to Jackie's cot.
He knelt down and got his fingers into a crack in the floorboards.
They watched, thrilled and a little scared, as he levered it up, and from the darkness within pulled out a tin box.
They looked at it.
The sum of all their labours over the last gruelling months.
Their hope for the future.
Conscience pricked.
‘Oughtn't we to give him just five minutes?’
‘What we going to do? pull him along after us on a cart?
We'll leave him his share.
And something for the girls,’ said Todger grudgingly.
Sam vowed silently to make sure they were fair shares.
‘Now come on, who's going to open it?’
Ferryman grasped the tin in his big hands.
This was his moment of glory.
He turned it over carefully, puzzling it out.
‘There's no lock, you big soft Nellie!’
He grinned, realizing.
Put his broad thumbs up under the lid and pushed.
It was empty, of course.
By the time Jackie crawled in, they had no anger left.
They had nothing left.
He had emptied their pockets and thrown away their hope.
They sat round his candle, waiting for him, with the open box in front of them.
They heard his boot on the stair.
They saw his pinched white face with the ageless, exhausted blue eyes sunk in scoops of shadow like the holes in a skull.
And they said nothing.
The empty box said it all: wide open, like an accusing scream.
He tried to bluster.
‘You should have waited.
You should have trusted me…’
But he couldn't keep it up.
Their silence gripped him like a huge fist squeezing out the truth.
That he had gambled all their money away.
Night after night with Biff he had shuffled and dealt, bid and bluffed, winning at first, winning over and over.
For a time he really thought he was going to strike it rich.
The goose, the stuffing, the Christmas pud, they were all realities.
And going away, he'd thought of that too.
Not that he'd go, but he would have helped anyone who wanted to.
And then his luck changed.
Maybe it was the gin finally getting to him.
But he told himself: you can always change luck back again.
You've just got to keep doubling up until the time is right.
Only he ran out of time.
They heard it all.
And nobody moved.
Nobody spoke.
And when it was obvious that he had nothing more to say, they lay down on their cots, pulled up their blankets and turned their faces to the wall.
Jackie sat on the edge of his bed, a tiny, spiky creature, utterly alone.
Then Todger had an afterthought.
He got out of bed and walked across to Jackie as if he were about to say something.
Jackie looked up at him.
Their eyes met.
Without a sign, without a word, Todger leaned down over him.
And blew out the candle.
Sam, lying rigid under his own blanket, heard the bare feet on the floorboards and the creak of Todger's bed.
And something else.
But he told himself he was mistaken.
Pulled the blanket up over his ears so as to be sure he was mistaken.
After all, nobody had ever seen Jackie Tiptoe cry.