

Aircrew's rocket-propelled exit from plunging plane
By Robert Bedlow
WHEN THE pilot of the stricken US fighter plane pulled the handle to eject from his EF-111 on Thursday, he was acknowledging the inevitable; there was nothing more he could do to save his £10 million ‘Raven’ from crashing, only save the life of his navigator and himself.
‘There is no set procedure,’ said Mr David Learmount, a former RAF pilot and now features editor of Flight International.
‘You use the ejector when there is no alternative; when you reckon there is no way of controlling your aircraft and you know you are going to crash.’
Crashing pilots always tried to ensure that their aircraft was not going to hit any people or buildings, ‘but quite often they leave it too late and die.’
He said that if the reports by eye witnesses were correct — and normally they are unreliable — the jet was out of control.
In most military aircraft, the crew would have been ‘banged out’.
The procedure would have been for the pilot to pull a handle, situated between his legs, which jettisoned the canopy while activating a rocket that fired his seat and that of his navigator clear of the plane.
The EF-111 uses a General Dynamics ejector system that blows the entire cockpit away from the airframe.
The cockpit is then propelled by a large rocket and almost immediately stabilised by a small drogue, or parachute, which then pulls out the main chute, said Mr Brian Miller, of Martin Baker, the leading name in ejection seat invention and manufacture.
‘As it opens it triggers air inflation bags underneath the cockpit capsule to soften the landing and reduces landing shock to the crew.
‘This type is only used by EF-111s.
Originally it was thought to give better protection to the crew ejecting at high speed and provide them with a ‘shirt-sleeve’ environment.
They could be more lightly dressed than those using a conventional ejector seat, who have to wear more safety equipment.
‘It was also thought that the system would provide more flotation in water, and provide better protection if the crew came down in desert or Artic conditions.
‘But it was never taken up because it is slower because of its weight and size.’