

City: Treasury climbs down over funds
By Roland Gribben
THERE was confusion yesterday about the affect on government spending and borrowing after the Treasury climbdown over the way subsidies from the European Commission are treated.
Unofficial EC estimates suggest that provision has had to be made for about £2 billion in the £28 billion borrowing requirement for 1992–93 as a result of the policy shift.
The Treasury says the decision to change the basis of treatment, announced by Peter Lilley, Trade and Industry Secretary, on February 13, came too late to affect the current year's figures but have been included in the 1993–94 estimates.
Pressure from Bruce Millan, EC regional commissioner, has resulted in the Treasury reluctantly accepting that the funds provided by Brussels are additional to government spending rather than part of it and should be steered to specific projects rather than forming part of the spending pool.
Treasury insistence that EC contributions are ‘taxpayers' money’ and should be counted as part of the public spending programme caused friction with the EC and Mr Millan froze money due to coal and steel areas.
City: Nervous sterling mauled by the mark
By Anne Segall
THE pound had another tense day, struggling to hold its own on the exchanges as investors waited nervously for weekend opinion polls before deciding their next move.
Dealers reported some overnight selling from Japan and the Middle East but the currency recovered its poise during the day before plunging in late trading as a result of heavy switching into German marks.
It closed 1½ pfennigs lower at Dm2.8308 but managed to gain a cent to $1.7420 as the dollar succumbed even faster to mark pressure.
Analysts said the surge in demand for marks followed the poor inflation figures the day before, which investors believe will prevent a cut in German interest rates for some time.
As the pound slumped it fell below its ‘effective’ floor set by its relationship with the peseta but dealers say that the peseta constraint is no longer as important as it was once thought to be.
Paul Chertkow, currency strategist at Citibank in London, said: ‘If investors decide to sell the pound then they won't let the peseta get in the way; they will sell pesetas as well.’
The cost of wholesale funds eased slightly, with the key three-month interbank rate easing from 11¼ p.c. to 11⅛ p.c.
The Bank of England acted to keep the cost of overnight money low so as to take pressure off the longer dates, but analysts warned that the authorities would find it difficult to keep this tactic going.
City: Japan record trade surplus
By Roland Gribben
JAPAN produced conflicting economic signals yesterday, announcing a record current account trade surplus at the same time as more companies imposed reductions in bonuses because of falling profits.
Fujitsu and Toshiba have followed Hitachi and IBM Japan in cutting top executives' pay following a weakening in consumer electronics and computer markets and a slide in profits.
The top three Fujitsu executives are taking a 35 p.c. reduction, while 29 others will see a 15 p.c. to 20 p.c. cut.
Toshiba has not specified the size of the reduction in the half-yearly bonus, which traditionally accounts for 50 p.c. of total pay.
The $10.8 billion (£6.2 billion) trade surplus in February topped the $10.4 billion achieved in December.
The surplus has now risen on a year-on-year basis for 11 months in a row.
A strong export performance, coupled with weak domestic demand for expensive foreign goods, contributed to the improvement at a time when the growing Japanese surplus is adding to trade tensions.
Exports of motor vehicles and ships accounted for a large proportion of the improvement.
Shipments of cars to Middle East markets rose by 60 p.c. when compared with the Gulf war-affected levels of a year ago.
City: Young loses SE listing
By Clare Pearson
YOUNG Group, the Durham-based opencast coal miner, is losing its stock market quotation because it is pushing through changes to its share capital which benefit majority holders and are in breach of the Stock Exchange's investor protection rules.
The changes are associated with a £2.4m overdraft Young has agreed with its banks to meet a financial crisis which has put it in breach of the covenants on £5.4m worth of convertible preference shares issued four months ago.
Institutional shareholders and directors are providing a £1.2m cash deposit as security for half the facility.
In return, they are being granted a secondary charge over the group's assets.
Such a measure would normally require independent shareholder approval but the exchange has waived this.
It has baulked, however, at changes to Young's recent convertible preference share issue and an issue of warrants which benefit the institutions and directors.
It has declined to lift restrictions that would prevent the beneficiaries from voting on the proposals, which are supported in respect of 79 p.c. of the ordinary shares and 92 p.c. of the convertibles.
The company will therefore lose its quotation after the measures are approved at a shareholders' meeting.
It hopes that its shares will be traded on a matched bargain basis thereafter.
The shares, suspended at 35p on Wednesday, tumbled to 4p yesterday.
Young is in urgent need of funds after an unexpected shortfall in reserves at its opencast sites.
In a circular yesterday, the company said it had not been possible to arrange a refinancing on conventional terms.
Pre-tax profits for 1991 were £283,000, against a restated £19,000 for 1990.
There is no final dividend and Young said it did not expect to make a payment for 1992.
City: East notes British quality
By Michael Becket
MAKING money has suddenly become much more profitable as recently-created countries wanting to establish their newly-won independence start issuing their own currency.
Printing banknotes is one area where Britain leads the world, with De La Rue having some 60 p.c. of the global banknote business and around half the market in printing passports.
Yesterday it added another country to its list with an order to produce nearly 5m passports for Lithuania.
David Rigg, commercial development director, reminisced nostalgically that there has not been such a boom in his business since the rush to decolonise Africa some 30 years ago.
‘It is unusual in a mature market to get the creation of new opportunities like this,’ he said.
It can cost between 50p and £1.50 to have passports produced, depending on the print run and the complexity.
The Lithuanian order is an unusually large one so it is likely to be at the bottom end of that range.
Many of the eastern European countries have their own banknote printers which are hard at work keeping up with inflation, but several, such as former Soviet states, the Baltics, Albania and Bulgaria might turn to the West for their own cash as well as hard currency.
Not only De La Rue but also maker of specialist papers Portals should benefit as it has more than half the world market for the secure cotton-based papers used for money and money orders which it is already selling to about 120 countries.
De La Rue reminded the Lithuanians of its track-record by presenting President Landsbergis with prints of the original notes the British company printed for his country in the 1920s and 1930s.
City: L&M dips into reserves for higher payout
LONDON & Manchester Group, hard hit by the slump in the commercial and residential property markets, is digging £12¼m into reserves to lift its dividend total from 13.32p to 13.57p, with a 9.14p final on June 3.
The core insurance business lifted its earnings 18 p.c. to £22½m in 1991, but a slump in mortgage profits, a £2½m loss from the estate agency business, and a £1.34m exceptional loss on commercial mortgages, saw pre-tax profits slip 4 p.c. to £21.2m.
But £11.4m of provisions on commercial mortgages and property development loans, taken below the line, reduced attributable profits to £3.95m against £16.6m last time.
City: Job totals fail to please US
AMERICAN investment attention yesterday turned to prospects for first quarter earnings figures after job figures failed to provide firmer indications about economic recovery.
The unemployment rate last month was unchanged from the February level of 7.3 p.c.
The Labour Department said the figures were in line with economists' forecasts, but many were looking for a modest reduction.
The non-farm workforce rose by only 19,000 compared with an increase of between 50,000 and 75,000 predicted by economists.
Job losses in retailing and a modest fall in manufacturing were offset by an increase in the number of Government employees and gains in the service and construction sectors.
City: Heron banks wait in line for £1bn debt repayment
By Richard Northedge
HERON International chairman Gerald Ronson yesterday told the garages and property group's bankers that its value has collapsed from £585m to £135m.
Banks and bondholders are being asked to wait for repayment of nearly £1 billion of its £1.2 billion debt.
Mr Ronson, 52, told a meeting of banks in the City that the privately-owned Heron has been hit by falling property values and the recession.
Heron — which builds houses, owns petrol stations and imports Suzuki vehicles as well as selling other cars including Rolls-Royce — made a small trading loss in the year to March, compared with a £60m profit in 1990–91.
But interest charges turned that into a £100m pre-tax loss — the first in the company's 26-year history.
That, plus £250m of property writedowns — half in Britain and half in the United States — and another £100m of provisions account for the £450m fall in Heron's value.
These provisions cover tax on properties which will be sold to repay debt, selling costs, fees connected with the financial restructuring and writing down Heron's 16 p.c. stake in Nazmu Virani's property company, Control Securities.
Heron's properties are worth £1.3 billion and Mr Ronson warned that it will take until 1999 to sell a sufficient stake to repay debt.
In a 90-minute presentation he and other directors also proposed classifying the company's borrowings as A or B category.
Category A debt's interest will be paid on time with the principal repaid as cash comes in; interest on B debt will be rolled up and the capital not repaid until all A debt is redeemed.
Holders of £435m of bonds will be offered A and B bonds with a similar repayment schedule.
About 60 p.c. will be A bonds, so investors expecting redemption in 1994 may have to wait several extra years for full repayment: holders are likely to seek higher interest rates as compensation.
Heron has breached its banking covenants and bankers too will seek an incentive to extend loans.
But most seemed intitially content to accept the restructuring which could take six months to negotiate.
Lead bankers from Barclays, NatWest and Bank of America sat with the Heron board on stage during yesterday's presentation and Barclays then chaired a private meeting of the other 80 banks.
Heron's board declined to answer questions.
Lenders to Heron Corporation, which operates the British subsidiaries, are barely affected; this subsidiary has £325m of debt and net assets of £425m.
It is the near £1 billion debt of its parent, Heron International, which needs rescheduling.
The group's gearing is about 1,000 p.c.
Heron International's net assets were £640m two years ago before an initial write-down of British properties.
City: Portugal seeks to join ERM
PORTUGAL is to join the European Monetary System's exchange rate mechanism.
Prime Minister Anibal Cavaco Silva said yesterday the escudo would join in a 6 p.c. band at a central rate of 180 to the ecu.
He said the decision was made because the Portuguese economy had achieved the necessary stability.
The application to join will be discussed today by the European Commission's monetary committee of senior treasury officials.
Greece will be the only EC member still outside the mechanism.
A report on Portugal published in February by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development said early entry into the mechanism ‘could help ease the costs of lowering its inflation rate’, which at 11.4 p.c. last year was one of the highest in Europe.
Deutsche Bank Research says it does not expect northern EC members to revalue or devalue their currencies before the introduction of the single European currency.
City: Isosceles appoints finance director
ISOSCELES, the debt-burdened Gateway supermarket group, has appointed Bob Nellist as finance director, a post which has been vacant since the departure of Elizabeth Hignell last September.
Mr Nellist was finance director of Bioplan Holdings until February when Hospital Corporation of America reversed into the small, listed healthcare company.
He was finance director of Mecca Leisure before its acquisition by Rank Organisation in June 1990, and before that occupied the same post for five years at Thorn EMI.
Mr Nellist joins Isosceles as it plans the flotation of Wellworth, its Northern Irish supermarket chain, and the sale of Herman's, its American sporting goods chain, to reduce its heavy borrowings.
Alistair Mitchell-Innes, chief executive, said his appointment was the culmination of a long search for a person ‘with good City contacts.’
Isosceles is aiming for an eventual flotation itself.
City: Grampian near £17m disposal
By Karen Cooper
GRAMPIAN Holdings, the animal medicines-to-sports goods group, is close to selling its Mitre soccer balls and boots subsidiary to Genesco of the United States for £17m.
The sale, to be announced within days, will be the Scottish group's second deal in the past few weeks.
Last month it lifted the pharmaceuticals component of its turnover above 60 p.c. with the purchase of Peter Hand from Hillsdown for £7½m.
Both deals will cut gearing from 45 p.c. to a pro forma 25 p.c.
Genesco already markets sports goods under the Mitre brand in the United States, which is the venue for the World Cup in 1994, as part of a licensing deal that expires in 2000.
Mitre, based in Huddersfield, had sales of £15m last year and made a 1990 profit of £1.7m.
Grampian plans to retain Patrick, a similar sports goods brand.
Shares in Grampian, which recently failed in its bid for chemist group Macarthy, fell 9 to 163p yesterday after it announced a 15 p.c. drop in pre-tax profit to £11.2m in a tough year for its retail and sports goods activities.
A lower tax rate meant earnings were not hit as hard, falling 9 p.c. to 12.77p.
Dividends are up 10 p.c. to 5½p after a final of 3.8p payable on May 30.
The £1½m cost of the Macarthy attempt was taken as an extraordinary item.
Chief executive Bill Hughes said the first quarter had been difficult but order books for the second were showing ‘promising signs of improvement’.
City: Mirror Group pays £12m to advisers
By Sonia Purnell
MIRROR Group Newspapers has paid more than £12m in fees to its advisers since the death of Robert Maxwell and the discovery that the company and its pension fund were the victims of a massive fraud last November.
Mirror appointed a second merchant bank adviser, Schroder Wagg, at the end of last year to work alongside its existing adviser, Samuel Montagu, which handled its flotation last May.
Both banks have their own lawyers, while Mirror Group also retains a firm.
Ernst & Young is acting as investigating accoutants for the merchant bank and, for the time being at least, Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte, continues as the company's accountants.
Mirror directors are understood to be deeply concerned about the mounting costs as the company continues to work on its 1991 results figures and a report on on its financial health, now expected later this month.
The £12m, which continues to rise, compares with the £17½m paid by the company in expenses when it raised £250m in its stock market flotation last year.
Mirror is also hit by the large number of transactions with the Maxwell private companies.
One source close to the company said: ‘We always have to keep to our side of the deal, but, as the private companies are in administration, they don't.
That's costing us a lot of money.’
The transactions, some of which have taken a long time to unravel, include guarantees on property leases and interest rate swaps.
Sheldon Aboff, formerly chief executive of the New York Daily News, has been ordered by the High Court to pay £7m to the administrators of three private Maxwell companies.
The court heard from the administrators that Mr Aboff received the money from the companies used as part of the Maxwell Communication Corporation and Mirror Group share support operations as directed by either Robert or Kevin Maxwell.
City: CORRECTION
THE Stock Exchange's SEAQ dealing system will open half an hour earlier only on April 10, the day after the General Election.
It is not a permanent change as suggested in yesterday's paper.
City: Drayton spoils Invesco year
By Karen Cooper
THE troubles of Drayton Consolidated Trust have marred an otherwise good year for its manager and major shareholder, Invesco MIM, the fund management group headed by Lord Stevens.
Invesco saw pre-tax profit drop 23 p.c. to £14.5m in the year to December, after an exceptional item of £16.6m.
This includes a £13m provision ‘against the potential losses that might arise’ from its one-fifth holding in Drayton, whose shares have slumped from 409p a year ago to 176p.
Stockbrokers County NatWest and Cazenove were appointed in February to advise on the future of Drayton.
Institutional shareholders are calling for a change in the trust's management and an eventual winding up.
The exceptionals are thought to include a provision covering the potential loss of the management contract.
Another £3.6m was provided against loans to the trustees of the Employee Share Option Trust.
Directors said yesterday they had decided to change investment accounting policy to charge the provisions as exceptional rather than extraordinary.
Profit before exceptionals rose 39 p.c. to £31m helped by increased profits from North America, where Invesco Funds Group generated record sales and Primco Capital Management made a first-time contribution of $3.2m.
Profits from the European and Pacific operations rose 27 p.c.
However, a £1.1m loss was incurred on the group's one-third stake in CM Group Holdings, the parent of City Merchants Bank.
Dividends are held at 6p after a final of 3.7p, payable on June 16.
Earnings fell from 5.4p a share to 2.3p.
Funds under management rose from £25 billion to £31 billion over the year.
Invesco shares rose 5 to 72p.
City: Strategists look to overseas
CITY share strategists believe that if Labour forms the next government, or leads a coalition government in a hung Parliament, investment sentiment will swing away from companies linked to the British economy in favour of those making the bulk of their profits overseas.
Optimism over the re-election prospects of the Conservative party, widespread among stockbrokers and fund managers only a couple of weeks ago, has ebbed away and there is now more active consideration of other possible outcomes.
The message from the strategists is that if the Tories win, the stocks to benefit will be the cyclical ones, whose fortunes would be boosted by a swift end to recession.
If Labour wins or there is a hung Parliament, then the cyclicals are best sold in favour of overseas earners like BOC, Shell, Grand Metropolitan and BAT Industries.
Privatised utilities could suffer too although in many cases share prices are already reflecting this.
The risk of devaluation, a prime reason for preferring overseas earners, is highest if there is a Labour-led government in a hung Parliament according to Kleinwort Benson market watcher Trevor Laugharne.
David Bint of Credit Lyonnais Laing is sanguine about the long-term differences in the macroeconomic outlook under governments of different political hues, pointing to the constraints of the exchange rate mechanism and the size of the deficit in the Government's finances.
But he believes that in the short term, if Labour wins or a hung Parliament causes extended political uncertainty, then recession could drag on.
In either case United Kingdom-linked companies are best avoided, as prolonged recession would result in more company failures and dividend cuts.
The only recovery that the strategists are placing any real faith in at the moment is that of the United States economy.
With this in mind Kleinwort Benson is recommending Siebe, Tomkins, TI, Morgan Crucible and Johnson Matthey, together with Cookson and FKI-American-biased recovery stocks with sound balance sheets.
City: Petrocon failure in Wilkes bid
JAMES Wilkes last night finally escaped the £28m hostile takeover offer from fellow engineer Petrocon when the Takeover Panel ruled that the company had not breached the code in its conduct during the bid.
The panel has decided that Arthur Watt, Wilkes' chairman, was not providing material new information when he told three institutional shareholders that the company secretary and finance director were likely to leave the company if it retained its independence.
Petrocon's advisers said they were astounded by the Panel's decision.
City: Opec output dips
OIL production by member states of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries dropped 900,000 barrels a day to 23.5m last month but remains well above the cartel's target level of 22.9m for the first half, the International Energy Agency has said.
City: Dalgety chief
JOHN West, 64, chairman of Christian Salvesen, is to succeed Sir Peter Carey as chairman of Dalgety, the food and agribusiness group.
He has been a non-executive director of Dalgety since 1990.
Sir Peter, chairman since 1986, retires in September.
City: Usher £60,000
USHER-WALKER, the printing inks group, reported profits of £60,000 before tax in 1991, down from £400,000.
It was affected by tough market conditions and one-off exceptional charges of £332,000, as it cut its cost base.
Before the exceptionals, operating profits were stable at £643,000.
The final dividend is 4p, payable on June 1, giving a total of 6p, up from 5½p last time.
City: SEB purchase
SOUTHERN Electricity has bought Thermal Transfer (Holdings), an environmental control systems business with sales of more than £15m a year.
City: Hartstone places
HARTSTONE, the international hosiery and leathergoods group, announced a $50m placing of medium-term debt by Chemical Bank with three American institutions.
The proceeds will be used to repay most of the group's sterling debt, providing a hedge for its American assets.
City: ATP suspended
SHARES in advertising and market research group ATP Communications were suspended at 1½p yesterday ‘pending clarification of the company's financial position’.
The company is in talks with its banks about a capital reconstruction.
City: Ford still ahead
CAR sales last month failed to respond to the Budget tax cuts but Ford has retained its market leadership while falling short of its objective of a 30 p.c. share.
Industry estimates are that sales were down by 12 p.c. on the year at about 140,000.
City: Atlas plunges
THE shares of Atlas Converting Equipment, whose profits have quadrupled since 1986, plunged 203 to 580p after the company warned of a slowdown in orders.
The warning accompanied full-year figures showing a 21 p.c. rise in pre-tax profits last year to £6.67m, on sales 27 p.c. ahead at £48½m.
Earnings are up 22 p.c. to 55p a share, but the dividend increase is being kept to 8 p.c. with a 14p final on June 8, making 21p for the year.
City: Housing ‘key’
LOWER interest rates were the main factor behind a 6 p.c. year-on-year rise in housing starts to 12,000 in February, said Environment Minister Tim Yeo yesterday.
The Government's policy of keeping mortgage costs down is ‘the most help’ it can give the housing market, added the minister.
City Comment: John Smith prepares for leap in the dark
JOHN SMITH is preparing to launch the biggest tax assault ever on middle income families while claiming that he does not know what the effect of his tax hike will be on incentives, confidence or on the economy.
Asked a few pertinent questions on Thursday's Question Time television programme, he was reduced to mumbling about an academic study by a ‘distinguished’ Stirling University economist.
Sadly, this guru died before passing on any decisive conclusion.
The man who hopes to be Chancellor next week cannot surely be preparing a leap in the dark.
If his taxes did deter hard work, the economy would wilt, jobs would be lost and he and his colleagues would run short of the tax revenue for financing their favourite causes.
Nobody would win and his tax victims would suffer in vain.
Mr Smith implicitly recognises the disincentive effect.
He has been careful to confine his biggest tax penalties to those ‘trapped’ salaried employees who cannot substitute leisure for work, while giving the self-employed special dispensation from higher National Insurance contributions.
This suggests he is worried that those who can might rather walk the dog or paint the house than work for miminal benefit.
Yet Mr Smith is not only proposing to raise tax in one go by more than anyone has ever dared to before but also concentrating the effect on a relatively small group.
This will cause economic disruption comparable with a hike in oil prices or interest rates.
The Keynesian economists on whom Mr Smith relies claim that the impact of his redistributive taxes will be negligible, since the money taken from the better off will be redistributed to lower earners.
Since total income is unchanged, these apologists see little reason to worry about the sectoral and regional effects, claiming that consumption will hardly change.
This is the conclusion reached by the National Institute of Economic & Social Research and London Business School.
But Mr Smith should not put too much trust in their findings.
He will probably find his Treasury advisers are far less sanguine: the Treasury believes that the same factors which produced the late 1980s' consumer boom are now working in reverse, with falling confidence and asset values undermining consumption though incomes are relatively buoyant.
Mr Smith should listen.
City Comment: Homeowner will be one who suffers
THERE is no need for Mr Smith to impose taxes on capital or on financial institutions though: his policies look set to do their damage by knocking the most valuable asset owned by most voters — their homes.
House prices, already up to one-fifth below their peak, look more likely to fall far further under a Labour government than to revive.
Good news for first-time buyers?
Not if a month later their house is worth less than they paid.
Nor is it good news for the majority of people who already own-especially those who became first-time buyers over the past four years and whose complete capital has been wiped out: more than a million such people are probably technically bankrupt but need not admit it so long as they keep paying their mortgage.
Such people are effectively under house arrest.
They cannot move until values again exceed the size of their loan.
Those one step up the housing ladder may have had more equity in their home to absorb falling values, but they cannot move either, unless those former first-time buyers can trade up.
True, it is the people at the bottom of the ladder and below it who benefit from Mr Smith's thin tax cuts but £100 a year helps little — and the saving would be more than eliminated by an upward move in mortgage rates.
The majority of owners are above average earners, however, and if higher taxes reduce take-home pay, they will find it harder to take on larger loans.
Prices and values cannot be higher than what people can pay — which means, how much people can borrow — and lenders, belatedly learning prudence, are no longer willing to give the high multiples of gross income they did in the 1980s or the high proportion of price.
All this will combine to keep the lid on prices.
But on top of this mathematical restraint on prices there is the confidence factor.
Who wants to buy a home if the mortgage costs may rise, pay is set to fall and values look like following?
As neither political party can cut unemployment overnight, that fear will continue to discourage potential purchasers and add to the tally of repossessions which is flooding the market with unwanted homes.
Indeed, the financial institutions would be hit by a continued slip in house prices.
Potential purchasers can willingly stay out of the market and owners can stay put, but lenders — and the insurance companies which share the losses — will face yet further provisions as more repossessed homes are sold at a loss.
Mr Smith must learn that hitting the pay packet hits the housing market, and that hits the institutions.
There are enough problems for the occupier of 11 Downing Street without adding a crisis at the banks or building societies.
City Comment: Time to come down hard on ‘softing’
‘BEST-EXECUTION' — an adviser or broker dealing on the best available terms — was one of the pillars on which the Financial Services Act was built six years ago.
Yesterday the Securities & Investments Board, the champion of that Act, came perilously close to removing the pillar by allowing stockbrokers' soft-commissions practices to continue.
It would be easy to dismiss ‘softing’ as an esoteric corner of the stock market which could be ignored, if it did not account for one deal in every six.
Softing involves a broker supplying technical equipment such as information screens or research to an institutional investor who in return guarantees business for the broker.
Some regard it as so close to bribery it should be banned.
Independent soft-commission brokers regard it as an acceptable method of payment so long as they deal at the best price.
But even they complain at brokers who buy shares from market-makers in the same ownership group, irrespective of whether the sister company offers the best price.
Last year the Securities & Investment Board, in the latest of several consultation papers, suggested that brokers should tie officially to market-makers.
Yesterday the board announced that, after protests, there will be no rule change-because unofficial ties work so well without any change.
It is a compromise solution which leaves the best-execution pillar swaying precariously.
City: Mirror Group pays £12m to advisers
By Sonia Purnell
MIRROR Group Newspapers has paid more than £12m in fees to its advisers since the death of Robert Maxwell and the discovery that the company and its pension fund were the victims of a massive fraud last November.
Mirror appointed a second merchant bank adviser, Schroder Wagg, at the end of last year to work alongside its existing adviser, Samuel Montagu, which handled its flotation last May.
Both banks have their own lawyers, while Mirror Group also retains a firm.
Ernst & Young is acting as investigating accountants for the merchant bank and, for the time being at least, Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte, continues as the company's accountants.
Mirror directors are understood to be deeply concerned about the mounting costs as the company continues to work on its 1991 results figures and a report on its financial health, now expected later this month.
The £12m, which continues to rise, compares with the £17½m paid by the company in expenses when it raised £250m in its stock market flotation last year.
Mirror is also hit by the large number of transactions with the Maxwell private companies.
One source close to the company said: ‘We always have to keep to our side of the deal, but, as the private companies are in administration, they don't.
That's costing us a lot of money.’
The transactions, some of which have taken a long time to unravel, include guarantees on property leases and interest rate swaps.
Sheldon Aboff, formerly chief executive of the New York Daily News, has been ordered by the High Court to pay £7m to the administrators of three private Maxwell companies.
The court heard from the administrators that Mr Aboff received the money from the companies used as part of the Maxwell Communication Corporation and Mirror Group share support operations as directed by either Robert or Kevin Maxwell.
City: Scottish TV hopes for issue repeat
By Ra Tickel
SCO ISH Television plans to repeat June's 1-for-1 scrip issue after seeing its shares double in nine months.
The shares have soared in recognition of its prospects after the successful gamble in last year's Channel 3 licence auctions, when it retained its franchise unopposed with a bid of just £2,000.
The company also backed Sunrise Television — which outbid TV-am to secure the breakfast franchise — where it has a 20 p.c. stake.
Scottish, like other independent television companies recently, announced lower full-year profits yesterday, pulled down by reorganisation and licence application costs.
Advertising revenue fell by less than 1 p.c. to £88.2m, and the 23 p.c. fall in pre-tax profits to £8.62m was more than accounted for by a £1.6m rise in its Channel 4 subscription and by £2.36m of exceptional staff cutting costs.
The franchise application bill, including £2m of ‘golden handcuff’ bonus payments to 20 or 30 executive staff, is reflected in a £4m extraordinary charge below the line — part of which was offset against Exchequer levy, which fell 30 p.c. last year.
As a result, attributable profits are trimmed to £1.33m.
But with a lower costs base and 6 p.c. rise in advertising revenue expected this year, the company is dipping into reserves to lift the dividend total 11 p.c. to 16p, with a 13⅛p final on June 8.
With the City looking for £14m profits next year, rising to £20m in 1993, the shares rose 40 to 750p yesterday.
City: Jitters peg values worldwide
By Matthew Doull
THE world's stock exchanges had a turbulent week as politics and economics conspired to give them the jitters.
The Japanese and British markets both fell below psychologically important support levels.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei share index continued its nosedive into depths not seen for five years, despite government efforts to stimulate the slowing economy and the maudlin market.
An emergency government spending package on Tuesday only seemed to encourage the sell-off.
A threequarter point base rate cut the following day failed to brake the decline, which bottomed at lunch yesterday below the 18,000 mark.
A late rally dragged the index up to close at 18,560, still off more than 1,000 on the week.
Using a rather perplexing argument, Japan's deputy finance minister complained with only a slight tinge of panic yesterday that the Nikkei should be at the 24,000 level.
On the home front, the FT-SE 100 index took a 34½ point dive on Wednesday as the market reacted to the real threat of a Labour government after polls giving Labour a seven point lead.
Investors remained sceptical of Tory damage control and subsequent polls showing a closer race.
Despite a few feeble rallies, the index closed yesterday at 2382.7, down 65.2 points over the week.
If the market thought the political news was bad, the business news cannot have helped.
Gerald Ronson joined the list of distressed property magnates.
He is trying to reschedule his £1.2 billion of debts after the net worth of his Heron group tumbled from £585m to just £100m last year.
Another property casualty was Speyhawk, which declared a £217m loss and the restructuring of £303m of debt.
Insurance group Sun Alliance was clouded by a £466m loss on the back of its exposure to mortgage indemnity insurance.
Tom Frost stepped down as chief executive of National Westminster Bank to help out the latest Department of Trade inquiry into the Blue Arrow affair.
He was replaced by Derek Wanless, but he remains deputy chairman.
Nazmudin Virani, head of hotels group Control Securities, was charged with false accounting and conspiring to mislead Price Waterhouse in connection with loans allegedly made to his companies by the defunct Bank of Credit & Commerce International.
The former Asian Businessman of the Year, reputedly Britain's 143rd wealthiest person, was refused bail and languishes in Brixton Prison until a further hearing on Tuesday.
Readers may soon have a chance to buy some of The Daily Telegraph.
The group announced tentative plans to obtain a Stock Exchange listing and float some of its shares.
The Market: Depressed end to account
By Paul Murphy
TOMORROW is the end of the financial year, yesterday was the end of the account and, as has become a recent norm, those blue chip stocks going ex-dividend on Monday were in heavy demand.
This is said to reflect a touch of panic among certain high-yielding income fund managers, pole-axed by the likes of Royal Insurance and Lonrho chopping pay-outs.
They nevertheless determined to maintain their own dividend levels — even at the risk of dealing in volatile pre-election conditions.
Against a depressed market trend, ECC, paying a 13.4p final, rose 3 to 517p, Ladbroke (6.23p final) added 3 to 214p, MB-Caradon (53/4p final) put on 2 to 263p, while Redland (16¾p final) was up a heady 14 at 481p.
Guinness, paying out 7¾p, rose 1 to 540p, despite a chunky line of 5m shares changing hands late in the day at 533p apiece.
Similarly, Lasmo, offering a 6.2p final, rose 4 to 190p after 5m shares went through at 187p.
However, some canny high-yield managers have been targeting blue chip convertibles as a way of locking in income, limiting the short-term threat and yet keeping the door open to future capital appreciation.
Hew Leyshon, convertibles specialist at James Capel, believes a portfolio yielding a good 30 p.c. more than the market average can easily be constructed, keeping away from most speculative issues and sticking to stocks where the underlying business is undoubtedly strong.
He is recommending Rank Organisation 8¼ p.c. (down 1 at 103p), Carlton Communications 6½ p.c. (steady at 84p) and Queens Moat 7½ p.c. (½ weaker at 95½p) in the first instance, together with British Land 6⅝ p.c. (down £1 at £74) for those wanting a spicy play on the property sector.
Elsewhere, aside from a last-minute rush of bed and breakfast deals, genuine trading was quiet and sentiment was dank.
The futures led the cash market below the 2400 level first thing and the FT-SE 100 index proceeded to drift lower throughout the day.
Poll rumours continued to play their part, with a handful of ‘local’ pit traders taking advantage of the lunch break to turn a 13-point deficit on the Footsie into a 21-point fall by 1pm.
The final reading yesterday was 2382.7, down 22.7, against a low point of 2379.5.
The futures contract for June expiry stayed close to its ‘fair value’ premium of 29 points for most of the day.
Fair value, which drops to 22 on Monday, is the notional premium for buying all Footsie stocks now but not paying for three months, taking into account both dividend payments and interest costs.
Concern over exposure to the troubled Heron International group hit the banking sector, with Barclays, down 12 at 287p, the main casualty.
Tan Sri Khoo Teck Puat, the Brunei banker who helped Standard Chartered fend off Lloyds Bank's £1.3 billion bid six years ago, has increased his stake by 1 p.c. to 14 p.c.
Standard's market price held steady at 430p.
Among the oils, British Petroleum was under pressure again after Thursday's huge below-the-market transaction between Salomon Brothers and County NatWest.
The stock fell another 6 to 240p before Hoare Govett was reported to have issued a recommendation on the basis of a 9 p.c. yeild, helping the price partially recover to 242½p.
Fears of higher interest rates if Labour takes power produced across-the-board mark-downs of brewing stocks.
Greene King was under particular pressure, reversing 16 to 484p, while Wolverhampton & Dudley fell 9 to 565p and Whitbread ‘A’ lost 8 to 378p.
British Aerospace enjoyed an early 10-point run up to 310p on news that it hopes to raise £400m from plant and site disposals.
The bears eventually had their way, pulling the shares back in line with the market to 299p.
Having fallen sharply on Thursday, Lightship, the financial services group formerly known as Harvey & Thompson, recovered 7 to 73p after a statement from the company saying it knew of ‘no justification’ for the share price fall.
Window lock specialist Arthur Shaw was a sick market.
The share price was chopped from 50p to just 21p following a short, sharp trading statement.
Full year figures will show a loss, even before exceptional reorganisation and redundancy costs, and a final dividend will not be paid ‘in the long term interests of shareholders.’
British Data Management, which started trading on Thursday at 112p against its recent placing price of 125p, recovered 5 to 117p.
The Market:
CO ON sock and frilly knicker specialist Sherwood Group (steady at 760p and now capitalised at £140m) is looking too big for the unlisted securities market and a move up to the main market may well accompany Tuesday's year-end profits.
House broker County NatWest expects a 36 p.c. rise to £14.4m pre-tax for 1991 and sees £19.3m as attainable this year.
Holders should also benefit from a share split.
Family Money-Go-Round: French banks under fire over Eurocheque costs
By DUNCAN HUGHES
NEARLY 2m British tourists visiting France this summer could find that some hotels and restaurants will not accept their Eurocheques because of‘exorbitant’ transaction charges being imposed by French banks.
Cathy Parker, proprietress of the Castang hotel in the Dordogne, says she refuses them because of a Ff38 (£3.80) transaction fee.
‘Some people accept the cost but I feel 38 francs is a bit steep.
There are some cases where I am just holding on to them and not cashing them in.’
John Richards, a Bristol-based financial adviser, who often has to send checks to his clients in France, wrote three cheques for £140 and was shocked to be charged £27 on each cheque.
‘I think it is incredible that with the supposed new spirit of co-operation, a major tourist country like France should have this quite ridiculous position where people wanting to pay for goods and services are being charged exorbitant fees,’ he said.
The Eurocheque guarantee limit in France is Ff1,400.
Another French-based hotelier, Stephen Sharp, proprietor of Les Hirondelles, added: ‘They are not well received in France.
People think they can spend them anywhere and they cannot.’
Ken Deeming, who runs the Hideaway in Burgundy, said: ‘I will not accept Eurocheques because when I pay them into the bank I am losing money because of the transaction charges.’
A spokesman for the Association of Payment Clearing Services, which administers Eurocheques in Britain, said France is the biggest European handler of the cheques.
‘We do get advised of problems where retailers get charged for handling the cheques.
The French banks are not allowed to discriminate against foreign Eurocheques.
If discrimination can be proved then we will ask the particular bank to desist and request that they refund the commission.’
The European Commission is reviewing banking charges within the Community and is attempting to establish a system of cross-border transactions at reduced cost.
Family Money-Go-Round: Covering the world
By CAROL O'LEARY
FEW people realise when the travel bug bites just how little insurance cover their tickets provide.
Airlines offer some cover but the amount payable can be small in comparison with sums offered by the travel insurance specialists.
A Consumers' Association report found that of the 32 tour operator's policies surveyed, all but four fell short of its recommended levels of cover.
It also discovered that they earned up to 40 p.c. commission on every policy sold.
Cheaper cover is available from banks and building societies, although specialist brokers can sometimes offer still better value.
The average cost of a standard policy for a two week holiday in Europe works out at £18, while cover for a three-week holiday in the United States averages about £45.
Those taking several trips abroad a year should consider special rates offered on annual cover.
Standard policies include cover as listed in the table (above) and usually extend to include cancellation and delay, missed departure due to failure of public transport or car breakdown.
Insurance companies raise premiums by up to 100 p.c. for holidays involving dangerous sports.
Family Money-Go-Round: Plastic path to cheaper travelling
By IAN COWIE
AS THE political parties' election campaigns grind into their final week, many peoples' thoughts are turning to Easter holidays and plans to get away from it all-assuming they can still afford it, that is.
Whether you intend a five-star sojourn in the Bahamas or a fortnight under canvas in Calvados you can trim costs by choosing the form of travel money which best suits your needs.
Most holidaymakers still opt for travellers' cheques which are no longer the cheapest means of funding trips abroad.
Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) cards, or other forms of plastic which may already be in your pocket, cost less and serve just as well, provided you do not stray too far from the beaten track.
There are now 71,000 ATM machines worldwide, providing local currency to those with Link or Plus ATM cards issued by a wide range of British banks and building societies.
This method of funding travel has the great advantage of allowing your money to earn interest until the moment you need the cash and it is free of charge.
A spokesman for the Link network, which trades as Plus abroad, said: ‘Cardholders from every other part of the world have to pay a transaction charge to cover the cost of the service but, interestingly enough, United Kingdom-based corporate members have decided not to charge their customers.
A growing number of people are coming to realise this is a cheap and efficient way to access money abroad, just as they already do on the high street at home.’
Some banks' machines, particularly in Spain, may levy a small charge but a warning should always appear on screen before this is deducted.
The system funds itself by operating on the Royal Bank of Canada's over-the-counter exchange rates which are not as fine as those obtained by the institution itself.
And, while there are Link/Plus ATMs from Guam to Canada and from Japan to America, there are none in Italy or France.
Another drawback is that Link cards issued by some British institutions — including the Halifax and Woolwich building societies — cannot be used to access Plus machines.
Credit cards also allow you to convert only just as much as you need into local currencies.
Visa and Access, the latter known as Mastercard abroad, can be used in more than 7m places worldwide.
Again, there is no charge for purchases other than paying an exchange rate 2 p.c. or 3 p.c. worse than the wholesale money market rate.
Even so, it is likely to be much better than that obtainable in hotels or bureau de change.
A 1.5 p.c. fee is levied for foreign currency withdrawals.
By contrast, travellers' cheques look like yesterday's technology.
First there is the problem of having to convert your sterling cash into the cheques in advance.
This costs up to 2 p.c. of the sum converted with the possibility of a £3 handling charge if you opt for non-sterling or American dollar denominated cheques.
Then you may have to pay commission to convert them into local currency on your travels and could have to pay to reconvert those left over back into sterling on your return to Britain.
Barclays Bank is one of the cheapest widely-available sources of travellers' cheques, charging 1 p.c. to issue them with a minimum fee of £2.
Money-Go-Round: National Savings lifeline for top-rate taxpayers
THE top rate of tax hit 98 p.c. and inflation exceeded 20 p.c. during the last Labour government, so it is worth considering tax-exempt and inflation-proofed investments in the six days before a possible change of government.
National Savings 36th Issue offers a fixed, tax-exempt return of 8.5 p.c. if held for five years.
At 50 p.c. tax — the top rate proposed by Labour — this would be equivalent to a 17 p.c. return.
The maximum holding is £10,000 which grows to £15,036.57 over five years.
The 5th Issue index-linked certificates, also tax-exempt, pay the accumulated increase in the Retail Prices Index each year plus 4.5 p.c. if held for five years.
For both investments there is a special holding limit of £10,000 for those reinvesting mature fixed, and index-linked certificates in addition to the normal limit, which increases the maximum total individual holding to £20,000.
You do not need to declare certificates in your yearly tax return.
The National Savings Monthly Savings plan offers a tax-free return of 8.5 p.c. yearly over five years.
A monthly £200 grows to £3,479.55 over that period.
One National Savings opportunity which can be achieved via the Post Office is presented by index-linked gilts (listed each day under ‘British Funds’ in The Daily Telegraph).
All gilts are capital gains tax exempt if held for more than one year, while gilts on the Register pay interest gross of income tax.
Haven against inflation — P26
Money-Go-Round: Putting off the day when tax falls due
By IAN COWIE AND MALCOLM CRAIG
SAVERS anxious to avoid the risk of 60 p.c. deductions from their ‘unearned income’ should take a deep breath and consider the possibilities of split capital investment trusts.
Daunting though the terminology may seem, these offer the chance to defer tax for years, in some cases until the millenium.
So, by the time tax is calculated and paid, rates could be considerably lower than they might be next week.
Zero dividend preference shares, one type of capital issued by split investment trusts, pay no income at all but instead accumulate earnings to provide a capital gain on maturity.
Those who prefer to see earnings credited to their account on a regular basis may use personal equity plans to shelter dividends from tax; here, the high-yielding income shares of splits including River & Mercantile, General Consolidated and River Plate may prove best.
For example, income shares in River & Mercantile — largely invested British blue chips — yield 12 p.c., adjusted for last year's rights issue.
Priced at 102p, they are to be redeemed in April, 2000, at 100p — implying a capital loss of rather less than 0.25 p.c. per annum.
Thus the yield is 11.75 p.c. before Pep charges which should not reduce the income received below 10.25 p.c. per annum— while retaining the possibility of higher returns if dividends paid by the underlying stocks rise.
Financial adviser Kean Seager of Whitechurch Securities said: ‘That is better than you can get in the building society — but how much extra risk is being taken?
‘The answer is ‘not much’ because, in the case of River & Mercantile, only 0.6 p.c. per annum growth is needed over the remaining eight years to pay the income shares 100p.
And dividends do tend to grow.
While share prices are little changed on their 1987 peak, dividends have grown by 70 p.c.’
But investors do need to be wary of new-style income shares — such as those issued by Olim Convertible, Kleinwort High Income and Edinburgh Income — which rely more heavily on growth in the underlying assets to prevent substantial capital loss.
This is an area where professional advice may be needed, although the Association of Investment Trust Companies produces an excellent range of free guides.
The same caveat applies to the 21 zero coupons on offer, currently rolling up notional interest of between 9 p.c. and 13 p.c. into projected, but not guaranteed, capital gains.
For tax purposes, zeros are treated like any other share with capital gains after the annual exemption and indexation relief for inflation are taken into account.
Alternatively, zeros can be included in a Pep.
And zero shareholders have preferential rights to trusts' assets when they are wound up.
However, the price of the zeros on redemption is not guaranteed — hence the high yields on offer.
They can be bought direct via a stockbroker, or via a managed fund set up for the purpose.
The broker Financial Services has a Zero Dividend Portfolio Fund with £10m to £12m invested in zeros.
The fee is between 0.5 p.c. and 1 p.c.
Exeter Fund Managers also offers a Zero Preference Unit Trust with a 5 p.c. initial charge, 0.8 p.c. annual.
To illustrate how zeros work in practice, TR Technology Trust's zeros have a market price of 166p and mature on April 30, 1998 at a projected price of 313p — equivalent to a yearly gross redemption yield of just over 10.5 p.c.
Looking further ahead, Exmoor Dual's zeros are 185p and have a projected redemption price of 489p at 31 August 2001 — equivalent to a yearly gross redemption yield of nearly 10.5 p.c.
However, Lewis Aaron, a director of stockbroker Barclays de Zoete Wedd, warned: ‘It is essential that the investor pays attention to what is available to cover the notional interest being rolled up.
Only River Plate & General has its projected price on redemption doubly covered.
‘High inflation could erode the capital gain attractions of zeros,’ added Mr Aaron.
‘For example, in 1979 the equity market rose in nominal terms by 9.7 p.c. but fell by 6.5 p.c. in real terms as a result of inflation.’
Money-Go-Round: Making the most of allowances
UNLIKE those rich enough to set aside assets for a period of years in order to avoid tax, those dependent on income — particularly those subject to Pay As You Earn — have limited scope to fend off the taxman.
Broadly speaking, their best strategies to cope with a Labour win would be to ensure they make the most of allowances created through the independent taxation of husbands and wives, and — where possible — to take income on a self-employed basis rather than as employees.
Married couples, where one of the spouses has little or no income, should transfer income from deposits and investments into the account of the non-working spouse to use up his or her allowance — that is, a slice of tax free income.
For this tax year, the individual personal allowance is £3,295 and the married couples allowance is £1,720.
Next year, starting on Monday, the personal allowance rises to £3,445 but the married one is unchanged.
Employees might also seek to change their status to self-employed and work for the same company, or others, on a consultancy basis.
Alternatively, they could seek to arrange their affairs so that part of their income is received on a self-employed basis, rather than being treated as overtime.
The reason is that Labour said it will retain the present National Insurance contributions ceiling for the self employed at £21,060 whereas employees will suffer an additional 9 p.c. deduction on earnings above that threshold.
But the Inland Revenue has already warned that it will investigate any changes of status to ensure that they are genuine.
In addition, many employers are reluctant to allow employees to change status because they could be liable for unlimited arrears payments of National Insurance if these are subsequently disallowed by the taxman.
Money-Go-Round: BES might look better with Labour
By IAN COWIE
BUSINESS Expansion Schemes share issues may appeal to those who can forego access to part of their savings for five years in return for sheltering these funds from tax.
Indeed, assurances from Labour that the abolition of the BES will not be retrospective could increase attractions.
At present, BES investors can claim relief at their top rate of tax and take gains tax-free after five years.
So BES stock with a nominal value of £1,000 costs a top-rate taxpayer only £600.
This means, for example, that only 20 p.c. growth is required for the investor to double his or her after-tax return.
Labour has said that the top rate of income tax will rise to 50 p.c. on income, after allowances, of £36,375 or more.
Thus the real cost of £1,000 worth of BES shares to anybody earning more than that during the fiscal year, which starts on Monday, would be only £500.
No growth in the BES company at all, after charges, would be necessary for this investment to double in value over five years.
But it is important to distinguish between high-risk BES issues and those that are virtually banking contracts, albeit underwritten by housing associations and educational institutions.
Those in the high-risk category are, broadly, those which invest in trading companies or which lack an assured means of turning this unquoted stock back into cash.
By contrast, contracted-exit BES issues have already signed covenants or agreements with institutions which will enable shareholders to realise their investments.
This type of BES has raised £340m this tax year compared with less than £50m in the riskier offerings.
The determining factor in choosing between contracted-exit funds is the quality of the covenant — how secure is the institution underwriting the realisation value?
BES analyst Anthony Yadgaroff said: ‘The best of these have already been fully-subscribed, but one exception is Close Brothers Bessa Plus where the covenant is very good and you get a minimum return of £1.25 for each £1 invested.
Standing behind this offer, which is equivalent to 14.5 p.c. per annum, is Hill Samuel, and standing behind Hill Samuel is the parent company, TSB.
‘I also quite like Johnson Fry's Election Protection BES and Capital Ventures Election Hedge, but my reservation with these is that contracts remain unsigned.’
Money-Go-Round: Money thrives in island climate
By DUNCAN HUGHES
OFFSHORE havens become increasingly popular when taxes rise on the mainland and fund managers report that many savers have already anticipated the General Election result.
The funds are suited to those investors not having any immediate need for income from their investments and who wish to accumulate returns.
This is because income and gains are retained and rolled-up within the fund, rather then paid out as dividends.
For those resident in Britain, the funds roll-up gross until the units are redeemed.
While they will be taxed at the investor's top rate, when repatriated they will be treated as income, rather than capital, and therefore avoid the risk of having to pay capital gains tax.
They could be of particular interest to those fearing punitive investment and income tax rates under a Labour government.
Between 1977 and 1979 — the final two years of the last Labour government — deposits in Jersey offshore accounts nearly trebled to £6.3 billion.
Guinness Flight, which has about £80m in its International Accumulation Fund, said the amount of investment in its funds has increased by 43 p.c. during the first three months.
During the past year it has more than doubled.
There is a minimum investment of £5,000.
Initial charges are up to 5 p.c. depending which of the 14 underlying funds are chosen.
Annual charges range from 0.5 p.c. to 1 p.c.
According to Philip Saunders, a director of Guinness Flight Global Asset Management, the funds have uses beyond sheltering money from a tougher tax regime.
They can be used for retirement planning for those currently paying the top rate of income tax and who expect their post-retirement income to attract basic tax only.
Alternatively, for the self-employed, encashments can be timed to coincide with periods where lower income is anticipated.
For non-working spouses, sufficient units can be encashed each tax year to bring total income up to just below the annual allowance.
Prudential has relaunched its Jersey-based managed currency fund.
The minimum investment is £1,000 and can be made in either Capital Growth or Income Shares.
The fund is 45 p.c. invested in dollars, 20 p.c. in yen and 35 p.c. sterling.
There is an initial charge of 5 p.c. and annual charge of 0.75 p.c.
The Hambros Currency Fund, which has about £26m under management, has a minimum investment of £1,000 with a portfolio consisting of three managed funds and two single currency funds.
Initial charges are 4 p.c. for the managed funds and there is no front end charge for the single funds.
The annual charge on all funds of 0.75 p.c.
Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man offer investor protection schemes equivalent to those on the mainland but they do not cover deposits.
The Isle of Man has a deposit protection scheme but has yet to pay 5,000 savers who lost £42m when its Savings and Investment Bank collapsed 10 years ago.
Money-Go-Round: Buying up all the bricks and mortar
PAYING off the mortgage ahead of time is certainly the safest investment and could also be best for taxpayers who fear reduced returns on deposits if Labour wins.
Taking funds out of deposit accounts and using them to repay mortgages will be particularly attractive for high earners who no longer receive mortgage interest relief at the upper rate — thanks to Mr Lamont — and who might suffer up to 50 p.c. deductions on savings' earnings.
Take, for example, a homebuyer with a £50,000 mortgage who also has £10,000 in a 90-day Halifax Building Society account.
The deposit currently earns £710 per annum after deduction of 25 p.c. tax, but, if Labour wins, the post-tax return would fall to £473 per annum if subject to the new top rate.
Assuming unchanged interest rates, interest on the £50,000 mortgage comes to £4,656, but if the £10,000 were taken off deposit and used to diminish the mortgage to £40,000 the annual cost falls to £3,564.
So moving £10,000 from a deposit account to diminish a debt will save this person £1,092 per annum at an opportunity cost — the interest that would have been earned on deposit — of £710 for a basic rate taxpayer or £473 for high earners.
Money-Go-Round: Haven against inflation GILTS
Choosing the best way to invest in government stock
By MALCOLM CRAIG
INVESTORS who fear that membership of the European Monetary System will not prevent a resurgence of inflation in coming years should examine the virtues of index-linked gilts.
This form of government stock can be, if held directly, ‘as safe as the Bank of England’— although that certainty disappears if the gilts are not sold before maturity or held in a managed fund.
They guarantee that for every £100 nominal worth of gilts bought by an investor, £100 will be paid on maturity, plus the increase in the Retail Prices Index over the years to that maturity.
There is also a small, yearly rate of interest.
Is this the right time to consider adding such gilts to your portfolio?
David Newton, head of gilts trading at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, said: ‘The longer-dated gilts in this sector have suffered as a result of the government's higher-than-expected borrowing requirement.
‘The most attractive gilts are in the middle maturity section of the spectrum.
The 2½ p.c.
Treasury 2001 and the 2 p.c. 2006 are particularly attractive to the high rate tax payer.
‘At a 40 p.c. marginal rate of tax the real yield over and above inflation is 3¼ p.c.
At a 59 p.c. tax rate the real yield would be 2¾ p.c.
This outperforms the return on conventional gilts of the same maturity so long as inflation is above 1 p.c. to 2 p.c.’
Given that the index-linked gilt is a difficult investment to evaluate, is it worth the private investor buying via a specialist gilt fund or direct?
Derek McLean, fund manager of Abbey Life Investment Services which provides two gilt and fixed interest unit trusts, said: ‘We have included short dated index-linked gilts in our Capital and Reserve Trust.
One drawback is the higher dealing costs for index-linked gilts.
‘The market is less liquid and market-makers quote wider prices.
There is a tax difference as between private investors buying such gilts direct and buying via a fund, such as ours, in that the former strategy is exempt from capital gains tax.
‘However, the tax difference is small and affects relatively few people.
Index-linked gilts are complex investments to assess and the investor does obtain professional management by buying via a specialist fund.
‘For example, when working out the redemption yield, the investor must make assumptions as to the future level of inflation.
In addition, there is continual switching between the conventional gilt market and the index-linked.
‘This can mean that the latter does not move in response to levels of inflation in the way that the private investor thinks it should.
A rise in the inflation rate can be bad for both conventional and index-linked gilts.
There is also the question of supply and demand.
There is little doubt that under any future administration we will get a larger supply of index-linked gilts.’
For the investor who decides to buy direct rather than invest via a gilt unit trust, which may have a front end charge of 6 p.c. plus an annual management fee, the cheapest buying route is via the Post Office.
The National Savings Stock Register can be used to hold more than 80 p.c. of the different types of gilts.
The charge is 10p per £10 on sales of less than £100, rising to £1 on sales — purchases not exceeding £250 and 50p for every subsequent £125 transaction.
Interest paid on gilts bought via the register is gross of tax.
Buying such gilts via a stockbroker normally incurs a higher cost.
The index-linked gilts on the market have maturities of up to 2024 and most of them stand at a substantial premium to their par value.
This is proof of the erosive effects of past inflation rate which climbed to banana republic levels in the 1970s.
Surprisingly there is only one index-linked gilt unit trust; it is run by Guinness Flight.
This is primarily designed for small, self-administered pension funds.
Money-Go-Round: Swotting up on school fees
WHILE the recession has reduced many families' incomes, school fees have continued to rise at about twice the rate of inflation.
Some boarding schools charge up to £10,000 per annum so its little wonder that a rising number of children are being taken away and placed in cheaper day schools or back into state schools.
There are several ways to save for school fees but whichever method you choose it is best to start eight to 10 years before the first child enters school.
The most common fees plans involve lump sum investment or regular savings.
Often a combination of both proves to be the best formula.
A fourth option — only to be used as a desperate measure — is to take a loan usually as a second charge on the family home.
A minimum of £60,000 would be needed to cover fees for two children attending public school from age nine to 18.
Lump sum investments can take advantage of the charitable status of public schools by paying into an educational trust run by the schools themselves or the life offices.
The lump sum is invested to buy an increasing or unit-linked annuity which in turn is used to pay the fees.
But Tony Murrell, managing director of financial advisers Fraser Marr said: ‘In most circumstances we would not recommend the use of educational trusts because these can only be used for school fees — nothing else.
‘If you change your mind or your child gets a scholarship, for example, there is a stiff surrender penalty on top of which a tax penalty could be incurred.’
Most parents do not have a large lump sum to invest and have to rely on regular savings plans sometimes boosted by a modest capital investment.
Mr Murrell's approach aims to combine a series of investments within a school fees portfolio.
For example, National Savings Chidren's Bonus Bonds offer a guaranteed tax-free return of 11.84 p.c. after five years.
The maximum investment per child is £1,000.
For monthly savings, Mr Murrell recommends Friendly Society plans over a 10-year period because the money grows tax free.
But the maximum amount that can be invested is £18 a month.
Mr Murrell said: ‘In the short term we recommend the safety first approach’.
Under this heading parents might go for a mixture of building society deposits or National Savings certificates.
Suitable investment vehicles over the medium to long term include tax exempt special savings accounts, personal equity plans, unit trusts and investment trusts.
Stephen Whiteheadof Whitehead & Partners, another school fees specialist, recommends various savings options depending on the period before the first school fees fall due.
If this is between one and four years he suggested the safest route is a simple building society deposit account.
If there are more than five years to go before the child is due to start school then tax exempt special savings accounts can be a safe option.
For more bullish clients he might suggest a maximum of 25 p.c. of the monthly saving could go into a Pep.
Money-Go-Round: Individuals more optimistic about rising stock market
By IAN COWIE
DESPITE increasing gloom among professional fund managers, individual investors are becoming slightly more confident about the outlook for the stock market over the next year, according to a Gallup survey of 2,000 savers and investors published today.
The Pearl Investor Confidence Index rose by 1.2 p.c. last month — its largest rise since August last year — to stand at its highest level since December.
However, it remains 14 p.c. below its starting point of one year ago.
Martin Fox, general manager of marketing at Pearl Assurance, said: ‘In spite of the small rise in the index in March, there appears to be a general reluctance among consumers to take a view on the performance for the stock market before the General Election.
‘The Budget does not appear to have had a positive effect on the attitudes of the consumer towards the market and investment.’
The survey also highlighted varying views on Europe.
Forty-nine p.c. of correspondents who said they intended to vote Conservative said that Britain should retain its own currency even if the rest of the European Community had a common currency.
By contrast, only 29 p.c. of Labour voters said Britain should stick with sterling.
Liberal Democrats fell in between, with 34 p.c. opting to go it alone.
Age also affected attitudes to Europe.
Among correspondents over 65, 40 p.c. said that English should be the official language of Europe.
Only 27 p.c. of those aged between 16 and 24 thought this should be the case.
Only 13 p.c. of the sample said that devolution for Scotland would be a good thing, but this rose to 28 p.c. of those questioned in Scotland.
Labour voters were twice as likely as Conservative voters to support devolution, with 18 p.c. of Labour supporters in favour, while 13 p.c. of Liberal Democrats agreed.
Money-Go-Round: NatWest in the firing line LIQUIDATIONS
A businessman is threatening to sue over a bank's advice
By DUNCAN HUGHES
A SUSSEX businessman is threatening to sue National Westminster Bank over a reference it provided about a company that collapsed within four weeks of him supplying games worth more than £7,000.
The case comes as some banks, such as the Co-operative, refuse to give references without the accountholders' permission and other banks, such as Lloyds, raise their charges for providing this service.
John Maitland, managing director of Hobbygames, a wholesaler, claims the company to which he sent the goods had stopped trading 24 days before he received a credit reference on January 15, 1991.
The receiving company went into liquidation the following month.
Bank references are sought by companies to ensure that those with whom they are trading are solvent and can pay for goods and services supplied to them.
Mr Maitland, 47, said: ‘The banks are always saying be prudent and careful.
I take their advice and this happens.
It is scandalous.’
Counsel for Mr Maitland, Edward Wooley, of West Sussex-based Holmes Campbell, alleges the bank has been negligent and is demanding compensation.
But a spokesman for NatWest denies liability and claims the reference was given ‘subject to a disclaimer clause’.
He said: ‘It was at a meeting on January 17 — two days after we answered the status inquiry — that we had the first indication that the shop had decided to consult an insolvency expert.’
Following a request for a reference in 1989, NatWest wrote to Mr Maitland stating that the company to which he proposed to send the games was good for £5,000 credit.
When payment for games totalling more than £7,000 was not received he wrote back to the bank and received two additional references on December 18, 1990 and January 15, 1991 confirming that the company was good for up to £10,000.
In addition, the later credit reference states that recipient firm was a ‘properly constituted company, considered good for your figures and purpose.’
But Mr Wooley claims that company incurred a trading loss of £127,000 for the year ending March 31, 1989.
He said: ‘It appears the company must have been virtually insolvent at that date.
Our clients understand it ceased trading on December 24 and it follows that the reference NatWest gave was worthless.’
He claims that Mr Maitland should have been able to rely on the references and should be compensated for the full amount plus lost interest.
But a spokesman for NatWest said: ‘When the reference was prepared it was provided in good faith and was reasonable at the time it was prepared.
The bank gave consideration to all matters relating to the company in question's affairs that were known to it and there was no onus on us to make inquiries outside.
The bank continued its banking facilities until the company's voluntary liquidation in February 1991 and therefore it is reasonable to accept the reply that we gave.’
Mr Maitland said that he does not expect to receive any proceeds from the liquidation.
Julian Wood, a partner with liquidators Sterling Ford, said there are ‘significant deficiencies’ with losses expected to total more than £200,000.
DUNCAN HUGHES 
Money-Go-Round: Moving on to a new mortgage
By DUNCAN HUGHES
THE prospect of a rise in interest rates and mortgage costs if Labour wins on Thursday is prompting some borrowers to lock into fixed rate loans for up to a decade.
But it is important to consider set-up charges and early redemption penalties.
There can also be restrictions on the repayment method used and it may be compulsory to take out house and contents insurance with the lender.
Pippa Raudsepp, residential mortgage manager with independent financial advisers London & Country Mortgages, said: ‘For people looking for a new mortgage the rates are quite good.
‘For those considering remortgages it is something of a balancing act.
A lot of people are inquiring about remortgages but often when they find out what exactly is involved they are happy to stay where they are.
‘The difference between the fixed rate and their standard variable rate is often quite small after allowing for exit penalties from their existing loan and the start up costs of the new.’
Independent mortgage broker John Charcol is offering a 10-year fixed rate for borrowers of 9.95 p.c. — equivalent to an annualised percentage rate (APR) of 12 p.c. — for loans of up to 95 p.c. of the value of the property.
The set up fee is 1 p.c. and there is an early redemption charge equivalent to three months' interest.
It is available for endowment, pension and interest-only mortgages.
The Bank of Ireland is offering a 10.5 p.c. rate (11.2 p.c.
APR) for 90 p.c. of the value of the property up to £200,000 with a one-month interest set up fee and six-month early redemption penalty.
It is available for endowment and pension mortgages only.
NatWest's 10-year offer at 10.7 p.c. (11.5 p.c.
APR) is also only available for endowment and pension mortgages only.
It is available for up to 95 p.c. of the value of the property with a £300 set up fee and six months redemption charge.
Over five years the Portman Building Society has a rate of 10.5 p.c. (11.5 p.c.
APR) for a maximum loan of 90 p.c. with a £350 set up fee and three months early redemption penalty.
Those taking up the offer must also take out building and contents insurance with the society.
National & Provincial is offering a 10.6 p.c. rate (11.6 p.c.
APR) up to a maximum of 85 p.c. of the property.
There is a £195 set up fee and three months early redemption charge.
For loans covering more than 85 p.c. of the property the rate rises to 10.7 p.c.
The Halifax, Britain's biggest mortgage lender, has a 10.8 p.c. rate (11.6 p.c.
APR) up to 95 p.c. of the value of the property.
The establishment fee is £250 with an early redemption charge of up to five months.
The mortgage is not portable during the first two years of the loan.
Over two years, the Woolwich, Britain's fourth biggest lender, has a 10.65 p.c. (12 p.c.
APR) up to a maximum of 90 p.c. of the value of the property with a £150 set up fee and three months early redemption charge.
It is not portable.
Money-Go-Round: Taking the direct route to investing in unit trusts
By PAUL NUKI
INVESTORS who buy direct from unit trust managers may be able to cut costs if proposals to bring the industry's charging structure into line with those in America and Europe are adopted.
The complex bid to offer pricing system British investors are expected to understand should be replaced by a system where unit trusts or ‘mutual funds’ deal at a single price with any charges clearly added, it is argued.
Changes are already underway.
Some management companies, including Murray Johnstone — which recently reduced its initial charge from 5 to 1 p.c. — welcomed the Securities & Investment Board announcement this week that it is to review its rules on unit trusts.
A green paper containing proposals for the liberalisation of charging methods, single pricing and other important reforms should be published by the end of the year, SIB said.
One problem with the current regime is demonstrated by the quandary Murray Johnstone finds itself in.
Like all United Kingdom unit trust providers — with the exception of Lazards Merchant Bank which offers investors free entry into all eight of its unit trusts (minimum investment £5,000)— Murray Johnstone has traditionally relied on commission hungry financial advisers to introduce its business.
Since it can only pay advisers a standard 3 p.c. commission by loading its funds with an equivalent charge, it runs the substantial risk of losing business now that the charge has been cut.
Richard Eliott Lockhart, managing director, said this week that ideally he would have liked to have compromised.
Rather than dropping his company's commission bearing charge completely, he would have preferred to have reduced it and moved it from the front to the back end of his unit trusts — that is, charging investors as they leave the fund rather than as they enter.
He said: ‘Originally we went for an American-style back-end load or exit charge which was tapered to reduce by a percentage point for each year an investment was held.
This was blocked; the current rules do not allow it.
‘The prime advantage of an exit charge would have been to the investor because he would have got into our funds at a nil cost and out again at a very low cost if he held his investment for, say, three years.’
New rules forcing all unit trust companies to disclose clearly their charges would also increase competition on prices and — with the introduction of exit charges — encourage longer term saving rather than speculation.
In America, and to a lesser extent Europe, such choice is already evident.
Of the 222 new American funds launched last year, 99 were of the Lazards variety and carry no initial or exit charges.
Just 87 had charges ranging from 4 to 8 p.c., while the remainder had either very low charges or long term investment — encouraging exit charge arrangements.
On all of these funds, charges are clearly visible to investors and are made in addition to the single price at which units are purchased.
In Britain, with our complex bid to offer system, investors often think that the standard 5 p.c. or 6 p.c. initial charge is all they must pay, when in fact the spread between a unit trust's offer and bid prices can be much greater.
Mary Blair, a director of Fidelity, whose parent company runs ‘no-load’ funds in America, said: ‘Greater flexibility on charges would certainly be welcome and exit charges are something we would be quite interested to look at.
Flexibility would increase competition between providers which will benefit investors.
‘It will open the doors much wider to product innovation.
Under the Financial Services Act such innovation has been sadly stifled.’
Mrs Blair added that any move away from the bid and offer system to single pricing would not be accepted if it threatened to reduce or ‘dilute’ the value of existing unit holders investments.
‘I think that any down-side would more than be offset by the increased simplicity which single pricing would bring the client, allowing him or her to see exactly what they are getting.’
Thriving under the feet of elephants Quentin Cowdry goes to see a giant-slaying small firm which is
making big tracks in the business of building real-life train sets
By QUENTIN COWDRY
COMPLACENCY is almost a sacking offence at Hunslet Transportation Projects, the Birmingham-based firm which in June 1990 startled railway experts by winning a contract to supply 37 electric passenger trains to Regional Railways.
It was a remarkable achievement for a company created just over a year earlier and which had had to pitch against some of the world's largest train-builders, including GEC Alsthom, Siemens, and BREL, the dominant British manufacturer.
Seventeen months later the firm, which employs barely 100 people, carried off another giant-slaying trick by landing a £38 million trains order for the Malaysian railway KTM in the face of competition from BREL and a leading Japanese manufacturer.
In both contract races Hunslet benefited greatly from its low overheads.
But running between the feet of elephants, as the company colourfully describes its market position, is a dangerous business, particularly when the trend in the train-building industry is towards the creation of larger international suppliers.
Management at Hunslet is acutely aware of the risks of operating in a sector acutely vulnerable to too much or too little government interference.
Its order book is now approaching £150 million.
‘Our aim is to provide excellence in the design, project management and assembly of smaller railway rolling stock contracts,’ says Peter Johnson, one of the firm's directors.
Essentially the company is a project management operation.
A core team of technicans and engineers, all with backgrounds in the rail industry, design rolling stock to the most exacting specifications and then oversees construction using components from various countries.
The original intention was to hive off assembly operations to sub-contractors.
But a reorganisation last year within Telfos Holdings, Hunslet's parent company, presented the firm with an unmissable opportunity to acquire a 100,000 sq ft factory at Telfos's headquarters in Leeds.
The Regional Railways order made waves not only because it went to a newcomer in train-building.
The design chosen was the most innovative of those submitted — a train made from an aluminium bodyshell and driven by a novel A.C. motor which saves some of the energy created when trains brake and feeds its back to the overhead power supply.
Hunslet claims its trains, based on three cars with a driver's cab at either end, will use 30 per cent less energy than similar electric models.
The capital cost of Hunslet's traction equipment, supplied by a Netherlands firm, is higher than that of many D.C. varieties, but Regional Railways accepted the argument that it would work out cheaper long-term because of its economic use of energy and low maintenance.
Designed to run on heavily-used urban networks, the trains, designated Class 323, can seat 289 passengers.
They are to be used in West Yorkshire and the Birmingham and Manchester areas to replace ageing diesel and electric rolling stock.
Regional Railways has been assured that they will knock 16 minutes off the journey between Redditch and Lichfield in the West Midlands.
The first results of the order — said to be worth about £81 million — are due on the network this summer.
Peter Johnson says: ‘We're hoping that our pollution-free and energy-efficient units will mark the start of a new generation of sophisticated electric trains which will eventually run all over the Regional Railways network.’
Hunslet is also breaking new ground with its Malaysian contract.
The trains it has designed will be the first electric rolling stock to run on Malaysia's rail system.
Ganz Hunslet, Hungary's largest train-builder (Telfos Holdings was one of the first British firms to take a majority stake in a major East European company following the collapse of Communism), is building the bodyshells and bogies, but final assembly will take place in Malaysia.
Property: Writers on the block Chris Partridge finds some bookish houses for sale
By CHRIS PARTRIDGE
‘LEIGH HUNT lived here’ is about as exclusive a tag for a house as ‘Queen Elizabeth slept here’.
Hunt and his ever-increasing family moved incessantly, leaving a house when the mess became unbearable.
Fern Lodge, Highgate, was one of their shorter stops, when it briefly became a centre of the literary universe.
There were visitors such as Charles Lamb and Charles Dickens, who ridiculed Hunt as hiding his irresponsibility and selfishness under cover of delightful childishness, in the character of Harold Skimpole in Bleak House.
Fern Lodge is a tea-caddy Regency house with a frilly wrought-iron porch, set in half an acre of secluded gardens; but it has no notable interiors.
It is on the market through Savills and Goldschmidt & Howland at £1.5 million.
Hunt's main claim to fame these days is his two-year term in prison for a particularly nasty libel — he called the Prince Regent ‘a fat Adonis of 50’.
ANOTHER Highgate house with a Dickens connection is Church House, said to be Steerforth's house in David Copperfield.
Dickens describes it merely as ‘a genteel old-fashioned house, very quiet and orderly.
From the windows of my room I saw all London lying in the distance like a great vapour, with here and there some lights twinkling through it.’
It is indeed a middling grand house, in red brick with three storeys of segment-headed windows characteristic of the early Georgian, and just the shape to frame the passionate, scarred face of Rosa Dartle, destroying herself with unrequited love for the seducer Steerforth.
Or perhaps not.
The Dickens Fellowship can get it wrong.
I once met an aged man who had waged a single-handed crusade to get the Fellowship to change its official line that Dr Manette's house (A Tale of Two Cities) is based on the old Carlisle House, Soho Square, in favour of No 1 Greek St. He said he felt prouder than if he had won the Nobel prize on the day they admitted they were in error.
Church House is on the market through Hamptons, at £985,000.
HOUSES on the Strand at Topsham, on the Exe estuary, have a weakness for Dutch gables, said to be a remnant of the Glorious Revolution when William of Orange's artillery came ashore there (William and Mary themselves landed at Torbay).
William of Orange House seems to date from shortly after the events of 1688.
It has a charming, white stuccoed wiggly gable, two windows wide, that might have come from Amsterdam with the King's guns.
The house faces out over the river, and is for sale with Knight Frank & Rutley and Fulfords at £340,000.
NICHOLAS HARVEY is one of the unsung heroes of the industrial revolution.
He invented the Cornish engine, a beam engine of Brobdingnagian proportions used mainly for pumping water out of tin mines.
Some of these engines ran for well over a century before being discarded, and particularly fine and huge specimens can be found operating at the Kew steam engine museum.
Harvey's own house in Hayle, Cornwall, is an elegant Regency villa with floral swags in stucco over the windows.
Features clearly cast in Harvey's foundry include the iron balustrade over the porch and the balusters of the main staircase.
The five-bedroom house is on the books of Jackson-Stops & Staff with Stimsons at £250,000.
Property: Don't let yourself in for trouble Choosing the right agent is essential if you want to rent your property.
Francesca Simon describes some of the pitfalls — and how to avoid them
By FRANCESCA SIMON
DEBBIE ADAMS had to let her East End terrace house in London in a hurry when her husband was re-located to Ireland with two months' notice.
She went to a local letting agency, Landlords of 41 Roman Road, Bethnal Green, London E2, who found a tenant that day.
She also employed Landlords to manage the let.
As is common practice, Landlords kept the tenant's deposit of £650 and told Debbie they would take their entire fee of £881 up front, so she expected no rent for the first month.
But July also passed without Debbie receiving any money.
‘I phoned and said, ‘Where's the money?’ and was told there were problems with the book-keeper, who would be coming in to sort it out,’says Debbie.
‘But nothing happened and I never heard from them.’
She repeatedly phoned Landlords, but was either unable to get an answer or told that manager Howard Keizner was unavailable.
Finally, after the third month passed with no rent received, Debbie phoned the tenants, asked them to pay her directly, and sent Landlords a recorded-delivery letter, which was returned, and finally one by ordinary post stating that Landlords were no longer employed as the managing agents.
Because they hadn't done any management, Debbie felt Landlords were entitled only to the 10 per cent tenant-finding fee and therefore owed her £2,400 (3 months' rent plus the deposit).
In December 1991 she sued.
Landlords didn't acknowledge the writ, so in January Debbie's solicitor requested a judgment in default for the full amount plus interest and court fees, a total of £2,453.24.
Just before the court was due to hear the request her solicitor received a cheque for £2,400.
‘They hadn't paid the interest and court fees, but we got back every single penny they owed.
We were lucky,’ says Debbie Adams.
Howard Keizner, of Landlords, said: ‘There were a lot of complications with this particular letting and management.’
But he declined further comment.
Last week he promised to supply us with a written explanation of the way his company had treated Debbie, but it never arrived.
Yusuf and Shabira Gulamali were less fortunate.
They lost over £4,000 dealing with two letting agencies which closed down without paying them the rent and tenants' deposit owed on their Wembley flat.
They hired the first agent, ‘Digs’, of Oxford Street, to manage as well as to let their flat.
The Gulamalis received their rent for the first three months, then nothing for four months, and were told the computer was broken, the accounts were being moved, the cheque was in the post, and so on.
‘After four months they closed down owing us £3,500,’ says Shabira.
‘Together with some other clients we took the owner to court but he escaped to Spain.’
The second time round they dealt with R. and B. Lettings in London NW10, who they instructed just to find a tenant.
The Gulamalis never received the agreement form, the tenants' deposit or the first month's rent.
‘Finally, we went to the office and they gave us a cheque, which bounced.’
The offices of R and B. Lettings are now up for sale.
‘Anyone can set up a letting agency,’ says David Galsworthy, Vice President of the National Association of Estate Agents.
‘They come and go, so it pays to deal with a member of a professional body, such as the NAEA, the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors or the Incorporated Society of Valuers and Auctioneers.
In case of a dispute you can complain to the professional body, and members are bonded, which means that deposits and rent are covered in case of fraud or dishonesty.’
If you are thinking of letting your property, the following points will help to safeguard your interests:
Ask any agency you are considering using if they are a member of one of the above professional associations.
If in doubt, ask to see proof of their membership.
If, in addition to finding a tenant, the agency is managing the let, you should be paid every month, less a tenant-finding fee of between two and four weeks' rent.
The agency will keep the tenant's deposit until the tenant leaves.
If the letting agent is not managing the flat, the tenant's deposit should be given to the owner immediately.
Expect to pay a management fee of up to 15 per cent.
Some agencies deduct it every month, others want it all up front, so shop around.
If the owner is abroad, the agent will also collect tax at the standard rate of 25 per cent, which will be deducted from your monthly rent cheque.
Letting agencies should never charge tenants a finder's fee, although according to Galsworthy, many agencies do.
‘It's not ethical as they are acting for the landlord,’ he says.
The self-regulating NAEA has 10,000 members, of which 2,000 also do letting and management.
But Galsworthy believes there is a clear need for the licensing of all letting agents.
‘We want everyone to be licensed, but the Government didn't think it necessary.
Section 22 of the 1979 Estate Agents Act dealing with bonding, licensing and standards of competency has not been brought in.
But we must have a common code and we must have licensing,’ he said.
Until then, owners and tenants beware.
Property: The Irish blessings worth counting Simon Courtauld looks for gold in the Emerald Isle
By SIMON COURTAULD
THE ADVANTAGES of living in Ireland may become more apparent next week.
The increase in tax rates for higher earners, which would follow a Labour victory on Thursday, would then be comparable to the top tax rate across the Irish Sea, which this month is to be reduced below 50 per cent.
There are several other attractions of buying a house in Ireland: prices are much lower than in Britain, and the annual property tax can be avoided by opening the house to the public, if it is architecturally interesting enough, for no more than four weeks in the year.
In addition— and this is a concession which the British Government refuses to grant — tax relief is available against the costs of repairing and maintaining historic houses.
There are one or two magnificent examples coming on to the market.
Few of Ireland's great Ascendancy houses, perhaps no more than 50, remain in private family occupation: one of the most significant, Stackallan, in County Meath, is a rare early-18th-century, pre-Palladian pile in the Boyne valley between Navan and Slane, which will be offered for sale later this month.
Most neo-Classical houses in Ireland date from 1730 onwards; Stackallan, however, was built around 1714 for Gustavus Hamilton, one of William III's generals, who raised six regiments for the King, including the Inniskillings, and was made Viscount Boyne by George I.
At some time in the 19th century it became a school, then reverted to being a private house, but was in a sadly neglected state when bought by Major and Mrs Anthony Burke in 1953.
Their daughter recalls that the family drove up from Waterford to see Stackallan, looked over the wall and fell in love with it.
The house was re-roofed and the interior gradually restored; lots of roses were planted in the formal gardens; and from 1960 Mrs Burke began, with two cheap mares, to establish a highly successful stud farm.
The 275 acres of pasture are of the best and surround the house on all sides, undulating towards distant hills — and to Dublin airport only half-an-hour away.
Though unarguably a large property — with 11 bedrooms, three staff cottages and a gate lodge — Stackallan retains the atmosphere of a family house.
The three principal reception rooms are well-proportioned and linked by double doors; and the colonnaded entrance hall leads to a magnificent central double staircase.
Above it the Boyne coat of arms, surrounded by a cannon, flags and spears, forms the centre-piece of the ceiling.
Mrs Burke leaves a remarkable house which deserves to be looked after with the same care that she has lavished on it for almost 20 years.
While the agents (Savills with Hamilton Osborne King) have yet to declare an asking price for Stackallan, an offer of around £1.5 million would, I understand, not be rejected out of hand.
Almost as fine — and described by the agents, Sotheby's International Realty, as ‘one of Ireland's great Georgian houses’— is Coollattin, near Shillelagh, south of the Wicklow Mountains, which is on the market at IR £750,000.
The house was built for Earl Fitzwilliam in the first years of the 19th century by John Carr of York, then in his 80s.
The entrance front is simple enough, with two storeys, a wide pediment and a central curved bow on each of the side elevations.
But when the house was enlarged in 1880, it became rather ungainly and would probably benefit now from some judicious pruning.
Handpainted wallpapers, a round room and a galleried landing with cupola are the main features of the Georgian part of the house.
There is a handsome stable block, a huge walled garden and 63 acres with glorious views.
Both Coollattin and Stackallan are in good hunting country, which is hardly unusual in Ireland, but may become more significant after next week.
With a Labour Government in Britain committed to abolishing foxhunting, there should be no lack of demand for these enduring legacies of ‘old England’.