

Tories focus on credibility of Kinnock
By GEORGE JONES, POLITICAL EDITOR
THE Conservatives sought last night to force the election debate back on to Mr Kinnock's fitness to govern and the economy, with a warning that Labour would plunge Britain from recession into a full-blown slump.
As Labour confidently outlined the contents of its first Queen's Speech, including a commitment to introduce by summer a Bill to establish a Scottish Parliament, the three main parties prepared for a big push over the last weekend of the campaign.
Five national opinion polls in tomorrow's newspapers are keenly awaited after a survey in London showed Labour's lead slipping a couple of points.
The two main parties are still neck and neck, pointing to a hung Parliament.
With Labour and the Liberal Democrats still arguing over the terms of a possible deal based on proportional representation, the Tories intensified their attack on Mr Kinnock's suitability for high office and the impact on sterling and interest rates of a Labour victory.
Last night's Conservative election broadcast questioned whether the electorate could ‘trust’ Mr Kinnock after he had changed his mind on nationalisation, Europe, Scottish devolution and unilateral nuclear disarmament.
This theme was taken up by Mr Baker, Home Secretary, in a speech in Chepstow, attacking Labour's rally in Sheffield on Wednesday.
‘For the first time, the real Neil Kinnock was on show.
Grinning and swaggering his way through yelling fellow socialists, he mounted the stage,’ said Mr Baker.
‘Mr Kinnock the statesman?
No way.
The boyo is alive and well.
And on Wednesday the boyo burst forth.’
Mr Heseltine, the Environment Secretary, said the Labour rally had all the characteristics of modern socialism —‘a vast arena built on the rates, losing money’.
He told a rally in Nottingham: ‘Rattled by Labour's failure to attract support for its own policies, now Neil Kinnock offers bait for the Liberals.
I've heard of pots calling kettles black.
I could even imagine a frying pan leaping into the fire.
But Labour are now so desperate that they're prepared to throw in the whole kitchen sink in their frantic bid for power.’
With five days to polling day, Tory strategists hope to focus the debate on which party is best placed to create a sustainable economic recovery.
Mr Major claimed yesterday that this was under way.
‘I suspect we are on the way to recovery and coming out of recession.
I can't statistically prove it yet.
By the end of the year we might be able to look back and prove it, but we can't do it today,’ he said on BBC radio.
At the Conservatives' daily news conference, Mr Mellor, the Treasury Chief Secretary, recalled the sharp fall in share prices on Wednesday after opinion polls indicating Labour had a clear lead.
‘Two days ago we got a dire warning of what would happen under Labour.
Just a whiff of Labour was enough to set everything tumbling on Red Wednesday,’ he said.
Under Labour, the financial community would require a ‘risk premium’ to stay in sterling — possibly an increase in interest rates of more than two per cent.
‘Such a rise in interest rates would destroy the recovery.
Business would suffer.
Families would suffer as mortgage rates leapt back up.’
Mr Major, visiting Kent, said the choice was between a ‘Conservative economic recovery or a Labour slump’.
Attacking Labour's proposals to increase tax and national insurance for the better-off, he said: ‘You cannot tax a nation into revival.
You cannot stimulate success by a tax policy that penalises the successful and drives small traders bankrupt.’
Mr Major also scorned Labour's attempt to woo voters by offering talks with other parties, particularly the Liberal Democrats, on proportional representation.
‘What sort of confidence does the Labour Party have?
One week before an election, they start cuddling up to the Liberals for support.
Cuddling up to the Liberals is like leaning on candy floss.’
Mr Kinnock, undertaking an intensive round of interviews after visiting Southampton, continued his efforts to woo wavering Liberal Democrats with the promise of a consensus government.
But he said on Newsnight it was ‘quite probable’ that the next election would be on the first-past-the-post principle.
Asked on News at Ten about attacks on him by Mr Baker and other Tories, Mr Kinnock accused them of negative campaigning.
The Tories, he said, were ‘ashamed’ of their record on the recession and unemployment.
Mr Paddy Ashdown issued his starkest warning yet that he would be prepared to force a second election if either of the two main parties sought to govern on a minority basis.
He said people ‘should not underestimate our determination — held at every level of the parliamentary party — that what we must have if there's an indecisive result is a stable government’.
He makes clear in an interview with the Times today that in a hung parliament his party would ‘bargain very hard indeed’ to stop Labour removing the £21,060 ceiling on National Insurance payments and introducing a 50p tax rate for top earners.
A Harris poll in London for London Weekend Television put the Tories and Labour on 40 per cent and the Liberal Democrats on 18.
£80m flutter on weekend's sport
BOOKMAKERS are expecting the nation to indulge in a £80 million flutter this weekend on the Grand National, Boat Race, FA Cup semi-finals, Rugby Union semi-finals, a motor racing Grand Prix and the general election.
Docklands Express, which will be ridden by the champion jockey, Peter Scudamore, became the Grand National favourite at 8–1 after Adrian Maguire, 20, broke his shoulder in a fall yesterday and lost his ride on Cool Ground, which drifted to 9–1.
Ladbrokes are offering 55–1 against Party Politics winning today and Labour having an overall majority in the election.
A horse called Hung Parliament was fourth in the 1.40 at Kempton yesterday.
Cambridge, who have won only one Boat Race in 16 years, believe they can end Oxford's run today.
John Wilson, Cambridge coach, who was with the victorious Oxford camp last year, considers he has produced a fitter and more professional crew for the four-and-a-quarter-mile.
Yorkshire County Cricket Club will sign Sachin Tendulkar, 18, the Indian Test batsman, as its first overseas player today.
Politicians keep their silence on the big questions of the future
By ANTHONY KING
ASK ANY thoughtful person for a list of the problems likely to confront Britain in the next few decades and he or she will have no trouble answering.
What is striking is that the responses bear almost no resemblance to the issues being discussed in the election campaign.
There is an almost total disjunction between the big issues facing the country and the issues the politicians are willing to talk about.
It is worth going through the list to see how great the disjunction is.
Somewhere near the top must come the so-called ‘demographic time-bomb’.
On current projections, in 2001 there will be more than nine million people aged 65 or more, well over four million aged 75 or more and over a million aged 85 or more.
Old-age pensioners will constitute 15 per cent of the population — a figure expected to rise steeply in subsequent years.
The consequences of this will be enormous.
Fewer and fewer people of working age will have to support more and more people no longer earning.
The take-home pay of the young will have to be substantially reduced to provide pensions for the increased numbers of elderly.
More special housing will be needed.
The strains on the NHS and other social services, already great, will grow inexorably.
The demographic time-bomb is ticking away.
The consequences of its exploding will be momentous.
Yet the party leaders are silent.
Another demographic change is altering — and will alter even more in future — the basic pattern of working and family life.
The low birthrate of recent years means that, by the end of the decade, much of the world's work will be done by women.
Eleven million women are now in full or part-time employment.
Government statisticians estimate that 96 per cent of the growth in the labour force between now and 2001 will be among women.
The consequences will again be momentous.
Will the birthrate continue to fall?
Who will look after the children?
By 2001, mothers looking after their children at home, already a vanishing species, will be virtually extinct.
Governments, whatever their own inclinations, will have no choice but to fashion childcare policies.
Whole generations of children will otherwise be in danger of emotional and physical neglect.
The issues are already clear.
Yet the politicians again have little to say.
The same is broadly true of Aids.
Official projections of the spread of Aids have mercifully been revised downwards, but around 50,000 are believed to be infected in Britain, and the disease is pandemic in parts of Africa.
Some medical experts believe the chances of an explosive spread of the disease to Europe, including Britain, cannot be discounted.
The list of 1992 non-issues can be extended.
Apart from the Liberal Democrats, the politicians are saying little about Britain's future relationship with the EC.
In private, politicians discuss the wisdom of membership of the Exchange Rate Mechanism and widely predict a devaluation within the ERM whichever party is in power next weekend.
Yet apart from a few scattered Tory voices, there is no public debate.
Politicians are also largely silent on how the next government will be able to carry out spending plans in view of the state of the productive economy.
Environmental issues — resource depletion, global warming, England's drought, the degradation of cities and countryside — likewise produce, for electoral purposes, a shrug of politicians' shoulders.
The problems associated with nuclear power, and the imminent proliferation of nuclear weapons, have yet to produce a party election broadcast.
The Green voice is hardly audible.
Politicians cannot reasonably be blamed for all this.
They are by nature reactive rather than pro-active.
There is nothing in the political system that forces them to consider the future.
They can protest that voters show little interest in the demographic timebomb, or childcare problems.
Yet general elections are supposed to be ‘the grand inquest of the nation’.
On present form, future generations are likely to look back on the 1992 election — with its emphasis on marginal tax rates — as at best rather quaint, or at worst a tragic irrelevance.
Anthony King is Professor of Government at Essex University.
Good Life couple yield to ‘progress’
By David Millward
EDWARD and Joyce Widdup, hailed nationally as principled fighters against the onward march of brick and cement, have lost their battle — four months after saying they were willing to sacrifice £2 million if they could continue to live in their green oasis on the outskirts of Bradford, West Yorks.
They have accepted that development, concrete mixers and neo-Georgian executive houses are irresistible.
They plan to move their goats, cattle, horses and dogs from their eight-acre smallholding in the village of Baildon.
The cottage they bought 38 years ago for £4,500 will be swept away as the last unspoilt corner of the village becomes an estate of 150 homes.
Mr Widdup, 64, made it plain yesterday that he was unwilling to play the role of rural hero.
‘We are not really crusaders, we are just human beings who want a quality of life in the way we have always done,’ he said.
Last December, when £2 million was suggested as the likely price for their property, Mr Widdup and his 62-year-old wife made it clear they would not sell at any price.
Mr Widdup said he would not know what to do with ‘the ludicrous amount of money’.
The Widdups vowed to stand firm even though the owners of the 11 acres surrounding their smallholding wanted to sell.
Now Labour-controlled Bradford council has supported outline building proposals, leaving the Widdups little option but to go.
They expect to sell to a developer and move into a modern bungalow on 13 acres less than a mile away.
Mr Widdup said: ‘Having lost the planning battle it looked likely that we would have had to allow our property to be dug up for services like electricity and sewerage.
It would have made life very uncomfortable.’
A Daily Telegraph editorial last December said the Widdups' defiance of modern moguls enshrined a principle of high value — the right of owners of private property to defy modern moguls.
‘May their goats flourish,’ it concluded.
Mr and Mrs Widdups' reluctant change of heart was brought about by the prospect of trying to farm in the middle of a housing estate.
Mrs Widdup explained: ‘There is always a danger of the animals trespassing or the horses leaning over and eating someone's trees.’
delivered a letter to Mr Donovan calling for his support in their campaign for the ‘enactment of legislation for lesbian and gay equality’.
After reading his statement, Mr Donovan was driven away to rest before his appearance at the London Palladium last night.
Mr Donovan had told the court that he was ‘humiliated and disgusted’ by the article published in the magazine in August, 1991.
The accompanying photograph, a reproduction of a ‘gay outing’ protest posterdesigned to force homosexual celebrities into the open, apparently showed him wearing a tee-shirt bearing the slogan ‘Queer as ****’.
The magazine described Mr Donovan as the boy with bleached hair, although the actor told the court he had never used chemicals on his hair —‘just lemon juice in the sun sometimes’.
He agreed he had once told journalists he was ‘a male tart’ but said this was a reference to his many relationships with women, not men.
He also agreed that he once claimed surfing was better than sex, and had said he could not be gay because he went surfing, which he considered a largely heterosexual sport.
Mr Nick Logan, 45, managing director of the magazine's publishers, Wagadon Ltd, the company in which the Conde Nast group has a stake, and the writer of the article, Mr Ben Summerskill, denied libel.
After the verdict, Mr Logan and the magazine's editor, Ms Sheryl Garratt, 31, appeared close to tears.
The defendants had accepted ‘unreservedly’ that Mr Donovan was not homosexual but maintained that the article was a responsible discussion of ‘outing’, which the magazine opposed.
It had referred to Mr Donovan because he had been targeted as the first victim of the campaign in Britain.
Mr Jonathon Crystal, defence counsel, said there would be an appeal against the amount of damages and was granted a stay of execution.
The defendants in a statement said that they were ‘very unhappy’ with the jury's decision.
Mr Logan and Mr Summerskill faced the prospect of financial ruin but would try to find resources to save the magazine.
‘Jason Donovan has known for a long time that The Face is not rich, and we have repeatedly offered to apologise unreservedly for the article,’ the statement added.
‘The Face never wanted this case to come to court and every effort was made to settle the dispute, without success.’
The statement said the defendants would now complete preparation of the May issue of their magazine in ‘the most difficult circumstances.’
Spending on education ‘up by 20pc under Tories’
By John Clare, Education Editor
SPENDING on all sectors of education has risen under the Conservatives by 20 per cent in real terms, a study by the London School of Economics showed yesterday.
Contrary to Labour's claims, the report said the proportion of national income spent on education is almost the same now (5.1 per cent) as it was when the Conservatives came to power in 1979 (5.2 per cent ).
It is a finding which invalidates Labour's pledge to spend billions ‘restoring’ education's share of the national wealth.
The study, by Mr Tony Travers, showed that spending on each primary school child increased by 41 per cent in real terms between 1980 and 1990.
Spending on each secondary school child rose by 53 per cent.
Higher education and science also benefited from real increases, disproving repeated claims of ‘cuts’ by academics and others.
Mr Travers, who drew his figures from public expenditure White Papers, said the sectors that enjoyed the biggest rises were education for the under-fives (up nearly 90 per cent) and children with special needs, both favourite Labour targets.
The ‘startling’ facts about increased education spending under the Tories would ‘leave many parents, teachers and administrators gasping in disbelief as they pick their way through pot-holed playgrounds to book-starved classrooms,’he added.
‘As in the National Health Service, perceptions of real life in public institutions do not fit well with the statistics.’
He said capital spending on school buildings and equipment had been cut twice — by Labour (by 45 per cent) between 1974 and 1979 and by the Tories between 1981 and 1985, when Sir Keith (now Lord) Joseph was Education Secretary.
‘The effects of reduced capital spending have almost certainly created a backlog of repairs and replacements which still leads to the widely held view (outside government) that the fabric of many schools remains poor.’
Another reason why people thought education was suffering continuing cuts despite the statistical evidence to the contrary was that the increased spending had not matched the improvements people saw in their homes and private spending power.
Historic building trust is ruined by squatters
By John Grigsby, Local Government Correspondent
A LEADING organisation involved in the renovation of historic buildings has been forced into liquidation because families have squatted in the houses it restored.
The British Historic Buildings Trust is unable to pay architects, builders and financial backers because it cannot raise money from most of the 33 houses it repaired in Hanover Square, Manningham, Bradford, West Yorks.
Under an agreement with the mostly Pakistani residents, the trust bought for £1 each the dilapidated Grade II-listed homes, dating from 1848–51, after they had been threatened with demolition.
The trust agreed to renovate the houses and sell them back to their former owners for the cost of the work and the trust's expenses, less the value of grants obtained.
The trust said the prices would generally amount to about two-thirds of their market value and those who could not afford to buy them could rent through a housing association.
When the houses were ready, prices of up to £51,000 were quoted.
Some people said their incomes were so low they could not obtain mortgages and 18 were squatted in by former occupants who refused to pay the money.
An attempt to have them evicted failed because the county court judge ruled that the law only applied to people who had no interest in the property.
The trust has failed to sell some of the other houses because of local concern about the squatters.
The trust, which has lost £153,000 on the project, has restored about 200 properties and was prominent in preserving Pell Well Hall in Shropshire and the 12th century Siddington Barn near Cirencester, Glos.
Mr Alan Bemrose, who founded the trust, said last night: ‘It is disastrous.
We have to go into liquidation because these people broke the agreement and illegally occupied the houses.’
Ivana breaks vow of silence with a fictional romance
By Hugh Davies in New York
DONALD TRUMP, the much-troubled New York property magnate, has a new problem, his lawyer said yesterday — a steamy book written by Ivana, his ex-wife.
In a novel called For Love Alone, described by the publishers as a sexy sizzler, she tells how a Czech woman loses her husband to a leggy honey blonde with a soft Southern drawl.
The husband is described as a yacht-sailing tycoon who is the darling of the New York tabloid newspapers.
Trump left Ivana, a Czech, for Southern belle, Marla Maples, a model from Georgia.
Marriage, he said this week, was probably ‘inevitable’.
A climactic scene is a brawl between the wife and husband on a ski-slope about his extra-marital affair.
A tearful Ivana had a very public confrontation with Donald on a slope at Aspen because of his liaison with Ms Maples.
Ivana insists the tome is pure fiction.
Donald thinks otherwise — and the upshot may be that he will sue.
For in their $25 million divorce settlement, Ivana is forbidden to publish anything ‘whether fictionalised or not’ about their marriage.
Mr Trump's attorney, Mr Jay Goldberg, said: ‘He's angry that she would choose to violate the agreement.
She took the money and ran from her obligations.’
The clause has been severed from the divorce decree, but Mr Trump, is appealing against the decision.
Mr Goldberg said they could bring a libel action, but he planned to wait until the appeal verdict.
‘This is a thinly veiled attempt to disguise the characters, and a court will decide whether to the average reader this is a book dealing with Donald and Ivana, despite the fact that she changed the names,’ he said.
The Czech heroine is uncannily like Ivana.
She is a model who moved to New York and becomes part of the Manhattan social scene.
She is depicted as regal, beautiful, smart and successful.
The mistress, named Sugar, is written off as gold-digger who likes sex and specialises in husband removal.
The authoress describes her as having ‘a mouth that could make a man think of doing some very strange things’.
Ivana said: ‘It's not similar to my life.
The story is totally different.’
Mother and baby escape after kidnap in car park
By A J McIlroy
A WOMAN escaped unharmed with her 11-month-old son yesterday after being held for 45 minutes by a knife-wielding kidnapper.
They managed to get away when they persuaded the man to stop for baby food.
The 27-year-old mother's ordeal began when the kidnapper jumped out at her after she had parked her car at the top of a multi-storey at a shopping centre in Eastleigh, Hants.
The man, aged about 25, slim and of Asian appearance, forced her back into the car and ordered her to drive off.
After a short distance he swapped places with the woman and drove her and the baby to Winchester.
They spent some time driving around before the woman persuaded the kidnapper to let her take the child into a shop to get some baby food.
The man followed her into the Misselbrook and Weston grocer's store in Springvale near Winchester.
She ran and held her child behind an employee, shouting for someone to call the police.
The kidnapper, chased by the shop manager, fled and escaped in the car.
Hampshire police said the woman's courage and quick-thinking had brought her and the baby unharmed through ‘a nasty and apparently motiveless’ crime.
Det Insp Eddie Muddle, who is leading the hunt for the kidnapper, said: ‘It was a very traumatic experience but she acted very sensibly by co-operating with her abductor for fear that something would happen to her child.
‘She acted in a very calm manner — remarkably so considering the trauma she was being put through.
‘The attack would appear to be totally motiveless with very worrying overtones.
It was a very nasty offence in view of the fact there was a babe in arms involved.’
Detectives were interviewing the mother, who has asked not to be named, to build up a picture of the kidnapper.
Children's home chief jailed
By Colin Wright
A FORMER head of a council children's home was jailed for four years yesterday for indecency against young boys in his care which he committed almost 15 years ago.
Christopher Oldfield, 49, was convicted at Newcastle upon Tyne Crown Court on evidence by his victims, now grown to adulthood.
They told how the man whom they had trusted and referred to as ‘Dad’ fondled them indecently while they sat on his knee in their pyjamas watching television in his rooms at Elm Tree Farm Community Home, Stockton, Cleveland.
The offences took place between 1977 and 1983 with boys then aged between 11 and 13, some of whom had been abused by their parents before being taken into care.
The crimes only came to light in 1990 when one of Oldfield's victims, then an adult, was himself charged with indecency to children.
The story of the abuse he had suffered as a child emerged in interviews with social workers.
It was the second time that Oldfield, a bachelor and former public schoolboy from Crosby Road, Birkdale, Southport, had come under suspicion for sexually abusing children in his care.
He had been investigated in 1983 when a child complained that the trained social worker had sexually assaulted him.
The boy's story was discounted and Oldfield was able to continue in charge of the home until his suspension in 1990 when new evidence came to light.
The jury took four hours yesterday after a nine-day trial to find him guilty of five charges of indecent assault.
They acquitted him of three further charges of indecency and one of buggery.
He put his head in his hands as Judge John Johnson jailed him, saying he had betrayed the trust of children who had needed his support.
While his crimes, he said, were not the ‘worst form of indecent assault’ they were made all the more serious because of his position.
‘These boys came from broken, deprived homes.
They were already disadvantaged and in your care.
You were the person they looked on as an authority and father figure, a trust you clearly betrayed.
‘What you did to them cannot have done much to put right what their own families had already done.’
Judges order explosives case appeal
By Terence Shaw Legal Correspondent
JOHN BERRY, 54, who was released on parole last week after serving three and a half years of a six-year sentence for making explosive devices, is to have a new appeal hearing in his long-running legal battle to clear his name.
Three Court of Appeal judges headed by Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice, ruled yesterday that the court could entertain a request by Mr Baker, Home Secretary, for the case to be reviewed, despite its 1990 ruling that Berry, a Norfolk businessman and ex-Royal Marine, could not have his case reopened.
Lord Lane said another division of the court had then felt powerless to intervene and hear new grounds of appeal because the House of Lords had restored Berry's conviction after an earlier successful appeal.
The difficulties in the case were caused by the Court of Appeal's earlier failure to rule on two of Berry's three grounds of appeal, said Lord Lane, but that did not preclude the Home Secretary from re-opening the case.
Berry, from Bramerton, Norfolk, was originally convicted in 1983 of making electronic timers for detonating bombs which it was claimed were intended for use in Syria and the Lebanon.
He had been tried jointly with another businessman, Jeffrey Smith, who was eventually cleared at a retrial.
Berry's conviction was quashed on a legal technicality by the Court of Appeal in early 1984, but later that year the House of Lords restored the conviction in allowing an appeal by the Crown.
He fled to Spain while on bail awaiting the House of Lords ruling, but was returned to England in 1989 and resumed his sentence.
This was reduced from eight to six years by the Court of Appeal in 1990, but the court then ruled that his remaining two grounds of appeal could not be argued in the light of the 1984 Lords decision.
Berry then petitioned Mr Baker who announced in January that he was seeking a Court of Appeal review.
Murder police given more time to question husband
By Michael Fleet
POLICE investigating the murder of a 40-year-old woman at her £300,000 home were yesterday given an extra 36 hours to question her estranged husband.
Mr Werner Palmer-Radford was arrested in Sussex after the body of his wife Jacqueline was discovered on Thursday by her 16-year-old son Matthew at their home in Eversley, Hants.
Detectives were granted the extension to the time allowed to question her German-born husband.
He is being held at Aldershot police station.
Mrs Palmer-Radford's other son, Oliver, aged six, only discovered what had happened after she failed to collect him from his Catholic prep-school, it emerged yesterday.
Mrs Shirley Hayden, headteacher of Our Lady's school in nearby Crowthorne, Berks, said: ‘Oliver had been waiting for his mother to pick him up as usual at 3.15pm.
‘He said he thought his mummy had been having car trouble because she hadn't turned up.
Parents are often held up in traffic so I waited until after 5pm.’
She then took him home to find Matthew in tears at the gate.
‘He had already contacted the police and when they came they asked me to look after the children so we sat in the car.
Oliver just buried his head in my lap and I said his mummy was poorly.
I know it was a lie, but at six years old I felt that a close relative should be the one to tell him in a quiet way.
‘We stayed sitting in the driveway then went to the police station in Yateley until their relatives arrived.’
Mrs Hayden said special prayers were offered for the boys during a service at the school yesterday.
‘They are both delightful boys — Matthew showing a maturity far beyond his years, and Oliver with the sheer exuberance of a child of six,’ she said.
Father David Buckley, priest of the Catholic church where Mrs Palmer-Radford regularly attended Mass, spoke of his sadness.
He said: ‘Mrs Palmer-Radford was a quite, polite, private person.
‘She was always immaculately dressed and had a pleasant manner,’ he said.
‘She would occasionally come to church with her sons.
It is a terrible tragedy.’
Praise for woman clerk who locked gunman in bank
By Nigel Bunyan
A BANK clerk was praised by police yesterday after she calmly locked a masked gunman inside the branch he was trying to rob.
She had earlier persuaded him to allow her out of the bank in Greater Manchester on the pretext of getting the keys to the safe.
At gunpoint, the woman walked slowly towards the main door, carefully adjusted the lock, and then slammed it as she ran to call police.
An armed response unit reached the bank within minutes and a police helicopter hovered overhead, but the robber had escaped through the back of the building empty-handed.
Police have refused to identify the 22-year-old clerk because her life could be put at risk.
However, Det Chief Insp Stanley Egerton said: ‘She showed a tremendous amount of courage.
Anyone in that position would have been absolutely terrified.’
The clerk was confronted by a man holding a handgun when she opened the branch of the Trustee Savings Bank in the Arndale Centre, Stretford, shortly before 9am.
When he ordered her to open the safe, she told him truthfully that she did not carry the keys.
She gave a similar answer when he asked her to open the automatic cash dispenser.
At this point the gunman became very agitated, said a spokeswoman for the TSB.
‘She calmed him down and said: ‘If you let me go outside I'll get the keys’.
‘He agreed to let her go out, but threatened her life if she was to raise the alarm.
When she left the branch she actually locked him in, using a special procedure which takes a few seconds.’
The spokeswoman added: ‘She acted very bravely and we are extremely proud of her.
She is with the police and a stress counsellor because of what she went through.’
Police described the gunman, who broke into the bank through the roof, as white, about 5ft 10ins tall and aged between 25 and 35.
He is of slim to medium build and was wearing a dark ski mask.
Election 1992: Labour will not sell utility stakes says Smith
By George Jones Political Editor
LABOUR will not sell the Government's remaining stake in British Telecom and the privatised electricity generating companies, Mr John Smith, the shadow Chancellor, said last night.
After several days of confusion over Labour's plans over future privatisation, Mr Smith confirmed that an incoming Labour government will not have the benefit of an extra £9.5 billion which the Conservatives had planned to raise through the disposal of the Government's remaining holdings in former public utilities.
On BBC Radio's Any Questions last night, Mr Smith said: ‘We will retain the holding in British Telecom and PowerGen.’
Earlier in the day, Mr Jack Cunningham, Labour's campaign co-ordinator, said on BBC TV's Breakfast Time, that Labour ‘have made no decision about further sales of the Government's holding of stocks in companies that have been privatised’.
The Labour leadership has already stated that it will take advantage of instalment payments still outstanding from the sale of shares in British Telecom and the Scottish electricity companies.
But until last night, there had been no clear line over what would happen in future years to the Government's remaining holdings in these utilities.
Mr David Mellor, Treasury Chief Secretary, said Mr Smith had ‘walked into a trap sprung by the Tories’.
He said Mr Smith's statement meant that in the first full two years of a Labour Government, they would have to borrow around an extra £9.5 billion.
‘This knocks a black hole in Labour's Budget plans.
John Smith has had four years to make sure his facts and figures were right.
They have now been blown to pieces.’
Election 1992:Most women seem unimpressed by the Paddy Factor Ben Fenton takes a straw poll in Richmond
By BEN FENTON WHATEVER is pushing women voters towards the Liberal Democrats, it is not some mysterious ‘Ashdown Factor’, if the party's female supporters in Richmond-upon-Thames are to be believed.
The south-west London constituency of Richmond and Barnes is one of the top target seats for the Liberal Democrats, where they lie 1,776 votes behind the Conservatives.
In 1983 the gap was just 74.
Nationally, although Gallup figures show that more women than men are intending to vote for Mr Ashdown's party, support for the Liberal Democrat leader himself is equally divided between the sexes.
A straw poll in Richmond yesterday showed that, of 53 women who favoured the Liberal Democrats, only two mentioned Mr Ashdown as the principal reason for their choice.
Mrs Angela Smith, 30, was typical.
‘I like him.
I think he's a charming man and he's certainly better than Major or Kinnock, who both give me the creeps.
‘But I would normally vote Labour and I'm voting Lib Dem because there's absolutely no point voting Labour in this seat.’
Not all tactical voters, of whom there are many in this affluent suburb, were so impressed by the high profile being given to Mr Ashdown — and nobody else — in the Liberal Democrat campaign.
‘He closes his eyes when he speaks and I don't trust anyone who does that,’ said Miss Jayne Pooles, 34, who works for the London ITV channel, Thames Television, in nearby Teddington.
‘I am voting tactically because Labour doesn't have a chance here, but the Liberal Democrats certainly didn't get my vote because of Paddy Ashdown.’
Mrs Mary Brunell, 67, was one of the few outright supporters of the Ashdown personality cult.
‘I do like him.
He seems sensible and rather nice and he knows what he is talking about.
In a way his personality does influence the way I would vote, because I think I can trust him.’
Frequently women voters said that they liked Mr Ashdown, but only in preference to Messrs Major and Kinnock, who were characterised by the words ‘creepy’ and ‘characterless’by several of them.
German-born Mrs Crystal Vane, 42, was analytical in her view of the Liberal Democrat leader.
‘I lived in America for a long time and I can see through the glossy image-making of his campaign, I think.
‘He talks strong, but he doesn't have a strong look.
I don't think his eyes quite match what he is saying.’
She was one of few women to comment on Ashdown the hunk: ‘I prefer the darker type, you know, with smouldering eyes.’
Mrs Erica Chalkley, 65, said she thought Mr Ashdown had ‘leadership qualities’ but she was unhappy about his military background and was ‘glad on the whole’that he was not likely to be the next Prime Minister.
‘He is very charismatic, isn't he, but possibly a bit more removed, more aloof, than the other leaders,’ said Miss Cathryn Avison, 22, a first-time voter.
Like most of the women questioned, she was quite willing to forgive Mr Ashdown for his extra-marital activities, revealed some weeks before the election campaign began.
Miss Claire Darbourne, 28, said she thought the five-year-old affair with a secretary was ‘just part of being human’.
She said she thought it was all right as long as he had squared the matter with his own family.
Mrs Caroline Blockley, 29, said: ‘He had an affair, but at least he admitted it and didn't make a big fuss.
It didn't change my mind about liking him.’
The Liberal Democrats may have wasted their money on the personality cult of Paddy Ashdown, but he is certainly not a negative factor as far as the forgiving women of Richmond are concerned.
Election 1992: Leaders to face voters' questions in TV ‘grilling’
Voters will question the Prime Minister, Mr Kinnock and Mr Ashdown on a television programme on Monday evening.
But strenuous efforts are being made to ensure the three party leaders do not meet during the hour-long Granada TV special World in Action programme.
Five hundred voters from the two Conservative-held marginal seats of Bolton North East and Bolton West are being ferried to London for what promises to be the toughest ‘grilling’ any of the leaders will face during the entire campaign.
In the programme, hosted by Sue Lawley, the three will answer the questions separately, at a London venue being kept secret for security reasons.
Election 1992: Ashdown sued
Mr Kinnock's own union, the 1.1 million-strong Transport and General Workers' Union, yesterday confirmed that it is to sue Mr Paddy Ashdown and six other Liberal Democrat leaders over a claim in a party newspaper that the T&G had advised members in 29 key marginals to vote Liberal Democrat rather than Labour.
Election 1992: ‘Red’ stumped as Tory ladies hit him for six
By Robert Hardman
THE scene was a Tory idyll, almost a caricature of Home Counties Britishness.
Here was a Conservative Prime Minister speaking on the steps of a cricket pavilion by an ancient village green in the Garden of England.
Not the time or the place to expect a violent gang attack on a pensioner.
In this case, however, the gang were elderly ladies.
And the victim could have chosen a better place to voice throaty communist sentiments.
The Prime Minister had brought his message, and his soap box, to Kent.
Meopham Cricket Club, which is even older than the other MCC, appeared the safest spot in Britain for a Tory oration.
But no sooner was Mr Major off his battlebus than a couple of eggs took flight.
The Socialist Workers' formation heckle team numbered about five and by the time the egg-throwers had been apprehended, they were down to three.
But their shouts were too much for one group of Meopham matriarchs.
As ‘Red’ Reg Weston, 78, a retired Press Association journalist and well-known local Communist Party activist, began to boo the Prime Minister, the ladies went into battle.
To begin with, a middle-aged blonde woman jostled him but was quickly joined by a cohort of silver-haired reinforcements.
Mr Weston was kicked, punched and hit with an umbrella before his poster —‘Rich Tories are the real poll tax parasites’— was stamped on and ripped up.
Afterwards, he produced a fine whinge about the infringement of civil liberties.
As his supporters muttered about ‘the ugly face of Toryism’, Mr Weston grumbled: ‘I said to a policeman ‘They're assaulting me’ and he said ‘No they're not’.
If this is Tory democracy, they can keep it.’
Mr Major, unaware of the fracas on the boundary, was in fighting form too.
The theme of the day was: A Labour vote is a vote for more recession and a Liberal Democrat vote is a Labour vote in disguise.
‘What a show of confidence the Labour have,’ he mocked.
‘One week before a general election, they start cuddling up to the Liberals for support.
Cuddling up to the Liberals is like leaning on candy floss.’
His audience of around 300 loved it, shouting ‘No!’ with gusto after each of Mr Major's ‘Do we really want…?’questions and feigning hysterical laughter at his put downs to the hecklers.
It is known that the Tory machine is particularly disappointed with the way that its messages on ‘constitutional’ issues such as Europe have failed to come across.
Meopham may be nearer to France than to most of Britain but its residents cheered long and loud as Mr Major derided a United States of Europe and the prospect of a Labour Government at the EC table: ‘Brussels wags its finger and over on its back rolls the Labour Party saying ‘Yes!’’
Red Reg aside, it was a day of True Bluery.
The Prime Minister began his Kentish tour with a visit to Sheerness Docks.
It was all a great privatisation success, he explained, pointing to fleets of cars and tractors lined up for export.
But the effect seemed diluted as he then toured the docks' cold store which was stuffed full of apples.
There were crates of South African, French, Canadian and Californian but nothing munchable with a Union flag on it.
There was also mild throat-clearing as Mr Major strode off towards the largest car ferry in Europe with the words: ‘Let's go and look at this boat!’
‘Ship, Prime Minister.
Ship,’ hissed an aide.
From there, Mr Major was flown by helicopter to the Whitbread Hop Farm in a more attractive part of the county.
Here, there were Tories, children, animals — and photo-opportunities — galore.
He fed mints to dray horses, said hello to a caged European eagle owl called Gonzo and let two barn owls fly on and off his arm as a smiling crowd clapped and asked for autographs.
A politician's paradise.
Had Red Reg turned up here, one felt certain they would have set the whole menagerie on him.
Mr Major said yesterday that the economy was ‘coming out of recession now’ but admitted that it could not be proved.
Interviewed on the BBC's Today programme, he defended the record of the Government over the past 13 years.
Election 1992: Campaign: the good, the bad and the seldom seen
By JONATHAN PETRE
GOOD: The star of the 1992 election is Michael Heseltine.
He has provided the only real glitz and glamour in what has seemed a decidedly lacklustre campaign.
Chris Patten deserves an award for endurance as well as resilience in the face of adversity.
He has faced the toughest election of any Tory chairman for 20 years, while spending the afternoons dashing to Bath to defend his own marginal seat against a strong Liberal Democrat challenge.
A rehabilitated Norman Tebbit has been brought into the front line in an attempt to win back defecting C2s, the skilled workers and their families, who helped Mrs Thatcher win three elections.
Douglas Hurd has proved a reassuring figure in a campaign that has at times seemed to lack confidence and direction.
He had a key role in the ‘leadership’ theme — contrasting Tory experience in international affairs, particularly Europe, with the prospect of former CND supporter Neil Kinnock in Downing Street.
His presence has forced Labour to keep his opposite number Gerald Kaufman off the TV screens as much as possible.
Making the most of a walk-on role at the start of the campaign, Margaret Thatcher made many Tory candidates realise how much they missed her strong presence on the political stage.
She loyally endorsed Mr Major and — despite a few barbs about borrowing too much — confounded predictions that she would rock the boat.
She left a hole in the campaign when she departed this week for a pre-arranged lecture tour in the United States.
BAD: The gloomy presence of Norman Lamont overshadowed the first week of the campaign.
Has proved no match for his Labour shadow John Smith, who wrong-footed the Tories with his alternative Budget.
By the time they woke up to the fact that many people would be only 2p a week better off, Smith had gained the headlines with the claim that eight out of 10 families gained.
Lamont was given a lower profile for the second week — prompting a Neil Kinnock joke that he was only allowed out at night.
William Waldegrave blotted his copybook during the ‘war of Jennifer's ear’, when he chaired a chaotic press conference on the National Health Service.
His admission that Central Office had put a tabloid newspaper in touch with the consultant at the centre of the case was a spectacular own goal.
SELDOM SEEN: With the economy and the recession at the heart of the election debate, the low profile of Peter Lilley has been a weakness.
Labour has campaigned strongly on its £1 billion ‘recovery package’ while Mr Lilley, a firm believer in Thatcherite non-intervention, has had to rely on promises that recovery is just around the corner.
Law and order should be one of the Tories' strongest cards, but record crime figures have tarnished their record.
Kenneth Baker, replaced by Chris Patten as Tory chairman, has been on the outside of the campaign.
He made an unfortunate slip when he was wheeled out for Thursday's law and order policy launch — conceding that Labour could win.
John Gummer was not even on the Tory platform for a press conference to defend the Government's record on animal welfare.
Frequently seen on the campaign trail — including Scotland, Wales and Yorkshire — he has not been part of Major's ‘A-team’ for the morning press conferences.
Virginia Bottomley made a brief appearance at the chaotic ‘Jennifergate’ press conference, but Central Office has failed to make use of her reassuring presence as the gentler face of Toryism to help soothe public anxieties over the NHS reforms.
George Jones LABOUR GOOD: Labour's campaign co-ordinator John Cunningham will take much of the credit for the projection of his party as putative government.
One of the few senior front-benchers with experience of government, he has been keeping one eye on the national campaign, chairing almost all the party's London campaign press conferences, and another on his marginal Copeland constituency, travelling by hired plane to Cumbria every weekend.
David Hill, the party's unflappable director of communications, has more than adequately filled the role performed by Peter Mandelson in 1987.
A former adviser to Roy Hattersley, Mr Hill has been running Labour's highly effective press and broadcasting machine.
The performance of the avuncular Shadow Chancellor John Smith has been the undoubted success of Labour's campaign.
A stolid Scots barrister, he has been entrusted with holding the line of an economic policy which his opponents have found hard to lay a glove upon.
Mr Smith has hardly put a foot wrong.
Margaret Beckett, the other half of the Treasury team, is a stalwart of the press conference platform and the Labour politician most respected by the Conservatives, although she has not always inspired on the hustings.
No one 's performance could be rated as BAD.
MODERATE: Labour's Industry spokesman Gordon Brown has made strenuous efforts to shed his normally lugubrious demeanour, presumably on the orders of the party's image police.
One of Labour's ‘A-team’, Mr Brown has appeared on every party election broadcast and on most political broadcasts in the run up to the campaign.
But as a master of the ‘sound bite’ quote he has been surprisingly unconvincing in this campaign.
SELDOM SEEN: The ‘Where is Gerald Kaufman’ jokes backfired on the Conservatives when Mr Chris Patten called for search parties to be sent out only five minutes after the Shadow Foreign secretary had appeared at Labour's morning conference.
But he will have cause to resent his treatment by campaign organisers given Mr Kinnock's unequivocal pledge to appoint him Foreign Secretary in a Labour government.
John Prescott, transport spokesman, has largely been frozen out of the national campaign, which is surprising given his adept performance on BBC's election call this week.
Mr Prescott's capacity for saying what he thinks and his somewhat abrasive manner are evidently not qualities that are easily packaged.
Philip Johnston LIBERAL GOOD: The strategy devised by Des Wilson, the party's campaign director, has been largely vindicated; despite the odd blip, the public has received a single consistent message.
And Mr Ashdown has been projected in photo opportunities across Britain as the best leader the country will never have.
BAD: The only serious wobble of the campaign followed the appearance of Simon Hughes, the party's environment spokesman, on BBC television's Election Call programme when he appeared to contradict or amend party policy no fewer than four times in less than an hour.
MODERATE: Treasury spokesman Alan Beith has had a high profile, though he must occasionally feel like a comma in the economy debate between Mr Lamont and Mr Smith.
SELDOM SEEN: After the first week party president Charles Kennedy was noticeable by his absence, raising the cry in the Ashdown battlebus: ‘Who shot President Kennedy?’
He was subsequently given a few walk-on parts.
Praying for a Christian victory
By Damian Thompson Religious Affairs Correspdonent
FOR perhaps the 50th time since lunch, the hotline rings.
With a tired smile — Miss Emma Joynson-Hicks plucks down a file.
‘Reading East?
Let me see…well, we've given Sir Gerard Vaughan an ‘A’ rating.
The others haven't responded.’
A pause, then a merry laugh.
‘Thank you so much for praying.’
Miss Joynson-Hicks is the great-grand daughter of Sir William Joynson ‘Jix’ Hicks, a puritan Home Secretary who regarded Roman Catholicism with horror.
He would have been shocked, she admits, by the mere existence of her organisation: the Movement for Christian Democracy, a pressure group run jointly by evangelical Protestants and Roman Catholics.
In recent years, Christians from the two traditions have cast aside centuries of hostility to lobby on political issues.
An unexpected consensus has emerged, combining traditionally conservative concerns such as abortion and euthanasia with ‘Left-wing’ issues like homelessness and overseas aid.
‘Even in the last year, barriers have come tumbling down,’ says Miss Joynson-Hicks.
Today sees one of the fruits of this co-operation: a National Day of Prayer and Fasting in which Christians will pray that ‘God's hand will be on the elections’.
The movement, founded in the last Parliament by Roman Catholic MPs David Alton and Ken Hargreaves, is also running a telephone hotline from the basement of a house in Westminster.
What do they hope to achieve?
The movement's priority is to get its people elected.
Emma Joynson-Hicks cannot bring herself to think beyond Thursday.
‘It's in God's hands.’
Election 1992: Outstanding brain for reforms
By Antonia Feuchtwanger
PROF Raymond Plant, whose work could help to change radically the British constitution if Labour wins the election, has been a Labour Party member for 30 years.
But in political science departments, normally among the bitchier and more partisan realms of academe, they respect the fairness and intelligence of the chairman of Labour's commission on electoral systems.
Under a Labour government, this committee would become an official inquiry into electoral reform.
The party has already accepted the committee's recommendation that a devolved Scottish Parliament should be elected by the additional member system of proportional representation.
The official inquiry would look at PR for the Commons, reform of the Lords, European Parliament elections and regional assemblies.
Prof Plant, 47, will not say how much change he expects by the time he retires — even though, as an expert on the German philosopher Hegel, historic change on a grand scale fascinates him.
The Prof is ‘a very practical man’, his colleague Prof Peter Calvert says warmly, as well having an ‘outstanding brain’.
Married with three sons, Prof lives in suburban Bassett, Southampton, where he is professor of politics.
On a day when Mr Kinnock was storming Southampton with helicopter and balloons, Prof Plant was quietly having lunch at home after a visit to his department.
‘I was born and bred up in Grimsby,’ he said.
‘I found Anthony Crosland, the MP there, personally very energising.
So was his kind of social democracy.
‘I had intended to become an Anglican priest but I saw more dark than light.
‘I went to Manchester to teach philosophy, though I am still an Anglican,’ added Prof Plant.
Election 1992: Ashdown would bar tax plans
By Jonathan Petre and George Jones
MR ASHDOWN served notice last night that his party would seek to block Labour's plans for a 59p top rate of tax — including the extra nine per cent national insurance contributions — if Mr Kinnock becomes Prime Minister in a hung Parliament.
In an interview for today's Times, he said Liberal Democrats would vote against a Labour Finance Bill which included the removal of the £21,060 ceiling on national insurance payments and the introduction of a 50p rate of income tax for top earners.
With the Tories certain to vote against such higher taxes, Labour would be defeated on the issue unless it gained power with an overall majority.
Failure to push through the higher taxes would have a serious impact on Labour's plans to raise extra revenue to pay for improved social benefits, such as higher pensions and child benefit.
Mr Ashdown said: ‘Imposing 59 per cent tax rates incorporating NICs at £40,000 is very bad news indeed, in particular hitting middle management, not just middle-income earners with a 49 per cent tax rate at £27,000.
He pledged that his party would ‘seek to use our influence and bargain very hard indeed’ to resist Labour's taxation proposals.
Earlier, he dismissed Labour's invitation to join its inquiry into electoral reform as a ‘short-term tactical move’ and delivered his strongest warning yet to his rivals not to underestimate his party's determination ‘at every level’to hold out for a clear commitment to proportional representation as its price for a coalition deal.
His blunt response to Mr Kinnock's ‘olive branch’ came amid speculation that he had appointed three ‘power brokers’to handle negotiations in the event of a hung Parliament.
Reports, described as ‘idle speculation’ by a senior Liberal Democrat source, said the triumvirate would be Mr Alan Beith, Treasury spokesman, Mr Robert MacLennan, home affairs, and Mr Menzies Campbell, defence.
Mr Ashdown, campaigning in north Wales, raised the stakes on electoral reform by saying that his precondition for talks would be legislation to implement PR in the first session of Parliament.
Election 1992: Enoch returns to the fold in ‘funny old election’
By Charles Moore
LAST NIGHT Mr Enoch Powell returned to Wolverhampton.
He was there to do something he has never done since he left the Conservative party in 1974.
He was speaking for a Tory candidate at the election.
Mr Powell endorsed Nicholas Budgen, the man who succeeded in Wolverhampton South West.
Mr Powell had only been back twice in nearly 20 years.
The sentimental journey began at Euston.
As the train approached Wolverhampton, Powell the historian told me about the foundation of the town in the 10th century and how it grew to prosperity making weapons for the Civil War.
As we drove to the Connaught Hotel, he pointed out the country's oldest traffic lights (erected 1924).
Enoch Powell won Wolverhampton South West in 1950 with a majority of 691.
Two days later he went out with the Albrighton Hunt to celebrate.
When he left 24 years later, his majority was more than 14,000.
His departure was sudden, though long pondered.
Mr Heath had taken Britain into the European Community.
When he called the 1974 general election, Mr Powell felt he could not support his party.
He wrote at once to his constituency resigning his candidacy.
He did not go back.
At the hotel last night, it was almost like old times.
The taxi driver cheered.
The doorman saluted.
There was even an ‘anti-racist’ demonstration at the front.
Inside, the capacity audience was respectful, admiring and a little anxious about a man in his 80th year.
‘My voice will carry beyond this room,’ ' said Mr Powell.
But it is a little thin now, and it only just reached the back of the hall.
‘Is this your last campaign, Mr Powell?’ asked a journalist.
‘I do not know when the Lord will take me.’
The message was familiar though updated in form.
‘What a funny old election this is, at which the political parties argue about taxation and legislation but declare all the time that they intend the electors of this country to have no further control over the very questions that are being put to them.’
Mrs Thatcher, he considered, was almost as bad as Mr Major, since she was prepared to support the man who signed the Maastricht Treaty.
Mr Budgen on the other hand was virtually unique in opposing the power of the EC.
The famous metallic voice with its slight Midlands cadences exercised its familiar thrill.
England has slept, said Mr Powell, but she was beginning to wake up.
Mr Budgen was generous in his admiration for Mr Powell —‘You are the great don of parliamentary debate’— but not in much else.
The Tory government was not particularly marvellous, he implied, just better than the others.
It deserved ‘two cheers.’
To three cheers, he explained how the Exchange Rate Mechanism was crippling the economy.
Then there were questions.
The butchers, bakers and candlestick makers paid their tributes to Mr Powell.
One read out a letter about how his shop was being pushed out of business by EC regulations.
Mr Powell answered: ‘You don't have to live under the same laws as a foreigner in order to trade with him.
You don't have to have the same kind of bathwater.’
Everyone felt better, in a nostalgic sort of way, not least Messrs Powell and Budgen.
Election 1992: Result of reform inquiry in a year
By Jon Hibbs, Political Staff
THE RESULTS of Labour's inquiry into electoral reform for the House of Commons will be complete within a year of taking office, Mr Kinnock promised yesterday.
As he intensified the party's efforts to lure floating voters away from the Liberal Democrats, the Labour leader made clear he had not ruled out holding a referendum on constitutional change.
However his personal preference remained to put any proposals from the inquiry before the public at the next general election.
Invitations to other political parties and representatives of business, trade unions and churches would be sent out immediately in the wake of an election victory to broaden the membership of the party's working group under Prof Raymond Plant.
The Plant committee was expected to report to the Labour Party conference in the autumn, but Mr Kinnock denied that turning it into an official government commission was a delaying tactic.
‘I do not think that will necessarily prolong the deliberations and the results will be available — the further recommendations and the analysis — within a year, though I would not nominate a month,’ he said on BBC Radio's World At One.
Earlier, during a visit to Southampton, he denied party strategy had been hi-jacked by the debate over proportional representation, disclosing that the decision to highlight constitutional issues on Democracy Day was taken a fortnight ago.
In keeping with the increasingly presidential style of his campaign, Mr Kinnock arrived at the city's docklands development by helicopter, and released 1,992 balloons to symbolise Southampton's links with Europe.
After visiting a geothermal heating plant, he took the opportunity of a walkabout in the shopping centre to mock Mr Major's use of a soapbox.
‘I guess simple people use them,’ he said.
Parallel to his attempt to portray Labour as a consensus government, Mr Kinnock sought to turn his confession of ‘errors of judgment’ over Europe and unilateralism into virtues in sharp contrast to Tory failure to apologise for ‘Thatcher mistakes’.
‘I actually think that people in a democracy respect a leader who will say I have not been right all the way along the line.
I have no monopoly of wisdom.
‘I hope people understand this is a natural thing for any honest person to do.
If you have been wrong, acknowledge it and then get things right — that is much better than pursuing ultimate follies like the poll tax,’ he said.
Mr Kinnock again declined to give his personal view about electoral reform lest the debate he initiated within the party two years ago became a test of loyalty to his leadership.
He has never been enthusiastic about it, regarding the growing grassroots demand for proportional representation as a distraction from the main issues facing the party, but aides insist he now has an open mind about the outcome of the review.
Election 1992: And what can the politicians do for Meadowell?
Probably nothing at all 
‘Joyriding’ riots propelled Tyneside's Meadowell Estate to national prominence last September.
Has the election campaign penetrated its grim streets?
By MARTYN HARRIS
AT THE drop-in centre on South Meadowell, Labour candidate Paddy Cosgrove has dropped in to meet the people — mostly fat ladies in shellsuits with laps full of chips.
‘You all know me,’ says Paddy, and a fat lady with good timing says, ‘I don't know you.
Never seen you in me life.’
On the floor a toddler peels more chips from a congealed, bluish mass and feeds them to a baby.
Another digs the cream from the centre of a pink fancy and smears it in his hair.
Paddy Cosgrove, councillor and barrister, in candidates' pinstripes, sits tensely on the edge of his plastic chair.
‘I'm a regular visitor to this estate…’
‘Who does he say he is?’ says a second fat lady.
‘That Liberal, Paddy Ashgrove…’
‘He's better looking on TV…’
‘He's only come because the press are here,’ says the first fat lady.
And Paddy Cosgrove blushes.
Political consciousness is low on the Meadowell Estate.
Turnout at the last election was around 50 per cent, and with the thinning of the electoral roll brought by the poll tax, will be even lower this time.
They are mostly Labour voters but several confuse their Labour candidate with the leader of the Liberal Democrats.
Very few know their MP is a Conservative, and hardly anyone that his name is Neville Trotter, defender of a slender 2,500 majority.
By most measures Meadowell is the worst council estate in Britain, and probably the most notorious since the riots last September, which followed the deaths of joyriders Colin Atkins and Dale Robson in a police chase.
In fact Meadowell is an Elastoplast name like Sizewell, invented in the 1970s to disguise what was already a running sore.
When built in 1938 it was The Ridges, which is still what they call it locally — a slum clearance project on the north bank of the Tyne, 10 miles east of Newcastle.
Its first inhabitants were shipyard and fishquay workers from the riverside towns of North Shields and Wallsend, who moved happily from their tumbledown terraces to these fine new houses with inside toilets and gardens.
Many, like Ronnie Collyer, a retired shipyard worker, still live here and are still proud of the place.
All the trouble, says Ronnie, is down to ‘a few families who doan't keep their young’ uns in order.
And then the media coom down and blow everything up.’
He has polished shoes, a close shave, and too much pride for a free drink.
‘It's a canny place The Ridges, with plenty of good folk.’
But something was wrong from the start.
Some say it was the importing of whole streets of fighting families from the fishquays, with their dockland diversions of prostitution, drug-dealing and handling.
Others say it was the shortage of pubs, shops, churches, transport and police stations.
By the 1950s, The Ridges was the criminal ghetto of Newcastle, and by the 1970s a costly council manicure job had turned it into a free-fire zone.
Paths and boundaries vanished, allowing the tides of street life to wash right up to the doorsteps.
Joyriders used front lawns to practise their handbrake turns.
Car theft became so common that private cars virtually disappeared from the area.
Shops like greengrocers and chippies, with pitiful cash takings, were routinely subjected to armed robberies with shotguns, balaclavas — the whole bit.
When I ask the fat ladies at the drop-in centre what is the one thing that would do most to improve the estate they say ‘get rid of the kids’ and they are only half joking.
The age structure of Meadowell means it is awash with teenagers, whose only pastimes are having babies and body-building.
Do your husbands come here?
I ask, and they all laugh.
‘The men are all useless — sitting indoors if there's trouble in the street.
It's women have to go out and deal with it.’
By the time of the riots a quarter of all houses on the estate were boarded up and burned out by infant petrol bombers.
Unemployment was 80 per cent on some streets.
In Meadowell Primary, which has 232 children, every one was receiving a clothing grant.
The area had effectively been abandoned by the authorities, a fact which became clear during the riot itself, when police waited five hours to enter the estate and put down the disturbances.
‘And there were never more than a few dozen ringleaders,’ Bob Mather, a local butcher, tells me.
‘I was stood outside me shop all night, and most were no more than kids.’
Eight months on and little has changed — if anything it is rather worse.
Unemployment is up another 17 per cent; more houses and shops are boarded up; burglaries and joyriding continue — and if there is less ram-raiding it is only because 50 or so of the hardest cases are still behind bars.
A food co-op which tried to replace the burned-out shops has been closed after several break-ins, and even the drop-in centre is burgled weekly, according to project worker Sheila Auld.
There is a new phone box, ripped from the wall and lying on the floor of her office to prove it.
Meadowell has even discovered a new martyr in the shape of one Willy Hunter, a local hard nut awaiting trial for murder, and allegedly the victim of a police frame-up.
‘Free Willy Hunter’ say the graffiti, next to the old, fading graffiti for Dale Robson and Colin Atkins.
My friend Kevin, muscleman and minicab driver, says the lads would be out rioting for Willy now if it wasn't tipping down with rain the whole time.
A few things have been achieved, I suppose.
There are some posh flats going up at neighbouring Royal Quays which will provide building jobs: ‘It's Sun City in the middle of Bantustan,’ a Labour councillor said to me.
The Cheviot housing association is slowly taking over property in South Meadowell.
A new police station is to be built.
The government sponsored Meadowell Initiative makes noises in the north of the estate — but does pitifully little, painfully slowly.
North Tyneside council says it is too starved of funds by central government to do much.
Tory ministers, like Michael Heseltine who visited Meadowell last November, say the cash shortages are due to council profligacy and bad management.
MP Neville Trotter is a pear-shaped Tory with pear-shaped vowels who has little appeal to the people of Meadowell, and a dwindling appeal in the middle-class suburbs where unemployment is also climbing.
Paddy Cosgrove, his likely replacement, is a council hack of 21 years standing and ideal backbench fodder, though it is hard to imagine him leading a crusade for Meadowell.
When I ask the people of the estate what they want from this election some say they want Cheviot to rebuild it and others that it would be better grassed over.
Some say they should bring back hanging; others say it is the politicians they should hang; but most say there is nothing anybody can do at all.
General Election: N Trotter (C) 25,113, P Cosgrove (Lab) 22,530, D Mayhew (L/All) 10,446.
Con Maj: 2,583.
Election 1992: Labour anger after Tory phone ‘prank’
By George Jones, Political Editor
LABOUR launched a strong protest last night over the latest Conservative election broadcast, which invited Tory supporters to telephone Labour's London headquarters to complain over the way it gave prominence to ‘bad news’ about Britain.
The broadcast sought to contrast the record of the past 13 years of Tory rule with Labour's Winter of Discontent in 1978–79.
It also launched a fierce personal attack on Mr Kinnock's fitness for high office, highlighting his changes of view on nationalisation, Scottish devolution, nuclear disarmament and European Community membership.
Describing the Labour leader as a former leader of the ‘hard left’, it said people ‘can't trust a man who will change any principle, abandon any policy, say anything to get elected’.
But the most controversial feature of the broadcast was the inclusion of the telephone number of Labour's headquarters.
The broadcast began with an upbeat picture of life in Britain — asking the viewers if they recognised which country it was.
There were clips of interviews with people in France, Germany, Italy and Holland saying it was not their country.
‘The country we are describing is Britain, and Labour don't seem to recognise it.
Labour have been talking Britain down so hard, relishing every piece of bad news, rubbing their hands at any failure in public services, that they have chosen to forget what a great country Britain really is,’ said the broadcast.
It then invited people to ring Labour's headquarters.
Labour launched an immediate protest over what they described as a ‘pathetic prank’, and voiced concern that their legitimate work as a political party in the election campaign could be affected if their switchboard was jammed.
But the Tories were unrepentant, declaring that the broadcast was ‘making a point’ and the telephone number was already publicly available in the telephone book.
The broadcast, which featured Mr Hurd, Foreign Secretary, and Mr Heseltine, Environment Secretary, acknowledged there had been a recession which had caused pain for some people.
It added: ‘It would be a tragedy if the frustrations and the hardships that the recession has caused, and for some it is still causing, if it meant that Britain threw away all the achievements of the last decade.
Remember British living standards have never been so high.’
Harking back to the ‘terrible Winter of Discontent’ under the last Labour government, the 10-minute film recalled patients being turned away from hospitals, rubbish going uncollected and the dead being left unburied.
With images of picket-line strife, the broadcast warned: ‘The last thing we need now is for Labour to come in and wreck Britain's recovery.’
The Prime Minister appeared at the end of the broadcast to warn of further turmoil if the Government's health and trade union reforms were undone.
Mr Major said: ‘There is only one real choice at this election.
Going forward with me or backwards with Mr Kinnock.’
He said a Conservative victory would bring confidence that would get the economy ‘really humming’.
Labour would put the economy into reverse.
Election 1992: Somewhere over the rainbow
By Robert Shrimsley
AFTER the opening shot of a cartoon rainbow descending over a stately home, the camera panned in on a well-groomed man with a moustache.
He spoke for a minute, followed by a succession of other characters and then four grown, men sitting in the lotus position, proceeded to hurl themselves into the air.
The Natural Law Party, which is fielding 313 candidates, unveiled its long-awaited party election television broadcast last night.
Beginning in apparent earnest it then descended almost into parody and ended with the rainbow falling over Westminster Bridge and the Houses of Parliament.
Dr Geoffrey Clements, leader of the party that draws its inspiration from transcendental meditation and the teachings of the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, began by stating that it was ‘time to bring the light of science into politics’.
He then summarised the party's policies as ‘growth and abundance in the economy, education for higher consciousness…and a foreign policy nourishing to all nations’.
Among those who followed was the party's education spokesman, introduced as Dr Bevan Morris.
His doctorate is in the science of creative intelligence and was awarded by the Maharishi European Research Institute in Switzerland, but the titles neglected to mention this.
Dr Morris, who speaks like a television evangelist, ended his mission to explain with the words: ‘With higher consciousness, students will enjoy their studies, unfold their full creative intelligence and live life spontaneously in harmony with Natural Law.’
Suddenly a long-haired man with a moustache filled the screen, introduced as ‘Dr Doug Henning — magician and party executive councillor’.
With the mannerisms of a Sesame Street presenter, Dr Henning announced himself as an ‘expert in making things disappear’ and revealed that he would make the ‘problems of the nation disappear as darkness disappears with the onset of light’.
As Dr Henning talked about meditation the picture changed to four men demonstrating the art of yogic flying.
Sitting in the lotus position they jumped into the air using their thighs to propel them off the ground.
‘Scientific research shows that yogic flying produces increased brain coherence and harmony is generated throughout society.
The programmes of my party are scientific and reliable,’ he concluded.
As the broadcast drew to a close a voice proclaimed ‘a vote cast for any parties which oppose each other is a vote for conflict’.
Election 1992: ‘Fair rates’ are Labour's top priority
By Anthony Looch
A BILL to replace the Conservatives' local taxes with ‘fair rates’ heads a list of three measures that Labour would introduce within weeks of taking office, Mr Kinnock said at a media briefing in London yesterday.
He said his Bill to abolish the council tax would be accompanied by ‘the immediate commencement of the process of introducing fair rates’.
The second priority would be to introduce a Bill establishing a Scottish Parliament, which would have its second reading before the summer recess.
The third would be a Freedom of Information Bill, which would be ‘an essential component of our comprehensive programme of constitutional change and strengthening of individual rights’.
On April 27, Labour would inform Britain's European partners that it would sign the Social Charter and unblock directives on temporary and part-time work and parental leave, which the Conservatives had vetoed.
Election 1992: City paying bonuses in advance of polling day
By Alastair McCall
MANY City stockbrokers, advertising agencies and banking houses are paying substantial bonuses to their high-earning staff to beat the effects of a substantial increase in taxes in the wake of a possible Labour victory on April 9.
Some companies are also reported to be paying several months' salary in advance of the election.
The number of advances made in the past few days has sharply increased as companies attempt to match their rivals and allay the tax fears of senior staff.
Part of the reason behind the payments is to placate high earners, some of whom are asking to be moved to overseas branches of their companies to avoid higher taxes.
All of these people would be affected by the Labour proposals to introduce a new top income tax rate of 50 per cent, and to extend national insurance contributions on salaries above £21,000.
One stockbroking source said last night: ‘There are a certain number of people who have already said: ‘Listen, if I'm going to get clobbered, I would rather be transferred, or maybe I could find someone else who can transfer me.’
‘These people have leverage.
So when some City and other British institutions start doing something for their employees and offering them something to alleviate their fears, the others are likely to match it.
‘The fact that there is an election has got everything to do with this.’
Bonuses make up an important part of their total annual earnings.
‘Essentially you have a lot of people who are very highly paid.
They have a good base salary but make more than that out of bonuses,’ the source said.
One of the stockbrokers who have been making bonus payments in recent days is Salomon Brothers.
A company spokesman said last night that Salomon had acted in response to payments being made by other institutions.
The special mid-year payments were being made in advance, based on performances last year.
‘It was essentially decided to do this because major institutions in the City were offering their employees an opportunity.
We have been here under many governments since 1971 and will continue to be here under many more,’ the Salomon spokesman said.
Election 1992: Labour: who is in the Class of ‘92?
By Charles de Lisle
ON the face of it, Clive Efford and Geoffrey Smith ought to be Conservatives.
Efford, challenging Peter Bottomley in marginal Eltham, is a London taxi driver — a breed not noted for its left-wing sympathies.
And Wing Cdr Geoffrey Smith, who takes on Robert Atkins in similarly marginal South Ribble, is a retired surgeon who was educated at Cambridge.
‘It's true that my cv reads like that of a Conservative,’ says Mr Smith, a former consultant opthalmic surgeon to the RAF.
‘But then I'm an independent-minded fellow.’
Smith and Efford will both have to win if Labour is to secure the 326 seats it needs to form a Government with an overall majority.
Such a result would mean one of the largest-ever Labour intakes, with at least 120 new faces joining the 206 Labour MPs standing for re-election — most of whom are confident of winning.
Less easy to determine is precisely what impact the newcomers, a familiar mixture of trade union officials and members of the teaching profession, would have on the political hue of the parliamentary party.
To judge by the official Labour literature, they would appear to be a moderate bunch.
Not one of the 120 is listed as a member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND)— but then as the Conservatives have pointed out, the published biographies contain no mention whatever of CND membership.
A Labour landslide would produce 20 new women MPs, including Glenda Jackson in Hampstead and Highgate, but the intake is predominantly local, middle-class and employed in the public sector; 16 are listed as sponsored by unions.
Just 15 of the new faces attended Oxbridge, half (57) were educated at other universities and a mere seven at those traditional breeding grounds, the polytechnics.
The election also marks a further stage in the decline of the manual workers: for example, there would be 13 miners in the new parliamentary Labour Party, against 16 in the old, and 31 in the party Harold Wilson led back from the wilderness in 1964.
The Tories have also put on their blinkers, choosing fewer candidates from working-class origin and fewer Etonians.
After the election, there are likely to be about 30 Etonians on their benches, compared with 43 in the last Parliament and 68 the last time the party was led by one of their number (Sir Alec Douglas-Home in 1964).
The most striking feature of the Labour candidate list is the rise of the professional politicians.
None describes him/her self as such in the party's official literature — that would be inviting disaster at the ballot box — but they are not hard to spot.
‘They often masquerade as local government officials,’ says Byron Criddle, senior lecturer in politics at Aberdeen University.
‘The professional politicians are now nearly as numerous as the teachers of one sort or another who have traditionally become Labour MPs.’
Certainly quite a few of the 120 prospective new faces might be described as career politicians.
Besides five local government employees, there are 16 lecturers, 13 union officials, 11 teachers, 10 voluntary workers, five party officials and three MPs' researchers.
Contrast that with the two miners and mere four who also dirty their hands: Jim D'Avila (Swindon), a worker at the local Rover car plant; Nick Ainger (Pembroke), a rigger; Llewellyn Smith (Michael Foot's successor in Blaenau Gwent), a former factory worker; and Bob Ainsworth (Coventry NE), a sheet metal worker.
More surprising, one candidate describes himself as unemployed: Eric Clarke, the Left-wing former miner and senior NUM official.
But he need not worry: he is assured of a job as MP for Midlothian.
Not so confident is Nigel Beard (Erith & Crayford), an ICI manager who is one of precious few Labour contenders with any experience of private enterprise.
For a typical candidate, one need look no further than Keith Hill, bidding to take Streatham from the Tories.
Mr Hill, 48, is a former politics lecturer who is now the political officer of the Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers.
‘He's a Kinnock moderate,’ says one insider.
Election 1992: Rivals seek the scalp of ‘Thatcher's disciple’
By Jenny Shields
IT WAS AN absolutely foul night in Buchlyvie.
Inside the village hall, a man regarded as one of Scotland's ablest politicians was invoking the name of his mentor.
Michael Forsyth, the Scottish Office minister whose portfolio includes two of the most hotly debated issues of the election campaign — health and education — had just been formally adopted by his constituency association to contest the Stirling seat.
With one of the slenderest majorities to defend anywhere in the country, Mr Forsyth could be forgiven if he looked worried.
But here, in the heart of rural Stirlingshire and surrounded by the party faithful, he is in good form.
Inside the hall there was no dissent but outside Mr Forsyth, long since dubbed Mrs Thatcher's leading disciple in Scotland, knew a tempest was blowing up.
His scalp is valued above all others in Scotland, with Labour desperate to regain the seat they lost to him in 1983 in the biggest pro-Tory swing of the campaign.
Six candidates are contesting this sprawling seat, which stretches from the historic town of Stirling, north and west to Crianlarich.
Mr Forsyth is in ebullient mood and is fighting his campaign on his record as a constituency MP.
He regards a recent remark by the Labour leader of Stirling district council that he ‘interferes more in local issues than any other MP in Scotland’ as a tribute.
Labour's Kate Phillips, a 45-year-old freelance adviser to Third World aid agencies, who has used the year since her selection to raise her profile locally, is in tigerish mood.
She insists she is the established challenger to Mr Forsyth's crown and argues that he has not appeared particularly sure-footed during the campaign.
Ms Phillips, like the Scottish National Party's candidate Gerry Fisher, has been making a big play for the student vote, which could prove critical in this, Scotland's second most marginal constituency.
A campaign by Stirling University students association — while officially non-political — to persuade those living elsewhere in Britain to register for a postal vote, has been a big success.
Mr Forsyth's support for student loans has ensured little support for him on the campus but, that apart, the student vote seems to be as divided as it is in the wider constituency.
In 1987 the SNP trailed the three other parties with a lowly 10.7 per cent but this time says Mr Fisher, a widower who lives in Dollar, the mood is different.
A computer manager with the Scottish Examination Board, Mr Fisher chuckles at the thought that he is ‘fighting my boss's boss’.
He calls Mr Forsyth a ‘clever wee chiel’(child), and as one raised in a hard debating school says he would relish a public debate with the Scottish Office Minister and the other candidates.
Mr Fisher believes that Mr Forsyth's vocal support of the union can only help the nationalists, but his real target is the Labour vote.
The Tories could profit from this switch of allegiance and, with the opposition vote split, Mr Forsyth could get home.
Willie Robertson, 42, the Liberal Democrat candidate, joined the party just three years ago but has an unbridled enthusiasm for the stump and feels that a sizeable proportion of Tories — disaffected by Mr Forsyth's ardent Thatcherism — could switch to him.
Election 1992: Poll tax evasion may hit Labour
By Ben Fenton
FALLING electoral rolls may threaten Labour's chances in several marginals and even in some ‘safe’ seats.
Poll tax evasion is thought to be the main reason for the falling numbers.
Figures from the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys show that the number of voters is significantly less than at the time of the 1987 election, even though the adult population has grown.
The independent Electoral Reform Society said the drop was largely due to efforts to evade the poll tax.
The biggest drop is in Hackney, east London, which has two safe Labour seats.
The electorate has fallen by 24,985 — more than 18 per cent— since 1987.
The number of voters missing in the Labour seats held by Ms Diane Abbott and Mr Brian Sedgemore is in each case about twice the size of their majority.
More worryingly for Labour, in six key target seats the number disappearing from the electoral rolls is higher than the majority it is trying to overturn.
In Hampstead and Highgate, north London, where Miss Glenda Jackson is trying to overturn a Tory majority of 2,221, the register has dropped by 5,156, and in Hornsey and Wood Green, north London, the chances of Labour reversing a 1,779 Conservative lead may be hit by the disappearance of 6,673 names from the list.
The majorities in Labour target seats are also smaller than the reduction in the rolls in Dulwich, Streatham, Greenwich and Wallasey.
The Electoral Reform Society believes most of those who have gone off the rolls are potential Labour supporters, if only because of their assumed strong opposition to the poll tax.
Labour argues that it will not be significantly affected because most of those who evade the register would have been among the large proportion — between 20.1 per cent and 31.2 per cent in their top 10 target constituencies — who did not vote in 1987.
Ms Abbott pointed out that although there are 12,000 fewer voters on her Hackney North and Stoke Newington register, only 55 per cent of registered voters visited the ballot box in June 1987.
Mr Simon Osborn, of the Electoral Reform Society, said: ‘It would be unsafe for Labour to assume that all these people are non-voters.
‘If it is a close-run thing in any one of these seats, it could make the difference between a win or a lose for one side or the other.’
People put heritage before new roads
By Charles Clover, Environment Editor
THREE people in four would prefer to protect areas of natural beauty or historic interest from roads, even if the roads took longer to build or cost more, according to a Gallup poll for The Daily Telegraph.
Only 12 per cent believed that roads through sites of natural beauty or historical interest should be built as planned.
Thirteen per cent did not know.
Some 175 protected sites, including 50 Sites of Special Scientific Interest, are threatened by road schemes, environmentalists say.
Most controversial are the M3 extension, which cuts through Twyford Down, Winchester, and the East London river crossing through Oxleas Wood, south London.
In the case of Oxleas Wood, a planning inspector had recommended that a cut-and-cover tunnel should be re-considered.
At Twyford Down, protesters want a tunnel but the Government has rejected the scheme as too expensive and time-consuming.
Contrary to popular belief among political parties that the environment is a middle-class issue, the poll found equal support — 77 per cent— across the classes for tunnels and re-routing.
The highest support for taking measures to protect the landscape was among the 35–44 age group, where 80 per cent were in favour.
The lowest support was in the 65-plus age group, with 67 per cent in favour.
Buildings trust is ruined by squatters
By John Grigsby Local Government Correspondent
A LEADING organisation involved in the renovation of historic buildings has been forced into liquidation because families have squatted in the houses it restored.
The British Historic Buildings Trust is unable to pay architects, builders and financial backers because it cannot raise money from most of the 33 houses it repaired in Hanover Square, Manningham, Bradford, West Yorks.
Under an agreement with the mostly Pakistani residents, the trust bought for £1 each the dilapidated Grade II-listed homes, dating from 1848–51, after they had been threatened with demolition.
The trust agreed to renovate the houses and sell them back to their former owners for the cost of the work and the trust's expenses, less the value of grants obtained.
The trust said prices would be about two-thirds of market value and those who could not afford to buy could rent them through a housing association.
When the houses were ready, prices of up to £51,000 were quoted.
Some people said that their incomes were so low that they could not obtain mortgages and 18 were squatted in by former occupants who refused to pay the money.
An attempt to have them evicted failed because the county court judge ruled that the law only applied to people who had no interest in the property.
The trust has failed to sell some of the other houses because of local concern about the squatters.
The trust, which has lost £153,000 on the project, has restored about 200 properties and was prominent in preserving Pell Well Hall in Shropshire and the 12th century Siddington Barn near Cirencester, Glos.
Mr Alan Bemrose, trust founder, said last night: ‘We have to go into liquidation because these people broke the agreement and illegally occupied the houses.
‘The situation is tragic, but it is important that these people do not undermine confidence in this approach to conservation.’
Job aid widened
A scheme to help the unemployed homeless find a job and accommodation, pioneered in London by The Industrial Society and major employers, is to be extended to Bristol, Edinburgh, Hull and Southend in Essex.
People put heritage before new roads
By Charles Clover Environment Editor
THREE people in four would prefer to protect areas of natural beauty or historic interest from roads, even if the roads took longer to build or cost more, according to a Daily Telegraph Gallup poll.
Only 12 per cent believed that roads through sites of natural beauty or historical interest should be built as planned.
Thirteen per cent did not know.
Some 175 protected sites, including 50 Sites of Special Scientific Interest, are threatened by road schemes, environmentalists say.
Most controversial are the M3 extension through Twyford Down, Winchester, and the East London river crossing through Oxleas Wood, south London.
In the case of Oxleas Wood, a planning inspector recommended that a cut-and-cover tunnel should be re-considered.
At Twyford Down, protesters want a tunnel but the Government rejected the scheme as too expensive and time-consuming.
The poll asked: ‘In building roads it sometimes happens that roads have to be built through or across sites of natural beauty or historical interest.
Some people say the roads could be re-routed or built through tunnels, but usually at extra cost and time.
‘What do you think is more important: to protect the historical and nature sites, paying more for the roads, or let the roads go through the areas as originally planned?’
Contrary to popular belief among political parties that the environment is a middle-class issue, the poll found equal support — 77 per cent— across the classes for tunnels and re-routing.
The highest support for taking measures to protect the landscape was among the 35–44 age group, where 80 per cent were in favour.
The lowest support was in the 65-plus age group, with 67 per cent in favour.
Conservative voters polled lower (67 per cent) in favour of protecting sites than Labour (80 per cent ) and the Liberal Democrats (80 per cent ).
The poll was conducted over the past week with a sample of 1,023 adults.
Hoaxer jailed
James Beveridge, 36, unemployed, of no settled address, was jailed for two years at the High Court in Edinburgh yesterday after admitting making a hoax bomb call to Gatwick airport.
New laws deterring foster parents
By Peter Pallot Social Services Staff
NEW LAWS and more paperwork are forcing some people to stop being foster parents, the National Foster Care Association said yesterday.
Natural parents often had access to children guaranteed under a court order and foster parents had to be committed to support for ‘parental responsibility’, which could cause difficulties, said Miss Marion Lowe, the association's director.
Relations could become strained over day-to-day decisions such as what clothes to buy for a child, for example.
Miss Lowe said: ‘Obviously there will be a minority of children taken into care precisely because their parents were not behaving reasonably.’
For many foster parents the strain imposed by the rights of natural parents and extra paperwork required under the Children Act which came into force last year could cause them to give up, she went on.
The association released details of a survey of 244 carers showing that half of were unsure of their duties under the Act.
One in five had received no training in the Act and most were expecting to receive none during the next six months.
The survey also found that a quarter of foster parents had received no written information on the Act.
Local authorities or voluntary agencies should have provided the information, the association said.
Social workers are increasingly placing children in foster care, which is seen as preferable to care in residential homes, whose image has been marred by scandals.
Lambeth Council is trying to encourage more homosexual men and women to adopt children or become foster parents.
A plan approved by councillors in the Labour-run south London borough requires material issued by its fostering and adoption unit to be amended by June to affirm the eligibility of ‘gay men and lesbians as foster carers/adopters’.
The plan was adopted by the social services committee after officials assured members that it did not contravene the 1986 Local Government Act, which outlaws the promotion of homosexuality in schools or by published material.
Job aid widened
A scheme to help the unemployed homeless find a job and accommodation, pioneered in London by The Industrial Society and major employers, is to be extended to Bristol, Edinburgh, Hull and Southend in Essex.
Pilots ejected too soon, say villagers
By Michael Fleet
RELIEF, anger and fear were felt yesterday in the scattered communities near the factory car park where an American EF-111 jet crashed on Thursday just yards from where 45 people were working.
Many locals were angry that the pilot and his electronic warfare officer ejected from their crashing plane too soon to ensure it would not hit buildings at Barton Hartshorn, near Buckingham.
Mrs Margaret Charles, living 200 yards from the crash, said: ‘I am furious because I do not think pilots should just bale out and let the plane go on and crash into a village.
I am still very shaken and will be taking it up with the American authorities.’
Mr Patrick Fitzgibbon, who lives in Steeple Aston, said he was deeply concerned that the pilot ejected one and a half miles from the crash site.
‘In 1969, an American jet crashed 200 yards from the school in Steeple Aston.
The pilot stayed with his aircraft and steered it away from the school and bravely died with it to save others.
‘In those days, it was standing orders for a pilot to stay with his plane until it was definitely safe.
In this case, the crew ejected and left the plane to fly on its own.’
Campaigners living near the base called for all flights to be suspended pending an investigation but a spokesman said operations would continue as normal.
The plane crashed near a crossroads one mile from three villages but the Dalgety seed processing plant, which almost took the impact, is surrounded by fields and isolated houses.
Mr Paul Bagni, general manager of Dalgety, said: ‘I am convinced the pilot was aiming for an old airfield behind our plant but came down just short of it.’
There were suggestions from the American air force that the controls may have been put out of order by the fire which caused the crash and that, even if the pilot had stayed in his cockpit until the collision, he would not have been able to do more.
‘Only the pilot will be able to tell us what he was thinking in the seconds before he ejected,’ said Mr Richard Colley, spokesman for the Upper Heyford base.
The jet crashed in a ball of flame, destroying 15 cars and damaging 10 more but further evidence of the good fortune became clear yesterday with the sight of the aircraft wreckage embedded in mud.
‘Had it hit the concrete or had the ground been less soft, it would have carried on after the collision and headed straight into our warehouse,’ said Mr Bagni.
Miss Jean Thompson, chairman of the ‘Defend Steeple Aston’ group in the village at the west end of the Upper Heyford runway, was angered to see flights continuing yesterday.
‘We are terribly concerned about safety and believe that, had this plane actually hit a village, all flights would have been stopped,’ she said.
‘Because it luckily missed houses, they are just carrying on.’
Capt Jeffery Coombe, the pilot, and Capt David Genevish, electronics warfare officer, spent much of yesterday with their families but will undergo a de-briefing.
International: Li Peng suffers blow as MPs rewrite report
By Graham Hutchings in Peking
THE FUTURE of China's conservative Premier, Li Peng, was thrown into doubt yesterday when the country's normally tame parliamentarians rebuffed him by rewriting his government report.
Delegates to the National People's Congress (NPC) made more than 150 changes to Li's work report to include a warning against hard-line Marxism and to stress support for economic reforms.
They also departed from their rubber-stamp tradition in a vote on the controversial Three Gorges dam project on the Yangtze river.
The scheme was approved, but amid strong opposition.
The changes to Li's report seem bound to weaken his position at an important juncture in China's political life.
They will boost Communist Party reformers, who are battling hard-line opponents before a crucial autumn party congress.
When the first draft of Li's report was presented a fortnight ago it incorporated many of the demands for faster reform voiced earlier this year by China's elder statesman, Deng Xiaoping.
But it omitted any reference to the dangers of ‘Leftism’, despite the fact that Deng had stressed this, and that it was at the heart of a party politburo statement.
The delegates added a clause saying: ‘While watching out for Rightist deviations, we must guard mainly against Leftist deviations.’
The NPC ended its annual session yesterday by passing all laws and reports put before it, but dissent was far greater than it has been in the years following the 1989 crackdown in Peking, which Li played a leading role in.
Nearly a third of the 2,633 votes cast on the huge dam project took the form of abstentions or ‘no’ votes.
Before the result was announced, two deputies representing Taiwan stood up and shouted out their opposition to the £6 billion hydro-electric and flood control scheme, before storming out.
The vote means that the project will be included in the current 10-year development plan.
But the Bill provides room for manoeuvring — and perhaps an indefinite delay — by allowing the government to choose an ‘appropriate time to proceed based on the state's financial abilities’.
Heated debate over the dam project took place during the 15-day NPC session, with many delegates opposing it for environmental and financial reasons.
International: Britons ignore warnings of danger and remain in Libya
By Alan Philps, Diplomatic Correspondent
BRITISH diplomats and contract workers appeared determined to stay in Libya last night despite warnings from mullahs and the mob that they should leave for their own safety.
After Thursday's rampage by crowds which burned the Venezuelan Embassy, Col Muammar Gaddafi appealed for ‘self-restraint’ and ordered more troops on to the streets to protect foreign missions, Libyan radio said.
But the situation remained confused.
A Muslim cleric whose Friday sermon was broadcast on Libyan television warned diplomats from countries which voted in favour of UN sanctions against Libya to flee.
‘We warn them that their lives are in danger,’ said the speaker.
‘We demand that their embassies should be closed, their companies nationalised and all the citizens belonging to these states be evacuated,’ the imam said.
Mr Douglas Hurd, Foreign Secretary, telephoned the head of the two-man British Interests Section in Tripoli, Mr Allen Brown, yesterday and was told that the British community was calm.
Foreign missions had not been warned to leave, he said.
European ambassadors were last night trying to find out from Libyan authorities if the chanting of the mob reflected the view of Col Gaddafi.
But with the three-day Muslim feast of Id el-Fitr under way it was unlikely any clear response would result.
Tripoli was reported quiet yesterday, seemingly proving that Col Gaddafi is able to bring out the crowds and send them home at will.
Mr Hurd said delays in granting exit visas to members of the 5,000-strong British community had eased.
But he said: ‘It's still a very confused, uncertain and unsatisfactory situation.’
More than a million foreigners live in Libya, including more than 10,000 Europeans, 500 to 1,000 Americans and 2,000 Canadians.
Col Gaddafi has until April 15 to hand over two suspected bombers of the Pan Am flight over Lockerbie in 1988 or face UN sanctions including a cut-off of air traffic and arms sales and an enforced reduction of Libyan diplomatic representation abroad.
Col Gaddafi's friends and neighbours are already preparing new transport links to the outside world to take the strain if the airports are closed.
The country will be far from cut off, but travel may be a lenghty and expensive process.
International: 19 die as Bosnia leader seeks UN intervention
By Michael Montgomery in Belgrade
THE President of Bosnia-Hercegovina, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, appealed yesterday for United Nations intervention to stave off civil war as fierce clashes swept across Bosnia and neighbouring Croatia, leaving at least 19 people dead.
In a letter to the UN, Mr Izetbegovic said armed attacks were propelling the republic's Serbian, Croatian and Muslim communities into open warfare.
He asked the Security Council to expand its peace-keeping operation in Croatia to include crisis points in Bosnia.
He called on the UN initially to deploy teams of military observers, but other Bosnian officials said yesterday they hoped a peace-keeping force could follow.
Intense artillery and mortar bombardments claimed 14 lives in the eastern Croatian town of Osijek in what Croatian officials said was the heaviest onslaught by Serbian forces since a ceasefire accord was signed last January.
Belgrade radio said Croatian forces fired mortars on to the Serbian town of Sid and attacked Yugoslav Army positions in central and eastern Croatia.
The renewed clashes came on the eve of the arrival of the first UN peace-keeping troops to Croatia.
Bitter inter-communal violence pitting Serbian militia against armed bands of Croats and Muslims showed no signs of easing in Bosnia, whose embattled government is anxiously awaiting a decision on diplomatic recognition by the West.
Mr Izetbegovic's urgent appeal was issued after Serbian paramilitary groups took control of all access points and key buildings in the northern city of Banja Luka and in other predominantly Serbian areas.
This appeared to be an attempt to stake out territory in the run-up to Bosnia's likely recognition by the EC as an independent state.
Serbian forces yesterday claimed to have captured the centre of Bijeljina, in north-eastern Bosnia, after days of fierce gun battles with Muslims and Croats.
Although telephone lines to the city remain severed, a Sarajevo radio reporter said corpses littered the pavement next to the town hall.
Serbian units were said to be conducting house-to-house searches last night after ordering Muslims and Croats to surrender their weapons.
The final assault on Bijeljina was reported to have been led by a Serbian guerrilla leader known as Arkan, whose units fought in some of the most ferocious battles in Croatia.
Western diplomats said the presence of paramilitary groups from Serbia indicated a dangerous escalation of the conflict in Bosnia.
International: Yeltsin may grab Black Sea fleet
By John Kampfner in Moscow
PRESIDENT Yeltsin deepened his Cabinet reshuffle yesterday, removing Mr Gennady Burbulis as First Deputy Prime Minister in an attempt to stave off an attempt by hardliners to sabotage his government next week.
In a day of fast-moving developments, Mr Yeltsin also took a shot at Ukraine, with a threat to take the entire Black Sea fleet into Russian hands, and saying he was taking over border troops in the Transcaucasus.
The measures were designed to pre-empt attacks at Monday's Congress of People's Deputies.
The replacement of Mr Burbulis, which the decree said was at his own request, will go some way to placating those in both the liberal and conservative camps annoyed by his somewhat high-handed manner.
But, by keeping him on as State Secretary, Mr Yeltsin is ensuring that his trusted colleague from his days as Communist Party chief in Sverdlovsk (now Yekaterinburg) remains firmly in charge of all presidential structures.
The decree said Mr Burbulis would formulate overall domestic and foreign policy.
On Thursday Mr Yeltsin relieved Mr Yegor Gaidar, Deputy Prime Minister and the chief architect of the reforms, of his additional post as Finance Minister.
There was no immediate word of a replacement for Mr Burbulis, who in the absence of a formal Prime Minister has run day-to-day government business.
Two Deputy Defence Ministers were announced.
They are General Pavel Grachev and Mr Andrei Kokoshin, deputy head of the USA–Canada Institute, a prominent think-tank.
International: Alia quits Albania presidency
By Adrian Brown in Tirana
PRESIDENT Ramiz Alia resigned yesterday as the leader of Albania, quietly removing the last pillar of communist power in what was once Eastern Europe's most orthodox Stalinist state.
In a subdued announcement on state television and radio, Mr Alia, who has been in or near the centre of power in Albania for almost 50 years, declared he would officially step down at today's opening of parliament.
He said his decision was taken after talks with the leaders of the two main political parties, the Socialist Party and the Democratic Party, which won a landslide victory in last month's general election.
News of his departure was greeted with muted satisfaction by people on the streets of Tirana, the capital.
The Democratic Party also announced that it had selected Dr Sali Berisha, party leader, as presidential candidate, making him Mr Alia's most likely successor.
International: The guerrilla chief whose very name strikes terror
By MICHAEL MONTGOMERY
MERE mention of the name Zeljko Raznjatovic, better known by his sobriquet, Arkan, is enough to send shivers down the spine of even the most battle-hardened Croatian fighter, writes Michael Montgomery in Belgrade.
Known for his baby face and beloved Koch and Heckler sub-machine gun, Arkan controls a highly-disciplined shock force thought to be the most able and ruthless Serbian guerrilla group to have emerged during Yugoslavia's tumultuous collapse.
A prominent underworld figure popular in Belgrade and the head of the fan club for the Red Star football team, Arkan became the Serbian supremo in eastern Croatia during one of the most brutal campaigns of the Croatian war.
In the process, according to Belgrade press reports, Arkan made himself rich on looted gold, cars and electronics equipment.
The entry this week of units of Arkan's 1,000-strong force, known as the Serbian Tigers, into the seething ethnic conflict in Bosnia was a further sign that the forces of destruction are massing for war in this volatile republic.
Unlike many of the guerrilla leaders who are unknown except to the intrepid few who visit their frontline hideouts, Arkan rebels are in the public limelight like the best of Hollywood's gangsters.
Flanked by his heavily-armed officers, Arkan is often in attendance at public ceremonies and state occasions in Belgrade.
His unchecked activities are thought to derive from the strong support he enjoys from the Serbian government, which is either unwilling or unable to deactivate him.
Although he declares that his mission is to stop the march of fascism — Croatian fascism first and foremost — Yugoslav press reports have linked Arkan to the murky world of drug smuggling and arms dealing.
He has also been accused in both Serbian and Croatian newspapers of working at one time as a hitman for the Yugoslav secret police.
Arkan is known under several aliases by Interpol.
Asked recently what he would do when the war ended in Croatia, Arkan said he would sell his six captured tanks, hang up his combat fatigues and return to his ice cream parlour business in Belgrade.
Instead, he appears to have transferred operations to Bosnia for the much more lucrative business of war.
International: Italy's poll campaign ends with a bang
By Robert Fox in Rome
ITALY'S general election campaign closed in the accustomed style of Roman carnival last night.
The reformed communists threw a pop concert in St John's Lateran and the neo-fascists of the MSI rallied and hectored in the Piazza del Popolo.
But for most of the campaign, the 12th since the Republic began in 1945, there have been fewer fireworks and more sober reflection.
Many Italians believe this could be the most decisive poll since 1948 when the Christian Democrats fought the scare of a communist takeover, and again in 1976 when it was feared the charismatic Enrico Berlinguer would win under the banner of Eurocommunism.
This time the communist threat has been absent; this is the first general election in a major European country since the Cold War ended and the Berlin Wall fell.
The red menace is gone and Italians must face the question of whether their country can hold together; whether it can be governed efficiently and whether a new administration will have the courage to beat public debt, the Mafia and corruption.
Some of the familiar fun of the election fair is still there.
The pornographic film star Ilona Staller, alias La Cicciolina, has withdrawn from the lists, pleading marital pressure and pregnancy.
Her successor in the Party of Love, Moanna Pozzi, has been voted the most popular politician campaigning on television, though her ‘seminar on eroticism’ at an election rally was banned on the grounds of public decency.
Alessandra Mussolini, granddaughter of Il Duce, has been a hit with photographers, although only the foreign press have paid attention to her pretence to campaign for the neo-fascist party.
The major political development has been the division of the communists into the reformist Democratic Left and the Marxist Refoundation, and the growth of protest movements.
The small but respected Republican Party has campaigned effectively against the old system which made the party bosses the real power brokers and not the elected candidates.
International: Brown in trouble for choosing Jackson
By Ian Brodie in New York
JERRY BROWN ran into trouble in the New York Democratic primary yesterday over his choice of the Rev Jesse Jackson as his vice-presidential running mate.
He was heckled, booed and hissed during a stormy meeting with Jewish leaders who detest Mr Jackson, the black civil rights leader.
They still resent Mr Jackson's 1984 description of New York City as ‘Hymietown’, although he later apologised.
They also loathe his associations with Yassar Arafat, leader of the PLO, and with Mr Louis Farrakhan, the radical American Muslim leader who once called Judaism a ‘gutter religion’.
Mr Brown was unrepentant, even though one in four Democratic primary voters in New York are Jewish.
He said he had been aware of the consequences when he picked Mr Jackson a few weeks ago.
He explained why he made his controversial choice: ‘I believe the number one goal of America's survival is healing the divisions between black and white.’
Jewish leaders insisted they had no argument with blacks and were not opposed to a black Vice-President.
But they thought Mr Brown had chosen unwisely.
So far Mr Jackson has not endorsed Mr Brown, but he has left the impression he would accept an invitation to be on the ticket if the former governor of California beats exceedingly long odds to become the Democrats' White House nominee.
Mr Brown is parading this tacit Jackson support in an effort to draw blacks away from Mr Bill Clinton, the Democrats' front-runner whose solid black support helped him to big victories in the South and Mid-West.
The Arkansas governor needs a good win in Tuesday's voting in New York.
A loss would give momentum to the idea of dumping him at the party convention in July.
International: Democrats take third option in Alaska primary
By Our Washington Correspondent
Alaskans faced with choosing Mr Bill Clinton or Mr Jerry Brown for their presidential candidate took the third option, with the majority voting ‘don't know’.
Alaska has rarely decisively elected any mainstream candidate.
This time the ‘don't knows’ won with 36 per cent; Mr Brown, former California governor, took 33 per cent and Mr Clinton 30 per cent .
International: Aquino fears the power of a corpse
By Hugo Gurdon, South East Asia Correspondent
HOLLYWOOD would reject it as unbelievable, but in Philippines politics anything is possible: even being double-crossed by the corpse of your husband's murderer.
This is the fear that haunts President Aquino in her final days in Malacanang Palace before presidential elections on May 11.
Mrs Imelda Marcos, widow of the late President Ferdinand Marcos, hopes to resuscitate her ailing political campaign by bringing home the body of her late husband on April 12.
The corpse has been in a freezer in Hawaii since he died there in exile in 1989.
Mrs Aquino, who believes Mr Marcos ordered the 1983 murder of her husband, Benigno, says the homecoming can go ahead as long as the coffin is flown direct to Laoag in the heart of the Marcos fiefdom in North Luzon province.
Mrs Aquino knows the power of a campaign corpse, having herself been catapulted into the presidency in 1986 after touring the country with her husband's body.
The President, who is not standing, is backing the candidacy of Mr Fidel Ramos, her former defence secretary.
Mrs Marcos agreed long ago to fly her husband's body direct to Laoag, but she is now hinting at defiance.
The Philippines consul in Hawaii has mounted a guard at the mausoleum to make sure the body is not moved without Manila's approval.
Mr Horacio Paredes, the Malacanang spokesman, said yesterday: ‘Mrs Marcos hasn't made any effort to seek formal permission.
She had better do so by April 10 or it will be too late.’
But he said a double-cross was suspected.
‘Our intelligence reports suggest that once the flight from Hawaii is aloft a bomb will explode at Laoag and they will ask for landing rights in Manila.
‘Then we will have world attention riveted on the box in the capital.
Maybe that way you produce enough instability that the elections…’ he said trailing off.
One of the leading contenders, Mr Eduardo ‘Danding’ Conjuanco, added glamour to his campaign this week by persuading the former heart-throb actor Joseph Estrada to postpone his own presidential ambitions and become his running mate.
Mr Conjuanco is a former Marcos crony and head of the San Miguel brewery, the Philippines' biggest company.
Mrs Miriam Santiago, a lawyer, is leading in the polls.
Her anti-corruption stance is popular but probably not enough to overcome more powerful candidates.
Mr Conjuanco's other main rival is his friend, Mr Ramon Mitra, former Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Travelling to polling stations is expensive in a country where many people earn only £100 a year, so wealthy well-organised candidates bus voters to the booths and traditionally nudge them in the right direction with sample ballot sheets with the appropriate names ticked.
International: Writer suspected of stranglings
By Our Los Angeles Correspondent
A writer who went on a police-escorted tour of Los Angeles's red light districts to help him with an alleged magazine article is now wanted on suspicion of strangling three prostitutes in the city, police said yesterday.
Jack Unterweger, 42, has been convicted in Austria of murdering a woman in similar style to the three killings in Los Angeles.
He is currently in jail in Miami awaiting extradition to Austria in relation to six other murders.
International: Spirits are undimmed in land of the midnight taxi-jams Japan has cut top salaries to deal with the recession.
But Robert Whymant in Tokyo reports that most businessmen are feeling little pain
By ROBERT WHYMANT
AROUND midnight each weekday the elevated highways leading out of Tokyo groan with taxi-jams.
Whole fleets of taxis, paid for by the company, carry Japan's white-collar elite home to the suburbs after an evening's drinking in the Ginza at company expense.
Despite the slowdown in the Japanese economy, and the collapse of the stock market, the hard times which an ‘economic crisis’ should usher in are hard to detect.
The midnight taxi-jams show no sign of being shortened by corporate retrenchment.
Faced with falling profits, a number of large firms plan modest cuts in entertainment budgets, and some bars are shedding part-time hostesses.
But a tour of Tokyo's night spots suggests that the lack of business confidence shown in official surveys has yet to dampen the spirits of the massed corporate revellers.
Japanese firms are cutting capital spending in a bearish business climate.
But in other ways the recession has still to nibble, yet alone bite.
Recession Japanese-style means economic growth of two to three per cent, a respectable rate by the standards of the US and Western Europe.
Unlike Britain, Japan has full employment and a high level of savings which facilitates investment and helps to keep down interest rates and inflation.
Some electronics and car manufacturers are cutting down on hiring this year, but owners of small factories and restaurants are crying out for workers.
Despite the labour shortage, employers have skilfully staved off demands for big wage increases, helped by sensational talk in the media of an ‘economic crisis’.
The average wage increase in industry this spring is slightly below five per cent for the first time in four years.
Yet that still translates into a net gain for workers, with inflation at about 2.5 per cent.
But falling profits are causing concern in boardrooms.
Some big firms have cut the pay of senior executives in a move to impress on humbler employees that times are tough.
At Hitachi 35 directors are taking pay cuts for six months.
Minolta, the camera maker, reporting its first loss in 27 years, has slashed the salaries of 23 directors by up to 20 per cent.
But at street level the business slowdown and slump in share prices are having little observable effect.
‘Disposable income is steady and consumption has barely fallen, though people have become more cautious about buying luxuries,’ said Mr Iwao Nakatani, a professor of economics.
The shops are packed, but shoppers are not throwing their yen around with the gusto of previous years.
Tiffany's boutique in Tokyo's Ginza has cut prices of gold necklaces and sapphire rings by up to 20 per cent because of sagging demand.
New car sales, down by 3.8 per cent in 1991, fell by 6.5 per cent in March, but second-hand cars are selling well.
The 1980s boom, when property and stock prices soared and created the ‘bubble economy’, is over.
With the bursting of the bubble, land prices fell last year for the first time in 17 years.
Even so, houses remain beyond the reach of the average wage-earner.
With the stock market dropping to less than half its end-of-1989 peak, brokerages report their worst business results in 30 years.
International: Democracy gives Islam a louder voice in Jordan Anton La Guardia in Amman discovers one neat solution to the fundamentalist threat
By ANTON LA GUARDIA
ABDELATIF AREBEYAT walks slowly on to the podium, utters a Koranic greeting and opens a new day of business in the Jordanian parliament.
It is a daily ritual which underlines how Islamic fundamentalists in Jordan have become respectable.
Mr Arebeyat, dressed in a sober dark suit with a bright red-chequered headscarf, is a member of the Muslim Brotherhood.
He was appointed Speaker of the parliament last year, after the Islamic movement secured the largest single bloc of seats in elections in 1989.
The indications are that the Muslim Brotherhood and its more liberal independent Islamic allies, who jointly control more than one-third of the 80 seats in the lower house, will make further gains in next year's general election.
It is a prospect that clearly worries the West, not to mention Amman's upper class and political establishment.
Western diplomats believe that the Islamic movement will grow unless the economic crisis, caused in large part by the Gulf war, is resolved and some progress is made in peace talks with Israel.
The Muslim Brotherhood, for its part, seeks to reassure the doubters.
‘The Islamic movement is a reformist movement based on the principles and creed of the nation,’ said Mr Arebeyat, 59, who studied agriculture in America.
‘We are democrats who believe in pluralism, in a modern state and human rights.’
Mr Arebeyat praised the moderation of Jordan, the wise leadership of King Hussein and the development of democracy.
There was none of the familiar denunciations against the West and no talk of replacing the system with an Islamic state.
Even denunciations of Israel, the Zionist enemy, somehow lacked the usual venom.
The Islamic movement in Jordan opposes the peace talks with Israel, but it is not actively opposing regional peace negotiations.
It is almost a rule of Middle East politics that democracy in Arab states means the emergence of a strong Islamic movement.
The process went so far in Algeria earlier this year that the army cancelled the results of general elections when it became clear that the Islamic Salvation Front would win an overwhelming victory.
In Jordan, where the authorities hope the experiment in democracy will become a model for other Arab states, King Hussein has opted so far to draw the fundamentalists into the government.
Dr Mahmoud al-Sharief, Jordan's Information Minister, said the best antidote to radical Islam was to give fundamentalists some power rather than jail sentences, to make them ‘deal with the world as it is rather than as they imagine it to be’.
He added: ‘The best way to get rid of them is to baptise them in power.’
The Muslim Brotherhood has made only a marginal impact on Jordanian life since its entry into parliament.
But it recently forced the government to promise new laws banning sales of alcohol.
International: Heart of Europe eludes tongue-tied British
By Boris Johnson, EC Correspondent, in Brussels
THE GOVERNMENT will have to redouble its efforts to put British politicians and civil servants ‘at the heart of Europe’ after a new poll yesterday showed that they are the least accomplished linguists in the EC.
Of the 1,500 senior Brussels-based politicians and civil servants, the British, French and Irish continue to show the most splendid ignorance of the eight official EC languages other than their own.
The survey, published in Dod's European Companion, once again confirms the Dutch as the most effortless prattlers, with 77 per cent capable of holding a conversation in two or more languages other than their own.
They are followed by the Portuguese and Belgians, with 69 per cent and 66 per cent capable of the same feat.
It is no surprise, perhaps, that the British and French are the most tongue-tied of all, with only 27 per cent boasting three languages.
As representatives of the two most ancient and chauvinistic patries of the Community, British and French civil servants instinctively hold forth in their mother tongue.
This causes considerable annoyance to the Germans, who find themselves being forced to speak English and say that they will settle the matter ‘by decree’.
Meanwhile, the Community may soon be embracing Finnish.
International: Drought-hit Namibia may eat zebras
By Christopher Munnion in Johannesburg
PRESIDENT Sam Nujoma of Namibia sparked a furious row yesterday when he said his country's abundant wildlife would have to be killed to provide meat for his drought-stricken nation.
Local and international conservationists joined many Namibians in expressing outrage at the suggestion.
A spokesman for the Endangered Wildlife Trust said: ‘It would be suicidal to interfere with one of Namibia's primary sources of revenue — its wonderful and unique wildlife heritage — to overcome what we hope is a short-term problem of drought.’
Mr Nujoma appealed to the international community for aid to counter the country's worst drought for 30 years.
He said: ‘I have no option but to declare an emergency situation.
All natural resources must be utilised to provide food for the needy.’
He did not stipulate which animals might be killed to provide immediate food, but environmentalists said the most likely targets would be antelopes and zebras in the Etosha National Park.
International: Mandela trial woman vanishes
By Our Johannesburg Correspondent
A woman co-accused with Winnie Mandela in last year's kidnap and assault trial was said to have disappeared mysteriously yesterday from her Soweto home.
Mrs Xoliswa Falati was reported last week to have been involved in an eviction dispute with Mrs Mandela, wife of the African National Congress leader, and to have telephoned a newspaper seeking help, before being driven off in a car with several men.
Mrs Mandela and Mrs Falati were given jail sentences last year but were released on bail pending an appeal.
International: Giant iceberg on collision course with Falklands
By Patrick Watts in Port Stanley
A DECADE after the Argentinians invaded, the Falkland Islands face a massive new advance — from an iceberg the size of Buckinghamshire.
The giant berg broke free from the Antarctic peninsula last August, threatening to cause havoc in the shipping lanes of the South Atlantic.
After a period of being grounded on the Shag Rocks, it has now confounded weather experts by drifting west, directly towards the Falklands.
Forecasters thought the iceberg — once measuring 65 miles by 50 miles, and now measuring 35 miles by 20 — would continue drifting eastwards towards the island of South Georgia and onwards towards South Africa, breaking up and melting on the way.
But satellite pictures received by the weather centre at the Falklands military base now show the iceberg moving straight towards the Falklands.
It is approximately 300 miles from the islands.
Crews of an RAF TriStar, which flies a twice-weekly service between the Falklands and Britain, say they can see the berg as they approach and leave the islands.
Passengers also enjoy the spectacular view.
The iceberg is moving at about five miles a day, said Principal Met Officer Ken Ingermalls.
He said he could not explain why the iceberg was moving west and not east ‘as everyone had anticipated’.
Mr Ingermalls added: ‘Perhaps it's some underwater current that we are unaware of which is causing this unusual phenomenon.’
An army parade and memorial services were held in Argentina, which still claims the Falklands, to mark the tenth anniversary of the invasion of the islands.
Letter to the Editor: Scandinavia poor guide for Labour
SIR — Neil Kinnock tends to use Scandinavian countries, and Sweden in particular, as models of socialist ideals in practice.
But these countries are rather different below the veneer of social justice which is apparent to the casual observer.
Sweden has recorded an 8.4 per cent fall in industrial production in 1991, a figure which compares rather badly with the United Kingdom's latest year-on-year figure of 1.1 per cent.
Denmark and Sweden are deep in a trough of domestic and foreign debt.
The former owes 63 per cent of its Gross National Product as accumulated public sector borrowing compared to the British figure of 43 per cent.
Every Dane owes ca £5,000 to foreign creditors when the foreign debt is divided equally, dwarfing the problem encountered in ‘debtor’ countries such as Poland and Brazil.
Paddy Ashdown's solution to the poll tax is a local tax a la Scandinavia.
But he fails to mention that Denmark has a local income tax of 13.5–22 per cent, as well as a property tax.
Marginal rates of income tax reach 68 per cent for many ordinary families, VAT is 25 per cent on all goods, and a wealth tax of 2.2 per cent per annum on assets over £125,000 causes successful people to emigrate.
In Denmark, there are just as many unemployed people as there are workers in manufacturing industry.
More than half the adult population receive unemployment benefit grants or pensions from the government, which in addition employs around 40 per cent of the workforce.
We do need to learn some more fiscal discipline in the United Kingdom.
We should learn to pay ourselves wage rises lower than inflation when necessary, and not to press for devaluation within the EMS.
What we do not need is another socialist experiment starting next Thursday.
Dr LARS KNUTSEN Broxbourne, Herts
Letter to the Editor: Treaty sell-out
SIR — Since Peterborough reported that the Maastricht Treaty was being sold by HMSO (March 19) I have been trying to obtain a copy without success.
HMSO says all copies have been sold and no more will be available ‘as publication has been suspended on instructions from the EC’.
If the Danish Government was able to distribute 300,000 copies of the Maastricht text through newsagents and libraries, who has decided here, or in Brussels, that the British public should not be allowed to find out for themselves during the election what the small print of the treaty contains?
If, as Lord Bruce of Donington points out (letter, April 2), the new Parliament will be presented with a Bill before most members have themselves been able to read the text of the treaty, this is presumably in the hope that they will railroad it through before the British presidency commences in June.
Let us hope that the Danes will vote ‘No’ in their referendum on June 2, thus forcing all members to renegotiate the treaty, as many of them are now said to be having second thoughts of their own.
STEPHEN BLAND Pant, Salop
Letter to the Editor: Fish vote threat
SIR — Is Labour's manifesto really promising a free vote on a proposal to ‘ban the hunting of live quarry’(report, April 1)?
No wonder, it will be a free vote.
By any standards, fish are a ‘live quarry’ who fight in terror against the pull of the hook through the side of their mouths.
So are the worms that fishermen hunt, in order to impale them, live and wriggling, on their hooks.
How many Labour supporters would vote for a ban on fishing?
HUGH CUNDALL Benson, Oxon
Leading Article: The road to chaos
THE Conservative Party and the Liberal Democrats are quite clear about proportional representation.
The Tories regard it as an aberration that would be catastrophic for Britain's system of government.
The Liberal Democrats support it as their one chance of grasping real political power.
Meanwhile, Neil Kinnock, leader of the one party that could actually bring PR about, is refusing to say where Labour stands on the issue.
Pressed to do so in a television interview on Thursday night with Sir Robin Day, Mr Kinnock allowed that he had formed a view, but he was not prepared to disclose it.
On an issue of such constitutional significance, this is a disgraceful evasion.
Labour simply cannot fudge its views on PR.
As Roy Hattersley, himself an opponent of the scheme, reminded journalists yesterday, proportional representation would involve a radical change from one form of democracy to another; it isn't something which can be taken lightly.
Yet Mr Kinnock, repeating the offer he has made to the Liberal Democrats of a committee of inquiry into electoral reform, has upped the stakes by speaking of a commitment to reform Britain's constitution by consensus.
What needs to be spelt out very clearly before polling day is that PR would bring about the opposite effect to what many voters comfortably believe.
A vote for PR, as represented by the Liberal Democrats, is not a vote for fairness, but for injustice; not a vote for stability, but for political chaos.
Take the example of Belgium where, as the Prime Minister pointed out on Thursday, PR has created a political culture of backstairs deals and perpetual campaigning.
Take the example of Italy, where proportional representation has created permanent instability, with a series of coalition governments that have had to depend on several minor parties whose influence has been out of all proportion to their success in the polls.
If anybody wishes to see just how pernicious that influence can be, they can look at the Likud government in Israel, which has had to impose repressive legislation at the behest of religious extremists who hold the balance of power.
PR (much diluted) has been an indisputable success only in Germany, which has enjoyed, until recently, a natural consensus between its political parties, founded on the need for regeneration.
In Britain, under PR, no government since the Second World War would have won an overall majority.
We should have had, at best, a continuous middle-of-the-road government which could never have taken radical reforming measures.
Under PR, the trade unions would still have a stranglehold over industrial policy, education would still be in the grip of local authorities and any proposals for effective tax cuts would have been quietly shelved.
Worse still, our elected representatives, far from strengthening their links with voters, actually become less accountable to them.
Under some forms of PR, their names are put on a list and seats are awarded to them by party managers.
PR creates that grim parasite upon democracy, a ‘political class’ of career politicians who are less vulnerable to electoral swings, and whose convictions are compromised in the constant brokering of deals and searching for consensus.
PR is all about horse-trading.
It may be argued that there is nothing too morally reprehensible about this in many areas of our public life: but when it affects life-and-death issues, such as Northern Ireland, the idea of making legislation on internment, for example, subject to back-room bargains struck at Westminster, is one which would stick in the throats of many voters.
Mr Kinnock's soft shoe shuffle, as he prepares to court the Liberal Democrats in the event of a hung Parliament, is an earnest of what could lie ahead.
He has refused to rush legislative changes through, but he has not ruled out proposals on electoral reform which could be put before the electorate either in a referendum or at the next general election.
This is his inducement to Paddy Ashdown.
The voters have the right to know whether his heart is in it, or whether it's a con.
Peterborough: Enemy lines
ADMIRAL Sir John ‘Sandy’ Woodward, former commander of the Falklands task force, is making overtures — of a sort — to the Argentines.
His account of the conflict, titled One Hundred Days, is to be translated into Spanish for publication in Argentina.
What South American readers will make of his repeated references to the former enemy as ‘Argies’ or of the punchy foreword by Mrs Thatcher is hard to predict.
But there is already interest in the book.
Yesterday, Woodward was interviewed by Radio Argentina, and its presenter, one Nelson Castro, was, in the admiral's words, ‘not particularly hostile’.
Castro was on best behaviour.
‘Was the action taken by the British the proper thing to do?’ he asked down a crackling line from Buenos Aires to Woodward's home in Surbiton, Surrey.
‘Yes, read my book,’ he replied, satisfying the needs of diplomacy as well as sales.
However, a promotional tour to Argentina is unlikely.
Woodward approached the Foreign Office, whose advice was: ‘Why upset the apple cart?’
THE KILLER blow for Punch came in the middle of probably its last lunch yesterday.
A call from ‘upstairs’ came through, interrupting an otherwise remarkably cheerful banquet.
There was, it appeared, considerable displeasure with one of the articles in next week's final issue detailing ‘How To Be a Has-Been…satirical magazine.’
Not at all funny, said the management.
An advertisement will now replace the offending article.
I hear that editor David Thomas's valedictory piece did not go down too well either.
It has been amended.
Peterborough: Hitting the Sack
IF LABOUR wins, Neil Kinnock will have little to decide in the selection of his Cabinet.
With almost all posts going to the present Shadows, interest centres on the choice of Lord Chancellor.
There are five main contenders for the best-paid job in government (at £106,750 it would leave something to spare even under Labour's tax regime).
The most colourful is Anthony Scrivener QC, on whom the odds are suddenly shortening.
His chief backer is Roy Hattersley, whom he has been seeing quite a bit lately.
Scrivener makes no secret of his ambition, and while his judgment is questioned by some he would attack the task of law reform with gusto.
A very high earner (he reputedly landed the first £1 million brief in English legal history), he does not lack exposure: he recently appeared in a Panorama debate on Europe and this week he was saying all the right things about Neil Kinnock.
‘He's an extremely competent and very caring person,’ he told the Independent.
There are two safer bets: Lord ‘Derry’ Irvine, Labour spokesman on legal affairs and long-time favourite for the Woolsack, who is backed by John Smith; and Peter Archer, the former Solicitor General, who is stepping down as MP for Warley West.
Lord Richard, meanwhile, has heavyweight credentials (former Ambassador to the UN) but is not highly rated as a barrister.
The wild card is Baroness Mallalieu.
She would be the first woman Lord Chancellor, but her love of hunting could prove an embarrassment to a party committed to doing away with the sport.
Sit, they said, but he wouldn't This week John Major began to appear on a different kind of box.
In the last of his series on the leaders, Frank Johnson reports
By FRANK JOHNSON
WE WERE in the West Country.
The Prime Minister was on his soapbox.
Just up the road, at Langport in Somerset, was the birthplace of Walter Bagehot (1826–1877), although as he directed his microphone at Liberal Democrat hecklers John Major had other things on his mind.
The relevance is that Bagehot was the first political commentator.
The travelling chaos of a modern party leader's election entourage had carried Major within a few miles of the home of the founder of the profession, a few of whose more troublesome contemporary practitioners are said to have caused him much irritation over the 16 months of his premiership.
‘A Liberal?
He's admitted to being a Liberal!’
Major cried, jabbing a finger in the direction of one heckler.
The man had a Liberal Democrat rosette pinned to his cap.
He was also carrying an orange poster on a pole, urging a vote for the local Liberal Democrat candidate.
Therefore the admission which the Prime Minister wrung from him could hardly be said to have been grudging.
But, like all the best soapbox orators, Major had prepared his repartee in advance.
‘I knew there was one here,’ he continued, meaning Liberal Democrats.
There were, in fact, about a score.
Then came the passage, which appeared on the television news that evening and in the papers the next day, about the Liberal Democrats being the Trojan horse that would let Labour in.
There were also some lines intended for local consumption: ‘Higher petrol prices from the Liberal Democrats…that's not gonna help a rural area…
’ What would Bagehot have made of him?
Like the heckler, he was a Liberal.
There the similarity ends, since judging from his writings Bagehot was a roaring snob, whereas judging from his heckles the heckler was not.
More to the point, it was Bagehot who said: ‘A constitutional statesman is in general a man of common opinions and uncommon abilities.’
The statesman to whom he was referring was Peel.
A political commentator of our own day, Paul Johnson, quoted it not long after Major became Prime Minister to suggest that it was also true of him.
But is it still?
B AGEHOT'S phrase comes in a passage in which he appears to propound the dispiriting theory that a politician, if he wants to get anywhere, must appeal to ‘the average man’.
The average man is ‘a cool, common person, with a considerate air, with figures in his mind, with his own business to attend to, with a set of ordinary opinions arising from and suited to ordinary life.
He can't bear novelty or originalities…
Original theories give trouble’.
Bagehot goes on to say of Peel: ‘From a certain peculiarity of intellect and fortune, he was never in advance of his time.
Of almost all the great measures with which his name is associated, he attained great eminence as an opponent before he attained even greater eminence as their advocate.’
That last sentence has more to do with Kinnock than with Major.
It is also a warning to all hack Tories who think that it is a telling blow against Kinnock to keep on pointing out that he has reversed his opinions about unilateral nuclear disarmament, British membership of the EC, or anything else.
But the most striking thing about Bagehot's essay on Peel, in the light of the last full week of this election campaign, is that it simply does not apply to Major at all.
Common opinions were what got Major into difficulties in the first place.
Between his becoming Prime Minister and his party's fall in the polls about 10 days ago, Major did nearly everthing that common opinion wanted him to do.
This was true of what he did about both high policy and low politics.
For example, on high policy common opinion said that there was nothing for it but to stay in the ERM.
He stayed in, and the recession worsened.
In low politics, common opinion — no less common for being expensively hired by Conservative Central Office — encouraged him in the belief that he should fight much of the election sitting down.
He did so, and he looked like the questioner in the studio audience rather than the answerer.
The result was Wobbly Week, the second week of the campaign.
But last Saturday Major climbed on to that soapbox in Luton.
Until then, he had been that most inhuman of creatures — the public figure described by others as ‘very human’.
Now he really was human — unscripted, jokey, even a bit passionate.
The jubilant word from Kinnock's camp was that Major was behaving more like an opposition leader than a prime minister.
But there seemed nothing wrong with the head of government appearing to be the challenger on the hustings.
President Truman did so in a campaign which no-one expected him to win, and he won.
It is justified if the head of government is challenging something powerful.
Kinnock complains of the alleged power of the Tory tabloid press, but he has powers on his side too.
Ninety per cent of his party's cash comes from the unions, which will expect a return.
The British people have in the past found them rather more powerful than the corporations which are popularly supposed to finance the Conservative party.
Then there are all those schoolteachers, dons, television producers, writers on arts pages and members of the agitating classes who want a Labour win in order to impose Political Correctness.
That is to say, they will have what the Jesuits once attached such importance to: power over young or impressionable minds.
As the week went by, Major rejected common opinion about two other large subjects: proportional representation and Scottish devolution.
He hardened his opposition to both, despite the fact that his own party chairman had once favoured the first, and vocal forces within his Scottish party were in support of the second.
E VEN at this late hour, psephology, demographics and luck suggest that the Tories could still emerge as the biggest single party in a hung Parliament.
Is it possible that Major would rather go into opposition — with the dangers that would mean for his continued leadership of the Conservative party — than offer PR and Scottish devolution to the Liberal Democrats?
If so, we are dealing with a more Quixotic, romantic or principled figure than some of us used to think.
Once that soapbox came out, Major campaigned as if he would now do and say what he really thought.
Was it too late?
From Central Office, and from around his entourage, came the unmistakable signs of fair-weather friends preparing to detach themselves from blame for defeat.
And then, on Thursday morning, when Major's election tour reached the Daily Mail Ideal Home Exhibition, Sir David English, the paper's editor, was not there to greet him.
A junior spin doctor is reported to have muttered, though admittedly out of my earshot: ‘We've been snubbed.’
Not Sir David!
Some in the profession of political commentating would opt for Bagehot as their formative influence, but mine has long been Sir David — a founder of biased Tory journalism.
His lack of humbug about political balance has always made him more honest than all the employees of BBC Current Affairs awaiting with glee the Kinnock years.
Eventually, Sir David's office issued a statement about the Prime Minister.
Normally, a prime minister's office would issue a statement about an editor.
But Major makes a point of not being grand, and with Sir David it is the other way about.
‘Sir David English was not informed of the visit and in consequence had no plans to attend the Ideal Home Exhibition that day,’ the official statement announced.
Faith in Sir David's leadership was restored.
Peterborough: Heir miss
WHILE Michael Foot makes it plain he does not wish to go to the House of Lords after the election, at least one senior Tory leaving the Lower House may also remain a commoner.
As a former Cabinet minister, George Younger is entitled to ennoblement in the Dissolution Honours, but with 10 fellow Conservatives queuing up for the Lords John Major may decide that Younger should be the one to miss out.
The reason is that Younger is destined for the Upper House anyway — when he inherits the title of his father, Viscount Younger, 85.
‘My father is very fit and well,’ says George Younger.
‘I'd like to play a role in the Lords sometime but I'll have to wait and see if anyone thinks I'd be useful there now.’
There seems no reason why the heir to a title should not enter the Lords before time as a life peer.
The Earl of Crawford and Balcarres, a former Tory minister, became the life peer Lord Balniel in 1974, only to succeed his father as the earl in 1975.
He was not required to take his seat twice.
WHATEVER the merits of John Major's soapbox, Mrs Thatcher must have her doubts about another accessory: the megaphone he used in Luton.
At a rural campaign stop in 1987, she announced she wanted to address some distant onlookers.
A rusty loudhailer was produced, only to be thrust back at her staff.
‘This is ridiculous,’ she snapped.
‘I can't be seen with a megaphone.’
Absent son costs father £10,000
A United Nations diplomat was ordered to forfeit a £10,000 security at the Old Bailey yesterday after his son, Petrus Alberts, 23, failed to appear on arson charges.
Alberts was expected to plead guilty to starting a fire at the Schiller University in Waterloo, south London, where he was studying hotel management.
A warrant was issued for his arrest.
90 jobs lost
A children's clothes factory is to make 90 workers redundant.
The Yates factory in Tattershall Thorpe, near Lincoln, part of Unigroup, is to switch production to North Africa and Eastern Europe.
Scrap trendy changes, urges police chief
By Neil Darbyshire, Crime Correspondent
POLICE should abandon ‘fashionable management theories’ which blur traditional relationships between ranks and return to the hierarchical principles of leadership, a senior officer said yesterday.
Recent pressure to end the obligation of junior officers to salute or stand in the presence of their seniors and recommendations to scrap the existing discipline code for a new ‘code of ethics’ applicable equally to all had dangerous implications, said Deputy Assistant Commissioner Lawrence Roach.
‘Many of our recent troubles in retaining and maintaining public confidence might have been less severe and more easily solved if we had not begun to depart from the traditional relationships between ranks,’ he added.
Writing in the influential Police Review magazine, Mr Roach, head of policing for north-west London and a member of the Association of Chief Police Officers, said that, since the time of Sir Robert Peel, the police had always had to reassure the public that their powers and privileges would not be misused.
‘Peel's response was to construct a service with a severe code of discipline and a structure of supervisory ranks designed to ensure strict control of policing and police officers.
‘It is for the protection of the public that police officers are subject to[this]code, which reaches into every aspect of their professional duties and into much of their private lives.’
When junior officers saluted, they were recognising the authority vested in them by Parliament, he argued.
It was not a simply a courtly ritual or a question of deference but an acceptance of the office and powers their superiors held.
If a senior officer were to be viewed as no more than a member of an amorphous managerial team, said Mr Roach, the public would be led to believe that any complaint against a policemen was merely being investigated by ‘one of the boys.
‘Far from departing from the traditional view of the relationship between ranks, the moment has come for a return to it,’ said Mr Roach.
‘The time is ripe to abandon not the rank structure but the tendency to impart fashionable management theories which are not necessarily appropriate to policing and which only confuse supervisors throughout the service.
‘The benefits of such a development would be a renewal of public confidence and a reawakening of the morale of police officers of all ranks.’
Mr Roach stressed yesterday that his views were personal and were an attempt to defend the status quo in the police service.
Obituary of Harry Neubauer
HARRY NEUBAUER, who has died aged 59, was a psychiatrist of multifarious qualities — not least an exuberant personality which lent his earnest profession a splash of much-needed colour.
Neubauer launched his career in the relatively new field of neurochemistry, and carried out research in America into neuro-transmission in schizophrenia.
This included work on LSD (later known as ‘acid’, the hippy drug), which Neubauer found surprisingly efficacious in certain treatments.
A paediatrician's son, Harry Neubauer was born in 1932 at Karlsbad, Germany, but during the Second World War the family found refuge in Newcastle upon Tyne.
In later life he was fond of Tom Stoppard's remark about being a bounced Czech.
As a medical student at Newcastle University in the 1950s Neubauer was inspired to take up psychiatry by Prof Martin Roth.
After qualifying, he settled at Bath, where he set up one of the first acute psychiatric units in a general hospital in the country.
A dedicated polymath, with a passion for the arts, Neubauer was an expert on the English visionary artists, particularly the engravings of Turner.
He was a champion of 19th century book illustration, which he regarded as the last relatively unexplored corner of the English artistic tradition.
He is survived by his second wife, Jenny, and by a son and daughter from his first marriage.
Obituary of Christian K Nelson
CHRISTIAN K NELSON, the confectioner and inventor, who has died at Laguna Hills, California, aged 99, created the ‘choc ice’— known in America as ‘Eskimo Pie’— and later revolutionised the manufacture and storage of ice cream products.
Christian Kent Nelson was born on March 12 1893 at Gunstrup in Denmark.
He emigrated to the United States as a child and received a teacher's certificate from Nebraska University in 1916.
He served in the US Army Signals Corps during the latter stages of the First World War before settling in Onawa, Iowa, where he worked as a teacher and ran a sweetshop in his spare time.
One day in 1921 an eight-year-old boy walked into the shop.
The child could not decide whever he wanted a chocolate bar or a scoop of ice cream: it occurred to Nelson to combine the two.
After months of experimentation he came up with a vanilla ice cream bar on a stick, bonded with cocoa butter to a coating of chocolate.
Initially, Nelson called this the ‘I-Scream’ bar.
This was because a slogan — which he himself coined — had been set to music and became a hit tune of the period: ‘I-Scream, you scream.
WE all scream.
FOR ICE CREAM!’
Nelson, however, feared that once the song was no longer in vogue, his product would become similarly unfashionable.
He accordingly renamed it the ‘Eskimo Pie’ and chose the distinctive Eskimo symbol that still appears on the wrapping.
The bar was patented and Nelson duly became president of the Eskimo Pie Corporation.
The popularity of these treats was enormous, and Nelson had to redirect his inventiveness towards devising new production methods to meet the burgeoning demand.
He invented a precursor of the high-speed continuous extrusion freezer which could cut novelties out of slabs of vanilla ice cream.
The original version of this machine — which Nelson eventually patented in 1955 — could cut about a dozen bars a minute: the version now in use can cut up to 400 a minute.
At the same time Nelson invented a freezer for ready-made products, now known to the frozen food industry as the ‘Nelson Box’.
This device froze mini-slabs of ice cream at -40 degrees Farenheit, which made them hard enough to be sealed with warm chocolate.
Nelson sold the Eskimo Pie Corporation to the US Foil Company (now the Reynolds Metal Company) in 1924, but retained his affiliation: he stayed as vice-president, moving with the company to New York and to Richmond, Virginia, in the 1940s.
Even after his retirement to Orange County, California, in 1961, Nelson continued to travel across America, promoting Eskimo Pies and inventing new ways to store and deliver frozen novelties.
Today the frozen sweets industry is worth $1.3 billion per annum.
Among 400 different brand names Eskimo Pie has held its own, selling half a billion bars each year.
Even in an era of ‘Political Correctness’ and hyper-sensitivity over racial slights, Eskimo Pie has retained its name and its logo.
Its television advertisements still portray a genuine Eskimo fisherman, who proudly declares: ‘You know what I like about Eskimo Pie?
It's refreshing, even when it gets way into the twenties!’
‘Chris’ Nelson can justly be described as the Henry Ford of ice cream novelty production.
He seems to have enjoyed greater success with the public than he did at home, however.
‘I don't think that his wife cared much for ice cream,’ said a relative.
Nelson married, in 1926, Myrtle Rhoda Skidmore, who predeceased him.
Obituary of Rhoda Dawson
Rhoda Dawson.
Aged 94.
Rugmaker who was first inspired by the work of her parents, dedicated followers of Ruskin and Morris.
Under the tutelage of Sir Wilfred Thomas Grenfell, at the Grenfell Mission, Newfoundland, she produced silk-woven rag rugs which illustrated the fight for survival in Labrador's cold climate.
Obituary of David Finch
David Finch.
At Greenwich, Connecticut, aged 51.
British journalist.
He worked successively for the BBC World Service and for the news agencies Associated Press and Reuters.
In 1987 he broke the story for Reuters that Terry Waite, who had been abducted in Beruit, was still alive.
Served as a scoutmaster in Greenwich and Dallas.
Obituary of Lieut-Col Fernando Salguerio
Lieut-Col Fernando Salguerio Maia.
In Lisbon, aged 47.
Portuguese cavalry officer and a leader of the Armed Forces Movement, the group of junior officers which overthrew the dictatorship of Marcelo Caetano in the bloodless revolution of 1974.
Election 1992: Liverpool's back in the cruise game
By Peter Elson
A HINT of Liverpool's long lost glamour as Britain's premier passenger port will return this autumn when a Ukrainian liner will operate several cruises from the Mersey — the first cruise ship to do so for 16 years.
CTC Lines, based in the UK since 1973 (primarily at Tilbury), chose Liverpool because about 22 per cent of all cruise passengers come from the north-west.
The cruises will be on the 15,500-ton Azerbaydzhan, built in 1976 with a capacity of 550 passengers.
If successful the company plans to return with a new Mersey-based cruise programme next year.
Richard Bastow, CTC Lines joint managing director, said: ‘We have the opportunity to rekindle Liverpool's spirited sea-faring tradition and provide the only cruises available from the Mersey.’
The Azerbaydzhan (whose home port of Odessa is coincidentally Liverpool's twin city) has a Ukrainian crew with about 30 British cruise staff.
The liner will depart from Tilbury on August 31 for a Norwegian fjords cruise which terminates at Liverpool on September 14.
She then departs that day for a 15-night Mediterranean cruise, returning to the Mersey on September 29 and leaving that day for a 14-night Canaries and North Africa cruise which terminates at Southampton on October 13.
The cost of the ex-Liverpool Mediterranean cruise is £772, based on sharing a four-berth cabin.
Further details are available from CTC Lines (071 930 5833); or any ABTA travel agency.