

Jason's libel win gives gays a straight answer
by Nicholas Farrell
SO NOW we know.
Despite three decades of campaigning by homosexuals to remove the stigma from their sexuality, to call a man a queer in Britain is still an actionable insult in the minds of the ‘right-thinking people’ who make up libel juries.
Until 1861 a man could hang for engaging in homosexual relations, and as recently as the early 1970s many doctors still regarded homosexuality as an illness to be treated by electric shock therapy.
Sex in private between consenting males over the age of 21 may have been legal since 1967, but how far have attitudes really changed?
To judge from the High Court jury, not much.
It awarded Jason Donovan, the pop star, actor and idol of mothers and daughters alike, £200,000 libel damages against The Face magazine for insinuating that he was a ‘queer’(and a liar by denying the allegation).
Terms such as‘faggot’ may be unacceptable to polite society in this age of political correctness, but clearly nothing has altered what goes on in the privacy of the popular conscience.
The jury chose to ignore Mr Justice Drake's advice that to call someone a queer ‘may not be defamatory’ and that the matter was ‘very debatable’.
The dozens of squealing girls who had packed Court 13 were ecstatic.
‘I am heterosexual,’ announced Jason outside the court.
A fan shouted: ‘There is justice!
There is justice!’
The case had echoes of the 1959 libel trial when Liberace successfully sued the Daily Mirror on the grounds that the paper's Cassandra column had implied he was a homosexual.
Then, too, the court was packed with female fans.
One woman juror winked at Liberace as she returned for the verdict.
In those days, when homosexuality was a criminal offence, it was beyond doubt libellous to call someone queer.
Why aren't things different today?
Peter Carter-Ruck, a leading libel lawyer, said: ‘All you can say is that it would probably still be held to be defamatory to call someone homosexual today when they're not.
But it would be regarded as less serious than 20 to 30 years ago, and less so in the theatrical and film worlds where it's regarded as almost normal.’
But it is stars of the theatrical and cinematic world — or certainly the matinee idols of that world — who still regard the term with such anxiety.
The wisdom is that it can kill a career.
How far would Rock Hudson have got if his true proclivities, hidden so long by a succession of girlfriends provided by the studios, had been known?
Highbrow actors such as Sir Ian McKellen, invited to brief Mr Major on gay issues last autumn, have not suffered by ‘coming out’.
Soap stars such as Michael Cashman, formerly of EastEnders, and the comedy actor Gorden Kaye of ‘Allo, ‘Allo!, have not been pilloried for their homosexuality.
But which male leads could get away with it?
And while the teenage millions may be breathing a sigh of relief at Jason Donovan's deliverance, the implications of the verdict were greeted with less satisfaction by the homosexual millions — variously estimated at anything from one in 100 to one in 10 of the male population of this country.
Next to the female fans in the public gallery were gay rights activists from the pressure group OutRage! who said the decision would reinforce anti-gay prejudice and hatred.
‘Queer is not libel’, proclaimed their placards.
Some doors have opened.
Since last year, homosexuals — so long seen as the weak link — can join the secret services.
Others remain resolutely closed.
In the armed services homosexuality is still punishable by imprisonment.
As for politics, forget it: only one MP, Chris Smith, Labour candidate for Islington South, has dared to ‘come out’.
Jeffrey Weeks, Professor of Sociology at Bristol Polytechnic, author of several set texts on homosexuality and himself gay, did not think it libellous to be described as homosexual.
But he said: ‘There's still a stigma attached.
It's very difficult for members of the Royal Family to ‘come out’, even when rumours abound.
Even in the theatre, not many have.
It was only after Olivier's death that details of his gay relationships emerged.
‘There's been an enormous change over the last 30 or 40 years, a much greater acceptance of sexual differences, despite the moral politics of Mrs Thatcher and Aids.
It's part of the same thing that allows Royal marriages to break-up and sex before marriage.
The idea of individual choice is very much there in Conservative ideology and so it becomes quite difficult to say you can have economic choice but not sexual choice in your private life.’
Michael Mason, editor of Capital Gay newspaper and involved in the gay movement for more than 20 years, said: ‘There have been enormous changes but there is evidence in the last few years of an increase in queer-bashing by men aged 15–23 who have difficulty coping with their own sexuality.’
But he added: ‘I don't believe anything need stop you coming out as a pop star.
It hasn't touched Elton John's fame.
Female fans might see it as a challenge.’
A challenge perhaps, but heaven knows what Mr Donovan's fans would have done with their bedroom posters if he had turned out to be gay.
Fiona Reekie, 13, and her mother Eileen had travelled from Fife to London to see Joseph and His Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat.
Would it matter to Fiona if Jason were gay?
Blushing silence.
Naomi, 17, an A-level student, and friend Zoe, 23, a sales assistant, from Cambridge, had seen Joseph 25 times.
What was the trial about?
‘They're insinuating he's gay.’
Did it matter if he was?
‘No comment.’
Later, at the Palladium's stage door after the show, a gang of girls lay in wait.
‘Hands up everybody who thinks Jason's straight!’ shouted someone.
Hands flew up.
Emma Jones, 19, a Cardiff University philosophy student, and friend Judy Miggins, 20, clutched a photo taken earlier showing Jason with his arm round them.
They said it wouldn't matter if he were gay.
But they added: ‘We know he's straight.’
Letter to the Editor: An honour from Chile
IN referring to the Chilean Order of Merit awarded to Mr Harold Pinter, Mandrake (March 29) stated that this is the first time the honour has been bestowed upon a playwright or, indeed, upon an ‘intellectual’ of any description.
My father, who spent the first quarter of a century in Chile, was awarded the Order of Merit.
The citation to Patricio Kenny has gone astray among family papers, but I carefully treasure the most attractive decoration with rosette and ribbons.
It was awarded in recognition of my father's work as a leading educationalist.
So it is fair to say it was granted for intellectual activities.
C. P. Kenny Dublin 4.
Letter to the Editor: Charting the varsity changes
TELEVISION has given us the dramatised documentary Last week The Sunday Telegraph, in its report ‘Cambridge blues as Oxford bags title’, gave us the dramatised book review.
Our book Oxford, Cambridge and the Changing Idea of the University will be published by the Open University Press in May of this year.
It is a long piece of detailed, even pedantic, research on higher education in Britain, which makes numerous descriptive comparisons between the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and attempts to understand the differences, similarities and changing natures of the two institutions.
There is almost no attempt to engage in evaluation, emotive or otherwise.
If the book does have one central purpose it is to shed light upon the process of the changing system of higher education in Britain, and if it reaches one clear conclusion it is that both Oxford and Cambridge have performed admirably in recent years.
One of the most interesting questions about higher education in Britain is how these two ancient universities have been able to retain their pre-eminence over time.
Having said that, we would agree that in the past 25 years Oxford has tended to do better than Cambridge on several fronts.
But it would be gratifying to be quoted accurately, and most importantly, in context.
Is this now the age of ‘lies, damn lies and journalism’?
(Dr) Ted Tapper and (Dr) Brian Salter School of English and American Studies, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton.
Letter to the Editor: Mistakes about women
WE LEARN from Paul Johnson's review last week of Barbara Caine's Victorian Feminists that he dislikes certain sorts of academic terminology, detests feminism, and believes the most effective way of achieving political ends is to refrain from campaigning for them.
This viewpoint seems to have prevented him from doing more than cast a supercilious eye over the book.
Among the errors that would have been eliminated by a more careful reading is the statement that Frances Power Cobbe was the only Unionist among these four women; Millicent Fawcett was at least as opposed as Cobbe to Irish Home Rule; and only Josephine Butler actively supported it.
Similarly, Fawcett supported the British Government in the Anglo-Boer War, while Butler's chief concern was for the ‘native races’.
Most seriously, the only feminists of any note who were not vehemently opposed to the attempt to introduce Prussian–Napoleonic regulation of prostitution into Britain were Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, and in the 1890s the maverick temperance campaigner Lady Henry Somerset.
To say that Josephine Butler and Millicent Fawcett were ‘diametrically opposed’ on this issue shows a worrying ignorance of 19th-century British history.
David Doughan Reference Librarian, Fawcett Library, City of London, Polytechnic.
Albany at Large: Unbelted earl
LORD Spencer's death has again brought out the busybodies of the art world.
Without ever themselves having had as much as a picture postcard to sell, they feel entitled to criticise both the dead peer and his widow for having disposed of some of the contents of Althorp.
If nothing from an historic house is ever to be sold, how is the roof to be repaired?
And what chance have the nouveaux riches to educate themselves by forming a collection?
After all, it was his father, a man of the most elegant taste, who before the war sold his magnificent Holbein of Henry VIII to Baron Thyssen.
I am pleased that in 1984 Johnnie Spencer sold his family papers to the British Library, where they are available to all historians.
And that exactly a century ago, the fifth Earl sold his splendid library to Mrs John Rylands, who gave it to Manchester (though the university has since broken the spirit of the benefaction by selling part of it).
What I do regret, however, is that at great expense Johnnie Spencer filled a room at Althorp with paintings by that derivative Norfolk artist Edward Seago (1910–1974).
Indeed, he used to queue up at Colnaghi in Bond Street for them, this one after Constable, that one after Boudin.
Spencer was kind, courteous, sometimes hot-tempered, cleverer than most people thought and very funny.
I recall a party at Althorp to see the newly cleaned 18th-century portraits by candlelight.
Unfortunately a blocked chimney filled the house with smoke.
‘It's always like this,’ the host explained, ‘when we roast an ox.’
Election Comment: Albany at Large: Royal and ancient PRINCESS Margaret's eyes and tongue proved as sharp as ever at the preview of the Sovereign Exhibition at the V & A last week.
Touring the mock-up of rooms in royal residences, she drily observed: ‘You have put Sandringham china in the Balmoral room.’
Mr Speaker Weatherill, who opened the exhibition, appeared for the last time before retirement in the distinctive tail-coat, knee-breeches and white bands of his office.
Unlike other MPs of the last Parliament, who as mere candidates now draw no salary, he remains in office until a successor is elected on April 27.
Meanwhile he draws his salary of £63,047 a year — and is worth every penny of it.
Election Comment: Albany at Large: Watch the birdie PRESIDENT Mitterrand did not allow last week's premiership crisis to deflect him from his usual Monday morning pastime: playing golf at St Cloud, near Paris.
It was here that Napoleon consolidated his power by dispersing the hostile Council of Five Hundred in the Brumaire coup of 1799.
Such is Mitterrand's passion for golf that he has set up a Commission Ministerielle de terminologie du sport.
Its task is to find acceptable French terms for the universally used English ones.
It had better begin with the word sport.
Interview: David Puttnam's enigma variations Puttnam's latest film is made for television.
Where does that leave the British film industry?
By MEGAN TRESIDDER
WHAT DO people think of David Puttnam?
The view in the film industry is consistently contradictory.
‘He is very charming,’ they say.
‘He is a brilliant producer.
He enthuses people.
He has made some good films and he is a good ambassador for the industry.’
Then they go through the buts.
‘There is a gap between what he says he is doing with film and what he actually does.
He sets himself up as the Father of the British Industry yet he doesn't deliver the goods.
But,’ they invariably end up, ‘I don't know who else could.’
Puttnam himself actually seems to warm to the theme of a divided reputation.
‘I would far rather we go through the criticisms, than have you editorialise afterwards, with ‘on the one hand and on the other,’’ he says.
He calls his production company Enigma because of a remark on his school report when he was 16.
‘After five years,’ his headmaster wrote, ‘I find this boy a total enigma.’
His biographer, Andrew Yule, wrote an exhaustive account of Puttnam's career and ended up choosing the same word for the title.
The company is based in a mews off the Cromwell Road in London, impeccably furnished with black leather, dark wood and framed posters from Puttnam's films.
Puttnam lives with his wife, Patsy, next door.
He is wearing the familiar Puttnam cardigan look, but is smaller than I expected, like so many who are writ large in the media.
He is a veteran interviewee, yet somehow gives the impression that he is talking from the heart.
In Yule's book, a reporter comments that if you interview Puttnam on a day when he is depressed, you will hear all about it.
Talking to him is a strange experience: he immediately establishes a close relationship.
He sets a high moral tone, exhorting the journalist to live up to the ideals of truth, decency and justice against the crasser world outside.
If you suggest that he has done anything for a base motive such as money, he replies, ‘That does not do justice to you, or to me.’
And yet he can also be self-deprecating — a strange combination.
His story is well known: the Cockney self-starter who worked his way up in advertising from messenger boy at 16 to account executive at 20, when he married his school sweetheart.
At 27, he started his own photographic agency and went on to make films on the proceeds, using the talents of advertising colleagues such as Alan Parker or of friends like Ray Connolly.
Why didn't Connolly write a rock and roll film, said Puttnam.
‘That'll be the day,’ said Connolly.
That'll Be The Day was his first box office hit, in 1973.
In 1976, there was Bugsy Malone, the first of many award-winners: Midnight Express, Chariots of Fire, Local Hero, Cal, The Killing Fields and The Mission.
Since his return from Hollywood, Puttnam has produced Memphis Belle and Meeting Venus.
They are not provocative films.
‘I am not a radical film-maker,’ says Puttnam.
‘I am a consensus builder.
If you drew lines along the class map of England, I would be at the point where they all meet.’
His latest film is A Dangerous Man.
Made for television and to be shown at Easter, it is about Lawrence of Arabia, or rather Lawrence after Arabia, back from the desert and involved in the Allies' post-war negotiations over the map of the Middle East.
Lawrence is ostensibly there on behalf of the Arab cause, but his role is ambiguous.
Is he in fact looking after number one?
‘You are the talk of Paris,’ the Arab Prince Faisal tells him, ‘but what of our cause?’
Transpose London for Paris, and you have the Puttnam enigma in a nutshell.
Is all his talk about films designed to promote the industry or David Puttnam?
‘It's a perfectly good criticism,’ says Puttnam.
‘One thing I would say is that we get inundated with rent-a-quote demands.
Not just me, but Dickie Attenborough, Michael Winner…
I suspect you journalists have a Rotadex with six numbers under Film Industry.
Eighty per cent of it I duck, but people look at the other 20 per cent you do and because it is 50 per cent more than others do, it appears, as you say, that you are a self-promoter.’
He gets the requests, he says, because he can deliver.
‘Now, I sat up in bed last night reading papers because I didn't want to turn up at a meeting unprepared.
Is that ambition functioning at a high level or is it just a sense of obligation or is it idealism?
I honestly don't know.
I have met very few who are unambiguous about their own decency.’
As his answer shows, Puttnam likes to expound.
He seems to feel a mission to explain, whether on film or on Green issues.
For the past seven years, he has been President of the Council for the Protection of Rural England.
Friends were surprised at his overnight interest in the countryside.
‘Not half as surprised as I was,’ says Puttnam, laughing.
On top of the CPRE work, he spends a quarter of his time teaching at the National Film School.
His zeal has been said to border on the autocratic, especially on the sets of his films.
It has been suggested that he is so determined to retain control that he deliberately avoids working with famous directors such as Bertolucci, Cronenberg or Karel Reisz.
Critics compare him to Jeremy Thomas, who produced The Last Emperor but whose name takes a back seat to Bertolucci's.
‘Absolutely true.
He has a background in film.
I came to film through advertising.
Therefore I am informed by the market…which makes me something of a rarity in the business.
I think it makes me rather useful.
I am interested in the interaction with the audience.
My relationship with the director is therefore rather different from most producers; I am looking not for someone to watch and admire but for someone who can deliver the result.
And I know exactly what I want.
To my mind, it's already done.
It's just a question of getting the damn thing on the screen.’
The accusation of hubris in Hollywood is harder to deny.
The story is well-known of how Puttnam won and lost the job of running Columbia studios.
A notorious critic of Hollywood, he justified taking the job by declaring he would break the stranglehold of the agents, who tied the studios up with pre-wrapped packages made up of their own clients: stars, writers and directors.
Puttnam stepped very hard on very big toes and enraged his employers by giving press conferences about his battles.
He had signed a three-year contract but that was technically breached by Coca-Cola, when it merged Columbia with Tri-Star, under Tri-Star's head.
It was Puttnam's excuse — greeted, he admits, ‘with quiet glee’— to leave Hollywood with a platinum handshake.
How does he account for what went wrong?
‘I think that secretly, deep down, I hated myself for taking the job.’
‘What persuaded you?
Was it the money?’
‘That was one of the things,’ he says.
‘The idea of a future without a financial question mark hanging over it was very attractive.
But it would not do you justice, or me justice, to say it was just that.’
He had just won the Cannes Palme d'Or for Mission, and was looking for a new challenge.
‘Do you accept any blame for what happened at Columbia?’
‘I accept partial blame but I have a feeling that history will treat me kindly because there was nothing wrong with my basic thesis.
And then there were things outside my control.
It didn't occur to me that criticism coming from an American of American business might be acceptable, but from someone like me, was much much harder to take.
Then there was this thing that I constantly talked to the press.
But I am victim of my own background.
My dad was a journalist.
I have never been frightened of the press.
I regard this as part of my life, a duty to explain myself.
I am making a speech tomorrow about film makers and journalists and the absolute obligation both of us have to express the truth about the complexity of the world.’
He told Hollywood all right.
He protested that they showed no love of the craft of film-making.
Why couldn't he leave Hollywood alone?
Why not let Hollywood make its Rambos and leave a love of the craft to the rest?
‘It's more complicated than that.
That presupposes there is no relationship between the impact of films we make, like Rambo, and the kind of world we live in.
There is a very precise relationship between the society we live in and the nature of the images that film and television show.’
‘But isn't it the case,’ I ask him, ‘that while people are piling into the cinemas to see the worst exports of Hollywood, they are also piling in to see our own films, such as Alan Parker's The Commitments, which has after all just won the Bafta award for best film.’
‘That is one of the exceptions, made by one of the few directors in this country who has huge energy, a great deal of talent and knows how to address an audience.
The tragedy in this country is that the critical establishment has found it impossible to embrace those talents.
Alan Parker wasn't nourished in this country.
No more than Ridley Scott or Roland Joffe.
There is something in this country that fails to nourish them.’
[The Commitments was made with American money.]
One of the reasons that Puttnam gets flak from the film industry, particularly from its fringe, is that he doesn't argue on their behalf for a government-subsidised industry.
Yes, he says, there is a case for providing grants to develop purely experimental film and the Arts Council already does.
‘But what I am talking about, because it is my business, is mainstream commercial cinema and I do maintain that mainstream cinema should be looking towards its audience.
If, at this point in my career, I needed public subsidy in order to function as a film-maker, I'd be a disgrace.
Having said that, I would not as a film producer be here today without sums of money like the Eady levy [a tax on cinema seats].
But they were tiny amounts of money, and only to kick-start us, to get that first film made.’
The most valuable form of subsidy, he says, would be for the Government to take a real and permanent interest in the British film industry, to foster — simply with time and energy — a nurturing climate.
‘Winston Churchill had no doubts of the value of film.
It is extraordinary how all that has been slung out of the window.’
Could Puttnam not have done more himself to change the cultural attitude of governments?
Puttnam answers in typical fashion, going through a list of the Ministers he has dealt with.
‘The short answer to your question is ‘yes’, and the long answer is that you are subject to the calibre of the Minister.’
In the end, Puttnam in the flesh endorses the film industry view of Puttnam: a beguiling mixture of energy that radiates to others and energy focused on himself.
While he laughs off comparisons to Lawrence of Arabia, he admits that ‘to spend 10 years getting the film made must mean it corresponds to something deep inside’.
But to what exactly?
The Lawrence of Puttnam's film is a puzzle to the end.
You can't decide whether he was a crusader or a self-publicist.
Puttnam smiles.
‘I have never met a remotely effective idealist about whom you wouldn't say the same thing.’
Birth of a legend Author Jack Higgins, right, tells how he came to write The Eagle Has Landed
By JACK HIGGINS
I DID my National Service with a Guards regiment on the East German border in 1948 — but there was still some fraternisation with the Russians, usually in the bar at some remote border village.
One evening the conversation turned to commando raids during the war.
I had heard stories about a failed invasion attempt in 1940, but a Russian NCO insisted that the Germans had planned some sort of operation against Churchill in a remote part of Norfolk in the autumn of 1943.
I didn't take it seriously until a holiday took me to the Blakeney area of north Norfolk in 1974.
The place fascinated me — narrow country roads, little lost villages, great shingle beaches and lonely salt marshes.
It was easy to believe that anything could have happened here.
I heard many a rumour in Suffolk pubs of Germans dressed as British soldiers turning up on the shoreline, and I found locals who insisted that Churchill had visited the area in November 1943 and inspected some American bomber bases.
When I checked my history, he was on his way to the Teheran Conference at that time.
But what better way of fooling the enemy when your Prime Minister was going to one place than by having a double suggest he was somewhere else altogether?
So The Eagle Has Landed was born.
I became obsessed with the whole idea and spent an enormous amount of time researching it.
I said at the beginning of the book that 50 per cent was documented historical fact.
The really astonishing thing is how fiction and reality can blur.
A retired postman who claimed to have been present at the Battle of Studley Constable was interviewed on television, and I still receive the occasional letter from Germans and Americans claiming that fathers or uncles had been at the ‘battle’.
Jack Higgins' latest book, The Eagle Has Flown, was published last month (Pan, £4.99).
The Other Me: Actress draws on her stage talents Anthea Hall meets Sylvestra le Touzel, the leading lady with a penchant for caricature
By ANTHEA HALL
SYLVESTRA le Touzel, best-known perhaps as Fanny Price in the television version of Mansfield Park, is a fine actress who has turned her acute eye and pen to caricaturing her fellow actors.
The common ground between acting and caricaturing is obvious: both seek to convey personality in a way that prompts total recognition.
But whereas caricature depends on paring down character to exaggerated essentials, acting conveys shades, nuances and inconsistencies.
Last week Sylvestra opened at the Barbican as Kate to Owen Teale's Hotspur in Henry IV Part 1.
When the play ran at Stratford last year, their partnership was described by Charles Spencer, The Daily Telegraph's critic, as ‘one of the best things in the production, a superb study of a relationship in which passion and mutual vexation compete for dominance’.
Sylvestra le Touzel has a face with quite enough character to be cartooned: an arresting aristocratic beauty, with dark, dramatic eyes, fair hair and a patrician nose and chin.
She once tried to draw herself at school ‘when I was obsessed with the dark circles under my eyes.
Nobody could understand why this rather depressed-looking character appeared off the page.
Now I'm much more aware of the shape of my nose and chin.’
She wears the signet ring of her historic family and is nicknamed the ‘Contessa’ by her pals, although the Touzels were Huguenot ducs.
Caricature has a unique capacity to make her happy: ‘When I feel frustrated I find that drawing gets something out of my system that nothing else quite does.
‘Acting is a collaborative medium, which is wonderful and renewing because every time you get another job you meet a new team of people.
But it can also be frustrating.
You're saying someone else's words.
You are standing on someone else's design — like a piece on a chess board — and you are always conscious of being part of a whole.
When you have a blank piece of paper you are free to say whatever you want.’
With a painter father and a musician mother, it might not have been easy to decide in which artistic direction to steer the young Sylvestra.
But as a small child she was so inspired by anything to do with the theatre that at six she was sent to the Barbara Speake stage school in Acton, west London.
She soon started appearing on such television classics as Doctor Who and Dixon of Dock Green.
Early attacks of stage fright were cured by a thimbleful of Courvoisier.
She also painted and drew and this, inspired by comics like Topper, developed into caricaturing.
‘My father paints, now chiefly icons, painting straight on to board and insists he is not a line-drawing man.
But he has helped me tremendously.
When I was about to take O-level Art and my teacher said I was a disaster, my father was shamed into giving me an intensive course ('I can't have a daughter not passing’) and taught me painting, pastel drawing, cross-hatching, line drawing.
Only about two of us passed.’
After leaving school at 16, she began to draw more and more: ‘It is quite close to acting in that it's to do with reflecting on life — how you see people and the fascination of trying to distil the essence of a person.
‘Though I'm sometimes so conscious of lack of technique, it's also quite exciting to find a way of expressing what you see in a person in lines.
And it's such a triumph when you capture it.’
Last year at the RSC, she said, she'd gone all the way through the season and had worked so hard that she had forgotten about drawing.
‘Suddenly one evening, I started on one of Owen Teale, who plays Hotspur.’
She explained her striking sketch of Teale.
‘Owen always seemed to have an enormous amount of mail at Stratford and would come straight from the stage door to the green room, clutching a handful of letters which he would clasp to his body in a special way which I hadn't realised he did until I started drawing this picture and couldn't work out what to do with the arms.
‘I wanted to catch the way his mouth goes down as well as up.
It's almost sad, and it goes up at the end.
It took a long time to figure out how his hair goes.
I had to wait for another performance to see.’
‘At the end of the year there is an actors’ festival at Stratford which actors put together to raise money for their own projects.
One of the schemes was an auction which offered promises, and I promised a caricature.’
The promise was won by the actress Saskia Reeves who gave the finished sketch to her father.
Inspired by this success, Sylvestra embarked on more which grew into an exhibition ‘including one commissioned by Julian Glover of him and his dresser — a colourful character known as Black Mac, and one of David Bradley talking to himself as Justice Shallow in Henry IV Part 2.
‘The exhibition was rather successful and I sold prints of the caricatures.’
The artists she admires are Searle, Scarfe, Steadman and Clive Francis: ‘I cannot work quickly.
But I notice the more I do the stronger the images become.
It's a question of not being discouraged and persevering until suddenly a drawing looks like you hope, of seeing the possibility in something, in a line, and thinking ‘Oh quick, I mustn't change that.
I must build on it.’
The boldness of caricature comes with practice — like acting Shakespeare.
‘Although when I approach a part I link it to someone I've observed in real life, with drawing this observation is a much closer examination.
It's strange since it meant, during performances, looking very closely at people I hadn't quite looked at before — at the way they move, characteristic positions they stand in.’
So far her caricatures have been well received by their subjects.
‘I drew Pam Harris, who runs the actors’ pub, the Dirty Duck, in Stratford.
She is a big lady who takes a lot of space with her personality and conviviality.
She likes a glass of brandy and wears rather wonderful, loud print dresses.
I've always admired her sense of style.
But I didn't show it to her till the last night in case it didn't go down well.
However, she loved it.
‘As an actor, though you sometimes get a feeling you have done something well, you have to wait to hear — from an audience's silence — whether you have held them in the palm of your hand; you are constantly measuring whether the feeling you have inside is endorsed by the people outside.
‘With a picture it's the same.
I want them to be amused.
I have to see whether people laugh with recognition.
If they don't, it has to be rejected and I will go back and try again.’
Books: Marital discord, family confabs Lucasta Miller enjoys Shelley Weiner's subtle satire set in Golders Green
By LUCASTA MILLER
The Last Honeymoon by Shelley Weiner Constable, £13.99 SET IN the uncompromisingly suburban surroundings of Golders Green, Shelley Weiner's new novel proves that it's possible to satirise Jewish family life with a touch more subtlety than the British Telecom commercials.
The Last Honeymoon centres around a marriage on the rocks, and its charac ters are more than mere stereotypes.
Judith Goldman has had enough.
Twenty years of Arthur, her doggedly dull hypochondriac husband, have taken their toll and, in the mood for a dramatic gesture, she books a room in the ghastly hotel where they spent their wedding night with the intention of committing suicide.
When she changes her mind and decides to call a family confab instead, hotel manager Chuck Wilmot, fresh from his last assertiveness training course, can't believe his luck.
His motives are profit pure and simple, and here at last is an opportunity to sell the establishment's conference facilities: maybe he should move out of honeymoon accommodation, a stagnating sector, and exploit the growth potential of the ‘marital disharmony’ market.
Through a series of flashbacks, Judith's past is gradually explored, and you begin to take her suicidal tendencies seriously.
Her relationship with her father, a pushy parent intent on moulding his daughter into a prodigious pianist, is perceptively drawn, as is her self-destructive decision to cut herself off from music after her marriage, where the only outlets for her frustration are manic housework and an unsatisfying affair.
Although the storyline sags in places, there are flashes of brilliant parody in the caricature of the All Seasons Honeymoon Hotel.
And there's enough psychological insight to give the characters three dimensions.
Books: Paperbacks
ALL THE PAIN THAT MONEY CAN BUY: The Life of Christina Onassis by William Wright Gollancz, £5.99 MANY MIGHT think that Christina Onassis's 37 years of life, notable only for her four marriages and succession of lovers, is not worth a full-scale biography, certainly not one of almost 400 pages.
But William Wright's has a sort of voyeuristic interest as we follow the neglected child of the shipping tycoon from her English boarding school via her wild goings-on in St Moritz to her battle for control of her father's business.
Wright's tone, only just short of saying every other paragraph, ‘Isn't she awful!’, is rather unpleasant.
Clearly he has listened at a number of keyholes and collected the right gossip.
But so what.
UNLOCKING THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE by Robert Burchfield Faber, £6.99 ROBERT BURCHFIELD retired as editor of the Supplement to the Oxford English Dictionary to devote his life to the study of grammar.
And it is a good thing that someone sensible should be doing so for the subject has got into the hands of theorists of the most tiresome sort.
As his lexicography has shown, Dr Burchfield is ready to acknowledge change but holds fast to certain rules on the grounds of avoiding barbarous sentences or ambiguities.
Here in re-printed lectures and essays, he expounds his creed.
The T. S. Eliot Lectures show him at his best — relaxed, immensely well read and decisive.
An essay on the pitfalls of including political words in a dictionary is wildly funny.
MY LORD JOHN by Georgette Heyer Arrow, £4.99 AT THE time of her death, Georgette Heyer was working on a large-scale historical sequence based on the character of John, Duke of Bedford, third son of Henry IV, and known to us primarily as the goody-goody prince of Shakespeare's Henry IV.
The author left her manuscript in mid-sentence.
The research is good, the narrative, as always, straightforward and the descriptions of the domestic scene lively.
I am doubtful if it was wise to include not only dialogue but descriptive passages in a sort of sub-Chaucerian English: for instance, ‘Grammercy, brother!
I had as lief do my own endeavour!’
THE UNMADE BED by Franoise Sagan Allison & Busby, £6.99 HAILED as a highly important and compulsively readable novel when it was first published in 1978, The Unmade Bed now seems like the work of a minor novelist at the end of her tether.
The story of a love affair involving a fashionable young French playwright and a dazzlingly beautiful actress, it describes in stiffly translated prose an unconvincingly chic theatrical and literary milieu in Paris, rather as any romantic novelist equipped with the requisite rose-coloured spectacles might present it.
Since the characters never come to life, it is difficult to care what they get up to, in or out of bed.
TWO LIVES by William Trevor Penguin, £5.99 THE TWO lives are laid bare in two novellas.
Reading Turgenev describes the loveless, unconsummated marriage with a dull haberdasher entered into by young Mary Louise out of impatience and boredom with life in provincial Ireland.
Her emotionally deprived life is enhanced briefly when she is read to in a churchyard on Sunday afternoons by the invalid cousin she had loved as a child.
The nursing home to which her husband has her committed after her eccentricity has become dangerous, and from which she and the other residents are eventually ejected to be cared for by an amorphous ‘community’, might have been lying in wait for her from the day she was born.
My House in Umbria is narrated by the owner of the house, whose life, though more colourful, is no happier.
LETTERS FROM MY FATHER ed by Amanda Allsop Alan Sutton, £4.99 I USED to encounter Kenneth Allsop frequently in the Sixties when we broadcast together on BBC book programmes.
He was a delightful colleague, amusing and sympathetic, and his suicide in 1973 in his early fifties came as a shock to his many friends.
His letters to his daughter Amanda, accompanied by her explanatory editorial notes, reveal him to have been something of a tender tyrant in his dealings with his three children, and much happier in the country watching birds than in London coping with editors and producers.
The letters are pleasantly ephemeral stuff, until the final brave, moving and apologetic note to his wife on the day when, depressed by illness and pain, he decided he'd had enough.
VOLCANO by Shusaku Endo Sceptre, £4.99 JINPEI SUDA, a Japanese seismologist who has just retired, is convinced that the volcano Akadake, his obsession throughout his career, is dormant; but Durand, a defrocked French Catholic priest, believes the volcano will erupt and sweep away the new Christian retreat being built on its slopes, as a sign of divine displeasure with Japan.
Shusaku Endo's novel of ideas can be read as symbolism or old-fashioned realism, for it works neatly on both levels.
Endo is a leading Japanese novelist who is sometimes compared with Graham Greene, but he writes about religion with a greater intellectual rigour than Greene, in a style both terse and elegant.
GRIDLOCK by Ben Elton Sphere, £4.99 WHEN a stand-up comedian decides to sit down and write a novel, does the result have to be a heavy-handed satire on just about everything?
The President of Global Motors (UK) employs hit-men to eliminate a spastic professor who has invented an environmentally harmless engine that runs on hydrogen.
Her Majesty's Government is also involved, for it is planning to set up the BritTrak Consortium which would reduce the rail network to a single, high profit track, ‘running from the City to a decent little pub in Chobham’.
Elton is sensibly sceptical about politicians, police, businessmen, taxi drivers, street buskers, alarm bells, pop groups, New York, the senior management of British Rail, and much else, but his jokes are old, tired and obvious, and certainly not as funny as his moments of hectoring seriousness.
Even though there isn't much space for plot or characters in between the authorial wisecracks, at 435 ill-written pages Gridlock is about four times as long as it needs to be.
THE AUDEN GENERATION by Samuel Hynes Pimlico, £12 THIS literary history of England in the Thirties (a decade often looked back upon nostalgically as the most recent time when literary giants still stalked the land) is more than the usual glib account of the rise to fame of that precocious composite poet MacSpaunday.
Hynes catches adroitly the flavour of poetry and politics in a period when even poetry found it impossible to be politically neutral, and he writes perceptively of the underlying links between such disparate writers as, for example, Isherwood and Greene.
It was a time when to be ‘new’ seemed more than usually important, as exemplified by the titles of its livelier publications: New Writing, New Verse.
Hynes's account of that impressive and depressing decade and its writers is sympathetic and lucidly written.
Books: Ted Hughes charges at Shakespeare Frank Kermode finds the Poet Laureate's theory about Shakespeare to be more energetic than persuasive
By FRANK KERMODE
Shakespeare and the Goddess of Complete Being by Ted Hughes Faber, £18.99 A VERY large book about Shakespeare, who was a good poet, by the incumbent Poet Laureate, who is also a good poet, should prove something of an event.
And so it is, though opinion will divide as to its success.
Nobody will deny its extraordinary energy, or fail to notice that however bizarre the turns and flourishes of the argument, the voice we hear has the bold, jolting force easily recognisable by poetry readers as characteristic of Mr Hughes.
But some will wonder about the direction in which the voice is calling them.
Mr Hughes is not the first critic to find in Shakespeare's works a dominant, all-informing pattern, or ‘myth’, but Hughes's myth exceeds all others in the extent of its ramifications.
It is impossible to give more than a brief and partial account of it.
Its roots are in Shakespeare's early poems Venus and Adonis and The Rape of Lucrece.
Adonis, cold and puritanical, rejects the lustful invitations of Venus, the supreme goddess, He goes off hunting, and as a punishment for his presumptuous chastity, is killed by a boar.
This avenging boar, the agent of the insulted goddess, is henceforth identified with the destructive forces that produce tragedy.
In The Rape of Lucrece Tarquin, unable to restrain his lust, and as it were possessed by the spirit of the boar, violates the chaste Lucrece, a devotee of the goddess in her virgin mode as Diana.
For it is an essential part of the pattern that the complete goddess manifests herself in two antithetical ways — as the Venus of sexual love and the Diana of virginity.
And men can be bewildered by the co-existence of these apparently hostile forces.
Shakespeare's early poems sketch that double vision and later many of his heroes are plagued by it.
A woman can be at once lovely and loathsome, chaste and lecherous, Sacred Bride and Queen of Hell.
This double vision of the woman-goddess is said to be the mainspring of Shakespeare's tragedies.
Hughes ingeniously detects its presence in the most unpromising contexts — in Coriolanus, for example, where the goddess is seen as a sort of combination of the hero's mother and the city of Rome.
The myth recurs in some form in all the plays right up to The Tempest, where the boar, again the agent of the lustful goddess, charges (the threats to Miranda's chastity) but is stopped ‘in mid-air’ by the magic of Prospero.
Hughes calls The Tempest a virtuoso Grosse Fuge on the themes of Shakespeare's tragic myth.
A fairly conventional view — but here it is transformed by an argument that makes Caliban not merely the boar, minister of the lustful Venus — in contrast to Prospero, who, like Adonis, is tediously keen on chastity — but the hero of the piece, and indeed of the collected works.
He is ‘full of visions…but full also of ‘jealous’ fury, the rage of the rejected Goddess’: he is close to Complete Being.
For, according to Hughes, his mother Sycorax is a black sorceress and a Queen of Hell, as well as being a lineal descendant of Dido, Queen of Carthage, a white magician, whom Aeneas loved and betrayed.
I have described only a small part of the whole mythological root system.
Hughes aims to provide nothing less than a complete account of Shakespeare's mythological base, the ‘DNA, as it were, of his poetic organism’.
He hopes it will transform future productions, and demonstrate that the collected works of Shakespeare, rightly understood, provide a mythic corpus like that of the Mahabharata as treated by Peter Brook.
The operation of the mythic DNA affects not only Shakespeare's plots but contemporary history as he interpreted it; so chaste women wronged by their boar-driven husbands include not only such fictional figures as Hero in Much Ado About Nothing and Imogen in Cymbeline, but also Katherine of Aragon (in Henry VIII).
She was succeeded as Henry's wife by her double or antitype, Ann Boleyn, a Queen of Hell.
The theory is worked out with a perhaps necessarily cavalier attitude to traditional assumptions, including those relating to the chronology of the plays.
The book is a courtly act of devotion.
Since Robert Graves wrote The White Goddess — an example Hughes acknowledges — nobody has offered the goddess so intricate a tribute.
The question remains whether an investigator equally committed might not perform much the same myth-detecting operation on any considerable body of writing, say the novels of Dickens, or indeed the works of some quite minor writer.
I confess to being sceptical about the whole enterprise, but readers who agree with Hughes that we need a drama that blends the sacred with the secular, on the model of the best Greek tragedies, may feel differently.
In any case the effect of this book is tonic; there is writing of high quality, and even the distortion and magnification of marginal details has its interest.
All the same, I feel that the myth-making tells us more about Hughes than about Shakespeare.
So does the prose.
Consider this passage about a sow: ‘her combination of gross whiskery nakedness and riotous carnality is seized by the mythic imagination as a sort of uterus on the loose — upholstered with breasts, not so much many-breasted as a mobile tub entirely made of female sexual parts, a woman-sized, multiple udder of trotters.
Most alarming of all is that elephantine, lolling mouth under her great ear-flaps, like a Brueghelesque nightmare vagina, baggy with overproduction, famous for gobbling her piglets, magnified and shameless, exuberantly omnivorous and insatiable, swamping the senses’.
Like the book as a whole, this is pure Hughes.
The prose throughout is animated not only by dozens of animals but by machinery of all sorts: gears, superchargers, power drives, X-ray chambers.
Shakespeare, who admired energy, might well have applauded this writing, especially some fine pages (pp.132–154) on his mature verse.
But a librarian, more likely to be an Adonis-type than a Boar or a Goddess, might be tempted to catalogue this book under ‘Hughes’ rather than under ‘Shakespeare’.
Books: Grim lives with goats in Uruguay Kate Chisholm on new translations of another Latin American novelist
By KATE CHISHOLM
Farewells & A Grave With No Name by Juan Carlos Onetti tr by Peter Bush Quartet, £12.95 IT MUST be hard to be a South American novelist these days.
How do you live up to Borges, Garca Marquez or Vargas Llosa?
How do you break free from the expectation that your stories will be heavily dosed with magic realism?
The Uruguayan Juan Carlos Onetti has been writing since the Thirties and so prefigures the magic realists, but his books are only now becoming known to English readers.
Farewells & A Grave With No Name are two extended short-stories originally published in 1954 and 1959.
They reveal Onetti to be convincingly full of realism, but frustratingly short of magic.
The narrator of Farewells owns a bar in a sleepy village up in the mountains.
He watches a man arrive who, we discover, has come to take the cure at the local sanatorium.
The man is visited by a girl and by a woman with a young child.
We never learn their names, nor is it made clear until the end what is wrong with the man.
We see him only through the eyes of the bar-owner, who whiles away the steamy summer afternoons fantasising about this supposed menage a trois.
He makes up for the boredom and emptiness of his own life by creating a dramatic emotional triangle for these puppets of his imagination, only to realise finally that his puppets are dancing to quite another tune.
All that remains for him is the bitter awareness of his own futility.
A Grave With No Name opens with the funeral of a prematurely aged woman whose only mourners are a goat and a young former patient of the doctor narrator.
Gradually the life of this prostitute and her strange pet is revealed to us.
But just as the narrator has difficulty in piecing together the fragments of her story, so we as readers are never able to see the whole picture.
This is realism taken to an extreme.
Onetti never fully fleshes out his characters since in life we can never really know what lies behind the faces of those we meet or pass on the street.
He gives us clues as to how to complete the jigsaw, but leaves us to fill in the missing pieces.
While this can be challenging, it can also be infuriating.
The extreme detachment with which Onetti views his characters makes it difficult for the reader to become involved in their fate.
And yet his stories are powerful studies of those living on the edge of life; of the bitterness and intangible hostility that are the real consequences of deprivation, misfortune and wasted lives.
They bear an unpalatable but unavoidable truth.
Books: Marx or McDonalds?
Philip Kerr is unconvinced by George Steiner's stories of ideas
By PHILIP KERR
Proofs and Three Parables by George Steiner Faber, £5.99 READING Proofs and Three Parables, George Steiner's latest collection of short stories (he prefers to call them ‘allegories of argument’), it is not difficult to see why dialectical method should be something that is more common to modern philosophy than to fiction.
The critical enquiry after truth can be a tedious business.
While it remains unclear to this reader exactly what moral or spiritual relations are set forth in the three stories which comprise the titular parables, Proofs, the main part of the present volume, concerns itself with how the collapse of communism threatens the whole Western intellectual tradition of idealism and asceticism.
An Italian proof-reader and old Party-member, nicknamed the Professore, tries to come to terms with the apparent bankruptcy of his own system of beliefs.
The fall of the Berlin Wall provokes a debate between the Professore and a Priest.
Their discussion comprises the major part of the story, with the Professore arguing the old dialectical materialist line.
There may indeed be something in the Professore's argument that the major fault of Marxism was to over-estimate man's capacity for altruism, for purity, for in tellectual-philosophic sustenance.
But at the same time one cannot help feeling that Proofs is the kind of story that would have been better off as a three-page essay in Granta.
So it is surprising to discover that the substance of Proofs was indeed a three-page essay in Granta — especially when one considers the puritanical intellectual rigour that characterises Steiner's literary style.
To turn three pages of essay into 77 pages of story looks suspiciously like the kind of redundant ornamentation that Steiner suggests is at the heart of what is wrong with Western values.
No wonder the old boy stares obliquely off the back cover like a guilty-looking Archie Andrews.
As is typical of those who seek to endow Marxist social and economic theories with the prestige of natural science, Steiner suggests that the ‘new temples to liberty…
McDonalds and Kentucky Fried Chicken’ are a false alternative to the knout and the Gulag.
Maybe so, but they sure taste a lot better.
And as for Steiner's suggestion that the West lays waste to the natural world, can he have forgotten that it was the Soviet Union that brought us Chernobyl?
If proofs there are in this book they are only that Marxism is now quite properly the preserve of cranks and dreamers.
Books: Low-cut dresses, firm-hewn parts Moira Shearer is not enriched by Shirley Conran's hymn to Mammon
By MOIRA SHEARER
Crimson by Shirley Conran Sidgwick and Jackson, £14.99 ‘THIS book is UNPUTDOWNABLE!’ screech the publicists for Crimson: my difficulty lay in picking it up.
‘Crimson is the colour of passion…rage…blood’— also the colour of most things featured on a revealing dust jacket.
First one sees a pretty, bronzed model clad in strapless dark crimson: she has aquamarine eyes (statutory in this novel, apart from two which are grape-green) and a large, open mouth.
But she looks troubled, unsure of herself — perhaps because her bosom is merely average, one has seen bigger.
This can be remedied immediately by turning to the jacket's end-flap, where the author, in low-cut scarlet-crimson, poses with maximum calculation.
Her confident smile glints of Mammon, for money is her central theme, closely followed by class; money for the American market, class (and some money) for the English.
Her plot is high-flown twaddle: dazzling romantic novelist with immense fortune has difficulty dividing it between three even more dazzling and successful granddaughters; devilishly attractive villain and many scenes in many beds.
This blockbuster may have been intended to rival Gone with the Wind but the result is sub-Dallas, sub-Dynasty.
The single remarkable feature is that Mrs Conran includes everything.
Her cardboard characters inhabit the classiest locations and move among the smartest people: top hotels, restaurants, designers, movie stars, models and mouth-watering menus are all thrown in: there is would-be-steamy sex, in abundant clinical detail which is risible, and a touch of criminal violence to please the sadistic.
Descriptions are predictably tacky — faces are ‘firm-hewn’, other parts ‘large, sensuous’: waiters ‘glide’, motorboats ‘cleave’, smell is all-important —‘the seductive, forbidden smell of him’, ‘the pungent, almond smell of love’, ‘the soft milky smell of David's body’ and a drop of the old BO…so sorry, I mean ‘the warm wool odour of his sweater’.
Good breeding is mentioned, which is ill-bred in itself: both World Wars and Hiroshima are used as cosy backdrops for banality: and, tucked into this shoddy glitz, is that stock figure of Thirties drawing-room comedy, the lower-class maid/companion who can't speak proper but is true-blue.
Mrs C writes that ballet dancers ‘box their stomachs and rears with their hands before dancing’— this is news to me.
As she insists on dabbling in nuggets of ‘culture’, I must remark that there is only one swan in her chosen Sibelius tone poem, and it is Dr Jekyll who turns into Mr Hyde.
Books: Vicious circles in our villages David Robson admires Margaret Yorke's deft exposure of middle-class criminal passions
By DAVID ROBSON
Criminal Damage by Margaret Yorke Hutchinson, £13.99 TODAY'S whodunnit is primarily a whydunnit.
If the author doesn't show a mastery of psychological theory and trace the murderer's little foibles back to problems with toilet-training, the reader feels short-changed.
The heroine of Margaret Yorke's latest novel, Criminal Damage, is a middle-class English woman with one of those undemonstrative, un communicative, tea-dispensing mothers you want to kick.
Starved of emotional nourishment from that quarter, the daughter is brittle and neurotic and, when her boyfriend leaves her for another woman, she takes umbrage, haunts the new love-nest night and day, lets down tyres, makes abusive phone calls and eventually throws a stone through a window and gets herself arrested.
Her anger is so incandescent that, when her ageing mother is brutally attacked by a burglar, she falls under suspicion.
But this second act of violence proves to have a healing effect.
As tragedy brings them closer together, the daughter discovers that her mother's tight-lipped manner is only a faade and that, as a young woman, she too was guilty of a crime passionnel.
The vicious circle of repressed feeling is finally broken.
If all this were laid on with a trowel, the reader's patience would quickly wear thin.
But Yorke wisely confines the psychology to the sub-text and contents herself with keeping the narrative moving.
In parallel with the main story, one family's tragedy mirroring another's like the Gloucesters and the Lears, two working-class brothers act out their own drama of unresolved guilt and suppressed violence.
The plot has an almost geometric neatness, but is saved from aridity by Yorke's sense of humour and excellent use of detail.
Criminal Damage captures with particular poignancy the dubious pleasures of life in retirement in an English village.
Pottering down to the library to exchange Colin Thubron for Jonathan Raban or dropping in to the Jacaranda Tree for a mushroom omelette, everything can seem orderly and secure.
But for the children running up and down the aisles in church or the yobs in leather jackets barging the queue at petrol stations, the elderly aren't so much objects of deference as obstacles to be pushed peremptorily aside.
Books: Mary Kingsley, I presume?
Flora Fraser considers a surprisingly hostile life of the Victorian explorer Mary Kingsley
By FLORA FRASER
Mary Kingsley: Imperial Adventures by Dea Birkett Macmillan, £25 IN January 1892 Mary Kingsley, approaching 30, was her mother's nurse in Cambridge.
Her father's large library of travellers' tales was her mental furniture.
Her parents died within three months of each other.
Five years later she was to be found lecturing on her expedition to the Gabon, she had climbed Mount Cameroon, and her Travels in West Africa was published to consolidate her reputation as a ‘fish and fetish’ expert.
She went on to attack the Colonial Office on the ‘hut tax’, and became a Fellow of the Anthropological Institute in 1898.
Two years later she applied to nurse in the Boer War and died from typhoid fever at Simonstown, aged 37.
The main points of Mary Kingsley's remarkable story have appeared in compendiums on Victorian women travellers.
Dea Birkett's detailed biography links Mary Kingsley's public and private life with great authority, for all that the biographer is very hard on her subject.
She emphasises Kingsley's indecision about the purpose of her two African journeys.
On her first foray to Freetown and the Congo Kingsley posed variously as ichthyologist, botanist and naturalist.
Second time round she turned explorer — from the Ogooue to the Ramboe river.
Only later did she decide on her expertise —‘ethnological bush-work’.
As time went by, she exaggerated her acquaintance with the Fang and other peoples of West Africa.
She did so, in part, to make authoritative her claim that there was an ‘African law’, which made English colonial government inappropriate.
She favoured an informal economic imperialism, where the despised ‘palm-oil ruffians’— the West African Traders of Conrad novels — should preside.
Unfortunately for her, the important Liverpool traders, like John Holt, had no wish, ultimately, to do more than trade.
Birkett is at her best where she describes her subject's exploitation of her gender.
For example, Kingsley would slip into trading stations up the Congo with the cry, ‘Only me.’
There are interesting portraits of Kingsley's female contemporaries — notably, Mary Slessor, Vice-Consul of Okoyong — but always to the disadvantage of Kingsley herself.
Birkett slashes at every one of her subject's achievements with an avenging blade.
She accuses Kingsley of mingling other travellers' experiences with her own and writing of what she had never seen.
Bruce Walker, an old Africa hand, commented, of her assertion that the Bubis, like the Fans, pulled out their eyebrows, ‘Surely she means eyelashes’.
She lied about her age.
But avenging what?
Birkett appears to feel a personal hostility to Mary Kingsley and her autocratic ways, rather than antagonism towards her imperialist activities.
Hostility aside, however, Birkett has drawn on Mary Kingsley's correspondence with friends and foes to provide a convincing biography of this ambitious and dauntless woman, who truckled to no man.
Books: Love makes the world go round — says a Prof Dr Anthony Daniels is baffled by a Freudian philosopher's hymn to love
By DR ANTHONY DANIELS
Love and its Place In Nature: A Philosophical Interpretation of Freudian Psychoanalysis by Jonathan Lear Faber, £20 WHAT exactly did Freud discover, what improvement in human existence did he bring about?
If pressed, most of us would say that he deepened our understanding of human nature, and that he made us aware that the mind of Man is complex and contradictory.
Yet this had long been known: for example, the maxims of La Rochefoucauld, which retain their power to amuse and disturb, established conclusively that many things in human affairs are far from what they seem.
And the injunction over the entrance to the ancient Athenian Academy, to know thyself, implies that it is possible, indeed easy, not to know thyself.
Any model of the mind which allows for such a possibility is not a simple one, and hints at, if it does not actually affirm, the existence of the unconscious.
Jonathan Lear is professor of philosophy at Yale, and is also a psychoanalyst.
I confess to finding some of his Freudian speculations, unleavened as they are by the faintest suspicion of humour, hard to follow, in the sense that I am unsure what would count either for or against them.
Perhaps this is my fault: I am insufficiently trained in metaphysics, but this will surely apply to the great majority of readers.
He states, for example, that Freudian psychology leads inevitably to the conclusion that love is a force immanent in the world, and is not just a product of the human psyche; and he states that ‘It is a condition of there being a world that it be lovable by beings like us.’
Try as I might, I can attach no definite meaning to this rather grand sentence.
Professor Lear's assertion that ‘it is through love that humans, and the rest of living nature, acquire form’ seems to me a throwback to a much earlier mode of thinking which, if widely readopted, would be about as intellectually productive as a Romanian state-run steel mill is economically productive.
Professor Lear believes that individuation and autonomy are the highest goals of Man and he also believes, along with Socrates, that the unexamined life is not worth living.
This is surely arrogance on a pretty preposterous scale.
As for the supposition that psychoanalysis favours and furthers personal autonomy, I can find little evidence for it among either the analysts or the analysands whom I have known, unless by autonomy is meant a retreat into a private (and invariably middle-class) world of minor emotional fluctuations.
Books: REVIEW OF REVIEWS
By WILLIAM STARTLE
The War Against Women by Marilyn French Hamish Hamilton, £9.99 Backlash: The Undeclared War Against Women by Susan Faludi Chatto & Windus, £9.99 Arcadia by Jim Crace Jonathan Cape, £14.99 ‘THE sisterhood at the top of British publishing should be collectively ashamed of itself,’ pronounced Richard Gott in The Guardian, in protest at the simultaneous publication of two more ‘tendentious feminist tracts by famous American writers’.
Other critics shared his view that enough was enough and gave both Marilyn French's The War Against Women and Susan Faludi's Backlash a pretty cool reception.
Robin Lee in The Times maintained that both books were beneath criticism, Faludi's for using the ‘low-brow, flirtatious idiom of Cosmopolitan magazine’, French's for being ‘aggressive and intemperate’.
Ahdaf Soueif in this paper felt that men were such a sorry, beleaguered lot anyway that the books'’ combative polemic’, with French in particular going wildly over the top, was likely to prove counter-productive.
The Observer's Nicci Gerrard admired Faludi's ‘formidable assault on American society’ and French's ‘impassioned hectoring’, but looked in vain for ‘thoughts on peace, pleasure, doubt or joy’.
In The Independent, Justine Picardie took Faludi to task for skating over the reasons why older feminists like Germaine Greer and Betty Friedan had modified the radicalism of their youth in the light of experience.
Arcadia, Jim Crace's poetic allegory of urban life, split the critics right down the middle.
Michael Ratcliffe in the Observer admired Crace's ‘fluent, witty and pyrotechnic ease’, and Francis King in The Spectator his ‘audacious deployment of simile, metaphor and language’.
David Robson in this paper (’ one of the most beautifully written books in years’) was also enthusiastic, as was Jonathan Coe in The Guardian who asked: ‘Why does Crace feel so much more modern and so much more relevant than writers who clutter their novels with a forest of contemporary references and cultural signposts?’
In The Times, Jim McCue thought the writing ‘impeccably even and even handed’.
Those against the book were equally emphatic.
Zoe Heller in The Independent on Sunday found cliches on every page and much misjudged dialogue.
Peter Kemp in The Sunday Times complained that his parable ‘lapsed into the lifeless and schematic’.
In The Independent, Tom Sutcliffe regretted that such a fine writer as Crace should have written a novel ‘so nullified by craft, so thwarted by a style which steadily blows against the direction in which the story wishes to travel’.
Books: The crazy artery of Manhattan Susannah Herbert on an account of Broadway that's so streetwise, it's almost incomprehensible
By SUSANNAH HERBERT
The Heart of the World by Nik Cohn.
Chatto & Windus, £14.99 WHEN the likes of us walk down Broadway — the seething, seedy artery of New York — we put our heads down, meet no eyes, and hang on to our wallets.
But when Nik Cohn walks down Broadway he writes 363 pages about it.
Cohn's Broadway is one populated by freaks and story-tellers.
Hard luck yarns come crawling out of doorways to tug at his sleeve, tall tales sit slumped over coffee in badly lit diners waiting for him to join them.
Like the diligent ‘style’ journalist he is, Cohn notes them all down and offers them up for our delight.
Except that it doesn't work like that.
Cohn's cast of ex-boxers, boozers, transvestites, addicts, art-dealers and cockroaches seem to have been summoned straight from central casting — the section labelled ‘kooks’, perhaps, or ‘sleazeballs’.
Cohn's style — which attempts to mimic the street lingo of cliches and superlatives — does his new friends no favours.
‘At every block, it seemed, there was the latest, the greatest.
And somewhere along the line, the street became an idea.
The idea boiled down to a single word, the most potent in the language.
And that word, of course, was action,’ he writes, incomprehensibly.
Subtract this nonsense padding, though, and there is a good — if slim — book struggling to escape from The Heart of the World.
In the hands of a Christopher Isherwood some of these characters might have become as memorable as Sally Bowles in Goodbye To Berlin.
It is their chronicler's fault that their words and actions slip through the mind instead of staying.
Books: Why violence and the vote no longer mix Brutality was once part of the British way of life at both ends of the class system, explains Paul Langford
By PAUL LANGFORD
Riot, Risings and Revolution: Governance and Violence in 18th-century England by Ian Gilmour.
Hutchinson, £25 ‘I LOVE a mob.
I headed a mob once myself.’
These are the words of an 18th-century Prime Minister, the Duke of Newcastle.
Newcastle is not remembered as a radical demagogue.
Thanks to Macaulay, he lives in history as the very type of a Whig oligarch.
It comes as a surprise to find him boasting of his prowess as a rioter.
Some will suppose that 18th-century riots could be rather jolly affairs, playful English affrays of the sort cheerfully satirised by Hogarth or Rowlandson.
But the truth is that Newcastle's riots were brutal street fights between Whig and Tory thugs.
This was gang warfare of a thoroughly nasty kind.
It resulted in a number of deaths as well as many injuries and much destruction of property.
How many modern Prime Ministers could recall such exploits in their past, let alone dare to boast about them?
In a liberal democracy ‘non-violence’ is a cherished value, perhaps the most cherished of all values, for violence is perceived as the negation of democracy.
Voting and violence are antipodes.
The right to vote renders violence illegitimate.
Violence would make the right to vote unusable.
Yet the Duke of Newcastle was an enthusiastic electioneer and a practised parliamentarian.
If he could hardly be described as a democrat, he certainly helped establish the parliamentary control and party politics which paved the way for democracy.
Political violence in 18th-century Britain was evidently a more complex subject than modern assumptions would make it.
This is the premise of Sir Ian Gilmour's stimulating and wide-ranging survey.
As he points out, 18th-century Britons did not even define violence in our terms.
They made no distinction between (legitimate) force and (illegitimate) violence, for instance.
Sophisms such as‘institutional violence’ and ‘verbal violence’would have baffled them.
Yet whatever one called it, it was a pronounced feature of British life.
Numerous kinds of violence are examined here.
Some of them, such as sedition in both its Jacobite and Jacobin forms, have always interested historians.
Others, such as popular protest and the use of the legal system to intimidate and terrorise, have attracted particular attention in recent years.
Sir Ian provides an eminently readable and always scholarly account of these very diverse matters.
What emerges?
The author's sympathies are with the governed rather than the governors.
For the most part, popular violence was reluctantly undertaken and temperately employed, a response to extreme provocation and almost always conservative in its aims.
The ruling class, by contrast, was ruthless and cynical in its resort to violence.
It disarmed the people in order to protect its own enjoyment of blood sports.
It multiplied capital punishment for the most wretched categories of offenders.
It preserved the code of honour without pretending to defend the legality or morality of duelling.
Yet there was a commonsensical strain in English life which restrained the excesses of ‘nobs’ as ‘mobs’.
Early Han overian governments could be viciously repressive, especially in Scotland after the Forty-Five, but their very unpopularity made them careful about the way they treated English grievances.
Later Hanoverian governments declined to panic in the face of a revolutionary threat, and relied more on public support for King and Constitution than on ‘state’ terrorism.
If Sir Ian intends a moral to be drawn, it would seem to be that prudent paternalism has much to commend it.
In the near-famine of 1795, champions of the market economy would have had the poor starve and let mobs of hungry peasants loose on the countryside.
What actually happened was that a less doctrinaire magistracy put local taxes up in order to provide bread for poor families.
The result was a kind of minimum wage financed by the ratepayer.
Readers of the Left-wing historian E. P. Thompson will be familiar with the concept of a ‘moral economy’ which provided a legitimising principle for the measured licence of an English mob.
That notion is quite compatible with a certain residue of benevolent despotism exercised by Tory squires.
Mr Thompson's demons, Whig oligarchs, proto-capitalists, and laissez-faire economists, are not so different from those of Sir Ian Gilmour.
Plainly, attitudes towards violence did change.
Sir Ian is right to emphasise that plebeian savagery was more vulnerable than its patrician counterpart: cock-throwing declined while fox-hunting flour ished.
But heightened sensitivity on this point cannot be explained entirely in terms of the need to tighten ‘social control’ at a time of rapid economic change.
It had some bearing at all levels of society.
Corporal punishment became an issue both in the armed forces and the public schools.
Violence in sport was the subject of growing debate.
The idea that it might be channelled in worthier directions, the development of team spirit and the inculcation of self-discipline, was already being ventilated.
Certain kinds of violence had long been thought particularly un-English.
This was true of the family vendetta, the resort to assassination as a political tactic, the systematic use of torture by the State.
What these had in common, of course , was their want of a genuinely public dimension, of communal legitimacy.
But by the late-18th century even communal violence in a traditional cause was becoming difficult to stomach.
The horror provoked by the anti-Catholic Gordon Riots of 1780 was not just a response to their ferocity.
It also reflected growing distaste for violence as such.
This can hardly have been the enlightening effect of reason and liberty since in France the outcome of the same ideals was the triumph of the guillotine.
Possibly it has something to do with the peculiar mixture of moral sensibility and religious revival which marked English society from the mid-18th century onwards.
Or perhaps it followed from that carefully nurtured tradition of political and religious toleration which was seen even by foreigners as a distinctively English achievement in the era of parliamentary government.
At any rate, non-violence was on its way to becoming a political objective, not merely a moral one.
Paul Langford's ‘A Polite and Commercial People, England 1727–83’ has just come out in paperback (Oxford, £10.95).
Books: Piero, the Palio, and traffic jams John Mortimer on an inside/outside view of the pleasures and pains of Tuscany
By JOHN MORTIMER
Within Tuscany by Matthew Spender Viking, £16.99 I OWE Matthew Spender a great debt of gratitude.
He told me about Piero della Francesca's mysterious Flagellation in the Ducal palace in Urbino, and he said that it was ‘probably the greatest small picture in the world’, a line which I was able to use in a novel set in Tuscany.
I was writing a comedy with sinister undertones about the villa renters and expats of Chiantishire.
But I was dealing with characters who were gliding along the surface of Tuscany, a beguiling countryside which they thought of as an extension of England.
Matthew Spender (son of the poet Stephen) has taken on the harder task of writing about Tuscany from within.
He and his wife, both artists, renovated a house, sent their children to school there and have survived it, not only in the crowded summers, but in the chilly winters when the place can get as cold as the Cotswolds without the central heating.
He feels so close to the nature of the place that he is photographed on the jacket of his book wearing a curious hat and holding the tusk of a wild pig.
It's no criticism of his book to say that his view from within remains, as mine did from without, unmistakably English.
The English love affair with Tuscany is so well known that in the last century hotel porters in Siena called all foreigners English, even if they were German or Russian.
We like the green landscape, the simple food, the reserved people, and our children don't wilt in the heat as they would on the Amalfi coast.
It is also a pleasure for a nation of country lovers to escape from what is in danger of becoming a land of theme parks and golf courses, to a place in which the earth is actually used for growing things and where the workers haven't been reduced to the statutory rustic who sits in the corner of the saloon bar entertaining the merchant bankers.
So, going back to Tuscany can be a return to a dream of the England of Hardy and George Eliot.
This is a great part of the pleasure Matthew Spender found; discovering craftsmen, for example, one of whom remembered who had built a palazzo in Florence, another who hid in the cellar for fear of thunderstorms, yet another who built him beehives.
The other lure of Tuscany is that its history is on the surface.
In England it lies concealed behind Tescos and the shopping mall.
In Siena, where the Palio takes the place of cricket, it's around every corner and dominates the city.
There is a masterpiece in most churches, or placed casually in a small chapel in a field.
Matthew Spender's writing is at its best remembering the past as though it has just happened.
Michelangelo's way of attacking a block of marble and the burning of Savonarola are described with real feeling.
There is a fascinating speculation about Shelley's possible murder: Italian criminals, even today, search for victims who are isolated in society, as were the English poetic tourists.
Thinking about the past, helping to build a cupboard, playing in the village band or photographing the bootmaker and the carpenter, Mr Spender seems contented and within the Tuscany he was looking for when he was, as he says, tired of the ‘thin blue light of London’.
But the expatriate is ever an outsider.
Matthew Spen der falls in love with an Italian girl called Vittoria, being particularly moved by a thin line above the wrist ‘denoting some absolute frontier between her hand and the rest of her body’.
The progress of this relationship isn't altogether clear but at the end of the book he describes the Italian male lover as a ‘sleepy tomcat’ and Vittoria's life as subject to frequent phases of ‘wailing neck biting followed by complacent indifference’from such men.
At a smart party in the garden of a villa, he sees an Englishman dancing.
He had ‘no tie — so rude at a formal party like this, heavy dun trousers of a fashion the French might call ‘eclat merdeaux’, smeared with darkening souvenirs of food and drink bound by a belt from the corpse of a dead guardsman.
No shoes — I hate a man who dances barefoot’.
No doubt the young Englishman was unpleasant, no doubt the Italian tomcats are exceedingly shallow — but the picture that emerges most convincingly is of a sensitive Englishman parted from the country of his birth and not quite within that of his choice.
For Tuscany is not only porcupines and wild boars and beekeepers and cameo carvers, it's also supermarkets, traffic jams, the boring conversation of tomcats, awful television and yes, for better or for worse, English tourists.
Books: When the Left encouraged good breeding Eugenics was a socialist passion before it was a Nazi crime, finds Shirley Robin Letwin
By SHIRLEY ROBIN LETWIN
Eugenics, Human Genetics and Human Failings: The Eugenic Society, its Sources and Critics in Britain by Pauline M. H. Mazumdar Routledge, £40 THANKS to Hitler, schemes for purifying the race by selective breeding are now associated with ‘ultra-right’ politics.
But a very different story is told by Dr Mazumdar's distinguished study, based on many unpublished documents, of the British eugenics movement.
By the 1860s in Britain, people of all sorts were becoming increasingly concerned about the ‘residuum’, the body of paupers being supported by the Poor Law who not only persisted but steadily increased.
Some thought that those poor could be rescued by providing them with religious and moral education, vocational training, and better housing.
Effective examples of such efforts were the Mechanics Institute movement and Canon Barnett's Settlement House work.
But a very different response appeared among some bien pensant intellectuals.
Social Darwinism in Britain, along with ideas coming from France and Germany, had led them to think of people as members of a ‘race’ which would degenerate and lose the struggle for survival unless its breeding was controlled by scientific experts.
In this view, the solution to pauperism lay in ‘eugenics’, defined by its founder, Francis Galton, as ‘the study of agencies under social control which may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations’.
By 1910, eugenics societies were flourishing in London, Oxford, and Cambridge.
The first public meeting in Cambridge was warned by the Dean-designate of St Paul's, the Reverend Professor Inge, that unless controls limited the reproduction of the ‘urban proletariat’, it ‘may cripple our civilisation as it destroyed that of ancient Rome’.
Sidney and Beatrice Webb, who wrote the syllabus for British socialism and the Labour party, explained that the social theory of collectivism required the state to ensure that only the fittest survived.
And in a lecture to the Eugenics Society in 1911, Sidney Webb denounced the Poor Law for degrading the British racial stock to the level of American blacks by supporting the unfit.
Eugenists not only opposed charity to the poor, but also favoured child allowances to the better-off to encourage the breeding of superior specimens.
The Charity Organization Society suggested segregating the degenerate residuum in ‘voluntary labour camps’.
Mainly, the leading eugenists devoted themselves to preparing ‘pedigree studies’ of pauper families in order to establish that the residuum was a degenerate sub-species, genetically afflicted by feeble-mindedness, insanity, al holism, venereal disease, criminality, tuberculosis, and infant mortality, which multiplied far more quickly than superior members of the race.
Inspiration was drawn from Nietzsche, whose idea of Superman made him the ‘poet of eugenics’, as Havelock Ellis, a founder of the movement, proclaimed.
Eugenics became an academic subject in the Thirties with the establishment of a Chair of Social Biology at the LSE through the efforts of its director, William Beveridge, who later fostered ‘cradle to grave’ welfare.
Launcelot Hogben (Mathematics for the Millions), who held the chair, and J. B. S. Haldane, the biologist, linked eugenics with enthusiasm for Marxism and Soviet Communism.
Eugenics had always gone hand in hand with socialism for Haldane — he and his sister, Naomi (later Mitchison), joined both the Oxford Eugenics Society and the Labour party — because, as he explained, biology compels us to recognise that the innate inequality of men requires scientific management by the state.
Haldane and Hogben's Marxism made them critical of pedigree studies because it taught them that biological determinism should be supplemented by economic determinism.
If undesirables were eliminated, let them be members of the bourgeoisie, as in Russia, rather than paupers.
Neither Hogben nor Haldane had any objection to a biologically based eugenics programme enforced by the state in a classless society.
By the late Thirties, eugenics was waning.
Hogben abandoned Marxism and eugenics for ‘scientific humanism’ and ‘genetic therapy’.
The Department of Social Biology disappeared.
Pauper pedigree studies totally lost their credibility because of criticism based on more sophisticated mathematical and statistical techniques im ported from Germany.
The British Medical Association led an attack on the eugenists for confusing undesirable behaviour with mental deficiency and for advocating sterilisation of the feeble-minded.
After the Second World War, eugenics was superseded by genetics and micro-biology.
By 1968, both eugenics journals had closed down and in 1989 the Eugenics Society was terminated.
But the basic impulse that animated the eugenics movement survives in the disposition to ignore human personality and treat people as material to be manipulated by ‘agencies under social control’, as Galton put it.
The programmes for positive discrimination in favour of‘sub-species’ such as women or blacks and the demand for legislation to ban smoking are mirror-images of the eugenics movement.
Dr Shirley Robin Letwin is the author of ‘The Pursuit of Certainty: Hume, Bentham, J.S.Mill, the Webbs’.
Books: Triangles of love among the Liberals Roy Jenkins on a romance that contributed to the collapse of the Liberals
By ROY JENKINS
Politics, Religion and Love: The Story of H. H. Asquith, Venetia Stanley and Edwin Montagu by Naomi B. Levine New York University Press, £27.95 ASQUITH's epistolary (at least) romance with Venetia Stanley has already been well-publicised.
It ended in May 1915, during one of the most politically testing weeks in Asquith's premiership, with the lady's retreat into a curious marriage to Edwin Montagu, a lesser member of the government and a very close friend — indeed acolyte — of the prime minister, and it is about Montagu that this book has most of new interest to say.
Venetia was a woman of unusual quality, as is testified to not only by her ability to make two such disparate figures as Asquith and Montagu as obsessed with her as they both were between 1912 and 1915, but also by the strength of her impact upon many other friends for the remaining 33 years of her life.
Asquith was manifestly a major — if currently under-estimated — prime minister, the longest continuously in office between Lord Liverpool and Mrs Thatcher.
Mrs Levine is, however, more interested in Montagu than in either of the other two points of the triangle.
Levine is described in the blurb as ‘an extraordinary woman with remarkable intelligence, creativity and energy’, and I think that claim, far-reaching though it may be, is probably justified.
She is, however, a professional Jew, formerly the National Executive Director of the American Jewish Congress.
Edwin Montagu by contrast, although indisputably by birth a member of la grande juiverie, was by inclination almost a professional non-Jew.
He disliked synagogues and Zionism with about equal intensity.
Out of the contrast between author and subject there arises a fine tension.
Montagu was a serious and talented, although not publicly charismatic Liberal politician, who chose to seek his pleasure and friends in a close-knit coterie whose speciality was ‘in’ jokes, to which some contribution was made by the more sophisticated aspect of pre-1914 (and indeed pre-1939) English upper-class anti-semitism.
He kept telling his gentle mother, both before and after the death (in 1911) of his more authoritarian and rabbinical father (the first Lord Swaythling), that he could not marry a Jewess because he found them so unattractive.
But when his father's will revealed that his marriage to Venetia might mean his losing £10,000 a year (approximately £400,000 today) he defeated it by the simple but ruthless stratagem of getting Venetia converted to the faith which he had himself rejected in everything except name.
Mrs Levine argues with some conviction and at great length that the break-up of Asquith's romance with Venetia was centrally shattering to the prime minister, was directly responsible for his flaccid performance in the contemporaneous creation of the 1915 Coalition, and indirectly led to the decline of his grip and power and to the end of the Liberal party as a governing force.
I think she is about 70 per cent right.
Asquith's capacity to recover quickly from his infatuation, strong though it was, was much greater than she allows, but it is none the less the case that he was thrown off balance for a crucial couple of weeks, the repercussions of which were considerable.
Apart from the balance of her judgment, how well and interestingly does Mrs Levine tell the story?
She commits a lot of solecisms.
Sometimes they cluster on a page like blackberries on a fecund bush, and made me wonder with a stab of unease whether my own writings on American politics and presidents have not managed equally often narrowly to miss the usage and the nomenclature.
Yet she nearly always gets the essence of the matter right.
Her research is meticulous, she has some very interesting new sources (notably Venetia's letters to Montagu at a time when Asquith was writing three or four times a day to her, but subsequently destroying her replies to these letters), and she mostly writes sensitively.
Her main fault is that she takes too seriously the allusive jokes in Asquith's letters.
When he refers to Montagu as ‘the Assyrian’ and his Queen Anne's Gate house as ‘the silken tents of Shem’, he was not being jealous or even anti-semitic, but complacently and affectionately mocking of Montagu, of whom he was almost as fond as he was of Venetia.
Maybe Mrs Levine would have done better to have cast her book in the form of a life of Montagu, who was of considerable interest, since, in substance, much of it is.
Books: Poets' inner worlds and the world of poets There are some poets who don't write about Soho in the Forties, says Hugo Williams
By HUGO WILLIAMS
IN A POEM called History Peter Porter piles a number of state crimes — reminiscent of those attributed to the Stasi — on top of one another in a seemingly solid pillar of evidence, only to explode it in the last line with the simple but logical detonation: ‘Their story will not be told.’
It is a favourite strategy.
In Porter, an Australian ex-patriate who knows more about European culture than almost anyone, the old creative-writing nag about ‘No ideas but in things’ becomes ‘No things but in ideas’— in The Chair of Babel (Oxford, £6.99) it seems to work just as well.
While other poets busily peer about them, acknowledging the given world, Porter looks inwards at the figures described by his imagination.
This doesn't mean there are no things in his work, only that the things are counters in the game of thought.
The title of his last book, Possible Worlds, gives a key to the process: that the world we inhabit is by no means the only one, but only one of any number we may care to imagine.
Poets of a certain generation are notoriously fond of writing tearful tributes to one another in memory of their rollicking days in Soho in the Forties, or was it the Fifties?
You know you're in for it when the name of Tambimuttu appears.
In Poems and Versions (Carcanet, £6.95) David Wright's contribution to this sub-genre is so bad as to be fascinating: I turn the leaves of memory To see you, prince of Rathbone Place, In blackout years, defying with Magnanimous and careless spirit…
David Wright was born in South Africa in 1920 and came to England as a teenager.
For someone deaf since childhood, poetry was a kind of hearing, fellow poets a life line.
Usually, the valedictions of old-boy poets are addressed to writers just above them on poetry's wobbly squash ladder — thus Wright addresses his hello-and-goodbyes to C. H. Sissons, David Gascoyne, Charles Causeley (Do you remember how we met/In the studio of Patrick Swift…), and George Barker (So long it is since first we met, /And in another world, it seems, /Where, out of pocket, down at heels, /Night after night in Rathbone Place…)
According to the convention, Barker himself doesn't include even a postcard to Wright in his own posthumous collection, Street Ballads (Faber, £4.99), addressing instead the shades of Yeats, Kavanagh, Tennyson, Shakespeare and Catullus.
He overlaps Wright's territory in letters to John Heath Stubbs and the painter Patrick Swift (Patrick Swift, for whom I write/These long delayed lines in a night/Given over to bad dreams…).
Perhaps he should have delayed writing them a little longer.
Other readers may respond more positively than I do to these over-leisurely presumptions on their interest.
Barker's poetry, however, is largely of a different order: rebellious, mad, hortatory, and still singing after all these years.
The subject matter, mostly elegiac, ranges from the Baader-Meinhof gang to Hieronymous Bosch.
Best of all is a series of self-mocking ballads to himself, The Eight Voyages of Sanctimonious Bones, whose multi-rhyming stanzas seem inexhaustible: ‘O take your soul, like a goldfish bowl and place it on your head, Then think not of loss but intrepidly cross the dangerous road,’ it said.
Some may find Barker's remorseless eloquence tiring, his singing tone inflated, but this lively and varied book is a remarkable collection to have left behind.
Wendy Cope is about as far from the old-boy generation as David Wright feels from his first meeting with George Barker, but she knows what they're like: Don't ask him the time of day.
He won't know it, For he's the abstracted sort.
In fact, he's a typically useless male poet.
We'll call him a tump for short…
A ‘tump’ isn't punctual, whereas women poets are ‘businesslike, able, /good dri vers, and right on the ball’and despite her pose as a loser in love and dieting, Cope is as good as her word.
She is all style, all form, all impeccably dressed dandy and wit, with never a tear out of place.
A lot of poems in Serious Concerns (Faber, £12.99; £4.99 pbk) are about the poet's life as led by Wendy Cope, how it doesn't bring you happiness, money or men, which seems a trifle ungrateful, considering how popular she is.
The truth may be that her stoical-witty-rueful literary persona may even steer the writer towards the sort of life that ensures her material doesn't dry up.
If she will never be able to hide under the beauty of her image clusters, at least she will never bore us with the undergrowth of psychology and metaphor, where art is an excuse for waffle.
Who else could have divined the route from ‘jingle’ through ‘tingle’and ‘mingle’to the inevitable sad ‘single’in a four-line Christmas poem.
Colin Falck's Cat Gone from Memorabilia (Taxus, £5.95), by contrast, goes courageously over the top in its eloquent last verse demonstration of how death and depression transfer emotion and unhinge reason: Come back my love.
Give me another chance.
I will protect you, play games with you, take you away for the weekend.
Who knows what might be possible?
We shall have a wonderful life together.
I will look after you till you die.
In another poem, it is remembered meeting places that receive the burden of grief at a separation that seems to underlie nearly all the poems in this book.
Falck shares a plainness and Englishness with Cope, but his stock in trade is not so much memorability of phrase as an absolute fidelity to primary feeling.
His poems can be awkward and blunt but you feel any revision has been towards truth rather than beauty.
Falck's indifference to what is considered smart has cost him the more prominent position he once looked like occupying.
Some of the poems in the present book, only his second, are so old that I seem to remember some of them from another world.
Of all the poets published in Ian Hamilton's New Review in the Seventies, Falck has stayed closest to the original impulse.
Books: One night stands with the Romantics
By CAROLINE MOORE
Claire Clairmont and the Shelleys by Robert Gittings and Jo Manton Oxford, £20 BIOGRAPHIES of women are now all the fashion: ‘herstories’ rather than‘histories’, as the cant phrase goes.
The point is to resurrect the lives of women obscured by their more famous male spouses or contemporaries; but too often these have been so effectively overshadowed that the biographies are pious constructions rather than recon structions.
Here, however, is a biography with a glorious wealth of material, put together with scholarly scrupulousness and self-effacing sympathy, which enables the women of the past to speak for themselves.
In the process, though this biography is refreshingly free of anti-male bias, it offers a portrait of men in whom high notions of liberty and truth were riddled with feckless egoism.
Jane Clairmont — who rechristened herself Claire — has usually featured as a minor and scandalous disturbance in the lives of Shelley and Byron.
She and her brother Charles were almost certainly illegitimate; when she was three, in 1801, her mother met and married the radical philosopher William Godwin.
Godwin was a widower: his first wife had been Mary Wollstonecraft, author of that seminal feminist work, A Vindication of the Rights of Women.
She too had brought an illegitimate daughter to the union, and died giving birth to Godwin's own daughter Mary.
When he married Mrs Clairmont, then, Godwin brought together four children all by different fathers, under one unconventional roof.
It is pleasant to find that this believer in the perfectibility of mankind was a good father to them all.
(His fecklessness was on an appealingly grand scale: when he was made a yeoman of the guard, responsible for fire-fighting equipment, his negligence permitted the fire which burnt down the Houses of Parliament).
In 1814, Shelley met and four months later eloped to France with Godwin's daughter Mary.
She was only 16; he was already married to the last schoolgirl he had eloped with, poor Harriet Westbrook.
They took with them the 16-year-old Jane as interpreter.
The step-sisters left without even a change of clothing: ‘it was acting a novel, being an incarnate romance’, as Mary later put it.
The adventure lasted six weeks, until the money ran out.
By then, Mary was pregnant.
Unsurprisingly, the Godwins were not radical enough to take this in their stride.
Jane described their reception: ‘Papa took to being very chilling, haughty and stern, and Mama to being lively and furibonde.’
Shelley would make most parents furibonde.
On his return, he borrowed money from Harriet to settle debts from his continental fling.
He then set up house with not only Mary but also Claire (as she now styled herself).
Calumny was inevitable, though Shelley seems to have been chiefly interested in working the feelings of a lively adolescent up to febrile hysteria.
Meanwhile, Claire at 17 was attempting to stage her own ‘incarnate romance…
’ She wrote to Byron, whom she had never met, offering herself.
Byron, glutted by the frenzied female adulation which is nowadays directed towards pop and film stars, accepted a one night stand ‘by way of novelty’.
Even more foolishly, the besotted adolescent attempted to extend the relationship, and chased Byron to Geneva.
As Byron put it, ‘I never loved nor pretended to love her, but a man is a man, and if a girl of 18 comes prancing to you at all hours, there is but one way…
’ The way led to pregnancy.
‘Is the brat mine?’ exclaimed Byron.
When her child was born, Claire was overwhelmed by the strength of her maternal feelings.
Her raptures are extravagant and pathetically touching; but she was pressurised into handing the infant, Allegra, over to Byron.
The pain of parting was real and lasting: ‘so dreadfully had he made me suffer, the chill of Death fell upon my heart’.
Despite her frenzied pleadings, Byron sent Allegra to a convent in Italy, where she died of typhoid, aged five.
Claire mourned for the rest of her life.
Allegra's death is only one of the numerous and heart-rending deaths of young children in this book — which should dispose of the comforting myth that mothers suffered less acutely when child mortality was so high that death could be no surprise.
But the overall effect of the biography is anything but gloomy.
Claire was shattered but not crushed.
After the death of Shelley, she set out to earn her living, and travelled over Russia, Italy, Germany and France as a governess.
Her letters and diaries offer a vivid, volatile and often romantically self-dramatising account of her impressions.
Sadly, this will be Robert Gittings's last biography, for he died last month.
But he and Jo Manton have produced a superbly readable life of a woman who, though rash and flawed, was also talented, generous and full of resilient courage.
The Arts: Da Vinci angel left Victoria unamused When the lewd Leonardo was stolen, how much did the Queen know?
Brendan Bourne reports
By BRENDAN BOURNE
ONE HUNDRED and forty years after it vanished from Windsor Castle in mysterious circumstances, a pornographic drawing of an hermaphrodite angel by Leonardo da Vinci has been discovered in Germany.
The charcoal sketch, measuring 25.7×19.3 cm, is thought to have been part of a Leonardo sketchbook owned by George IV.
It was considered so repulsive by Queen Victoria that there are suggestions she actually allowed it to be stolen.
The drawing has been authenticated by Dr Carlo Pedretti, director of the Armand Hammer Centre for Leonardo Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles.
It came to light after he was approached for conservation advice by a German academic who is a family friend of the present owners, an aristocratic family that wishes to remain anonymous.
Dr Pedretti travelled to Munich from his Los Angeles home to meet the owner, and was allowed to take the drawing to a Zurich laboratory specialising in art restoration.
Spectrography tests and examinations under an electron microscope confirmed that the distinctive blue paper was manufactured in Venice in 1510 and was a perfect match with other Leonardo works at Windsor.
But while there now seems little doubt that the drawing is by Leonardo, the question remains as to whether the theft had royal approval.
It is impossible to point the finger directly at Queen Victoria or Prince Albert.
However, what does seem remarkable is just how little effort was made to pursue the thieves after the theft was discovered.
Whether or not the Palace actually arranged for the drawing to be removed, there can be little doubt that they were delighted to be rid of it.…
But who did the actual stealing?
The Art Journal of 1852 points the finger at an unscrupulous surgeon named William Cowper and an equally scurrilous bookseller named George Cowper.
A Dr R. Knox writes that the two men were allowed to view the Leonardo collection for medical studies.
After their visit custodians noticed that a sketchbook ‘had been mutilated in a very clumsy manner, by the abstraction of several leaves containing an unknown number of sketches or drawings.’
According to Brian Sewell, art critic of the Evening Standard, it was well known that the Royal Collection had once contained a number of pornographic drawings by Leonardo.
‘I remember being fascinated by the story when I worked for a while in the Royal Library.
The whole episode had passed into the mythology of the place.
‘According to the version I heard, a large man in a Sherlock Holmes cape had arrived one day to have a look at the drawings.
He was reputed to be a very eminent German scholar.
It was not until some time later that the drawings were found to have been stolen.
‘The theft coincided with a project to publish a facsimile set of all the Leonardo drawings in the Royal Collection.
There had already been a kerfuffle over the pornographic ones; they couldn't be included in the facsimile edition and yet at the same time it could hardly be called a complete edition if they weren't there.
There's no doubt that the drawings were a considerable embarrassment, and I think everyone was very relieved to find that they'd gone.’
The Windsor drawing is thought to have been completed in Rome about 1513, shortly before Leonardo's death in 1517.
The subject is believed to be Gian Giacomo Caprotti, a pupil of da Vinci who joined him at the age of 10, later becoming one of his lovers.
The artist gave him the nickname ‘Salai’ after a popular devil character.
On the reverse in the artist's left-handed script is a three-word inscription from the Roman poet Pliny.
Dr Pedretti has named the drawing The Angel in the Flesh, a phrase first used by the Renaissance scholar Cellini to describe Leonardo.
At some stage a clumsy, and unsuccessful, attempt has been made to erase the angel's prominent manhood.
‘The drawing would be a joke on the theme of the angel,’ he says.
‘Personally I consider it distasteful.
I think it is ugly and perhaps one of the worst examples of Leonardo's draughtsmanship.
However, it does provide a unique guide to Leonardo's inner self.
It gives very significant clues to his fascination with sexual ambiguity.
I believe he became dangerously fascinated by the idea of having one sex merge into the other.’
The owners do not intend to exhibit the work and have no interest in selling it, having already refused an offer of $50 million from a Japanese collector.
But the discovery has set Dr Pedretti on a new trail.
After news of the drawing was reported recently in the Italian press he received tips from all over Europe about other missing Leonardos.
Among the most important information was news from Switzerland of a sketch for the Mona Lisa, with the artist's working notes scribbled on the reverse, five other drawings from the Windsor Collection, a map of the New World showing Florida as an island next to Japan, and a plate decorated with phalluses, missing since the 1830s.
‘I have made it my business to go after lost Leonardos now,’ says Dr Pedretti, who worked closely with Kenneth Clark and took over his mantle as the world's leading Leonardo expert.
The next major discovery, he believes, will come in Spain.
According to his researches there are at least three volumes comprising 908 drawings still undiscovered in obscure Spanish collections.
‘It's an exciting challenge, and I am confident, given time, thorough research and perhaps a little bit of luck, we will find them.’
The Arts: The end of an era for Russian ballet As a new Russian dance tour begins, Ismene Brown argues that a myth is wearing thin
By ISMENE BROWN
’ FOUR stalls for the Bolshoi, please.’
‘Right, at £27.50 each, that's £110.
How would you like to pay?…
’ At box-offices up and down the land, in Ipswich, Hanley and Rhyl, the crowds are waving their credit cards for the ‘Stars of the Bolshoi Ballet’tour of 25 British towns.
For the British public, one nation above all still means ballet: Russia.
It doesn't matter to them that the so-called ‘Stars’ setting out next week on a gruelling four-month tour are no such thing.
These ‘Stars’ are the Bolshoi's has-beens and also-rans, headed by Natalya Bessmertnova, who though a great ballerina in her prime is now well over 50.
It is no coincidence that Bessmertnova is the wife of the Bolshoi's artistic director, Yuri Grigorovich, and that this is probably her last chance to turn her former reputation into hard currency.
Most of the Bolshoi's real stars are already dancing here in England, with the Royal Ballet or the English National Ballet or London City Ballet.
Nowadays Moscow balletgoers grumble that the best have fled to Europe and America, that the great Bolshoi Ballet is looking as threadbare on stage as its building does.
This though makes no difference to the British public's love-affair with the Russians.
A myth is at work, sealed with royal approval.
The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester will honour the ‘Stars of the Bolshoi’ opening night a week tomorrow at the Dominion Theatre in London.
This Thursday the Princess of Wales is due to grace a Covent Garden gala given by the rather more genuine stars of the Kirov Ballet and Opera (ticket prices up to £200).
At the Royal Ballet, whose dressing rooms they will be using, mention of ‘the Russians’ touches a raw nerve.
‘It's difficult for us to understand why everybody wants to talk about the Russians all the time,’ says ballerina Fiona Chadwick.
‘Ballet isn't only Russian; it's just as much French, Italian, Danish and English.’
Ah, but Pavlova and Diaghilev were Russian, you might say, and they truly made ballet immortal.
Well yes, but Pavlova hardly spent any time in Russia, and Diaghilev did his great creative work in France — he was an artistic defector.
These, however, are academic arguments.
To the British at large, the feeling is widespread that ballet is Russian, that they are a race of superdancers.
It's a delusion, for which a tiny handful of extraordinary performers are responsible — though hardly willingly.
The three great defectors, Nureyev (1961), Makarova (1970) and Baryshnikov (1974) came West not for political reasons as such but because Russian dance was in a straitjacket.
And you can't seriously characterise a nation's ballet strength by those who would risk anything to escape it.
But any attempts by frustrated British dancers to persuade their public otherwise are hardly helped by the growing profile of Russian performers at the Royal Ballet itself, the holy of holies of English ballet.
The dancer everyone wants to see, the man the Royal's chief choreographer Sir Kenneth MacMillan wants to create for, is Irek Mukhamedov, from the Bolshoi.
And two of the spring's six leading ballerinas at Covent Garden are Russian guests, the Kirov's Altynai Asylmuratova and Nina Ananiashvili from the Bolshoi.
Mukhamedov's defection two years ago, just as Communism was falling apart, will not be forgiven in a hurry.
He was Bolshoi Man, and he betrayed them.
In 1986, on their first tour to Britain for years, the Bolshoi's artistic director, Yuri Grigorovich, revealed Mukhamedov to the ballet world, and it gasped with astonishment.
Grigorovich's simplistic, ideological heroes took on a new dimension when danced with such dramatic appeal, with such virility, such fabulous jumps.
But Mukhamedov, thank you very much, a few months after another rapturous reception on the 1989 tour, walked into the Royal Ballet and told them he'd quit the Bolshoi and wanted a job.
There was rage in Moscow, even threats — but Mukhamedov's pregnant wife, Masha, had gone with him to England, and they could do nothing.
He said at the time, ‘A dancer's time is short.
I needed new material.
The Soviet ballet is stagnating, there is a lack of ideas.’
He added that Russia was no place to bring up a child.
The story ends happily with Mukhamedov now the lion of the Royal Ballet.
Grigorovich ought to forgive him: he is putting fresh life into an exhausted myth.
For ballet has moved on, leaving Russia behind: it is not pantomime any more, it has become theatre.
The Russians' forte is pageantry, yet somehow, on these rare sightings in the West, the gaudiness seemed to set off and magnified the melancholy and finesse of their leading dancers.
They could also time their appearances when they had something to show off.
As Ivan Nagy, the Russian-trained Hungarian dancer who runs English National Ballet, points out, to produce four great artists like Nureyev, Makarova, Baryshnikov and Mukhamedov in 30 years is not a great striking rate for so huge a nation.
‘We have seen the very best.
The defectors were not only great dancers, they had an extra quality of independence, a strong artistic character that led them to defect.
Everybody thinks there must be 10,000 more Baryshnikovs over there.
Rubbish.
The creme de la creme have left.
I've just returned from this year's Prix de Lausanne and the two Russian boys who entered were kicked out.
They were no good.’
What's going wrong?
Nagy says Russia's new young men are rebelling against what has become their characteristic style: muscular, virile men and pliant, slightly flowery women.
‘I was a little bit surprised by the Moscow City Ballet last year,’ he says.
‘Their men had always been so butch before, and now you see very mannered, rather ‘nelly’ movements.
They seem to be trying to catch up with the West of the Fifties.’
Dame Ninette de Valois says the clue to any national ballet style is its folk-dance tradition.
‘In England we had Morris dancing, mostly knee down, and our ballet dancers have always been the best for quick, precise footwork.
The Russian folk-dances are either Slav or oriental: and look at their ballet dancers.
The men have these huge leaps, and the women are very expressive above the waist.
But you don't need to be fast to beat a Russian's footwork, I can assure you.’
To which could be added that you don't need to be the best to be top, if the ballerina Lyudmila Semenyaka is to be believed.
She was the British critics' favourite on both the Bolshoi's tours here, but for 20 years she played second fiddle to Grigorovich's wife, Bessmertnova.
Every female role he made was for his wife, even though she was well past her prime; Semenyaka's youth was wasted stepping into others' shoes.
Still, even when Grigorovich refused three years ago to let her guest at the Royal Ballet, she did what she was told.
At last, at 39, facing the Bolshoi's compulsory retirement age of 40, she had had enough.
Six months ago, in Britain to dance Aurora as a official guest with Moscow City Ballet, she accepted Ivan Nagy's offer of a contract with English National Ballet.
She didn't ask permission, and Grigorovich was furious.
One wonders just how furious: last week, back in Moscow to see her three-year-old son between performances, Semenyaka was having difficulties getting a visa to come back for her next role here, Cinderella, in only three weeks' time.
ENB is doing its level best to stay calm.
Before she left for Moscow, Semenyaka talked to me about the British public's fond picture of Russians as a nation of artists, who dance because they need to.
It simply wasn't true, she said.
Although folk-dance is embedded in their way of life, ballet has long been regarded much as the diplomatic service is in Britain: good money, plenty of respect and no political controversies.
This is because, of course, ballet was indeed a diplomatic service, the USSR's most potent cultural export.
It's hunger that drives so many ballet students there, not an innate artistic urge.
WHY do we admire them so uncritically? asks Semenyaka.
The Bolshoi is full of indolent time-servers, more interested in feathering their nests than in Swan Lake.
It's not Bolshoi people she admires but ‘true artists’: the defectors, and Europeans like Marcia Haydee, Alicia Markova and Yvette Chauvire.
What keeps dancers fresh is new work to dance, and by that reckoning Russian ballet has been moribund since the 1917 revolution.
Semenyaka is an honoured People's Artist, but she agrees: ‘Our heyday was the time of Diaghilev, Nijinsky and Karsavina, and the fact that they inspired Fokine and Balanchine.
We have done almost nothing since then.’
It is thanks to the emigres that in America and Europe ballet has been on the move all century; in Russia itself, it has been left in a museum.
The Imperial Russian tradition of grand display pieces has painlessly given birth to Grigorovich's epics — grand, without doubt, but lumpen compared with Balanchine's irreverent classicism or MacMillan's exploratory dance-dramas.
And no one else has been creating ballets.
The Bolshoi regime seems similarly hidebound, with Tsar Grigorovich running the world's largest ballet company like a children's home.
‘In the Bolshoi people say you need the teeth of a tiger and the hide of a dinosaur to survive,’ Semenyaka laughs, rather hollowly.
A ballerina's performances are limited to two a month, and so-called critics are ‘dictated’ what to write, so that she doesn't get ideas.
Twenty years doing two shows a month, of a tiny range of parts which she has known inside-out for years — it's a miracle her creative spirit survives at all.
Mention of the ‘Stars of the Bolshoi’ tour makes Semenyaka laugh even more bitterly.
Especially that it's headed by Mrs Grigorovich, Natalya Bessmertnova.
‘Big star!
She only danced once at the Bolshoi Theatre last year.
But all the photographs on the posters are of her!’
Regardless of the political changes, she says, Russian ballet will not change until Moscow critics become honest and the West's great choreographers are welcomed in.
But she can't say more because her three-year-old son is in Moscow and she needs a job when she gets back there.
A pathetic story.
Somehow it sounds even more so coming from a ballerina sitting in full-length black mink coat and twiddling with diamond earrings.
The luxuries and extra food dancers always get represent the Russian public's view of them as ‘holy personages’, as she puts it.
But she would rather have had a handful of honest reviews.
It's puzzling that the British public seems to share this feeling of worship for Russian dancers, yet doesn't extend anything like the same respect to its own.
Ivan Nagy cancelled the English National Ballet's planned appearances in Liverpool last autumn because a couple of mediocre Russian companies were visiting.
‘If I have a date at a venue a week before a Russian company, I don't want to go.
The public simply won't come to us rather than a Russian company.
It's sad.
If they were good, you would say it's good for our art-form, but when they're not and they take our money, that makes me mad.’
Peter Wright has the same problems in Birmingham.
‘It worries me that impresarios are using the Russian label to make money at the expense of companies like us, like the Scottish and Northern Ballet.
And now the Russians have realised they can make money out of this country.’
They have indeed.
Last year, Britain hosted within a few weeks of each other the Moscow City Ballet, Moscow Classical Ballet, Moscow Ballet La Classique and the Russian State Ballet.
Next year, on the tail of its ‘Stars’, the Bolshoi Ballet is back in full; the following year it's the Kirov's turn.
The Russians always seem to be with us.
Grigorovich and the others are cashing in on the myth — the blanket subsidies have been slashed, and their jobs may depend on box-office returns.
But the future also depends on producing new gods and goddesses for the pantheon.
The talk in Moscow now is of a 21-year-old ballerina called Nadezhda Gratchova.
For Russia is, in a sense, a ballet factory.
Asked last year what he would do about the loss of his top stars, Grigorovich said defiantly: ‘If the stars leave we will bring up another generation, and when they go, we will bring up another.’
But a ballet factory is one thing, maintaining a myth is another.
Beauty often seems enhanced behind bars.
If for much of the last 50 years the Russians were almost invisible, and those whom we did see were either the brilliant defectors or carefully hand-picked stars, it is hardly surprising that the British public swallowed the myth.
We have always loved the idea of artists at the mercy of art, the dancing shoes that take over.
But as Ivan Nagy says, ‘The barriers are down and the world is becoming — in a civilised way — polluted with Russian dancers, and the myth will tone down.
Then we shall return to judging people on their merits.’
It's already started in America, where they were just as mad about the Russians as the British.
Last year the Entertainment Corporation, Russian ballet's most devoted promoter, went bust.
It had made the fatal error of overkill.
Americans suddenly got fed up with all these Russians who weren't Nureyevs.
The golden goose became a turkey.
The Arts: A little fish swims on Nicholas Dromgoole at the Bournonville festival in Denmark
By NICHOLAS DROMGOOLE
MY work has been written in sand and after my death will disappear in a decade or so,’ wrote August Bournonville (1805–79), the Danish choreographer whose ballets are still in the repertory, and whom the Danes have been celebrating with yet another Bournonville festival in Copenhagen.
His bust, crowned with fresh bay leaves, presides at the side of the stage, and if he is looking down from Valhalla, let us hope he is pleased to be proved wrong.
In just over a week at the Royal Theatre, they have presented almost every known ballet by Bournonville, including a recent revival of his full-length Abdallah.
He was not only a director, dancer and choreographer, but an inspired teacher, and after his death his classes were regularly followed in the Royal Danish Ballet until the 1950s.
That is really what made Danish ballet such a discovery for the rest of Europe 30 years ago.
Here, almost untouched by time, because it was regularly subsidised by the state and enthusiastically supported by the Danish monarchy, was the original French style of dancing from the late 18th and early 19th centuries, long since lost in Paris.
Then Vera Volkova, the Russian teacher who had been influential in England, taught the Royal Danes for 25 years, changing their style and giving them a more modern technique.
Since then controversy has raged: Did she ruin something uniquely precious?
Had the Bournonville style been lost?
The Danes themselves have made sporadic efforts to revive it, and the company now have one Bournonville class a week.
What can be said with certainty is that the Danes still dance a Bournonville ballet much better than any other company, with far greater understanding and sympathy for its original style.
And there is another vexed question.
Just how good a choreographer was Bournonville in the first place?
Did he survive because he was essentially provincial, unable to compete with the main creators of his own day, disregarded because in their eyes he did not count for much anyway?
Was he just a big fish in a very small pool?
He spent one year (1855–6) as director of the Vienna State Ballet, one of the grand cultural ballet centres.
During that season Vienna saw ballets by Perrot, Taglioni, Borri, Saint-Leon, Ronzani, Martin, Hoguet and Frappart.
Apart from Perrot, whose Giselle has survived, we have little or no idea what these choreographers were like.
Yet in competition with them the Bournonville ballets did not find favour with the sophisticated Viennese public.
Here was the only really contemporary test, and Bournonville failed it.
One of his ballets, La Sylphide, certainly has been a success all over the world.
Unfortunately, Bournonville cribbed it from somebody else.
Taglioni mounted La Sylphide in Paris in 1832.
Bournonville saw it and was so impressed that he put his own version in Copenhagen in 1836, to different music.
They said at the time it was a crib, and La Sylphide is indeed markedly different from any other Bournonville ballet.
Its construction, story-line and dramatic pace show the hand of a master.
That master would seem to have been Taglioni, now filtered to us through the Bournonville version.
The rest of the Bournonville repertory, with the possible exception of A Folk Tale, pervaded with a sense of humour and the joy of dancing, is less satisfying.
It was not created at a good time for ballet music and these scores are relentlessly trivial.
And what of the company?
The Royal Danish Ballet, under its present director, Frank Andersen, is looking in remarkably fine shape.
As ever, the men look more impressive than the women, but the difference is less marked than it used to be.
At the last festival, Ib Anderson was the undoubted star, and we were told he was leaving immediately after the festival to join New York City ballet.
This time around, the star has been Nikolaj Hubbe, and he, too, will leave at the end of the festival to join NYCB.
Their gain is Denmark's loss.
As James in La Sylphide, Hubbe gave a performance that rivalled memories of the very best in this part.
The witch was played by Sorella Englund, celebrating 25 years of dancing leading roles in the company.
As ever, she gave a riveting performance.
The Queen of Denmark stood up to applaud, while the rest of the theatre gave Englund a standing ovation and endless curtain calls.
The Danish royal family had attended every night of the festival.
It must be heartening for the company to enjoy such royal favour; they richly deserve it.
A theatre packed with enthusiasts, including more than 140 critics from all over the West, shows that the company is just as appreciated by the rest of the world, too.
The Arts: The luminescent power of pork John Gross on the RSC's ‘The Virtuoso’ and ‘The Chalk Garden’
By JOHN GROSS
THOMAS SHADWELL was a successful dramatist in his own day, but he made the mistake of picking a quarrel with John Dryden.
As a career move, it was a disaster: for the past 300 years, he has been remembered almost solely for having been the butt of some of Dryden's most swingeing satirical couplets.
The Royal Shakespeare Company's production of The Virtuoso, at the Pit, gives us the chance to redress the balance, and demonstrates beyond doubt that in one basic respect Shadwell has been hard done by.
Dryden makes him sound a monument of dullness; in reality he is brisk, lively and journalistic.
Much of the play is standard Restoration fare — two virtually interchangeable gallants with designs on the fair Miranda and the fair Clarinda; a rich old curmudgeon; a booby with romantic pretensions called Sir Samuel Hearty; a would-be orator called Sir Formal Trifle; manifold marital deceptions.
This is not to say that Shadwell does not add some twists of his own.
Sir Samuel, disguised in drag, comes close to being ravished by Sir Formal; the curmudgeon turns out to have a taste for flagellation.
And some of the more orthodox farcical confusions are well managed.
The scene where a husband and a whore accidentally rent the same bedroom as his wife and her toyboy is as skilfully worked out as anything in Feydeau.
Other episodes are more laboured, however.
The plot flies off in all directions.
Much of the comedy is knockabout for knockabout's sake.
In the end, the only character who lifts the play from the ruck and gives it lasting interest is the virtuoso himself.
At the time, ‘virtuoso’ meant scientist, and Sir Nicholas Gimcrack is a kind of 17th-century Professor Branestawm, full of wonderful schemes and inventions.
Some of these are dotty by anyone's standards.
We watch him trying to master the pure theory of swimming — he has no intention of ever setting foot in the water.
We hear about his plans for harnessing the luminescent power of putrescent meat (’ I have read a Geneva Bible by a leg of pork’), and about his experiments with bottled air (’Isle of Dogs air is the heaviest’).
But although Shadwell saw himself as a follower of Ben Jonson, he was writing in a different era.
Science had made enormous progress since Jonson's day; the Royal Society had been founded a few years before; a virtuoso was not the same thing as an alchemist.
Sir Nicholas has a fine collection of microscopes, for example.
His dream of covering whole counties with a giant speaking-tube may be grotesque in itself, but it makes him a remote ancestor of Thomas Edison and Alexander Graham Bell.
His ideas about blood transfusion are mad, but if someone had not had mad ideas on the subject in the first instance, would anyone have subsequently developed sane ideas?
He is in fact a figure of considerable historical interest.
And there is one particularly prescient episode, where a group of weavers attacks his house under the impression that he has invented a ‘steam loom’ that will rob them of their livelihood.
They are Luddites well over a century before the term was coined.
To capture the ways in which the play points forward, it obviously needs to be set firmly in its period.
Unfortunately the director of the RSC production, Phyllida Lloyd, has tried to ginger things up (where they do not need gingering) with a number of anachronistic touches — a Victorian costume here, a modern uniform there, saxophones, neon lights, and so on.
They are less obtrusive than they might have been, but quite enough to dissipate the historically accurate atmosphere that is called for.
For the rest, the production is cheerful, energetic and reasonably entertaining.
Christopher Benjamin bumbles around agreeably as the virtuoso; Linda Marlowe puts on a powerful Vampirella act as his sex-hungry wife.
In the annals of the theatre 1956 was the year of Look Back in Anger, but in the West End it was the year of Enid Bagnold's The Chalk Garden — a full-dress Binkie Beaumont presentation, directed by Gielgud, starring Edith Evans and Peggy Ashcroft.
Now, some way from the West End, the King's Head Theatre offers a new look at a play that attracted glowing praise on its first appearance.
The action starts with a number of implausibilities and works its way towards a world-class coincidence.
A grande dame of a grandmother, Mrs St Maugham, hires an enigmatic companion, Miss Madrigal (such names!), to look after her troubled teenage granddaughter.
Miss Madrigal and the girl develop a strange rapport.
Then Mrs St Maugham asks a friend whom she has not seen for years to lunch.
He is a judge — and, as it turns out, not just any judge, but the judge who once sentenced Miss Madrigal to death.
Within this novelettish framework the play veers from loopy comedy to serious moralising, from sub-Wildean epigrams (some of them quite funny) to horticultural symbolism.
Its contents are hard to classify, and its quality is hard to define: it is a good-bad play, which does not stand up to examination once it is over but provides some striking effects while it lasts.
The King's Head revival features two distinguished veterans: Constance Cummings, who is amusing if not quite intimidating enough as Mrs St Maugham, and Robert Flemyng, looking every inch the judge.
The chief acting honours, however, go to Jean Marsh as the tense but battle-hardened Miss Madrigal.
Mark Rayment directs.
The Arts: The termagant and the lion tamer Kirsty Milne on ‘The Taming of the Shrew’
By KIRSTY MILNE
DON'T expect romantic comedy from Bill Alexander's production of The Taming of the Shrew at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon.
Comedy there certainly is but this Petruchio and this Katherine are so evenly matched in the violence of their tempers that romance is in short supply.
It is not Cupid that they need but the attentions of a sympathetic psychotherapist.
There is no question here of portraying our heroine as a normal woman whose energy and intelligence have been frustrated.
Amanda Harris plays her as a termagant who steams about like the mad woman in the attic, her face set in a perpetual lockjawed scowl.
This Katherine bites the heads off rag-dolls and threatens her sister Bianca with a pair of pinking shears.
The reason for her pent-up fury is not disclosed, though we rather suspect it may have something to do with her father's preference for her sister.
(Rebecca Saire's Bianca is clever enough to conceal her own shrewishness until after she has secured a husband.)
Anton Lesser attacks the part of Petruchio with gusto, wielding chairs against his adversary with the ease of a professional lion tamer.
There is a streak of sadism in his performance which leads us to expect an answering streak of masochism in Katherine.
But when she finally capitulates, consenting to call the sun the moon and see the world as her husband wills it, she seems not crushed but excited.
There is a frisson between them as if they have discovered a game of role-playing which both find sexually stimulating.
But it is not at all obvious to the audience how the couple have arrived at this happier state of affairs, neither is it entirely clear what Bill Alexander hopes to add by exercising his powers of invention on the play's Prologue, in which an alcoholic tinker called Christopher Sly is persuaded by a group of gentry to think of himself an aristocrat — the story of the shrew being laid on as a suitable dramatic entertainment.
The original Warwickshire lord and his huntsmen have been replaced by groups of young Sloanes who identify the sleeping Sly as ‘probably working-class’ and divert themselves by ‘messing around with his mind a bit’.
They stay on stage to watch the play, with Petruchio's manipulation of Katherine very obviously mirroring the tricks they are playing on poor Sly.
But with no explanatory signposting from the director, his update becomes a source of irritation rather than enlightenment.
The Arts: No push but lots of pull John McEwen on ‘Sovereign’, a celebration of the Queen's 40-year reign, at the V & A
By JOHN MCEWEN
A S EVERYONE must know by now, 1992 marks the 40th anniversary of H M The Queen's accession to the throne.
The event has and will be commemorated in various ways throughout the year, but the principal exhibition, Sovereign, rightly takes place in London, and in the most famous museum associated with the Crown, the Victoria and Albert.
Bearing in mind the length of her reign, I took along two loyal subjects, aged 12 and 13, to broaden the critical perspective.
It must have been a daunting task to know how to encompass and animate such an extensive and familiar subject, but the Royal College of Art, which was commissioned to organise and design the event, enlisted that most reliable of cultural populists, John Julius Norwich, to curate, and he has proved a model of Dimblebyan dependability, as well as introducing the commendably brief but informative and well laid-out catalogue.
Only five of the Queen's 39 predecessors — Henry III, Edward III, Elizabeth I, George III and Victoria — have achieved longer reigns, and this fact is usefully illustrated at the outset with a family tree, which shows that Queen Elizabeth II can trace her ancestry back over 1,000 years to Egbert, King of Wessex, in the 9th century.
Having established the Queen's hereditary right to the throne — the late Albany Herald of Arms, Sir Iain Moncreiffe of that Ilk, had no doubt she was the true Stuart claimant — the exhibition next dwells on her spiritual right, which the monarch received by the solemn sacrament of coronation.
It is therefore an appalling error of judgment for Terence Cuneo, who painted the official picture of this awesome ceremony, to introduce his ‘signature’— a vivid green mouse — sitting by the throne.
His lack of taste and the pictorial journalese of his style as a painter merely reflect the galloping decline of the traditional crafts during the Queen's reign.
Inevitably the Crown Jewels displayed are copies — always a let-down — but a battered old throne on which William III was crowned is some compensation.
Its venerability is enhanced by the irreverent graffiti of names carved in the wood.
It is interesting to note, in the context of the present nationalist uprising in Scotland, that while the Queen is Defender of the Faith (ironically, a title first bestowed on Henry VIII by the Pope) and Head of the Church of England, she is only a member of the Church of Scotland.
Next we come by logical progression to the Queen's function as a ruler, in the first place as the fount of all honours.
The highest civilian honour she can confer — the Order of Merit — is particularly featured.
Constitutional rule is more ostensibly and controversially exercised as Head of the Commonwealth.
The marquee-like interior is prettily enlivened by the flags of the 50 Commonwealth countries.
Some of the shields, spears, fetishistic objects and lion's-teeth necklaces she has been presented with on her travels are displayed.
One harbours superior thoughts as to just where and in what circumstances her hosts can have possibly imagined her wearing such things, until one recalls that only seconds before one was counting the endless number of stoats' tails that have gone into the making of the coronation robe.
The show is none the less in need of a theatrical lift at this point, and gets it with a magically contrived facsimile of a royal banquet.
This was the visual highpoint of the recent tribute on television, and the same banquet — that for President and Mrs Lech Walesa of Poland — is featured.
One leaf on the table has been laid and, with the help of side mirrors, is reflected ad infinitum in both directions.
This highlight sustains us through successive rooms of the flotsam and jetsam of royal life, not least a sample of the reams of press cuttings.
Nothing so depressingly encapsulates the heart-rending decline from imperial majesty to federal anonymity which the nation has undergone in her lifetime, than a case devoted to stamps and banknotes.
To think that not less than 30 years ago we still had a fiver worthy of the 18th century and felt no need to supplement the revenue by the constant issuing of new postage stamps.
Design says a lot about a country, and our headlong moral and political decline in the post-war era is laid bare by the abject standard of all the contemporary examples of design on view.
A celebration of the Queen's passion for the Turf, gun dogs and racing pigeons — one imagines in that order — comes as a welcome relief and makes one hope fervently that she will one day lead in a Derby winner.
So far she has won two classics, the St Leger (twice) and the Oaks.
A shop full of royal souvenirs intervenes before a memorable finale featuring exact replicas of her private boudoirs at Windsor, Sandringham and Balmoral.
Balmoral's is particularly homely, with a fishing-rod in a corner and a tea-tray in waiting, complete with almond cake.
One notes with approval the prominent place given to The Daily Telegraph in the order of daily reading; her ‘oldie’ taste for a Roberts radio, which she surely calls a wireless, and a telephone heavy enough to act as a doorstopper.
Her legendary love of horses is further evidenced by three sparkling equine portraits by Susan Crawford; and a model corgi ‘breathes’ contentedly like the Sleeping Beauty at Madame Tussaud's.
Some delightful snapshots taken by the Queen herself complete the display, followed by a token sampling of the royal collections, including pictures by contemporary and even ‘modern’ artists such as Salvador Dali, Ivon Hitchens and Alan Davie.
These new works are without exception undistinguished — neither major nor, in most cases, characteristic — and one only wishes the present Court was more robustly advised in such matters.
Among the antique items there are some charming floral objects by Faberge, a cracking Canaletto of St Mark's and a delightful and most unusual polychrome bust of a grinning Henry VIII as a boy.
My companions complained of the lack of hands-on, push-button displays, a prerequisite for the young these days, but they enjoyed the state banquet and the rooms, and were sure the show would be a great success with tourists.
For her subjects it will undoubtedly confirm our respect and affection for her as a person; but, more importantly, by its sequential emphasis, it reasserts the awesome spiritual power with which she is invested.
Queens and kings may not always be objects of moral rectitude, but their right to rule is sacramental before it is practical.
‘Dieu et mon droit’ indeed.
By her own faultless example Queen Elizabeth II has strengthened that mystical bond which has directed our nation, through thick and thin, for so many centuries.
‘Sovereign: A Celebration of Forty Years’ Service', Victoria and Albert Museum, until September 13 (sponsored by The Daily Telegraph, Pearson and Reed International)
The Arts: A Night To Remember
By Elisabeth Schwarzkopf
Although there have been many marvellous performances that have meant a great deal to me, the most important to me, without doubt, was the only time I heard my first teacher sing.
She was a famous contralto,, who had sung with both Brahms and Wolf.
She had been the toast of Berlin but she was getting on by now when one evening she gave a Lieder recital in the Berlin Philharmonie.
I was only 19 or 20, and I knew nothing about singing — but I was conscious of two things.
The first was that I didn't ever want to sound like that.
It was a horrible sound, in German one would say tuten, hooting — like a ship's foghorn.
But what I heard at the same time was the most fantastic application of expression.
She sang Schubert's song Erlkonig in a way I can still recall.
And at the end she did Hugo Wolf's Maus fallen Spruchlein, in which a child sings to a mouse to lure it into her mousetrap.
And hoot or no hoot, I have never heard anyone match that range of expression since.
I think that evening I felt instinct for the first time — what not to do and what to do.
It sounds rather pompous, I dare say, but I think it was the beginning of understanding without knowing.
When you are young and know nothing, all you can do is trust your teacher, but here I felt some inner awareness of my own.
After hearing such wonderful expressiveness coupled with such disastrous sound, my instinctive reaction was that I must acquire an absolutely foolproof technique.
That I could express nothing if I didn't have the technique to do so.
I said nothing to her, of course; she was considered almost a goddess in Berlin, had a huge following.
I knew no other way to learn technique, so I kept on trying to do what she told me, hoping for the best, hoping that my true voice would appear around the corner.
It was my mother who brought me to my senses.
She heard me practising at home one day and said, ‘This can't go on.’
After that I searched high and low for a new teacher, and when I found one I had to start from scratch.
My leaving Lula caused quite a scandal in Berlin; but that period with her could have been deadly for me.
Elisabeth Schwarzkopf was invested Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire by the Queen last week
The Arts: The palazzo on the Strand is up for grabs Once the tax gatherers have been cast out, Kenneth Powell envisages a brilliant future for Somerset House
By KENNETH POWELL
SIR WILLIAM Chambers (1723–1796) was one of the greatest Classical architects in British history.
He served as architectural tutor to King George III when the latter was Prince of Wales and designed the State Coach in which one day the current Prince of Wales will ride from the Abbey as King Charles III.
It is hardly surprising, in the circumstances, that the heir to the throne and his advisers, including the trustees of his new Institute of Architecture, are currently showing a keen interest in the future of Chambers' masterpiece.
For Somerset House, begun in 1776 and indisputably one of the finest Classical buildings in Britain, is, it seems, up for grabs.
Last December, the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, revealed that the Government was considering surrendering Somerset House — largely occupied by the Inland Revenue and the Lord Chancellor's probate registry — for ‘some imaginative public use that will add further lustre to London’.
All ideas would be welcomed, he said.
Michael Heseltine enjoys grand gestures and has no intention of allowing the Labour Party (which has brought in the architect Sir Richard Rogers as its adviser) to make all the running where the debate on the future of London is concerned.
He wants to see cultural activities in at least part of Somerset House — although he has not ruled out some commercial use (for example, a hotel) in the rest.
Magnificent as it is, Somerset House was designed not as an arts centre, of course, but as offices for the civil servants whom Mr Heseltine now proposes to eject.
Only the Strand block, now appropriately (if not very elegantly) occupied by the Courtauld Institute Galleries, which opened there in 1990, was intended for ‘cultural’ use — as premises for the Royal Academy and other learned bodies.
The greater part of Somerset House consists of small rooms off corridors, with few interiors of spectacular interest.
The east and west wings were not, in any case, built to Chambers' designs but were added, respectively, in the 1820s (for King's College) by Sir Robert Smirke and in the 1850s by Sir James Pennethorne.
King's College first registered an interest in acquiring part of Somerset House as early as 1836.
It is now at the head of the queue when the future of the building is considered.
With 7,000 students spread across three campuses, King's badly needs more space on its historic Strand site.
It was nearly a year ago, before the Heseltine challenge, says the college's Principal, Dr John Beynon, that the Prince of Wales's advisers approached King's with proposals for a jointly funded study of the potential of Somerset House.
Architect Sam Lloyd, responsible for a skilful conversion of parts of the building to house the Courtauld's library and teaching space, was commissioned.
His report has galvanised a powerful alliance of interests behind what is loosely described as ‘the Somerset House Group’.
Prominent in the latter are property developer Trevor Osborne, effectively the group's chairman, Michael Abrahams (of the ‘Pru’ and a prominent fund-raiser for the Prince's Institute) and Lord Stevens (incoming chairman of English Heritage), along with representatives of the Arts Council, Architecture Foundation and other interested parties.
Osborne, a board member of the Royal Opera House, envisages the great courtyard being used for opera performances and concerts al fresco and has brought the ROH's Angus Stirling and Jeremy Isaacs into the discussions.
Lloyd proposes that King's should get the east wing, facing its existing building, and the Prince's Institute (temporarily domiciled in Regent's Park) half of the west wing.
Suggested tenants for the rest include the Royal Commonwealth Society Library (which needs a home), English Heritage's London Division, the RIBA's Drawings Collection, and the Architecture Foundation.
The trustees of the latter (who include, incidentally, that great Chambers scholar John Harris, along with Lord Palumbo and architects Richard Rogers and Norman Foster) are enthused by the idea.
Lloyd has ‘discovered’ for them a magnificent location in the shape of the old ‘boat-houses’along the Embankment.
Until the mid-19th century, these huge vaulted spaces (presently subdivided) opened directly on to the Thames, giving Somerset House something of the character of a great palazzo along the Grand Canal.
The Foundation would need only half the total area.
The remainder could house another public gallery — perhaps a permanent home for Mantegna's Triumphs, currently on show at the Royal Academy.
EVERYONE involved is highly enthusiastic about the project.
Only the RIBA is standing somewhat aloof, even though it has no chance of funding a new ‘architecture centre’, intended to house the splendid Drawings Collection at its Portland Place headquarters.
It surely ought to consider moving its operations to the Strand in their entirety.
With the Prince and his traditionalists in one wing, and Palumbo, Rogers and their adherents in another, Somerset House could then become the focal point of the appealingly pluralistic British architectural scene.
One body which is not dragging its heels is the CBI, which wants space for an industrial design and enterprise centre — an idea backed by Westminster Council and the City Corporation.
A financial plan for the entire project has yet to be worked out.
Major alterations to the buildings would not be required; the existing spaces generally suit the prospective users.
The most radical proposal in Lloyd's report is a reconstruction of the courtyard below ground to provide subterranean auditoriums and galleries, and a grand stair linking the great quadrangle with the Embankment.
The existing users of the buildings would also have to be rehoused, although some of the taxmen are already set to move to Nottingham under the Civil Service's dispersal programme.
Whichever party forms the next government, Mr Heseltine is unlikely to be Environment Secretary in it.
But the issue of Somerset House, which he has put on the political agenda, will not fade.
Mr Kinnock has spoken of his desire to give London at least one grand projet on Parisian lines.
Could Somerset House become London's Louvre — perhaps with its own version of Pei's pyramid in the centre of the courtyard?
Trevor Osborne dismisses this idea.
He envisages the ambience of the place as ‘discernibly British’ and wants to see an element of ‘commercial’use: private art galleries, bookshops and design studios would fit in very well, and there could be restaurants off the splendid riverside terrace, which would make a fine sculpture park.
Somerset House, says Osborne, could become the powerhouse of the art and design world in Britain.
(He intends to seek a meeting with the new Environment Secretary as soon as the next government is formed.)
Its present condition — where the great court is used as a carpark and the terrace stands desolate and empty — is a scandal.
It is equally intolerable that locked gates separate students and teachers of King's College and the Courtauld Institute, and that surly security men seem intent on excluding the public from the place altogether.
When tax inspectors sat on high stools and wrote with quills, the sober ranges of Somerset House were an apt location for them.
In the age of the computer, they would be better off in Croydon or Nottingham.
The incoming government should give them their marching orders.
The Arts: I may be odd but I'm well informed
By A. N. Wilson
THE ELECTION has now become so thunderingly dull that I believe the viewing ratings on telly have never been lower.
People are switching off, or going to the video shop, in droves.
If you trod carefully last week, however, it was possible to avoid the appalling tedium of the poll of polls, or the studio debates about the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement.
There was the final episode of The Old Devils — bravo! superb!
The director, Tristram Powell, and his magnificent actors really deserve medals for this.
(Yes, all right, Sir Kingsley, a medal for you, too.)
Another respite from the campaign reports was the showing of Heavens Above! on Channel 4 (Sunday).
It is one of my favourite films — Peter Sellers as the vicar who tries to put into practice the teachings of Jesus Christ, causing anarchy and chaos thereby.
(The date is 1963.
There is a superb guest appearance by Malcolm Muggeridge in gaiters, playing a senior Anglican cleric.)
And there were three documentaries, salutary at election time, about the hellish consequences of founding an earthly paradise.
Elisabeth Nietzsche was the subject of last week's Timewatch (Wednesday, BBC2).
In the late 1880s, Elisabeth and her husband, a failed schoolmaster called Bernard Forster, hit on the idea of founding a ‘New Germany’ in Paraguay.
It would be an Aryan paradise, with no Jews, or financiers, to pollute its atmosphere.
This little community is still in existence, largely untouched by the march of time.
Forster, who committed suicide, was much hated by the other colonists, who had a hard life trying to farm in the remote swamps plagued by insects.
We were told by a doctor that the colony had been weakened by inbreeding, but they all looked robust to me, in a puddingy, German sort of way.
There were no Jews for them to complain about, but when questioned by Timewatch the modern Master Race considered the Paraguayan natives to be lazy good-for-nothings.
‘Nothing is alien here,’ Elisabeth wrote home.
‘Everything is homely and German.’
When her husband died, Elisabeth returned to the Fatherland, where her brother, driven mad by syphilis, was immured in a lunatic asylum.
We were told that she set to work ‘editing’ the crazed philosopher's work to make it more Nazi, and that Elisabeth had a strong and malign influence on the growth of National Socialism.
I rather doubt this is true, but I look forward to Part Two of this well-made documentary.
Another earthly paradise based on the idea of racial purity is the state of Israel.
Last week's 40 Minutes (Tuesday, BBC2) took the form of a diary of a young Israeli conscript doing his service in the occupied territories of the West Bank.
All enlightened opinion in Israel now believes these territories should be in the hands of the Arabs.
But the government of Shamir insists on Israeli soldiers, at great risk, policing the area and protecting the Jewish settlers there — fanatical characters who, according to the soldiers, do not work.
Certainly the Jewish settlers on the West Bank seemed both mad and odious.
There was the man who had trained his dog to bite Arabs, and who informed us that a dog always knows an Arab by his stink.
We met the little boy who believes that all the inhabitants of an Arab village should be exterminated.
‘The settler terrorists will take over and kill all the villagers,’ one Israeli soldier opined.
‘It will be another Lebanon in less than a year.’
Israel and New Germany are not unique.
The world is littered with communities which believe that if they could only separate themselves from the world, they would escape the consequences of original sin.
Another little colony of the Blessed Ones which has turned into a hell-hole is to be found at Summerhill in Suffolk, where 70 years ago, the educational idealist A. S. Neill founded his progressive academy, known as the do-as-you-like school.
In Monday's Cutting Edge programme (Channel 4) we witnessed what seemed like near anarchy.
Lessons were optional.
The only subjects which appeared to be taught were massage, biology (sex talks) and chemistry — a lesson in which the teacher appeared to be teaching the children how to manufacture high explosives.
We saw a ‘pairing-up’ ceremony, between two young people: a Japanese girl of about 15 and a boy who was slightly younger.
The master who performed the pairing-up ceremony wore a parody of clerical vestments and pronounced the couple ‘properly paired-up’.
‘In the name of the Meeting, the chairperson and the freedom to not attend lessons.’
What's a split infinitive, you might ask, amid such scenes of horror?
No bedtime, so everyone was in a foul mood, and thieving and violence and fights seem to take up everyone's time.
But language always reveals the truth about its speakers.
There was nothing incongruous about the fact that the headmistress, Zoe Neill, was incapable of uttering a sentence which did not contain a word for excrement or a word for copulation.
Having been educated at Summerhill herself, I should imagine that these are the only areas of activity in which Zoe has much competence.
Her foul-mouthed old mother was also to be seen at the school ‘meetings’, shouting about the bottoms, while children hurled abuse and insult and accusations at one another.
Sooner or later someone mentioned Lord of the Flies, and of course Zoe was able to tell us that everyone has anger.
It was just that at Summerhill the ‘kids’ knew what to do with it.
Throughout the whole ghastly hour, I thought with gratitude of the boring school routines and the strict schoolmasters who have made me into the psychological oddity which I am today.
At least I am a well-informed psychological oddity.
Summerhill — which, by the universal testimony of its (largely American) pupils, ‘sucks’— seemed to be turning out children who were not merely unbalanced but pig-ignorant; and that was what shocked me so much.
The Arts: Little Ms Hood rides out in the jungle
Christopher Tookey reviews ‘Deceived’, ‘Kuffs’, ‘La Belle Noiseuse: Divertimento’ and ‘Scorsese×4’
By CHRISTOPHER TOOKEY
FORGET serial killers: recycled fairy-stories are the big trend in Hollywood.
After an updated Dick Whittington in Working Girl and a thinly disguised Cinderella in Pretty Woman, to say nothing of Disney's The Little Mermaid and Beauty and the Beast, we have Deceived (15), a psychological thriller which casts Goldie Hawn — a shade improbably — as Little Red Riding Hood.
Adrienne Saunders (Goldie Hawn) is a woman in her forties who apparently leads a fairy-tale existence.
She has a charming husband (John Heard), a successful career, a palatial New York apartment and a Hollywood-cute daughter (Ashley Peldon).
After six years of marriage, however, Adrienne finds she has been strolling unwittingly through a psychological jungle.
As shadows start to threaten and corpses pile up, she wonders whether her Prince Charming is really the big bad wolf.
The story, by Mary Agnes Donoghue, is best when seeing events from a female point of view (Donoghue also wrote that classic women's weepie, Beaches).
There are hints of a deeper and more subtly disturbing film, when Hawn's character pauses to wonder if any woman really knows her husband — but, all too abruptly, it's on with the show.
Despite one outburst from John Heard, there's no attempt to explore another sinister possibility, that all men conceal their true identity in order to live up to the modern woman's expectation of her ‘dream man’.
This is the most promising film yet by director Damian Harris (son of actor Richard), although he resorts to cliche in the final woman-in-peril chase sequence.
He manages the fairy-tale allusions with a light touch, although some of his other visual symbolism has that same sub-Hitchcock ponderousness which helped to make Kenneth Branagh's Dead Again so tiresome.
The central defect is the plot.
There's never sufficient doubt about who is the villain.
And, purely to keep the story progressing, he has to be one of the laziest criminals in screen history, scattering clues with such recklessness that he seems subconsciously determined to be discovered.
At one point, I hoped this might be the twist, but no such luck.
Still, if you don't mind suspending your disbelief as you walk into the cinema, Deceived is a cut above recent thrillers like Shattered and A Kiss Before Dying, though hardly up to the standard of Fatal Attraction or Jagged Edge.
Kuffs (15) is a comedy-thriller about George Kuffs (Christian Slater), an irresponsible youth who drops out of San Francisco high school, walks out on his pregnant girlfriend (Milla Jovovich) and can't be bothered to hold down a job.
Suddenly his older brother dies, and he inherits a police force.
The basic situation is not as unlikely as it may seem.
San Francisco has had a privatised police force since 1851, when the city cops were so desperate for help that they sold off districts to private enterprise.
These entrepreneurial police districts have, apparently, been traded and inherited.
I only hope that the civic authorities have them under better control than they seem to be here.
Granted the intriguing premise, one might reasonably expect some attempt to probe the morality of a privatised police force, and of a society which allows someone like Kuffs to buy and use firearms as casually as he does here, but no.
This is strictly undemanding garbage tossed at the youth market, for whom Slater is the nearest thing to the new James Dean.
The plot sticks to a depressingly familiar formula, as our hero avenges big brother's murder as violently as possible, and, along the way, learns the meaning of growing up, responsibility, life, etc.
Almost identical characters (played there by William Baldwin and Charlie Sheen) were central to Backdraft and The Rookie, two of the least impressive films of last year, and it's hard to see why anyone thought the idea was worth doing even once.
The set-pieces are derivative of any number of second-rate movies (with one particularly blatant steal from Turner and Hooch).
The humour is laughter-freezingly crass, and the devices of allowing the hero to address camera (like Michael Caine in Alfie) and keep baring his none-too-impressive chest (like Bruce Willis in almost everything) are both wearisome and aesthetically ill-advised.
Any suspense is negligible, since the baddies can be spotted a mile off: one wears a Mephistophelean beard, the other an insane grin.
It's all polished and pacy enough to titillate a teen audience, but it's idle hackwork from writer-director Bruce A. Evans and writer-producer Raynold Gideon, whose previous screenwriting credits included the promising Stand By Me and Starman.
I was on holiday when the four-hour, much-acclaimed version of La Belle Noiseuse was released, and having seen the two-hour version, La Belle Noiseuse: Divertimento (15), I'm rather grateful.
The short version makes much less of the allegedly arduous process of painting, and many will find it more, er, palatable.
It's sensitively acted by Michel Piccoli as an old artist struggling with powers which are failing (or, by the look of his paintings, failed).
The excellent Jane Birkin is self-effacing as his long-suffering wife and ex-model, and the beautiful Emmanuelle Beart shines as the model who's replaced her.
It shows a loving appreciation of Provenal light, and is undoubtedly Jacques Rivette's prettiest film since Celine and Julie Go Boating in 1974.
It also has the reverential, quasi-mystical approach to artistic creation which always seems to go down well with critics.
I found it boring, self-conscious and a good deal sketchier than the Balzac novella on which it's based.
It struck me, in fact, as just the kind of deadly conventional, decorative, romanticised art-house film that the 64-year-old director used to rail against in the magazine Cahiers du Cinema during the Fifties and Sixties.
Regular readers will doubtless remember that I tipped The Silence of the Lambs for Best Picture Oscar way back on June 2.
Perhaps the most bizarre aspect of this year's Academy Awards was the fact that five other of the year's best films — Cape Fear, The Commitments, Hear My Song, Homicide and Thelma & Louise — weren't even nominated.
Ah well: posterity must judge.
Anyone who shares my enthusiasm for Martin Scorsese's Cape Fear may be interested in the ICA's compilation of his juvenilia, four short films known as Scorsese×4.
The earliest two, student pictures, show his humour and vitality; the third, The Big Shave, a (literally) cutting allegory about America's self-inflicted wounds in Vietnam, exemplifies his fascination with blood, and also explains why he grew a beard; the longest, Italianamerican, is a warm but surprisingly static home movie of his parents' reminiscences.
All four films — along with the week's three major releases — remind one that not even the most talented director can achieve much without a decent screenplay.
The Arts: A few peas short of a majority?
By David Sexton
LIVING under one form of government rather than another ‘is of no moment to the happiness of an individual’, said Johnson offensively.
Such robustness is salutary and not much in evidence in the sickening programmes monopolising the air at the moment: Election Call, Your Election Voice, Election Platform, Campaign Report and the rest.
The phone-ins are especially stomach-turning.
On the one side, the callers: individuals who have been deluded into believing that the prime function of a national government is to look after them and who therefore itemise their personal miseries in public(unemployed, house repossessed, eldest son unable to claim benefit, one leg) before asking the politician: ‘What I want to know is, what you going to do for me?’— for all the world as though asking a pretty sharp question.
And on the other end of the line, the spineless, boneless baby-kissers: all eagerly participating in the charade, briefly pretending to be interested in these individuals, in order to make importuning for votes look like philanthropy and vacant sayings appear new minted.
‘We're doing everything we can to be positive, to look to the future, and to be realistic about the present,’ said that chirpy fatuity, Neil Kinnock, on the News ‘92 phone-in, perhaps the most dementing phone-in of them all (Radio 1, daily at 6.30 pm).
A horrid jingle sets the tone.
‘1 FM gives you a voice — Election ‘92!’ exclaims an over-excited growler, over a thumping beat and a banging cow-bell.
In pursuance of this nonsense, you not only hear those few callers who succeed in getting through, you're also subjected to a cheery stream-of-consciousness summary of the grievances expressed by all the rest.
‘Chris Jefferson from Daventry, he'd like to see, if Mr Kinnock gets in, some action against Tory tabloid papers; Mike Humphries, an engineer, called in from Cornwall, says, I don't know what Labour's identity is all about — what are they pretending to stand for? whatever happened to socialism?
Stephen Ross phoned in from Cardiff, he says can Labour lower the consent for gay people if they get in; Mike Collins from Chesterfield says he's not had a job for 11 years, has to pay for all sorts of things, he wants some action from Labour on long-term unemployment…’
And on it goes, a chorus from the asylum, a jumble sale of indignation.
In return come posturings from the politicians.
On Wednesday, Paddy Ashdown played the tough talker, the straight man who won't soften the harsh realities — though those realities immediately turn out to be the same smooth bribes offered by every other politician.
‘I have to be honest with you, I'd like to invest more in education,’ he said.
Even more hammily: ‘But — and here's the bad news — our first priority — and I've got to be blunt and straightforward with you — is to raise the number of students going through higher education to double what it is at present, by 96/97.’
Creep.
On Thursday, John Major (Labour's no longer secret weapon) once more appeared as a caricature of pedantic reason — the clerk who, having accidentally become boss of the factory, believes that, if only he keeps his desk tidy and always sounds calm, he'll never be discovered.
He was rudely asked by the first caller, ‘Do you feel that you come across OK?
Some speakers, like Heseltine, come across more powerfully and capture the imagination of people a little better…’
Major's reply suggested that, as an interested visitor from another solar system, he had heard about human personality but regretfully had no first-hand experience of this rare bird, though he was prepared to extend it every reasonable courtesy.
‘Well, let me tell you what I think the election's about, Mark.
Personalities of course are important in politics, because people are attracted to them, or they are repelled by them, or they're indifferent by them (sic).
I understand that, but the substance of what is at stake in this election is the policies that the parties put forward…’
Later, he replied with similar fighting spirit to a question about whether or not he really liked peas.
‘Not especially,’ he said carefully.
‘Some vegetables I'm very fond of — peas I'm relatively neutral about.’
Come Thursday, such fairmindedness will surely win him votes among vegetables everywhere.
The Arts: Heroic venture without a hero Michael Kennedy on ENO's ‘Don Carlos’ and Robin Holloway's violin concerto
By MICHAEL KENNEDY
IT IS unlikely that Verdi's last French opera, Don Carlos, has previously been performed in Britain in such a full version as that being used by English National Opera in its new production which opened at the Coliseum on Thursday.
The result is an evening of Wagnerian dimension spread over four and a half hours.
ENO performs the five-act version which includes the opening Fontainebleau scene, but this is longer than usual because the prelude and opening chorus about the privations of the French populace have been reconstructed from Verdi's cuts by Andrew Porter (whose excellent translation is used) and Sir Charles Mackerras.
Two other cuts made before the Paris premiere in 1867 are also restored at the Coliseum: part of a scene between Carlos and Rodrigo (Marquis of Posa) in Act II and a splendid passage between King Philip and his son Carlos which found its way into his Requiem in 1873.
The prelude and subsequent scene in which Elisabeth de Valois and the Princess Eboli exchange masks is also included.
Mercifully, for it was apparently not very good music, the 15-minute ballet is not restored.
The ethics of restoring material in this way can be endlessly debated; the matter is complicated in the case of Don Carlos because Verdi sanctioned four versions, and no one can be sure he would have disapproved of the restoration of his Paris excisions.
We owe this full version chiefly to Andrew Porter's researches, and there is no doubt it allows us to hear one of Verdi's grandest designs in full majesty.
This is not one of ENO's excursions to the wilder shores of Verdi production, like its Masked Ball and Macbeth.
If anything, David Pountney's staging errs on the side of ultra-respectability and operatic convention; and even he fails to solve the problem of the ending when the mysterious apparition of the ghost of Charles V ‘saves’ Carlos from the Inquisition by supernatural intervention.
In his golden armour in this production, he adds another quasi-Wagnerian touch.
David Fielding's set has his familiar white walls and floor, with a series of coloured backdrops on to one of which are projected a distant view of the palace and a nearer one of a stag.
The stage is tilted and is propped up by the coffins of Inquisition victims.
The handsome and sombre costumes, historically accurate, are relieved by colour only in the auto-da-fe, which seemed to belong to another production and signally failed to make the flesh creep, even when the fire was lit in the victims' underground cage.
Such a heroic venture requires heroic singing, and that is where it seemed this enthralling evening would fall short of its target.
Edmund Barham's wooden acting as Carlos would have mattered less if he had been vocally more alluring and if his stilted phrasing had taken a hint from Mark Elder's conducting.
He is a good tenor, and it was a good effort, but in this Verdi role that is not enough.
(Carlos is known to have been an epileptic, and Pountney introduces this into Barham's characterisation.)
For much of Act I, too, Jonathan Summers's Posa seemed as if it was to be a rough-and-ready performance by this gifted baritone.
But in the later scenes with Carlos, and especially in his great aria after he has been mortally wounded, he recovered his true form.
As Elisabeth, Rosalind Plowright sounded more secure than she has been for some time on British stages and sang her last aria with true Verdian pathos and passion.
Linda Finnie as Eboli was curious casting until she reached O don fatale, which she sang extremely well.
Until then, she had performed the role as if the princess was one of the Merry Wives of Windsor.
Returning to my seat after the second interval, I had decided that this was a first night which had somehow not ‘taken off’ and that all kinds of good intentions had somehow failed to coalesce, though they probably would later in the run.
Then the magic happened.
On his earlier entrance Gwynne Howell as Philip II had sung everybody else off the stage.
Now, in his wonderful aria of lamentation, he brought the whole performance to life and raised it to a higher plane of artistry.
He was joined by Richard Van Allan as the Grand Inquisitor, and these two bass-baritones supplied the power and nobility which had been wanting.
They galvanised their colleagues.
Both Barham and Summers lifted their performances, and thenceforward what had been prosaic developed a much higher voltage.
As is invariably the case, the chorus's singing was first-rate and so was the orchestral playing.
Mark Elder took some time to strike a fair balance between stage and pit and was not always as considerate as he usually is towards the singers.
But he conducted the preludes and important orchestral episodes with admirable breadth and dramatic zeal.
VIOLIN concertos are very much the thing for British composers lately.
Robert Saxton's has just been recorded, William Mathias's was given its premiere in Manchester in January, and those by Dominic Muldowney and Robin Holloway in Liverpool and Manchester respectively at the end of last month.
If Muldowney's is the most adventurous and forward-looking, Holloway's is the one I feel I can take to my heart.
Like most of his music, it looks back fondly to a golden age, but it does so creatively and with vitality.
It lasts 40 minutes and contains so much inventive material in its one-movement, arch-like structure that one sometimes feels Holloway did not know what to do with it all, a pleasing problem for any composer today!
The performance, broadcast on Radio 3, was by Ernst Kovacic with the BBC Philharmonic, conducted by Jerzy Maksymiuk, and seemed to do justice to a score so full of beautiful music that it will need several hearings before one begins to identify all its jewels.
What was clear from one hearing was that none of them is paste.