

City: Ronson seeking a debt standstill
by Margareta Pagano
HERON International chairman Gerald Ronson will this week meet the steering committee set up on Friday to represent Heron's 82 bankers to negotiate a standstill agreement on its £1.22 billion debt.
Achieving a standstill is vital for Heron if it is to make headway in rescheduling its debt.
This is necessary as a result of property writedown which would have left it in breach of its £350 million net worth banking covenant.
So far the steering committee comprises representatives from its lead bank, Barclays, and four big lenders.
Heron is understood to be confident its rescheduling programme, backed by a mass of financial information contained in three volumes, will be accepted by bankers and bondholders.
Early feedback from bankers at the 90-minute City meeting is that the plan, which involves splitting debt into two categories, was ‘greeted respectfully’.
‘This is not a Brent Walker,’ said one banker.
‘Those present listened to Gerald with respect.
Everyone knows it is in their interest to give Heron the time to sell on its property.
I doubt that anyone will want to create any problems.’
Heron proposes classifying debt as A and B. Category A interest would continue to be paid on time with principal repaid from cash generated by the ongoing businesses and asset disposals.
The B debt would have interest rolled up, and would be repaid once the principal on the A debt was repaid.
This gives Ronson until 1999 to achieve his pledge of selling Heron's entire £1 billion property portfolio.
Ronson told bankers that the March 31 accounts would show net assets had fallen to £135 million compared with £585 million previously.
Some £450 million has been written off.
This includes £250 million of property writedowns and a £100 million operating loss after interest payments of £100 million.
There is also a further £100 million provision covering losses on Heron's stake in Control Securities, now suspended, and the cost of selling properties, legal fees and tax liabilities.
At the trading level Heron's activities, ranging from Suzuki dealerships, petrol stations to housebuilding, broke even.
Write-downs in housebuilding were £40 million and Heron estimates the value of its land bank is 60 per cent below its peak.
Rescheduling the £950 million of debt does not affect the British Heron Corporation subsidiary.
It has net worth of £430 million and net debt of £325 million.
The Heron proposals, which are backed up by an independent report by Price Waterhouse, provide bankers will the latest revaluations of Heron's portfolio.
These show that the property portfolio is worth about £1.2 billion at present prices compared with £1.7 billion at the last year end.
There have been rumours that investors holding £450 million worth of Swiss, German, French and Ecu denominated Eurobonds, may attempt to negotiate better terms from Heron.
But other sources say the lead managers of the various issues are confident of agreement on a new offer of bonds by UBS Phillips & Drew.
The new offer, mirroring the bank terms, will involve bondholders getting 60 per cent of their nominal stakes in A bonds, paying interest like the A bank debt, and the rest B roll-up bonds.
UBS P & D plans a series of roadshows in Europe to present the proposals to Heron's many thousands of bondholders who have seen bonds slashed to a third of their face value.
The bonds are suspended.
Sydney Robin, a former Great Universal Stores director, is thought to be about to take the chair at Control Securities, where Heron has a 17 per cent stake.
Current chairman Nazmu Virani is on remand having been charged last week with conspiracy in connection with the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
City: Markets on an election knife-edge
by Our City Staff
STOCK and currency markets are braced for a knife edge finish to the election campaign with a new batch of opinion polls pointing towards a hung parliament.
Three polls show Labour two percentage points ahead, one gives Labour a six point lead, another puts them three points ahead and Gallup for The Sunday Telegraph has Labour and Tories neck and neck.
All eyes will be on the pound.
Any further selling from the current DM2.8308 rate would put the Bank of England on amber alert for a base rate rise.
Money markets fear a half point base rate rise on a Tory defeat.
Last week the Abbey National, Halifax and Bradford & Bingley building societies lifted their fixed rate mortgage rates by about half a point.
Smith New Court chairman Sir Michael Richardson said: ‘The polls are showing the Tories are getting their edge back.
But with Labour showing a 3 per cent lead I think the stock market will slide back on Monday.’
If Labour were the biggest party he feared the FTSE100 Index could fall from its current 2,382.7 to 2,200.
Barclays de Zoete Wedd chief strategist Michael Hughes said: ‘Even at this last hurdle the Tories have not broken through the magic 40 per cent barrier.
So the market will have to prepare itself for a non-Tory government.
The market is likely to continue drifting down and may reach a low point on Friday.
The City may take some relief if a hung parliament means some of Labour's tax rises are not implemented.’
Yamaichi economist Neil MacKinnon said: ‘The polls suggest we will have a hung parliament, with Labour as the biggest party.
The markets have already largely discounted this result but we may see shares and the pound slipping a bit further.
This talk about a crisis of confidence in the City is overdone.
I think Bank of England intervention will be enough to defend the pound.’
A Gallup poll of Britain's top businessmen reveals widespread fears about the impact of a Labour government.
The poll shows more than half (52 per cent) think the economy will deteriorate under Labour.
Four out of five think the economy will get better under John Major.
The poll highlights the problems Labour would have in raising business confidence.
The average expectation of interest rates under the Tories was just below 10 per cent, while under Labour rates are expected to rise to 11.6 per cent .
Many forecasters are expecting an anaemic recovery in the second half.
The reason for caution is the ‘Kinnock kebab’: for earners on twice average income the prospective marginal tax rates will be unprecedented and the decision not to phase in the changes slowly will mean a quick fall in discretionary spending.
Warburg calculates the John Smith Budget will have a net toll on the personal sector of £1.7 billion in 1992–93 and £2.2 billion in 1993–94.
Not only the housing market stands to be hit but also retailing.
More than 21 per cent of spending is by the top 10 per cent by income.
These people account for 25.3 per cent of all spending on clothing and footwear, 21.6 per cent on household goods and 31.3 per cent on leisure.
Chancellor Norman Lamont a piece of good news coming this week-after the election.
On Friday, retail prices index inflation is expected to dip from 4.1 per cent in February to 3.7 per cent in March, helped by the recent fall in mortgage rates.
City: Pennsylvania comeback for De Lorean's car
by James Srodes
THE infamous gull-winged De Lorean sports car is about to make a comeback.
Or at least that is the ambition of the industrial development commission of a small Pennsylvania steel town.
It has agreed to raise $100,000 to help a local promoter assemble the car developed by John De Lorean.
More than a decade ago, De Lorean and his cover-girl wife Cristina were the toasts of London.
With £100 million from the Callaghan government (and a further £50 million from Mrs Thatcher) De Lorean was the white knight who would save British efforts to industrialise Ulster.
His sleek, stainless steel two-seater (designed by Lotus) would create 2,000 jobs at his Belfast factory and fill the waiting lists of American punters who wanted to pay $25,000 to get the show-cars as they rolled into the dealerships.
In 1983, the company failed amid charges that De Lorean and friends looted $17 million.
His arrest and ultimate acquittal on cocaine smuggling charges made headlines in the mid-1980s.
The new promoters hope to make prototypes at $299,000 each and after attracting enough investors, to produce up to 3,000 cars a year costing $50,000 each.
By the time De Lorean closed, more than 18,000 cars had been made but only 9,000 were sold, mainly to collectors.
Among the well-wishers for the new venture are the New York lawyers who represent the British government and other creditors.
Last year they won a settlement of a fraud suit against De Lorean.
The paltry $7 million judgment is growing by $2,000 a day because De Lorean has failed to make several payments on time.
The creditors hope to recover cash from De Lorean's auditor, Arthur Andersen.
Their suit claims £250 million.
A fortnight ago, they wheeled in a surprise witness for deposition as to the representations made at the time — Margaret Thatcher herself.
City: Sherwood steps up to full listing
by Margareta Pagano
BRITAIN'S biggest sock maker and second largest bra maker, Sherwood, will this week announce pre-tax profit of £14 million plus, a 4-for-1 scrip issue and plans for a full market listing.
Unlisted Securities Market-quoted Sherwood, chaired by David Parker, is due to report the 30 per cent-plus profits increase on Tuesday.
The final dividend should be 10 per cent up on last year's payment.
Parker, who brought Sherwood to the USM six years ago this month, will disclose plans for a full quote scheduled for May.
At 770p, Sherwood is now valued at £158.8 million compared with the £10.8 million launch price tag it had six years ago.
The scrip issue will make the shares more marketable, while the full listing will provide more liquidity and easier access to capital.
Trading at Sherwood has been strong, showing that people are still spending on low ticket underwear despite cutting down on outerwear.
Sherwood's timely expansion into lace and fashion's latest accessory — stretch lace — with the acquisitons of Birkin in 1987 and Dentex two years later, makes it Europe's largest lace maker.
Half the group's sales are now outside Britain.
About a third of products are manufactured overseas.
One in five pairs of socks sold in Britain is made by Sherwood, which can turn around designs in a matter of hours, allowing it to respond quickly to high fashion for its high street customers which include Marks & Spencer, BhS and Littlewoods.
Sherwood has just won the licence to sell socks at Paris's EuroDisney park.
City Comment: Soaking the newly ‘rich’
By JOHN JAY
Last week I spent an evening at the coal face, or tunnel face to be more accurate, of Tory Britain.
Forty metres below London, in hot and grimy conditions, tunnelers were working on Thames Water's £250 million ring main round the capital.
The tunnel, the biggest piece of water capital spending ever made, is a symbol of the last 13 years.
It shows free enterprise Toryism at its best.
The ring main is about providing London with quality water.
Once it is built, water pressure in the mains network can be reduced.
This will result in fewer burst pipes and help Thames achieve its target of cutting wastage from 29 per cent in 1989 to 15 per cent.
The tunnelling is ahead of schedule and ahead of budget, in contrast to most big infrastructure projects.
With Thames privatised, it is a private sector project with appropriate incentives paid to workers who achieve their targets.
I am told £1,000 a week is not unknown among manual workers.
The funding is on commercial terms under a Water Act that says Thames is entitled to make reasonable returns on capital.
Those returns are partly paid to its 307,000 shareholders, many of whom live and work in London.
This virtuous circle, in which labour is rewarded for its genuine efforts, capital is given a return and quality improves, is set to be blown apart if Labour is in government on Friday.
Let's start with those Stakhanovite tunnelers.
Their pay means some will be heavily stung by Labour's planned rape of middle-income earners.
Not only businessmen and white-collar professionals are going to be savaged by Neil Kinnock and John Smith.
In London, a large number of manual workers will find themselves denuded of discretionary spending.
Then there is Thames itself, where chairman Roy Watts tells me privatisation has worked wonders with staff morale.
Watts and his team have been given the freedom to manage, they have lifted the quality of staff and have improved productivity.
Will this be so under Labour?
Watts fears not: he fears a return of union militancy; he fears Labour's desire to bring water under greater public control will put back the modernisation of the industry.
If Labour wants to attack ‘greedy investors’ by using regulation to cut ‘excessive profits’, then capital spending will fall — or it will have to come from a government that can ill afford it even on Smith's numbers.
Finally, there are the investors.
They only have to look at Thames's shares to see what life might mean under Labour: since the start of March they have fallen 13 per cent to 333p.
If Labour wins, they may go much lower.
Small wonder most businessmen are fearful of a Labour victory.
According to a Gallup poll on behalf of Tory Central Office, 90 per cent of top businessmen reckon the Tories have the best long-term economic programme, 52 per cent fear a deterioration under Labour and 80 per cent expect economic improvements under the Tories.
The key issue is interest rates: the average guess for interest rates under the Tories is 9.9 per cent.
The guess under Labour is 11.6 per cent, or 1.7 points higher.
If these fears are confirmed, the outlook for the economy, particularly in the high salary/high mortgage South East will be dire.
City Comment: Ronson's style
YOU cannot fault Gerald Ronson for the professionalism of his approach to his liquidity crisis.
Last December, the Heron International chairman sat down with Price Waterhouse accountant Alan Wheatley, whose stature was confirmed last Thursday when he became chairman-elect of venture capital giant 3i.
The two decided Heron's losses in America and the impact of recession on housing and property closer to home would mean it would run out of money in late 1993.
On Friday, Heron's 82 banks saw the result: a request for a rescheduling backed by a plan to liquidate £1 billion worth of property over seven years.
Each bank was offered binders containing a stack of papers 12 inches thick.
One seasoned participant of corporate restructurings told me: ‘Usually when a company calls in its bankers there is panic and hostility.
The board usually has little credibility; there is little reliable financial information, no management, assets or money.
Typically, there is no strategy on offer, no solutions and no time.
With Heron, things are different: there is time, there are quality assets and quality management.’
That is quite an endorsement.
But no one should underestimate the efforts Ronson and his advisers, such as UBS Phillips & Drew, will need to make to bring creditors on-side.
The banks will bargain hard although they have little choice but to accept a restructuring.
The bondholders, spread in their thousands across Europe, may be more difficult to bring into line.
There are already reports of planned revolts.
But the real issue is where the power lies: and the mostly unsecured bondholders are close to the bottom of the pile with not much more chance of getting cash out in an insolvency than shareholders.
City Comment: NatWest action
THREE weeks ago, I suggested National Westminster Bank should hurry up in naming a successor to chief executive Tom Frost, whose credibility has been damaged by allegations relating to the Blue Arrow affair.
Last week, chairman Lord Alexander bit the bullet: Frost became deputy chairman, freeing him to cope with the re-opened Department of Trade and Industry probe.
In as replacement came 44-year-old Derek Wanless.
On page 48, Jim Levi profiles the man who will occupy one of the hottest seats in British banking, so I will confine myself to a few points.
Alexander and the non-executives he has recruited, such as Sir Ian MacLaurin, Sir Michael Angus, Hanson's Martin Taylor, and Sir Charles Powell, have decided to leap a generation in finding a manager to lead NatWest into the 21st century.
They feel the need to inject young and hungry talent into the bank's deliberations at the highest level.
Too often NatWest has followed rather than led the way in banking, and too often its strategy has been faulted in execution.
There is the Big Bang securities foray culminating in the Blue Arrow scam.
Then, there is the late move into bank assurance.
Finally it came close to emulating Midland's Crocker fiasco in America.
So Wanless has a challenge.
Though he appears genial, the next year will not be comfortable for his staff.
His inclination is to shy away from grandiose strategies and concentrate on return on capital and customer service.
NatWest's subsidiaries will have to earn their keep while technology will be deployed to lift service levels.
Banks are like supertankers: it takes a long time to turn them round.
But Wanless has impressed his non-executives.
He, in turn, might consider as his role model MacLaurin, who has taken Tesco from a poor second fiddle to Sainsbury to one of Britain's great success stories.
There is no reason why NatWest cannot mix it again with Barclays.
But it will take leadership.
City: SE may allow biotech floats
by Angus McCrone
THE Stock Exchange is considering a change to its Yellow Book rules to enable young biotechnology companies to be floated in London even if they are years away from making profits.
There is pressure for the change because, without it, many young British companies in this growing sector might be ineligible for a London quote and might instead float in New York, ensuring significant or even majority American ownership.
Biotechnology has been a dynamic part of the American stock market, and already 40 American firms are capitalised at more than $100 million.
Two home-grown drug research firms, British Bio-technology of Oxford, and Immunology of Cambridge, are expected to go public this year.
British Bio-technology, which employs 70 drug researchers with PhDs, could be valued at up to £200 million.
Finance director James Noble said: ‘We have appointed British advisors, Kleinwort Benson, and American advisors, Morgan Stanley and Hambrecht & Quist.
We are looking at options which will almost certainly include a Nasdaq listing.
We also hope to get a London listing.’
Immunology director Paul Heycock declined to comment on flotation plans.
But his company is believed to be close to appointing advisors for a flotation in New York.
The Stock Exchange allows some companies without the standard three-year trading history to apply for a listing as an ‘exceptional case’.
But it also has provisions for mineral exploration firms and investment trusts, neither of which tend to have typical trading records.
It may soon add biotechnology to this list.
City: Costain profits crumble
by Angus McCrone
COSTAIN will this week provide the starkest evidence yet of the slump gripping Britain's construction industry, by revealing pre-tax losses of about £40 million for 1991.
City analysts expect it to pass its final dividend, or make only a token pay-out.
The housebuilder and Channel tunnel contractor is making its decision on the dividend in the face of a dismal trading outlook in Britain.
Also its balance sheet is still under pressure despite last year's £77 million rights issue and the sale of a portfolio of properties for £84 million in December.
The fall into loss last year represents a dramatic turnabout from the late 1980s.
In the 1988 housebuilding boom, profits reached £89 million but fell to £5.5 million in 1990 as the sector tumbled into recession.
Chief executive Peter Costain is expected to unveil a series of exceptional costs, which will have contributed to the deep losses.
Analysts expect these to include a £12 million provision for Channel tunnel losses taken by Costain in its role as one of the members of the Transmanche Link construction consortium.
There will also be £30 million to £35 million of provisions against British and American housing land and commercial property developments.
A decision to cut or pass the dividend will be especially painful for Costain because of the blow it will be for the 91 per cent of shareholders who took up last year's rights issue and because Costain will be only the second major contractor, after John Laing, to cut the pay-out.
Last month Wimpey decided to hold its dividend despite making losses in 1991.
In December Costain estimated its net debts at £194 million after the sale of 11 properties to Great Portland Estates.
It also said difficult trading conditions were continuing to hit housebuilding in Britain but expressed satisfaction over the performance of its Australian mining business.
Costain shares closed at 64p on Friday, down from a 1991 peak of 223p.
Their low is 43p.
Slightly more cheerful results are expected this week from another construction group, Amec.
Analysts predict it to report profits of £41 million in 1991, compared with £63 million in 1990.
There is expected to be a £10 million write-down on its land bank.
Some analysts believe Amec is in a strong enough position to give shareholders a marginal increase in their dividends.
City: Lloyd's battle rages anew
by Robert Tyerman
ANOTHER cliff-hanging week for Lloyd's of London opens tomorrow, when solicitor Michael Freeman resumes his High Court battle for 820 names to stop Lloyd's drawing on their deposits to pay claims from several loss-stricken syndicates.
He does so in the wake of a report confirming apparent irregularities in the hardest-hit syndicates, run by the now-defunct Gooda Walker agency, where total losses could be as high as £400 million.
By Thursday evening, errors and ommissions underwriters are due to remit £116 million to solicitor Richards Butler under the settlement reached last month between underwriter Richard Outhwaite and names suing him for negligence over £260 million of losses.
Top insurance brokers, Richard Fielding of C E Heath and Richard Shaw of Lowndes Lambert, leading those Outhwaite names persuaded by Lloyd's not to sue, are now contemplating litigation of their own.
Investigator Ken Randall found Gooda Walker had made unorthodox use of ‘time and distance’ insurance policies, which led to a possible £10 million overstatement of profits for 1988 on one syndicate, 290.
There is no criticism of the auditor, Littlejohn Frazer, which also audited other problematic syndicates, 602 and 255.
The T & D policies were placed, wholly properly, through C E Heath with the Pinnacle group in Bermuda.
Part of Heath until last year, Pinnacle also provided T & D cover for Outhwaite and the Trinity Insurance group, itself now in liquidation.
Accountant Ralph Sharp, who heads G W Run-Off, has told Gooda Walker names he tried to achieve a market settlement through Lloyd's, but could not reach agreement.
City: MTM may face legal action
by Margareta Pagano
INVESTORS are exploring whether they have grounds for legal action against MTM, the troubled chemicals group whose value has collapsed from £256 million in February to £22 million.
Investors will wait for the report by Binder Hamlyn, MTM's auditor, into events before the group delayed its 1991 accounts because of accounting policy changes.
Binder is due to present the report, together with the results, at the end of the month.
Once fund managers see the sequence of events leading to the share price collapse, they will decide whether to sue.
If it is shown the market had been misled, fund managers are likely to take action.
A precedent lies in the success of securities house Smith New Court in winning £14 million in an action against Citibank over shares in Ferranti bought two months before a fraud.
Discovery of the fraud nearly halved Ferranti's share price.
Talks continue between MTM and its banks, following its breach of covenants.
MTM's debt stands at £70 million.
The appointment last week of company doctoring group Postern to work on an MTM recovery should help in buying time with the banks.
Postern boss Trevor Swete was in Middlesbrough last week talking to executives.
Last week, we inaccurately described David James, the company doctor at the helm of Eagle Trust, Davies & Newman and Lep Group, as a Postern director.
He is in fact an independent operator.
Letter to the City Editor: Thatcherism works
WHO said ‘For too long this country…has been ready to settle for borrowing money abroad to maintain our standard of life, instead of grappling with the fundamental problems of British industry.
We used to think that you could spend your way out of a recession and increase employment by cutting taxes and boosting government spending.
I tell you in all candour that the option no longer exists, and that, insofar as it ever did exist, it only worked on each occasion since the war by injecting a bigger dose of inflation into the economy, followed by a higher level of unemployment as the next step.’?
It was not Mrs Thatcher.
It was James Callaghan.
But the words did not match the actions.
Denis Healey talked of ‘squeezing the rich until the pips squeaked’.
Unions tried to take over the country.
High farce was reached when a union official declared: ‘Every worker should get at least the average pay rise.’
Mrs Thatcher brought a revolution in economic attitudes.
She brought clarity of thought and purpose.
Taxes needed cutting.
People had a right to decide how to spend their money rather than the government.
If ‘earn more’ meant ‘keep more’that created incentives.
And having earned more and kept more we needed to be good housekeepers.
Government had to set the example.
Public spending was controlled so it did not exceed revenue.
Anyone who succeeded in business in the past decade owed more than a little to the climate she created.
Should Thatcherism be allowed to fade away?
I hope not.
Before Thatcher, the country stumbled, led by men who failed to control unions or create a climate whereby we, the people, had the incentive to save ourselves.
We were in such a state we decided to swallow what seemed the bitter pill of Thatcherism.
Did it provide a cure?
It dealt with unions and restrictive practices.
It got rid of nationalised monopolies that were a drain on taxpayers, allowed the people to own them and ensured services improved.
It understood governments do not run economies, they only create the conditions by which the people and commerce do.
By controlling inflation it created the conditions, by lowering taxes it created incentives.
In giving most people middle-class aspirations it tried to rid the nation of its old-fashioned class structure.
Its success can be measured by how it has moved Labour to the right of the Heath Tory government.
The world is rejecting non-productive socialism as it rejected feudalism.
Do we want to step back to those days as eastern Europe steps forward?
Much of Thatcherism is common sense and it should not go out of fashion.
John Major may appear a more gentle leader but his Citizen' Charter is right up Mrs Thatcher's street.
If you want to succeed in business you need policies that are in line with her philosophy.
Or would you prefer a return to high taxes and secondary picketing?
HOWARD HODGSON Hodgson & Partners London SW1
Letter to the City Editor: Unhealthy plan
JOHN JAY (’ The fall-out from Labour’, March 29) correctly points out the shortsightedness of withdrawing tax relief on private medical insurance — but, by using figures from only one insurer, he has grossly underestimated the flaw in Labour's arithmetic.
The problem is even bigger than he suggests.
Taken across the industry, the Treasury has confirmed that 600,000 elderly people benefit from the relief which costs the Treasury some £50 million in ‘lost’ revenue.
Mr Jay's article quoted annual claims payments of £95 million for 210,000 such people — which, at that rate, would be some £272 million for all 600,000.
Even if only half these elderly people find that the withdrawal of tax relief makes private medical insurance too expensive for them and, consequently, revert once more to relying solely on the NHS for treatment, the cost to the nation of providing this care would be approximately £136 million.
Quite clearly, this cost would far outweigh Labour's anticipated ‘saving’.
As well as the financial cost to the nation, the likely adverse effect on waiting lists would make the withdrawal of this tax relief, if implemented, really shortsighted and a classic example of ‘penny wise, pound foolish’.
CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON Private Patients Plan London, WC1 
City: Why Tokyo is tumbling The Japanese stock market has halved in value since 1989.
Robert Tyerman looks at the causes and assesses whether the fall has further to go.
By ROBERT TYERMAN
TIMES are tough for Japanese fund managers in the midst of the worst Tokyo bear market since the early 1960s.
Recently a Nomura executive suffered the indignity of being taken hostage by a client wielding a samurai sword.
Others may make more conventional protests but the pain looks like continuing for some time.
Friday's 273.68-point rally in the Nikkei Dow index to 18,559.71 brought some relief, lifted by hopes of a new morale-boosting emergency government package.
But no-one in Tokyo dares say with any confidence it spells the end of a collapse that has nearly halved the value of Japanese shares since 1989.
The plunge has wiped £1,000 billion off share values in barely three years.
This is now a serious threat to the health of Japan's banking system and weakens the continuing ability and resolve to pump yen into overseas stock and property markets.
‘I see a selling climax building up,’ said Baring Securities' Nick Cant.
But many traders agree with Yamaichi's Neil McKinnon, who fears the Nikkei will test 16,000.
Finance minister Tsutomu Hata needs to have in mind a more convincing package of measures than last week's widely expected damp squib to get Japan Inc back into top gear.
The market dismissed a 0.25 point discount rate cut to 3.75 per cent and the bringing of forward public spending plans, worth 0.5 per cent of gross domestic product, as window dressing.
Although this is the fourth rate cut since last July, analysts say Bank of Japan governor Yasushi Mieno must go further.
Short term money market rates are still more than 4½ per cent and need to be much nearer 3 per cent.
Lower corporate profits, the crisis caused by reckless bank lending and corporate dabbling in financial derivatives, tumbling property prices and scandals involving business, investment houses, the yakuza crime syndicates and politicians have been at the core of Japan's financial woes.
It continues to chalk up record trade surpluses, but the first three months of 1992 are expected to show the second consecutive quarterly fall in gross domestic product, confirming that the Land of the Rising Sun is officially in recession.
Overall corporate profits are estimated to have fallen 15 per cent in the year to last month, with a further 7 per cent slide on the cards for 1992–93.
Sentiment has not been helped by sharp profit downgrading from such pillars of Japanese business as Sony, Matsushita and Pioneer, though computer group Fujitsu recently said it expected current profits to be modestly increased.
Bankruptcies are 75 per cent up on a year ago.
Industrial and commercial groups are also paying dearly for their rash incursion into property, futures and other financial instruments during the late 1980s: the banks that advised and funded them are faring even worse.
Companies must refinance £20 billion of warrants and bonds this year convertible into equities at prices way above today's, nearly £50 billion next year and £24 billion in 1994.
Rumours abound of a further scandal in the financial sector to add to last year's rich crop, which forced the resignation of the heads of Nomura, Japan's biggest investment company, and Nikko, among many others.
The simultaneous plunges in share and property prices have weakened banks' capital ratios so drastically that no single Japanese bank boasts a Triple A credit rating.
James Capel's Brian Waterhouse reckons problem property loans could be as much as £68 billion, 4 per cent of all bank lending.
Recently one bank, Mitsui Taiyo Kobe International, warned it might not satisfy the Bank of International Settlements' capital requirements.
It is changing its name to Sakura Finance International — this means cherry blossom, but whether it will add much of a shine to its image remains to be seen.
On top of all this, the United States Congress is planning laws to punish Japan for alleged discrimination against American securities houses operating in Japan.
With other foreigners they account for a quarter of trading.
At the same time, American investors, including the $68 billion California state pension fund, are considering suing some of Japan's ‘Big Four’ investment houses for massive damages over the practice of tobashi, the switching of losses and profits between favoured and unfavoured discretionary clients.
Last month lawsuits over tobashi brought against Japan's number two broker, Daiwa Securities, by domestic corporate clients resulted in out-of-court settlements totalling £320 million (8 per cent of Daiwa's shareholders' funds) and the resignation of its president, Masahiro Dozen.
No-one believes that will be the last case to shock the market and infuriate private investors.
Overseas investors are also up in arms.
New York Democrat Congressman Charles Schumer has written to the Tokyo Finance Ministry protesting at ‘unfair restrictions’ on non-Japanese firms trading in futures and derivatives.
He has not received a reply, but, as a sponsor of a Bill going through Congress threatening retaliation if Japan does not practice an open door policy, his anger could be translated into action.
This does not mean Japan is friendless.
Thanks to its balance-of-payments strength, it is one economy that could get away with a bold fiscal stimulus without facing a currency crisis.
The US recovery could help exports — trade retaliation permitting.
Tokyo's price/earnings ratio of 36 may compare with 22 for Wall Street, 19 for Frankfurt and 13 for London.
But banks and financials, such as scandal-ridden Industrial Bank of Japan on a 50-plus multiple, are out of line, not industrials.
Friday's uptick, leaving the index still close to its lowest level since January 1987 and more than 20 per cent down since the start of this year, was prompted by some old-style ‘suasion’ between the Ministry of Finance and the Big Four, Nomura, Nikko, Daiwa and Yamaichi.
Investment trust money flowed back into blue chips such as Sony, Honda and Pioneer, but banks, financials and government bonds continued to slide.
The big companies are adjusting to a colder climate, shedding labour and rationalising.
The inefficient, high-margin, over-employing distributive sector is being forced to mend its ways.
‘There is real value there,’ says Cant.
But there are likely to be more upsets before it is recognised by investors.
City: Attalli's new order of things — one year on Frank Kane finds a Frenchman in the Anglo-Saxon world of banking pleased with progress at the institution he helped to found to rebuild the East
By FRANK KANE
IN the office of Jacques Attalli, president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, is a row of Russian matrioshka dolls, representing the great villains of the 20th century — Saddam Hussein, Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, all the way down to a miniature Leonid Brezhnev.
Some of Attalli's wilder critics, especially in Britain, would almost like to reserve a place in that line for the 47-year-old Frenchman.
He has many characteristics irritating to Britons, especially in the world of finance — he is an intellectual, a socialist and a polymath who walks the world stage, but is suspected of putting French interests first.
He is one of Franois Mitterrand's closest advisers and an unashamed interventionist.
In the Anglo Saxon-dominated world of banking, he appears spectacularly out of place.
With little experience, apart from a controversially-received history of the Warburg dynasty, he has been put in charge of one of the world's highest profile institutions.
The EBRD's brief is to ‘foster the transition towards open market oriented economies and to promote private and entrepreneurial initiative in the countries of central and eastern Europe committed to multiparty democracy and pluralism,’ no less.
Next weekend in Budapest, Attalli will tell the EBRD's 45 members how this ambititious enterprise has fared in its first year of business.
He will reel out the numbers — 621 million Ecus (£477 million) committed to projects in eastern Europe, with outside investors adding a further 1.5 billion Ecus.
But does Attalli feel EBRD has been a success in its grander strategy?
‘You could say that our first success is the fact that we exist,’ he says.
‘It is the first time in 30 years that an international financial institution has been created, and we are not simply a bank, but also a political endeavour.
‘Of course, there are failures.
We are young, weak and small, and the job we have to do is enormous.
But I was pleased that the World Bank said we had done as much in our first year as they did in their first 10.’
Size is at the heart of it.
The EBRD has 10 billion Ecus (£7 billion) of capital, a drop in the ocean compared with the needs of eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union — the latter alone got £15.7 billion of aid from the Group of Seven last week.
And the triple-A rated EBRD's charter means it must invest according to conventional banking criteria.
Attalli says the bank has enough money for the basic task of investment in private industry and in infrastructure projects (’ in fact, there is more money than projects,’he complains), as well as for training and education, but there are areas that could prove to be capital-hungry and ultimately create as many problems as they are intended to solve.
He is reluctant to use the bank's funds to subsidise the balance of payments deficits of eastern Europe, nor to restructure industrial sectors not yet ready for privatisation, in energy safety and military conversion.
‘This kind of assistance must come from governments in the form of low interest loans and interest payment subsidies,’ he says.
There have been doubts about the bank's central aim of fostering the entrepreneurial spirit in countries that for the past 40 years, or longer, have been dominated by communism.
He does not underestimate the task, and is aware of the dangers of developing a dependancy culture through massive overseas aid.
‘It is easy to develop a market without entrepreneurial institutions, but it will become a black market.
It is in nobody's interest to see eastern Europe become a black market for laundering the world's money.’
And, as many have pointed out, he is working with the nomenclatura of communism who have served their political masters faithfully for the past 40 yerars.
He sees no alternative to doing business with former communists in their own countries.
‘We have to work with business people as they are.
We don't ask about their past, unless they have been involved in killing people, in which case they can be tried.
There are not enough local entrepreneurs, and it will take time before a new elite is generated in eastern Europe.
We have to live with that,’ he says.
More controversally, he has been accused of giving plum EBRD jobs to former communists, but he defends the policy.
Of Boris Fedorov, head of Russian affairs in the EBRD's merchant banking department, Attalli says he ‘fought hard against the Soviet regime when economic reform did not move fast enough’.
Bogdan Baltazar, a Romanian merchant banking adviser, spent 10 years in prison under Ceaucescu, he says.
And in the case of the Hungarian Miklos Nemeth, Attalli says: ‘This is the man who opened the border with Austria, beginning the whole process of liberation.
And he came with the highest recommendations, from Margaret Thatcher and Helmut Kohl.’
There have been other criticisms.
In the deal that gave Air France part of Czech airline CSA, EBRD funds were being used to finance a deal between two state airlines, one of them run by his brother Bernard.
He dismisses the nepotism charge derisively, and claims Air France, despite state control, operates competitively.
It has also been said that private companies can be enticed into investment in eastern Europe, as in the deal whereby BSN of France and Nestle of Switzerland bought a stake in Czech confectioner Chakoladnovy.
But Attalli says such deals would not happen without EBRD involvment.
He is willing to co-operate with other international institutions, such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, but insists the EBRD retains its exclusive brief for eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
His first year has been generally regarded as a success, but Attalli's task, with a portfolio that extends from the river Oder to Manchuria, is enormous.
Of this, he is well aware.
In his office next to the Russian dolls sits a plaque with a quote from Machiavelli's The Prince.
It reads: ‘It must be remembered that there is nothing more difficult to plan, more uncertain of success, nor more dangerous to manage, than the creation of a new order of things.’
City: Seeking a fillip from the Fed
By JAMES SRODES
FOR months, Wall Street has kept near its record high despite worries that the broader economic recovery might not arrive.
Now, just as economists have spotted hard evidence of a revival, brokers and investors have begun to fret that the Federal Reserve will not cut American interest rates quickly enough to guarantee prosperity.
The Fed's policy-making Open Market Committee met last Wednesday to set monetary growth goals for the second quarter and since then punters have been looking for signs of a massive rate cut.
However, the central bank is virtually immobilised for most of April.
The US Treasury is being flooded with hundreds of billions of dollars in advance income tax payments in the countdown to the April 15 deadline for the 1991 income year.
Because of the recession, there is a prospect that more of that money will flow back out of Washington afterwards in refunds to taxpayers who did not do as well as in the past.
Cosequently, the Treasury does not know whether its spending overdraft for the coming budget year will be closer to $350 billion or $400 billion.
That, in turn, has a fundamental impact on interest rates and equities.
Still, it is an election year and the nominally apolitical Fed is expected to rally round the incumbent president and dole out the credit with a liberal hand.
But is there a recovery on hand to help?
Yes, came the resounding answer last week from an ad hoc group of America's leading economists.
The 100 top economic thinkers challenged the Fed to lower interest rates and urged the White House to mandate new tax credits for business investment alongwith a $50 billion public works programme.
The difference between a $400 billion spending deficit and one slightly larger was not crucial, the economists argued; the continuation of the recovery was the issue.
‘Recent signs of an economic rebound are encouraging, but they do not vindicate a do-nothing approach,’ the group said in an open letter to President George Bush and Fed chairman Alan Greenspan
What was impressive about the group was that it included six US Nobel laureates in economics and a broad bi-partisan collection of the best of American economic thought.
Among the prize winners were Kenneth Arrow, Lawrence Klein, Franco Modigliani, William Sharpe, Robert Solo and James Tobin.
The White House, not surprisingly, pointed to its tax legislation stalemate with Congress and quickly passed the buck to the Federal Reserve.
‘The US economic recovery is well on its way, as long as the Fed makes sure that the money supply grows at an appropriate pace,’ said Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.
He also warned that a slowdown in money supply growth this summer could threaten the recovery at just the wrong moment.
The Bush team wants the Fed to follow up the cut in its discount loan rate to banks from the 3.5 per cent it reached in December to perhaps as low as 3 per cent.
Then the Administration wants the more closely watched federal funds rate that banks charge each other for overnight reserve borrowings to be cut from its long-standing 4 per cent to 3.5 per cent.
Just to show how the White House was sympathetic to the problems of the Fed and its crusade against inflation, White House chief economist Michael Boskin rebuked the 100 economists and their call for new tax credits and public works spending.
Such stimulus could wipe out any recovery, he argued, by reviving longer term rates.
And, indeed, it is the gap between short-term rates, currently around 4 per cent, and longer-term rates, as high as 8 per cent , that has everyone worried.
Inflation, such as it is, continues to abate.
The government's core rate of inflation on consumer products, excluding food and energy prices, was rising at an annual 3.8 per cent recently while it was nearly 6 per cent just a year ago.
In addition to the group of economists who confirm the recovery, the government's own composite of leading economic indicators showed a bullish increase on Friday.
The response from the Fed itself after its Open Market Committee has been a cautious wait-and-see approach.
A Greenspan protege, Fed governor Susan Phillips, made the bank's official comment when she conceded that ‘fundamental imbalances’ in the economy ‘have begun to abate,’paving the way for a more vigourous and sustained expansion.
‘If the recent burst of consumer demand is sustained in the next two or three months, it should ultimately be translated into increases in production, employment and income.
Business investment is an area that bears watching in the coming months to see if the recovery is sustainable.’
Translation: Maybe some more credit growth and interest rate reductions, but not during April.
Perhaps as soon as May, however.
City: Interest rate torpedo to recovery
By BILL JAMIESON
After weeks of almost uncanny silence, interest rates have moved sharply to the top of the election agenda.
A further 22.7 point slide in the FTSE100 index on Friday (bringing the fall to 192 points or 7 per cent since the election was called) is testimony to growing concern over economic prospects if Labour wins the election and the possibility of an early interest rate hike.
Despite statements by Neil Kinnock and John Smith that Labour would not devalue, the sterling/deutschmark rate has fallen more than three pfennings to 2.8308 since the start of the campaign.
A Labour Chancellor will hope that by publically ruling out devaluation this would pre-empt a run on sterling and would limit any base rate rise to ½ per cent at most— thus avoiding a mortgage rate rise.
But what would happen if markets are not so sanguine?
While we have strong reserves to support the pound it is likely Bank of England Governor Robin Leigh Pemberton would advise a Labour Chancellor to combine firm words with firm deeds if support from the Bundesbank and our other exchange rate mechanism partners is to be assured and a drawn-out war of attrition avoided.
But even if an immediate rise is avoided, the longer terrm effect is more insidious: a Labour Chancellor will find it hard to prevent the markets from widening the interest rate differential with Germany.
This has narrowed to less than 1 per cent.
It is likely to return to around 2 per cent: the price a Labour Britain will have to pay for giving priority to public spending rises unrelated to economic recovery.
The problem is any interest rate rise, particularly one which triggered a rise in mortgage rates, would be an outrage for business at this point in the cycle and would deal a blow to consumer confidence.
With the retail prices index this week likely to fall to around 3.7 per cent, it would add a further perverse twist to real interest rates that are ravaging the property sector, office as well as residential.
It would damage those tentative, but increasing signs of recovery: February retail sales showed a gain of 0.4 per cent, the second consecutive monthly rise and the balance of payments for February showed an increase in both export and import volumes.
At best it would delay the arrival of that strong and vital recovery on which Treasury calculations on government spending and revenue are so delicately balanced.
At this point in the debate a public bunfight has arisen between, on the one hand the authors of the Coopers & Lybrand report on Tuesday that warned of a ‘fiscal reality gap’ and a public sector borrowing requirement soaring way above Tory and Labour projections (about which this column warned last week) and those who believe this takes too gloomy a view of prospects.
Coopers & Lybrand took issue with the official Red Book projections of growth rising to annualised 2 per cent rate in the second half of this year, climbing to 3½ per cent from 1993–94 to 1996–97, and based its forecasts instead on a 2½ per cent growth rate.
It is not alone in this view: most City economists have taken a distinctly sceptical stance on the Red Book's projections.
Supporters of official forecasts say the 1982–86 recovery saw an average annual growth rate of 3 per cent— not far removed from the 3.1 per cent average implied by the Treasury over the five years to 1996–97.
They say fiscal policy is now highly stimulative, the world economy should be growing in 1993 and real interest rates were high throughout the early 1980s, as the Datastream/Robert Fleming graph shows.
This would provide grounds for optimism — if you accept this recession is similar in type and degree to that of 1980–81.
But it is not: it is the differences rather than the similarities that call into question Treasury projections, in particular the effect of high real interest rates.
The differences are threefold.
First, unlike 1980–81, Britain has experienced an asset deflation.
Property values have fallen sharply.
The housing market is fighting to regain stability after a period, without post-war precedent, of both real and nominal falls in prices (see chart).
There has been a collapse in confidence, soaring repossessions and a reluctance by households to borrow more and trade up.
Second, there is a continuing contraction in the growth of consumer credit.
February figures showed growth in bank and building society lending had slowed to a 5 per cent annual rate against 12.4 per cent a year ago.
In 1981 such lending rose by 20.3 per cent and in 1982 by 18.9 per cent.
Similarly, broad money is growing at a rate of just 6.1 per cent against 10.9 per cent a year ago.
In 1981 broad money rose by 13.9 per cent and in 1982 by 14.3 per cent.
Third, there is a distinct difference in where and how this recession has struck: while the 1980–81 recession hit deep in manufacturing, this recession has hit the South East and the service sector.
The effect is qualitatively and psychologically different: those with discretionary spending power continued to spend last time.
Those with such power now are showing a reluctance, and it is hard to see how higher tax, higher national insurance and the prospect of higher interest rates will persuade them otherwise.
All this has reinforced a mood of debt reduction and rebuilding of savings back to levels that were broadly maintained throughout the 1960s and 1970s.
To assume this debt averse psychology can be reversed at the turn of a sixpence is facile.
It ignores the erosion of confidence created by asset deflation and the role of high real interest rates, at this point in the cycle, in preventing anything like a re-run of the early 1980s recovery.
Robert Fleming economist Peter Warburton, in a powerful assessment last week, focused on the critical role of real interest rates, combined with a fixed currency value, in posing a threat to asset prices and economic activity.
‘For most of the past three years,’ he writes, ‘banks' customers have been unable to service their debts out of income growth, with the result that many have been and will be forced to shrink their non-interest expenditures or sell assets in order to pay bank interest.
Many others have defaulted or will do so before long.
The only practicable solution to this unstable situation is a substantial fall in real (and nominal) interest rates.
Otherwise, the unremitting logic of compound interest will tighten its stranglehold on the economy.’
Looking internationally, high speed recovery should not be counted on.
Germany, the economic locomotive of Europe, looks set for stagflation and Japan is in turmoil.
The one bright spot is America where DKB International is forecasting gross domestic product growth of 1.1 per cent this year rising to 2.3 per cent next.
But for Britain it is reckoning on just 0.4 per cent growth this year and 0.9 per cent in 1993.
It only takes a small slippage for government revenue and spending forecasts to be thrown out of kilter.
That is why the market is so worried by the budget deficit and a Labour agenda that has fatally confused government spending with economic recovery.
City: MARKETS IN FOCUS
By MARGARETA PAGANO
FEARS of a Tory defeat hit shares last week.
The FTSE100 index fell to its lowest level of the year.
Prices were slashed across the board, leaving the index 65.2 points lower at 2,382.7, down 74 points on the account.
The risk of higher interest rates with a Labour victory or hung parliament, combined with the property crisis, sent prices diving.
Bank shares slithered as exposure to first Heron, and then Speyhawk, became apparent.
Barclays, which has £120 million of debt with Heron, saw its shares fall 35p to 287p, while overall banking shares fell 7 per cent.
Property shares continued to slide on awareness of the full extent of falling asset values and the growing danger of breaching banking covenants.
Speyhawk, which declared a £216 million loss, fell 7½p to 3¾p, while Hammerson A fell 36p to 369p.
MEPC slipped 35p to 288p.
Worries over consumer spending if interest rates rise sent Kingfisher down 21p to 459p and Dixons 27p to 190p.
Even the recession-resilient supermarket kings were nervous.
Sainsbury shed 8p on Friday to 375p.
Tesco gave up 15½p to 242p on the week, even though profits for last year are expected to be £123 million up at £540 million.
Redland was a bright spot, up 34p at 481p, after figures and the Steetley merger.
More gloom at MTM, in breach of banking covenants, took a further 49p off the shares to 25p.
City: Sure imprint from MacGregor
INVESTORS should take note of the fact that Sir Ian MacGregor, hammer of the miners and now chairman of printing group HunterPrint, has been increasing his stake with the purchase of 840,000 shares, giving him a stake of 3.4 per cent.
With cost-cutting taking effect and some big contracts recently signed — the first HunterPrint People magazine comes out today — the shares look good value at 11p.
DEFENCE equipment group MS International is set to clinch part of the Malaysian order for two frigates from the Yarrow shipyard.
The news should boost the shares, at 19p.
DEALINGS in BDM, the storage and retrieval company recently brought to market, got off to an uneasy start, standing at 117p against the 125p issue price.
That makes them good value set against the sector leader Hays, trading on a ratio of 17 times earnings, with BDM at 10 times.
‘The company is not going bust, assets are four times the current price and the yield on a cut dividend is over three times the UK average.’
Thus Durlacher analyst Michael Coulson on Lonrho, at 81p yielding 21.4 per cent.
‘While it would be a brave man who bought the shares in the current atmosphere (although we think they are a buy), only a fool would sell them.’
LEATHER group Pittard Garnar (77p) has landed a deal with Puma for its new waterproof leather for football boots.
The product's sales are heading for £1 million a year, benefiting from ecological concern over the kangaroo skin that traditionally covers soccer boots.
A recovery stock.
Buy.
EXPECT news this week that Arcadian International (62p) has clinched financing for its £10 million luxury hotel at Gressy-en-France near both EuroDisney and Charles de Gaulle airport.
Arcadian has other promising projects in Spain and near EuroDisney.
A property play for the adventurous.
RUB your eyes.
Burton shares (36p) may be worth buying again after the horrors and management upheavals.
James Capel predicts the new team can get profits moving from £5 million this year to £30 million next and £81 million in 1995.
DIVERSIFIED USM insurance broker Oriel (129p) is set for further expansion into niche areas after a 33 per cent 1991 profits increase to £2.8 million.
William Syson, former assistant general manager of Bank of Scotland, has been recruited as chairman of Oriel subsidiary CGA Insurance Brokers (Scotland).
SO FAR disappointing, Aviva Petroleum near a year's low at 170p should have more good news on acreage soon, say followers.
Graham Ferguson Lacey, with 20 per cent, is expected in London shortly and a share placing is rumoured.
A gamble.
NOTE Mayflower Corporation's pre-tax profits up 137 per cent to £1.06 million, with gearing eliminated.
A resumption of dividend payments looks in store this year and the shares at 37p are attractive.
BREWER Boddington (152p) is friendless.
Borrowings have shot to £99 million due to the £21 million cost of its 20 per cent Devenish stake.
The group can rebid after June 18, but a stake sale or deal with another predator look possible.
Avoid for now.
City: EUROPE IN FOCUS
By FRANK KANE
THE French market bid a cheery au revoir to Edith Cresson, glad to see the back of a government that has been the source of much uncertainty, even outright damage, for the Paris market.
That the bourse did not perform worse in the year that she held power testifies to the inherent strength of a market many analysts see as one of 1992's best bets.
It has out-performed other European markets for most of the period, and this year has been a good 5 per cent ahead.
Market reaction to the resignation was muted, with the CAC40 rising 1 per cent to 1,942.73.
Most dealers had already written in a premium for the premiership of Pierre Beregovoy, whose stint as finance minister made him well known to the business community.
The market expects his firm anti-inflation line to continue, as well as his insistence on a sound franc and carefully contolled public borrowing.
None of that would be especially surprising, but what would give the Paris market added spice is Beregovoy's enthusiasm for privatisation.
Several publicly-controlled groups have already signalled a desire to unwind some state shareholdings, and the new prime minister is likely to raise fewer objections than the interventionist Cresson.
Elf Aquitaine, Air France, Renault, Rhone Poulenc and UAP are all regarded as prime privatisation candidates.
Expect a lively bourse for the rest of 1992.
City: Builders sight more gloom
By ANGUS MCCRONE
ALL over Britain, office, shopping and road projects launched in the sunny days of the late 1980s are drawing to a close and building workers, their companies and shareholders are facing the economic equivalent of deep mid-winter.
Bobby McAlpine, chairman of Alfred McAlpine, says grimly: ‘This is infinitely the worst construction recession I have come across in 42 years in the industry.’
Few see light at the end of the tunnel, whatever the election result.
The pain in the building industry will be evident on Wednesday with results from Costain, expected to show losses of about £40 million in 1991 due to problems in contracting and housebuilding.
Costain is also expected to take a pick-axe to its dividend, only a year after its £77 million rights issue.
Costain is only a detail in a sorry picture.
Tarmac, which made profits of £377 million as recently as 1989, is expected to announce a plunge to just £30 million this month and the betting is that it too will slash the dividend.
Taylor Woodrow, traditionally the most conservative of contractors, has just unexpectedly parted company with its chairman, Peter Drew.
It is expected to report a profits slump on April 14.
Last month, Wimpey and John Laing both reported big losses for last year.
The industry estimates that more than 100,000 construction jobs have been lost in the recession, and the pace seems to be quickening as projects end without new ones to replace them.
McAlpine says: ‘The whole sector — commercial building, industrial building and civil engineering — is being hit worse now than probably at any time during this recession.’
Government figures show the number of new private homes peaked in 1988 and fell by 19 per cent and 22 per cent in 1989 and 1990.
But last year housebuilding bottomed out at about half the level of 1988 and analysts predict a slow upturn in 1992.
Even so, prices are not expected to rise and companies such as John Laing, Barratt and Wimpey have already written down their housing land bank values by up to 20 per cent .
Laing wrote off £45 million, and if industry leader Tarmac was to take similar action, its write-down might be £100 million.
One of few optimists is Sir Lawrie Barratt, who claims pent-up demand after years of inertia will lead to a housing recovery this year, starting in the South East.
The biggest change has come in office building, particularly in London, where in 1989 and 1990 the City, West End and Docklands were full of cranes, hard hats and builders' wolf whistles.
Nomura analyst Graham Foster says: ‘Now the cranes have gone.
A major fall in commercial building is happening, with output down 15 per cent in 1991, and likely to drop 28 per cent in 1992 and 15 per cent in 1993.
Activity in 1994 may be only about half the peak level of 1990.’
Infrastructure work was the bright spot in 1991, output rising by 4 per cent.
But Birse Group chairman Peter Birse says: ‘Civil engineering has tightened up recently and big projects such as the Jubilee Line extension and the Heathrow express link have not got going.
The only reliable source of work is the water industry.’
Margins have been squeezed in road building as house and office specialists have tendered at low prices for road work to fill order books.
The Channel Tunnel has been a great source of work, but not profits, in the last five years.
But the project should be complete next year and 6,000 British workers face an uncertain future.
Balfour Beatty and Wimpey have already taken provisions of £12 million to cover possible losses on the contract and Costain, Tarmac and Taylor Woodrow may follow suit.
Birse says under Labour local council receipts from the sale of council houses may be released to enable more council houses to be built, and this could help the industry, particularly local builders.
But the industry fears Labour might have to raise interest rates to defend the pound.
If so, this would compound the effect on housing of its tax rises for the well-off.
Last November, the Tories announced a £5.6 billion boost to state spending in 1992–93, enabling British Rail to spend £1.5 billion on investment, and London Transport £1 billion.
But builders fear neither the Tories nor Labour could find the money for the much bigger public works pro gramme needed to get construction moving.
City: Property without solid foundations Bricks and mortar were once thought to be be as good as money in the bank.
That belief has been rudely undermined by the collapse in the market causing severe embarrassment to many big players.
Patrick Weever and Margareta Pagano outline the depth of the slump.
By PATRICK WEEVER AND MARGARETA PAGANO
In palmier times Speyhawk chairman Trevor Osborne used to entertain parties with the tale of three developers who went moose shooting every year.
The pilot warned there would be only room for one moose on the small plane.
But, predictably enough, the three turned up with three moose and bargained them all aboard, one on each wing, the third across the fuselage.
When the plane duly clipped the trees and landed on the ice lake one property developer sat up and asked: ‘How far have we got?’
The second replied: ‘About 200 yards further than last time.’
This tale of developers who never learn would appeal to Bank of England Governor Robin Leigh Pemberton, who warned in May 1987 about too much property lending.
The anecdote will have less appeal to Speyhawk's shareholders who were last week told of a £205 million writedown in the value of its properties.
Like so many fellow developers only the embrace of its banks keeps it alive.
But Speyhawk is a minnow compared to some big fish currently feeling the pain: Olympia & York, the world's largest property company, and Gerald Ronson's Heron International are both trying, in Third World style, to reschedule their debts.
When the mighty tumble with such alacrity it is a sign we are near the bottom, say optimists.
But if this is true, and there are some signs of stabilisation, the climb back will be slow.
This has been a truly vicious downturn.
For 200 years City offices have been regarded as a near certain store of value.
Proximity to the Bank of England was its own guarantee.
No more: City rents have nearly halved from a £70 per sq ft peak in 1987 and capital values have fallen by at least 30 per cent.
Nor is that the end of the story.
In a desperate effort to camouflage falling rents and values landlords have been offering inducements to tenants.
Sometimes they offer up to two years' rent free; in other instances a capital sum changes hands.
It is called a reverse premium.
The cause of the desperation is oversupply.
Up to 20 per cent of City office space is vacant, a record.
The importance of the Speyhawk write-downs may lie in a new realism by the banks who are now in charge.
They have had a stomach full of illusion.
For years they have been making effectively equity investments in developer traders at debt margins.
Now, says a developer, they have been educated.
They are ready to recognise their mistakes.
They want to be done with inducements and get cash flow from the start.
That, he says, means rents will fall further and those seeking £40 per sq ft will get £30.
But, say the bulls, look at the yield from property.
Historically there has been a wide gap with the yield on gilts.
This has virtually closed.
With interest rates set to fall in the medium term this must augur well for values.
But an analyst says: ‘When you buy a gilt you are certain of the income.
There is no such certainty in property.
What people are frightened of is buying a property, finding the tenant goes bankrupt and leaves them with the running costs.’
The malaise in sentiment has hit the stock market.
John Atkins at broker UBS Phillips & Drew says: ‘The decline in property shares since November 1988 relative to the All Share Index has been around 60 per cent.
That makes it the worst slide since the All Share indices started in 1962.
Over 30 years property shares have lost 44 per cent of their value relative to the All Share Index.’
Talk of long-term outperformance by bricks and mortar is shown up as a myth.
Chris Turner at Barclays de Zoete Wedd says: ‘We are not at the bottom yet.
Vacant space is still rising.
In London an increasing amount of space is being mothballed but as soon as there is demand it will be opened up again.
‘We are staying liquid.
We do not expect prices to rise generally for a further two years.
There are exceptions.
Institutions are rushing after shops in cathedral towns.
Retail warehousing and the business parks are also popular.
‘But the institutions are concentrating almost entirely on covenant and length of lease.
You do not have a property investment market so much as a lease investment market.
Nobody wants to buy an empty building.’
This kind of talk does not appeal to developers.
Elliot Bernerd of Chelsfield says: ‘One of the psychological problems is people who work in the institutions and banks are in the City every day and they see these monster empty buildings such as MEPC's Alban Gate.
That is 400,000 sq ft looking like a large empty lipstick box over London Wall.
They cannot conceive the rest of the country is not in the same shape.’
John Ritblat at British Land takes the same view and backs it with money.
He bought 250,000 shares lastMonday at 180p — currently they are 168p — and has spent £500 million in the past 18 months buying mostly retail properties in the provinces.
‘I do not think there is any element of risk in British Land, or companies such as Land Securities, MEPC, Hammerson, Great Portland or Slough.
In these times well financed companies can afford to tread water and pick off suitable acquisitions without pressure.
Property shares have no friends at the moment so the stock market is just a panicky picture — exaggeratted as always.’
Great Portland chairman Richard Peskin also bought 75,000 more shares in his company last week.
Over the past year Peskin and his family have bought more than a million shares.
On Friday Peskin, before jetting off to Florida's Disney World, successfuly completed the rescheduling of £80 million of debt due to expire over the next six months.
Instead the debt has been converted into a syndicated four-year loan.
‘Over-expansion through the 1980s is one cause of the problem,’ says Peskin.
‘But the real problem was bad financing.
Too much of the development was highly geared.
When income stream is not coming through and capital values are falling then you are going to get problems.
Asset values are falling to such an extent that it is inevitable many companies will break their covenants.
I think we will see more in trouble,’ he says.
Stuart Lipton of Stanhope, developer of the City's Broadgate complex, Stockley Park and now finishing 500,000 sq ft of office space at Ludgate says: ‘The reality is that supply outstripped demand by a phenomenal amount.
One of the real problems was that there were too many badly built, badly designed buildings in the wrong location which the tenants don't want.’
Lipton believes about a quarter of London's empty space will have to be reconverted into either light industrial use, studios or housing.
‘What we will see is segmentation.
The quality buildings will be let — Broadgate is now 95 per cent leased — but slowly developers will realise they have to convert the bad space which I can only say is a lot of classified DIY.’
Once the market starts breaking down, or segmenting, then Lipton can see an upturn.
Rents this year will come down a further 15 to 20 per cent, he says, stabilising next year.
By 1994 Lipton predicts the market will be moving again.
What would be the impact of Labour victory?
Kleinwort Benson said it could lead to a further 15 per cent fall in property values.
Trafalgar House's Sir Eric Parker says the tax squeeze on middle income earners could hit house prices.
But he is pleased with deals at Brooklands business park where lettings last week to Sony and Marks & Spencer were ‘spectacular’.
The sector that has held up best is industrial where oversupply is less of a problem.
Slough, chaired by Sir Nigel Mobbs (also a Barclays Bank director) is specialist in this area.
He says: ‘I think we are near the bottom and beginning to see the slope up.’
Time to invest in property shares then?
‘Recovery will be pretty slow,’ he says.
‘There is plenty of time to get on the bus.’
Additional reporting by Nick Fox 
Family Finance: How to keep the cost of dying in check As the cost of a funeral soars, Steve Ellis examines the benefits of the ‘pay now, go later’ schemes undertakers are offering
By STEVE ELLIS
FUNERAL insurance plans are going up market.
In the past, most plans were sold strictly door-to-door by companies such as Prudential and Pearl, but now companies aiming at a more affluent middle-class market have started to move in.
New names such as Chosen Heritage and Dignity in Destiny have appeared, with a few more insurers, including Sun Life, and several friendly societies, such as Tunbridge Wells Equitable and Odd Fellows.
This reflects the jump in funeral costs.
Research suggests the average cheap funeral costs £776, 50 per cent more than five years ago.
Costs have risen faster than general inflation and that is not going to change.
Mintel has extrapolated the figures, assuming the same level of inflation, and reckons the simplest funeral could cost a bereaved family £6,230 in 25 years' time.
The price of a more elaborate service and burial looks to be £17,000.
Pre-paid funeral plans are standard in America but few Britons have latched onto the idea of ‘pay now, go later’.
Many suppliers have been reluctant to promote schemes in the past for fear of being accused of bad taste.
But sales are now rising by about 50 per cent a year as the idea loses its social taboo.
The contracts take several forms.
The basic pre-payment plans allow a choice of a particular standard of funeral from a range of set packages.
Prices vary, depending on the quality of the coffin, the number of limousines and the ‘extras’.
Savers take their pick and pay for the arrangements they want in today's prices.
Once they have done that, the undertakers guarantee to provide a funeral to that standard, whatever has happened to charges in the meantime.
But people have to choose a particular undertaker to handle the arrangements.
If they change their minds, the most they can expect is their funds returned without interest; at worst they could lose some or all of their money.
The classic occasion when problems appear is when people move home at retirement then have to think again.
Buyers need to tell someone close to them they have made the arrangements, otherwise the policy will be worthless.
What is more, at least some of the extras that typically appear at funerals may not be fully covered in the plans available.
The Odd Fellows has worked out average charges and the overall bills do not come cheap.
Extra cars (at today's prices) may cost £55 each though some firms make a basic charge plus mileage.
Doctors' certificates cost £55 and clergymen will normally charge £25 for a service.
That provides for the funeral service itself.
But there will be other charges, too, including crematorium fees of £70 to £125, or burial plots costing anything from £75 in the country to several thousand pounds in London.
Headstones, obituary notices and catering can push up bills sharply.
Straight insurance to cover the cost of a funeral is possible.
Sun Life and several friendly societies, including Odd Fellows and Tunbridge Wells Equitable, sell policies designed to do that.
As with a straight life policy, people pay a regular premium, which varies according to the age when they start the insurance.
Most companies aim policies at people over 50, though they are open to those under 85.
Taking a funeral policy can cost less than paying for a funeral plan by instalments but it depends on average life expectancy.
A man of 60 wanting a £3,000 potential benefit would pay only about £180 a year.
The cost over 13 years, the likely life expectancy, is £2,340.
But there is no guarantee an insurance pay-out would cover funeral costs, as is the case with the pre-payment schemes.
Dignity in Destiny has already raised its prices and our table includes the increases at Golden Charter due to come into force this week.
The other firms look set to raise their prices as well.
The Perfect Assurance Funeral Trust is one of the newest entrants.
It is run by the National Association of Funeral Directors but has no set packages.
Customers have to sort out specific requirements with a local undertaker.
Family Finance: ‘Only’ way to beat a fraud
By STEVE ELLIS
ANYONE with an account at Co-operative Bank or Bank of Scotland will soon find important changes have been made to ensure their cheques are safer to use.
They follow the Cheque Act hurried through Parliament just before MPs broke up for the election.
It becomes law on June 16.
Banks and building societies are estimated to have paid out more than £50 million to cheque cheats last year.
In many cases, genuine customers footed the bill under old laws governing cheques.
One of the main problems was ‘endorsing’.
Anyone could pay any cheque into their account provided the original payee had signed the back.
But the bank or building society could not confirm the ‘endorsed’ signature so stolen cheques could be cashed long before anyone realised it.
Even the Inland Revenue suffered — to the tune of £1.5 million — from people who intercepted cheques destined to pay tax bills.
That is why the Revenue backed Banking Ombudsman Laurence Shurman when he suggested people should make changes to their cheques so they were less susceptible to fraud.
Banks argued against the changes but acknowleged the need for change and so supported the Cheque Act.
From June 16, a cheque with the word ‘only’ on the payee line, instead of the present ‘or order’, and crossed with the words ‘account payee’can only be paid into the payee's account.
Co-op Bank managing director Terry Thomas is adding the extra words to all cheque books.
‘These moves will undoubtedly help protect our customers.
If a cheque is wrongly processed it is the collecting bank and not the customer who will be liable.’
So if a cheque sent through the post is cashed by the wrong person, it is the bank that accepted the cheque, not the person who wrote it, which will have to pay.
The banks have given themselves a get-out clause.
The new law says a bank is not liable if it has accepted the cheque ‘in good faith and without negligence’.
Even so, lawyers think a cheque would have to be paid into an account with exactly the same name.
Most banks, with the exception of the Co-op and Bank of Scotland, are undecided about how to react to the new law even though they have only two months to decide.
Barclays, National Westminster and Royal Bank of Scotland will bring in the new cheques ‘at some point’.
But they have yet to decide whether they will be issued automatically or if customers will have to order them.
Clydesdale will discuss the situation ‘shortly’ and Girobank is ‘reviewing’its position.
TSB is likely to say ‘Yes’ but is not certain when or if the new cheques will be on request only.
Lloyds will add the extra words to cheques from mid-summer but will have the present cheques available on request.
Like Lloyds, a number of banks claim customers will still want old-style cheques because not everyone has an account into which they can pay cheques.
Youngsters in particular would have difficulty — cheques from relatives and friends could not be cashed by their parents.
Legal experts say it is worth protecting cheques until the new laws come in by making the alterations.
Cross out the words ‘or order’, substitute ‘only’ and initial the change.
Make sure all cheques are crossed with the words ‘account payee’.
Family Finance: Drop in and take cash out Christine Stopp looks at instant settlement share dealing, the latest offer from the only building society with its own stockbroking arm
By CHRISTINE STOPP
FAIR shares for all at special rates seems the motto in the City.
The Government's share shop initiative at the time of the second British Telecom issue brought cheaper dealing for the smaller investor, with charges of no more than 1.5 per cent or £15 minimum.
Dealing costs continue to fall although share shop services are still not universal among banks and building societies.
The only society with its own stockbroking arm, Norwich and Peterborough, has pioneered user-friendly share dealing over the past five years.
Its most recent offer is an instant settlement selling service, which allows customers and non-customers to get cash on the spot when selling shares worth up to £5,000.
It is available through only two branches of N & P stockbroker Waters Lunniss, but the plan is to extend the service to all 63 East Anglian branches.
Charges are higher than for the society's standard dealing system because the stockbroker cannot itself be paid on the deal until the end of the stock exchange account, an average of 10 days' delay.
N & P's charges are still competitive, particularly on larger deals.
Is it worth going out of your way for instant cash on a share deal?
One of N & P competitors says that with shares, which are typically held long term, it is rarely necessary.
But there are plenty of reasons why cash might be needed in a hurry.
The basic idea of making share dealing more user friendly is to encourage investors unfamiliar with the stock market to trade more freely.
Waters Lunniss' Richard Larner says the N & P service has been used by staff of neigbouring companies wanting cash from shares bought through incentive schemes.
But Larner reports one £300,000 deal late last year.
No other organisation so far offers cash on the spot.
But Barclays is the cheapest for walk-in deals.
Its share shop service, says Barclays Stockbrokers managing director Tony Vine-Lott, is aimed at people investing between £500 and £1,000.
The service is limited to 50 of the most widely held shares.
Other than privatisation stocks, they include Euro-Disney, Abbey National and Marks & Spencer.
For deals of more than £1,400, Barclays' standard service offers better value.
That is the point at which the 2 per cent share shop charge equals the £28 standard service minimum.
The great virtue of the N & P service is that the customer hears the price at which he is dealing, at the time it happens.
Instant pricing is also available with NatWest Touchscreen, which offers dealing in more than 500 stocks.
Lloyds gives a guide price at the time of dealing.
Barclays bundles together orders to make them more economical, though it guarantees to deal within three hours, and the shareholder can call back to check the price.
But Barclays' Vine-Lott says few people ask the price at which they can sell their shares.
Most banks and building societies (except Lloyds) will deal with non-customer investors.
In that case, the usual procedure is to ask for two items of identification, such as a driving licence, when accepting an order, and then allow people to pay by cheque.
Barclays will take payment by transfer from other banks and most building societies.
All other features aside, the cheapest deal on a £50 shareholding is through Barclays share shop (£15).
The most expensive is through the Barclays standard service (£28), followed by Lloyds (£25).
The charge on the others would be £20, except for N & P instant settlement (£22.50).
For a £1,500 deal Barclays' share shop is the dearest at £30.
Cheapest are N & P, Midland and NatWest at £22.50.
For deals of more than £7,000 both Midland and N & P offer cheaper rates.
Some banks, Lloyds, for example, charge lower commission on gilts.
All these services are ‘execution only’.
The institution does not give any advice on the deal.
Many institutions will also offer services that include advice and fund management, but on different conditions.
Surprisingly, N & P seems to be the only building society to offer a permanent share dealing service, though others have offered temporary privatisation arrangements.
Not even all banks have a cheap, convenient share shop scheme.
Royal Bank of Scotland, for instance, has only an upmarket service through stockbroker Charterhouse Tilney.
Abbey National offers current dealing by post or phone through Sharelink but its own dealing system should be ready by the end of the year.
Family Finance: Investments with a no-lose guarantee With election uncertainty hanging over the stock market, Tom Tickell looks at equity bonds that offer at least your money back
By TOM TICKELL
WORRIES over what the election result will bring make contracts designed to take the risk out of risk investment increasingly popular.
A raft of insurers including Sun Alliance, Scottish Provident and Clerical Medical have launched guaranteed bonds designed to do just that and last week the mighty Shearson Lehman produced its own offshore contract to help remove risk.
The scheme, forbiddingly called a fixed assured note, will take a minimum £5,000 and guarantees to provide people with the full increase in share prices over the next five years as measured by the FTSE100 index.
If share prices fall over that time, a safety net guarantees you will get your money back.
The scheme uses the magic of futures and zero coupon bonds to achieve that, meanwhile you collect a 3 per cent dividend.
If anyone needs to take funds out of the Shearson scheme early, they can do so via selling the note itself.
But doing that inevitably brings the risk back into what was a risk-free investment.
Shearson Lehman is not the only offshore player.
Both Royal Life International and the Danish Hafnia group have their own schemes, which work slightly differently.
They both allow people to choose their own time horizons, which can be anything from two to 25 years.
The investment they make goes into a fund combining equities, fixed interest and cash.
The funds do not merely guarantee you will get the full rise in the index over the period you have chosen; they also ensure you get the highest bid price that the fund achieves at any point while the investment is running.
So if it peaks two years before you plan to cash in, you do not lose because you had to wait for the money.
‘Shearson has the same option, but with its bond you have to make the decisions yourself,’ says Richard Spencer of financial adviser Brooks MacDonald Gayer.
‘So if you believe that share prices look dangerously high after three or four years, you can decide to lock in to the rate you have picked.
The snag is that once you have done so, you cannot move up or down.
With the other bond funds, your investment floor does not automatically become the ceiling at the same time.
’ As always, there are swings and roundabouts.
Money in the Royal Life and Hafnia funds rolls up inside the bonds tax free, because they are offshore.
But once holders cash in the bonds, they will have to pay income tax at their top rate on whatever gains they have made.
The final offshore scheme comes from Abbey Life, though the investment guarantees on its Global Growth and Security Trust are far more limited.
The contract ensures that if you decide to cash in after five years in April 1997, you will not get less than the unit price on offer in April 1996.
It will not promise to provide the best price in between.
In tax terms, Abbey Life's scheme is more attractive than the others.
It pays gains in full, and only those who actually pay capital gains tax need worry about it.
Relatively few people incur a capital gains tax bill because of index linking and the offsetting effect of the personal tax allowance.
The insurance funds from Sun Alliance, Scottish Provident and Clerical Medical are slightly different from those offered offshore.
Once again, investors who put in their minimum £5,000, will get 90 per cent or 95 per cent of any increase in the value of the top 100 companies in the portfolio.
Meanwhile, if share prices fall, the guarantee of money back after five years still stands.
Clerical Medical has set up a fund specifically for the investment, whereas the others are relying on their existing pools of money.
That is not as technical as it may seem.
Clerical Medical's fund will have to be wound up at the end of five years, which will ensure that it will have to pay CGT in full on whatever has been made.
The other companies use an existing fund, which will continue after the five years are up.
Inevitably, some people will want to cash in early, but rules vary.
Several insurers split their investments so that buyers collect five separate contracts each for £1,000.
They can then use them for withdrawals without worrying about having to take all their money at once.
It is prudent to check each company's rules before you commit yourself ‘These contracts have only just started in Britain and so far people have treated them cautiously,’ says Peter Hargreaves of adviser Hargreaves Lansdowne.
‘For the moment at least they are a solution looking for a problem.
People who are used to stock market investment do not seem concerned about risk and those who are worried over risk do not seem keen to put funds in the market.
‘But in America, these guaranteed equity funds have been enormously successful in the past three or four years, and I see can see that happening in Britain too.’
The funds certainly provide some protection for savers.
Brooks MacDonald Gayer has just launched a useful guide to the subject.
Copies are available by ringing 071–499 6424.
Family Finance: Fix a mortgage over your head
A SPATE of new fixed-rate mortgage schemes has appeared this weekend.
The Newcastle has launched a two-year scheme at 10.45 per cent.
National & Provincial wants a longer-term commitment.
It offers a new fixed-rate loan where people have to pay 10.6 per cent for five years.
Both rates are higher than those available earlier.
According to John Charcol, the mortgage broker, one or two schemes are still available, offering mortgages at a fixed rate of under 10 per cent.
But the bad news is that the schemes require a 10-year commitment.
Cheltenham & Gloucester and the Yorkshire are taking the discount route to drum up business.
C & G will give a fixed 0.5 per cent discount on its mortgage rate, but only for people who take loans of under 60 per cent of the property's value.
The Yorkshire is taking the same approach but also provides booster discounts that will cut the cost of a mortgage by 2.55 per cent for first-time buyers, but only for six months.
There is a matching 1 per cent discount for 12 months for borrowers wanting loans of more than £50,000.
GUINNESS Mahon Asset Management will be launching a £6,000 Peps plan investing in the European Growth and High Income units, once the new limits come in tomorrow.
Guinness Mahon is offering a discount of 1 per cent on the normal charge of 6 per cent for investments made by May 5.
Investors can take out a combination Pep, allowing them to choose the balance they want between the two plans, though they have to put at least £500 in each one.
The Prudential is also looking for extra Peps money.
People can opt for the group's Global trust, where only 50 per cent of the funds go into the UK, or for one of the UK-based unit trusts, or pick one of more than 200 shares on the Pru's list, or select a combination of both direct and indirect.
The Pearl Investor Confidence Index shows investors are slightly more optimistic than they were, the first time that has happened since November.
COLONIAL Mutual has just opened its range of Rainbow personal pensions to money people want to transfer from occupational schemes as they change jobs.
The funds have recently won three Micropal awards for best performance among smaller groups.
City Diary: Jackson's new brief breaks a solicitors' barrier
IF THERE ever was a man for all seasons it is the redoubtable John Jackson, whose posts include a board seat at electronics group Philips and the vice chairmanship of Ladbroke.
This week he adds yet another job to his blossoming portfolio with the chairmanship of Mishcon de Reya, the solicitor best known for its litigation and entertainment work.
As far as anyone knows this is the first time legal eagles have taken on a businessman as boss.
A barrister by training, Jackson's career has ranged from television to biotechnology.
Along the way came the rescue of the magazine, History Today, a long walk in the Himalayas collecting more than 2,000 seeds, and making his family self-sufficient in milk, eggs and vegetables on a London plot.
The Mishcon job came like a bolt from the blue.
City Diary: Roy's verdict on Captain Bob
ROBERT Maxwell killed himself.
So says ex-Daily Mirror editor Roy Greenslade in his book, Maxwell's Fall, due on April 27 from Simon & Schuster.
‘He died when the balance of his mind was temporarily undisturbed,’ quips Greenslade, whose conclusion will bring added comfort to Lloyd's underwriters who wrote a £20 million personal accident policy for Maxwell.
‘The sons, Kevin and Ian, will be the scapegoats, but there are an awful lot of people in the City who should be searching their consciences.’
Greenslade was dismissed from his Mirror post after barely a year, but denies any trace of sour grapes.
City Diary: Other ranks' rooms at Hamlyn inn
MILLIONAIRE publisher and Labour Party benefactor Paul Hamlyn has bought his wife, Helen, a bijou chateau south of Lyons.
The plan is to convert it into the ultimate upmarket hotel and haute cuisine restaurant.
But one problem surfaced days before the official opening.
They will have to provide the chauffeurs with somewhere to sleep and are having to build an extra wing.
City Diary: Great minds think alike
EACH-way election bets from Nomura's banking and insurance experts.
Mike Fesemeyer, John Tyce, Robert Haim and Trevor May reckon two shares to buy if Labour wins on Thursday are Willis Corroon and Standard Chartered.
If there is a hung parliament, two shares to buy are Willis Corroon and Standard Chartered.
On the other hand, if the Tories get back, two shares to buy are Willis Corroon and Standard Chartered.
City Diary: Singing the blues at Canterbury
TORY party at prayer?
Or an omen?
The anthem at Canterbury Cathedral on April Fool's Day was by Henry Purcell, whose Lloyd-Webber-adapted Abdelzar is John Major's campaign theme tune.
The anthem, Hear me, oh Lord, the great support, contains the memorable words: ‘Now to my prayers draw nigh fond men that would my glory stain, my government despise.’
It ends: ‘Lord, cast on us a favourable eye.’
City Diary: Take a tax holiday if Kinnock wins
PACK your bags this morning if you think Labour will win on Thursday.
So says accountant Robson Rhodes in its Guide to Pre-election Planning.
‘Absence from the UK for the period 5 to 10 April could be a first step to establish non-residence in 1992–93,’ it adds.
City Profile: Action Man at the action bank Derek Wanless, with a ‘classic C2’ background, has made a meteoric rise through the ranks to become the NatWest's chief executive at 44
By JIM LEVI
Can you visualise a Governor of the Bank of England who is a fanatical Newcastle United supporter, speaks with a Geordie twang and whose background is, in his own words, ‘classic C2’?
Derek Wanless is all of these things.
More important, perhaps, the newly appointed National Westminster Bank chief executive is very young — at least by the standards of clearing bank bosses.
Only 44, and with 16 years to go before the official NatWest retiring age, this is, he agrees, unlikely to be his last job.
‘How long it is right for both me and the bank to do the job is not something we are considering at present,’ he says, ‘but I would be surprised if I was still here in 16 years'; time.’
Wanless, the meritocrat whose late father was a storeman in a cement works on Tyneside, is something of a mould-breaker.
It is far from clear whether he should be congratulated on his sudden elevation.
For his predecessor, ‘Teflon Tom’ Frost, the job became a chalice poisoned by the Blue Arrow scandal, bad debts and recession.
Wanless is first to admit he has no quick antidote to the corrosive effect of falling asset values.
But undeterred, he can still visualise the enormous potential of a bank that even last year managed to make record operating profits of £2 billion, only to see ‘almost all of it swept away by debt provisions’.
His excitement at the prospect of exploiting that potential is palpable, though he has no illusions about current difficulties.
‘The reality is that property underpins the whole of the security base of bank lending,’ he says.
‘As a matter of policy, NatWest chose to shed market share in property lending in the late-1980s, but that did not protect us from bad debts.
Had we not pursued that policy, the position could have been worse.’
If some of the disastrous property lending was avoided, NatWest landed in trouble with many of its small business customers, where it outlends all the other banks.
And, of course, it was heavily hit by the Maxwell collapse.
The Wanless way out of trouble is to look at the detail.
‘My style has always been to be analytical,’ says the man who gained a double first in maths at King's College, Cambridge.
‘I have always looked at the numbers to find out what we are actually doing — to measure what is happening.
We need to analyse the components of the business and we cannot any longer assume that they will all naturally stick together.’
He says: ‘There is no place in the group for units that are subsidised or don't make the right sort of return on capital employed.’
All of them are now under review to make sure they are ‘in a particular market where we can win in the long term’.
The biggest question marks hang over the United States operation, Bancorp, and investment bank County NatWest.
John Tugwell, a rival to Wanless in the race to succeed Frost, wins diplomatic praise from his new boss for the way he has restored Bancorp to profit this year.
‘He has done an excellent job,’ Wanless says.
‘Since he went there the figures have shown a quarter-by-quarter improvement.
Because of our significant tax losses, the profits now being earned in America go straight through to the bottom line.’
There is a diplomatic silence over County NatWest, but chairman Lord Alexander of Weedonhas already put it on notice to make a profit this year — or else.
Naturally with the adrenalin flowing freely on his sudden elevation, Wanless is anxious to accentuate the positive in NatWest's core retail and business banking.
He reckons the bank has shown it can attract personal savings from building societies and is confident the new NatWest Life company, a joint venture with Clerical Medical, will reap rewards.
‘The banks have been giving away the savings market to the building societies since the 1950s,’ he says, ‘but we have now proved large numbers of people will save with us.
The volumes of savings by personal and business customers with us is now tremendous.’
Overriding everything else is the key issue of assessing credit risk.
Wanless says a computer can be programed to assess personal customers.
But in commercial lending there is, he insists, no escaping the ‘person-to-person nature of the transaction.
It is not about figures.
A lot of it is about assessing the character of the individual borrower.’
He says one lesson the bank has learned is the need to have better trained staff, ‘more aware of the business problems of the person on the other side of the desk’.
If there is surprise among outsiders at his rapid rise, within the bank it is seen as totally predictable.
One former colleague recalls working with him in the early 1970s: ‘Then he was very much one of the new breed.
Most of us left school at 16 with four O-levels, including art and needlework, but here was a high-flying Cambridge man.
The nice thing about him is his self-deprecating manner.
His intellectual ability was never pushed at you, yet he obviously had great potential.’
Mike Fesemeyer, a former colleague who now analyses bank shares for Nomura, says: ‘Even in the 1970s he was perceived as a future chief executive or at least one of the bank's fast track graduates.
The bank then had a grading system ranging from M1 to M10 and he was already by then on M5.’
The mutual love-in with NatWest began early.
The young Wanless, an only child who had been captain of the football team and head boy at his primary school, won a scholarship to Newcastle Royal Grammar School.
There, he excelled at maths and won a scholarship to Cambridge in 1967.
Finding himself with nine months to kill between school and university he cast round for a job.
Had he not been turned down by a local industrial company, things might have been different.
Instead Westminster Bank made him a junior at its Darlington branch: ‘I did all the jobs from making the tea to fetching the ledgers from the safe.’
Before he had finished he had become manager's clerk at the Newcastle branch and the bank had offered to sponsor him at university.
‘They offered two such scholarships a year as their way of getting the bank better known among schoolkids,’ he says.
‘They also offered me a job at the end of it, but there were no strings attached to the scholarship.’
His academic excellence at King's prompted an offer of a PhD course in operations research.
‘But I wanted to get out into the commercial world.
I had become more and more interested in the business world, going back to work at the bank in Newcastle during my vacations, so I was looking for a general business career.’
By then, Westminster had merged with National Provincial and Wanless was offered a new job working in market intelligence for another King's graduate, David Lomax.
His office was just along the corridor from where Wanless now sits in his ornately furnished chief executive's eyrie.
His career developed as a series of rapid advances.
When Roger Stubbs — now Bob Worcester's number two at MORI — left the market research unit, Wanless was put in charge at just 24, ‘an unheard of young age for a job like that’.
Through the 1970s, he was tested out as PA to the finance director, director of planning in domestic banking and lending manager in the City's Bishopsgate branch — and not found wanting.
By 1982, the bank sent him off for four months' study at Harvard Business School.
Then came the big leap forward: running the 50-branch network in his Geordie home patch.
‘That was an M8 job on the old grading scales,’ he reminds me.
‘When I went to Newcastle, I was 35.
Nobody had ever done that job at that age before.’
The rapid rise may suggest he is wedded to the bank.
But this is not entirely true.
He married hometown girl Vera in 1971 and she has borne him five children, including twins.
Their ages range between seven and 17.
He denies reports that he plays chess blindfold though he was ‘a reasonable player’ at school and university.
A touch overweight, he has abandoned playing soccer and squash for an occasional ‘very modest’ game of tennis.
Since he has only been a director since last May, Wanless is untainted by the strategic mistakes of the past regime.
Whether he avoids his own pitfalls must be open to doubt.
‘All I can give you at this stage is fine words when what is needed is action.
But I believe we can take the present collection of businesses and produce from them a very profitable bank.’
One leading businessman who sits on the NatWest board is in no doubt he will succeed: ‘My experience of bankers is they are a crusty bunch.
Wanless is an exception: good with people and pragmatic.
He has built a good team and has a wonderful opportunity and the will to see it through.
I would employ him in any position in my organisation at any time.’
Property: Mother, wife and mistress
By Glenys Roberts
CINEMA buffs may remember the film 10 about Dudley Moore's search for the perfect girl — the 10 out of 10.
Readers of this column will have concluded I have the same hang-up about finding the perfect house.
Imagine my excitement, therefore, when it seemed recently that I might have stumbled across it in the shape of the Tower House in Malmesbury, Wiltshire.
At first sight the house did not appear to be much.
Its front door opened on to an average Cotswold high street.
I was not about to make an instant bid for a terraced house with no immediate sex appeal.
Once across the threshold a change came over me, which was the stuff of true romance.
The back of this house looked over a lawn full of chestnuts and beech, through an avenue of espaliered pears next to a Beatrix Potter asparagus patch, down to the water meadows of the Avon.
There was a walled garden full of little nut trees and figs, a conservatory which ran the length of one wing, loose-boxes, and a private bridle path leading to the open countryside.
All this was set in just about one acre.
It was small but perfectly formed, as Dudley Moore is fond of saying of himself.
It is also a country house and a town house in one, or, as he might equally say, both a mistress and a wife.
What a saving of money and energy this might represent in a person's life!
Could any one house be sufficiently interesting to fulfil this dual role after the first flush of passion passed?
This one was full of reassuring surprises.
There was a well right in the middle of the dining room from which Charles I is said to have drawn water.
There was a glass cupola in the entrance hall reached from an attic suite with exposed beams.
There was a tower observatory built by a 19th-century doctor with a view of the entire surrounding town and countryside.
Even the vaulted garage was once a refectory where Henry VIII is supposed to have supped, no doubt stabling his horses in the adjacent Tudor coach house.
This house, full of perspectives and privacy, was shaping up as a mother, as well as a mistress and a wife.
It was a house I would have liked to have grown up in.
At this point I had one of those Proustian flashbacks about just such a place which I seemed to have known in childhood.
It was colonial and rambling.
It had belonged to a family during the American civil war.
It was set on the Potomac near Washington D C which, like Malmesbury in our civil war, changed hands several times during the American one.
My perfect house, the one I am condemned to search for just as the womaniser in 10 is condemned to search for his impossible mate, could only have existed in some fiction I had read — or in a past life.
It was not entirely by chance that soon afterwards I found myself discussing historic family houses in central London with my 90-year-old friend Monsignor Gilbey.
He reminded me that there were plenty in his early lifetime.
All along Park Lane they backed on to Hyde Park, and the whole space between the Ritz Hotel and Berkeley Square was taken up by just two very grand ones.
Even those of us who are keen to return the residents to London cannot turn the clock back to those days, but I recommend Tower House to someone who would like to see Malmesbury go more gently into the future.
At present there is planning permission to chop it into three, and garage eight cars.
What a pity that would be.
It is currently in the hands of a young family and, with an asking price of £385,000, it is surely not too extravagant a dream to hope it passes into the care of another one.
Tower House will never be grand but in this it is timely.
In my book it merits a rare eight out of 10.
Property: War on the home front Architects are mounting a counter-attack on ‘dull’ housebuilders, reports Jenny Knight
By JENNY KNIGHT
DURING the housing boom they used to say that the only contact an architect had with the design of many high-volume, speculative developments was to lay out the site so that the maximum number of little boxes could be squeezed in.
The week beginning April 13 has been designated by the Royal Institute of British Architects as Individual Homes Week.
It is clear that the architects intend to take their revenge for years of perceived slights by firmly nailing up the poor old builders.
Builders' standardised products are slated as boring and overpriced.
RIBA has even proposed staging a debate at its headquarters in London's Portland Place on the motion that ‘volume housebuilders give insufficient thought to design, leaving innovation to the designers of individual homes’.
Needless to say it has so far proved difficult to find any sacrificial lambs among the building trade.
The architects' case is that the volume builders could do far more to adapt their products to fast-changing markets than they have wanted, or needed, to do in the past.
Architect Max Hutchinson, a past president of RIBA, said: ‘We are told that people like the houses that volume housebuilders supply, but I don't believe it.
They buy them because that is all there is.
When new and innovative houses are built, like those at Milton Keynes Energy World, they are snapped up.
‘Housing made available by volume housebuilders has changed little in decades.
I can't believe people are really satisfied with living in out-of-date houses with out-of-date technology, which doesn't accord with patterns of family living nowadays.
‘People may have five televisions, one in each room, but acoustics have not changed in 40 years.
Cellular living accommodation — that is, individual rooms with doors — started when heating was a problem.
Open-plan living is no longer a problem, because we can control the environment.
‘If I was designing a one-off house, I would make acoustics a priority, because noise is one of the most harrowing problems of contemporary living.
‘Individual homes tend to be designed around the needs of a particular occupier, but we need iconoclastic houses to develop ideas.
Then we need to apply and interpret those ideas for volume housing.’
Clare Frankl, also an architect, disagrees with this last point and doubts whether volume building can be reformed by example.
‘The suggestion that innovation and change have to be led by those building individual houses is a dangerous notion.
It would not be reasonable to argue that Georgian London was a pale derivative of Georgian country houses.
It was a development of an urban form in its own right,’ she said.
This is not to say that she has much time for the developers' current products.
‘The generality of family houses being built have a fundamental flaw: the ratio of bedroom space to living space doesn't accord with the way people want to live.
In an average middle-class house, people convert the garage to a workshop and tack on conservatories and put sheds in the garden, so I think there is a misunderstanding about what they want.’
Michael Jones, president-elect of the National Association of Estate Agents, doesn't exactly endorse the architects' case, but he too is deeply critical of the volume builders.
‘They have built little boxes for many years, but some volume builders use outside architects so the finger must be pointed at architects as well,’ he said.
‘Some of the worst designs I have seen are by architects for themselves.’
David Goldsworthy, vice-president of the NAEA, added: ‘Volume housebuilders just chuck them up.
They get the plan out of their bottom drawer and say ‘this is a block we designed last week,’ stick a different name on it and hey presto!’
He added: ‘They offer goodies, like free carpets and washing machines, but there is no cupboard in the hall for the wet coats, the umbrellas or the Hoover.’
Of course, lectures from architects and estate agents will change little.
But market forces are now making the builders listen more.
In the US and most of the EC hardly any houses are built by developers who buy land, fill it with standard products and then try to sell them.
Instead, they offer plots on planned developments and — after a deposit has been paid — build a house very much more to the new owner's design.
This is starting to become a trend in Britain as well, although the planning system which encourages standard development is to some extent acting as a block.
Most young British architects have never seen one of their house designs actually built.
In America and other European countries it is the way they cut their teeth.
And the market researchers tell the companies more and more that their customers want something more tailored to their special requirements.
At a time when they can no longer persuade people to move by holding out the prospect of huge capital gains, perhaps the builders will take to design as a way out.
The Daily Telegraph Individual Homes Show is at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham from April 18 to April 21.
Details: 071–757 7523.
Property: The man who defies the market Tom Rowland meets the bullish City financier who has just bought Crosby Hall in Chelsea
By TOM ROWLAND
IS THIS the right time to invest in the property market?
Those on the brink of buying are mostly waiting until the election is out of the way before committing themselves to a new house, but City financier Christopher Moran thinks they are all wrong.
He is buying now.
Moran knows a bit about markets: he has a personal fortune estimated at £150 million, and he has just announced that he intends to spend £25 million converting a remnant of medieval London into a sumptuous family home.
It is a gesture of faith in the future on a scale that takes the breath away and confounds the gloom merchants.
And it is worth taking careful note of a man who has consistently read the markets correctly, avoiding debt and the pitfalls of the 1980s that caught out so many others.
‘I have always been counter-cyclical,’ says Moran, who made his first millions from aviation insurance in the late 1960s and backed the Boeing 747 when nobody else would.
‘I was buying in 1975 and 1976.’
He is not put off by the prospect of a change in government.
‘I've always bought when other people are squeezed and have got to sell.
I actually think the time is right in the next nine months to be buying a property.
You will be buying at far less than it will be worth in 1996 or 1997, when the inevitable upturn means you will see a big capital appreciation.’
The object of his attention is Crosby Hall in Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, overlooking the Thames.
It boasts a banqueting hall with one of the most prized scissor-beam roofs in the country.
Moran bought the freehold of the site from the Government four years ago and since then has been involved in delicate and at times heated negotiations to take possession from the leaseholder, an educational charity, the British Federation of University Women.
The charity currently uses Crosby Hall as an international student hostel and headquarters.
The main hostel has 60 bedrooms and will make an enormous mansion, but its stone mullioned windows and Tudoresque red brick front are deceptive.
With the exception of the banqueting hall it was built in the early years of this century by the Edwardian architect Walter Godfrey.
The medieval section has been moved from its original site.
In 1910 the great hall with its spectacular painted oak and chestnut roof and vaulted stone oriel was transplanted from Bishopsgate in the City of London to Chelsea, to save it from demolition.
The project was masterminded by Godfrey, then aged 29, and made his reputation.
He went on to become the first director of the National Monuments Record, the body that catalogues the most important buildings in country.
It is the medieval section of the building that Moran has fallen for.
‘I could die for that ceiling,’ he says.
‘My purchase of Crosby Hall is outside my normal commercial activities.
I bought it with my conservation hat on, and think it is well worth doing.’
He has the distinction of being among Britain's 100 richest men, and also of being the first man to be kicked out of Lloyd's — in 1982 for ‘discreditable conduct’.
One-time golden boy of the insurance market, Moran started in 1965 as a 17-year-old broker's assistant, and had a Rolls-Royce and chauffeur by the age of 22.
Lord Goodman, Moran's long-time friend and legal adviser, said: ‘I am sure he will look after Crosby Hall and take advice.’
Moran says he has the best collection of medieval furniture in private hands in the country, and he wants the hall to set it off.
He specialises in the period between 1500 and 1675 and is also keen on art: last year he bought a Van Dyck from Althorp when the Spencers put it up for sale.
Crosby Hall was built by Sir John Crosby, a wealthy grocer and wool merchant, and was completed in 1475.
The hall had a sparkling past in its City location.
It survived the Great Fire intact and between 1621 and 1638 was the headquarters of the East India Company.
Sir Walter Ralegh had lodgings there in 1601.
Sir Thomas More owned it for two years, although he probably never lived there.
But in 1483 Richard of Gloucester, later Richard III, is supposed to have been in residence when he first heard news of the murder of the princes in the Tower.
During the 19th century, however, it fell on hard times, and was turned first into a warehouse and then a restaurant.
An ugly modern extension obscures part of the Godfrey building at present and Moran says his architectural consultants have advised him to apply for permission to remove it and replace it with a gatehouse.
‘It should look rather like an Oxford college by the time we are finished,’ he says, although he emphasises that no alterations will be made before full permission is granted by the planners.
That is just as well.
One of his neighbours will be Jocelyn Stevens, the new chairman of English Heritage, the body charged with making sure that alterations to listed buildings are in keeping.
Moran already owns the Glenfiddich estate in Aberdeenshire, and says he spent £2.5 million on the renovation of one room in the 18-bedroom castle there.
Crosby Hall will give him an additional 30,000 sq ft of living space.
‘I like big houses,’ he says.
Property: Visit America-on-Thames
By TOM ROWLAND and CHRIS PARTRIDGE
PLYWOOD TOWN.
The British tend to sneer at American house-building methods.
Little boxes, all made out of ticky-tacky, we sneer, even though that song was written by an American, Tom Paxton.
The American Plywood Association is aiming to correct that impression by building a village of timber-framed houses in south east London.
Britain is a major market for US plywood — about a million cubic metres of the stuff comes across the Atlantic every year, nearly half of all the plywood we import.
The village will be a huddle of 100 American-style houses designed by Wigfall Group Practice, a firm already well known for its addiction to timber-frame construction.
The designs show houses shaped like school set squares, with one high wall and a roof swooping almost to the ground.
This allows some spectacular spaces within, with rooms soaring into the roof space in a way that American architects have designed for years.
The construction will be a showcase of new methods, including such exotic creatures as glulams (glued laminated beams) and LVLs (laminated veneer lumber).
Another feature will be single wall construction, using a simple timber cladding without a brick facing.
Fears have been expressed that timber cladding could suffer from Britain's cold and damp climate, but the location on the south bank of the Thames estuary at Thamesmead should test the method to extreme: in winter the fog rolls in directly from Denmark.
Timber-frame construction is, however, naturally energy-saving, and the Thamesmead houses have been designed to maximise the heat available by pitching as many roofs as possible to the south, and placing rooflights strategically to let in the heat of the sun, according to Geoffrey Wigfall of Wigfall Group Practice.
The scheme develops ideas tried out at Urbanbuild in Swansea, also sponsored by the APA, completed two years ago.
‘Urbanbuild produced low-cost, high quality public housing — an attractive combination,’ says Dennis Hardman, the director of information services at the APA.
‘Because 15 per cent of building costs were saved at Urbanbuild by using timber frame instead of brick and block, better quality housing could be built for the same money.’
Energy costs are low as well, Hardman claims, with the average energy costs of an Urbanbuild home running at £5 a week last winter, compared with £20 a week in the smaller concrete flats nearby.
The Thamesmead development will include 100 low-cost houses and flats, workshops and retail units.
The scheme will be self-financing, the APA hopes, and negotiations are under way with a developer and a housing association.
GLORY IN THE GARDEN.
Behind the Victorian faades of Earlham Street and Shorts Gardens in London's Covent Garden, a major building project has transformed a city block into a complex of new flats, offices, shops and a theatre.
It is the kind of ‘big’ development that is very out of fashion with the money men at present, and it is unlikely that we will be seeing anything on this scale started in the next few years.
So savour it while it is still new, because the developers have had the conservationists looking keenly over their shoulders during the building work, and everything has been done in the best possible taste.
A great deal of money has been spent conserving a block of less-than-distinguished Victorian slums and warehouses.
But the result, the Thomas Neal Centre, sparkles and ought to be a great success; as a development it works well.
The block is shaped rather like a slice of cake, with its narrow point on Seven Dials and the two sides radiating outwards.
The 15 homes include three maisonettes, two studios and nine bigger flats, as well as a substantial town house.
Prices range from £100,000 to £335,000 for 99-year leases.
The aim has been to combine the old architecture with new building that relies on traditional materials and a degree of craftsmanship.
So real slate has been used for the roofs, York stone for the internal shopping court, and crafted plasterwork for the ceilings.
The retained Victorian warehouses still have their cast iron columns, and external brick walls with arched windows, while the shop fronts and internal stairs are in a lighter, Art Nouveau style.
At the heart of the development a new glazed roof stands over the two-level shopping area.
Atria of this sort tend to give shopping a Disney World flavour, but at least here it is in line with the latest shopping mall design ideas, with intimate spaces, winding allies and an element of unpredictability.
It opens at Easter.