

Bridge champion dies
By PATRICK JOURDAIN
RIXI MARKUS, the world's best-known woman bridge player, has died, writes Patrick Jourdain.
With Fritzi Gordon, who died last month, she formed the world's most successful women's bridge partnership.
They won four world titles for Britain: the women's pairs in 1962 and 1974, the mixed teams in 1962 and the women's teams in l964.
The highly excitable pairing of Fritzi and Rixi became known in the bridge world as Frisky and Bitchy.
The first woman to become a world Grandmaster of bridge, she was bridge correspondent of The Guardian and author of a dozen books including her autobiography, A Vulnerable Game.
She was made an MBE for her services to bridge in 1975.
Mrs Markus was born Erika Scharfstein on June 27, 1910, in what is now Romania, and spent most of her early life in Vienna.
She represented Austria in the first European Women's Bridge Championship of 1935 (winning it, and the next in 1936).
She fled to Britain the day Hitler entered Vienna in 1938.
She became a naturalised Briton in 1950, winning the European women's teams championship for Britain seven times from 1951 onwards.
Letter to the Editor: It's not cricket to attack Yorkshire
GEOFFREY Wheatcroft wants Yorkshire County Cricket Club to be punished by further lack of success for employing overseas mercenaries (March 29).
Surely it is the fact all the other counties have gone down the same road that has persuaded Yorkshire that, in order to compete on equal terms, they must follow suit.
The decision to fall into line was not made for ignoble reasons, but from financial necessity.
Members and supporters brought up in the pre-1968 glory days are mostly content to support the White Rose despite their lack of success.
Unfortunately these supporters are increasingly watching matches played between their old heroes on the Elysian Fields.
Young members can only be attracted to a team that realistically and consistently challenges for honours, not because the team is composed entirely of Yorkshiremen.
The administration of Yorkshire is now in good hands, expertly led by Sir Lawrence Byford and chief executive Chris Hassall and shortly by a committee which will be reduced by half to cut the waffling and dissent.
With a professional director of cricket and coaching staff installed, Geoffrey Wheatcroft can look forward with confidence to seeing guileful bowlers called Patel or Singh playing alongside future Smiths and Joneses.
Geoffrey Holmes Idle, Bradford, W. Yorks.
Letter to the Editor: The Welsh tribe of Argentina
I am surprised that Trevor Grove, in his feature ‘Argentina Revisited’(March 29), did not mention the strong Welsh-Argentine connection, which is totally distinct from, and unrelated to, the Anglo-Argentine link.
As a Welshman, I have visited the Welsh Gwladfa or Colony in Patagonia.
As Welsh-speakers, we have a special rapport with the Welsh of Y Wladfa — who are bilingual in Welsh and Spanish — and many in Wales have relations and friends there.
During the war over the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas in Spanish and Ynysoedd Malfin in Welsh) we too had a ‘kith and kin’ situation: rather different and more poignant than the more well-known situation between the English-speakers of London and those of Buenos Aires and Port Stanley.
Imagine how we felt when we heard talk, on the BBC, of the possible intention to bomb Puerto Madryn (Welsh: Porth Madryn), named after Love Jones Parry of Madryn — which is a small village, some three miles from where I live and am now writing.
Sadly, our voice went unheard at the time.
A version of the history of the Welsh emigration to the Chebut Valley is taught in schools throughout Argentina.
Thus, all Argentinians are perfectly well aware of the distinction between los Galeses (the Welsh) and los Ingleses (The English).
Rightly or wrongly, it is the latter whom they regarded as the enemy during the war of 1982.
And, rightly or wrongly, we Welsh find ourselves completely absolved — in the eyes of the people, if not in that of officialdom.
We found it most refreshing.
Robyn Lewis Gwynedd.
Albany at Large: Encore
By KENNETH ROSE
THE National Art Collection Fund has every reason to be pleased with itself at having given £250,000 of the £10 million needed to acquire Lord Cholmondeley's Holbein, Lady with a Pet Squirrel, for the National Gallery.
It is a repeat story.
In 1909 the NACF was determined to keep another equally lovely Holbein, The Duchess of Milan, in the country.
It had originally been sent to King Henry VIII to tempt him into marrying the girl-widow.
But the Duke of Norfolk wanted £72,000 for it — rather more than £2 million in today's currency — and the money had to be raised within a month.
It proved a close-run thing.
On the day the portrait was to be exported to a private gallery in the United States, an Englishwoman telegraphed from a resort in Germany offering to make up the balance of £40,000.
So it went to the National Gallery.
She laid down only one condition: that her name should never be revealed.
It remains a secret, though it is said to be passed on from chairman to chairman in a discreet whisper.
Election Comment: Albany at Large: Bring back Tebbit THERE is just time for the Tories to take the direction of the election out of the hands of a lot of Central Office schoolboys and to make Norman Tebbit their supremo.
I do not want to see the election lost on the playing fields of Eton.
It is scarcely possible that the most incisive speaker and planner should have had to drive himself up to Newcastle for a meeting the other day — and in a car without a telephone.
Albany at Large: Queen's cousin to be canonised
By KENNETH ROSE
AN AUNT of Lord Mountbatten, murdered by the Bolsheviks in 1918, is to be canonised in the summer by the Russian Orthodox Church.
She is Elizabeth, known in the family as Ella, a daughter of Louis IV, Grand Duke of Hesse, and of Princess Alice, Queen Victoria's second daughter.
Born in 1864, she was at one time wooed by the future Kaiser William but instead married the Russian Grand Duke Sergei, assassinated by anarchists in 1905.
His widow withdrew from the Imperial Court and founded a religious order for the relief of the poor and the sick.
That did not prevent her from being thrown down a mineshaft to her death in 1918.
A priest, Father Seraphim, managed to retrieve her body and brought it to Jerusalem via Peking, Shanghai, Hong Kong, Colombo, Bombay and Port Said.
In Jerusalem the remains were received by her sister, Princess Louis of Battenberg, the mother of Mountbatten, and buried in the Russian church on the Mount of Olives.
The last Tsar, the Tsarina (another sister of Ella) and their five children have already been canonised as martyrs by the Russian Orthodox Church in exile.
But this is the first time that the official Russian Orthodx Church, freed from the restraints of communism, will have canonised a member of the Imperial family.
How Lord Mountbatten would have relished adding a saint to the other family honours he proudly displayed.
Motor Racing: Mansell injured in Senna tangle
By Timothy Collings
NIGEL MANSELL was taken to the circuit medical centre at Interlagos suffering from shock and minor injuries after tangling with his old rival, Ayrton Senna, and crashing heavily in the last minute of an incident-filled final qualifying session for today's Brazilian Grand Prix.
The Briton, who claimed pole position and again set the pace in his Canon Williams Renault FW14B, attempted to pass Senna's new Marlboro McLaren Honda MP4/7A on the outside of the tight and slow Bico de Pato curve.
As Mansell, 38, attempted to overtake, Senna moved wide to his left as he took the racing line in approach to the corner, forcing the Englishman to career wide and then off the circuit.
Mansell locked his brakes up and span off, his car turning backwards and colliding into the wall at about 75mph in a cloud of debris which included his right front wheel.
Mansell, clearly in pain, was then helped from his car and stood doubled up on the edge of the track before being escorted away to the medical centre for a lengthy check-up.
The first news of his condition was that he was winded, bruised and in shock, but likely to be passed fit to race today.
Senna, who made no contact with Mansell's car, escaped unscathed from the incident, which may have seriously diminished Mansell's hopes of a third successive season-opening triumph here this afternoon.
Not only was he shaken and upset by the accident, but, worse for him, his favourite race car suffered severe damage on a day when the Marlboro McLaren Honda team endured a series of setbacks to their own hopes.
Mansell's pole, secured by the outstanding lap he produced in opening qualifying on Friday, was the 20th of his career and his third in succession this season.
Assuming he is fit, he will again share the front row of the grid with his Williams team-mate, Riccardo Patrese.
The Italian managed to improve his Friday time to 1min 16.894sec, but was still left 1.1sec adrift of Mansell's record pole lap of 1–15.703 on the 2.687-mile track at an average speed of 127.799mph.
Senna, who improved his time by 1.4sec, finished up third quickest and will share the second row of the grid with his McLaren team-mate, Gerhard Berger.
Both men, however, had to suffer a day of ups and downs — including two engine failures in the morning on their new ‘high-tech’ MP4/7A race cars — before they found the pace in the afternoon.
Michael Schumacher was fifth fastest in his Camel Benetton Ford and shares the third row of the grid with Jean Alesi's Ferrari F92A, ahead of Martin Brundle in the second Benetton and Pierluigi Martini's Dallara Ferrari.
Johnny Herbert, struggling for grip with his Lotus Ford, squeezed on to the back row of the grid in 26th position.
Boat Race: Oxford launch power surge
By GEOFFREY PAGE
CAMBRIDGE made a magnificent effort in the 138th Boat Race to break Oxford's long run of successes but lost one of the most outstanding duels in the history of the event by 1½ lengths.
A close contest between two evenly matched crews had been predicted and so it proved in conditions that were considerably better than had been anticipated.
With Max Justicz calling the toss wrongly, Jo Michels unexpectedly chose the less fancied Middlesex station for Oxford.
That this was clearly a tactical decision quickly became apparent.
Cambridge struck 38½ to Oxford's 40 in the first minute and despite the Light Blues having the better of the tide, the crews were level at Beverley Brook.
Oxford were warned for their steering on the inside of the bend at Craven Cottage, the first of several warnings given by umpire Roger Stephens.
Liz Chick, the Oxford cox, gave way and Cambridge took a narrow lead, though the crews were again level at the Mile.
The water here was turbulent but the crews held their form well.
Both coxes were warned again at the Crab Tree, where Cambridge began to show in front.
At Harrods, Gardiner looked to be rowing a little short forward and Cambridge shot Hammersmith Bridge possibly a few feet ahead.
There was no flag at Hammersmith, so it was difficult to judge who was leading from the launch.
With both at 33, Cambridge began to draw ahead with the advantage of the long Surrey bend.
It was here that Oxford began to show their true worth.
The Light Blues had a half-length lead at the Old Ship but with Gardiner setting an excellent rhythm, and with Davy, Maclennan and Bridge backing magnificently, Oxford were holding on in flat water.
The crews were still rowing well but as Cambridge's bend began to end, Oxford drew level again.
It was beginning to look ominous for the Light Blues, as the final bend favoured Oxford.
Oxford, at 34, with coach Pat Sweeney urging them on from the Oxford launch, began to assert their full power off Duke's Meadows, drawing ahead while Cambridge, at 35, began to look vulnerable.
They had looked to be a one-pace crew in practice and it seemed as though they had no answer to Oxford's attack.
Oxford led by nearly a length at Barnes Bridge, though they could not get away.
Bangert kept Cambridge going, but his cause was becoming desperate.
Oxford, now at full steam, were not going to be caught, eventually crossing the line, at 36 to Cambridge's 35.
There was clear water between the crews.
Boris Mavra, Oxford's Yugoslavian three, was so exhausted that he had to be lifted out of the boat, though he recovered quickly.
With the crews overlapping until the last few minutes of the 4¼-mile race, it had been a gruelling test for all.
But there was none of the bad feeling that marred last year's contest at the end of the race and each crew cheering the other.
Much credit is due to both crews for maintaining their form so well in a race which went much as expected, with Ian Gardiner's excellent rhythm probably proving decisive.
It was a great triumph for Gardiner, a Scot who learnt his rowing at Oxford and was brought into the crew in last month of training, while Cal Maclennan, in his third Boat Race, and Peter Bridge, in his second, were outstanding.
Cambridge, in comparison, looked metronomic and lacked the power through the water to counter Oxford's punch.
Both coxes steered well and the blades did not appear to touch but the youthful Chick probably won the battle against Cambridge's Andy Probert.
Justicz commented on Oxford's ‘very nice’ rhythm and felt the Dark Blues had been able to capitalise whenever Cambridge had not been at their best.
He felt that Cambridge were knocking a little harder at the door each year but it will still need something special to break Oxford's hold on the race.
Oxford have now won 16 of the last 17 races, and have taken the Beefeater Gin Trophy for the sixth year running.
The overall score is 69 to Cambridge, 68 to Oxford.
Cambridge can take heart from Goldie's substantial victory over Isis.
Their reserves, stroked by last year's president, Richard Staite, led all the way.
They won in the same time as that recorded by Oxford half an hour later despite being warned three times for their steering.
BOAT RACE.
— Intermediate times: Mile Post, 3min 56sec; Hammersmith Bridge, 7.5; Chiswick Steps, 10.57; Barnes Bridge, Oxford 14.43, Cambridge 14.46; Finish, Oxford 17.44, Cambridge 17.48.
Verdict: 1½ lengths.
Reserves' race: Goldie beat Isis, 3¼ lengths, 17.44.
Motoring: Renault's tough cookie cool enough to handle RAY HUTTON drives Safrane to Zurich
By RAY HUTTON
PRAGUE to Zurich promised to be a better-than-average test drive for a new model.
The Renault Safrane presents itself as an executive express, so this was an appropriate exercise, involving poorly-surfaced roads in Czechoslovakia, the smooth by-ways of Austria and Switzerland, and Germany's limit-free autobahns.
To make the car, and us, work a bit harder, last week there was snow through most of the 550 miles; at first wet, then settled and frozen, and later a veritable blizzard.
The Safrane, successor to the Renault 25, did well.
If it could feel confident and secure in these conditions it should be fine for year-round Britain.
It will be the autumn before it gets here, available in five versions, with either 3-litre V6 or 2-litre four-cylinder engine.
The likely price range is £17,000 to £25,000.
Such opulence looked out of place on the streets of Prague, where the riches are in the historic architecture — and the best of that, sensibly, is in a traffic-free zone.
Not that there is much traffic.
The streets of Prague are like London in the early Sixties, an idea sustained by the old-fashioned local cars — the ubiquitous rear-engined Skodas and the chauffeur-driven Tatras.
The Safrane made light work of the uncrowded road to the beer-producing town of Pilsen.
The main hazards were wandering, overloaded trucks and the similarly erratic movements of youngsters learning to drive, not in cars but on tractors complete with driving school insignia.
There was frozen snow on the mountain pass at the border with Germany.
There is a four-wheel-drive Safrane Quadra but we didn't have one and it won't come to Britain, at least not initially.
Front-wheel drive with summer tyres was OK, driven carefully.
The smooth progression of the Safrane's controls helped and once again we confirmed the value of an anti-lock braking system.
A little bright relief on the autobahn around Munich allowed the Safrane V6 to show its paces.
That it will reach 130mph was no surprise but to do so with so little fuss and noise was impressive.
On the Bavarian country roads that followed, there were high marks for the suspension system, which in the V6 models has dampers which automatically adjust their stiffness with the driving conditions and air springs that maintain an even keel.
On these more expensive versions the steering's power assistance also varies with speed but there were times when this felt a touch too sensitive.
The cheaper versions have simpler power steering.
The four-cylinder 12-valve engine also remains quiet, except for a boom at around 5,000 rpm.
Fortunately, this corresponds to 110mph in top gear so it is unlikely to be an irritation on a British motorway.
Less impressive is the performance of the optional automatic transmission.
The example that I tried changed gear with a jerk and was too eager to change up as I slowed down.
This is the first big Renault with a transverse engine.
The company were among the first, post-war, to use front-wheel drive for larger cars.
In the 1965 Renault 16 the engine was placed behind the gearbox.
Later, for the 20 and 30, the motor was moved ahead of the front axle.
Others manufacturers saved space by scaling-up Alec Issigonis's plan for the Mini, with the engine mounted cross-ways.
Georges Douin, Renault's chief of all things technical, says that their turning point was in 1985.
‘I went to the Tokyo Motor Show and looking around realised that most of the new big cars were front-wheel drive and nearly all had transverse engines.
We decided to make the change.’
Douin saw advantages in component supply as well as the potential to provide the car with more space and less noise and vibration.
The major task involved was to re-design the transmissions to fit the small space alongside the engine.
Renault's new partners, Volvo of Sweden, faced the same problem at the same time, needing a new gearbox for their new 850 GLT (which goes on sale here next month).
In 1986 engineers of the two companies tried to reach agreement on a shared transmission.
They could not.
Ironically, now that Renault and Volvo are part of a greater alliance they are seeking to use some of the same components in their two, separate gearboxes.
In one way, the association with Volvo dictated the kind of car that the Safrane is.
The Ford Granada has shown that customers in this class prefer a separate luggage boot to the undeniably more practical hatchback.
Renault feel comfortable with the hatched style that they started with the 16 and developed into a smooth aerodynamic shape with the 25.
The hatchback also keeps them away from the big Volvos.
Renault explain: ‘Our aim is to have the best car in this class from a generalist manufacturer.’
In other words, to challenge the Granada and Carlton rather than BMW, Mercedes — or Volvo.
If the objection to a hatchback is that it means more noise in the cabin, the Safrane is an exception.
It is certainly the quietest and most refined of the ‘generalist’ group.
This is a major step forward from the Renault 25, a car that was good with a V6 but coarse with the smaller four-cylinder engine.
Its interior was spacious but the trim stark, hard-edged plastic.
The Safrane has more room and softer, better furnishings.
The Renault 25 was big on gadgets.
Safrane has even more.
Most are useful and work well but I am not convinced of the value of a pictogram that shows the direction of airflow in the cabin, nor do I wish to have a reprimand from a stern-sounding lady if I don't close the door properly.
Fortunately, she can be turned off.
The important bits — volume and tuning — of an astonishingly complicated stereo system can be operated from a convenient remote control on the steering column.
A display at the top of the dashboard tells you what you have selected: radio, cassette, compact disc.
It also gives the outside temperature, which in our case rarely exceeded zero.
Golf: Woosnam unnerved by latest loss of form
By Michael Williams
AFTER another limp performance in the third round of the Freeport-McMoran Classic at English Turn yesterday, Ian Woosnam, who defends the Masters next week, said he was seriously considering sending out an SOS for his coach, Bob Torrance.
Woosnam lost ground with a 73 and admits that he is ‘not in the groove at all.
I do not know what is wrong but I don't feel right’, he said.
He will, however, not make up his mind whether to fly out Sam Torrance's father, who he has not seen for six months, until after today's final round in New Orleans, where he is also the defending champion.
‘It could be that I have had some new shafts put in my clubs’, Woosnam pondered, ‘and they are too stiff.
But something is wrong.
At the moment I am just making up the numbers.
Nick Faldo, on the other hand, was well satisfied with his round of 69, just a couple of bad iron shots, though he thinks he knows the reason.
He has also got a good routine going with his putting now that his caddie, Fanny Sunesson, has stopped crouching down behind him before he putts to make sure he is aiming in the right direction.
This is, of course, a time of smokescreens so far as the Masters is concerned and to hear some of the Europeans talk over the last few days, they appear to be in need of the psychiatrist's couch as much as anything.
Steve Richardson, who had a 72 yesterday, says he is giving himself no chances at all on the greens, Severiano Ballesteros has temporarily lost his iron play, Jose-Maria Olazabal (74 yesterday) his driving and Sandy Lyle and Montgomerie, both of whom missed the cut, their confidence.
None of the five surviving Europeans were in the hunt as Chip Beck suffered an unexpected collapse.
Four strokes ahead at the turn he was suddenly in trouble and overtaken by Jeff Maggert, who had a three-stroke lead with two to play.
Form is a durable thing.
When Lyle won the Masters in 1988, he did so immediately following another victory at Greensboro.
When Woosnam won last year, it followed closely his first American victory here in New Orleans, the jazz centre of the world.
The tournament then was under different sponsorship on a different date.
Two other tournaments intervened before the Masters and one of them at Houston was washed out with hardly, in cricketing terminology, a ball being bowled.
It has been better weather this year, if rather chilly at times.
The fat cats of the American tour have stayed away, including in financial terms, the fattest of them all, Fred Couples.
He understandably carries the burden of expectancy in the States, winner of two of his last five tournaments and, in one of those he did not win, a course record 63 in last week's Players' championship.
Nonetheless, his main rivals all appear more likely again to come from overseas than they do from America.
What Lyle, Faldo twice and Woosnam can do in successive years has broken whatever invincibility the home players thought they had.
However, the Ryder Cup is back in the States and if the match were ever extended to, say 24 players, instead of 12, then I have not the slightgest doubt that America would win every time.
Their batting still goes a lot deeper.
Faldo, Ballesteros and Olazabal seem to me to have much the best chance of maintaining Europe's monopoly.
When I arrived in America two weeks ago, I would probably have reversed that order.
Playing evidence now suggests otherwise.
The whisper is that Faldo has not been saying too much about how well he is playing for fear of tempting fate.
There has, nevertheless, been time to watch him and he appears to be hitting shot after shot pretty well exactly where he wants it.
Only the number of putts he holes varies.
Ballesteros, too, is already smelling the azaleas, the important factor with him being that his short game is razor sharp.
His driving, suspect in the Players' championship, has also improved.
I have seen less of Olazabal because, for some reason, I do not find him an easy player to watch.
Everyone knows how good he is, or nearly is, but somehow he remains a more remote figure.
Bernhard Langer, who has steered clear of New Orleans, is keeping his cards close to his chest while the best the rest can hope for is a high enough finish in order to be invited back next year.
Lyle, as a former winner, has no worries on that score.
But nothing much has happened this year that suggests he is about to start firing.
One must not, however, dwell overmuch on the Europeans.
Apart from Couples, there is Payne Stewart, Tom Watson, Mark O'Meara, Davis Love and, for the hell of it, Raymond Floyd, all good Americans all showing signs of form.
Golf: Canizares on brink
JOSE-MARIA CANIZARES is poised to become the fourth Spanish golfer to pass the £1 million European prize winnings mark after a 69 in the wind-buffeted Rome Masters third round at Castelgandolfo.
Canizares, 45, second and fourth on his last two tour outings in the Catalan and Portuguese Opens, is the only player under par on 212, four under, and is five strokes clear of the field as he attempts to emulate the millionaire feats of Severiano Ballesteros, Jose-Maria Olazabal and Jose Rivero.
His nearest challenger for the £37,500 first prize, which would push his official winnings since 1971 to £1,020,545, is Scotland's Bill Longmuir, whose 75 for 217 included a triple-bogey seven at the 10th.
PAUL PAGE, 20, of Langley Park, won the first major amateur prize of the season when he took the Berkhamsted Trophy in a sudden-death play-off with Matt Maguire after both players recorded one-under-par totals of 141, writes Bill Meredith.
Page had been forced into the play-off after dropping a shot at the ninth, his last hole, but edged home at the second extra hole with a par three after Maguire's ball had landed in heavy rough at the back of the green.
At one stage it looked as if Gordon Hotson, of Sleaford, would put in a severe challenge, but after being five under in his second round he slipped back to a 69, finishing a stroke behind the leaders.
BERKHAMSTED TROPHY: 141 — P Page (Langley Park) 69, 72; M Maguire (Drayton Park) 72, 69.
Page won sudden-death play-off.
142 — G Hotson (Sleaford) 73, 69; J Good (Shirley Park) 72, 70. 143 — T Trodd (Langley Park) 71, 72; M Stanford (Saltford) 69, 74; S Graham (Ham Manor) 72, 71. 144 — D Lee (Wanstead) 71, 73; C Tingey (Mid Herts) 72, 72.
Golf: Cagey Faldo runs into form at right time
By Michael Williams
IF THE PLAN has been for the Europeans not to show their strongest hands in the Freeport-McMoran Classic at English Turn, which takes its name from one of the sweeping bends in the Mississipi River, much has gone according to plan.
With the exception of Sandy Lyle and Colin Montgomerie, the other five still all made it with varying degrees of comfort into the final 36 holes.
Severiano Ballesteros was best placed, though even he was eight strokes behind the tournament leader, Chip Beck.
Beck had a miserable round in The Players Championship last week but he confessed it helped him in his charging 65, one off the course record.
‘I shot 81 last Saturday,’ he said.
‘That taught me a lot.
It was tough on me.
It seasoned me.
It will help me be stronger.’
To listen to the Europeans talk, they would all appear in need of similar introspection before they descend on Augusta National for the main business of their trip, the Masters, which begins on Thursday.
Ballesteros says he has lost his iron play; Jose-Maria Olazabal his driving; Ian Woosnam, Nick Faldo and Lyle their putting; Steve Richardson his zip and Montgomerie his game altogether.
Some of it is genuine, some of it all a smoke-screen.
This week, each will be hoping to move up a gear for the first of the year's major championships, even if Augusta do still insist on calling it a tournament.
Nonetheless, form is a durable thing.
When Lyle won the Masters in 1988, he did so immediately following another victory at Greensboro.
When Woosnam won last year, it followed closely his first American victory here in New Orleans, the jazz centre of the world.
The tournament then was under different sponsorship on a different date.
Two other tournaments intervened before the Masters and one of them at Houston was washed out with hardly, as would be said in cricket, a ‘ball being bowled’.
It has been better weather this year, if rather chilly at times.
The fat cats of the American tour have stayed away, including, in financial terms, the fattest of them all — Fred Couples.
He understandably carries the burden of expectancy in the United States, being winner of two of his last five tournaments and, in one of those he did not win, having a course record 63 in last week's Players' Championship.
Yet his main rivals all appear more likely, again, to come from overseas than America.
What Lyle, Faldo twice and Woosnam did in successive years has broken what ever invincibility the home players thought they had.
However, the Ryder Cup is back in the States and if the match were ever extended to, say 24 players, instead of 12, I have not the slightest doubt that America would win every time.
Their batting still goes a lot deeper.
Faldo, Ballesteros and Olazabal seem to me to have much the best chance of maintaining Europe's monopoly on the Masters.
When I arrived in America two weeks ago, I would probably have reversed that order.
Playing evidence now suggests otherwise.
The whisper is that Faldo has not been saying too much about how well he is playing for fear of tempting fate.
There has, nevertheless, been time to watch him and he appears to be hitting shot after shot pretty well exactly where he wants it.
Only the number of putts he holes varies.
Ballesteros, too, is already smelling the azaleas, the important factor with him being that his short game is razor sharp.
His driving, suspect in the Players' Championship, has also improved after consultation with David Leadbetter.
I have seen less of Olazabal because, for some reason, I do not find him an easy player to watch.
Everyone knows how good is he is, or nearly is, but somehow he remains a more remote figure, both on the course and off it.
There have to be doubts about Woosnam because he has shown so little of the form of which he has been capable in the past.
Bernhard Langer, who has steered clear of New Orleans, is keeping his cards close to his chest, while the best the rest can hope for is a high enough finish in order to be invited back next year.
Lyle, as a former winner, has no worries on that score.
But nothing much has happened this year to suggest he is about to start firing.
One must not, however, dwell too much on the Europeans.
Apart from Couples, Americans like Payne Stewart, Tom Watson, Mark O'Meara, Davis Love and Raymond Floyd have all shown signs of form.
It could well be that an Australian will win for the first time.
Greg Norman has had his chances and failed to take them, but Ian Baker-Finch, the Open champion, or Craig Parry might do better.
Golf: Masters challenge open to outsiders
Chris Plumridge on the prestigious American event that appeals to the Europeans
BACK IN the bad old days when home-bred Open champions were a rarity, it was said that British golfers didn't win because they regarded the event as something special, while the Americans regarded it as just another tournament on the circuit.
The same theory could now be applied to American golfers in their quest to win the Blue Ribband of American golf, the Masters.
The tournament has been well and truly annexed by the British for the past four years, and the form book still favours a non-American winner this time.
However, it doesn't matter who you are, for if you have an ounce of history in your soul you cannot help regarding the Masters as something special.
It is a superbly-run event staged upon a sumptuous golf course, and although it is the youngest of the four major championships, it has built itself a tradition founded on the legendary career of Bobby Jones.
Thus it is that the Masters and Augusta are always spoken of in reverential tones, each contestant being made to feel that he is walking on hallowed ground in close communion with the saints of the game.
The Masters Committee itself does nothing to dispel the feeling that the event is something special.
It is still referred to as a tournament rather than a championship, which reflects a kind of inverted snobbery.
Television advertising is strictly monitored, there are no banners or hoardings around the course and the committee decides the terms on which players are invited.
This last point should make the Masters less forbidding in terms of achieving victory, for the field assembled is far smaller than that which gathers every week on the US Tour.
But this, too, works in favour of the Masters' mystique.
‘Gee,’ says the inexperienced Masters contestant, ‘I only won the Paduca Classic and here I am driving down Magnolia Drive to the Masters.
This is something special.’
He then expends so much of his emotional energy wallowing in the aura that when the gun goes for the start there's nothing left of the real thing.
Purely in competitive terms it is probably just as difficult to win the Paduca Classic or any other US Tour event as it is to win the Masters.
Any player who wins a US Tour event should feel himself equally capable of winning the Masters, but first he has to lay the ghost of history, which pervades every hole on the course.
Unless a player is totally without imagination, then he cannot fail to be aware of what has gone before as he makes his pilgrimage round Augusta.
It is doubtful whether any other golf course, with the exception of St Andrews, has been written about so much, photographed so lavishly and expanded upon so frequently.
This analysis occurs annually regarding the nature of the course, the key holes and the previous dramas.
This very continuity should work to the advantage of the regular US Tour competitors.
There is nothing penal about Augusta's design — there is no thick rough off the edge of the fairways or around the fringes of the greens, the bunkering is minimal, the fairways generous, and although there is a fair sprinkling of water hazards, it is certainly no more than the players come across practically every week on the Tour.
What sets the Masters and Augusta apart is the psychology of the tournament and the course.
When Bobby Jones and Alistair Mackenzie designed the course, they could have scarcely envisaged what a shrine it would eventually become.
What they did realise was that their grand design must afford an acceptable challenge for both the average player and the accomplished player.
Furthermore, the accomplished player must be able to produce golf of an exceptional quality to receive the reward for his skills.
Finally, and unwittingly, they created nine holes that would tax any player to the utmost.
I say unwittingly because originally the second nine was intended to be the first, but this was changed and thus gave the second nine its water-strewn flavour.
So the psychology of the course was created and this has been integral to the development of the tournament.
When a player is presented with these psychological problems there are two ways he can overcome them.
He can approach them with a devil-may-care swashbuckling attitude, hitting every shot flat-out, going for every putt and disregarding the historical precedents.
Or he can adopt a clinical approach, hitting out the best line from every tee to give the best angle onto the green, taking note of all the historical precedents and prudently heeding them.
Into the first category would go Sam Snead, Arnold Palmer and Severiano Ballesteros, while into the second would go Ben Hogan, Jack Nicklaus and to a slightly lesser extent Nick Faldo.
Palmer and Hogan probably epitomise the extremes of the two approaches, and in their differing ways contributed greatly to the legend of the Masters.
In recent times Nicklaus probably did more than any player in sustaining the aura of Augusta.
He was never a precise golfer in the mould of Hogan, but his magnificent tactical management enabled him to calculate the exact odds in moments of high tension.
Even when he was not striking the ball well, he still posed the biggest threat.
The inexperienced Masters' contestant therefore has to contend not only with the aura of the Masters but with the aura of Jack Nicklaus.
Faced with these twin assaults on his ego it was hardly surprising that many players were found wanting.
Yet for all the theories put forward about the qualities required to win the Masters, it provides one of the best opportunities for a rank-and-file player to win a major title.
Occasionally, such a player realises this and finds he has the nerve to win the tournament, just as he had the nerve to win the tournament that took him to Augusta in the first place.
So the Masters' honour roll contains such unlikely winners as Art Wall, Gay Brewer, Bob Goalby, George Archer, Charles Coody and Larry Mize, all of whom have failed to win another major title.
Snooker: Hendry has final say
By JOE LANCASTER
STEPHEN HENDRY extended a season's unbeaten record over world champion John Parrott in the Benson and Hedges Irish Masters semi-final at Goffs, County Kildare, writes Joe Lancaster
His 6–4 win, his fifth of the season over the Liverpudlian, gave him a psychological advantage for the World Championship at Sheffield.
They are seeded to meet in the May 3–4 final.
Parrott, Merseyside's sportsman of the year, ran into trouble in only his second visit to the table, cannoning off black and knocking down the red.
In the second game, when attempting to smash a pack of reds, he knocked the black off the table.
The outcome was a two-frame deficit as Hendry compiled 47 and 73 breaks.
His best effort came in the decider.
From 37–1 down he had a 64 clearance to pink and Parrott said afterwards.
‘That was the best clearance I've ever seen.
I would have put my mortgage down on Stephen not making it.’
The miss rule that has dogged the game all season struck again in the third.
Parrott, snookered behind green, was called four successive times by referee John Williams for a missed red.
To his credit, Parrott ignored the 16 points loss and nibbled away to put a game on the scoreboard by a 73–48 margin.
Hendry missed a red three times from a snooker in the sixth and lost by eight points as his rival levelled.
Their situation was different to Friday's quarter-final, when Steve Davis missed three times in a row at 4–4 and lost the frame and match to Ken Doherty.
The six times world champion could see a full ball and the standard miss rule was applied for a forfeited frame.
Hendry, winner of six titles this season, shrugged off the setback and won three of the next four frames for his first Irish final in three years.
He was pleased with his performance and said: ‘I am playing well but I am lacking a little bit of killer instinct.’
Dubliner Doherty, 22, faces Hendry in today's final over 17 frames for a £42,500 prize.
The young Irishman reached his career second final by beating world No 8 Mike Hallett 6–1 in 84 minutes.
Showjumping: Overdue victory for Beerbaum
By Alan Smith
LUDGER BEERBAUM, the German Olympic team gold medallist, and the eight-year-old Almox Classic Touch fought a gruelling duel to beat Holland's Piet Raymakers, on Optiebeurs Ratina, in the season's last qualifying round of the Volvo World Cup in Gothenburg, Sweden.
Only these two, both mares, from a field of 34, went clear in the first round and then Raymakers, who had scored earlier in the day on Rinnetou, had to go first against the clock.
With a treble which had caused major problems in the first round included in the jump-off course, Raymakers could not afford to go at racing pace but it certainly looked hot enough to give his rival something to think about.
When Beerbaum and Classic Touch won the Everest Grand Prix at the Horse of the Year Show last October, they had the only clear round in the jump-off.
Yesterday, once again, she never looked in danger of making a mistake and her rider was able to push her along fast enough to win by more than three seconds.
Surprisingly, considering how successful he had been, this was Beerbaum's first victory in a World Cup qualifier, ‘though I have been second more times than I know’, he added.
This also made him the winner of the European League of the World Cup, with the final in Del Mar, California, on April 15–19 as his next major task.
The 11-fence course was not an inspiring one.
Only two horses apart from the jump-off duo were able to get through the treble without fault.
Sweden's Maria Gretzer, on Marcopille, was one but they had the next fence down and were among 10 sharing third place with four faults.
Britain's Tina Cassan, on Genesis, was the other, lowering three later fences.
Nick Skelton, on Everest Major Wager, and Geoff Billington, with Rhapsody, had their only fault at the treble and were also among the thirds.
Although Classic Touch and Ratina disproved the old prejudice against mares, John Whitaker had a less happy experience with Dollar Girl.
Yachting: Koch steering into trouble
By Tim Jeffery
FOR those who say the America's Cup cannot leave San Diego soon enough, Gary Jobson, the American television pundit, has this message: ‘If the defenders' final trial is between Dennis Conner and Bill Koch, Conner will win and the cup will stay in San Diego.
If it's a final between Koch's two boats, the cup will leave.’
In three weeks' time, we will know if Conner has made the final with his solitary Stars & Stripes, or if Koch's multi-boat, dollar-rich campaign has succeeded.
And in six weeks' time, we will know if the cup will remain with San Diego YC, or go to Italy, New Zealand, France or, less likely, Japan.
At the moment, Koch has the upper hand.
Although he is a newcomer to sailing and the America's Cup, he has created a huge syndicate of 200 people and spent a staggering £1.4 million per month on his camapign for the past year-and-a-half.
Koch has mounted the most intensive and sophisticated intelligence gathering operation in the cup's history, even resorting to tailing previous employees, like Jobson.
His huge technichal team have given Koch four yachts, the last two of which, America and Kanza, are clearly faster than Conner's Stars & Stripes.
‘We know Bill's got a couple of fast boats over there,’ concedes Conner, a six-time cup veteran.
A round of modifications has speeded up Stars & Stripes for the fourth round of trials.
But he needs more speed.
When Bill Koch's latest boat, Kanza, halted Conner's run of four wins, it was evident Conner can only win by superior sailing not superior speed.
‘There just weren't the windshifts to give us leverage,’ Conner admitted.
‘Kanza had the longer legs.’
But Conner's search for more speed continues.
Revolutionary seamless sails, formed in one piece in a 3-D mould, in place of conventional sails sewn or glued from numerous panels, are expected to used on Stars & Stripes soon.
At the moment, however, Conner is waging a psychological war against Koch, who, despite his achievements, is the greatest weakness — as a helmsman — in the America syndicate.
Koch has a intense desire to steer his own boat in an America's Cup defence.
Yet whenever he has steered in the defence trials, his helmsmanship has proved deficient.
Not even his crew know when he wants to take the wheel.
He simply taps his helmsman, multiple world champion Buddy Melges, on the shoulder and says: ‘Are we far enough ahead for me to steer yet?’
Testing times for the old safety net
By RUSSELL DAVIES
MY SON has a very good memory for songs and snatches gathered in passing from radio and television, and can reconstitute these with sometimes startling accuracy.
One of his specialities is a droning refrain, performed I think some years ago on one of those Saturday morning comedy-pop-and-hobbies programmes for children, in which a long-haired tennis-player with a head band gives out with his sporting autobiography.
This emerges in the form of a dreary Swedish mantra along the lines of ‘He tried to beat mee, but I beat heem, and so I won Weembledon for the first time.’
It then bores on in this vein until our hero — Bjorn Borg, unmistakably — has won Weembledon for the fifth time consecutively.
At which point the lyrics make an exciting switch to: ‘I tried to beat heem, but he beat mee…’ and so on.
How the thing finished is not recalled; but if it was true to life, it simply came to an abrupt and inexplicable halt.
Borg's disappearance from top tennis, like Harold Wilson's withdrawal from government a few years before, constitutes one of the great resignation puzzles of modern times.
One can put up all kinds of contributory explanations for it, but none seems central enough to be convincing.
Borg had enjoyed what he may well have considered an unrepeatable run of success; perhaps he thought it was all downhill from there.
He had also married Marina Simionescu in 1980, a partnership dissolved four years later and enshrined in between times by what now appears a very sad little book, Love Match, Mariana's ‘belated wedding present’ to her husband.
It's a book in which euphoria and anguish mingle uncomfortably.
The idea of writing it, Mariana says, struck her ‘a few days after that wonderful ‘love doubles’ in London, when I played with Bjorn against Chris Evert and her husband, John Lloyd.’
The Lloyds won that encounter, though love deserted both partnerships in the end.
It may be that Borg realised quite soon that family life was not going to carry him through the great silence left behind by his renunciation of that terrible drug, competitiveness.
At all events, he attempted comebacks twice, in 1982 and 1984; they failed to ‘take’.
Tennis was changing rapidly, not least in the technology of its implements and the surfaces of its playing area.
Borg, with his great sweeping topspin shots, had virtually invented a new game; now the equipment was being changed to cope with it.
Every time he came back, he was playing the new game with increasingly outdated tools.
At the beginning of his latest resurrection, he was still insisting on wooden rackets, which, flattering though it was to the Cambridge stockists who were able to supply him, made Borg look a little like something out of an Ealing Comedy.
He might just as well have stipulated long white trousers.
But with persistance that is at least recognisably characteristic of him, Borg seems still to be pressing on.
This week we read of him losing to an unranked Swede who virtually apologised after the match, explaining that Borg had been the reason for his getting into tennis in the first place.
Then Borg and Lloyd, ghosts from the ‘Love Match’ of long ago, were reported as having lost to a pair of teenagers young enough to be their sons.
Borg said afterwards that he and Lloyd were just getting the feel of the game when they lost it.
In a way, there is no terrible indignity in this — it is not the tennis equivalent of Randolph Turpin's sordid tour of the halls as a wrestler — but even so, it is difficult to see what Borg is aiming to get out of this renewed struggle.
His best result of recent days was to win a tie-break set in the course of losing to Nicolas Pereira.
No doubt he sees this as a stage in his learning to win again, but all the time, he is learning instead to derive small satisfactions from losing — a skill he will have discarded some time before he won the Weembledon (he really did pronounce it like that) Junior Championship, all of 20 years ago.
Borg's role model, or rationale, is presumably his old rival Jimmy Connors, who is, after all, nearly four years older.
But Connors has taken no serious breaks from the game and its stylistic progress; his game in itself has durable, idiosyncratic features (whereas Borg's became the prototype on which newcomers based their own playing patterns); and he has been able to take his audience along with him through the very gradual decline in his competitive expectations.
He no longer expects to win major tournaments but he settles for creating a noisy sensation in going as far as he can go.
The all-American claim that You Can Be Anything You Want To Be is an obvious fraud, but while Jimmy Connors is on court, you can believe it.
It sounds unkind, but nothing of the sort was ever remotely true of Borg.
It may be the case — I hope it is — that Borg has always been a much happier man than he has seemed, and that his resumption of his old trade is more a matter of idle curiosity about himself than it is a neurotic search for lost identity.
But on the face of it, Borg is preeminent within that small category of sportsmen — they are almost invariably men, because women are at least offered an alternative role by Nature — whose existence seems entirely bound up with their success.
You simply can't imagine how it will turn out for them when, for one reason or another, they stop winning.
Nigel Mansell is one example, though Mansell's metabolism, once released from the horrors of his competitive life, seems to revert to such extreme placidity that it is possible to picture him living out his days as a happy family man and manager of his own investments.
With Nick Faldo, another of the type, one cannot be so sure.
There seems to be a lot of anger locked up in a sense of competition that he apparently directs first and foremost against himself; and it is clear that his endless tampering with his swing must have at least as much to do with mind-control as with bodily mechanics — either that, or Faldo has a very perverse and forgetful body indeed.
The new entrant in this category, and one who interests me a lot, is Fred Couples.
Here is a man who strides about purposefully, hits the ball a long long way, and looks at first sight like a competitor capable of a certain bumptiousness.
But what we learn from interviews, now that Couples is enjoying a run of success that some see as likely to culminate in the Masters title, tells another tale entirely.
His speech-making capacities, in terms of their rhetorical drive, match those of Peter Sellers' zombie President in Being There.
In himself, Couples has the potential to displace Borg at the top of the pyramid of Great Baffled Victims of Success.
But of course, Couples hasn't had that outstanding a career, so far.
And he is also happily married to a woman with her own sporting interests — different ones, chiefly polo — and the organisational temperament he apparently lacks.
So Couples has a safety-net in place.
Borg, meanwhile, is still falling.
Rugby Union: England Colts now following footsteps
Wales Youth 18, England Colts 29
ENGLAND'S Colts emulated their seniors for the first time in three seasons at the Parc de Pugh in Brecon by toppling the Welsh Youth in no uncertain fashion.
In lock Craig Yendell, of Bath, and No 8 Richard Hill, of Salisbury, England had forwards of immense potential while half-backs Gary Becconsall (Bristol) and skipper Paul Burke (Loughborough University) were smooth operators.
Another impressive performance came from left-wing Darren O'Leary.
England led by 14–10 at the interval through tries by O'Leary, Nick Smith (Northampton) and centre Jason Keyter (Harlequins) plus a Burke penalty goal to which Wales replied with two penalty goals from full-back Ian Jones (Camarthen Quins) and a try by Allnut.
The visitors forged further ahead with second-half tries by flanker Ian McNerlin (Bristol and RAF) and lock Gavin Webster (Northampton) to which Burke added a penalty goal and two conversions while the Welsh response was two tries from Wainwright.
Rugby Union: Barnes and Bath have final laugh PILKINGTON CUP SEMI-FINALS
By John Reason
Gloucester18 Bath27 BATH reached the final of the cup for the seventh time in nine years when they scored two tries in the last five minutes of extra-time at Kingsholm and Stuart Barnes converted both of them from the touchline.
That flurry produced a result which bore no resemblance to most of what had gone before.
The match had reached full-time with the scores level at 15–15, and when Gloucester hacked upfield after Bath had botched an attacking move in extra-time, Clarke, the Bath No 8, was so far offside you almost needed a telescope to see him.
Smith, the Gloucester full-back, kicked that goal and when Barnes pulled an easy kick at goal wide of the Gloucester posts early in the second half of extra-time, the cheers were those of the Gloucester crowd who thought their team had won.
Bath had already scored one try from an attacking scrum in the first half.
Rolled passes do not impress the purists, or stop the opposition, but Gloucester were slow to see the threat of Swift coming across field and when Guscott took Barnes' pass, Swift appeared outside him with the powerful Fallon overlapping on his left.
Fallon still had a bit of work to do, even then, but he had already bumped off Perrins and Hannaford with one uncompromising run and this time his strength buried the rest of the Gloucester defence and took him over for a try in the corner.
Barnes had been given the bird for an earlier kicking failure but he converted that try with such a fine kick that he felt entitled to make an equalising gesture to the crowd.
Bath worked an almost identical move from a scrum near the end of the match.
Morris, the Gloucester left wing, did not move to cover Swift as he sprinted across again from the right wing, so Swift was left with such a clear overlap when Guscott and Fallon gave him the ball that he was able to score unopposed.
Again, Barnes converted with a flourish and Bath knew they had won.
That was not the end of Gloucester's misery.
Just before the end, their fly-half Matthews kicked badly out of defence.
That gave Webb an easy catch and it gave him the time to see that Bath would have a man over if he ran the ball to the left.
That he did and that they had.
This time Fallon was the man over and he took Guscott's pass to score his second try.
Once again Barnes produced the salt rub with his conversion.
Rugby can be a cruel game.
Gloucester lost a lineout at the beginning of the match, and Ubogu, the Bath prop, took the ball on the peel and drove through the middle.
Gloucester were offside at the ruck and Barnes kicked the goal.
A penalty goal by Smith after a lineout barge and a goal nicely dropped by Matthews from the short side of the scrum, briefly gave Gloucester the lead.
Bath regained it with Fallon's first try but just on half-time Smith kicked another goal when Clarke was penalised at a ruck.
Barnes kicked two more penalty goals to put Bath 15–9 ahead in the second half but Gloucester fought back and drew level again with two more goals by Smith.
The second was a remarkable effort.
He hit the right post with a penalty kick and the ball bounced almost square to the left.
It must have been within inches of the goal because when Swift collected the deflection, he was running along his own goal-line for dear life.
Swift is normally the most phlegmatic of characters but he was in such a state of fluster on that occasion that he missed touch and found Smith instead.
Calmly the Gloucester full-back lined up his kick and dropped a soaring goal from 40 yards.
Gloucester: T Smith; J Perrins, D Caskie, D Cummins (M Hamlin 28), S Morris; N Matthews, M Hannaford; P Jones, K Dunn, R Phillips, N Scrivens, D Sims (P Miles 40), P Ashmead, I Smith (capt), S Masters.
Bath: J Webb; A Swift, P de Glanville, J Guscott, J Fallon; S Barnes, R Hill; G Chilcott, G Dawe, V Ubogu, M Haag, N Redman, D Egerton, A Robinson (capt), B Clarke.
Referee: C Rees (RFU).
Rugby Union: Rich pickings for Pears and Quins
By John Mason
Harlequins15, Leicester DAVID PEARS and John Liley mopped up all the points in a dog's dinner of a Pilkington Cup semi-final at the Stoop.
As Pears, the faithful England reserve who covers outside-half and full-back, claimed a try, conversion and three penalty goals to Liley's try, conversion and penalty goal, Harlequins, the holders, move on to the 1992 cup final across the road at RFU headquarters on May 2.
Leicester, who were without Dean Richards in the final period because of injury, were trailing 15–3 with an hour gone.
At that late stage they abandoned a kick-and-chase policy and began moving the ball.
The Quins, previously at ease, fumbled and fretted in defence but held on.
Leicester, scoring only once more despite concerted attacks, were left to ponder on what might have been.
There was an early welcome-back embrace for Coker, the Wallaby, from Richards, England's No 8 — shades of the World Cup final back in November.
Nor was it too friendly, a fact duly noted by the flag-waving touch judge.
Referee John Pearson was not impressed either but he waved play on and instead was intent on punishing a Leicester offside as they came piling round in search of the loose ball.
The penalty goal was firmly struck by Pears, rather more accurately than a series of baseline rallies in which, in current vogue, putting the ball to touch was not permissible.
Most of the better things, such as they were, involved the persistent Pears, playing only his second club match of the season, at outside-half.
Penalty goals two and three from him duly followed to counter one from Liley for the Tigers.
That established a tidy 9–3 lead, which Pears decided was insufficient.
From scrambled possession at the back of a line-out by Winterbottom, an industrious leader, Pears jinked left and right, adding a couple of half-dummies for good measure.
Leicester's tacklers, unwisely, were keeping anxious eyes on Carling and Halliday in midfield as Pears measured his options.
A pass to the line opened up and the outside-half ended beneath the posts for the try.
He added the conversion points from in front — a happy first half of 15 points for him and his club.
The only blots for Pears were two drops at goal that flew wide.
In truth, though, the Quins were not hugely tested by a Leicester side interested in the main in kicking for position.
Ironically, when Leicester did run at the opposition, the previously secure Quins looked vulnerable.
The tactical change coincided, remarkably, with the departure of Richards.
The Achilles' tendon which had been bothering him for weeks finally gave out amid a sympathetic cheer and a great forward ambled to the sideline and out of the match with an hour gone.
Povoas was the deputy at No 8.
Within 10 minutes Leicester were in full cry for the distant try line.
Boyle cleverly kept the ball in play on the right-hand touch, Rory Underwood came in to midfield from his wing and sharp accurate passing allowed Leicester to exploit an overlap on the left.
Full-back Liley strode into the left-hand corner for a splendid try and there was still a man to spare.
Liley had no problems with the conversion from the touchline and suddenly here was a match both of quality and drama.
There was no further reward in points for Leicester, however, because they could find no way through the Harlequin wall.
But a great deal of Tigerish pride was regained as Quins, oddly subdued up front for much of the second period, hung on for victory and another appearance at Twickenham.
Harlequins: S Thresher; M Wedderburn, W Carling, S Halliday, G Thompson; D Pears, R Glenister; M Hobley, B Moore, A Mullins, N Edwards, T Coker, M Skinner, P Winterbottom (capt), R Langhorn.
Leicester: J Liley; T Underwood, I Bates, L Boyle, R Underwood; G Ainscough, D Grewcock; S Redfern, C Tressler, D Garforth, M Johnson, M Poole, J Wells (capt), N Back, D Richards.
Referee: J Pearson (Durham).
Rugby Union: Pepper tries add spice to Nottingham survival fight
By Mark Salter
Nottingham34 Rosslyn Park9 TEARAWAY flanker Martin Pepper provided the spice for Nottingham with a hat-trick of tries and a vague mathematical chance of staying in Courage League One next season.
The Midlanders have been eating humble pie this season, though they deserve better fare.
Perhaps, though, it was Pepper's display which exposed some of their deficiencies for the impetus was created and maintained almost exclusively by the forwards, who dominated the lineout and drove magnificently.
Rosslyn Park, going backwards constantly and finding their defence overrun, inevitably conceded penalties, the first of which came in the fourth minute.
Guy Gregory put over a total of 18 points, including the first dropped goals of the season for Nottingham, though he did miss four other chances.
The visitors came back into the game with two penalty goals by Graves and could have turned ends 9–9 had he been successful with his third penalty goal on half-time.
Five minutes after the restart Pepper broke from a maul on the 22-metre line and dashed to the corner to score.
If that was not enough, Park lost flanker Matthew Hill with a groin injury and brought on second-row forward Stephen Foulds, forcing a reshuffle in the pack.
They were to lose Foulds 15 minutes later with a neck injury as well as their No 8, Tony Brooks, which left the Courage League One stragglers struggling with 14 men in the closing stages.
Pepper was in no mood for mercy, however, and in the 58th minute he broke free from a maul, went inside Graves and, with Moon hanging on, crashed over near the post for Gregory to convert.
Although Graves pulled three points back with a penalty goal, there was no let-up as Gregory put over the second dropped goal of the season.
Pepper was on hand, as always, to take the pass from Kilford's fine break down the left for his third try under the posts and seven minutes later he cut through some dispirited defence to provide the scoring pass to wing Richard Byrom.
Gregory had no trouble with the two conversions.
For Nottingham to survive, however, they will have to beat title-chasing Orrell at home and Northampton away — tasks which, for all their spirit, may prove too much.
Nottingham: W Kilford; R Byrom, S Potter, C Jones, M Walker; G Gregory, J Hughes; M Freer, J Hudson, A Everett, C Gray (capt), D Hindmarch, M Greenwood, M Pepper, J Wilby.
Rugby Union: Llanelli run into form after Parry error
By Edward Bevan
Pontypool3 Llanelli27 AN ERROR by Arwel Parry eight minutes into the second half which allowed Wayne Proctor, the Llanelli left wing, to score the first try, changed the course of the game.
The Schweppes Cup holders went on to score 24 points in 17 minutes.
Parry had attempted a quick drop-out from his 22 but the kick was charged down by Boobyer.
Proctor gathered the rebound and scored in the corner.
A penalty goal apiece were the only scores of a scrappy and disjointed first half with neither back division able to escape the attentions of the opposing back rows.
Pontypool's spoiling tactics nullified Llanelli's attempts to play open rugby with Moon and Stevens, the visitors' half-backs, constantly under pressure.
Llanelli were indebted to Tony Copsey, who won an abundance of ball in the middle of the line-out, while the young Scott Quinnell, son of Derek, had a storming game at No 8 and looks destined to play international rugby.
Pontypool were constantly penalised for their indiscretions, especially in the scrums, and despite the return after 10 weeks of Dean Oswald, their Kiwi No 8, they were unable to win any worthwhile possession.
Parry kicked a penalty after three minutes before Stephens replied for Llanelli.
Both missed with other attempts before Stephens made amends in the second half, landing another three penalties and kicking three conversions.
Stephens converted Proctor's try with a massive kick from the left-hand touchline and, within the next 10 minutes, kicked two further penalties to stretch Llanelli's lead to 15–3.
The first penalty was after the Pontypool front row had scrummaged illegally and the other when Taylor had handled in a ruck.
Llanelli's second try was initiated by Boobyer, whose break was supported by Lyn Jones, a constructive open-side flanker who scored near the posts, Stephens converting.
Pontypool were now in disarray and when they attempted to move the ball near the opposition's 22, Nigel Davies intercepted to run 70 metres and score his side's third try which Stephens again converted.
Pontypool: A Parry; S White, R Lewis, G Lintern, S Hanson; D Phillips, C Jonathan; A Dibble, N Meek, L Mustoe, G Taylor, F Jacas, C Huish (capt), M Spiller, D Oswald.
Llanelli: H Williams; I Evans, N Davies, N Boobyer, W Proctor; C Stephens, R Moon; R Evans, D Fox, L Delaney, P Davies (G Jones 69), A Copsey, E Lewis, L Jones (M Perego 78), S Quinnell.
Referee: G Simmonds (WRU).
Rugby Union: Bridgend lines of supply starved
By David Green
Newport9 Bridgend4 AN EXCELLENT display by Newport's pack, the highlight being Kevin Moseley's line-out work, starved Bridgend of possession at Rodney Parade and cleared the home side's path to the Schweppes semi-finals.
Though Newport's forwards dominated the early exchanges, Bridgend had the first scoring chance, when Orrell tackled Webbe high, but Gareth Thomas was well short from 56 yards.
Llewellyn's long, diagonal punt soon put Newport back into Bridgend territory.
Bridgend prop Shaw came over the top at a ruck but Harries pulled his penalty attempt across the posts and five minutes later missed a sitter when the referee reversed a penalty originally awarded to Bridgend.
Pressure told, however, and Richard Jones banged over an angled penalty goal for a line-out barge by Prosser.
Newport, well served by Moseley and Waters at the line-out and also by their back row, were looking increasingly confident.
Only a fine cover tackle from Apsee stopped Harries from scoring after clever play by Withey, George and Waters, but from the ensuing line-out Withey stole Bridgend's throw and drove over, Jones converting splendidly from the touchline.
Winning a little more possession in the second period, Bridgend attacked through their backs, bringing some fine defence from Withey and George.
Yendle and Westwood also made important tackles on Webbe and Gareth Thomas respectively.
Newport began to show signs of tension, Orrell tackling David Thomas late as he pursued his own high kick, but Gareth Thomas hooked his penalty attempt past the left post from 37 yards out.
Owain Williams led a Bridgend drive from a line-out and when Newport were penalised for off-side a swiftly-taken tapped penalty and deft passing gave Gareth Thomas the space to round his man and score wide out.
At the other end, Jones missed a penalty awarded against Jenkins for illegal use of the boot.
Bridgend threatened a try when Williams released Gareth Thomas but Newport's well-marshalled defence again held firm.
Newport: R Jones; A Harries, R Bidgood, K Orrell, J Westwood; M Yendle, D Llewellyn; F Hillman, A Peacock, M Sibthorpe, K Moseley, D Waters, A Carter, G George (capt), K Withey.
Bridgend: D Thomas; G Webbe, J Apsee (capt), G Thomas, P Jones; C Barber, R Howley; L Gerrard, L Phillips, R Shaw, J Jenkins, G Prosser, S Bryant, D Bryant, O Williams.
Referee: R Yeman (Port Talbot).
Rugby Union: Old Boys given the push
By Mark Evans
Pontypridd35 Cardiff HSOB15 CARDIFF HSOB's aim to become the first Welsh junior club to reach the semi-final stage of the Schweppes Cup failed just as all previous attempts by minnows had done.
Pontypridd, whose lone cup final appearance in 1978–79 ended in an 18–12 defeat against Bridgend, were very much on their guard for the unexpected, having only scraped through 12–10 against renowned giantkillers Tondu in the previous round.
It was, eventually, their forward power that told on the Old Boys, with New Zealander No 8 Dale MacIntosh conspicuous in a constructive back row.
Scrum-half Paul John was in outstanding form as he ignited attacks in broken play, while a 19-point conribution from Wales outside-half Neil Jenkins proved crucial to the final result.
Old Boys locks David Phelps and Mark Trigg managed to achieve parity at the line-out, but it was the set scrum which proved to be their Achilles heel.
Pontypridd shunted Old Boys back 10 metres, when two of the junior club's forwards detached themselves from a scrum 20 metres out.
When scrum-half John moved the ball, he burrowed his way over to open the scoring in the 15th minute.
As Pontypridd gained the upper hand in the forward exchanges, Jenkins crossed for two tries to give the home side a 19–3 lead at half-time.
When John, Mark Rowley and Jonathan Mason all crossed for tries to send Pontypridd into a 35–3 lead, midway through the half, it appeared as if the Old Boys would be sunk without trace.
But they struck back in the last 10 minutes with tries by their flanker Andy Williams and scrum-half Howard Evans.
Pontypridd: J Mason; D Hughes, J Lewis, R Sheppeard, P Harries (G Jones, 75); N Jenkins, P John (capt); N Bezani, P John, M Powell, M Dicks, M Rowley, J Burnell, G Owen, D McIntosh.
Cardiff HSOB: I Samuel; J Payne, A Martin, S Hopkin, D Walters (R Mynott, 50); C Cormack, H Evans; D Williams, A Thomas (capt), S Hedges, M Trigg (D Lockyer, 60), D Phelps, A Williams, G Emyr, S Hurley.
Referee: R G Davies (Dunvant).
Rugby Union: Llanelli run into form after Parry error
By William Gray
Dunvant6 Swansea14 SWANSEA reached the Schweppes Cup semi-finals for the third successive season and the 10th time in all as they battled home against their Second Division League neighbours.
The All Whites, staying on course for a First Division and cup double, were only 10–0 up at half-time with a stiff breeze behind them.
Dunvant, whose ground was opened by Swansea nearly 20 years ago, at least had the satisfaction of holding their own after the interval.
Swansea, who had scored seven tries against Pontypridd the previous week, were restricted to two tries, the first from flanker Richard Webster, a former Dunvant player.
An estimated 4,000 crowd, with some being accommodated on the top deck of four double deck buses, saw Dunvant give everything in a spirited display.
Swansea, with six of their 10 internationals in the pack, kept the opposition's forwards under pressure but, led by captain and prop Richard Llewellyn, Dunvant held firm.
But in the last minute of the first half they gave away a penalty for going over the top at a ruck and Aled Williams, the Swansea outside-half, made no mistake from 20 yards to establish a 10–0 lead.
The visitors scored again in the 61st minute, a sweeping move rewarded as Williams timed his pass perfectly from about 30 yards for full-back Anthony Clement to score.
Swansea, whose lead was cut by two penalties by outside-half Mark Thomas, strove to move the ball again in the last 10 minutes with lock Paul Arnold and replacement Ian Davies, at flanker, being checked just short of the line.
Davies had come on when Swansea scored their second try to take over from flanker Alan Reynolds, who had a foot injury.
Dunvant were left to lament lost chances.
Full-back Huw Davies failed to take a scoring pass 20 yards out early in the second half and Thomas failed with four penalties, the first two against the wind.
In contrast, Williams put over two of his four to book Swansea a place in the semi-finals.
Dunvant: H Davies; P Farnworth, C Hutchings, W Lloyd, N Bolton; M Thomas, M Gallagher; M Waygood, D Morris, R Llewellyn (capt), D Crane, M Jones, C Butler, R Greenwood, P Morris.
Swansea: A Clement; C Higgs, K Hopkins (capt), T Michael, B Taylor; A Williams, R Jones; D Joseph, G Jenkins, K Colclough, P Arnold, R Moriarty, A Reynolds (I Davies 61), R Webster, S Davies.
Referee: C Thomas (Brynamman).
Rugby League: Shambolic Saints ease Wigan's path
By Michael Crossley
Warrington30 St Helens18 ST HELENS, the only remaining challengers to Wigan's serene progress towards their third successive championship, almost handed the title to their historic rivals by producing a shambles of a performance against struggling Warrington, who had lost four of their last five games.
This stunning defeat means that if Wigan win at Featherstone this evening they will require just one point from their remaining three matches.
Saints, who have a rare capacity for exasperating their supporters when hopes are highest, saved their worst performance of the season for this crucial game.
They were dreadful, lacking organisation and committing a succession of hair-raising blunders.
They lost despite the fact that Warrington were reduced to 12 men five minutes into the second half.
Their scrum-half Kevin Ellis was sent off for allegedly tripping his opposite number, Paul Bishop.
It looked a harsh decision for the Welshman was on his back after making a tackle on the Saints forward Harrison and Bishop seemed merely to blunder into his legs.
At that stage Warrington were in complete command, leading 18–2.
Saints managed a brief recovery to 18–12 before falling away to ignominious defeat.
None of the Saints candidates advanced their claims for inclusion in Malcolm Reilly's tour squad which the Great Britain coach will announce tomorrow morning.
In contrast, Ellis showed great form until the dismissal which he said afterwards amazed him.
He must still be in with a chance of making the tour — although Andy Gregory's 11th-hour decision to put himself in the frame must have reduced the odds somewhat.
Just before his departure, Ellis had set up the position for prop Harmon's try.
Full-back Lyon also kept himself in contention for the tour with some exciting running and rock-solid defence.
Young winger Kenyon took his chance well to beat Hunte at the corner for Warrington's opening try and hooker Duane Mann made the Saints defence look foolish with a cunning kick through the ruck for Jackson to pounce.
Mercer used his pace in the second half to get in at the corner after Harmon's effort and Forster scored after a quick-witted kick by Turner, who also kicked five goals.
Bishop made Saints' opening touchdown in the 46th minute after what seemed an eternal wait and then George Mann crashed over before Warrington regrouped.
Substitute Ropati's try, after neat work by Bishop, came on the stroke of full time as Warrington relaxed in the warmth of this surprisingly easy victory.
Warrington: Lyon; Drummond, Bateman, Forster, Kenyon, Turner, Ellis, Harmon (Phillips 53), D Mann, Sumner (Richards 59), Jackson (Sumner 72), Mercer, Shelford.
St Helens: Veivers; Hunte, Connolly, Loughlin, Sullivan, Griffiths, Bishop, Ward (Groves 71), Groves (Cooper 23), Forber (Ropati 23), Harrison (Forber 55), Nickle, G Mann.
Soccer: Last blast against elitism by second-class travellers
By COLIN MALAM
THIS SEASON, the semi-finals of the FA Cup carry more significance than usual.
The imminence of the Premier League means that this is probably the last time the famous old knockout tournament will be played while some degree of financial equality exists between the present First and Second divisions.
From next season onwards, the Professional Footballers' Association permitting and the projected earnings proving correct, the Premier League should have the purchasing power to buy up even more of the available playing talent and be in a position to dominate the FA Cup to a greater extent than usual.
Thus, the presence in this year's last four of two Second Division clubs, Portsmouth and Sunderland, is not only rich in irony but a symbolic gesture, and a rude one at that.
It is, if you like, a way for the rump of the Football League to moon defiance at their succeeding, elitist brethren.
Whether the whole thing will go beyond a gesture is doubtful.
History suggests very strongly that class tells more often than not at this stage of the competition, although it is certainly not unknown for a Second Division side to go all the way up to the royal box and collect the trophy.
Post-war, there have been three Second Division winners.
They were Sunderland (1–0 v Leeds, 1973), Southampton (1–0 v Manchester Utd, 1976) and West Ham (1–0 v Arsenal, 1980).
Four other Second Division sides have reached the final — Leicester (1–3 v Wolves 1949), Preston (2–3 v West Ham 1964), Fulham (0–2 v West Ham, 1975) and Queens Park Rangers (1–1, 0–1 v Tottenham, 1982).
Frankly, it is not an outstanding record of achievement, considering there has been at least one Second Division club in the semi-finals for 30 of the 47 seasons since the last war.
But it is a little unusual for there to be more than one left in at this stage.
It is only the fifth time in the post-war history of the tournament that this has happened, and only the third time there has been a First Division v Second Division clash in each semi-final.
In 1958, Blackburn and Fulham were defeated by Bolton and Manchester United.
In 1982, QPR got past West Bromwich Albion but Leicester were knocked out by Tottenham.
Indeed, if Portsmouth and Sunderland were to defy the odds and emerge victorious from today's matches against Liverpool and Norwich, it would be the first time in the 120-year history of the tournament that two teams from the Second Division contested the final.
Perhaps the most interesting feature of the pattern is that Second Division clubs have continued to reach the semi-finals and finals despite the abolition of the footballer's maximum wage in 1961 and the subsequent destruction of the retain and transfer system.
Before 1961, there was a Second or Third Division club in all but three of the 16 semi-finals following the war.
Since 1961, it has happened 17 times in 31 seasons, or over half: a remarkable proportion given the economic imbalance that has developed already within English football during the last 31 years.
There is no better representation of that imbalance than the semi-final between Liverpool and Portsmouth.
On the one hand, you have the country's premier club in the process of spending a small fortune to reconstruct an ageing team: on the other, a Second Division side thriving on young, home-grown talent who may have to be sold to Liverpool and other members of the wealthy elite.
So do Portsmouth have any realistic chance of winning?
Yes, they do, in the opinion of John Lyall, the manager of Ipswich and an expert better placed to judge than most.
For this is not only the man in charge of the Second Division leaders but the former manager of West Ham, the last Second Division club to win the FA Cup.
‘Jim Smith has done a tremendous job at Porstmouth,’ says Lyall, ‘They play quick-pass football and any team who play the ball early can always create space.
Anyone who knocks Nottingham Forest out of a cup competition has to be respected, too.
‘They play three at the back, but the ability of players like Awford enables them to use it as a springboard for attack as well as a defensive system.
Kuhl is a very experienced player who can control the pace of the game from midfield and Anderton has so much natural talent that he could be a match winner.
‘On top of that, Portsmouth have players like Clarke and Whittingham, who are always capable of getting you a goal.
‘To be honest, I wouldn't like to predict the result of either semi-final.
In the Cup, so much is down to luck of one kind or another and one flash of individual brillance can settle it.
‘In Byrne, Sunderland have a player who could supply that sort of brilliance and they have a great Cup tradition, too.
The two First Division clubs will have hard games, and I'm confident Portsmouth and Sunderland will bring great credit to the Second division.
‘Psychologically, everything is in their favour.
Very few people expect them to win, so they can go out and enjoy themselves.
I've a feeling one of the lads from Portsmouth or Sunderland could end up a national hero.
‘Remember what Alan Taylor did for us at West Ham in 1975?
Two goals in the quarter-finals, two in the semis and two in the final.
I'd like to think something similar could happen this time.’
Soccer: Arsenal on high
By DAVID HORRIDGE
Coventry 0, Arsenal 1 KEVIN CAMPBELL displayed the brand of finishing that has become his hallmark, to take Arsenal into fourth place and leave Coventry facing relegation worries, writes David Horridge.
In a game of few scoring opportunities, Coventry lacked the power and precision revealed by Campbell in the 29th minute after he ran on to Limpar's lobbed pass.
Campbell surged between two defenders, shrugging off Pearce's challenge, then drove the ball out of the reach of Sealey, the on-loan goalkeeper from Aston Villa back at Highfield Road after an absence of nine years.
Despite the defeat, Coventry can be satisfied with their form against the League champions, who are enjoying their best spell of the season — unbeaten in 11 games.
Coventry had the better of the first half, with Ndlovu and Robson demanding good saves from Seaman, while Smith had a shot blocked on the line by Winterburn.
Flynn also brought out the best in Seaman with a 25-yard shot but while Coventry's strike force of Furlong and Ndlovu showed promise, their threat later diminished.
Soccer: Leeds sunk as the other light blues surge ahead
By William Johnson
Manchester City4, Leeds0 THE WHEELS came off Leeds United's hitherto solid championship challenge at Maine Road in a match which, paradoxically, they could easily have collected the point they needed to return to the top of the table.
Howard Wilkinson's team were victims of an inspired performance by a Manchester City side who had not scored in four previous outings.
On this occasion City accepted with relish the chances which came their way and inflicted serious psychological damage on their dejected opponents.
The result will also give a huge lift to Alex Ferguson's Manchester United team who were originally due to travel to Norwich today but went there instead on Tuesday and pulled off a significant victory.
All Leeds, who remain a point behind Manchester United but have now played two games more, can hope for is a similar display by City at Old Trafford on Tuesday.
Morale could not be higher in the light blue camp and Leeds can rest assured that there will be no favouritism showed by Peter Reid's team who are enjoying the role of potential title deciders.
Reid insisted that his team had done themselves a favour in their quest to make a late run for Europe and that any favours done for neighbouring causes were only coincidence.
Reid the player took no active part in City's biggest win of the season — it was also Leeds' biggest defeat — and it was more than coincidental that McMahon, his recent recruit from Liverpool, produced possibly his most influential performance since that £900,000 transfer.
McMahon and Reid, long time Merseyside rivals on the field, are extremely similar in style and have tended to get in each other 's way in City colours.
McMahon, despite a few unnecessary niggling exchanges which tested the tolerance of referee John Watson, was the dominant midfield force yesterday and his young partner, Simpson — a bargain buy from Swindon — was a close second.
A much closer contest than the scoreline suggests was effectively settled during two crucial first half minutes when Sheron, City's unheralded striker, made two crucial interventions — one in each goalmouth.
Firstly, he was well placed inside the far post to prevent a Leeds equaliser when McAllister's shot from Strachan's corner took a wicked deflection to beat the otherwise defiant Coton.
Then he charged to the other end to anticipate a precise through ball from McMahon and reach it just before the advancing Lukic and flick it into the empty net.
City had been ahead from the 12th minute when full-back Hill was left unmarked at a Brennan corner and took advantage with a crisp header.
Coton had made a brilliant save from Speed, again demonstrating his great versatility at right-back, to preserve that advantage and the City goalkeeper, voted No 1 in the League by his fellow professionals, went on to make other important stops from Fairclough and Wallace to thwart a predictable Leeds rally early in the second half.
A third City goal just after the hour convinced Leeds that a fightback was beyond them.
McMahon robbed Speed just outside the City penalty area and a sharp counterattack ended with Quinn taking the ball wide of his marker, Whyte, and beating Lukic with a thunderous drive which went in off the underside of the crossbar.
McMahon was still not finished, even if Leeds were, and the former England midfielder could not conceal his joy when a beautifully judged looping pass two minutes from the end gave Brennan an irresistible opportunity to complete the scoring.
Wilkinson conceded that odds against the title going to Elland Road for the first time in 18 years have ‘lengthened considerably’ but he refused to throw in the towel.
‘Who knows whether it's gone,’ he said.
‘If we win our next five matches it could be interesting.’
Soccer: Forest feel the strain
By DON HARDISTY
Nottm Forest 0, Sheff W 2 FIRST-HALF goals by Williams and Hirst gave Sheffield Wednesday a notable victory over a Nottingham Forest side buckling under the strain of playing four matches in a week, writes Don Hardisty.
This was an unfamiliar Forest line-up.
With five regulars missing they rarely tested former colleague Woods in the Wednesday goal and it was Sheridan, another of Hillsborough's former Forest contingent, who set them on the way to victory.
Taking a clearance from Nilsson, Sheridan found Palmer, whose centre left Williams to snap in the first goal from close range.
Wilson, another former Forest player, sent over the corner which Shirtliff nodded down for Hirst to score his 19th goal of the season.
The game was nearly an hour old before Woods had to make a worthwhile save — from Keane — then Marriott brought off a superb one-handed save to deny Hirst another goal.
Walker, the only regular in Forest's back four, strove to rally his side but Woods remained under-employed.
Soccer: Sheffield play safe
By KEITH FARNSWORTH
Sheffield U 2, Oldham 0 PREMIER LEAGUE football next season now looks assured for Sheffield United after goals from Whitehouse and Bryson clinched their 13th victory of the season against Oldham at Bramall Lane, writes Keith Farnsworth.
Oldham, who have now gone seven away games without a win, will rue the fact that they dominated the first half but failed to turn it to advantage.
United grabbed the initiative with a 22nd minute goal from Whitehouse, who seized on Sheffield's only serious chance to score on the rebound from just inside the penalty area.
United owed much to goalkeeper Rees, who had earlier saved superbly from Holden and later denied Adams, first with a block with his feet then by kicking over a dipping effort from the right.
For Oldham, Holden put a 20 yard free-kick just over the bar but after 81 minutes United sealed the points when a crossfield pass from Hodges saw Rogers fail to connect with Gage's low-cross but substitute Bryson hammered home.
Soccer: Bright day for Palace
By MARK READING
C Palace 2, Everton 0 A DUBIOUS offside decision midway through the second half kick-started an uninspiring game into life and brought about Everton's downfall, writes Mark Redding.
As the Merseysiders struggled to get into the match, Beagrie picked up a short corner on the left and let fly with a tremendous swirling drive that ricocheted into the net off the post.
Everton celebrated but a linesman's flag signalled offside.
As Everton regrouped bad-temperedly, Crystal Palace attacked swiftly down the left, Rodger pulled the ball back from the byline and Coleman sidefooted into an empty net.
To add insult to injury, Palace, attacking with renewed vigour, were then awarded a doubtful penalty.
Bright was put clear by Coleman's flicked header and though his shot was saved by Southall, the referee ruled Keown had pushed the striker.
Bright put away the spot kick for his 20th goal of the season.
As the teams left the pitch, Everton manager Howard Kendall remonstrated angrily with referee, Mike Bailey.
Soccer: ‘Boro and Leicester slips to let Derby through
By IAN WHITTELL
Middlesboro 1, Watford 2 WATFORD enhanced their impressive away record by becoming the first team to win at Middlesbrough's Ayresome Park in the League this season, writes Ian Whittell.
They did so with two well-executed goals and an organisation that the home side could not match.
The action belonged exclusively to the second half with two goals packed into the first 100 seconds of the period.
Defender David Holdsworth firmly headed the opening goal from Jason Drysdale's well-worked and well-taken free-kick.
But within a minute former Watford striker Paul Wilkinson had equalised, scoring his 20th goal of the season — yet only his second in the League since Boxing Day — from Bernie Slaven's shot.
The winner came in the 64th minute thanks to a combination of fine attacking play from Jason Soloman and inept defending by Boro.
Stephen Pears did well to block Soloman's shot but could do nothing to prevent Steve Butler tapping the ball into the open goal.
Soccer: Dublin's timely arrival
By JOHN BURROWS
Cambridge 1 Millwall 0 DION DUBLIN, Cambridge's top-scorer, started the game on the bench but finished it as the match-winner, following an inspired double-substitution by manager John Beck at half-time.
He sent on Dublin and Mick Norbury and, within 30 seconds of the restart, they combined to give Cambridge the victory which, after four successive draws, took them back to second in the table.
Norbury crossed with an overhead kick and Dublin stabbed a close-range shot inside the near post.
A minute later, there was almost a repeat, Norbury crossing again but Dublin shooting over from five yards.
But although there was relief at this success, it is significant that Cambridge have failed to score during the first 45 minutes of their last eight games.
Devon White, who was signed from Bristol Rovers in order to improve the goal-scoring rate, missed a glorious chance to score after only three minutes on his home debut for Cambridge.
A well-flighted right wing cross by Paul Raynor seemed perfect for the unmarked 6ft 4in player, but he headed over from seven yards.
The goalless first half finished on a controversial note when Cambridge were denied an advantage after winger Lee Philpott was felled.
Tony Dennis took the ball on and Raynor was clear on the right, but as Dennis prepared to pass, referee David Phillips blew for the free kick.
Cambridge dominated after the interval, but Millwall went close to an equaliser in the 63rd minute when Etienne Verveer headed against the foot of the post.
Soccer: Barnsley v Derby
Barnsley 0, Derby 3 DERBY returned to their slick, enterprising form and gave their promotion hopes a welcome shot in the arm.
Simpson curled in a 20-yard free-kick for the opener after 10 minutes and the second goal came 21 minutes later when Johnson's corner was headed in by Forsyth.
Williams rounded off with a 63rd-minute penalty after Gabbiadini was brought down in the area.
Derby's Coleman was sent off late for his second bookable offence.
Soccer: Last-gasp Thompson lifts Ipswich
By IVO TENNANT
Southend 1 Ipswich 2 IPSWICH'S inexorable progress towards the Premier League continues although they were not assured of their third successive victory until a minute before full-time.
Neil Thompson's excellent winning goal atoned for a missed penalty by John Wark.
Ipswich re-emerged five minutes after the end as if they had made certain of promotion.
Yet the players did not dally for long.
Instead, the pitch was taken over by massed Southend fans demanding the resignation of chairman Vic Jobson.
There they stayed for nearly half an hour.
They feel that if Jobson resigns, Dave Webb, the most successful manager in the club's history, will not leave in the summer.
This was Southend's first five-figure crowd of a season which has soured of late.
Here Ipswich were unquestionably the better side, but Southend's football was skilled enough to have beaten most teams in the Second Division.
Ipswich had not played at Roots Hall since the 1950s, although Southend were, in fact, their first opponents in the Football League.
Ipswich won on that day in 1938 and deserved their victory yesterday.
Nonetheless, Southend had their chances — notably early in the first half.
Ansah's bicycle kick was as cleanly executed as it was spectacular and necessitated Forrest to be at his sharpest.
Then Cornwell tested Ipswich's goalkeeper with two drives, one with either foot.
Ipswich, working their moves across the penalty area with great confidence, created chances for Dozzell, Kiwomya and Thompson before scoring their first after 53 minutes.
Thompson's initial corner was headed behind goal by Southend's massed defence.
His second was planted to the far side of the penalty box where the lanky Whelan — no relation to Liverpool's Ronnie — headed in with great strength on his League debut.
Still Southend had their chances.
Benjamin had the pick, failing to control an awkwardly bouncing ball.
Within seconds he had been substituted and within minutes a goal almost came about at the other end.
Dozzell, splendidly sent racing clear by Stockwell, was upended by Cornwell.
Wark, who had not been shy of venturing upfield for corners and free-kicks, struck the penalty cleanly enough, but against the crossbar.
Two minutes later Southend equalised.
From Jones' cross, Prior's header was too much for Forrest.
When Palmer made a hash of a perfectly weighted through pass from Dozzell two minutes from the end, that seemed to be that.
Yet in the very last minute Thompson was permitted space in Southend's penalty area, and, for a left-back, his right foot proved potent indeed.
Soccer: Southampton v QPR
By SUE THEARLE
Southampton 2 QPR 1 ALAN SHEARER collected his 20th goal of the season with a 69-minute penalty to give Southampton their sixth successive League victory and ease their lingering relegation fears.
The England international sent goalkeeper Jan Stejskal the wrong way after he had been tripped by the keeper as he chased a weak back pass into the penalty area.
Shearer's penalty capped a remarkable and decisive seven-minute spell in which Southampton, leading thanks to a 13th minute Iain Dowie header, had seen their visitors come back into the game with a 62nd minute equaliser from Les Ferdinand and then miss a 67th minute penalty through Clive Wilson.
Rangers, with only one defeat in their previous 19 League games, had battled back to level terms when Ferdinand collected Impey's pass and turned powerfully away from Kevin Moore 50 yards out.
He set out on a surging run for goal and held off the challenge of Moore and Benali before sending a low shot past Stejskal.
Although Rangers could have snatched a point in the dying moments when Allen's shot was blocked, an equalister would have been harsh.
Soccer: Luton v Wimbledon
By JOHN LEY
Luton 2 Wimbledon 1 LUTON TOWN, those hardy escapologists, served notice that they are in the mood to repeat their annual Houdini act to beat relegation.
David Preece scored the second-half goal that earned them their first win in seven games and, though they remain in the bottom three, they do have a chance of making the Premier League.
The game was spoiled by erratic and inconsistent refereeing by Kettering official Brian Hill, who felt it necessary to take aside both captains in the 21st minute and warn them about each team's tactics.
Wimbledon took the lead in the seventh minute when Phelan crossed, Earle flicked on and Fashanu scored his 18th goal of the season.
Luton's Chamberlain, recalled in goal for the injured Day, denied Earle soon afterwards before Miller wasted the chance to increase Dons lead when he shot over from 10 yards.
Luton's resilience brought an equaliser in the 27th minute when a typical long throw from Pembridge was flicked on by Harford and in the goalmouth scramble Varadi, on loan from Leeds, scored on his debut.
Wimbledon might have conceded a second goal on the stroke of half-time when Harford curled his shot narrowly over after a poor clearance by Segers.
Segers denied the veteran Stein soon after the restart and then, at the other end, Chamberlain made an outstanding save to stop a superb drive from Sanchez.
Kamara started the move for Luton's winner in the 64th minute when he crossed from the right and a nod-on from Harford saw the ball bounce awkwardly in the area.
Barton failed to clear and it fell to Preece, who fired in his third goal of the season.
Predictably the latter stages were nervous and tense for Luton and the visitors might have levelled in the 73rd minute.
Clarke, a substitute for Sanchez, robbed Stein and tried to steer the ball home but Chamberlain, playing only his second game since November, saved well.
Soccer: Revival by Spurs turns to slump
By CHRISTOPHER DAVIES
Tottenham 2 Aston Villa 5 APPALLING defending by Tottenham allowed Aston Villa, who recently went 578 competitive minutes without a goal, to inflict the 13th home defeat of the season on the troubled London club.
Spurs are almost certain to avoid relegation but their heaviest home defeat was even harder for their fans to accept because they were 2–0 up after 13 minutes.
Lineker gave Spurs the lead in the fifth minute with his 30th goal of the season.
Teale turned Gray's centre past Spink eight minutes later.
Walker, playing for the injured Thorstvedt, should have done better with two high centres which allowed Richardson, in the 19th minute, to reduce the arrears and Olney to head the equaliser on the half-hour.
Sloppy play by Spurs let Regis release Yorke to make it 3–2 with a shot across Walker.
The turning point came in the 75th minute when McGrath brought down Walsh only for the resulting penalty by Lineker to be saved easily by Spink.
Daley beat Mabbutt and Cundy in the 86th minute to score Villa's fourth and, a minute from the end, Regis completed Tottenham humiliation after brushing off a Bergsson's weak challenge.
Soccer: Bristol C v Leicester
Bristol C 2, Leicester 1 LEICESTER'S promotion hopes took a jolt against a bouyant Bristol City, who under new manager Denis Smith, are pulling away from their own relegation fears.
‘We've played Bristol three times this season and they have been the better side each time.
We were never really a unit out there,’ said Leicester manager Brian Little.
But leading scorer Tommy Wright nearly snatched a point for Leicester in the final minute.
His header, from substitute Kevin Russell's centre on the left, bobbed just over the bar.
Bristol led after five minutes when Dziekanowski held off a challenge before centering accurately to the far post, where Rosenior headed powerfully home to mark his first full appearance for the club.
Leicester drew level after 19 minutes through Oldfield, who landed a 25-yard volley after the home team only half cleared a corner from Wright.
Bristol's Cole grabbed a close-range winner in the 56th minute after Leicester had half blocked a header from Rosenior.
Soccer: SCOTTISH ROUND-UP
AIRDRIE and Hearts must replay on April 14 following their goalless Scottish Cup semi-final draw, and Hearts manager Joe Jordan was the more unhappy manager.
‘From a Hearts point of view, I don't think the replay could be as bad as that,’ said Jordan.
‘I didn't think it was a very good game.
There was a lot at stake for both clubs, but we just didn't perform and I'm very disappointed.’
But Airdrie manager Alex MacDonald said: ‘Overall I'm delighted with the way my players performed.
As for the replay, we know that we're in no way inferior.’
Soccer: Blunders keep Hammmers on skid-row
By COLIN MALAM
Chelsea 2 West Ham 1 THERE now seems no way back for West Ham.
Their second defeat in four days by a London club means that a quick return to the present Second Division is more likely than ever for the First Division's bottom team.
What slight hope the East London club retain of sharing in the projected Premier League bonanza was dimmed further here by two pieces of sloppy defending that allowed Chelsea to end a run of four games without a win more easily than the one-goal margin might suggest.
Billy Bonds, West Ham's manager, keeps on saying that his team must win all their remaining matches to stay up, but they keep on losing instead.
This, in fact, was the seventh defeat in their last nine League games.
The hope fanned briefly into life by draws with Leeds and Queens Park Rangers has gone.
As at Tottenham last Wednesday, West Ham played with the look of men resigned to their fate — only more so.
Chelsea are not a particularly good team and they did not have to play well to win this often tedious match.
Even the inevitable goal from Clive Allen, making yet another debut against one of his many former employers, could not lift West Ham.
Allen could not have done more to justify his £275,000 fee.
He equalised only a minute after Chelsea had taken the lead when Wise, at the far post, had stabbed in an aimless Stuart cross after 26 minutes.
It was much less spectacular goal than Allen's equaliser.
Taking a pass from McAvennie, Allen looked up, saw a spot in the top corner and hammered the ball into it from the edge of the area.
Tony Cascarino then set the tone for a livelier second half by heading a Clarke centre past Miklosko three minutes after the restart.
On several occasions after that, Chelsea almost increased their lead.
Le Saux, Clarke and Wise all went within inches of scoring while West Ham threatened only once, Beasant holding on to an unexpected volley from Foster.
Soccer: Shilton on song again
Charlton 0, Plymouth 0 PETER SHILTON made his playing debut for the Plymouth side he now manages against the team he first played against over 20 years ago.
Shilton, 42, kept another clean sheet in his 962nd League appearance.
His sheer presence seemed to inspire a side threatened with relegation to Division Three to only their seventh away point of the season.
He made telling first half stops and saw his forwards come close to securing three points.
Top scorer Dwight Marshall headed a David Smith cross against the underside of the bar after just 10 minutes and in a late rally Smith was denied on three occasions by the faultless Charlton goalkeeper Bob Bolder.
Charlton's managerial duo of Alan Curbishley and Steve Gritt received the Second Division manager of the month award before the game and were satisfied with another promotion point.
Soccer: Nicholas and Creaney lift Celtic hopes
By MICHAEL WHITE
Falkirk 0 Celtic 3 CRITICS of the 44 game Premier League would have been pleasantly surprised by the effort, enthusiasm and entertainment served up by two good teams.
Chances galore at both ends could have produced a scoreline usually reserved for end-of-season testimonials.
Celtic deserved their win, achieved through decisive goals from the Nicholas-Creaney partnership.
The match was reminiscent of the problems of schools' football — the big school with 11 good players will always beat the village school which has only six or seven.
With limited resources, manager Jim Jefferies has done remarkably well to keep Falkirk in the big league.
His side played a significant part in making this a good match.
Falkirk looked to have taken the lead when a net-bound shot from Gary Lennox was kicked off the line by Derek Whyte.
Tommy Boyd's low swerving volley and Gerry Creaney's loping header gave notice that the visitors were determined to chase a European place.
It was exciting end-to-end entertainment and it could easily have been two goals each after the opening quarter.
Kevin McAllister's header from a right-wing McGivern cross gave Marshall problems, while at the opposite end Creaney took advantage of a huge kick-out which bounced over John Hughes, to send a lob inches over.
Celtic started to apply relentless pressure and the home defence finally cracked in 23 minutes when Mike Galloway's header was volleyed home by Creaney.
Having survived this onslaught, Celtic gradually settled and went 2–0 ahead in 61 minutes.
Charlie Nicholas scored from 12 yards after the home defence froze, almost anticipating the inevitable.
Falkirk conceded a killer third goal when John Collins dived to head home a Boyd left wing cross 10 minutes from time.
Falkirk: Westwater; Oliver, Johnston, Duffy, Hughes, Lennox, McAllister, McGivern (Simpson 73), Cadette, May, Rutherford (Sloane 45).
Celtic: Marshall; Morris, Boyd, O'Neil (Fulton 58), Mowbray, Whyte, Galloway, McStay, Creaney (Coyne 80), Nicholas, Collins.
Soccer: Hearts' hustle and bustle held in check by Airdrie's muscle
By BOB FERRIER
Airdrie 0 Hearts 0 AFTER one of the least memorable Scottish Cup semi-finals on record, Airdrie and Hearts played out a soulless, goalless draw and must meet again in 10 days' time to decide who will challenge Rangers on May 9.
The eventual cup-winners will, of course, be guaranteed European football next season but, on the evidence of this performance, fans in Madrid or Milan will not be losing too much sleep.
Hearts had marginally more possession but were kept in check by an Airdrie team expert at preventing their opponents from playing.
Significantly, the yellow cards shown to Kidd and Honor took Airdrie's haul of bookings this season to a dismal 87.
Airdrie had something of a fifth column working for them.
Of their squad, Walter Kidd, James Sandison, Kenny Black, Davie Kirkwood and Alex Stewart were all former Hearts players.
And then there was manager Alex MacDonald, Joe Jordan's predecessor in the Tynecastle management chair.
Despite such inside knowledge, the opening passages were racked with nervousness and blighted by a series of up-and-unders.
Sandison adopted the McPherson role of organising matters behind the Airdrie defensive line while the midfield remained conservatively deep.
With 15 minutes gone Airdrie were able to break out into attack for the first time and Hearts' experienced defenders looked oddly rattled, particularly when Coyle came close with a flashing cross-shot from the left.
Airdrie appeared determined not to give their opponents any room — a tactic typified by Stewart's marking of Robertson, who looked unusually ineffective.
Yet it took a brilliant save by Martin to keep Hearts out after 27 minutes when he went full stretch to grab McLaren's header from a Derek Ferguson corner at his left-hand post.
Airdrie produced an instant counter-offensive, however, Smith sprawling twice to save from Kirkwood.
As the play blundered on into the second half, the Airdrie strategy was clear — to ignore any pretence of building attacks from the back of the team through to the midfield.
On the contrary, it was to hammer long balls into the Hearts penalty area at every opportunity on the grounds that such pressure would produce defensive mistakes.
After 63 minutes Martin had to stretch yet again, this time from Bannon's well-directed header, but play remained terribly lacking in imaginative incident.
However, with 75 minutes gone, Hearts scored a quite superb ‘goal’ which was disallowed for an offence not immediately apparent.
McPherson rose brilliantly to a McLaren free-kick to head the ball beyond Martin.
No goal, said referee McCluskey.
It was one moment of delight in the general hurly-burly but, with only three minutes left, there was another moment of controversy.
In one last, massed Hearts attack Levein headed downwards and Robertson touched the ball on before Martin stopped the ball apparently over the goal-line.
Again, no goal.
Airdrie: Martin; Kidd, Stewart, Sandison, Honor, Black, Boyle, Balfour, Coyle, Lawrence (Jack 83), Kirkwood (Conn 78).
Hearts: Smith; McLaren, McKinlay, Levein, Mackay, McPherson, Bannon (Crabbe 81), D Ferguson, I Ferguson, Wright, Robertson.
Soccer: Bowman bang on the target
By DICK DONNELLY
Dundee United 2 St Johnstone 1 A RARE goal from Dave Bowman gave Dundee United their first win in four attempts this season against their Tayside rivals in a game which started well but finally provided poor entertainment for the crowd.
A promising early phase of play brought a sloppy opening goal in the 13th minute, when Hamilton lodged a long kick into the heart of the Dundee United half.
Malpas, the captain, normally deals with such intrusions efficiently, but blundered on this occasion with a slack header towards his goalkeeper which Wright intercepted and guided beyond the advancing Main.
Johnson should have increased their initiative in the 26th minute, in a dazzling move started, and almost finished, by Turner.
But the midfielder spoiled the moment by turning his header into the arms of Main.
That let off seemed to breathe relief back into the home side, and not for the first time this season the imposing physical presence of youngster Ferguson proved crucial with a deft header which set up Cleland for a fine angled finish from 15 yards for the leveller.
The second half was brightened only by Bowman's winner in the 53rd minute.
Hamilton was lax with a goal kick, Ferguson whipped the ball across the box and Johnson back-heeled the ball into the path of Bowman, who calmly swept home the ball for his first goal since November.
Dundee Utd: Main; Cleland, Malpas, McInally, Van der Hoorn, Welsh, Ferreyra, Johnson, McKinnon, Ferguson, Bowman.
St Johnstone: Hamilton; Treanor, Baltacha, Cherry, Inglis, Redford, Turner, Davies, Wright, Grant, Curran.
Soccer: Hibernian v Motherwell
By ROY MACLEAN
Hibernian 0 Motherwell 0 HIBS' prospects of finishing fourth in the Premier Division are fading fast after they served up a dreary scoreless draw against Motherwell before the lowest gate of the season at Easter Road.
The 4,400 attendance was no less than the sides deserved.
They were short of ideas, the passing was appalling, and the game provided ideal ammunition for the Scottish critics who claim a 44-match Premier Division season is too much to ask of supporters.
Neither goalkeeper was seriously threatened in the first half, with the exception of a speculative 25-yard drive in the 15th minute by Love, who was making his first-team debut for the Edinburgh club.
Motherwell ‘keeper Thomson was at full stretch to smother the youngster's shot which looked like sneaking in at the foot of the post.
Territorially, there was little between the clubs, who were playing as though the end of the season could not come quick enough.
Several chances fell to Wright before the visiting defence settled, but again Hibs' leading scorer did not show the same sharpness as he did earlier in the season.
Just on half-time, a long ball from Milne put him through within excellent shooting distance of Thomson, but McCart's late intervention robbed him of the golden chance to break the deadlock.
Hibs: Burridge; Milne, Love (Hamilton 46), Orr, Beaumont, Hunter, Findlay, Nicholls, Wright (McGraw 63), Evans, McGinlay.
Soccer: Europe plans under threat Bob Ferrier on the repercussions of McCoist's clincher
By BOB FERRIER
WHEN Rangers won that memorable semi-final during the week, their 10-man team confounded more than Celtic.
Shattered, too, were the ‘Europhobes’ and their scenario that has Scotland's four places in European competition next season already arranged.
The prognosis was for Rangers to qualify for the European Cup, Celtic for the Cup-Winners' Cup (having beaten Rangers in the semi-final, of course, then prevailed in the final), Hearts for a place in the UEFA Cup for finishing second in their Premier Division and Hibs as Skol League Cup winners, joining them.
Neat.
But McCoist's goal — his first-ever against Celtic in the Cup — blew all that away.
Now, there is the possibility of Celtic failing to find a place anywhere in Europe.
The executive committee of the SFA decide on the final four at the end of the season; but, if Celtic are ignored, it will be a sadness.
After a very haggard start to the season, they have come good since the start of the year, playing some of the most attractive football in the land.
Liam Brady and his players certainly deserve something from the season, even if it is only a back door into Europe.
Their performance against Rangers was inexplicable and one cannot believe that the extraordinary general meeting of shareholders, which lasted eight hours on the day before the match, with bickerings between cabals of directors over the club's future, had no effect on the players.
Senior men, such as Charlie Nicholas, Paul McStay and Peter Grant and younger players like Gerry Creaney and Derek Whyte are products of Celtic Boys Club football; their allegiance to Celtic goes far beyond a pay packet.
Rangers had no such inhibitions: a night which will certainly be enshrined in the history of the club under ‘minor miracles’ called for what Alex Ferguson calls ‘men of character’.
Rangers had them in abundance, none greater than Nigel Spackman, one of their foreigners.
Spackman has not always been the darling of the Ibrox crowd, not always been immaculate in his conceptions, in distribution given to moments of near madness and almost always one of the great unsung; but, against Celtic, Spackman fashioned for himself a night to remember.
He was the spirit of Rangers' resolution, defying Celtic and flaunting it by taking the ball for a walk into the distant corners of the Celtic defence whenever he could, destroying time, the Rangers' enemy on the night.
Athletics: Reduction of Krabbe ban rejected
THE GERMAN Athletics Federation last night rejected a proposal by its independent legal commission that the ban on double world sprint champion Katrin Krabbe be cut to less than four months.
Commission members had proposed lifting the penalty on Krabbe and team-mates Grit Breuer and Silke Moeller from May 15.
All three were barred in February for tampering with urine samples during out-of-competition tests.
But the Federation's anti-doping expert, Ruediger Nickel, said the proposal was unacceptable.
‘It is not a good way of dealing with the battle against doping,’ he added.
Racing: Party Politics first past the post in Grand National's gallop poll
By J A McGRATH at Aintree
TOPICALLY-NAMED Party Politics, a gift to Mrs Patricia Thompson from her husband only 48 hours before the Martell Grand National, romped home the comfortable winner at Aintree, marking a dramatic change of fortune for trainer Nick Gaselee.
Purchased by David Thompson, of the Cheveley Park Stud, for a reported £80,000, Party Politics shook off a catalogue of breathing problems and one case of breaking blood vessels to take the world's most famous steeplechase by two and a half lengths.
Party Politics, known as an equine giant in racing circles because of his massive size, was cruising when he took it up four fences from home, and winning jockey Carl Llewellyn later admitted that his chief concern at that stage had been striking the front too early.
But with Party Politics galloping on strongly up the run-in, Llewellyn always had victory in his sights and they held off Romany King for a popular win at 14–1.
Laura's Beau, one of four Irish-trained runners, battled on to take third place, 15 lengths away, while Peter Scudamore's mount Docklands Express, the 15–2 favourite, was eight lengths farther back in fourth.
The Thompson family had bought Classified and Northern Bay several years previously in an attempt to win the Aintree spectacular.
Mrs Thompson said: ‘I am overwhelmed.
I didn't know I was going to own a Grand National runner until Thursday evening.
My husband should really have kept him for himself, but he believed that I should try to change his luck.’
The deal, which involved the purchase of Party Politics and the Irish-trained Roc de Prince (17th) was struck by renowned bloodstock agent David Minton, who advised his clients to leave the two horses with their respective trainers.
Gaselee had always regarded Party Politics as a Grand National type and decided early in the season to set the gelding, who stands more than 18 hands, for steeplechasing's biggest prize.
‘He had been off-colour after running in the Mildmay at Sandown earlier in the season and we found that he had broken blood vessels,’ said Gaselee.
The first the trainer knew of the impending purchase was when a fax from Minton was found in his office last Wednesday.
Former owner David Stoddart, who also bred Party Politics, decided to sell the gelding — a move largely influenced by the fact that he retains a five-year-old half-brother, who is the last from the family.
Gaselee confessed that the trauma of a winner-drought this year had rocked his confidence before the Grand National.
‘I knew that my horse was capable of running well so long as he was all right.
But I had not had a winner since December 27 when Mr Entertainer won at Kempton Park, and many of my horses had been sick.’
Party Politics became Gaselee's first winner in 1992 and was only his 11th success of the season.
The trainer was understandably emotional at his sudden change of luck in one of racing's biggest single events.
‘It is hard to believe that it could come in the Grand National,’ Gaselee said.
‘You just never know when things will turn.’
Gaselee, 53, has a long history in racing in several capacities.
He was assistant clerk of the course at Ascot, and at one stage was the racing correspondent of the London Evening Standard.
He took out a licence to train in 1976 and is based at Saxon Lodge Stables in Upper Lambourn.
Carl Llewellyn, 26, was having his third ride in the Grand National and could never have hoped for a better experience around the huge Aintree fences.
‘The first fence seemed so small for him because he is so big,’ the jockey recalled delightedly.
‘When he took me into the lead I didn't want to be there that soon — so many horses have been caught after being clear,’ he said.
Llewellyn, who is attached to the Tim Forster stable, was really third choice for the mount on Party Politics, as injured Andrew Adams, 27, was still recovering from a broken knee, and Richard Dunwoody, who had also ridden the gelding, was committed to Brown Windsor.
Llewellyn sportingly admitted: ‘I have got to feel sorry for Andy Adams — he's done all the work.’
Rawhide unseated Kevin O'Brien at the first fence, but the remaining 39 runners, led by Golden Minstrel and Willsford, continued without another casualty until Brown Windsor fell at Becher's first time round.
Honeybeer Mead fell at the seventh, where Omerta was pulled up because jockey Lorcan Wyer feared he had broken down.
But the gelding returned sound.
Stearsby refused at the ninth and Rowlandson's Jewels unseated Graham Bradley at 15th, The Chair.
Remarkably, at that stage, 34 runners were still standing, with Willsford cutting out the running from Golden Minstrel.
It was noticeable that Docklands Express and Cool Ground were both together in the middle of the field, neither having yet made a move.
Willsford and Golden Minstrel continued to take the field along until Hotplate jumped to the front at the 21st, the fence before Becher's on the second circuit.
Romany King then joined the issue, as Llewellyn inched nearer on Party Politics.
Four fences out, Llewellyn made his move, and from the next it was merely a question of whether Party Politics could hold on or whether Romany King could peg him back.
Docklands Express was travelling well three fences from the finish, but tired soon after, while Cheltenham Gold Cup winner Cool Ground could finish only 10th.
Twin Oaks, one of the backmarkers on the first circuit, ran on remarkably well to finish fifth without ever looking likely to take a hand in the finish.
Trainer David Barons had no excuses for last year's winner Seagram, who made no show and was pulled up before the third-last.
There were 22 finishers out of the 40 runners, strengthening the theory that the National fences are not as formidable as in bygone years.
Apart from Ghofar cutting his side, all the horses returned safely, as did the jockeys in an election year which will be remembered by all parties concerned.
RICHARD DUNWOODY, who took his sixth fall of the meeting from Thetford Forest in the final race, was advised to rest until April 13.
Racing: TONY STAFFORD Comment
By TONY STAFFORD
THE Grand National generally throws up triumph and disaster in equal measure and yesterday's first Martell-sponsored edition of the great race was no exception.
Two of the people most closely associated with Party Politics throughout his life, former owner David Stoddart and regular rider Andrew Adams, had to watch with mixed emotions as the race unfolded.
Adams has been absent through injury since a fall at Doncaster six weeks ago left him with a broken tibia in his left leg.
But watching the race on TV in the jockeys' room he still summoned the energy to cheer his erstwhile mount home.
Afterwards he was reticent about the ill-fortune which has plagued him.
If Adams' mixed feelings were understandable, imagine the trauma for Stoddart, who bred the horse himself and was his proud owner until just 48 hours before the race.
David Minton, as adept as he is fortunate as an international bloodstock agent, concluded the deal which took Party Politics into the ownership of Mrs Patricia Thompson.
Stoddart, still beaming despite the conflicting emotions, said in the post-race euphoria: ‘I'm absolutely thrilled he won.
I bred him and love the horse, and I'm delighted to have sold him to an owner who will look after his interests.
‘Naturally I am slightly sad, mainly for Andrew Adams but also a little for myself.’
Stoddart broke off to watch the presentations and then continued: ‘Happily, I still have the mare, who is now 18.
She has been covered by the dual-Gold Cup winner Gildoran and I also have two half-brothers to Party Politics — Christmas Gorse, who is in training with Nick [Gaselee], and a two-year-old by Neltino.’
Minton, whose record of buying top jumpers is outstanding, with several Triumph hurdlers to his credit, similarly had been instantly lucky when acquiring Mountain Kingdom for Mr David Thompson, husband of yesterday's winning owner, 48 hours before that horse won a Yorkshire Cup.
Minton, in the same deal which secured Party Politics, also bought the Irish-trained Roc de Prince.
This nine-year-old, outpaced at a crucial stage in the race, finished strongly in ninth place, and with Party Politics, gives Mrs Thompson excellent prospects of a second Grand National triumph in 12 months' time.
As for Adams, he must be hoping that he can regain his place on Party Politics in the coming season.
City: Americans may buy into ITN
by Angus McCrone
INDEPENDENT Television News yesterday announced the appointment of American investment bank Lehman Brothers to guide it through ownership changes envisaged in the 1990 Broadcasting Act.
The restructuring could lead to stakes of up to 20 per cent being bought by outside media organisations such as American TV news groups.
Big changes are certain because all ITN's shares are owned by regional ITV companies and several of them, including Thames and TVS, lost out in the licence auction last autumn.
They will hand over to new operators at the end of this year, and are likely to sell their shareholdings in ITN.
Regional companies that retained their licences, such as Granada and Scottish, can keep their ITN stakes or reduce them.
Groups that ousted an incumbent in the licence auction, such as Carlton Television in London, may buy shares.
But bigger moves are likely.
ITN chief executive Bob Phillis said: ‘ITN will benefit from the earliest possible introduction of new shareholders who can contribute operational, commercial and strategic expertise.’
American news organisations, such as CNN and CBS, may show an interest in the shares in the hope of collaborating with the relatively low cost ITN.
European and British newspaper companies are also possible investors.
One of Lehman's main tasks will be to value ITN.
Up to now it has been run as a cost centre rather than a profit maker, but the Broadcasting Act specified change.
Back-of-envelope estimates by analysts have valued ITN at about £60 million.
If foreign investors do express interest, ITN may raise new equity to strengthen the business.
The government has laid down a 20 per cent limit to stakes.
City: Chelsea nears £12m solution
by Frank Kane
CHELSEA Football Club is edging close to a deal with Cabra Estates, its heavily indebted landlord, which could settle their drawn-out tussle over the football club's Stamford Bridge ground.
Cabra won a court order last week requiring Chelsea to pay £22.8 million within seven days, but talks between the two sides are still taking place.
Chelsea, headed by fiery chairman Ken Bates, is hoping that a compromise can be reached involving the payment of between £10 million and £12 million.
Talks with bankers were taking place over the weekend, attempting to reach what one source described as an ‘elegant solution’.
Cabra, in which Bates has a stake of nearly 30 per cent, may settle for less than the £22.8 million if it takes into account other shareholders in its subsidiary company SB Properties, which owns the football ground.
Bates and Sir Richard Attenborough have a 17 per cent holding in SB.
If tax breaks are taken into account, as well as the estimated £5 million value of neighbouring football ground Craven Cottage, also owned by SB, the striking price for a deal could be nearer £12 million.
If a solution is reached, it could spell the end for John Duggan, the Cabra chairman.
Several directors are believed to be unhappy that he has kept details of the negotiations from them.
Duggan has taken a ski-ing holiday in the United States while the tricky negotiations were taking place this weekend.
Bates said yesterday: ‘I want a solution that is in the best interests of all parties.
I believe, and have always believed, that with the Stamford Bridge and Craven Cottage issues out of the way, Cabra (without soccer-related problems) will survive and have a viable future.’
City: US fund set to sue in Tokyo
by Robert Tyerman
ONE of America's biggest investors, the California Public Employees Retirement Service, is poised to launch a legal action alleging unfair treatment by Japanese broking houses during Tokyo's savage bear market.
Calpers, with $68 billion under management, is taking advice from American law firm Coubert Brothers after Daiwa Securities paid £320 million in damages to Japanese investors that accused it of tobashi.
This practice involves fund managers switching securities between accounts to shield favoured clients from losses to the detriment of others.
Calpers, with $1.5 billion invested in Japan, fears it has been a victim of this practice, along with other American pension funds.
‘No one has yet formally taken action,’ says chief fund manager Dewitt Bowman.
‘We have not yet announced legal steps and our inclination is to work with the system, if we can.
But our board of trustees is following the situation with interest.’
The Tokyo bear market has wiped £1,000 billion off shares.
One lawyer says the aggregate loss to Americans from tobashi runs into hundreds of millions of dollars.
Two fund managers first suspected irregularities comparing their portfolios during an off-duty chat.
Suspected tobashi involves deals done in Wall Street and London as well as Tokyo.
City: Whitbread may forge Euro-link
by Frank Kane
BEER and restaurants group Whitbread is considering a European partnership to solve its problems.
The prime candidate is Dutch group Heineken, which already has a 1 per cent-plus Whitbread stake and a long-term agreement to sell its beers through Whitbread's pubs.
Whitbread chief executive Peter Jarvis would not comment on possible closer links with Heineken, but senior company sources say a share deal with Heineken could be a means of loosening the connection with Whitbread Investment Company, which has a dominant interest in Whitbread's split-voting share structure.
‘Whitbread is interested in closer links with the continent, and it is a natural thing to suggest a link-up could be a way out of the shareholding problem.
There are likely to be big changes in the relationship with WIC in the next year,’ a source said.
Talks may be accelerated this summer when Unilever's Sir Michael Angus becomes Whitbread's chairman.
‘He is a committed European,’ said a source, ‘and highly regarded in Holland.’
Though Heineken is the favourite, Whitbread could do a deal with Belgian group Interbrew, which supplies it with Stella Artois lager.
A way out of the WIC problem — possibly involving a cross shareholding with Heineken — could win investors back to Whitbread.
The City is uneasy as Whitbread faces a ‘triple witching hour’ of difficulties.
The A shares stand at 378p, 2p off their 1991–92 low, amid fears about Whitbread's ability to comply with new rules calling for pub disposals.
Jarvis says he is making progress towards compliance with the beer orders.
‘We will comply,’ he says.
WIC, which has stakes in several regional brewers, also has to comply with the orders, which require it to reduce its stakes below 15 per cent.
A spokesman said it was considering ‘delicate plans meant to benefit shareholders’.
Brewing sources say there has recently been tension between Whitbread and WIC over the shareholding issue.
Whitbread owns almost half of WIC.
Senior sources say it is appropriate for Whitbread to move away from being a family-dominated group, saddled with an arcane share structure, in 1992, its 250th anniversary.
City: Tiny tests Observer market
by Frank Kane and Patrick Weever
TINY Rowland's Lonrho is reliably understood to have tested the market in recent weeks about a possible sale of the Observer newspaper.
Rumours abound that Lonrho scouts have talked to managers at the Financial Times, Guardian and Independent about a deal.
One executive said: ‘Tiny is looking for pie in the sky.
We are looking for a more realistic piece of sky.’
But Rowland, in a message relayed through his daughter, said: ‘It is ridiculous to say the Observer is for sale.’
Director Paul Spicer said: ‘Don't expect me to discuss this with you.
We don't want to be written about.
We want to be left alone.
Write about someone else.
We are money-makers.
You don't want to write about people who are successful.’
At last month's annual meeting, chairman Rene Leclezio said Lonrho's debt was £850 million.
An Observer sale would not make much of a dent but it would staunch losses Lonrho may no longer want to suffer.
The most recent published loss is £14.5 million for the year to September 1990 on sales of £42.6 million.
The disposal price would be related to sales.
Given the losses and a circulation that has fallen back to 540,000, in third place in the race behind the Sunday Times and The Sunday Telegraph, a premium price could not be expected.
One analyst said: ‘In good times, it might be a target for an individual buccaneer seeking power and prestige.
But in this climate it could be hard to find a buyer at all.’
Others are more optimistic, pointing to the Barclay brothers' rescue of the European.
Independent editor Andreas Whittam Smith would want to merge the Observer with the loss-making Independent on Sunday, which has a circulation of about 390,000.
Whittam Smith might feel he could achieve profits faster in a three-cornered race.
City: O&Y Tube link hope
EVEN amid debt rescheduling talks, Canary Wharf developer Olympia & York hopes to finalise agreement this week with London Regional Transport on the Jubilee Line extension to Docklands.
O&Y has agreed to pay £400 million over several years but its bankers will have a say before any deal is ratified.
One hundred bankers have been invited to Toronto on April 13 when O&Y is expected to seek formal suspension of debt repayments.
City: Forte checks in
FORTE, the Travelodge to airline catering group, has this weekend signed a deal to lease BAA's Gatwick Sterling Hotel, with 474 bedrooms and conference facilities.
Forte is expected to convert the Sterling, its first hotel at Gatwick, to its upmarket Crest brand.
The move is a morale booster for Forte, two weeks before its results, which are expected to show a profits plunge to about £70 million.
City: Ashley into black
LAURA Ashley, at 93p, will tomorrow announce a return to trading profit after its recent setbacks.
But an exceptional item of £11.7 million covering write-offs and redundancy costs will result in a loss of £9 million in the year to January 25.
City: UK Land meeting
THE Official Receiver of UK Land's £60 million Northampton Business Park has called a creditors' meeting.
Builder Kyle Stewart, claiming £4 million, has issued a writ against British Linen Bank, leader of the banking syndicate with 20 per cent which put in administrative receivers.
Close Up: No recluse, but a wonderful Bar
By PETRONELLA WYATT
JUST my luck.
I get asked to a party with John Paul Getty II and he doesn't show.
Still, there was enough at John Mortimer's book launch last week to satisfy the most exacting social gourmand.
Mr Mortimer was celebrating the publication of his new bestselling novel, Dunster, at the Ivy restaurant in the West End.
‘Who's Dunster?’ he was asked by Anna Ford.
‘Nobody,’ the author replied.
Despite this inconclusive beginning, the evening soon livened up as guests swooped down like scenic railway trains on the trays of grilled prawns and champagne.
Lord and Lady Longford, Keith Waterhouse, Sir Clement Freud and a host of ladies wearing what appeared to be late Victorian chic gave the evening a satisfying eclectic air.
Newsnight's Jeremy Paxman was in an uneasy trance, suffering from anchorman's amnesia.
‘Er, I can't remember,’ he said when I asked him who he was interviewing the following week.
Around the perimeter of the room, the shadows of the literate flickering gracefully on its walls, there were convulsive scramblings for miniature baked potatoes filled with cream cheese and caviar.
In a welcome change from most ‘literary’ parties, the talk was as much of the Bar as of books.
One of Mortimer's barrister friends, his face eloquent of the excitement of the courtroom, transfixed a group of attractive girls with gory tales of murder and how to carry it out.
‘I know a lady lawyer who can get you off, even if you've been going round the shops buying poison,’ he said.
Forget John Paul Getty.
This was a party with everything.
Over at the Dorchester Hotel we celebrated the elderly Jackie Mann and his wife Sunnie.
I can think of fewer couples more deserving of homage.
More's the pity, then, that they are in danger of drowning in soap suds.
Last week the couple launched their memoirs, Yours till the End, co-written by Tess Stimson.
Or rather, their memoirs were launched for them at a glib and glitzy party by Heinemann, the publishers.
Sentiment engulfed it like the sea.
An ice sculpture of a heart, crowned with pink roses, stood precariously on a plinth at the end of the room.
Sunnie Mann was dressed in an opaque white blouse and a red and black skirt.
Her glasses were as blue as ever and her smile just as large.
Her husband, who has been ill recently, was hustled off to a chair in the corner.
He sat bemused while the photographers, who outnumbered guests by three to one, were marshalled into position.
Flash!
Bang!
What a picture!
A young man from the publishers told us how moved we were.
‘I'm speechless,’ cried Sunnie.
‘Never, never,’ interjected her husband.
Jackie sank back in his chair to autograph copies of the book, while Sunnie began circulating among the guests, including Terry Waite, A. N. Wilson and Brent Sadler from CNN.
‘It's the first time that Jackie and Terry have met,’ beamed someone else from Heinemann, sailing resolutely forward towards the cameras.
Trembling by the drinks table, a woman was dabbing her eyes.
‘It's wonderful, isn't it?
To be so close to them,’ she said.
‘I could cry.’
Behind her, as if on cue, the ice heart started to melt.
Fashion: AMONG THE BIG GUNS
‘What did you think of the show?’ someone asked me after Yves Saint Laurent.
I couldn't remember a thing.
Determined to experience life as a catwalk photographer, I swapped my pen and notebook for a Canon Eos camera, 200mm lens with a doubler and a monopod (bravely loaned by Michel Arnaud) and squeezed into the ‘gun emplacement’ at the back of the Salle Sully.
What clothes?
Of 112 outfits, I had only the haziest recollection of red, pink and leopard-print.
So intent was I on focussing, and avoiding camera-shake, I forgot about fashion.
My worst moment came when I had to change film.
A graduate of the Instamatic school of photography, I was baffled by the camera-back.
As I fiddled frantically with buttons that wouldn't depress and a monopod that wouldn't telescope downwards so I could actually see what professional fingers find in the dark, I became aware of the incredulous stare of a Japanese with an even bigger lens than mine.
It was all too obvious he was thinking: ‘What fool's paying this idiot?’
Goaded by desperation, I finally achieved lift-off.
The adrenalin was amazing, the buzz palpable, the girls so close I could see every pore.
I loved every minute.
But I'm not giving up the day job — yet.
Fashion: Women who call the shots Hilary Alexander clambers into the ‘gun-emplacement’ at the Paris collections and meets the female catwalk photographers.
Photographs by Michel Arnaud
By HILARY ALEXANDER
IN THE girl-crazy world of fashion, everybody talks about the supermodels.
Linda, Christy, Cindy, Claudia, Yasmeen, Naomi; their names are dropped as casually as cigarette butts in a pavement cafe.
They are the glamour girls of the catwalk, whose looks, legs and lifestyles often overshadow the designers whose clothes they wear.
But there is another group of catwalk girls who are as important, albeit anonymous.
Their earnings are peanuts compared with the salaries of the million-dollar models, but they too are an essential part of the fashion circus.
While the world's most desirable clothes-horses parade on the runways, the female catwalk photographers watch them through Canon, Leicaflex and Nikon lenses.
At the Paris pret-a-porter shows last month, there were 70 of these women among the 300 photographers who registered with the Chambre Syndicale for a Photographe pass.
It is not a job for the frail.
Ask anyone who has lugged 70lbs of camera gear and an aluminium ladder around Paris to cover 80 fashion shows in 10 days.
Nor is it for the sensitive.
Imagine being crammed for two hours in a sweltering tent under 250 kilowatts of stage lighting, along with 200 other photographers; your eardrums assaulted by the machine-gun fire of motor-drives and curses in assorted languages, your nostrils assailed by a breath-catching blend of garlic, stale cigarettes and old shirts.
Then imagine taking pictures with a brace of 400mm lenses performing surgery on your shoulder blades and a dozen elbows excavating your rib-cage.
And the 18-hour day plays havoc with your social life.
Then there's the jealousy.
Doesn't a steady stream of perfect, size 10 cover-girls induce just the slightest feeling of envy?
Apparently not.
The girls who sign up for fashion's survival course say they couldn't imagine life on the other side of the camera.
‘It's some sort of kick, this work.
We may wait two hours in the cold or dark, but when the show starts, it's a moment of magic,’ says Gertrude Holle-Suppa, 44, a veteran of 20 years on the circuit.
Based in Frankfurt, Gertrude photographs for Burda magazine, Morgenpost Berliner and Munich's Sueddeutsche Zeitung and works as a fashion presenter on ZDF TV.
She describes her style as sportif for work, more dressy when she's with family and friends.
A former model and fashion illustrator, she started alongside the catwalk and moved into the back-pack with a 300mm lens five years ago.
‘It can get rough.
There's a lot of competition to get your space, specially with the Latins; they're not used to a woman doing the same job as well as they do.’
Certainly not with a broken left arm and measles, as was the case with Gertrude.
Nor with a baby on the way.
Ola Sirant, 34, who covers the shows for Canadian magazine Chatelaine and Toronto Life's monthly Fashion, is expecting her first child in September.
‘It's been fine,’ said Ola.
‘But I think I'll miss the couture shows in July.’
A graphics graduate from Ontario College of Art, Ola slipped into fashion by accident 10 years ago.
She is equanimous about the beauty that glides past her lens.
‘I'm in awe of it.
I think, ‘Wow!
What a perfect specimen,’ but it's not sexual like the guys.
I have no envy.
Modelling is their profession, photography is mine.
When the shows finish, my life goes on.’
Solvi dos Santos, based in Paris, has been a familiar figure along the catwalk for 15 years.
She mixes show coverage for Scandinavia with interior design photography.
‘There's no secret about good catwalk photography.
If you have top professional models, the pictures work; if you don't, the pictures suffer.’
New Yorker Roxanne Lowit, Conde Nast's answer to Candid Camera, prefers to work backstage.
An intense, excitable figure, she bobs and weaves, snatching the reportage shots that have made her famous.
‘Here's the energy, the reality.
Think of the tips I've picked up.
I can do my eyebrows exactly like Linda Evangelista's.
Exactly.’
Trained as a painter and textile designer, she began taking pictures with an old Instamatic.
In l979, the then underground paper SoHo News offered to publish her work if she got a proper camera.
‘I did, and photography became my paint brushes.’
Roxanne wears black.
‘When you're working a 17-to-18 hour day, it's the only colour.
I love what I'm doing.
Excuse me.’
She breaks off to focus on Karen Mulder, a voluptuous streak in skin-tight Alaia, with a dozen red rollers in her blonde hair.
‘That's my picture.’
Meanwhile, out front at Jean-Paul Gaultier is Mary Russell, who covered the catwalk for a decade.
Now a vice-president of American fashion firm Esmark, she has one comment: ‘I had a ball!’
Food and Drink: SUNDAY WINE
By ROGER VOSS
Mumm, Cuvee Napa, California Sparkling Wine Victoria Wine £7.99; Safeway £8.49; Tesco £8.55 WITH the first results of the Election due on Thursday night, you may be in the mood to celebrate or drown your sorrows.
This wine, made by the Champagne house of Mumm, but in the Napa Valley in California, is made from the classic Champagne grapes, Chardonnay and Pinot Noir, and while the California sun gives riper flavours than you might be used to, there is poise, a rich creamy mousse and a soft, smooth taste.
Victoria Wine's price is an April special offer; selected stores.
Last week's Sunday Wine, the Vino de Tavola from Sainsbury's, was at some stores selling for £2.99 rather than the advertised £2.69.
Special offers are quoted in good faith based on information supplied by retailers.
Food and Drink: Some like it garam masala
By GLYNN CHRISTIAN
Garam masala
OF THE many mixtures of spice used in Indian cookery, this is the most generally useful.
Masala is a generic word meaning mixed spices, and thus the most basic curry powder is a masala of a sort.
None of these mixed spices is meant to be the full flavouring of a dish.
Even curry powder is merely a base, relying on ground coriander and ground cumin for its essential character and then turned this or that way, sometimes by roasting, more usually by the addition of other spices, fresh herbs, aromatic vegetables and so on.
It is important to the final effect that, whatever the mixture, a curry powder is lightly fried at the beginning of the cooking to release its full flavour, and not merely stirred into a liquid.
In contrast, garam masala is used only at the end of cookery, to add voluptuous scent and flavour, revitalising and extending flavours which have been dulled by heat.
Thus it relies on the most fragrant of spices and should never contain anything hot.
Some mixtures of garam masala available commercially include cumin and coriander, but this is merely a cynical way to reduce the cost.
If you have used curry powder, such flavours are already in the dish.
Black pepper is a proper and good inclusion, because stirring it in to a hot dish a few minutes before serving releases wonderful flavour.
The most common suggestion for garam masala I find in authentic Indian cookery books usually suggests equal quantities of cinnamon, cardamom and clove, with or without the pepper, a perfect complement to the spices of the mixture that began the cooking.
In Western cooking such a mixture can add zing to almost anything from scrambled eggs to vegetables, soups, stews and sauces and poached or baked fruits, with the grateful advantage that the result will not taste as though you have succumbed to panic and thrown in a spoonful of curry powder.
Food and Drink: Leaves full of tasty ideas
By SIMONE SEKERS
ANEW crop of cookery books is springing up with all the vigour of hardy perennials; neck-and-neck with growth in the garden is the arrival of publications on my doorstep, some fresh and new, some welcome revivals.
One of the latter is a book that has become a favourite in the two years since it first appeared in hardback form.
Now out in paperback is Joyce Molyneux's The Carved Angel Cookery Book (Grafton, £6.99), full of recipes that range from the frankly rib-sticking to the fashionably rib-revealing, from pheasant with pig's trotters to courgette terrine, and with a whole, wonderful chapter on offal.
It is good for vegetarian recipes, too, and the pudding collection is inspiring — try the first gooseberries of the year with a saffron honey custard, for instance.
IN THE Collins Gem series appear two new titles: Food for Freezing by Juliet Brigstocke and Food for Microwaving by Lorna Rhodes.
These bijou reference books will just about slip into a cardboard Easter egg and cost only £2.99 each.
Of the two, I found the former much the more useful; its alphabetical list of foods is easily referred to and includes such ‘new’ foods as quorn, fromage frais, hummus and tofu.
You might take this with you on shopping trips to see whether it's worth buying lots of cut-price special offers.
Food for Microwaving is also useful but it has some curious entries: under flour, for instance, it simply describes what flour is and what it is used for, but has nothing to offer on how microwaving affects it in pastry, cakes, etc.
There are many entries which are similarly non-microwave-orientated, such as those for tofu, purees, lime and so on.
This could have been a thinner book.
It is useful, however, for its condensed advice on cooking methods, defrosting and especially comparative power settings.
A LATER flowering is expected in the form of four more titles in the National Trust Little Library series, published by Dorling Kindersley on April 16.
Garlic and Onions, Exotic Fruits, Coffee and Oils, and Vinegars and Seasonings are part of a very pretty bunch, written by Jill Norman.
Each is a slim volume but so packed with useful information and recipes that the price of £4.99 seems modest.
Take Seasonings, for instance.
Here is all you need to know about salt, peppers, vinegars and oils, together with details of all those other essences and sauces used to enliven food.
I found the pages devoted to soy pastes and fish sauces particularly useful.
After the facts come recipes — broccoli with oyster sauce, hot-sour prawn salad, and rudjak, an Indonesian fruit and vegetable salad with hot dressing that calls for trassi (described earlier in the book), an intriguing paste of rotted shrimps that smells of meat extract.
Those lost for a way to use the unlovely rambutan or wondering how to test a sapodilla for ripeness will find Exotic Fruits especially helpful.
AND for those to whom chocolate and many other foods are anathema, here is a reminder that Berrydales Special Food News spring edition is out now.
This publication manages to pack into its few pages masses of useful information for those with allergies who have to pick their way through foods the rest of us take for granted.
In this issue there is a sensible article on coffee, a list of new food products, and a report on school meals.
A year's subscription costs £5, from Berrydale House, 5 Lawn Road, London NW3 2XS, 071–722 2866, fax 071–722 7685.
Food and Drink: The welcome taste of the tropics Have you ever put pepper on pineapple?
Glynn Christian suggests new ways with a symbolic fruit
By GLYNN CHRISTIAN
BLESS the pineapple.
Used for centuries as a symbol of hospitality and welcome, it is also one of the few rays of culinary delight at this dreariest time of the year.
Although available most of the year, its enjoyable, explosive tropical flavour in winter heralds the promise of sweet new vegetables to come, and then of syrupy summer fruits.
Of course the pineapple has nothing to do with pine trees and is not an apple; yet it seems its English name is associated with pines.
This most luscious of fruits is native to tropical South America, and in the highlands of Brazil wild varieties still flourish.
The honeycomb-like appearance of the skin shows it not to be a single fruit but an inflorescence, the melding together of many single fruits.
When the botanical writer John Worlidge described it in 1676, he called the fruit ananas, a Brazilian dialect word, but went on to call it a ‘fruit like a pineapple but much bigger’.
C. Anne Wilson says, in her Food and Drink in Britain, that this was because the pine-cone was known as a pineapple in the 17th century.
Eventually the name was transferred, not least because the Spanish were calling it pina.
The extraordinarily complicated sweetness of pineapple meant it was quickly distributed to other parts of the world; it was apparently cultivated in the West Indies before Columbus arrived there.
In 1661 Charles II was presented with one from Barbados.
There are nasty stories of greed overcoming sense, and of hideous lip lacerations as a result of biting directly into the fruit.
It seems to have been in the Eastern seaports of colonial America that the fruit acquired its association with hospitality.
Sailors returning home stuck a pineapple or two on their gateposts to tell the community they were back and welcomed visitors.
Certainly the symbolism of the pineapple is immensely more potent there than in Britain.
It is almost impossible to go into a New England hotel or house without finding pineapples somehow incorporated into the decor.
At such places as colonial Williamsburg there are shops selling pineapple everything — from door knockers and book ends to wallpapers, stencils, trivets and dishcloths.
In Britain, once you know to look, you commonly find the pineapple in the fabric and carving of 18th-century furnishings, but more commonly outside houses, as gatepost finials particularly.
Yet, because the pineapple is usually shown without its crown of pointed leaves, it is often thought to be a pine cone, the original confusion continuing.
Most pineapples sold in Britain have come by sea, which means we are sometimes at risk from being offered unripe or partly ripened specimens.
They are curious fruits in that respect.
The starch of the unripe fruit, which will turn into sugar, is not stored in the flesh but in the stalk and then injected almost overnight.
The process happens a precise number of days after flowering, and, if this has not occurred or been finished when the fruit is harvested, it will not ripen a jot more, whatever a street vendor swears.
Until 15 or so years ago most of us knew pineapple only from cans — who hasn't used chunks to make sweet and sour pork, or rings in an upside down cake?
My favourite hamburger comes with a ring of fried pineapple.
Somehow fresh pineapple isn't quite the same in any of them.
If you haven't quite made up your mind, this is a great time for comparison: Ivory Coast pineapples are in the markets now from about 60p.
The most startling thing about fresh pineapple is quite how much acid balances the sweetness, something which contributes enormously to its enjoyment and versatility.
This is why it is quite as useful in savoury as in sweet dishes.
Provided you have a system which avoids burning your flesh with the skewers, pineapple cubes are invaluable on any kebab, even with fish and shellfish.
In fact one of the simplest and best ways to extend any kind of seafood salad or cocktail is with fresh pineapple.
Use lime juice or zest rather than lemon.
Much nicer and far more refreshing than the bland oiliness of avocado and prawns, a combination which still baffles me.
The well known combination of pork and pineapple has tremendous possibilities but none is better than pineapple grilled or fried with a little butter to serve with bacon and eggs.
Thus an almost instant hot accompaniment of chopped pineapple flavoured Creole fashion with fresh or dried thyme, a touch of vinegar, a grate of fresh ginger and a little garlic would make the simplest roast or grilled pork rather special.
It can't be simpler.
Among its many unsuspected affinities, pineapple is quite amazingly good with black pepper.
The next time you roast duck or chicken, cook thick slices of pineapple in the pan with lashings of black pepper.
Add a little more three or four minutes before serving.
If you are very good otherwise at restricting your fat intake, this combination with black pepper is much better if the pineapple is fried in a little butter, for its juices and the butter together make a spectacular caramelised sauce.
If you would like more sauce or a thinner one, splash in vodka or white wine, both of which have unassailable affinities with the fruit in any guise.
Pineapple — tinned, fresh, or fresh-cooked — is excellent in coleslaw and an unexpected success in sauerkraut.
Take wonderful advantage of a double affinity by cooking cabbage in very little water with masses of black pepper, draining, adding more black pepper and finely-chopped pineapple, with or without butter.
Let it heat through so neither the cabbage nor the pineapple lose their bite.
At the end of a meal pineapple is universally useful unless you wish to use gelatine.
Fresh pineapple contains an enzyme called bromelin which digests gelatine, so the dish won't set.
Agar-agar is not affected and may be substituted for gelatine, otherwise you must use cooked pineapple as heat corrupts the enzyme.
I generally prefer hot pineapple desserts, often as simple as a sponge steamed pudding with crushed pineapple in the sponge and much more in the base.
Kirsch is a good addition, but I am not as crazy about this combination as Europe seems to be; orange of any kind is much better.
My current passion is to put a rich, dark caramel in the bottom of an ovenproof dish, to layer fresh pineapple thickly on it, and then to sprinkle with orange zest and dark rum.
Puff pastry goes on top and then into a very hot oven.
It has to cool a little and you must pour off excess juices, then it is turned out, becoming a rather tropical tarte tatin, sitting inches high on the puff pastry.
A specially good recipe within my family is the combination of fresh pineapple cubes with fruit mincemeat.
It is excellent however you use it, but rather than fiddling with small mince pies, my great aunts from Norfolk Island made huge double-crusted pies, the pineapple layered between home-made mince meat, rich with rum and spices.
If you have a jar or two left over, this is the way to use it.
Like all really good recipes, the proportion of one to the other is entirely arbitrary and you could use canned rather than fresh pineapple.
And then there is gin.
Pineapple and gin have a truly spectacular affinity, combining to make something bigger and better than either.
You might like to explore this by mixing gin with pineapple juice in a long drink, or folding gin into the whipped cream for a pineapple sundae or hot dessert.
It doesn't work if you cook the two together, for gin is exceptionally fugitive.
Best of all is simply to let nature do its work.
Prepare fresh pineapple in cubes or chunks or slices and pour on some gin.
Leave it at room temperature for an hour and then chill slightly.
There is nothing else you need to do, except let everyone else wonder quite what you have done.
Food and Drink: Win the holiday obstacle course
By Karin Perry
DURING the next two weeks, there are the three hurdles of school holidays, the general election and Easter to be overcome.
Whether or not you look forward to any of them, you and your kitchen are unlikely to escape the demands of at least one of them.
If you have teenagers at home, planning a meal can be tricky; you may think you have them pinned down, but one phone call and they are up and away to more exciting prospects.
It is worth considering what makes ‘convenience’ foods so popular, and introducing superior ones of your own.
Few people tire of pizza.
Claudia Roden's recipe for Arab pizza is one that I use frequently.
The dough is simple to make and because these pizzas are small they are quick to cook.
If you plan to stay up on election night, you could sustain yourself in the small hours with freshly baked pizza.
The traditional filling is a spicy mixture of minced lamb or beef, tomato and onion.
For a party, a layer cake can be iced and decorated to fit the occasion, or according to your political persuasion.
At Easter, decorate with chocolate eggs, crystallized flower petals, or fresh primroses and pansies.
Pates and terrines, a useful standby, provide an adequate meal when accompanied by good bread and a salad.
With a processor or blender, smoked fish pates are ready in minutes.
LIVER AND BACON PATE
YOU can divide the mixture and freeze one portion.
1lb/500g chicken livers
1lb/500g streaky bacon
2 medium onions
4oz/125g lightly salted butter
4oz/125g plain flour
7 fl oz/200ml milk
2 eggs
sprig of thyme
1–2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1–2 tbsp brandy
salt and black pepper
one or two bay leaves
Trim the livers and remove the bacon rind.
Use either a processor to puree the liver and chop the bacon and onions, or a mincer, working the liver through the fine blade and the bacon and onion through the coarse blade to vary the texture.
Melt the butter in a heavy pan over a medium heat.
Stir in the flour then gradually add the milk.
Cook for two or three minutes and remove from the heat.
Beat in the eggs, one at a time, then stir in the onion while the mixture is hot; after five minutes, add the bacon and liver.
Crumble the thyme and add with the garlic and brandy, season and mix well.
To taste for seasoning, either fry a teaspoonful of the pate or poach it in simmering water (it will taste less strong when cold).
Fill a greased earthenware or enamelled cast iron dish (or dishes), put a bayleaf on top and bake in the oven at 350F/175C/gas 4.
If you make two portions, test after 35 minutes by inserting a skewer into the centre for 30 seconds.
It should come out clean and hot to the touch.
For a single portion, bake for 45–50 minutes.
Allow to cool before refrigerating.
The pate will keep for 4–5 days.
(Serves 10–12.)
LAHMA BI AJEEN (Arab Pizza)
1lb/500g strong white flour
½oz/15g fast-acting yeast
1 tsp sea salt
pinch of sugar
2 tbsp oil
Mix all the ingredients in a bowl; add about ½ pint/300 ml lukewarm water to make a soft dough.
Knead thoroughly until smooth and elastic.
Put in an oiled bowl, cover with clingfilm and leave to rise in a warm place until doubled in bulk (or leave overnight in the refrigerator).
Knead the risen dough and divide into walnut-sized balls.
Allow to rest for a few minutes then roll, on a lightly floured board, into rounds 5–6ins/12–15cm in diameter.
Cover the entire surface with your chosen filling and transfer to an oiled baking sheet.
Bake in a very hot oven, 450F/230C/gas 8, for about 10 minutes.
The pizzas should be well done but remain pale and soft enough to fold in the hand to eat.
(Serves 8.)
LAYER CAKE
8oz/225g butter
6oz/175g sugar
4 eggs
7oz/200g self-raising flour
2½oz/70g ground almonds
raspberry jam or redcurrant
jelly glace
icing decorations
Pastry cream
7 fl oz/200ml milk
¼ pint/150ml single cream
half a vanilla pod
3 egg yolks
1–2 tbsp sugar
1 tbsp flour
1 tbsp cornflour
Grease four 8 in/20 cm sandwich tins and line the bottom with a disc of baking parchment.
Cream the butter and sugar and beat in the eggs, one at a time.
Fold in the flour and almonds.
Divide the mixture between the tins and bake in a preheated oven at 350F/175C/gas 4 for 20–25 minutes.
Remove from oven, after 5 minutes turn out on a rack to cool; peel off the paper.
Scald the milk with the cream.
Slit the vanilla pod, scrape the seeds into the milk, add the pod and leave to infuse for 10 minutes.
In a bowl, beat the egg yolks with the sugar until thick, sprinkle on the two flours and whisk until smooth.
Whisk in the hot milk and pour the mixture into a clean pan.
Bring slowly to the boil, whisking constantly, and cook for two minutes.
Remove from heat and chill, stirring occasionally to prevent a skin forming.
Set aside one cake for the top and thinly spread the rest with jam.
Put one layer on a large plate and spoon on one third of the pastry cream.
Do not spread it right to the edge or it will ooze out.
Stack the other two layers on top, covering each with cream filling.
Put on the final layer.
Ice the cake so that the top is covered and a little icing trickles down the sides.
Decorate as you wish.
Leave for about 6 hours for the layers to fuse before cutting.
Serve with whipped cream if you like.
(Serves 8–10.)
Food and Drink: The Alsace improviser Lucy Bailey tunes in to the style of jazz fan and winemaker Andre Ostertag
By LUCY BAILEY
I FELL in love with jazz even before I fell in love with wine — I'm talking about great, improvised, live jazz and, of course, great bottles of wine; both darned hard to describe, poignantly ephemeral and profoundly moving experiences.
Being British, one would not gush about such things; winemaker, jazz-lover and poet Andre Ostertag, being French, has no such qualms.
I met Ostertag last month over a lunch hosted by wine merchant Jasper Morris at The Square in King Street — the wine list there included, as our excuse, one Ostertag wine (the Sylvaner ‘VV’).
The Ostertags have been making wine in Alsace for a long time — centuries rather than years.
But, when Andre returned from oenological college in Beaune, brand new influences soon became apparent.
Andre had fallen in with the legendary Lafons of Meursault — Dominique Lafon was at college at the same time, and Lafon pere had become something of a mentor.
By 1984 he plucked up the courage (or obtained the permission) to do the two things he really wanted: make wine from Pinot Gris (originally a Burgundian grape) as a Burgundian would, fermenting and maturing it in (partly new) French oak barriques; and stop filtering his dry white wines.
The ‘barrique scandal’ brought him a lot of attention — Ostertag was the first, although not the only, winemaker in Alsace to think of using new oak.
Traditionally, Alsace wines never see new wood, and the appellation laws clearly preclude anything that might get in the way of ‘fruit plus terroir’.
Leaving white wines unfiltered is certainly far more revolutionary than a bit of oak.
Hardly anyone in France apart from the Lafons, and now Ostertag, dares to risk refermentation in bottle and the subsequent deposit of anything other than a few tartrate crystals in a dry white wine.
To get away with it at all, the wines must be bone dry, so that there's no food (ie sugar) for any possible remaining bugs.
Classical ‘dry’ Alsace Pinot Gris, for example, in fact contains about 7–10g/litre residual sugar; Ostertag's has none.
But never mind the risk, feel the quality — that's why he's doing it: ‘People pay great attention to the nose and the palate, and too often neglect one of our major senses: the tactile sensations of form, texture, density, and volume express the vitality of a wine.
And vitality is its quality of mystic nourishment, its physical and spiritual trace in us.’
This last bit (whatever it means) is a quote from Ostertag's occasional, over the top and irredeemably French publication, La Lettre du Vigneron, a platform for his passionate outpourings on wine, art, dreams and the meaning of life.
The wines are all bone dry except for the Vendage Tardives (VTs), made from 100 per cent late-picked, super-ripe (but not botrytised) grapes, and the Selections de Grains Nobles (SGNs) made from 100 per cent botrytis-affected fruit — 1989 was a great year for both.
(The dry wines are marked ‘Vin non filtre, risque de leger depot’ just to remind you.)
Sylvaner ‘VV’ '89 (£5.30).
Ostertag has an emotional and historical attachment to this generally uninspiring grape.
His unusually old, relatively low-yielding vines give a crisp, creamy, meadowy, delightful wine.
Pinot Gris Barriques '89 (£9.90).
Made and aged in Vosges oak (¼ new); vividly yellow-gold, with spicy oak, good acidity, mouthfeel and pungency —‘this needs time to come together’.
Muenchberg Riesling ‘VV’ Vendange Tardive '89 (£18.70).
Deceptively simple and restrained at first, then juicy, almost lychees, with a salty/grassy finish.
Muenchberg Pinot Gris SGN '89.
This is the barrique-aged wine that gained cult status as A360P, the Michelin map reference of Grand Cru Muenchberg, when the appellation authorities temporarily forbade Ostertag to use the Grand Cru name on the label.
This is the showstopper: only 9.1 alcohol but a massive 287g of residual sugar, and it feels like it — incredible colour with an amazingly pungent nose-tickling scent, with hints of candied citrus fruit and butter.
In the mouth it is hugely, stickily unctuous and far, far too young.
As he is not a chap to do anything by halves, to get your hands on the eight per cent SGNs you'll have to go the whole hog and invest in ‘Work '69: Terres a Vin’, a box containing six special half-bottles (1 Muenchberg Riesling ‘VV’, 2 Muenchberg Pinot Gris and 3 Franholz Gewurztraminer) with handmade labels and capsules pebbledashed with vineyard soil, a piece of rock from each of the three Grand Cru vineyards and a book of Andre's poems.
Price: £235.
These and all other Ostertag wines are available from Morris & Verdin, 28 Churton Street, London SW1 2LP (071–630 8888).
A Place I Know: Amid the batter of Hastings Fiona Pitt-Kethley explains why she loves to eat beside the seaside
By FIONA PITT-KETHLEY
WHEN London friends come and spend the day with me in Hastings, the first thing they all want to do is sample the fish and chips.
Our choice of venue is usually the Mermaid Restaurant where punters can dine al fresco at white plastic tables, rain or shine, in season or out, risking the wrath of the passing gulls.
The Mermaid is frequented by the local fishermen for breakfasts and lunches, which makes me think its fish must be the freshest.
Plaice, cod, huss and skate are all caught locally.
The fish hawkers on the beach stalls opposite sell plaice still flapping, straight out of the sea.
Fish never quite tastes the same by the time it reaches London.
The Mermaid is at the end of the Old Town in a row of narrow houses which peters out on to the beach past the Fisherman's Museum (complete with stuffed albatross) and the new Sea Life Centre.
It is a remarkably piscatory street — a choice of three fish-and-chip shops, a jellied eel bar and an excellent wet fish shop that smokes everything from conger eel and whole salmon down to the humble sprat.
From the Mermaid you get a view of the tall black huts used for hanging nets.
To the right you can also see Winkle Island — an island in the middle of the road with a statue of a winkle.
It is the emblem of an all-male club which raises money for charity by fining members 10p if they aren't carrying their shell when they hear the Freudian rallying cry ‘Winkle Up.’
The club is also responsible for marathon winkle-eating competitions, and its elderly members sometimes appear in suits made of thousands of shells.
I eat only fish at the Mermaid these days — not because I believe in dieting, but because I once suffered an awful chips surfeit that put me off them for life.
In my early struggling days as a writer I spent occasional days as a film extra.
I once worked two night shifts in the open on Superman II which was being made at Pinewood Studios.
We had been told to wear thin summer frocks, although it was November.
The extras huddled in coats between takes and were served frequent meals of chilli con carne, curry and chips to ward off hypothermia.
The chips were those oven ones which taste good hot, but become remarkably nasty when cold.
If you have to eat a cold chip, you're better off with an old-fashioned greasy one.
By the end of that second night I never wanted to see a chip again.
You can, of course, order fish without chips at the Mermaid and watch the proprietor's mouth open in surprise.
Sometimes, though, it's easier to take it as it comes — you'll never be short of a willing gull to use up your leavings in Hastings.
There's a remarkably fat one that stands by the nearby shellfish stall.
He does a most pathetic act, limping.
At least, it would be pathetic if he always remembered to limp on the same leg.
But the tourists are always taken in.
The Mermaid Restaurant, Rock-a-Nore Road, Hastings TN34 3DW (0424 438100) serves meals from breakfast time till about 7.30pm, seven days a week.
Fish and chips cost from £2.50.
Licensed for drinks.
Food and Drink: SUNDAY PUDDING
By THANE PRINCE
PRALINE ICE-CREAM
1 pint single cream
85g/3oz granulated sugar
2in strip vanilla pod
85g/3oz unblanched
4 egg yolks
almonds
1 tbsp caster sugar
IN A heavy-bottomed saucepan heat the cream with the vanilla pod and allow the mixture to infuse for 15 minutes.
Split open the pod and scrape the seeds into the cream.
In a bowl, beat the yolks with the caster sugar and mix in a little cream.
Re-heat the remaining cream and add the egg yolk mixture.
Cook over a very low heat, stirring constantly.
When the custard thickens, slightly remove from the heat.
Strain the custard to remove lumps or whiz in a blender for 60 seconds.
Pour into a bowl, cover and allow to cool, stirring from time to time to prevent a skin from forming.
Melt the granulated sugar with the almonds in a saucepan.
Stir and cook until the caramel is golden brown.
Remove from heat, pouring the mixture into a buttered tin.
Once cold, grind the praline into a fine powder.
When the custard is cold, put it in the freezer.
Twice remove from the freezer before the ice is solid and beat vigorously, folding all but 2 tbsps of the praline mixture into the ice-cream the second time.
Freeze until solid and serve sprinkled with the reserved praline.
Exploring Dracula's old haunts David Walton and family make the most of the coast between Saltburn and Boggle Hole
By DAVID WALTON
THERE was not another house to be seen from the Boggle Hole hostel on the North Yorkshire coast, as we woke to the gentle sounds of the warden reciting Buddhist mantras, and waves lapping the sands.
Boggle Hole hostel is a converted textile mill, standing on a stream and with its own beach on the doorstep.
Our exploration of the coast had begun at Saltburn, an elegant if truncated testimony to Victorian values and market forces.
It was to have been another Scarborough, a resort for the wealthy of Middlesbrough.
But the tide of prosperity ebbed, leaving the town unfinished.
A remarkable hydraulic lift still plies the cliff face between the high promenade and the pier, and there are some imposing villas, but the grandest of grand hotels has been turned into flats.
We found the beach temptingly deserted, but unsafe for bathing thanks to ICI's futuristic chemical city, Billingham, just round the headland in the Tees estuary.
Our younger child was bitterly disappointed when shown the discreet little warning notices.
On the way to Whitby and the first hostel, we turned off at Skinningrove, a steel-producing town that looked exactly like a slice of Newcastle's backstreets scooped up and set down on the rugged coastline.
A bright orange river wound between terraced houses and cleanly-painted pigeon lofts perched among the allotments.
Nearby, alum has been worked for centuries and we could still see the remains of the old landing stage where little coasters brought brimming vats of urine from London, which was mixed with the local mineral to produce dyestuff fasteners for textiles.
The hostel at Whitby is housed in the old abbey stables, all that is habitable of this splendid cliff-top ruin where Caedmon, the simple cowherd regarded by many as the father of English music, once sang of the Creation with a voice like an angel.
The average charge for an overnight stay in such historic surroundings was £16 for the four of us, including breakfast.
Across the River Esk is a whale's jawbone arch, a reminder of the town's maritime history.
Captain James Cook, whose parents were local farmworkers, set out on his celebrated voyages of discovery from this estuary.
Nearby is St Mary's (the old abbey church), still without benefit of electricity and containing a wonderful triple-decker pulpit and box pews built from wrecks and gouged with Jacobean graffiti.
To the delight of both children, we learned it was just below this spot that Bram Stoker's Dracula leapt ashore from his sinking ship in the shape of a huge black dog, and slept on a suicide's grave among the abbey tombs.
The ‘Dracula Experience’ tourist show seemed an anticlimax to me, although the children loved it.
Perhaps they were influenced by the ghoulish sets and sound effects, Christopher Lee's cape and the ‘blood capsules’ they bought to disgust their pals.
Although friendly, the hostel was not in the same class as its neighbour at Boggle Hole.
Whitby is worth minor discomfort, however, and we quickly clambered down the 199 steps and strolled around the endlessly fascinating harbour and backstreets.
The Magpie Cafe provides the best value fish and chips I have ever eaten; the staff seem to love children, and bread, butter and tea are automatically provided with every order.
There is also a good wine list and local delicacies such as crab, scampi and sole are often on the menu.
The cafe closes at 6.30pm and — like Whitby itself — is best avoided on a Bank Holiday.
And so to Boggle Hole, seven miles down the coast.
One party drove, one party walked briskly along the Cleveland Way.
Once settled, we continued our walk, picking our way along the shoreline to Ravenscar to hunt down the shale fossils there.
We passed splendid mare's-tail waterfalls where tiny becks tumbled over the cliffs, and watched oyster-catchers and cormorants wading and diving.
The fossils (mainly belemnites and ammonites) were liberally strewn around the beach, below the ‘Old Man’ stack of Ravenscar.
They were brittle, however, and we had tears as some ‘wicked mega-whoppers’ disintegrated in the children's eager hands.
The castellated Raven Hotel (a healthy clamber up the cliff path) provided refreshment at reasonable prices.
The coast (or cliff-top) walk from the hostel in the other direction led to the delightful settlement of Robin Hood's Bay, where the slipway resembles a drawbridge let down from the towering sea walls.
The medieval feel is enhanced by the narrow, stepped lanes of the upper village.
But our greatest find was the friendly Dolphin pub, serving excellent local seafood, and with a games room for children of all ages.
The landlord, a fund of local knowledge, recommended a visit to Captain Cook's house in the village of Staithes and a trip to the North York Moors steam railway — both a few minutes' drive away.
There are good family restaurants in Robin Hood's Bay, a well-stocked second-hand bookshop, a fossil and gem shop and an excellent delicatessen.
An SOS at the YHA A sudden drop in membership has brought massive reform to the hostels of old
By DAVID WALTON
YOUTH hostelling, in my experience, has not always been plain sailing.
I have been woken at 6.30am in Bavaria by deafening Wagner over the Tannoy, which continued until the last wretched sleeper was driven into a cold shower.
Along with a dining room full of others, I have been accused of stealing an extra jam sponge in Yorkshire (‘There's bin someone 'ere 'as 'ad more'n one pudding, and I shan't rest till I find out 'oo…’).
On the other hand, I have discoed the night away in Marina di Massa and had payment waived in Copenhagen when I was visibly kroner-less.
My unhappier memories are now a generation old and, thankfully, much of the starch seems to have gone out of youth hostelling.
Youth hostels originated in Germany before the Great War and after 1918 spread rapidly throughout Europe.
They were set up to provide young people with basic, well-ordered accommodation from which they could experience the countryside.
There were early setbacks — the first hostel to open in Britain, Pennant Hall, closed almost immediately because its water supply was contaminated with manure, and Derwent Hall, first of the YHA's fine old mansions, now lies drowned at the bottom of the Ladybower Reservoir.
But other hostels were successfully established in areas of outstanding beauty or interest, often in historic, unusual buildings.
The Peak District hostels, for example, include the former home of a wealthy quarry owner (Buxton), an old manor house (Hartington), a row of railwaymen's cottages (Crowden), a 19th-century Co-op store (Youlgreave), a 15th-century hall (Castleton), and a flax mill (Gradbach Mill).
The International Youth Hostel Federation was established in 1930, and by the Seventies had 20 million members worldwide.
But a decade later, numbers had fallen to three million and the YHA was in crisis.
It had failed to meet the demand for family accommodation, and cheap holiday alternatives were attracting young members elsewhere.
In 1986 the English YHA did some market research, learnt some painful truths and embarked on a modernisation programme unhandily titled ‘The Product Development Marketing Plan’.
Its aim was to improve safety, comfort, privacy and the quality of facilities in hostels and to encourage more groups with a shared interest, such as wildlife.
The £25 million cost will be met by raising prices and selling off some of the little-used hostels.
The introduction of new technology means that you can now book hostel accommodation in advance; a pilot fax scheme is in operation for onward reservation between some hostels (most hostels will also accept payment by credit card).
There is no limit to how far ahead you can book nor, often, on length of stay, although popular hostels may impose restrictions to give everyone a fair chance.
Do not expect to book a fortnight's summer holiday in one hostel; instead, plan to explore an area with two- to three-night stopovers in different hostels.
Camping is allowed where space permits.
The majority of hostels now offer family accommodation and all provide excellent, free, self-catering facilities, though breakfast (£2.30), packed lunch (£1.95), and evening meal (from £3.50) are widely available and some hostels even run to a wine list.
Compulsory chores are a thing of the past, although you are expected to leave rooms tidy.
Games rooms and reading rooms are fixtures in most hostels, and noticeboards, fellow hostellers and friendly wardens supply all the information you are likely to need about the local area.
The YHA has also made a positive effort to accommodate disabled hostellers and welcomes enquiries from them.
Travel: Grand tours with great commentators Which cultural holiday?
Jessica Mann samples study tours offered by three leading operators
By JESSICA MANN
ART TREASURE tours all begin in the same way.
One arrives early in the morning at an airport, where even those who have disobeyed the injunction to label themselves and their luggage with the travel company's name are unerringly identified by a courier with a clipboard.
How?
I neither know nor need to know.
One of the great advantages of such journeys is that from this moment someone else solves all practical problems.
The groups have a certain homogeneity.
All include more women than men, more old than young.
There is always one member who gets lost and is late for the bus, one who talks too much, another who never speaks at all.
There is one who stands apart, dissociating himself from his companions.
And there is a high proportion of people who know a good deal about what they are looking at and may even have seen it before.
The motive for sheltering within this cocoon is not cowardice.
Most turn out to be experienced travellers, trumping Mongolia with Patagonia in competitive conversation over the dinner table.
I tried out three companies that specialise in cultural holidays accompanied by expert lecturers.
Travel: Grand tours with great commentators
By JESSICA MANN
THE MARKET leader in this field, offering the largest number of trips and covering the widest geographical spread, is Swan Hellenic.
It is the oldest of its type, having been started by an ex-Army officer to show schoolteachers and clerics the classical world, and is now part of the P & O group.
The military influence survives in an unobtrusive but strict adherence to timetables that specify where the party should be every five minutes of the day.
Heads roll (though out of sight of the passengers) if the local bus is late or the agent is lost.
Swan's ‘guest’(ie, unpaid) lecturers are academics singing for their supper and for the chance to revisit sites and monuments, or sometimes visit them for the first time.
The practical details are organised by a tour manager, whose role is a cross between hostess, nanny and courier.
He, or more often she, provides photo, shopping and ‘comfort’ stops.
She protects her charges from all hassle, handling every emergency with experienced unflappability.
Ann Harper, who accompanied my trip to Malta in May, knows her way and her charges' way around the Far East, South America and most of Europe.
She has dealt with a dead passenger in Poland (his widow carried on regardless), outbreaks of war in India, and breaking her own leg falling out of a rickshaw in Nepal.
Malta, in comparison, must have been a doddle: a civilised, sophisticated holiday island where traffic keeps to the left, letter and telephone boxes are scarlet, the coinage matches ours, and everyone speaks English.
But the landscape is not the least bit like home.
Without any rivers or natural water catchments, Malta is naturally rocky, windy, treeless; its landscape biscuit-brown.
When the Knights first took over the island on their expulsion from the eastern Mediterranean, they saw it as a penitential desert exile.
It is still not beautiful, but extremely interesting, with notable monuments.
On Swan's Art Treasures Tour of Malta we mixed culture with more basic sight-seeing, taking in not only the great prehistoric temples of Gigantia, the stupendous fortifications and baroque architecture of Valletta and the numerous modern churches with their vast, red domes, but also the Blue Grotto, a performance of Mozart's Requiem in the oldest theatre in Europe, and a botanical garden.
What I would most like to see again, at greater leisure, is Rabat, or Mdina, the Silent City, a citadel town of car-free streets filled with palazzi, churches and tiny squares.
Local guides are ubiquitous but our scholarly instruction, with evening lectures, was provided by Charles Daniels, senior lecturer in archaeology at Newcastle University.
Details were added by a member of the party who was stationed here during the wartime siege of Malta.
He helpfully identified one typical cobbled street in Valletta as the Red Light alley, known to servicemen as The Gut.
My companions came with Swans as much for comfort as for culture, to be spared any anxiety about car-parking, or the ferry timetable, or where to stay, or even to dine.
Three meals a day are pre-ordered, wine and mineral water included.
The high proportion of programmed togetherness compared with free time is a feature of Swans tours, and I felt churlish on leaving restaurant lunches in mid-meal in order to see more and eat less than my companions wanted to.
Their average age is higher than those on other tours, and several walk with sticks.
But the indefatigable Swans, yellow labels flapping from their shoulder bags, would never dream of sitting anything out.
WITH Martin Randall Travel I went on a thrilling journey in July called Country Houses of the Hapsburg Empire.
The itinerary included parts of Czechoslovakia and Austria and a day trip into Hungary, with Martin Randall himself as the lecturer.
He is an art history graduate of the Courtauld Institute and was one of the founders of Prospect Tours, but now runs a company under his own name.
He insists that everyone in the office should ‘get out into the field’ occasionally.
However, most of his tours are accompanied by freelance lecturers, though never those who rely on it for their livelihood, who, he thinks, get stale.
All are carefully auditioned and must be experts on every single site visited.
Martin Randall's company organises art, archaeology, architecture, history and music tours all over Europe, and in the near and Far East.
He is a kind of missionary.
‘I really want people to travel to see lovely things.’
His clients seem to be younger than those of the other companies, and to be more seriously interested in the topic.
Many go to evening classes to prepare themselves.
This trip included a newly qualified doctor, who was given the trip as a birthday present, a curator from the V & A, a City solicitor, a pianist and a colonel in the UDR.
They were inexhaustible, even after a 10-hour day of hard sightseeing.
On this tour there was also a tour manager, who invited us to turn to him in case of need or trouble.
I noticed a not unpleasant atmosphere of discipline.
Two women who were late for the bus at one castle were left behind to follow it to the next by taxi.
Everyone was keen to work hard at seeing as much as possible in the time given — including some places not normally open to the public, for which Martin Randall had made special arrangements.
This was an eye-opening journey.
I had never realised quite how the Iron Curtain distorted our perception of geography, making Prague, which lies west of Vienna, seem so eastern European.
It has become a cliche to say that Prague is the most beautiful city in Europe, but that fact still struck me as a stunning truth on this, my first visit there.
Even Vienna, which we reached at the end of the journey, seemed disappointing by comparison.
I was enthralled, driving through rural Moravia, Bohemia and Hungary, to see houses which seem to have been preserved almost unchanged since their heyday.
Some were dilapidated, others restored, some hideous, others glorious.
Renaissance, baroque, rococo and Biedermeier swirled around in our minds as we grew to understand the history of the Habsburg Empire in a tour that was, as far as possible, chronologically arranged.
Martin Randall believes in allowing his clients off the leash for a good deal of unorganised time, which enabled me to enjoy my favourite occupation: finding my own way around a new city.
‘Our passengers are not dumbos, therefore they mustn't be babied along.
They want to arrange their own lunches, decide for themselves how to spend some days.
I believe in treating clients like adults, otherwise you find they have reverted to childhood by the end of a trip.’
THE holidays of Prospect Art Tours are intentionally arduous, designed, I was told, for people whose normal lives are quiet, restful and uneventful.
They go to Europe and the Near East, and a separate brochure lists Prospect Opera and Music.
The chairman, David Lawson, says, ‘Our typical customer is someone who is not necessarily having much day-by-day culture intake.
We give them one period in the year of intense stimulation.’
With an average age of 60, customers choose his trips as much for the company of like-minded people as for the presence of an expert lecturer.
Being ‘protected’ is a minor detail.
The lecturer also performs the function of a tour manager and the itinerary is less ‘embattled’, Mr Lawson says, than Swans'.
‘We try to leave free time, to pace it, to offer a good variety.’
He described an ideal short programme.
Day 1: Early flight, arriving in time to walk round and get orientated.
Day 2: Hit them hard with a high-aesthetic experience.
Day 3: A busy morning of museums or churches, a free afternoon and evening.
Day 4: An all-day excursion.
Day 5: Another serious day of aesthetics.
Day 6: Free morning to go back to favourite sights, home in the afternoon.
In October I joined Prospect's Ravenna and Urbino tour.
It conformed to this pattern, with plenty of free time and many independent meals.
Unfortunately, the announcement of free time seemed to be the local signal for metal shutters to clang down over everything one might have wanted to see.
Our own disputes about Sunday trading ignore the fact that most of our Community partners close shops and museums at weekends, often on Mondays, and for long lunch breaks.
But this sitting-out time was important to several of my companions.
One couple (an ex-diplomat and his wife), who wanted to come to Italy without having to drive, found it a strain to be polite and conversational all day.
‘We never talk when we are alone.’
This area of the holiday business is a growth area — which is good news for the many scholars who would formerly have worked only for universities and can now supplement their incomes as tour guides.
Some names appear in several rival brochures.
We were escorted on the Prospect Tour by Dr Francis Woodman, an art historian who lectures part-time at the Bartlett School of Architecture and at University College, London.
He had the ability of good actors or teachers to communicate his own enthusiasm repeatedly, especially for his special subject, the history of architecture.
We undertook a packed programme.
Seven churches and a museum on one day devoted to Byzantine mosaics in Ravenna; Rimini; a unique medieval library in Cesena; and the perfect hilltop town of Urbino, full of fascinating treasures.
In the 15th century the town and its palace were thought to be the most beautiful in all Italy.
Even in incessant rain it still seemed lovely and, at least within its walls, remarkably unspoilt, though behind the medieval faades many houses have been relentlessly modernised.
Walking around Urbino's quiet streets on a wet Sunday out of season was an evocative and fascinating experience, even though the churches and palace had closed early in the morning.
Dr Woodman cleverly got us into them even earlier.
Travel — Holidays On The Move: How a tenderfoot fell for a cowboy On a blazing saddle, Angela Humphery treks 100 miles through the Sierra Nevada
By ANGELA HUMPHERY
’ BET YOUR bottom's sore,’said a friend sympathetically when I described my six-day, 100-mile mule ride through the Sierra Nevada of southern Spain.
Four hours a day in a blazing saddle can leave its mark, but my bottom was fine, the terrain being so rough that we never broke into a trot, let alone a gallop.
It was my arms and legs that ached.
I had fondly imagined that sitting astride one of these slow, sure-footed and allegedly stubborn beasts would be a doddle — which it was when actually in the saddle.
It was what came before, during and after each day's ride that was rigorous.
I joined the rest of the group of nine (eight women and one man) at Malaga airport.
From there it was a two-and-a-half-hour minibus ride along the coast towards Motril, then inland and up to Orgiva, a small town of some 6,000 souls.
There we were greeted by Jeff Judd who runs Aventura from a lovely old farmhouse.
Although we didn't arrive until nearly midnight, it was still an early call next morning for breakfast, after which came the tricky task of packing our saddle-bags.
These were solid leather and weighed so much that, not surprisingly, we were allowed only a further 9lb each to include all essentials for the next six days and five nights.
Down in the stable we met our mounts — three mules and six horses.
My mule was a 17-year-old snow-white gelding called Vaquero — Spanish for cowboy.
He had big, brown eyes, long furry ears and dimpled buttocks.
As we were to take care of our own mounts during the trek, we were shown how to groom them, which had to be done morning and evening, and how to tack up.
By the time I had done the obligatory 20-minute brushwork on Vaquero, my arms ached.
Then there were blankets to be cleaned, saddles to be lifted on and buckles galore to be done up on girths and surcingles, stirrups and cruppers, breastplates and bridles.
Last, but by no means least, came the saddle-bags.
The six women horse-riders led the way, single-file, and we muleteers followed, to meet some four hours later for lunch at our first watering-hole, the hilltop village of Torvizcon.
Our group of four included the one man in the party, a 35-year-old barrister, a girl of 30-something, myself, and Helen, our guide — once a guest but now a member of the staff.
We walked along the dry bed of the Guadalfeo (ugly) River: ugly only because of the plastic bags, bottles and other rubbish which had been tipped there.
We arrived in Torvizcon, starving, but resigned to unsaddling and stabling the animals before looking to ourselves.
Although these inns were simple, the food was delicious.
It was country cooking of mouthwatering soups, filleted sardines, pork with almonds and a dish called migas (breadcrumbs mixed with olive oil and garlic and then fried) and local rose.
From the village of Pitres, our second night's stop, we rode through sage- and mint-scented hills, and orchards filled with peaches and almonds, past hedgerows bursting with blackberries, and trees laden with figs and pomegranates.
On our third day we reached Trevelez, the highest village in Spain at nearly 6,000 ft.
The next morning we climbed still higher to 7,000ft, looking back down on Trevelez, its white flat-topped houses spilling down the mountainside, and crossed colourful cliffs and canyons to the village of Cadiar.
We spent our final night of the trek back in Torvizcon before returning to Orgiva.
Every one of us felt sad at having to part company with our particular horse or mule.
After a week of caring for them a bond had been formed.
Those who'd chosen mules were most pleasantly surprised at how easy to handle they were.
Who ever said ‘stubborn as a mule’?
Travel — Holidays On The Move: All aboard the friendship express Christopher Zinn travels through one of the world's most remote regions, but finds he is never alone
By CHRISTOPHER ZINN
THE TRAIN journey between Mongolia and Moscow will take you through some of the most desolate country in the world, but you will never feel lonely.
It is possible to meet almost anyone, from a member of the Red Army to a Red Indian, on the 6,304km (3,917-mile) trip.
The vast distances of central Asia; the slow speed of the so-called expresses, and the intimate but comfortable confines of hard-class sleepers conspire to banish the gulfs of language and culture between passengers.
Under the watchful eye of the provodnitsy — the female ticket-collectors, tea dispensers and mother hens — you feel less a stranger on a train and more a member of an extended family, sharing food, drink and gossip — even if you can't understand a word of Russian.
My family comprised Vitalie, Sergei and Andrei, three members of the Red Army being pulled (gratefully) out of Mongolia.
Four of us were jammed in one compartment on the first leg of my journey — a train full of soldiers bound from the Mongolian capital Ulan Bator to Irkutsk, described as the Paris of Siberia, some 36 hours away.
Their English was rudimentary but enthusiastic.
Sergei, a cynical NCO, had a great line in profitable card tricks.
Andrei, a conscript, swapped Latvian biscuits for Mongolian Arkhi vodka and Vitalie, a teenage cadet, explained the secret of speaking Russian; you run the hyphenated syllables together and roll your Rs.
If only it was that easy.
Outside it was lonely.
The high-latitude summer light barely fades from the sky above a treeless, empty steppe.
Only occasionally was there the distant glow of fires from the Mongolian tents or yurts.
Our first rude awakening was at Naushki for Soviet border formalities.
It was early morning, but since all trains in Russia run on Moscow time, which is five hours behind, the platform clock confusingly said 1am.
More than 100 years ago this area was one of the most important trading centres in Asia as great caravans of camels brought Chinese tea across Mongolia.
Today it is almost impossible to get a cup of tea with new-found friends in the station restaurant.
Twelve hours later we pulled into Zaudinskiy, the junction of the Trans-Mongolian and Trans-Siberian lines, and after fond farewells and toasts my comrades headed west — in the same direction as train after train loaded with tanks.
Their places were taken by two Armenian jewellery traders from Baku in the southern republics.
These men wore white shoes instead of boots and fine-fitting clothes instead of uniforms.
They were con-men who work the black market and although they spent the whole of the next day in Irkutsk taking me to lunch, visiting a host of Siberian churches and museums and organising a trip to the opera, their interest was in valutta — hard currency — not culture.
Next came one of the most spectacular sections of the whole Trans-Siberian, the Circumbaikal line, which skirts Lake Baikal.
It is the deepest (one mile), oldest (20 million years) and volumetrically largest lake in the world, containing about one-fifth of the world's reserves of fresh water.
At the lakeside Listvyanka hotel, we enjoyed a hearty Russian breakfast — fried spam with sour cream and tinned peas — as we took in the view.
Breakfast starts late at this wonderful Intourist institution — about 9am if you are lucky.
The Japanese are luckier since they can eat in the Tokyo-Baikal, their own joint-venture next door.
I never even learned the name of the man I spent the next two days with.
It's a long way through the massive forests of larch and pine to Novosibirsk, especially if your travelling companion only grunts as he downs another tumbler of cheap vodka.
His seemingly endless supply (despite a ban on alcohol sales on trains) emerged from a battered suitcase stuffed with old newspapers.
This sort of vodka, which they do not sell to tourists, comes in small bottles — like school milk used to — that are impossible to re-seal.
They are made to be drunk at one sitting.
Still, he was a nice enough fellow.
With his huge rough hands and a large red nose, he looked like a rebellious peasant from Doctor Zhivago — and compared to the four veterans of the Afghan campaign in the next compartment he was a veritable teetotaller.
These heavily tattooed men, now unemployed civilians, were so drunk for so long that they could barely talk or even sit up.
Eating seemed beyond them.
They could only manage to smoke.
The provodnitsy, as well as the other passengers, seemed to regard them more with sorrow than contempt.
From Novosibirsk, which lies in the middle of Siberia on the mighty Ob river, it is only 3,343km (2,077 miles) to Moscow.
Fifty-six hours in the relative luxury of a two-berth, soft-class compartment with Robert, an engineer, returning from a Siberian fishing trip.
Thankfully, he was not bringing back any fish.
The train was full of children, travelling alone and in groups, who managed to finish off the entire food stocks of the dining car.
Long before we got to Moscow everything was ‘off’ the already limited menu.
Fortunately babuskas, or old ladies, were at every stop selling paper cones full of fresh berries and currants for one rouble.
We also picked up cooked chickens, bruised fruit and wonderful ice-cream at the larger stations.
The landscape was flat, forested and every so often there were small wooden villages.
Sometimes there were sandy heaths which looked like parts of Surrey and sometimes massive, sulphurous and heavily polluted industrial plants.
Just 1,500km (932 miles) from Moscow we passed over the Ural mountains which divide Europe from Asia.
They seem low enough to be part of the North Downs.
The next major geographical crossing was the Volga river.
Train passengers used to stand up as a mark of respect when they passed Mother Volga, but not any more.
There seems little respect for anything in Russia these days.
By dawn the next day we were nearing Moscow.
Dachas, or what Australians call weekenders, were dotted among the woods.
The kilometre posts, which had indicated the distance from Moscow for the journey, now read single figures.
It was time to say dasvadanya (goodbye) to almost the entire carriage: the old man with a chest full of medals from the Great Patriotic War against the Nazis; the young pianist visiting her estranged father in Riga and, of course, the gentle engineer with whom I had shared so much food and time.
Early on a wet Sunday morning outside Yaroslavl station, in the centre of Moscow, my journey was complete and for the first time in 10 days I was alone.
Travel — Holidays On The Move: On an old boat to Luxor Tom Pocock cruises down the Nile and finds himself becoming an Egyptologist in a matter of days
By TOM POCOCK
AS OUR ship's company — some 50 passengers and the same number of crew — assembled on the dockside, there were wry remarks that nothing else was like our old tub and that they would sail the Nile in none other.
The Nefertari was a veteran, it was said, of something between 30 and 40 years on the river; someone thought she had been built on the hull of a much older Nile steamer, and another that she might be a pharaoh's reconstituted sun-boat, disinterred, like the others, near the Great Pyramid.
But when the Nefertari appeared after her annual refit, she was gleaming with fresh white and blue paint and varnished wood.
Certainly her design is old-fashioned.
Open galleries surround her three decks and only her saloon and dining-room are air-conditioned.
As we sat on her open decks in the fresh, warm air, we realised how sensible this was when passing the other 200-odd cruisers on the river: big and flat-topped like aircraft-carriers, almost hermetically-sealed and air-conditioned throughout; most with television in every cabin, shops, disco and Muzak.
She is about a third the size of the air-conditioned monsters, with two-thirds fewer passengers, and she blends with the panorama of the Nile.
She offers a sense of discovery as well as cosiness.
One can sit leafing through glossy English magazines, reading in House and Garden about somebody's ‘elegantly understated’ home in Kensington while passing within yards of a rather more understated Egyptian peasant's home of mud-brick.
But you don't feel as insulated from Egyptian life as were those within the plate glass of the big cruisers with names like Nile Smile, Flash and Lady Diana.
The Nefertari was thoroughly Anglo-Egyptian.
The food, coming from a spotless galley, we ate fearlessly: an agreeable mixture of English and Egyptian, while the drink was, for most of us, Egyptian beer or their resinated white wine.
The passengers, who represented most social strata, were all British, having booked through the quintessentially English family firm Bales Tours, to which the ship is chartered.
Our tour manager was a quietly efficient, handsome lady, whose calm suggested those intrepid women who travelled these regions in the last century, and the lecturer was a young woman professor from Manchester University, who turned out to be an authority on mummification.
There were three professional Egyptologists aboard — a distinguished Australian woman professor; our lecturer; and the Egyptian girl who guided us ashore.
But by the end of the first week we had all become Egyptologists.
What captivated us was not only the beauty of the art and architecture but the immediacy of ancient Egyptian life.
On the walls of the tombs in the cliffs above Beni Hassan are painted the meals expected in the after life, the menus marked with the number of portions required, as on cards hung on the doorknobs of hotel bedrooms to order breakfast.
In the great temple of Osiris at Abydos the tangible sense of sanctity has often been noted.
Our lecturer, who had spent months translating hieroglyphics there, said that entering the great, dim temple was for her, even now, like swimming into a warm patch of sea.
Small wonder that the temples are still not redundant, and it was a common sight to see a woman — often young and dressed for church — slip into one of the chapels to say a prayer to Isis.
In our sudden obsession with things ancient and Egyptian, we attended all the lectures on board— and found cause for worry.
Tourism is now Egypt's third most important industry, and sheer numbers cause damage.
Ancient wall-paintings have survived because Egypt is hot and dry; now thousands of sweating, panting tourists surge through the scorching Valley of the Kings and into the deep, unventilated tombs, creating their own humid microclimate.
It is not only antiquities that suffer.
At Luxor the cruise ships often lie four or more deep at their moorings so that their passengers' view can be of the side of the next ship instead of the river and the Theban hills, and the desert air is replaced by their neighbours' diesel exhaust.
When we went ashore, the transport was not always an air-conditioned coach but sometimes a rickety taxi, a horse cab or even a farm trailer hauled by a tractor.
Our pilot was said to be the best on the river, but every now and then there was a shudder as we touched a sandbank; and there was so little water coming down from Aswan that we only squeezed through the lock at Nag Hammadi by all the passengers crowding into the bows of the Nefertari, while her crew hauled on ropes, chanting a shanty that might have been sung on the sunboats of the pharaohs.
Tom Pocock travelled as a guest of Bales Tours, Bales House, Junction Road, Dorking, Surrey RH4 3HB (reservations 0306 885991; brochures 0306 885923).
The 21-day ‘600 miles up the Nile’ cruise from Cairo to Aswan or vice versa, with tour manager and lecturer, costs from £1,530 per person, full board.
Out And About: Spring-loaded and snappy A good workman names his tools: Robert Pearson on the latest gadgets
By ROBERT PEARSON
THERE is much to do in the garden at present and I have been looking at some of the useful tools and equipment on the market.
Wolf-Tools offers an extensive range of work-heads that can be ‘snap-locked’ in one simple movement to any one of several handles.
All the work-heads and handles are interchangeable and the benefits are even greater for anyone whose movements are restricted.
Useful hand tools in the range are the Garden Scraper, a sharp, narrow knife with numerous uses, including removing weeds from between paving stones; the Small Cultivator, for loosening soil with three pointed prongs (the Small Cultiweeder is similar, but has an additional weeding blade); and the Small Hand Sweep seven spring-steel tines.
The work-heads cost about £7, and the handles about £3 for the 1ft size, and about £9 for the 4ft 7in version.
The Spear & Jackson Neverbend range has an excellent hand trowel and fork (about £5), the 12in wooden handles of which make them suitable for many jobs.
For cutting hedges by hand Sandvik's well-balanced Professional Hedge Shear (about £32) has a long reach and cuts very easily and cleanly.
The top blade has cutting notches to cope with stems up to ⅜in thick, and Sandvik's Bypass-lopper (about £29), a well-made long-handled pruner, cuts through stems up to 1¼in thick.
Both these tools are fitted with shock-absorbing buffers to stop jarring.
Felco has a range of secateurs for ordinary pruning jobs and I especially like the Classic (No 8) model (about £33).
This, and the Professional, with a rotating handle to reduce hand fatigue (about £42), are available in left-handed versions.
It is not only the less sprightly who use a kneeling stool in the garden.
Corrie's Original Easy Kneeler Stool (about £33) is robustly constructed and comes with a foam mat that can be used to kneel on when weeding or, turned over, to sit on while having a rest and a cup of tea.
Folding it for storage only involves undoing four wing nuts.
Corrie's also makes the Garden Buggy (about £36), a lightweight folding wheelbarrow that is ideal for use in a small garden, especially where storage space is a problem.
It is only 10in deep when folded, making for easy storage.
Both the pan and the 8in wheel, which has a PVC tyre, are made of polypropylene fabric, and the chassis is rust-resistant.
One ingenious aid is Bucket Pockets, a durable nylon band with a double row of pockets that fits around an ordinary bucket to make a carrier for the tools, gloves or other small items you wish to have with you in the garden.
It is made by Town and Country Garden Products and costs about £17.
The caterpillars of codling moth, which can damage a good proportion of apple and pear fruit, can be controlled by the Trappit Codling Moth Trap (about £6).
It is pesticide-free and traps male moths by luring them on to a sticky pad with the aid of a sex attractant (a pheromene lure capsule) given off by female moths to attract a mate.
Fewer males means fewer fertilised eggs when they are laid between mid-May and late July.
The trap looks rather like an open-ended small plastic cloche, and hangs in the tree.
After three years of exceptionally low rainfall, especially on the eastern side of England, it is of more than academic interest to know just how much rain has fallen on the garden.
Diplex's Rain Gauge Standard Model (about £8) has a plastic funnel calibrated in inches and millimetres, and the distinguished agricultural meteorologist, L. P. Smith, compiled the notes on how to make the best use of it.
There is also a rough guide to water losses in different parts of Britain and Northern Ireland during the crucial months from April to September, and a full year's daily rainfall chart that you fill in yourself.
Hanging baskets are not the easiest things to water.
Waterways, a watering system designed for them, consists of a perforated funnel inserted when making up the basket so that its mouth is just above the compost level.
This device directs water and feed to the roots.
It can also be used in window boxes, growing bags, tubs and indoor planters.
A pack of four funnels costs about £4.
Hi-Lo (about £5) is a device that allows hanging baskets to be lowered for watering and then returned to their positions.
Maximum recommended basket weight is 25lb (a 14in basket).
These products are available in most good garden centres, but if you have difficulty obtaining any of them, a mail order service is offered by Barralets of Ealing, Pitshanger Lane, Ealing, London W5 1RH (081–997 0576).
Exact prices and postage and packing charges will be given on request.
Out And About: GARDEN GUIDES
By MARGOT BISHOP
GARDEN visiting is one of the most popular ways to spend summer Sunday afternoons and there are several guides to help you decide which, when, where and if it is worth the journey.
Gardens of England & Wales lists over 2,800 gardens that open in aid of the National Gardens Scheme, 574 for the first time.
Available from bookshops, price £1.50, or from N. G. S., Hatchlands Park, East Clandon, Guildford, Surrey GU4 7RT, £2.00, including p&p.
The Good Gardens Guide 1992 (Vermilion, £11.99) provides comprehensive information and an assessment of about 1,000 gardens.
Patrick Taylor has visited the 400 places he describes in the pocket-sized The Gardener's Guide to Britain (Pavilion, £9.99).
And, to whet your appetite, there are many delightful colour photographs.
All these guides give opening times and precise directions, so you won't get lost and waste good visiting time.
Out And About: Always blossom on the bough Winifred Carr looks for trees and shrubs providing continuous colour
By WINIFRED CARR
THE PAST three dry years have not been good ones for young trees.
A winter-flowering cherry, planted in memory of someone in a place I cannot visit to water regularly, bit the dust last spring, but a replacement seems to have become established and even had a few blossoms this winter.
Another cherry, the double pink Kiku-shidare Sakura, no longer weeps gracefully over the terrace pond as it did for more than 20 years.
In spite of many buckets of water, it gave up the struggle last summer and had to be cut down.
But this spring's burst of blossom on older trees in the garden has had me thumbing through the catalogues again.
Clouds of white blossom, fragile and beautiful as snowflakes, covered the Golden Hornet and John Downie crab apples last month, and the wild cherries Prunus avium and blackthorn Prunus spinosa, which are planted in the boundary hedges.
A pink winter cherry Prunus subhirtella autumnalis rosea, which was a birthday present years ago, is still flowering, as it has been since November.
Even when the blossom was browned by heavy frost just before Christmas, it took only a fortnight to recover.
The blossom buds on the apples, Victoria plum and quince are showing pink.
As they finish, the double red hawthorn Crateagus rosea flore pleno, so old its gnarled trunk has multiplied into a mini forest, will be out, with the lilies of the valley which grow beneath it.
The last of the blossom in my garden arrives in August when the large white flowers of Eucryphia nymansensis Nymansay open.
Each flower shows a prominent boss of golden stamens, and the tree is tall, slender and evergreen, and seems to shrug off frosty winters, even though some of its leaves get seared.
The eucryphias, some of which are deciduous, come from Chile and Tasmania and, although they do best in the milder southern counties as long as they are sheltered from the wind, they thrive as far up country as the Midlands.
Nymansay is reckoned to be the hardiest, and was first grown in the gardens of Nymans in West Sussex.
Hoheria is another mild-frost-hardy large shrub or small tree which is smothered in white blossom in mid-summer and has survived the winds in my Cornish garden.
Like the eucryphias, some are evergreen and the choicest is the lace-bark H. populnea, which flowers from late summer into autumn and whose trunk is attractively covered with toast brown bark overlaid with white.
The early flowering Fuji cherry Prunus incisa February Pink opens its single shell-pink blossom almost as soon as the deeper pink flowers of the sweet almond Prunus dulcis.
Rubra is the darkest pink almond, roseoplena has double pink flowers, and P. amygdalo-persica Pollardii is a rich pink hybrid between a peach and an almond.
The myrobalan P. cerasifera also has early pink blossom and is often used for hedging, but will grow into a graceful small tree.
Its leaves turn rich purple in autumn and it produces small, sweet ‘cherry plums’ when mature.
It makes a lovely, colourful specimen tree for a small garden.
Ever since I first saw a Judas tree, its winter bare branches studded with clusters of rosy-purple blossom, I have meant to plant one in the garden.
This autumn I will.
Its stalkless flowers burst straight out of the branches and sometimes even the trunk, although in our climate they usually appear after the first leaves.
It needs to be planted in full sun, which it gets at home on the mountain sides of Greece and the Levant.
Like many plants from the Eastern Mediterranean, it is linked to a legend.
It is said to be the tree on which Judas Iscariot hanged himself, after which its pink blossom turned dark red in shame.
The other trees on my autumn planting list are the Indian bean tree Catalpa bignonioides and a medlar Mespilus germanica, brought here by the Romans but nowadays found only in old gardens.
Everything about the catalpa is exotic.
Its large, pale green leaves are heart-shaped, its bell-like white flowers touched with yellow and purple are out in summer, and these are followed by dangling long brown seed pods which hang until late autumn.
The golden catalpa C. bigonioides aurea has bright yellow oval leaves, and the flowers of C. speciosa are larger and frillier than the type.
All are lovely specimen trees for the edge of a lawn and, since they shrug off urban pollution, can be spectacular in a town garden if planted in full sun.
My medlar will be planted where I can see its pure white blossom in spring and watch its autumn leaves turn crimson.
The variety Nottingham has the best fruits, which must be left on the tree as long as possible so that they become ‘bletted’— dark brown and softly squidgy.
They can then be eaten with sugar and cream or used for making medlar jelly, which is delicious with game.
TV Choice: Art draws the short straw
By SEAN DAY-LEWIS
GIVEN THE curious blindness of members to BBC arts products, it was appropriate that the recent BAFTA award for best 1991 arts programme went to Channel 4's Without Walls for Robert McKee's constructive debunkery in J'Accuse — Citizen Kane.
Unlike other J'Accuse contributors, telling at least as much about their own problems as the art or artist selected for puncturing, McKee provided valuable insight to the method of Orson Welles's 1941 movie.
Following this success, McKee has now been promoted to official movie guru and given his own Without Walls series Reel Secrets (C4 on Tuesday: 9.30–10.00 pm).
Last week, he dealt with the techniques of horror films.
This week, he moves on with similar expertise to The Anger of Comedy, in particular Mel Brooks's The Producer (screened straight after his lecture) and Penny Marshall's Big.
His ability to tell you how he sees things and then show you how he sees things, with the use of film, leaves the viewer wondering why he is not given the whole Without Walls slot.
Particularly when the first half is devoted to such time filling as The Obituary Show: Jeffrey Bernard (C4 on Tuesday: 9.00–9.30 pm).
The Guardian women's page editor admires Bernard's ‘beautiful face’ when young, Richard Ingrams gives the Spectator columnist credit for being ‘very widely read’, George Melly likes the professional Soho character for having ‘no self-pity’.
All concede that JB is famous only for his alcoholic intake and its effect.
‘I don't do anything, I go to the pub and drink with my boring friends,’ he says.
‘I wanted to be a writer like Graham Greene or John Osborne but I wasn't good enough.
So I have written the same column for 15 years.’
Where Without Walls might be more fittingly titled Without Arts, the BBC2 equivalent, Arena, has a thing about promoting unknown artists who disappear forever as soon as their hour on screen is done.
At first sight, Holly Aylett appears to have stumbled on the ideal Arena subject with her A Spanish Odyssey — A Portrait of Javier Mariscal (BBC2 on Friday: 9.30–10.30 pm).
‘The Andy Warhol of Spain…who thinks a Camel cigarette packet has as much value as a Picasso’, an artist who reckons to ‘make cultural sandwiches for the brain’.
Just so.
But he makes a lively film and he will be heard of again.
Real art is another matter and, despite recent genuflections towards Rembrandt, a rarity becoming rarer.
Viewers who relish high artistic aspirations and standards can turn to the BBC Young Musician of the Year: Concerto Final (BBC2 on Saturday: 6.25–9.10 pm).
With the National Youth Orchestra conducted at Glasgow's Royal Concert Hall by Christopher Seaman, this promises to be as sparkling an occasion as ever.
Film Choice: A hymn to people power
By ALAN STANBROOK
GREAT BOOKS seldom make great movies but John Ford's film of The Grapes of Wrath (Channel 4, Sunday: 2.00–4.25 pm) is an exception that proves the rule.
John Steinbeck's saga of the Depression years was a political hot potato when Hollywood mogul Darryl F Zanuck sought to film it in 1940.
He skirted the problem by turning it, via Nunnally Johnson's script, from a radical rallying cry into a depiction of the common man's ability to survive injustice by endurance.
Aspects of the novel were changed.
The screenplay drops Steinbeck's somewhat pretentious literary device of interspersing the story of the Joad family (poor farmers trekking from the Oklahoma dust bowl to the false promise of the California orange groves) with abstract chapters pontificating on the state of the world.
Also abandoned was the grandiose ending, in which Rose of Sharon, whose baby has died, breast feeds a starving stranger.
The film covers only the first two-thirds of the book but is dramatically more satisfying because it is the story of Tom Joad's political awakening.
From a hot-head who has done time for killing a man, he develops into a union organiser who discovers the eloquence his new role demands.
There is a Biblical cadence in the last words he shares with his mother: ‘Wherever there's a fight so hungry people can eat, I'll be there.
Wherever there's a cop beating up a guy, I'll be there.
And when our people eat the stuff they raise and live in the houses they build, why I'll be there, too.’
There's memorable dialogue in this film, not least in the last scene, which turns Jane Darwell, as Ma Joad, into a spokeswoman for all the oppressed of the Earth and ends the picture on a defiant, upbeat note that rightly won her an Oscar.
John Ford won one, too, as best director and it is a triumph of the film-maker's art, powerfully assisted by some of the best black and white photography in Hollywood history.
Gregg Toland was the cameraman and his work is in a class of its own — full of haunting close-ups and long shots that graphically bring out the tragic relationship between man and the land.
Yet the visual quality never dwarfs the human element.
Ford makes the Joad family spring vividly to life.
The almost wordless scene in which Ma Joad, packing her belongings for the last time, comes across a pair of old earrings and tries them on, recalling some long forgotten happiness, is as touching as anything he ever directed.
And Henry Fonda's Tom Joad is so human that it does not seem like acting.
Even today his performance rings true as a bell.
This is not strictly speaking a realist film and some hold that the artistic embellishment is at odds with Steinbeck's message.
But to celebrate the dignity and resilience of man is itself an honourable ambition and just as moving and true.
Pick of the Day
By SEAN DAY-LEWIS
IN COLD and wet Twenties London, unhappy Hampstead housewife Lotty Wilkins (Josie Lawrence) spots a newspaper offer of ‘wisteria and sunshine’ at a small Italian castle through April.
She persuades her less impulsive neighbour Rose Arbuthnot (Miranda Richardson) to share her dream holiday.
A second advertisement produces two more escapees: beautiful socialite Lady Caroline Dester (Polly Walker) and the formidable widow Mrs Fisher (Joan Plowright).
Enchanted April (BBC2: 10.00–11.40 pm), a Screen Two film dramatised by Peter Barnes from the novel of Elizabeth von Arnim, is a fairy-tale advert for the liberating and healing properties of Italian sunshine.
You keep expecting the spell to be shattered, especially as Michael Kitchen is around looking much like the villains he has played lately, but it remains intact.
In short, a romantic fiction of unashamed sentimentality.
Installed at San Salvatore, high above the Mediterranean near Portofino, the defence mechanisms of the four Englishwomen melt away.
Soon they feel able to involve the other sex in their idyll.
Lotty's pompous lawyer spouse Mellersh (Alfred Molina), Rose's unfaithful writer husband Frederick (Jim Broadbent) and half-blind castle owner George Briggs (Michael Kitchen) all arrive to find the redemptive power of love or romance.
Director Mike Newell creates the atmosphere and wisely allows the surrounding beauty to speak for itself.