

Twitchers' delight
A HOST of unusual spring migrant birds have appeared in the North East.
A hoopoe was found near Bamburgh, Northumberland, a great grey shrike at Whitburn, South Tyneside, and an osprey in Nidderdale, North Yorkshire, in addition to 30 black redstarts along the coast.
Scientists click over a way to save dolphins
by Greg Neale Environment Correspondent
HUNDREDS of thousands of dolphins could be saved from death thanks to pioneering work by British scientists.
They believe they have found a cheap, practical means of preventing dolphins entangling themselves in monofilament drift fishing nets — the ‘walls of death’ believed to be responsible for killing large numbers of dolphins off Cornwall this year.
But their work is hampered by lack of money.
So far they have received nothing from the Government, little EC assistance and are running out of funds donated by individuals and industry.
The researchers, headed by Dr Margaret Klinowska, a Cambridge biologist, and David Goodson, an expert on acoustic engineering at Loughborough University, say new data shows that plastic sound reflectors attached to fishing nets can warn dolphins of hazards.
Data to be published shortly draws on experiments including observations of Freddy, the dolphin that has been living off the Northumbrian coast for four years.
Using equipment donated by Racal, the scientists have analysed recordings of the ‘clicking’ dolphins make while hunting.
Observations of Freddy led them to conclude that dolphins use sonar while hunting.
They emit an intense, broad-band ‘click’ or pulse of sound.
Echoes of the signal alert them to possible prey, at ranges up to 80–90 metres in shallow waters.
Mr Goodson, who became interested in the sonar capacity of dolphins after hearing one while swimming off the Welsh coast, has experimented with various shapes of sound reflectors.
The most promising is eliptical, about 3½in long.
The theory is that its internal air pocket will ‘bounce’ back the dolphin's sonar signal, regardless of the direction of approach.
Last autumn, Dr Klinowska, Mr Goodson and their team put the theories into practice.
In the Moray Firth, they placed a ‘headline barrier’, from which they had suspended reflectors at two-metre intervals.
The movement of dolphins around the barrier was observed, using electronic equipment to monitor sonar activity.
‘The results exceeded our expectations,’ said Mr Goodson.
Dolphins swimming near the barrier altered their behaviour to avoid it, the result, the scientists believe, of them detecting sonar echoes from the reflectors.
Dr Klinowska said that, although it was necessary to be cautious about the findings, a combination of reflector devices and some modification of fishing gear might reduce deaths.
But the Moray Firth experiments were only possible after the naturalist Dr David Bellamy helped secure a donation from the Co-operative Wholesale Society.
‘Our work is being delayed simply through the lack of funding,’ said Dr Klinowska.
The scientists hope to raise £100,000 through an appeal by Windsor Safari Park.
Donations can be made to the Dolphin Research Project c/o Windsor Safari Park, Windsor, Berkshire SL4 4AY.
Eureka!
Cracking Creation's code Mankind's emergence from primordial slime was no miracle, believes Robert Matthews
By ROBERT MATTHEWS
A LOT OF PEOPLE are very sceptical about Darwin's theory of evolution.
I know this after answering questions for two mind-boggling hours on a phone-in about the mysteries of science for Piccadilly Radio in Manchester last week.
There were the inevitable late-night nutters ringing in after a beer too many, but many of the questions revolved around the evolution of humans.
The sheer implausibility of the emergence of humans from primordial slime in just three billion years is clearly too much for many.
The stock response to such qualms is that it is difficult for humans to grasp a time scale of such length.
This, combined with the process of survival of the fittest — which promotes the emergence of ever better creatures — is what enables the ‘miracle’ of human life to develop.
But, over the past few months, I have been investigating something that makes such abstractions far more impressive.
Back in the mid-1970s, an American computer scientist called John Holland hit on the idea of using the theory of evolution to solve notoriously difficult problems in science.
A classic example is the so-called Travelling Salesman Problem.
Imagine a carpet salesman whose ‘patch’ covers, say, 10 different towns.
He wants to visit them all, while minimising his time on the road.
How does he find the quickest route?
Trying out all the different permutations of routes is clearly impractical: there are 3,628,800 different ways of making a journey between 10 towns.
Dr Holland realised that the basic idea behind evolution could help.
This would mean starting with a random set of, say, 20 possible routes between the towns, and calculating how long the journeys would be.
One would then throw out all but the best — that is, the shortest — routes, and keep these for a kind of ‘survival of the fittest’.
One then ‘breeds’ a new generation of routes by combining features of the best ones, and randomly altering a few details as a form of mutation.
This next generation of routes is then assessed, and the whole fitness-rating, breeding and mutation process repeated.
This Darwinian recipe for solving the Travelling Salesman Problem has proved incredibly effective, rapidly finding the shortest routes between scores of towns, where the number of possible routes is so large it could never be written down.
In recent months, I've been having a lot of fun using a similar ‘biological’ approach to crack a certain type of code.
I started off with a random set of guesses as to how to break the code, and then checked each guess to see how good it was at turning the garbled message into English.
What has amazed me and the friends I've press-ganged into watching the process is the speed with which the ‘genetic algorithm’ sniffs out the way to decode the message.
In just a few minutes, the encoded gibberish on the computer screen starts to turn into plain English.
Frankly, it's rather spooky.
Building this genetic algorithm for code-breaking has certainly left me in no doubt that evolution is quite capable of performing miracles in no time at all.
Indeed, I now find it puzzling why, after all this time, evolution only produced something as dismal as a human.
IN THIS week of the election, we can expect to see Peter Snow doing his impersonation of John Cleese, with lots of statistics produced by computers accompanied by the timeless phrase —‘it's just a bit of fun’.
I hope he doesn't suffer the same fate as those who first used a computer to predict an election's outcome.
In 1952, CBS Television used Univac, the first commercial computer system in America, to do a Peter Snow for the Stevenson-Eisenhower election battle.
At about 9pm on election night, with just seven per cent of the votes in, Univac predicted 438 electoral votes and 43 states going to Eisenhower, and just 93 electoral votes and five states to Stevenson.
Univac's masters decided the machine had a screw loose: most human pollsters were predicting a close race.
The programmers were called in and told to fiddle with Univac's brain to make the prediction more realistic.
Univac's watered-down prediction went out at 10pm.
But as the night wore on, it became clear that Univac had been right all along.
By midnight, its masters had thrown in the towel, and put out the computer's original forecast.
The final result was 442 votes and 39 states to Eisenhower, and 89 votes and nine states to Stevenson.
As the legendary CBS reporter Ed Murrow drily observed: ‘The trouble with machines is people.’
Review: By gum, mother knew best all along There are times when a doctor's diagnosis is no match for widely held beliefs about illness.
Dr James Le Fanu tells two cautionary tales
By DR JAMES LE FANU
THERE have been two instances recently where populist concepts of health and illness — much derided by doctors — have been partially vindicated.
The first concerns teething.
For as long as I can remember, it has been standard medical teaching that teething of babies causes no symptoms.
Nelson's classic Textbook of Paediatrics says that ‘teething can lead to intermittent localised discomfort’, and little else.
However, mothers bringing their babies to surgery attribute a bewildering variety of symptoms to teething, including poor sleeping, refusal to feed, earache, diarrhoea and fever.
The situation calls for considerable tact on the doctor's part.
There seems little point in saying that teething is a non-existent condition which has never reliably been shown to cause any distress.
So a sensible compromise is to examine the baby to see if there is any obviously treatable cause for its symptoms, and if there is not to advise a treatment for the temperature or diarrhoea, or whatever the baby is suffering from.
It now transpires that mothers have been right all along.
Researchers at the Tel Aviv School of Medicine asked 46 of them to take their babies' temperatures and monitor their symptoms in the two weeks before the eruption of their first tooth.
Sure enough, its appearance was associated with a distinct fever, which in some babies rose as high as 38C (100.4F).
There are complex reasons why doctors deny what can so easily be demonstrated, but in the case of teething I am sure there is a strong historical element of guilt.
From the 16th century, doctors widely accepted that teething was responsible for a multiplicity of childhood illnesses, including convulsions and death, and recommended a protective measure that babies' gums should be lacerated ‘to liberate the death’.
Besides being extremely painful, this often resulted in a nasty infection leading to many problems that they attributed to teething itself.
The custom fell out of favour at the turn of this century and I suspect that, as a reaction to the damage the treatment caused, the contrary view that teething is harmless has been passed down through generations of doctors.
They have been equally disparaging about low blood pressure as a cause, among other things, of tiredness, fainting and dizziness, although their colleagues in Germany, France and several Mediterranean countries not only recognise the condition but actually treat it.
The British view is uncompromising: except where low blood pressure is secondary to some underlying condition, such as shock or septicaemia, it is a non-illness.
Indeed, the lower the blood pressure the better, because statistically it reduces the subsequent risks of stroke and heart attacks.
The symptoms attributed to low blood pressure are, it is argued, essentially neurotic, with a high prevalence among young women.
There is, it must be said, a lot to be said for this robust view.
The unhappy and depressed frequently complain of tiredness and lack of energy and, if they are young women, they invariably have a blood pressure in the lower range of normal.
Yet, the European doctors are also right.
Dr Simon Wessely at the Institute of Psychiatry has recently shown quite convincingly that, independent of underlying psychological problems, tiredness is associated with low blood pressure.
Perhaps, he suggests, British doctors should be less condescending towards their Continental colleagues and refuse the evidence of the efficacy of their treatment for this condition.
THE New England Journal of Medicine tells a grim story in which seven people were infected with the Aids virus by a man after his death.
Surgeons operated on a 22-year-old American male who had died from gunshot wounds.
Tissues and organs were transplanted into 50 recipients.
Unfortunately, the donor must have been infected with the Aids virus just before his death, and over the next few years seven of his beneficiaries have become HIV positive.
It is a contemporary tale of medical misfortune which paradoxically illustrates quite dramatically the remarkable achievements of modern medicine.
Had Aldous Huxley introduced a sub-plot into Brave New World, where the remains of a dead man were cannibalised to save the lives of 50 strangers, only for them to succumb to a lethal virus hidden in his tissues, his readers would have been impressed by the fertility of his futuristic imagination.
They would certainly have thought that such events were unlikely to happen for millennia to come — if at all.
Huxley was, after all, writing at a time when medical horizons were limited to digoxin for heart failure, morphine for pain and a handful of other remedies.
In 50 years, such fantastic imaginings can become reality.
If only the politicians seeking our vote on Thursday had achieved a fraction as much.
Out And About: NATURE NOTES
By Austin Hatton
ALTHOUGH treetops are thick with big, about-to-burst buds, hardly a tinge of summer verdure shows yet against the sky.
Russet and grey still prevail in the recently gale-thrashed boughs.
Shafts of sunlight probe down into secret nooks and woodland hollows, just as they did in the wintry days to frustrate the birds in their efforts to conceal nests.
Vexatious, persistent winds have rarely seemed so unnecessary.
It is not enough that hedges are misted in fresh green spray; are greener today than they were yesterday, and greener yesterday than they were the day before.
The yearning for explosions of fresh leafage in the top-most boughs is heightened by a notion that lack of foliage may well be delaying the return of more homecoming birds: warblers, wheatear, chiff-chaff, willow wren, swifts and flycatchers.
Blackthorn blossom, gold of cowslip and kingcup, and blue of periwinkle and speedwell do not atone for unclothed branches.
Yet there is some comfort in a solitary, precocious horse chestnut's struggles to show that special mosaic of leafage designed to catch the light.
A lonely larch, too, is gossamer-robed in softest green.
Villagers say things that begin too well are likely to end badly: early peach blossom, early geese, early beauty, even early love, ‘all will come to bad ends, like whistling girls and crowing hens’.
So, gratitude it has to be for the glimpse of a hornbeam's golden rain of catkin pollen in a sheltered copse where, among primroses and the first bluebells, sorrel shows its delicate pink flowers and (useful in salads) triple leaflets, which Saint Patrick used to demonstrate the nature of the Trinity.
There, too, are the ramsons, the wild garlic whose white petals are delicious, the smell less so.
Indeed, every day brings possibilities of new flowers, some new kind of insect: a fat, steel-blue oil beetle thrusting her way out of the earth to blunder over hedge-bottom debris in search of a slimmer but scarcely less clumsy male.
Flick over a crisp, curled leaf and out prances a black hunting spider, or a green tiger beetle scuttling for the obscurity of darkness, or a wolf spider abroad with her cubs.
All's well, if only the very large and very sticky buds in the tree-tops would burst into leaf.