

Spurn Kinnock, says Owen
by David Wastell
DR DAVID OWEN last night urged tactical voting to keep Neil Kinnock out of Downing Street and boost the prospect of electoral reform.
In a long-awaited move, the former Social Democrats' leader endorsed John Major as the best man to fight Britain's corner against moves towards a federal Europe.
Conservative strategists believe that his backing for the Prime Minister could persuade up to 500,000 wavering voters to support the Tories, and could be crucial in a number of closely-fought seats.
Mr Major said yesterday that he would study Dr Owen's views with ‘keen interest’.
The former Labour Foreign Secretary is urging voters in 90 key marginals to cast their vote to keep Mr Kinnock out.
But Dr Owen will indicate by his own example how he hopes voters will react in seats where the Liberal Democrats are the main challengers.
He is planning to vote for Paddy Ashdown's party — although he objected to the Liberal-SDP merger — in Bow and Poplar, the London constituency where he lives.
At the last election the Labour MP, Mildred Gordon, a Left-winger, beat the Liberal Alliance candidate into second place by 4,631 votes.
Dr Owen's decision to support tactical voting for some Liberal Democrat candidates will surprise senior Conservatives, who had hoped for a simple message of support for Mr Major.
But Dr Owen is said to have taken on board the ‘reality’ that electoral reform is most likely to be delivered by a Parliament with strong Lib-Dem representation.
Mr Major has repeatedly made clear his strong opposition changing the voting system.
Friends of Dr Owen say that his farewell advice to the nation — he has now stood down as an MP — is intended to avoid damaging the chances for his two remaining SDP colleagues, Rosie Barnes and John Cartwright, who are fighting to hold on to their south-east London seats.
Neither is being opposed by the Liberal Democrats.
Mrs Barnes, who faces a strong challenge from Labour in Greenwich, said that she was ‘quite happy’ with Dr Owen's decision.
‘He is saying that where there is not a straight fight between Labour and Conservatives, people may wish to vote tactically.’
In an article in today's Mail on Sunday Dr Owen also warns Tory leaders that if they rule out coalition with the Liberal Democrats they could end 13 years in
CND threat to Labour unity on defence
by Toby Helm Political Correspondent
UP TO 100 Labour MPs are expected to join a relaunched pro-CND Parliamentary group after the general election in a move that threatens to undermine Neil Kinnock's remodelled defence policy.
Plans by backbenchers to reactivate and expand Parliamentary Labour CND, which has been deliberately inactive in the election run-up, will be a severe embarrassment to the Labour leadership.
Mr Kinnock and his foreign affairs spokesman, Gerald Kaufman, have insisted that the party is united behind Labour's policy of retaining Britain's nuclear capability until world stocks are eliminated.
But last night the Conservatives seized upon the relaunch as evidence of a serious split.
They said Left-wing Labour MPs, including many who opposed the abandonment of unilateralism after the 1987 election, would cause havoc for a Labour government.
Mr Tom King, Defence Secretary, said Mr Kinnock was guilty of a ‘monstrous cover-up’ over the true extent of the party's links with CND and questioned his ability to deliver strong defence based on a nuclear deterrent.
Mr King's comments came after two Labour candidates, Harry Cohen, chairman of Labour's backbench defence committee, and Dennis Canavan, the committee's vice-chairman, revealed plans to begin a new recruitment drive for Parliamentary Labour CND after the election.
They expect at least 80, and possibly more than 100, Labour MPs to join up.
Mr Cohen, a long-time supporter of unilateralism from Labour's backbenches and secretary of PLCND, said: ‘I have nothing to hide about my commitment to unilateral nuclear disarmament.
There are 80 to 100 members who I believe will support the group after the election.
We will be looking at the new MPs to see if the numbers can be further increased.’
Mr Canavan, who is fighting for re-election as MP for Falkirk West and has been a prominent member of PLCND, said: ‘I have always been proud to be a member of CND and will continue to campaign vigorously for unilateral nuclear disarmament within the Labour Party.
‘I believe we could build up the parliamentary group to more than 100 members.’
Mr King said: ‘While Mr Kinnock and his front-benchers make out that Labour is a party which believes in nuclear defence, behind them the back benches are packed with those who believe exactly the opposite.
And the backbench committee on defence, elected by MPs, is run by supporters of CND.
‘The fact is that there is a huge group which sees Labour as a way of furthering the cause of CND.
They keep quiet now but would let loose after the election.’
PLCND, chaired by Bob Cryer, Labour candidate for Bradford South and vice-chairman of Labour's backbench defence committee, has not met since last year.
Party candidates privately admit that regular meetings could have jeopardised Labour's chances.
Last night Labour Party insiders said members of the group would be brought into line by Labour whips.
‘If you think we have shown discipline in the run-up to the election, we will show even more when we form the government,’ said one source.
A Labour spokesman added: ‘We are very sceptical about claims that they would clear 50 members.
It would represent a very small minority in a government, one with no influence over policy.’
The PLCND group has campaigned since the early 1980s for the unconditional removal of all British and American nuclear weapons from UK territory.
In 1987, before Labour dropped its links with unilateral nuclear disarmament, membership stood at around 130 MPs.
The current number is unknown.
The only difference between its policies and those of CND proper is that it does not campaign directly for Britain's withdrawal from Nato.
Last year Mr Kinnock let his membership of CND lapse, as did members of his Shadow Cabinet team including Martin O'Neill, defence spokesman, Jack Straw, education spokesman, and Michael Meacher, social security spokesman.
But it is believed that several dozen members of the last Parliament are still members.
The row follows separate claims by the Conservatives last week that Labour had censored its list of parliamentary candidates to conceal their links with CND.
Of more than 600 entries, only one, that of Mr Bruce Kent, former chairman of CND and now Labour candidate for Oxford West, mentions links with CND.
The claims of censoring were rejected by Labour as a desperate Tory tactic.
In a Radio 4 interview last month Mr Kaufman said that Labour had ‘got nothing whatever to do with CND’.
Hung Parliament looms PM stands firm: no deals to weaken Britain
by David Wastell Political Editor, Toby Helm and Mark Palmer
BRITAIN is on course for a hung Parliament after Thursday's general election.
The largest set of opinion polls since the campaign began show that Labour still has a narrow lead but will not win enough seats to secure an overall majority.
In previous elections there has been little change in the parties' support between the final Sunday of the campaign and polling day.
A Gallup poll for The Sunday Telegraph shows Conservatives and Labour level on 37½ per cent each, virtually no change since the middle of last week.
The Liberal Democrat share is up to 22 per cent, the highest in any survey since the campaign began.
A Sunday Telegraph poll of polls, calculated from six surveys published today, shows Labour ahead on 39.6 per cent, the Tories on 37.5 per cent and Liberal Democrats on 19.3 per cent .
The figures came after a tough warning from Mr Major that plans for constitutional change backed by Labour and the Liberal Democrats threatened to sap Britain's strength and would lead to weak, indecisive government.
Senior Tories are attempting to highlight the dangers posed by a hung Parliament to boost their support in the final days of the election campaign.
Douglas Hurd, Foreign Secretary, said yesterday that an indecisive result would delay recovery, lead to uncertainty and result in a second election within a year.
But Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, stepped up his calls for a coalition government.
He issued a passionate plea to Labour and the Conservatives to spell out what they would do in a hung Parliament.
Mr Ashdown will give warning tomorrow, in two television interviews and in his party's last election broadcast, that an attempt by either Labour or Tories to go it alone in a hung Parliament would end in disaster.
Mr Major remained buoyant yesterday as he campaigned in Cambridgeshire, insisting that the Tories were on course for victory.
Ministers said they were encouraged by reports from candidates that the party's vote was holding up and appeared to be firmer than Labour's.
They claimed that mid-week polls showing a large Labour lead had shocked some floating voters into the realisation that opting for the Liberal Democrats would let Mr Kinnock in by the back door.
Mr Major said that plans for devolved Scottish, Welsh and regional assemblies, combined with moves to a federal Europe and an end to the first-past-the-post voting system, were ‘of far greater importance than the general election itself’.
He said that some forms of proportional representation would ‘let in’ minority parties such as the National Front and the Communists.
The combined effect would be to weaken Britain's government and its ability to play a part in world affairs.
‘We would not, I believe, if we had had that situation, have had the strength to deal with the Falklands, with Iraq and with the economic difficulties that we had in the early 1980s,’ he said.
But even as Mr Major urged the opposition parties not to do back-stage deals on the constitution, Labour revealed a plan to introduce proportional representation for the election of British Euro-MPs before the next European elections in June 1994.
The move will be seen as a further step towards a possible post-election deal between Labour and the Liberal Democrats, who are holding out for a commitment to PR for the Commons as a pre-condition of backing a minority government.
The Sunday Telegraph Gallup poll shows that two-thirds of Conservative supporters would prefer Mr Major to soldier on without making a pact with a smaller party if he fails to win an overall majority on Thursday.
But 35 per cent of all voters want him to do a deal with the Liberal Democrats, including a pledge for electoral reform.
There is little support for a pact with the Ulster Unionist MPs.
Almost half of Labour supporters would prefer Mr Kinnock to try to govern without the support of another party, but 36 per cent favour a deal with Mr Ashdown.
Mr Ashdown is to spend the last four days of the campaign stressing the need for a lasting coalition to rescue the country from economic and political crisis.
He will appeal to the public today in an attempt to drive home his claim that Britain has an ‘historic opportunity’ for a partnership government.
Labour will try this week to portray itself as the party of hope, with policies on education, training and health.
Tory strategists are banking on an upbeat message about the prospects for lower taxes, lower mortgage rates and more jobs to build a last-minute lead.
Ministers published yesterday a Gallup survey of boardroom executives which showed fears over the impact of Labour's economic policies.
Labour's vote is holding up in Scotland while Tory support is at its lowest level since the campaign started, according to a poll conducted for Scotland on Sunday.
A Market Research Scotland survey put Labour on 43 per cent, up five points from a MRS poll five days earlier.
The SNP was on 27 per cent(31 per cent in the previous poll), the Conservatives 18 (21), Liberal Democrats 11 (10) and the Greens 1 (1).
Devolution for Scotland was backed by 40 per cent(42), independence within the EC 26 (26), independence outside Europe 8 (7) and the constitutional status quo 20 (26).
MRS interviewed 1,133 people in 66 constituencies across Scotland on April 2–3.
Clinton wife says Bush had a lover
By XAN SMILEY
THE White House last night denounced as ‘completely scurrilous’ allegations of marital infidelity made against President Bush by Mrs Hillary Clinton, wife of the Democratic presidential hopeful, Bill Clinton, writes Xan Smiley in Washington.
Mrs Clinton said in Vanity Fair magazine the American press was guilty of double standards by airing stories of her husband's alleged philandering while shying away from‘long-standing rumours’ about Mr Bush.
Allegations that Mr Bush had a mistress have been investigated by newspapers and referred to on radio and television.
There has never been any corroboration.
Full story — P3 
Plane crash crew missing
A SEARCH is under way for the two-man crew of a light aircraft after wreckage of the single-engined Grob, which had been missing for 24 hours, was found beside Loch Muick, near Ballater, Grampian.
The men, who left Aberdeen Flying Club on Friday on a training flight, have been named as chief instructor Mark Ives of Aberchirder and his pupil Kenneth Ramsay of Aberdeen.
Stepping out
WALKERS celebrated the opening of a 16-mile extension to the Heart of England Way at Blockley, near Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire, yesterday.
The new path links the Staffordshire Way with the Cotswold Way and gives hikers an uninterrupted 100-mile walk.
Tony Banks sued
TONY BANKS, the Labour MP, is being sued for libel and slander by The Field, the country sports magazine, after he allegedly made derogatory comments in another magazine about a survey of MPs' views on hunting, shooting and fishing.
Nightclub murder
AN off-duty pub doorman was stabbed to death outside Bobbie's nightclub, Coventry, early yesterday.
Noel Darcy, 23, of Coventry, had been out with friends when he was attacked by a three or four youths.
Clothes-switch prisoner on run
A PRISONER who did a clothes switch and walked out with visitors to Acklington prison, Northumberland, was on the run yesterday.
Frederick Greaves, 29, of Pickering Square, Pennywell, Sunderland, was serving three years and three months for burglary.
An inquiry has been launched.
Ulster victim dies
JACK KEARNEY, 70, who was shot when Loyalists murdered his nephew in a butcher's shop in Moy, Co Tyrone, three months ago, died yesterday in a Belfast hospital.
He had been on a life-support machine since the attack.
No votes for peace
SO FAR there are no takers for ‘election escapes’ on Lundy, the National Trust island off north Devon, where guest rooms will have no televisions, radios or newspapers from April 8 to 11.
Mickey taken
A SWINDON publican has been forced by the Walt Disney Corporation to abandon a Mickey Mouse theme for his public house, named Cartoons, because of copyright enfringement.
Tories disown Fairbairn slur
by Valerie Elliott Home Affairs Correspondent
TORY leaders last night distanced the party from the maverick Conservative Sir Nicholas Fairbairn after he claimed Britain would be ‘swamped with immigrants’ under a Labour Government.
Mr Major, clearly embarrassed by the remarks, said: ‘I believe we should have firm but fair immigration and I have no truck with any distinction between people of different race or colour.
‘That's always been the view I've taken — it's the Conservative Party's view.’
The sidelining of Sir Nicholas was signalled by Lord Whitelaw, the former deputy leader, who immediately cancelled a planned visit yesterday to Perth and Kinross, the constituency held by Sir Nicholas since 1974.
Lord Whitelaw said that he could not be associated with ‘the very extreme views which he has expressed’.
In a constituency speech on Friday, Sir Nicholas, the former Scottish solicitor-general, railed at the notion of Britain becoming a ‘country of aliens’.
He said: ‘Under a Labour Government this country would be swamped with immigrants of every colour and race, and on any excuse of asylum or bogus marriage, or just plain deception.
‘And with the abolition of the Prevention of Terrorism Bill, the terrorists of the IRA would come here as invited guests.’
He condemned Scottish Nationalists who would allow ‘everybody born in Scotland, be he Greek, Tasmanian, or the bastard child of an American serviceman, or the 10th child of an Englishman, to qualify to vote in Scotland.’
Yesterday Sir Nicholas, wearing tam o'shanter and tartan, denied he was a racist but provoked further outrage by attacking Lord Whitelaw.
‘I'm sorry he hadn't read the manifesto, but he's better off playing golf with Sean Connery and drinking Japanese whisky in Marbella.’
The James Bond star is a leading supporter of the Scottish Nationalist Party while whisky is a main industry north of the border.
The incident has angered senior party officials who are fighting to retain Conservative-held seats in Scotland at a time when the Scottish Nationalist bandwagon is gathering pace.
Sir Nicholas, who is defending a majority of 6,733, is accustomed to controversy.
He said yesterday: ‘It's nothing to do with whether they are black or green or brown.
It's whether they are illegal immigrants.
It's a problem facing every nation.’
Earlier Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, hoped it would be demonstrated that Sir Nicholas did not speak for other Tories ‘because the gutter language he used is not fit for anyone standing for a democratic party’.
Jim Sillars, the deputy SNP leader, said it was sad to see a former solicitor-general bringing his career ‘to such a discreditable end’ while Sir David Steel, Liberal-Democrat foreign affairs spokesman, said: ‘I am glad that Willie Whitelaw has shown that there is still a streak of honour and decency in the Tory Party.’
Sir Nicholas is noted for making outrageous remarks.
He once attacked a Government scheme to promote black businesses by describing the plans as favouring ‘lazy West Indians at the expense of diligent Asians’.
He also criticised aid to famine-stricken countries like Ethiopia as foolhardy and wasteful of money, saying Britain should send condoms instead to help keep birth rates down.
He said of Lynda Chalker, Foreign Office Minister responsible for foreign aid programmes: ‘All she is doing is giving these poor people the chance to breed more children who will suffer the same horrible fate as their parents — death by starvation.’
Sir Nicholas has also been in trouble with the Board of Deputies for British Jews for describing the Band Aid organiser and singer Bob Geldof as ‘a self-advertising Jew’.
£1.5bn boost for arms industry
by Christy Campbell Defence Correspondent
JOHN MAJOR has announced a £1.5 billion cash advance for defence contracts between Britain and Saudi Arabia, a crucial step forward in the Al Yamamah oil-for-weapons programme on which 30,000 British jobs depend.
The deal, released yesterday, will boost Tory election prospects in seats as far apart as Preston, Lancashire, where British Aerospace build Tornado bombers, Brough on Humberside, where Hawk trainers are built, Southampton where Vosper's build minesweepers, and Yeovil in Somerset, the home of Westland helicopters — all expected to be part of the arms package.
A Downing Street statement in the Prime Minister's name said: ‘King Fahd of Saudi Arabia has told me that his government has made available £1.5 billion for the Al Yamamah government-to-government defence programme.
This is excellent news and reflects the close co-operation and friendship between our two countries.’
The timing of the announcement could not have come at a more politically sensitive time.
Industry observers expected a deal only after the result of the general election was known.
The Ministry of Defence has been obliged to freeze its own orders to British industry in the run-up to the election, but a Downing Street spokesman said last night the civil service guidelines allowed the announcement of foreign arms sales.
When the good news from the Gulf arrived from Saudi Arabia via a Foreign Office cable, ‘officials checked the rules to ensure the announcement could go out in Mr Major's name’, he said.
‘This is a continuing government-to-government deal and thus is entirely legitimate.’
Dick Evans, chief executive of BAe, prime contractor for British companies involved in the Al Yamamah programme, said he was ‘absolutely delighted’ at the Prime Minister's announcement.
‘We look forward to detailed discussion with the Saudi authorities on their specific requirements and priorities.’
So far, Saudi Arabia has invested more than £10 billion in the Al Yamamah programme, first struck by Mrs Thatcher in 1985.
Already under way are orders for 72 Tornados, 30 Hawk advanced trainers, three minesweepers and other major defence construction projects.
Gaddafi warns of crusade
by Robin Lodge, Diplomatic Correspondent and Robert Fox in Rome
THE Libyan leader, Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, called yesterday for Arab countries to unite against ‘a new crusade’ against Islam.
Rejecting the UN Security Council resolution imposing sanctions on Libya unless it hands over two men accused of carrying out the 1989 Lockerbie airliner bombing, Gaddafi said he would never surrender to demands by the United States and Britain.
‘If this is an excuse to occupy Libya, we will resort to arms and automatic guns and barriers,’ he told a crowd of 3,000 at a dawn rally in Tripoli.
‘There will be guns and trenches, a line of fire between us and them.
We do not want to transform the world once again into a place for religious fighting.
We do not want to revive the crusade spirit once again.
But it appears that they have decided that.’
He said the Western Christian world, having ended the war against communism, had now directed its crusading forces against Islam.
Gaddafi again held out the possibility of handing over the two men for trial by the Arab League in an Arab country, saying such a solution would be ‘fine’.
On Thursday angry crowds stormed the Tripoli embassies of countries supporting the UN sanctions, which will be applied from April 15 unless Libya complies.
The Venezuelan embassy was burned down.
Gaddafi later called for restraint and ordered troops to protect foreign missions.
But a fiery sermon by a Muslim cleric, who demanded the ejection from Libya of all diplomats from countries supporting the sanctions, was carried on state television on Friday.
A Foreign Ministry statement said the UN action had ‘provoked a climate of tension and instability’.
All responsibility now lay with the West.
A number of Arab countries have condemned the UN resolution, which they say displays its double standards in dealing with Arab countries and Israel.
They drew attention to Israel's refusal to implement UN demands to withdraw from the occupied territories and asked why no sanctions were applied against the Israelis.
Following the UN resolution, which also provides for the use of force to ensure its implementation, doubts have emerged about the effectiveness of sanctions.
The Italian government has adopted a deliberately cautious line.
Libya is Italy's biggest oil supplier.
‘The UN resolution directly affects Italy's vital economic interests,’ said Gianni De Michelis, Foreign Minister.
But Italy would adhere to the sanctions resolution.
Italy gets more than 27 per cent of its oil from Libya.
As the former colonial power, it is Libya's major trading partner in the EC.
The relationship has been stormy, with joint projects often cut off in their prime.
Until recently AGIP, the Italian state petroleum company, was discussing building a pipeline to Sicily from a Libyan offshore gas field.
Outburst puts marital infidelity back on the US election campaign agenda Clinton's wife accuses Bush of cheating on Barbara
by Xan Smiley in Washington
THE American presidential campaign was plunged into new controversy last night when Hillary Clinton, wife of the embattled Democratic hopeful Bill Clinton, sought to counter allegations of her husband's marital infidelity by airing the same charges against President Bush.
In a profile in the latest issue of New York's Vanity Fair magazine, Mrs Clinton takes the astonishing step of naming Mr Bush's alleged former mistress.
But the magazine — against the interviewer's wishes — has deleted the surname of the woman, referring to her only as Jennifer.
She is, however, described as a senior State Department official and is readily identifiable in Washington circles.
Mrs Clinton also clearly implies that Mr Bush has had several other mistresses.
The White House denounced the charge as ‘completely scurrilous and irresponsible’, adding: ‘There is absolutely nothing to the allegations.’
Last night Clinton campaign officials denied malice.
Mrs Clinton was quoted as saying: ‘Nobody knows better than I do the pain that can be caused by discussing rumours, even in private conversations, and I didn't mean to be hurtful to anyone.’
Mr Clinton, Governor of Arkansas, is the Democrats' leading candidate in the race to challenge Mr Bush for the presidency in November.
In the magazine, the influential journalist and author Gail Sheehy writes: ‘Hillary boils over at what she perceives as a double standard — that the press has shied away from investigating long-standing rumours about George Bush.’
A source close to the Clinton campaign said the idea is to bring the Bush rumours into the open ‘to counter what's already happened, then get this all out there, out of the way, enough to prevent the campaign from being preoccupied with these questions, then to prevent the Republicans, who are very good at it, from taking this low road’.
Mrs Clinton tells Vanity Fair, apparently without weighing the truth of the charges against Mr Bush: ‘What Bill doesn't understand is you've gotta do the same thing in response as you do in negative advertising.’
Several newspapers have pursued the allegations against Mr Bush but have not published them because they have never found any supporting evidence, although rumours have occasionally been aired on radio and television.
But the fact that the wife of Mr Bush's challenger now chooses to raise the allegations gives the issue a new dimension.
A disgusted Torie Clarke, spokeswoman for the Bush re-election campaign, told The Sunday Telegraph: ‘We will put George and Barbara Bush's marriage, and their family and their commitment to family values, up against anybody's in this country, including the Clintons.’
She added: ‘When you have as many problems as the Clintons are having, you try to deflect attention.
It's just a desperate attempt to get a few votes’.
She predicted the tactic would backfire.
Mrs Clinton's apparent eagerness to embarrass Mr Bush, supposedly to redress the balance of gossip in favour of her husband, whose front-running campaign remains dogged by ‘the character question’, is certain to create a furore.
But while it is no doubt calculated to cause trepidation in the White House, it could rebound on Mr Clinton.
Ms Sheehy quotes ‘friends’ saying that after Mr Clinton's only gubernatorial defeat, in 1980, he ‘went a little crazy…for the next six months’.
The Clintons' marital problems, they say, began then and lasted until a few years ago.
The outspoken Mrs Clinton, an assertive Leftish lawyer, has already become a campaign issue because of a scathing remark she made about women who ‘stay at home and bake cookies’ and because Mr Clinton says he will consider her for a job in his Cabinet once he wins the White House.
In the magazine profile, Ms Sheehy divulges that she interviewed the woman named by Mrs Clinton.
The woman is now 58 and a born-again Christian.
Ms Sheehy says she received a flat denial of any impropriety.
The key difference between the charges against Mr Clinton and those against Mr Bush is that Gennifer Flowers came forward to accuse Mr Clinton, albeit lured by a large sum of money, and replete with records of telephone conversations.
By contrast, neither Mr Bush's alleged lover nor any disaffected ‘friends’ have dropped even a hint to substantiate the charges.
Nor has Mr Bush or any of his family ever commented on the allegations against Mr Clinton, though Mrs Clinton alludes darkly to ‘Republican hitmen’.
It should also be noted that Mrs Bush is hugely popular in the country, whereas Mrs Clinton — seen by her husband as likely to be more powerful even than Franklin Roosevelt's wife, Eleanor,— is already controversial.
Clearly the President's enemies are itching to believe unsubstantiated stories that could hurt him.
After Mrs Clinton's outburst in print, the campaign promises to become increasingly dirty.
Crunch in Big Apple — P12
Attack on cash ‘whinge’ by dons
by Fran Abrams
A FURIOUS argument has erupted in universities after publication of an academic ‘chain letter’ which condemned Government higher education policy.
While more than 1,000 university and polytechnic staff signed the letter, which was released to the press last Friday, others have condemned it as unrepresentative.
The academics' letter to The Independent, for which signatures were gathered over the past fortnight, expressed dismay at the damage it said had been inflicted on universities and polytechnics since 1979.
Professor Sig Prais of the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, a member of the recent Channel 4 Commission on Education, dismissed the authors as ‘a pressure group appealing for more money’.
The problem with the current rapid expansion of higher education was not that it was underfunded, but that it was taking place in the wrong subject areas, he said.
Large sums of money were being spent on the expansion of arts degree courses whose students would make little contribution to Britain's economic welfare.
Dr Peter Jones, a senior lecturer in classics at Newcastle University, said he despaired of those who had signed the letter.
‘This is just the scream of the Luddites in a changing world.
It is not a message that either a Conservative or a Labour government would listen to.
Just whingeing about money is the worst sort of cretinous trade unionism.’
Professor John Ashworth, director of the London School of Economics, agreed with most of the letter's points, but disagreed with the assertion that there had been a ‘brain drain’ as a result of Government mismanagement.
Dr Greg Philo, research director of Glasgow University's media unit and one of the principal signatories of the letter, defended its stance.
‘We are saying that higher education is on the point of collapse, and unless something very radical is done to repair that damage we are going to have a completely different type of education system in the future,’ he said.
Summerhill's son rises in East Japanese learn from two very different British schools
by Victoria Macdonald
JAPAN has opened its own version of Summerhill, the ‘progressive’ school whose pupils were seen in a television documentary last week fighting, screaming, swearing and — it seemed — never going to classes.
The Kinokuni Children's Village at Hikotani, near Osaka, admitted its first 90 students on Wednesday, just two days after Channel 4 screened the controversial documentary that depicted life at Summerhill as undisciplined and chaotic.
Based on the teachings of A. S. Neill, the Scottish educationalist and founder of Summerhill, Kinokuni is offering pupils an ‘alternative to the production-line techniques’ of the Japanese education system.
Like Summerhill — a third of whose pupils come from Japan — the school will emphasise the belief that children have a natural tendency to be good and that, given freedom, they will develop on their own.
That belief took a severe knock with the screening of Cutting Edge, which showed a pupil beheading a rabbit (said later to have myxomatosis), boys prowling around with weapons, and girls fighting over stolen make-up.
There was also much foul language from pupils and teachers.
But the programme — accused by parents and staff of misrepresenting Summerhill — has done nothing to dent the enthusiasm of Shinichiro Hori, the 48-year-old professor of elementary education at Osaka University who has spent the past eight years planning and raising money to open Kinokuni.
Prof Hori, who has translated A. S. Neill's works into Japanese, decided to open a Summerhill-type school when his son was born in 1984.
He formed the A. S. Neill Society to spread libertarian views on education, and the following year held the first of a series of camps for potential pupils and staff.
The school is already oversubscribed, despite fees of 1.2 million yen (£5,100) a year, and appears to reflect the increasing interest in Japan for the various education systems developed in Britain.
According to Prof Hori, Japanese parents have become frustrated by their education system, which stresses competition and conformity above all else.
Yet many other Japanese parents looking to Britain want a more disciplined approach.
In the same week that Kinokuni opened, a college for young Japanese women announced it was to open in Suffolk.
For £30,000 a year the St Edmund's Ladies' College, based in a stately country home in Bury St Edmunds, will teach young women to be ‘internationally comfortable and active’.
From April 21 the annual intake of 80 women aged 18 and over will be taught intensive English, current affairs, art, history and geography.
The college brochure hints at a style far removed from that of Summerhill under the heading ‘Requirements of a Lady’.
It says: ‘It is not being beautiful or being born of noble family that makes one a lady.
Elegant actions that take in the other as if in a warm embrace, polished gestures, considerate words and wit in conversation, the depth of culture and intellect that underlie one's words and actions — such are the requirements of a true lady.’
It adds: ‘Fluency in English, of course, is a must for one who is to be active on the international scene.’
To this end, a protocol specialist — Diana Makgill, who spent 30 years in the Foreign Office — has been appointed vice-president of the college.
The academic side will be organised by Dr Marie Lawrence, who is also vice-principal of Lucy Cavendish College, Cambridge.
Interspersed with the lessons will be visits to historical sites in Britain and abroad.
There are also plans to take pupils on outings to Wimbledon and Ascot, and there will be nights at the opera.
In a month when Harpers & Queen magazine devotes several pages to the lost art of manners, it may seem strange that parents should send their daughters from the most polite nation in the world to this newly graceless country.
Teruhiko Fujiwara, the college's director of administration, does not see the irony.
He sees instead Japanese women able to ‘do in Rome as the Romans do’, a vital asset in a more multinational Japan.
Heir of uncertainty in the shadow of Raine Old problems face the new Earl Spencer as he takes over Althorp from his shrewd stepmother
by Anthea Hall
AT ALTHORP — pronounced Altrup or Althrup, but never Althorp — the flags were flying at half mast, mourning the death of Johnny, the 8th Earl Spencer.
Down the road at the church of St Mary the Virgin at Great Brington, scene of Lord Spencer's funeral, the door was locked and tourists wandered round the churchyard in search of flowers and Spencer tombstones.
Althorp is closed to the public until further notice.
It will re-open under new management, when the answer to the big question will be revealed.
Has the chocolate-box portrait of Raine, Countess Spencer, resplendent with lacquered back-combed hair and bare shoulders — the picture that rubbed shoulders so anachronistically with Van Dycks and Gainsboroughs — been removed from the staircase?
If the cuddly Lord Spencer, for whom the nation held its breath as he walked down the aisle of St Paul's Cathedral to give away his daughter Diana, will be sorely missed, it is far from clear whether the departure of his widow from Althorp will be seen as a loss.
The families of the nobility have always fascinated the visiting public more than their historic homes and works of art.
The Spencer soap opera was launched when Raine, daughter of the romantic novelist Barbara Cartland, married Lord Spencer to become the first member of the cast.
When newspapers first speculated that Lady Dartmouth was to replace the Earl of Dartmouth with the divorced Earl Spencer, a then-unknown Lady Sarah Spencer gave the memorable quote: ‘Since my grandfather died last June and we moved from Sandringham to Althorp Park, Lady Dartmouth has been an all-too-frequent visitor.’
But if the reputation as high-handed, unloved and ruthless stepmother hurt (and it clearly did), it did not deflect her from her purpose of re-vamping Althorp and opening it to the public as a top-attraction stately home in a competitive business.
In 1975, Lord Spencer inherited Althorp in a state of bad repair, with death duties of £1.5 million and another £2 million in estate debt.
Now Charles, the 9th Earl, inherits a sound historic property — some would say it is too spick and span with Raine's bright colour schemes and shining new curtains — at the top of the stately home league with between 40,000 and 50,000 visitors a year.
Charles Spencer comes on stage as the nice guy who has dissociated himself from the forced sale of tenants' cottages, grieved over the disposal of historic treasures and heralded a new degage era of neighbourliness.
Until the complex family trusts set up to protect his inheritance are unravelled, the liabilities of the new Lord Spencer remain unclear.
But now he has moved from critic to principal player, he may discover the advantages of the business brain so vilified by Raine's critics.
The scale of his new responsibility was illustrated last week by two estate workers who were laboriously repairing a broken stretch of the eight-mile-long stone wall that surrounds Althorp.
Like the grave-diggers in Hamlet, they speculated on life: ‘We've been working on it for 25 years and we still haven't got round.
In some places it's 14ft high.
We've seen them come and go and the wall keeps on falling down.
We knew Lord Spencer's father and we like Charles.
We're not saying anything about Raine.’
If Raine Spencer's iron will and unswerving competence made her intolerant of others less efficient — in the words of one neighbour, the kind of woman who ‘rubs up worthy souls the wrong way’— does she deserve the epitaph of the woman who alienated the children, sold the family silver, was short with servants and decorated Althorp in poor taste?
In the past 13 years, when 250 historic houses and their estates have been sold off, Althorp has flourished.
Even Raine's critics acknowledge that, in doing what dirty work had to be done and attracting the odium that went with it, she has put her stepson in a strong position.
Strong as it is, Charles Spencer will undoubtedly have to find painful and unpopular solutions of his own.
Will he be as happy as his stepmother to indulge the coach parties, the corporate guests, the Japanese tourists with whom Raine and her husband spent so much time?
Without them Althorp would have failed.
But it is not a life calculated to appeal to a young man with sophisticated Metropolitan tastes and a career in the media.
Yet if Althorp loses that personal touch, if it can no longer offer the chance to take tea with a relative of the Princess of Wales, will it still pull in the crowds?
Terry Empson, director-general of the Historic Housing Association, said Althorp was not only virtually impossible to value but almost certainly unsaleable: ‘Nobody in their right minds would want a ducal palace designed for an entirely different age.
People with money choose a nicely-sized Georgian building with a reasonable amount of land.
‘If you start from a sound basis and do things right — keep the house open to the public on an agreed scale and keep it in good nick — then running a major house is feasible.
But even then, there are massive periodic bills that come round every second generation — a major roof repair, a bit of bad luck like serious dry rot.
‘These are lurking demons waiting to pounce and then you either pack up or reluctantly and sadly sell something off.
‘A good, conscientious owner can ensure maintenance but even new wiring can cost £100,000, for which there is no financial assistance.
These things have always been expensive but now the cost is terrifying.
Tourism is never going to pay on a scale that covers the major repairs which are going to clobber you.’
What the new Earl faced, he said, was decreasing farm income and increasing repair bills: ‘Traditional workmen's skills have now become specialised craft skills.
A historic house is valued as a capital asset whereas in fact it is virtually a non-income producing liability.
When they value a property in Sweden, they put a negative value on a historic house.’
Commander Michael Saunders Watson, who opens Rockingham Castle to the public, said the survival of historic houses depended on ‘not dying’ and daughters-in-law.
‘They are an absolutely key thing.
They have to run the beastly place and do all the work.’
International: President plans a surprise ending Mitterrand ready to write a new chapter
by Suzanne Lowry in Paris
AT THE height of last week's farcical premiership crisis, President Mitterrand slipped out of the Elysee Palace under the lenses and noses of the encamped journalists awaiting his decision, and went shopping.
As the hacks speculated about the cloud of black smoke that suddenly appeared over the palace roof — it did not mean that no decision had been taken, only that a chimney had caught fire — the President was browsing in his favourite bookshop, Les Arcades, just below The Sunday Telegraph's Paris office.
I saw him there, an unmistakable figure in his black double-breasted coat, his black fedora placed carefully on the pile of books beside him.
The grand old man of French, even European, socialism with his gaunt profile and livid complexion, calm at the eye of the storm, looking almost like his own ghost.
He was engrossed in a book called Mitterrand s'en va (Mitterrand Quits) a new political novel aptly subtitled The Cruel Week.
The book, signed with the pseudonym Manicamp, after a character in Dumas's Vicomte de Bragelonne but in reality by Stephane Denis, a political journalist, is a fictional account of the end of Mr Mitterrand's reign and the welter of intrigue surrounding it.
It predicts an eventuality the real President does not wish — that his successor will be his prime-minister-before-last and arch-rival, Michel Rocard.
The President left without buying it and headed back, with no sign of security or presidential pomp, towards the Elysee, the journalists and the ‘ballet’ of ministers that called and called again in a seemingly endless round of consultation.
Some papers later reported that he had stopped for tea at the Ritz but this unlikely frivolity was angrily and officially denied.
The bookseller expressed no surprise that Mr Mitterrand, a client of 40 years' standing, should go browsing on such a crucial day.
‘The President is the most civilised of men.
He puts books before everything.’
The next morning, Mr Mitterrand appointed Pierre Beregovoy as Prime Minister.
Monsieur Solidite, Monsieur Rigueur: the beaming ex-Finance Minister's arrival seemed to satisfy everyone except the Communists and the National Front.
Even some Right-wing opposition politicians reckoned it was the best Mr Mitterrand could have done in the circumstances.
At least the economy would be safe — even if unemployment remained a cruel problem and there were many pitfalls ahead.
But what of socialism in all this?
Can the government that has been assembled around Mr Beregovoy, the man who has moved from Leftist doctrines to a belief in a mixed economy and who keeps a tight rein on public spending, still be called socialist?
Can Mr Mitterrand, even as the opinion polls condemn him and the press mock him as a king on the eve of his dethronement, be about to try one last grand jeu before he really ‘quits’.
There were hints before the local elections, rumours of some sort of relaunch of the Left.
The strong showing of the two environmental parties — the Greens and Ecology Generation — who clearly benefited from a haemorrhage of votes from the socialists, must have convinced the President that the old party pulled together by him in 1971 and still led by its familiar herd of ‘pink elephants’ was doomed.
In her last days Edith Cresson tried to rally ‘progressive forces’ to the government's cause.
The government of Mr Beregovoy is still discernibly the government of Mr Mitterrand and many of the old faithfuls are still in place.
But is it a socialist government?
Or is it more like the foundations for a new party, more broadly based, more conscious of the feelings of the young, the green and the European?
Jack Lang, long-serving Culture Minister, has been promoted to Minister of State, with Education added to his responsibilites.
A socialist, certainly, but first and foremost a Mitterrandist.
Bernard Tapie, millionaire industrialist, owner of the Olympique de Marseille football team and ferocious antagonist of Jean-Marie Le Pen and his extreme Right National Front, is Minister for the Cities.
Mr Tapie is by no means a doctrinaire socialist and sits as an independent in the National Assembly.
The other rising stars include Jean-Louis Bianco, Minister of Transport, Elisabeth Guigou, who remains in charge of European Affairs, and Segole Royal at Environment, all immensely competent functionaries who owe their allegiance more to the President than the party.
That leaves the Greens and Ecology Generation still on the outside.
Mr Mitterrand's eye is on them and their potential vote-winning capacity in next year's general election.
But maybe the leaders, Brice Lalonde and Antoine Waechter, will have to fight it out for the leadership of a united ‘green’ party before a real alliance can be forged.
If it were achieved, what name could this coalition of ‘progressive forces’ have?
Mr Beregovoy has been quoted as saying that he is not ashamed to be called a social democrat.
Democracy with a strong social policy has always been at the heart of Mr Mitterrand's thinking.
Perhaps under this banner Mr Mitterrand will, before he leaves the stage, contrive to unite his children — and, with the help of a little tinkering with the voting system and the constitution, defy the augury of satirical novelists and opinion pollsters alike.
International: Encounters of the Italian kind Today's poll is the first under electoral reforms which promise to alter the political shape of the country, reports Robert Fox from Rome
By ROBERT FOX
AT CHARLIE'S disco in downtown Cagliari, the hour was late, and so was the candidate.
No matter: for the bellezze of Sardinia had come to admire and be admired in a sea of high fashion, micro-skirts, cravats, and a rock group in blazers and ties.
This is the setting of an election incontro (encounter) for Mario Segni, parliamentary candidate for the Christian Democrats, radical reformer, and son of a former president.
Encounters have been all the rage of this Italian election campaign — only the 12th since the republic's first in 1948.
Physically at least, this is one of the cleanest campaigns for many a year.
The incontri take place on street corners, in works canteens, in the palazzi of the rich, in the corners of humble bars, and before panels of windy interlocutors in hundreds of television and radio studios.
The talk is straight and serious, and curiously free of rhetoric, for voters and candidates agree that this election is Italy's encounter with destiny.
Whatever happens, even if the same coalition led by the Christian Democrats and Socialists gets back into power, things can never be the same again.
Protest is in the air against government by private horse-trade between political bosses and parties.
Gloom is gathering over the weight of public debt, declining small-business confidence, the inefficiency and expense of public services, and the spreading tentacles of organised crime.
There is serious doubt about whether Italy can achieve the norms laid down by the Maastricht Treaty, and qualify for membership of the European Community single market next year and full monetary union by 1997 or later.
‘Thank you for coming.
I won't detain you and spoil your fun.
Please support me in the election — you know what I stand for.’
That is the extent of Mr Segni's pitch to the clientele at Charlie's.
He has already achieved electoral reform, and now wants the process to continue along British lines.
Last year's Segni Law means that voters will state a single preference for a named candidate on the ballot paper for the Chamber of Deputies, instead of giving four numbers on a party list.
‘I hope it means we can start breaking the old structures of power within the parties,’ says Mr Segni.
The Christian Democrats are faced with another important change in the electoral landscape.
For the first time in more than 40 years of power in Italy — more than twice the reign of Mussolini's fascism — they no longer have the threat of the largest Communist Party in Western Europe to keep them in power.
‘This is the first election we have had since the Berlin Wall came down,’ says Andrea Borri, a Christian Democrat MP from Parma, addressing an incontro of hoteliers in the spa town of Salso Maggiore.
‘With the Cold War over, and the Communist Party divided, we can no longer give excuses for the shortcomings of the system, the lack of accountability.
You expect most candidates to make you offers and promises — that would be the old way.
But I can't offer you anything, the situation is so grave now in Italy.’
Mr Borri recognises the threat posed by the powerful Lombard League, a populist movement which has expanded to embrace most of the Po basin from Venice to Turin and Bologna as the Northern Alliance, or Northern League.
Last time the League took 1.3 per cent of the national vote, enough to get its rabble-rousing leader Umberto Bossi into the Senate.
Now, with its protest against the wayward and corrupt ways of government by Rome and a demand to run its own affairs in a federal Italy, it is set to top the polls in Milan and Lombardy with as many as 60 members in the next parliament.
At one of the League's many incontri, a Milan taxi driver raises the temperature of a quiet meeting by shrieking: ‘Why the hell should we pay our taxes to that mess in Rome?
Of course I will vote League — and most of my mates will too.’
At the upper end of the social and economic scale the mood of protest has been captured most effectively by the small but respected Republican Party.
Last year the party leader and son of the founder, Giorgio La Malfa, pulled the Republicans out of the coalition in protest against the old ways of doing government business.
‘We stand first for responsible opposition,’ he says at an incontro in the palazzo of a Milanese business grandee.
The Republicans, who are set to double their vote, are backed by leading newspaper editors and the chiefs of Fiat and Olivetti.
The curtain was briefly lifted on the murkier side of the governing Christian Democrats with the most dramatic incident of the campaign — the murder of the party's boss in Sicily by Mafia gunmen.
Salvo Lima had been Mayor of Palermo in the building boom of the Fifties and Sixties, when the Mafia set the rules of many public contracts.
More important, he delivered nearly a quarter of the Christian Democrats' votes at national elections as a faithful lieutenant of Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti.
With the growth of population in the south and the decline in the north, coupled with the fragmentation of political protest in the north, the government of Italy is increasingly a southern affair.
The mass rally in Florence by the Christian Democrats — who are increasing their support in the south and losing it in the north — to celebrate the hundredth anniversary of the start of the Christian Democrat movement, and the appeal to ‘trust those who know how to govern’, seemed curiously old-fashioned and out of key.
Little was said about the need to tackle public debt, now running at £15,000 for every man, woman and child in Italy.
Nothing was said about institutional reform.
Possibly Mr Andreotti sensed that little will change this time round.
After all, some things in this election campaign have not changed — porno-star Moanna Pozzi is the most popular candidate, according to her TV ratings.
But even if the old partnership of Christian Democrats, Socialists and Liberals gets a working majority, the serious opposition parties have made their point more effectively than at any time since 1948.
The sense of Italy's crisis is pervasive, and there will have to be a settling of accounts.
It may come sooner than the present management thinks.
Will power of the iron man Mining millionaire's death opens up rich seam of intrigue and pits widow against daughter in struggle for vast riches
by Dave Lawrence in Perth
THE unlikely romance that began in a hotel lobby has ended in death and bitterness for Rose and Lang Hancock.
Langley George Hancock, a rough and tough multi-millionaire mineowner, died in strange circumstances in his glistening white mansion, Prix d'Amour, nine days ago.
He was 82 and for months had received intensive medical care which included trips to the United States to consult experts about his wasting body.
Even before he died there had been hints that all was not well between his Philippines-born wife, Rose — some 40 years his junior — and Gina Rinehart, Mr Hancock's daughter by a previous marriage.
It was said that Mrs Rinehart was upset because she thought Mrs Hancock might inherit vast royalties from the tycoon's ore resources.
The apparent malice continued last week into bizarre encounters.
First there was a battle over copies of the will.
Then on Wednesday, hearses from two funeral companies turned up at the morgue to claim the body.
Neither got it.
The coroner turned them both away.
On Thursday the widow's lawyers dashed to the Supreme Court to seek a directive that she should have the remains.
It has been more like carnival week in Rio than the death of an iron man.
He had always said that Rose Lacson, the woman he met in one of Manila's finest hotels and brought back to live in a mansion that she designed, would inherit his iron-ore wealth.
That was what she expected.
But when the contents of the will were disclosed last week, it was Mrs Rinehart who got control of the mines.
Mrs Hancock kept the white mansion and some other property interests of her late husband.
Shortly before his death, Mr Hancock had added a codicil stipulating that if either woman contested the will, she would automatically be excluded as a beneficiary.
Among the more bizarre events after Mr Hancock's demise was a police swoop on the quarters where he spent his last days.
A tip-off about prescription drugs, said the police.
It created intense speculation, forcing Mrs Hancock's lawyer, Martin Bennett, into a circus-style press conference outside the mansion gates.
Mr Bennett disclosed that police had acted on a tip-off that Mrs Hancock had planned to use narcotics to murder her husband — which she denied.
The lawyer insisted that relations between the two had been normal.
He even said that shortly before his death Mr Hancock had suggested that his wife might, despite his failing health, be willing to spend the night with him.
Mrs Hancock, the girl from the other side of the tracks, had always professed her love for the rough, tough ex-miner who made a fortune and espoused the most outlandish ideas.
She was certainly an attraction.
Golfers on the course opposite the mansion were treated to the sight of the lady of the house going through her aerobic routine at the windows of the gymnasium on the first floor.
In keeping with the tourism-oriented Perth scene, she would always be available to potter in the garden as coachloads of Japanese tourists pointed their cameras.
She set up huge parties, inviting members of both the smart set and Perth's ‘old money’.
Her birthday present to her husband on his 82nd birthday was a BMW car covered in red roses.
That pleased the smart set, but secretly the old money decided it was a bit tacky.
The old-money set was not Mrs Hancock's greatest fan.
One source said: ‘When Rose arrived in Perth, the old money prepared to accept her around the scene.
After all they have seen much worse.
But, really, those outrageous parties just became too much.
Yes, they were a bit tacky but Rose wasn't happy to take things at Perth pace.
She wanted too much too soon, and I think the old money just shut her out eventually.’
It was typical of the Lang Hancock style that he should have turned up in town with his young woman, caring little for the opinion of the climbers.
Mr Hancock preferred to let his money do the talking.
His portrait isn't in Perth's exclusive Weld Club, where influence counts for more than cash.
Pride of place in the leather and wood-panelled coffee lounge is a portrait of Frank Wittenoom, the man who gave Mr Hancock's father his start — he sold Mr Hancock Snr the land on which the wealth of iron ore was found.
‘I think we were all going to pay the price for that’, said a member of one of Perth's oldest families.
‘Honestly, Lang caused nothing but trouble in the Pilbara when he was first up there.
He was always flying to Canberra, stirring it up, trying to create problems for the stations in the north-west.’
It fits the mystique surrounding the man that the mineral deposits were found through apparent chance.
Queensland author Neil Phillipson recalled the incident in his 1974 biography Man of Iron, which he called a tribute to a ‘living legend’.
Mr Hancock talked about a fateful flight on November 16, 1952.
He was on his way south from a place called Nunyerry when, he said, monsoon clouds forced him to fly lower and lower into the Turner Ranges, one of those areas of outback Australia that are so inhospitable that even the local animals hibernate below ground.
He could not turn back and his instruments were not functioning so he flew down a succession of gorges well below the surrounding peaks.
He was in a tiny Auster, ill-equipped for the buffeting it was getting.
Mr Phillipson wrote: ‘Hancock recalls that in the less traumatic moments he was struck by the rich red colour of some of the massive formations as they slipped by barely a metre from his wing-tips.’
The rich red of iron-ore country.
It sounds glamorous.
But Mr Phillipson went on to question this account.
He said that no pilot of Mr Hancock's experience would attempt such a flight with the slightest hint of monsoon weather.
He said there was no record of rain on November 16, 1952.
Nor was there any rain in October or December.
Finally he suggested that Mr Hancock must have been 180 degrees off-course.
But the legend survived.
And the ore was certainly found, for as early as 1975 Lang's fortune was estimated at between £40 million and £90 million.
Yet it has not been built without cost.
In 1967 Mr Hancock bought the blue-asbestos mine at Wittenoom in the Pilbara.
Twenty-five years on, the claims for compensation for medical disability are still trickling in.
His idea of a millionaire's treat was to take his first wife, Hope Hancock, to the cinema for the 11 o'clock morning show.
A glowing profile by a local journalist of the time said: ‘There's nothing of the ruthless businessman in him.
It's his profound faith in the north which has kept him battling on.’
But many of Mr Hancock's actions were tinged with entrepreneurial oddity.
As late as 1986 he persuaded the West Australia government to back a barter deal with the Romanian communist dictator Nicolae Ceausescu.
It involved exchanging ore from his new McCamey's Monster mine for manufactured goods.
The Romanian products turned out to be near-worthless.
Mr Hancock's cremation on Thursday night failed to end the saga of his death.
Mrs Hancock's lawyer said that his client and Mrs Rinehart had reached a compromise over access to the body so that the funeral could go ahead.
Mrs Hancock turned up in a Rolls-Royce after announcing she had organised a requiem mass at Perth's St Mary's Cathedral on Friday.
It was within 30 minutes of a wake ordered by Mrs Rinehart in her own mansion in old-money Dalkeith.
True to form, Mrs Hancock agreed to a live hook-up with Australia's Ray Martin Midday Show on television within minutes of the requiem.
Even in death, Lang Hancock continued to stir the desert winds of controversy.
International: Thirty killed in township war
By FRED BRIDGLAND
TWENTY people were shot and hacked to death in a Johannesburg township in the worst incident of violence in South Africa since August 1990, and 10 others were killed in settlements elsewhere in the city, writes Fred Bridgland in Johannesburg.
Xhosa-speaking men armed with guns, spears and axes, killed 17 men, two children and a woman, and seriously injured 18 other people in an attack on a squatter camp at Katlehong.
Xhosa-speakers generally support the African National Congress, which has been waging a small-scale war with followers of the Zulu-orientated Inkatha Freedom Party for the past week in Johannesburg's townships.
The Law and Order Minister has called for peace talks.
International: KGB signs up for Hollywood After the success of JFK, Russian spies start to trade in undercover past for over-the-counter assets
by John Hiscock in Los Angeles
HOLLYWOOD producers are scrambling over each other to snap up rights to top-secret data on some of the biggest Cold War spy scandals.
The material, long hidden in KGB files or in the memories of intelligence operatives, is up for grabs as ageing ex-KGB agents come in from the cold to trade in their undercover pasts for over-the-counter assets.
Eager Hollywood producers, always on the lookout for real-life dramas and entranced with the idea of revealing untold Soviet secrets, are funnelling hard currency their way.
But the negotiations have been fraught with enough intrigue and duplicity to do justice to any spy drama.
So far, three production companies claim to have bought the rights to subjects ranging from the ‘Third Man’ scandal of Kim Philby to the assassination of Leon Trotsky, the Cuban Missile Crisis and the attempted assassination of Winston Churchill during a Second World War summit in Teheran.
But with 500 officers of the KGB Foreign Veterans Association all with stories to tell, as well as offshoots from the KGB making their files available to the highest bidders, it is not clear who owns the rights to which stories.
The companies are keeping many details of their projects a secret while rushing to be first on the screen.
‘It's all a confusing mess at the moment,’ confessed an executive of one of the companies involved.
‘The situation could arise whereby we all own different bits of the same story but we will only know that when we go to one of the television networks with a proposal.’
Rival producers Robert Halmi, who recently paid a record £5 million for the rights to film Scarlett, and Marvin Davis, the former owner of 20th Century Fox, both claim to have secured exclusive rights to official KGB archives.
In true spy fashion, there is also a mysterious third man, Brian Litman, a Hollywood-based producer and agent who has signed up the Foreign Intelligence Veterans Association, a fraternal association in Moscow of 500 old spies made up of retirees from the former Soviet secret service.
He plans to act as their agent and intends to create films and television programmes as well as books and lectures on spycraft based on their reminiscences.
Mr Davis expects his Davis Entertainment Television company to have his first Soviet-based project, a made-for-television film about the Cuban Missile Crisis as seen from a Russian perspective, ready by January.
He claims that although Mr Halmi's stories may emanate from Moscow, they are not from the official archives of the KGB.
Observers believe the confusion may have arisen because the original KGB ceased to exist as on January 1 and has been replaced by two separate agencies, both of which entered into negotiations to sell the files.
A spokesman for Robert Halmi's company, Ted Nelson, said: ‘We have exactly what we say we have.
We are going ahead with our projects and have no comment on what any other company says it does or does not own.’
Among the material contained in the KGB files are the Soviet version of the attempted CIA assassination of Fidel Castro; the biography of a high-level Soviet scientist known as Tolkachov whose spying on behalf of the CIA during the 1980s led to a devastating penetration of the Soviet radar defence system and, in 1987, Tolkachov's execution; and the revelation of joint CIA–KGB operations during the Gulf war that led to the pre-emptive destruction of much of Saddam Hussein's offensive missile power.
Both companies also claim to own the rights to aspects of the KGB's study of UFOs.
Mr Litman, who has set up an office in Moscow, is unperturbed by his rivals' plans and promises that his ageing ex-spies will provide ‘astounding new material that will shatter myths and create new controversies.’
According to Mr Litman, the veterans are delving back into their memories to produce new information on Glenn Michael Souther, the US Navy spy and defector who committed suicide in Moscow; events such as the assassination of Leon Trotsky and details of Soviet femmes fatales in espionage.
One of Mr Litman's sources is ‘Yakovlev’, whose real name is Anatoly A. Yatskov, who retired from the KGB in 1985.
He is expected to reveal the truth of whether Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, executed in 1953 for wartime espionage, had in fact helped obtain plans for the American atom bomb for the Soviets.
Another of the veterans, Col Oleg Nechiporenko, a Latin American specialist, promises to shed new light on Lee Harvey Oswald, whom he says he met at the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City two months before the assassination of President Kennedy.
Mr Litman refused to discuss details of the money involved but his Russian associates are clearly expecting a considerable boost to their meagre pensions.
‘Yakovlev’, for instance, receives around 2,000 roubles a month, about £11.50 at the customary exchange rate.
‘We are selling historical information so it has to be valuable,’ said Col Anatoly Privalov, vice-chairman of the Veterans Association and a former intelligence operative in Turkey and Algeria.
‘The idea that all people involved in espionage are rich is a myth.
We are only rich in the moral sense.’
International: Beef about Vatican blowout
By BORIS JOHNSON
LIFE must be hard in the Vatican — if the latest European Community farm export figures are to believed.
The Pope and the other 765 inhabitants of the Holy See barely have time to roll out of bed before the great binge begins.
Breakfast means making a manful start on the average per capita daily consumption of 9 lb of patisseries and 2 lb of butter, washed down with all the coffee produced by 1 lb of beans, sweetened with a truly papal ration of — yes, every day — 13 lb of sugar.
‘These statistics are incredible,’ said Ernest Glinne yesterday, the Belgian MEP from Charleroi who coaxed the figures from the Brussels bureaucracy.
On Tuesday in Strasbourg he will be renewing his calls for a crackdown on EC agricultural fraud.
‘I know they have a famous stomach in the Vatican, but this is impossible,’ said the atheist Walloon.
When he submitted a written parliamentary question on the matter last December, the alarm bells rang sufficiently loudly in Brussels for Jacques Delors, the Commission president, to reply in person.
About to join a battle royal with Britain and Germany over his ambitious plans for a 30 per cent increase in the EC budget, the last thing Mr Delors wanted was more tales of bogus food exports.
Even the Commission acknowledges that 10 per cent of the EC's annual budget — about £3 billion — is still being lost in fraud; it is a point the British will not forbear to mention now that they are being asked to pay an extra £1 billion per year into EC coffers.
Mr Delors's reply, however, which begins to explain the mystery of the Vatican's medieval levels of personal consumption, will do little to console those who worry about crookery in the Common Agricultural Policy.
Under the Lateran Treaty of February 11, 1929, he says, the ecclesiastical state is deemed to be not part of Italy, and therefore not part of the EC.
This means that food ‘exported’ ' to the Vatican (from a Roman abattoir, say) is treated as if it were going to a ‘third country’.
It is therefore possible, M Delors admits, for an EC wholesaler sending food to the Vatican to claim one of the Community's fabled ‘export refunds’— the generous cash incentives to dump surplus produce outside the EC which have crippled the world trade talks.
The goods are then ‘re-exported’ to Italy, where, in all probability, the obliging EC officials pay more money to put them into intervention stores.
Hence, says Mr Glinne, the apparently astonishing dietary habits of the Holy See.
‘These exports exist only on paper.
They must be fraudulent,’ he said yesterday.
Otherwise, he says, he finds it incredible that the cardinals, monks, nuns, Swiss Guards and the ascetic curates of the Sistine Chapel should be managing per head, per day, 3 lb of beef, the equivalent of 12 large beefburgers.
With 1.8 litres of liquor and wine, it is a wonder they are able to remain upright, he says.
Mr Delors insists that it is up to the pontifical authorities to check that everything is above board.
‘A form issued by the Governatorato dello Stato della Citta del Vaticano is used to certify that the products are intended for consumption,’ he said in his written reply.
But Mr Glinne makes dark references to financial scandals surrounding the Vatican, the Banco Ambrosiano, the P2 Masonic Lodge and the Italian mafia's well-known expertise in farm fraud.
‘This is a huge problem.
I shall not let it rest,’ he said.
One EC official said yesterday that the problem of fraud involving the Vatican had been understood for several years, and that attempts were being made to stamp it out.
He also pointed out that the apparently prodigious appetites of the clergy might be explained by the droves of tourists and worshippers who ate at Vatican restaurants.
The wine intake might be justified by the mass communions in St Peter's, he suggested.
Perhaps the food was given to the poor.
‘Anyway, there's always problems at the Vatican,’ he concluded.
Hunger pangs, in any event, seemed to be diminishing.
If it was 3 lb of beef per head per day in 1990, it was 4 lb in 1989.
International: Promises are cheap in crunch over Big Apple
by Xan Smiley in Washington
PANDER!
Pander!
Pander!
That was the Big Apple's mantra of the week.
Even by the standards of New York, the primary race for the Democratic presidential nomination has been a shameless charade, with the candidates grotesquely outbidding each other in their hunger for the city's myriad sectarian votes.
The Arkansas Governor, Bill ‘Slick Willie’ Clinton, has outpandered California's ex-Governor Jerry ‘Moonbeam’Brown by a whisker, has spoken a bit more sense with a bit less pizzazz and conviction, and looks set to scoop a big enough bundle of votes to guarantee him the nomination — unless he falls victim to further scandal or Democratic Party fixers impose a ‘brokered convention’to find a last-ditch candidate.
But Clinton's nationwide image as untrustworthy refuses to fade, while the insurgent Brown is enjoying himself hugely as the slash-and-burn anti-everybody candidate who knows he will never have to fulfil his outlandish promises.
The embattled Clinton looks just too keen to be President, while Brown still sounds, as the Clintonites like to put it, ‘like the candidate from Pluto’.
New Yorkers seem unconvinced by both aspirants.
In a desultory turn-out Clinton will probably win.
A broadly sympathetic tell-it-all interview with Mrs Clinton in Vanity Fair contains enough new detail on the challenger's love life and psychological scars to provide even more ammunition for the ‘Luv Guv's’ foes in both parties.
It could also turn the spotlight unfavourably on the assertive Mrs Clinton, who has herself become a ‘campaign issue’.
The front-runner has kept his ill-starred record, in Brown's words, as ‘the scandal-a-week candidate’ with his recent admission after years of slippery circumlocution that he smoked marijuana when a student at Oxford 22 years ago.
A candid confession to youthful pot-smoking, it is generally agreed, is no longer a disqualification for office, but the sore part of the latest wound — pretty mild by Clinton standards — was that he had been evasive when asked repeatedly about it for at least seven years and that even last week's admission was shifty.
‘I didn't inhale,’ he blandly explained.
‘That's the equivalent of saying you drank beer but didn't swallow it,’ expostulated one columnist.
‘Even when the Democrats ‘do wrong’ they can't do it right,’chuckled another talk-show host.
‘I mean, next thing he'll say ‘Yes, I did sleep with Gennifer Flowers, but it's okay, I didn't enjoy it’.
’ The Californian crusader looks set to win a big enough protest vote in this second biggest state of the country — after his own — to make Clinton look less than presidential and to keep the character question hanging over him.
Brown's biggest blunder, at any rate in New York, was naming the Reverend Jesse Jackson as his running mate.
The black leader says he will accept the Number Two nomination from any Democrat, but many Jews, who make up a good third of New York's Democratic voters, dislike Jackson intensely for his support of the Palestinian cause and past reference to New York as ‘Hymietown’.
Many will reject Brown for choosing him.
Brown's message is turning into a zealot's redemption-seeking rant, with scant regard for facts or figures, for his own past record (’ I Lobbied: It Was Bad’mocked one headline), for the need for compromise to make laws, least of all for financial contraints.
‘He has more positions than the Kama Sutra,’ says a leading black columnist, Bob Herbert.
‘If Clinton is Slick Willie, Brown is Jerry the Hypocrite.
This clown reinvents himself every 20 minutes,’ says Don Imus, the city's most popular radio host.
Moral fervour, Brown argues, can solve problems — such as drug abuse.
‘We can do it if the leadership of this nation will just stand up and do the right thing.’
Right on, Jerry.
Billions were needed to improve the urban infrastructure, a black mayor said at a Clinton-Brown debate, $6 billion, for a start, for a project in New Jersey.
‘Yeah.
Sure.
Whatever,’ said generous Jerry.
‘Capitalism, the money-lenders and the greedy elite have been allowed to subvert the democratic process,’ he railed at a crowd on Wall Street, asking for a cleansing of the temple and drawing swift accusations of anti-semitism.
How to save an ailing General Motors plant in Tarrytown?
‘Well, give them more ownership and more say in management decisions; give them stock options; give the unions more clout — whatever it takes.’
Easy, really.
Yet his passion, untempered by Clinton's overscripted if articulate jargon from the policy think-tanks, is touching a chord.
He sounds sincere.
He has even begun to laugh and smile.
Complaining that a recent photograph showed him with an unrecyclable styrofoam coffee cup, he denounced it as ‘politically incorrect’.
People thought he might have been joking, but he wasn't.
For both candidates the biggest pander contest was over Israel.
Refusing even to denounce the building of West Bank settlements, though a good half of Jews in America and Israel would freeze them as part of the price for peace, Clinton easily outbid Brown.
Brown proclaimed his record on Israel as ‘unassailable…
I support the $10 million loan guarantees without conditions…
Those guys [in the Middle East]have got to live with each other and sort it out,’ he explained.
‘Don't pressure Israel; don't pressure the Arab side,’ he later elaborated.
Clinton's pitch for the Jewish vote was more obsequious.
Donning a yarmulke, he promised a Jewish group that ‘we'll keep a glatt [strict]kosher kitchen at the White House,’ a pledge that his aides were at first unsure whether to treat as a jest or for real.
Clinton issued a statement that he was ‘opposed to the creation of an independent Palestinian state’ and added that ‘the US President should not be taking positions on subjects such as the settlements’.
‘How bad a pander can you get?’ said a leading Jewish reporter on a New York newspaper.
‘He sure crossed over the pander line.
Brown is just as pro-Israel but more honest about reality.’
Though Clinton may have clinched most of the Jewish vote with his down-the-line promise to treat Israel more gently than President Bush does, the irony is that, for Jews and gentiles alike, his blatant Big Apple vote-seeking has done nothing to make him look principled or even presidential.
International: Kohl digs heels in after clanger Visit by Waldheim angers Jews
by Robert Tilley in Munich
IS CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl losing touch?
The question was put by a German television commentator in response to the resignation last week of one of Kohl's top Cabinet ministers and in the face of mounting evidence that his government is falling seriously behind in its programme to stitch the two halves of the country together economically.
The commentator's ingenuous query could just as well have been prompted, however, by an unrelated but somehow symptomatic display of the insensitivity and obstinacy that have come to be regarded as part of Kohl's character.
The reluctant resignation of the Defence Minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg, over the outlawed use of German weapons against Kurdish rebels in Turkey diverted attention from a potentially much more embarrassing affair — Kohl's clash with the world Jewish community over his demonstrative meeting in the Bavarian capital with Kurt Waldheim, the pariah President of Austria.
Waldheim beamed with pleasure as Kohl and the Bavarian Prime Minister, Max Streibl, welcomed him to Munich, where the Austrian president — shunned by most of the world's leading democratic countries because of his still-unexplained wartime record — was feted by a Right-wing crypto-chauvinistic organisation.
Waldheim's delight at meeting Kohl was understandable, for the encounter was possibly the last he will have with a foreign leader before bowing out and slipping into retirement.
The Austrian presidential election will be held on April 26.
Kohl, on the other hand, will have to live with a politically obtuse gesture that is being compared to his appearance with American President Ronald Reagan, in May 1985, at a Bitburg cemetery where they laid remembrance wreaths only a few yards from rows of graves of SS soldiers.
As then, his response to criticism of this latest faux pas was characteristically antagonistic.
‘As Federal Chancellor, I alone decide with whom I meet,’ was his haughty rejoinder to Jewish protests.
‘I don't need any advice.’
The strongest objection to the Waldheim-Kohl meeting came from the Jewish World Congress, whose director, Elan Steinberg, accused the Chancellor of being ‘morally thick-skinned’.
Kohl was stung into an angry retort, accusing the Congress of sending an emissary to East Berlin at the end of 1989 with a ‘polemical’ message which pleaded against German unity.
The row simmered on last week despite deliberate efforts in Bonn to brush the affair under the carpet and diversionary events such as Stoltenberg's resignation, campaigns for state elections today in Baden-Wurttemberg and Schleswig-Holstein — and Kohl's 62nd birthday celebrations.
Just as Prime Minister Streibl was perhaps hoping that his role in the Waldheim affair had been forgotten came an uncomfortable reminder that his own approach to Germany's past history is not beyond scrutiny.
A flattering recommendation by Streibl was discovered on a Right-wing publisher's pamphlet promoting a biography of General Eduard Dietl, one of Hitler's most loyal military leaders.
Dietl was known as the ‘Butcher of Murmansk’ because he allegedly sent thousands of German soldiers to certain death in the Arctic campaigns.
A Catholic priest was sentenced to death in September 1944 for publicly voicing the ‘Butcher of Murmansk’ description of Dietl.
Nevertheless, Streibl recommended the Dietl biography as a ‘highly interesting description of the life and personality of this general, whose excellent military abilities and achievements cannot be doubted’.
Streibl said he was looking forward to ‘getting deeper into the book in my leisure time’.
The Bavarian Prime Minister's recommendation appeared on the publicity pamphlet below excerpts from a similarly glowing review by the ultra-Right wing newspaper Deutsche Nationale Zeitung, which tries to boost its fringe circulation by challenging what it calls the ‘Auschwitz lie’ that millions of Jews died in Nazi extermination camps.
During the Waldheim visit to Munich, Streibl demonstratively invited the Austrian President to sign the golden book of the Bavarian State in the Prinz-Carl palace, where Mussolini liked to stay.
Kohl, who had found time in his busy schedule to make the 360-mile journey from Bonn to meet Waldheim, excused himself after an opulent lunch and rushed back to his Rhineland base before Waldheim was awarded the chain of honour of the Peutinger Collegium.
The ceremony took place in the Max-Joseph hall of the Residenz, the former Wittelsbach royal palace, most of whose former residents — according to one aghast Munchener —‘wouldn't have allowed Waldheim through the kitchen entrance’.
A political friend of Streibl's, former Bavarian Agriculture Minister and deputy Premier Otto Schedl, read a eulogy for the Austrian statesman who still stands accused of assigning Jews, partisans and even British soldiers to their deaths during service in occupied Yugoslavia and Greece.
Waldheim's ‘virtues’ had become particularly clear when the Austrian President had been confronted by a ‘world of defamation and absolutely unfathomable persecution’, said Schedl.
The accusations against Waldheim, however, had collapsed like a house of cards and ‘those pulling the strings’ had been revealed, Schedl claimed.
He didn't elaborate — but, for many observers, he didn't have to.
‘There's a subtle and dangerous anti-Zionism at work here,’ said a Munich Jew who insisted on anonymity.
‘In the Bavarian context it's not too serious.
‘But at a time of rising neo-Nazi sentiment, it is very worrying when Kohl himself rolls out the red carpet for a man like Waldheim.’
International: Cotton republic is hanging on by slim thread
By JOHN KAMPFNER
THERE is no shortage of blue pencils in Uzbekistan.
Censorship is alive and well, one arm of a police state which has shed the outer trappings of communism to survive.
Most political parties are banned, and harassment of dissidents is commonplace.
Even the one moderate opposition that has been sanctioned, Erk (Independence), complains of intimidation.
Last week the latest edition of its newspaper failed to appear.
‘They said it was for lack of printing plates,’ said Mohammed Salekh, the party leader, who has to submit articles to the authorities for approval.
‘I phoned the president's office and they said they would see what they could do to help.
I had to laugh.’
At Birlik (Unity), a radical nationalist movement, they are forced to camp out at the decrepit Writers' Union building, where rotting rubbish is piled high in the corridor.
From there, activists try to hold meetings to ‘politicise the masses’, but are detained on an almost daily basis.
Their Independent Weekly newspaper is printed in the Russian city of Yekaterinburg and smuggled back into Uzbekistan.
Most of the copies are seized in raids.
Last January students at Tashkent University rioted, ostensibly in protest at the price rises that followed President Boris Yeltsin's reforms in Russia.
The security forces opened fire, killing two and injuring dozens, and then closed down the dormitories.
But Abdulrakhim Pulatov, the head of Birlik, says that President Islam Karimov is trying to use slightly more subtle forms of repression to avoid deterring the growing army of businessmen and politicians from abroad.
‘The students were given free tickets to go to their home towns,’ he said.
‘It was a cunning way of putting off the problem.
But it will come back to haunt Karimov.’
Mr Karimov, one of the more artful of the old-guard Communist Party leaders, sees his style of government as a buffer between growing Muslim fundamentalism and Western-style democracy.
He is trying hard to develop business ties, with special emphasis on secular Turkey.
His relations with the Grand Mufti of Central Asia, who is based in Tashkent, are tense, but each needs the other at the moment.
Religious leaders in the provinces look to Saudi Arabia and to Iran.
As for politics, it seems only in modern Tashkent that liberalism gets a hearing.
When Mr Salekh, a popular poet, stood in a two-way contest against Mr Karimov in December's presidential election, he gained only 12 per cent of the vote.
He said he would have done considerably better had he been granted anything approaching equal access to the media and had tricks not been played against him.
One was villagers being told that his visit had been cancelled just as he was arriving.
At least he has a seat in parliament.
But the dozen or so Erk sympathisers are no match for the rest of the 500 deputies — all members of the People's Democratic Party, the former communists who regrouped under a new name after the failed Moscow coup.
Mr Karimov knows that he will stand or fall on his ability to stave off economic collapse.
The third most populous republic of the former Soviet Union is saddled with immense environmental problems, an appallingly high infant mortality rate and an economy based on overcultivation of cotton.
The insidious climate of fear hangs over everyone.
At Tashkent's showcase maternity clinic, a Russian from Omsk said that doctors inserted contraceptive devices into local peasant women, often without their consent, as part of a state campaign to lower the birth rate.
He then stopped himself in mid-sentence and claimed he had been joking.
When Mr James Baker, the American Secretary of State, met opposition leaders in Tashkent in February, Mr Pulatov urged him to establish diplomatic relations to enable the United States to monitor human rights and give democracy a foothold.
The small group of diplomats — the first foreign envoys in the republic — arrived two weeks ago, but it will be some time before their presence is felt.
They and the opposition are up against a tradition of oppression that goes back to Tamerlane.
Under the communists, feudal fiefdoms flourished.
Sharaf Rashidov, the former party boss, would lie about the cotton crop year after year to ingratiate himself with Moscow.
His close ally was Yuri Churbanov, Leonid Brezhnev's son-in-law, Deputy Interior Minister and a man of singular mediocrity imprisoned by Mikhail Gorbachev for corruption.
Marat Zakhidov, a senior member of parliament, knew all the local chiefs personally.
A kindly man who is trying to nudge Mr Karimov away from repressive measures, Mr Zakhidov admitted that the government apparatus was as corrupt as ever but suggested that the president himself was clean.
‘In any case, we can't get rid of people with experience,’ he said.
Election Focus:A Hung Parliament: Britain may be on the verge of a hung Parliament — and a dramatic change in the political landscape.
David Wastell and Toby Helm look at the dire prospects now facing the parties and the people
By DAVID WASTELL
A NIGHTMARE is looming.
This time next week, 48 hours after all the votes have been counted, the outcome of the election may still not be settled.
John Major may be sitting in Downing Street putting out feelers to the 13 Ulster Unionist MPs, while from his house in Ealing Neil Kinnock tries to get Paddy Ashdown to answer the telephone.
Saturation coverage of three-and-a-half weeks of intense campaigning may have given way to non-stop reports of a complicated new chess game — as each main party, neither with an overall majority, manoeuvres to secure the support it will need to form the next Government.
The ramifications will even reach Buckingham Palace.
If the Tories lack the troops to hang on to office alone, the Queen will be awaiting Mr Major's decision.
Will he visit her to tender his resignation — or will he decide to tough it out and attempt to form a minority administration?
The financial markets, jittery enough at the prospect of a Labour victory, would dive further in the face of uncertainty, putting pressure on the pound and raising the spectre of an immediate interest rate rise.
This is the reality of a hung Parliament — still the most likely outcome of Thursday's general election.
Only a handful of polls since Christmas have given either party the lead they would need to secure an outright majority.
To politicians of the two main parties the prospect of an indecisive election result is dire.
It will mean constant uncertainty in the new parliament over which policies can be pushed through the House of Commons, and a constant pre-occupation with which minor parties might decide to vote down legislation, and when.
To voters, who hope that a clear result will speed the end of the recession, an unclear result could have precisely the reverse effect.
‘The danger of a hung Parliament is that it could hang Britain,’ a senior Cabinet minister said yesterday.
Business, faced with the prospect of a faltering government and the likelihood of another election within months, may shy away from investment decisions and postpone long-term commitments.
The gloomiest predict that the effect on confidence could turn recession into slump.
There are three options facing a party attempting to govern without an overall majority.
It can soldier on, living from day to day in the hope that it can attract support from MPs in one or another minority party — there are likely to be at least 50 such members — for each piece of legislation.
Second, it can forge a ‘pact’ with one or more of the other parties, which entitles them to be consulted over policy decisions but excludes them from holding ministerial posts.
This was the course adopted by Labour in 1977, when a series of by-election losses deprived the then prime minister, Jim Callaghan, of his overall majority, and forced him to strike a deal with the Liberals.
Third, it can establish a formal coalition — commonplace in Europe, but unusual in Britain — in which MPs of more than one party become ministers.
Anything is possible between now and polling day.
But, despite repeated public protestations to the contrary, senior politicians of both main parties have been discreetly considering their tactics in the event that neither Conservatives nor Labour secure the 326 seats needed to win immediate power.
They will have 17 days between the moment when the last result is known and April 27, when the new Parliament meets for the first time, to gather sufficient support from MPs from minority parties to form a government.
The stakes will be high.
Whichever party succeeds in winning enough support may, once the uncertainty has passed, reap the benefit of the long-awaited upturn in the economic cycle.
The prize could be growing popularity as the economy recovers — and the chance to choose the best moment for a second general election which would produce an outright majority.
The key hurdle for the new Government will be the vote after the Queen's Speech, which is set for May 6, in which its legislative programme will be set out.
Mr Major's dilemma will be acute.
If the Conservatives are the largest single party, should he hang on as Prime Minister in the hope that he can do a deal with another party?
Or should he gracefully accept what, to many, will appear to be defeat, recommending to the Queen that she invite Mr Kinnock to try to form a government?
The answer depends in part on arithmetic, and on how far short the Conservatives are of the 326 seats needed.
It could be that support from the 13 Ulster Unionist MPs likely to be elected on Thursday would be enough to see Mr Major home.
Or he could face a knottier, and probably impossible, problem — how to woo the 20-plus Liberal Democrats who are likely to be returned and who would insist on electoral reform and Scottish devolution as pre-conditions for their support.
Even if the Tories do not form the largest party, there is a precedent, albeit a controversial one, for Mr Major hanging on.
After the election in February, 1974, Edward Heath stayed put in Downing Street over the weekend while trying to do a deal with Jeremy Thorpe, the Liberal leader.
His attempt failed, and on the Monday afternoon he tendered his resignation to the Queen.
Mr Heath claimed that, because his share of the vote was higher than Labour's, he was entitled to try to form a government.
Labour refrained from attacking him, confident he would fail.
Lord Callaghan, then Labour's foreign affairs spokesman, recently recalled that the party's decision was to allow Mr Heath ‘to swing slowly in the wind’.
But Mr Heath was savagely criticised by the press and the public, and friends of Mr Major believe that in similar circumstances he would be unlikely to hang on.
The scope for Labour to do a deal is greater.
Mr Kinnock appears to have been preparing the ground for a possible arrangement with the Liberal Democrats by stressing his party's commitment to proportional representation in a Scottish assembly, and to involve other parties in a review of alternative voting systems for the House of Commons.
But Mr Ashdown, who is demanding a full-scale coalition, has so far rejected anything that Labour has offered, threatening to vote against a Queen's Speech that does not include a commitment to electoral reform; and Mr Kinnock has said that he has made no overtures — not even played the ‘opening chords’— which would lead to a post-election pact.
The chances are that, if Mr Major gives way to Mr Kinnock in a hung Parliament, Labour will attempt to govern as a minority administration.
In effect Mr Kinnock would dare the Liberal Democrats and the Tories to vote Labour down, bringing a second election upon their heads.
Labour will be encouraged by remarks made by Kenneth Clarke last week.
Speaking on the BBC's Election Call, the Education Secretary did not rule out abstaining on a Queen's Speech from a minority Labour government.
In the first public comment by a Cabinet minister on Tory tactics in a hung Parliament, he said it ‘depends what they put in the Queen's Speech’.
Labour may also gamble that Scottish Liberal Democrats — who in the last parliament made up almost half Mr Ashdown's party — will be reluctant to vote down a government which is trying to legislate for a Scottish assembly elected by proportional representation.
With the issue of how Scotland is governed now dominating politics north of the border, Labour MPs are convinced that such a move by Liberal Democrats would be like turkeys voting for Christmas — the description employed by Callaghan of the Liberals who threatened to break the Lib-Lab pact.
Instead Mr Kinnock would be likely to introduce a more modest programme, tinkering with his tax plans to accommodate Liberal Democrat reservations, and concentrating on plans for constitutional reform — including Scottish and Welsh assemblies and a new Freedom of Information Act.
While the Liberal Democrats feel that Labour is at least making progress towards their central demand for proportional representation, the demand has met only outright hostility from the Tories.
Mr Major has repeatedly said that he would not contemplate reform.
‘PR is no principle,’ he said at the start of the election campaign.
‘What does it stand for?
Paddy's roundabout.’
Instead the Tories best bet for a deal of any sort — although it is likely to fall short of a formal pact — is with the Ulster Unionists.
The recent meeting of Ulster's leaders at Downing Street, the granting of a Commons debate on security and the appointment of Mr Jonathan Caine as special adviser to Peter Brooke, Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, helped to improve relations between Unionist MPs and the Conservatives as the election loomed.
Senior Conservatives believe they could satisfy some of the key demands of the Unionists, without undermining the terms of the Anglo-Irish Agreement or the all-party talks on the province's future.
One of their main demands is for a greater say in policy-making and legislation governing Northern Ireland.
This includes setting up a select committee to which ministers and civil servants could be summoned for questioning, and phasing out the present system by which legislation on Ulster is passed by unamendable Orders of Council.
Unionists want methods of legislating for Northern Ireland to be brought into line with those for the rest of the United Kingdom.
Unionists also want enhanced security through extra troops, and would like conferences under the Anglo-Irish Agreement to be held in Dublin and London, rather than Dublin and Belfast.
There would be problems for the Tories.
One would be the difficulty of bringing Unionist MPs — notorious absentees — to Westminster for votes.
A second is that the Unionists in fact consist of two parties with separate leaders — Jim Molyneaux and Mr Ian Paisley.
Tories are also conscious that the image of Unionism is such that any agreement would attract inevitable criticism from opposition parties.
But one Tory source said: ‘We think we could accommodate the Unionists if we needed to far more easily than the Liberal Democrats.’
Smaller minority parties which might come into play include the Welsh and Scottish nationalists — the latter most likely to make a deal with Labour, based on a common ground on economic and social policy.
A minority government would represent a change in the political landscape.
Ministers would have to be prepared for legislation to be defeated, time and again, without feeling the need for the issue to be made one of confidence — on which the government would feel it necessary to force an election.
Labour's minority government of 1974 lost 29 votes in June and July that year; yet did not hold the election until the following October.
‘It would need a change of culture compared with the last 13 years,’ said one senior civil servant.
‘You'd have to signal in advance which issues you regarded as a matter of confidence — for instance, the Tories might have a crack at coal privatisation but might not want to go to the country on it if they failed.’
The worst scenario of all is one in which no party feels confident of forming a government, leaving the Queen with no alternative but to grant a second dissolution.
But either Mr Major or Mr Kinnock would come under strong pressure from constitutional advisers — including Sir Robert Fellowes, the Queen's Principal Private Secretary, and Sir Robin Butler, Cabinet Secretary, to make the effort.
As Lord Armstrong, Sir Robin's predecessor, put it in an unusually candid interview for BBC radio's Analysis programme last year, it would be a ‘primary objective’ of the Queen and her advisers —‘and, one would hope, the politicians concerned’— to ensure that the government of Britain is carried on.
Election Focus:A Hung Parliament: In a quagmire of coalition Robin Lodge, Diplomatic Correspondent, looks abroad to see how other countries cope with pacts, backstairs deals and perpetual campaigning
By ROBIN LODGE
THE difficulty is finding apples to compare with apples.
Oranges and lemons abound.
It is a problem of which Mr Major is well aware.
He used it to his best advantage last week, when he raised the ghastly spectre of Belgium to warn unwary voters of the dangers of coalition governments and proportional representation.
Belgium, he remarked, was a state addicted to backstairs deals and perpetual campaigning, where it took 100 days just to form a government.
The implication was clear: vote Liberal Democrat and you are opening the door to hordes of squabbling Flemings and Walloons.
It must be admitted that Belgium is not the best advertisement for purveyors of hung parliaments.
Even the Belgians have their doubts.
Indeed, as the country's stalwart burghers give lusty tongue to the national anthem, Apres des siecles d'esclavage —‘After centuries of slavery’— there might be some cynics who would be tempted to reflect that under the present system they are not an awful lot better off.
The present coalition government elections include no fewer than five political parties.
It is led by Jean-Luc Dehaen of the Flemish Christian Social Party (CVP).
Under him are five deputy prime ministers, representing the CVP, which won the largest number of seats, but no majority, the Francophone Socialist Party (PS), the Flemish Socialist Party (SP), the Francophone Christian Social Party (PSC) and the Flemish People's Union (VU).
These same parties share the ministerial portfolios — which, Mr Major might care to note, include a Minister for the Middle Classes, the present incumbent being a Mr Andre Bourgeois (CVP).
Bad luck on the Liberal Flemish Freedom and Progress Party (PVV) and the Francophone Liberal Reform Party (PRL), who got left out and with a handful of other minority parties make up a discordant opposition.
Worse luck on the voters who have to contend with the most challenging of ballot papers.
It is a wonder that no Flemish or Francophone equivalent of the Corrective Party — or Screaming Comte Ghent — has ever managed to slip through the net.
The system is further complicated by the fact that on many issues a Flemish socialist is far less likely to agree with a French-speaking fellow-socialist than with a conservative fellow-Fleming.
Nation usually speaks louder than ideology; as a result, the generally accepted notions of government and opposition break down.
Without wishing to underestimate the aspirations of the Scottish National Party or Plaid Cymru, it is unlikely that such complications will colour Britain's political map in the foreseeable future.
Perhaps Italy would have been a fairer example for Mr Major to have picked.
There at least the ideological differences have not been obfuscated by national divisions.
Not that things are any simpler.
When Italian voters go the polls today they will have a bewildering array of 116 parties to choose from, including the Movement in Defence of Motorists, the League of Housewives and Pensioners and, of course, the Party of Love, headed by Italy's self-styled porno star, Moana Pozzi — who has recently taken over the mantle from her screen colleague and Member of Parliament, Ilona Staller, La Cicciolina, who is taking time off from politics to have a baby.
The once-powerful communists have splintered into hundreds of pieces, the largest of which is the Democratic Party of the Left, now expected to pick up only about 15 per cent of the vote.
As in so many countries in Europe, the collapse of the communists has been accompanied by a resurgence of support for the extreme right.
Among the candidates is Alessandra Mussolini, granddaughter of Il Duce, standing for the neo-fascist MSI party in Milan.
Since 1945, Italy's successive coalition governments have been dominated by the Christian Democrats, who have provided the country with a measure of continuity and stability through repeated crises and elections.
The fears are now that the outgoing government of the Christian Democrats, Socialists, Liberals and Social Democrats will no longer be able to command a majority, leaving a plethora of parties from which it will be impossible to form a working coalition.
Such a farcical situation could never come about in Germany, where a party must win a minimum five per cent of the overall vote before it can take a single seat in the Bundestag.
The rules were adjusted for reunification; in the 1990 election it was sufficient to win five per cent in either the western or eastern Lander.
The elections are organised under a system of proportional representation devised by the Western powers in 1949 with the specific aim of preventing a single party from seizing power.
The result has been that the minority Free Democrats (FDP), with only 79 seats in the Bundestag, can maintain their grip on the balance of power for decades.
While Chancellor Kohl's CDU-CSU alliance holds 309 of the 652 seats, far more than its closest rivals, the Social Democrats, who have 239, it could not govern without the support of Hans Dietrich-Genscher's FDP — which is why Genscher has managed to hold on to the post of Foreign Minister for so long.
Opponents of proportional representation would argue that the system gives Genscher and the FDP a disproportionate amount of power — music to the ears of Paddy Ashdown, anathema to Labour and Conservatives.
Fair or unfair, it is a system which has helped make Germany a beacon of political and economic stability in the Western world.
It is not hard to understand why Mr Major, scoffing at coalitions and PR, chose to highlight Brussels rather than Bonn.
Election Focus:A Hung Parliament: Paddy's Big Step The Liberal Democrats' well-laid plans for power-sharing may be about to bear fruit.
But, their leader tells David Wastell, Political Editor, although success seems so close, this is not really what he wants at all 
By DAVID WASTELL
PADDY Ashdown was on a high.
Pushing up in the polls, his par ty's agenda leading the news, talk of a hung parliament everywhere.
Not only that, but he had worked out in the gym that morning, then managed a half-hour nap before heading out for an unusually late lunchtime start from the VIP terminal at Heathrow.
His brow furrowed, though.
‘You know, a hung Parliament and a coalition government would be extremely tough for me, very tough internally.
It would require a great deal of leadership to manage the party.’
There would be ructions, especially if he went into coalition with the Tories.
‘Inevitably there will be some at councillor level and some of our senior members who will say, if we go in with the Conservatives: ‘That's it, I'm off’.
‘Opinion polls show that exactly 39 per cent of our voters would like me to have a relationship with Labour and the other 39 per cent would like us to have a relationship with the Tories.
So either way I go, it's likely to be unpopular with the other section.’
For a moment it was possible to feel sorry for the man.
After all, he does not actually seek the result to which the polls have been pointing since the election campaign began.
What he really wants, he still insists, is a Liberal Democrat majority.
It is just unfortunate that reality obliges him, instead, to contemplate the tiresome possibility that the Liberal Democrats hold the balance of power in a Parliament in which neither Tory nor Labour parties have an overall majority.
Well, maybe.
And it is certainly true that, on previous form, the centre party has failed to extract any long-term benefit from recent occasions when it has held the balance of power.
This time, though, Paddy Ashdown is determined it will be different.
With this in mind, he is painting a picture of the disaster that would follow if either of the two main parties formed a minority government without a firm agreement with the Liberal Democrats.
The price of such an agreement, of course, would be electoral reform — which, purely incidentally, would give his party the balance of power after any election in the foreseeable future.
The outlook for both the economy and for government finances, in Mr Ashdown's judgment, is dire — in fact, it is likely to prove ‘immeasurably worse’ than either Conservatives or Labour have realised.
Although he would not care to make predictions, ‘it is not unlikely that the other side of the election, particularly in the case of Labour, we will have to take some very, very tough action indeed — not the least of which will include raising interest rates’.
True, there are no signs that either Mr Major or Mr Kinnock would contemplate a coalition.
Rather, they would prefer to struggle on, in charge of a minority government, in the hope that the economy will recover and they can reap the benefits at a second election after about a year — as Labour did in 1974.
In doing so they would deny Mr Ashdown the opportunity to take his painful decision.
But he believes the recession is so serious, and room for manoeuvre is so limited, that this time the feel-good effect will be too long in coming.
‘Either a Tory or a Labour minority government will look at the next election down the track and say, ‘Hang on, we ain't going to win’.’
On this basis, he said, ‘sensible people’ will see that striking a firm deal which produces a majority in the House of Commons and guarantees ‘stable government’for a full five years ‘is the best way to take the tough decisions and probably the best way for them, too’.
His soundings in the City support this view, he said.
Of course the financial markets would prefer a straightforward Tory government.
‘But they realise that a partnership government would be better than a Labour government, and much better than a minority government of either party.’
Such a government, he argues, perpetually teetering on the brink of defeat and another election, would be nothing more than a lame duck.
Last year, Mr Ashdown and his advisers embarked on ‘war-gaming’— what social workers would call ‘role playing’— to explore the moves and counter-moves likely to be made in a hung Parliament.
The strategy devised from this included setting out his shopping list for a post-election pact so far in advance that the Liberal Democrats would not get the blame if a deal fails to materialise, and a second election is forced.
He has already made clear that he will demand a commitment to electoral reform in the first Queen's Speech of a new government as the price for Liberal Democrat support.
He would demand a written agreement from either Mr Major or Mr Kinnock, backed up by a collective decision in favour from MPs of whichever party.
And there would have to be at least one Liberal Democrat post in Cabinet.
This weekend, buoyed by the growing Liberal Democrat support and the trend to a hung Parliament in the most recent opinion polls, he is moving on to the next stage: cranking up the case for a coalition.
‘The other two parties can ignore the realities of what the polls show up till about Sunday,’ he said.
‘But if they still show the same thing we are all going to have to respond to it.
I am going to have to say, ‘OK, this is not what I wanted, but it appears that is what you [the voters]have decided’.
Now, anybody who cares about the country ought to be saying what they will be doing.
I am saying that, and I think the other party leaders will have to say that too.’
But what of Mr Major's claim that Mr Ashdown has more in common with Labour than with the Tories and could be the Trojan horse with which Mr Kinnock bursts through the wrought-iron gates into Downing Street?
Mr Ashdown professed to be delighted that the Tories had taken the Liberal Democrats head on last week, in an attempt to chip away at their support.
‘It has really played us into the game and I think the Prime Minister has made a considerable mistake.
If you look back to 1974 you'll discover that our vote lifted at precisely the moment the Tories tried the same game.
I don't believe it will work.’
Was it not true, though, that the Liberal Democrats had voted with Labour in five out of every six divisions in the last Parliament?
No, that argument was ‘ludicrous’, he said.
‘We were part of the opposition, so what else would you expect us to do?’
The important point, he said, was that his party had voted with the Government more often in the last decade than in the previous one.
The Liberal Democrats supported Tories on a raft of issues, not least on reform of trades union law — and if they were able to exercise a restraining influence on a minority Labour government they would not hesitate to do so.
‘The Tories are quite wrong because we disagree profoundly with Labour on almost every cardinal principle of economic policy.’
But were the Liberal Democrats not in favour of higher taxation — with their famous penny on basic rate income tax to pay for more education spending, and a new top rate of tax set at 50 per cent?
‘If you're saying we are both reformist on taxation then yes, we are.
We both believe that, out of sheer natural justice, it is illogical for someone on £24,000 to be paying less tax on the marginal rate than somebody on £19,000.
But unlike Labour, who just want to extend national insurance contributions to all levels of income, we want to consolidate them into income tax.
That means we support a top tax rate of 50 per cent, but not higher — and it would only bite on incomes above £50,000, not the £40,000 where Labour's 59 per cent begins.’
Mr Ashdown pledged that the Liberal Democrats would combine with the Tories to block the worst excesses of Labour's tax plans if Mr Kinnock led a minority government.
‘We will use whatever influence we have to the full to ensure, for example, that you don't tax middle-managers with a 49 per cent rate at £27,000, and you don't tax people above £40,000 with a combined 59 per cent rate.
We would not tolerate policies that drive out incentives.’
The Liberal Democrats had a tougher view on controlling inflation than Labour, he said, including their commitment to an independent central bank.
On policies to stimulate competition, they were ‘in many ways further to the right’ than the Tories.
What about Mr Kinnock's pledge on Friday, that a Labour government would sign up to the notorious social chapter of the Maastricht treaty, a move which the Tories claim would cost jobs?
Here again, Mr Ashdown said, the Liberal Democrats would exercise a moderating influence.
They would like Britain to opt back into the social chapter, but join other EC members in attempting to renegotiate its contents.
In particular, they would oppose anything which smacked of the corporatist state.
‘With the presidency of the European Community coming up, we believe Britain has a unique opportunity to renegotiate it and strip the corporatist elements out.
A number of countries are now queueing up to do so.
We would join them.’
And what if Mr Ashdown gets his way: a coalition government later this month which introduces electoral reform and thus commits Britain to more coalition governments for the indefinite future?
Would the end of the first-past-the-post system, with its unpredictable results, not make the business of politics boring?
He was suddenly animated again.
‘No, no, it would be exciting,’ he said.
‘You would not have this clammy hand of conformity.
‘You could have a Left-wing and a Right-wing Labour Party; but there would be a tremendous tendency towards moderation.
It will be very interesting to see how it all plays out.’
Then, reverting to his chosen, statesmanlike stance, he added: ‘Anyway, we should not be talking about it as if it's just bread and circuses.
The purpose of politics is to govern the country, not to provide a spectator sport.’
Election Focus:A Hung Parliament: The concurrence of atoms Andrew Roberts looks at the history of political pacts in Britain and finds them disliked, short-lived — and heartening for the Tories
By ANDREW ROBERTS
ENGLAND, warned Disraeli while wind ing up his Budget speech of 1852, does not love coalitions.
He said it correctly suspecting that the Conservatives were about to be pitched back into opposition by Lord Aberdeen's coalition of Peelites, Whigs and Liberals.
His judgment was based largely on the fortunes of the Fox-North coalition of 1783, which Lord Blake has called ‘the first coalition of any significance in British political history’ and which died ‘unhonoured and unwept’after only 10 months.
Fox and North faced a threat which Messrs Kinnock and Ashdown, or Major and Ashdown, should think themselves fortunate they need not worry about this week.
King George III used every means to manipulate the House of Lords into throwing out the India Bill and in Lord Rosebery's rotund phrase: ‘The Peers, who yearned for lieutenancies or regiments; for stars or strawberry leaves; the prelates who sought a larger sphere of usefulness; the minions of the bedchamber and the janissaries of the closet; all, temporal or spiritual, whose convictions were unequal to their appetite, rallied to the royal nod.’
The Fox-North coalition was characteristic of the phenomenon for a second reason besides its brief time in office.
When coalitions fall the country tends to revert to decisiveness.
Thus, the 1784 election led to 17 unbroken years of Pitt as prime minister; after the First World War the coalition stayed on in name but the Conservatives won 335 seats in 1918; Churchill's Great Coalition presaged the Labour landslide of 1945 and the iniquities of the Lib-Lab Pact were a major factor in Mrs Thatcher's victory in 1979.
On each of the three occasions this century where there has been a clear coalition government — May 1915 to November 1922, August 1931 to September 1932, and May 1940 to May 1945 — it has been to meet a national emergency.
Politicking carried on within the coalitions during both world wars and the financial crisis, but in a muted, coded and generally responsible way.
When there is a minority government, however, the combination is far less stable.
Of the six occasions when the government's continuation in office has depended on the votes of an opposition party, five have lasted less than 30 months.
Ramsay MacDonald told the House of Commons in 1924 that ‘Coalitions are detestable, are dishonest’.
He then headed two minority governments which were dependent on the Liberals, and a National Government which had a clear Conservative majority from October 1931 onwards.
Indeed, each of the five times since 1915 that there has been a minority government in power it has been Labour, dependent either on the Liberals' support, their abstentions, or on all the other parties not uniting to defeat them.
The most recent and comprehensive of these relationships was the Lib-Lab Pact of 1977–79.
After a string of by-elections in which the Liberals had done badly — they always do better under the Tories, especially in the South — and in the wake of the Thorpe affair, the Liberals desperately needed respectability.
The young David Steel was persuaded to support James Callaghan's government for two years, at virtually no cost to Labour.
Mutual terror of the electorate kept the arrangement intact.
The Conservatives have not experienced being in minority government at all this century, although after the election of February 1974, Edward Heath tried unsuccessfully to entice the Liberals into coalition.
However the Tories, who have gone into coalition only in times of great national danger, can take heart from history.
On historical form, the Liberal Democrats will agree either to support a minority Labour government which will be short lived, or join a coalition which will swiftly become unpopular.
Either way it is likely, as Palmerston said of a projected coalition with Disraeli in 1857, to be little more than ‘the accident and fortuitous concurrence of atoms’.
The Tories can then expect to be returned within a couple of years, by an England — Disraeli did not mention Scotland or Wales — which has once again proved it does not love coalitions.
Election Focus: Labour Boyo Tactics James Langton watches the remarkable transformation of Neil the Wild Man of the Valleys into Kinnock the Man You Can Trust, a figure of international standing who expects the key to Number 10
By JAMES LANGTON
IN Sheffield, at that rally, all spotlights and scha denfreude, he hit the stage like a boxer entering the ring, index fingers punching the air:
‘Yerallriiiiiiight?’
Was this the real Neil Kinnock; back among the party faithful, one of the lads despite the sharp suit?
It was a toe-curling moment, the sort of thing that turns the middle-classes right off.
But then the middle classes don't really figure in Labour's plans, unless you count £500-a-plate fund-raising dinners at the Grosvenor Hotel.
Yet the next night there was another version.
Kinnock the Teflon Taff versus Sir Robin ‘Grumpy’ Day on ITV's This Week.
Now it was the turn of the international statesman, the Man You Can Trust, settling back in his leather swivel chair, the body language just right, hands folded and head tilted the better to address the serious issues.
Different strokes for different folks.
It is easier to carve Neil Kinnock into chunks: the party boss, the family man, the orator, the man who is fit to govern, the would-be Prime Minister.
The problem is making them all come together.
Some of the preconceptions have gone.
The Windbag jibe for starters.
That is not to say brevity is yet a Kinnock hallmark (’ I'll answer this briefly,’he told foreign correspondents on Friday before launching into a five-minute response).
Instead he uses his elongated sentence constructions to great effect, looping coils of verbal rope around his inquisitors until so weighed down with sub-clauses, extended definitions and qualifications they lose both the beginning and the end, leaving them like Sir Robin, spluttering and blinking crossly; an elderly and bad-tempered owl offered a rubber mouse to play with.
He keeps his cool these days as well.
Some of Fleet Street's finest wind-up merchants have been put on the case, but the search for the Kinnock temper has so far been fruitless.
Only once has he come close to losing his rag, when publicly embarrassed by his press secretary, Julie Hall, as she admitted giving the first name of the little girl at the centre of the health election broadcast row to the press.
‘Don't give that man the benefit of any more conversation,’ he snapped as Miss Hall moved to answer an entirely reasonable question from Bruce Anderson of the Sunday Express.
‘He is simply not big enough.’
What else?
He is good with children.
‘God help the politician who doesn't like children,’ as he remarked at one point.
But he does honestly like them and can join a playground game or a classroom singalong without a hint of embarrassment.
It feels as if he has met more children than any other group of the population during the campaign.
‘Ah,’ the cynics have said, ‘But then children don't ask awkward questions.’
Indeed, this sort of campaigning has given rise to a certain newspaper image — that Mr Kinnock is being protected from real people, shepherded into a succession of carefully-staged photo-opportunities designed to look good on television but a million miles away from the real cut and thrust of the hustings.
You can count on the fingers of one hand the times Mr Kinnock has jumped in among the public.
Unlike John Major and his soapbox, it is not part of the image.
The Conservatives want to demonstrate that the Prime Minister is a man of the people; Labour, in contrast, that their man of the people can look like a Prime Minister.
Anyone who has ever witnessed a ‘meet the people’ exercise knows it is an absurdity.
A flailing chimera of camera crews, photographers and reporters staggers backwards down some city high street.
In the middle is Mr Kinnock, grabbing hands.
He tells them they are ‘lovely’.
They say ‘Good luck Neil!’
It is hardly profound stuff.
‘All you can see is a bleeding bald head,’ said a young mum in south Wales.
A shopper in Southampton said: ‘I don't care who it is.
I just want to get to Marks and Spencer.’
In fact anyone can put a question to Neil Kinnock.
The problem is getting an answer, or a least one that doesn't tell us anything we don't already know or indeed anything at all.
Mr Kinnock appears to have learnt all the answers to all the questions.
At one point last week, emerging from examining some factory, he passed just a few feet from a group of Fleet Street's finest.
No-one even looked at him.
What was the point?
Nor have there been any informal jolly gatherings when the daily toil of pressing the flesh is over: Mr Kinnock wandering back among the press party, glass of whisky in hand, letting his (metaphorical) hair down a little, tipping us just the hint of a wink that this is all just a great game.
He thanked the press for a 50th birthday card in Glasgow and bought everyone a drink in Wales, but he does not mingle like Paddy Ashdown or even Mr Major.
A huge part of the real Mr Kinnock remains hidden behind the curtains that segregate his private jet.
He did invite us to his Silver Wedding party in the Inns of Court in London.
It was an odd mixture of family and friends from the valleys, senior figures from the Labour Party and odd showbiz hangers-on such as John Mortimer and Stephen Fry.
There was a cake, good Australian fizz and an impromptu cabaret from the classical guitarist John Williams, the singer Cleo Lane and her jazz musician husband John Dankworth.
It was a celebration not just of 25 years' wedded bliss, but also the modern Labour Party.
Mr Kinnock is clearly a tough cookie.
In nine years he has brought the Labour Party back from the dead to the brink of power.
He inspires extraordinary loyalty among his staff; in return, one suspects he is unlikely to suffer fools or dissidents gladly.
There is a ruthlessness in those pale blue eyes.
In that sense he has something in common with Mrs Thatcher.
In another sense also.
He has a vision, albeit one unclouded by economic and social reality.
It emerges in his speeches, perhaps the high points of an otherwise largely dull and contrived campaign.
There have been three so far, in Birmingham, Glasgow and Sheffield.
They are said to be his own work, although the truth is that he probably has the final say.
He disdains an autocue.
The secret of public speaking, he told me early in the campaign, is to address your audience right between the eyes.
He speaks like a preacher.
In Scotland it was the plight of children waiting for an operation on the NHS.
Their pain, he said, was: ‘A sin, a sin, a sin.’
His face twisted; he cupped his hands close to his face.
It made News at Ten.
At the Sheffield Arena, he was magnified 10 times on a giant screen, the better for 8,000 party followers to see him.
The message was likewise enlarged: the young Kinnock and his family escaping from cockroaches and mice —‘you never forget the smell of damp’— into the prefab paradise of the post-war Attlee government.
The mood among the Labour campaign team has swung with the opinion polls.
Twice growing confidence has been dashed; once in the aftermath of the Jennifer's Ear broadcast; then late on Wednesday when it became clear that the crucial poll breakthrough had not, after all, taken place.
The long hours — most of his staff are working 18 hours a day — and the pressure are taking their toll on his campaign team, many of whom are clearly very tired.
This weekend it is possible to sense a feeling that they can do no more.
Mr Kinnock has been led through a minefield of interviews and policy statements without serious damage.
They do not expect him to lose but cannot quite see how he is going to win.
In the teeth of a recession the reworked Labour Party and the reworked Mr Kinnock are level-pegging with the Tories.
Six out of 10 voters are still not buying and three weeks of slogging seem to have made not a jot of difference.
Doubled-breasted suits and the single-minded pursuit of power are not yet quite enough.
Election Focus: Labour A return to industrial anarchy under Labour has been forecast.
Robert Porter, Chief Reporter, finds out what the shop stewards would ask for at Downing Street and what they might get
By ROBERT PORTER
ROGER LYONS cheer fully confessed that beer and sandwiches at No 10 would never again be on the trade union agenda.
Instead he is looking forward to pate de foie gras and champagne in Downing Street this Friday with Neil Kinnock firmly installed as Prime Minister.
This would be the first public acknowledgment of the role of union leaders in a Labour victory.
Mr Lyons, leader of the MSF technical union, believes — albeit slightly tongue in cheek — that the more exotic menu is fully justified.
‘We want nothing but the best, as befits our new status as full partners in Europe.’
This is a reminder that one of the first things a Kinnock government is pledged to do is sign the European Commission's social charter, rejected by Mr Major at the Maastricht summit.
This will restore most of the rights sought by the union movement as a reward for their loyalty, and Mr Lyons would like to see it signed on Friday.
Conservative governments since 1979 have brought in eight Acts of Parliament which have steadily constrained union power.
‘Not one of those Acts responds to what is now contained in the EC social charter,’ said Mr Lyons.
‘We would expect a Labour government to sweep away all those laws which conflict with the right to union recognition, which conflict with the social charter, and which conflict with the conventions of the International Labour Organisation, such as banning unions at GCHQ, Cheltenham, and banning collective pay bargaining for teachers.’
In a recent MORI poll, commissioned by a group of unions, 89 per cent of those canvassed thought employees should have the right to be represented by a union.
Even among Tory voters 86 per cent said ‘yes’ and only five per cent‘no’, said Mr Lyons.
Britain currently flouted so many ILO conventions that, now Eastern Europe had embraced democracy, we were the most ‘lawless’ country in Europe, he said.
Union leaders put up 90 per cent of the funding but have played little public part in Labour's campaign.
The TUC General Council made history by failing to urge members to vote Labour, and a march in Birmingham yesterday headed by Bill Jordan, president of the AEU, and Mr Lyons was one of the rare occasions when trade union support has been out in force on the streets.
But behind the scenes it has been very different.
Most of the streamlined, designed-to-appeal policies which appear to have impressed voters have emerged from a Review Group headed by Tom Sawyer, chairman of the Labour Party and deputy general secretary of the National Union of Public Employees.
This group, which included Shadow Cabinet members and senior union leaders, met regularly over the past two-and-a-half years and identified key election issues.
Mr Lyons has been part of the team which restructured Labour's industrial policy, the fruits of which were seen in John Smith's alternative Budget.
‘This is why there has been no last-minute panic,’ said Mr Lyons.
‘Everything has been carefully thought through well in advance.’
Victory on Thursday would bring Mr Kinnock a shopping list from the unions.
Mr Lyons said: ‘We would expect talks with Neil Kinnock, John Smith and Gordon Brown to consider a framework within which manufacturing industry can thrive.
‘There is a record number of MSF members — 83 — standing as Labour candidates in this election and this gives us an important stake in what is going on.’
Despite calls for sweeping change, many Conservative reforms are likely to remain.
Tony Blair, Labour's Employment Secretary, is said to be privately impressed that fewer days are now lost to strikes than at any time in the past 60 years.
Labour would insist on legally enforceable democracy in a union's internal affairs.
Union immunity from legal action would be allowed, as now, only if conditions such as a secret ballot had been met.
Otherwise unions could still be made to pay damages to an employer.
A strong body of moderate union opinion would be content with this.
Gavin Laird, veteran general secretary of the AEU, said: ‘Both Labour and the TUC have learned many lessons.
I am an advocate of an arm's length relationship with a Labour government and I have no desire to be knocking the door of No 10 on a whole range of issues.’
Bargaining had evolved in such a way that very few of the Conservative reforms had been used by employers in day-to-day negotiations, he said.
‘When you look at the Tory legislation there is surprisingly little we would say was totally unacceptable.
‘We would expect more equity for unions in terms of employment.
People must have the right not to belong to a union, but where more than half the workforce demonstrate in a postal ballot that they want to belong, they should be allowed bargaining rights.’
Labour would relax laws on secondary action — but only where an employer transferred work from a plant in dispute to another.
It is this which caused the Employment Secretary, Michael Howard, to claim that under Labour the unions would become more privileged than when Michael Foot was Labour's Employment Secretary from 1974 to 1976.
Mr Kinnock had already stated that secondary picketing would again become ‘a right to be enjoyed’.
So miners would again be able, quite lawfully, to picket a coke depot like Saltley.
Mr Howard painted a picture of industrial unrest under Labour rivalling the worst days of the 1970s.
Ministers are also likely to emphasise the industrial muscle which will be created by the merger of three public sector unions — Nupe, Nalgo and Cohse.
A ballot of members later this year should lead to a combined strength of 1.4 million making the super-union dominant in local government and the National Health Service.
But Mr Laird is convinced that economic forces preclude a return to the bad old days of union disruption.
‘There has been a sea change,’ he claimed.
‘The name of the game is ‘competition’ which the single European market will intensify.
‘If the next Labour government embraces the social charter rejected at Maastricht, that would cover all we are asking for.’
Election Focus:Conservatives: Campaign Notebook
By LORD MCALPINE
A S THIS campaign rumbles on I long for John Major to stand up either on his soapbox (which is really a box for transporting Central Office typewriters but no matter) or on one of the Conservative Party's all-singing, all-dancing stage sets, and say: ‘I have brought you a dramatic drop in the rate of inflation.
When I became Prime Minister this is what I promised.
Now I promise to devote myself to bringing down the costs of your mortgages because I believe that people should be able to own their own homes and to own them cheaply.’
He should say this because what his campaign needs is the idea that something new is going to come from re-electing the Tories — not just more of the same, however admirable that may be.
And so far Conservative strategy has been anything but effective.
At the start, this strategy was to show the electorate that the Prime Minister was ‘a very nice person’, tell them of the horrors of Labour's tax policies and hope that in the twinkling of Mr Heseltine's eye — aided by the applause of some celebrities and a giant (and inexplicably awful) stage set — the Conservatives would be back in government.
There were two problems with this.
First, John Major, though a pleasant man, had to say some nasty things about his opponents.
As a result, if the polls are to be believed, the gap in popularity between him and Mr Kinnock began to close.
Secondly, Labour's tax policies, while bad for the nation, seemed mildly attractive to a large number of people.
So the plan did not work and the emphasis switched from stage set to soapbox.
The soapbox suits Mr Major.
When the election is over it will enter the folklore of Central Office and the next campaign may be a more modest affair because of it.
WOBBLY Thursday in fact came on Tuesday this time.
But, as I predicted last Sunday, it frightened the life out of everyone at Smith Square.
The key date for seasoned party apparatchiks, however, is today.
It is today — professionals such as Mr Peter Mandelson and Sir Gordon Reece believe — that the electorate make up their minds.
Not that anyone is listening to seasoned campaigners like Reece these days.
His varied background in newspapers and television was ideal preparation for the campaign trail.
But now Central Office is full of men in their twenties wearing double-breasted grey suits and carrying those portable telephones that so annoy Mr Lamont.
The girls with long legs and short skirts from the shires are gone.
So, more's the pity, are men like Sir Gordon Reece.
Election Focus: Conservatives: Baptism of fire for the Brat Pack Dominic Loehnis and Valerie Elliott turn a spotlight on the pratfalls that dogged the fancy footwork choreographed by Smith Square for the second week of the election campaign
By DOMINIC LOEHNIS
CENTRAL Office was in disarray, the morning coffee soured by the sound of Cecil Parkinson on Radio 4 mounting a thinly disguised attack on the Tory campaign.
By lunchtime, loose guns were rumbling all over the Tory deck.
It was last Saturday, the day before John Major's birthday and a tirade of denunciation of his campaign team had cast gloom over the celebrations.
And there was more trouble.
Many strategists, including Maurice Saatchi, the advertising guru, wanted a radical rejig of the structure.
There was talk of resignations as they waited for the opinion polls.
For the inexperienced in the team —‘Patten's Puppies’ or the ‘Brat Pack’— the campaign has been a baptism of fire.
From the right flank, the Thatcherite old guard — including Parkinson, David Evans, Sir Marcus Fox and the former director of presentations, Harvey Thomas — have railed at the awfulness of the campaign.
Brendan Bruce, sacked as director of communications by Chris Patten, has monopolised the airwaves, telling the nation what is going wrong.
‘He is constantly being thrust down our throats by the BBC and others as an ace pundit.
The fact is that Brendan himself never fought an election here,’ said one strategist, through taut lips.
From the left flank, the Labour Party gleefully exalted in ‘Tory chaos’, content to be out of the spotlight.
‘The fact is,’ pointed out another Smith Square campaigner, ‘we haven't made any of the policy gaffes that Labour are constantly making.
We haven't had the ridiculous spectacle of our leader's press officer interrupting a press conference to contradict him.’
The strategy of the first half of the campaign was simple — to neutralise the appalling economic news and Labour's expected attack on health.
They were successful in the first aim by concentrating on Mr Smith's shadow budget and re-exploding the tax bombshell.
Marital difficulties in Fergie's ‘Southfork’ may have helped too.
Then, thanks to Labour's controversial election broadcast on health, that issue, too, was effectively neutralised.
Mr Waldegrave's shambolic performance in the press conference was a necessary evil.
To have cancelled the conference would have created an equally bad impression.
The second part of the plan was to turn to the Tories' own strong issues for the last 10 days: defence, foreign policy, law and order and — hard though it is in a recession — the economy.
In this, they have failed.
Naturally, they blame the media.
If the campaign has been logical to the strategists, the public perception is that it has been awful.
As one senior party man said: ‘The campaign plan was based on theories and notions, which is the opposite to how elections are really fought.
People should have known that performance does not always match up to promise.’
The gimmicks, meticulously planned at great expense, have failed: the ‘Val Doonican’ barstool and the ‘Blue Bubble’make London look identical to Sheffield.
The much-heralded Schlesinger broadcast on Mr Major's Brixton roots —‘I'll have some kippers’— was widely criticised.
Compared with Labour's slick and airy set, the low ceilinged, cramped quarters and dark blues of the Tory press conference set have felt like the interior of a submarine.
Understandably, Smith Square has suffered from collective schizophrenia.
One insider said last week: ‘The sheer anger of people has taken everybody by surprise.
I don't think people here realised how much some people hate the Tories.
They thought everybody loved John Major, so they must love the party.’
When the mood is low, accusations are hurled in the search for a scapegoat for a problem that nobody can rationalise.
The ‘Old Guard’, no longer playing a role at Central Office, has muttered darkly about the inexperience of the ‘Brat Pack’: the Young Guns say it's not their fault, that they have been forced into the background by more experienced campaigners.
There has been tension, too, in Central Office about the ‘omnipresent’ Sarah Hogg, who heads the policy unit.
One source said:’ She has been rewriting all the Prime Minister's press releases.
It's not necessary and is a reflection of the Prime Minister's lack of confidence and inexperience.’
Some Ministers believe the combination of Chris Patten, the chairman, and John Major has given the wrong signals: ‘Patten and Major are sweet and sweet, whereas what this campaign needs is sweet and sour.’
There have also been mutterings about the lack of liaison with Ministers.
‘Before this election, Chris Patten sent a note to departments about campaign plans and how Ministers would be given a theme every day.
Well, it just has not happened, and when they have decided on a theme, it has been so late at night that Ministers have not been told,’ said one disgruntled insider.
Such disillusion and frustration came to the fore last Saturday.
A group of strategists, led by Saatchi, demanded a rethink.
There were too many cooks, they said.
Strategy meetings were being attended by up to 30 people, including many of the ‘old guard’ of the party, brought in for the election.
Why couldn't they go back to small strategy meetings?
Before the election, these had chiefly comprised Patten, Woodward, Saatchi, Andrew Lansley, head of the research department and Steve Hilton, the 22-year-old campaign coordinator.
Richard Ryder, the chief whip, had brought along ministerial colleagues and, through 10 weeks of appalling economic news, the Tory Party had kept up with Labour in the opinion polls.
Now there were just too many people turning up.
A meeting was arranged with Patten for 10.30 the following morning.
When they met, the Tory chairman tried to soothe nerves.
The polls were better than expected.
Mr Major's soapbox was a triumph.
Labour's breakthrough had not emerged.
There was no need for change.
Then came Tuesday evening and three opinion polls put the Conservatives between four and seven points behind.
Only that morning the party had been excited over Mr Major's rediscovered soapbox.
What had Labour done — or where had the Conservatives gone wrong — to create such a gap?
At the press conference next morning, there was eloquent body-language.
Distracted and fidgeting, John Major, Chris Patten, Douglas Hurd and Tom King looked like suspects in an identity parade.
A Downing Street source gave an unsolicited verdict: ‘Labour looks to have it wrapped up.’
Yet 12 hours later it was all smiles again.
Gallup had put the Tories half a point ahead.
As the campaign enters the final furlong the Tories in the campaign team know they are no closer to finding a magic formula than they were at the outset.
The bags under their eyes reflect the wild mood swings that have afflicted the party since the first week.
Whether, as the campaign team insists, it has timed its rush so that Central Office strategy and a national fervour for Conservative rule synchronise on April 9, or whether, as critics insist, the campaign is fatally flawed, not even the pollsters will know until Thursday.
Election Focus: Conservatives: Boxing Clever The Prime Minister's soapboax saga is approaching its climax.
At the request of Tory toughs, he has given 10 per cent extra scorn and 30 per cent extra snarl.
But, as Trevor Fishlock reports, Major remains Major
By TREVOR FISHLOCK
IN THE ancient fable the frogs called on the gods to give them a king.
Jupiter sent them a log.
But King Log was a dull ruler and the frogs grew restless and demanded excitement.
Among a large number of Tory frogs in this election the craving for a more compelling and stirring leader has been plain.
They have wanted to thrill to the resonances of a persuasive voice powered by a passionate heart.
They have not, therefore, been swept off their feet.
John Major, if not exactly King Log, is no political magician.
His campaigning manner today is much the same as it was when he set out three weeks ago to seek his coveted mandate.
Apply a stethoscope to the Tory chest as he speaks.
It does not bob.
There is no throb.
Everyone can see that Mr Kinnock is running very hard to win, straining every sinew; but Mr Major, in comparison, does not appear to have that same, almost feral, competitive edge, that they want.
At this late stage, the finishing line in sight, Mr Major's supporters are hoping that he will reach into his very core for some hitherto hidden source of charismatic energy.
They want him to detonate such a great burst of passion that all those millions of waverers upon whom so much depends will rush to support him.
But since passion does not come in bottles it seems a vain hope.
Major remains Major.
Tories aching for fizz have to accept the meat and two veg reality; and they may remember that, in the fable, Jupiter grew so tired of the frogs complaining about their uninspiring King Log that he sent down a replacement, King Stork, who ate them all.
There is much more to the election than the party leaders; and a prime minister does not have to be a star.
The earth need not move for his supporters.
But the race is so close that all of the qualities and defects of the main rivals — Mr Major's lack of an aura and Mr Kinnock's relative unpopularity — are cast into the equation.
They may make the vital difference.
We tricoteuses of the press who set off to crisscross the country with Mr Major in his campaign plane and bus, many packed lunches ago, accompanied a diffident, decent figure presented in a soft-sell promotional film as a man with whom ordinary people could identify.
‘One of us,’ admirers said, though not in the Thatcherian sense of the phrase.
The film showed him finding his roots on the John Major Heritage Trail in Brixton and then, after he had hauled himself up by his bootstraps, helping to run the world, confident and determined, with large and capable hands.
But after a few days of insipid campaigning there was grumbling back at base about the way the campaign was going.
Utter shambles, said one Tory candidate.
Questions about Mr Major's style and the way he was fighting the battle arose from the evident disarray in the Conservative campaign.
Labour's simple, single theme is that after 13 years it is time for a change.
But the Conservative response to that proposition has been uncertain and diffuse.
Having called the election at a bad time, defending the 13-year record, and with an anti-Government trend growing significantly, the Conservatives have found it difficult to say clearly why they should go on and on.
They have found it hard, too, to make a bridge between the 11 years of Mrs Thatcher and the 16 months of Mr Major, to say what a wonderful woman she was, while being unable to explain why they threw her off the sledge.
It is part of a crisis of identity.
They have not made it clear enough what they think Conservatives are for.
There is a strong feeling inside the Tory campaign that incumbency, like the mighty bulk of an oil tanker, will see them through.
But there can also be detected an incumbent's complacency after years of huge majorities and easy victories; a slight resentment, almost, at having to fight an election at all.
There is a relentless derision of Mr Kinnock among some young apparatchiks and if that reflects voices higher up it adds to the sense that, like bad generals, the Tories may be underestimating the enemy, as dangerous to them as hubris for Labour.
Those in the party's Saw-edged Tendency demanded that the battle be taken to Labour.
Mr Major was to be less Nice and more Nasty.
Ten per cent extra scorn and 30 per cent extra snarl was added to his speeches.
But, of course, Mr Major is no snarler, and, as he said to me, he thought he was tough enough already and he wasn't going to change because he would then be a phoney.
In any case, although some of the speeches became tougher (in tabloid terms he began to slam and lash Labour), his delivery has never matched the words.
It is monotone, mechanical and Daleky.
It lacks light and shade, the conviction and theatrical intensity that drives words straight into people's hearts.
When he tries to sound fiercer he sometimes sounds peevish or wheedling.
The wordsmiths who put wooden jokes into his speeches are writing for a man who lacks the essential sense of timing for making them.
He always gets a laugh at Gerald Kaufman's expense —‘Where are you, Gerald?’— and he has tried a music-hall Welsh accent to score off Mr Kinnock; but these jibes issue uneasily from his tongue.
They are not really his style.
Mr Major has insisted that the Tories hammer Labour over tax.
It has been his central theme, returned to constantly in the belief that this is the effective way to frighten would-be Labour voters.
But in his tax speeches he is the earnest bank manager, unable to speak succinctly and dramatically, to grip people who do not have his bean-counter Treasury mind.
It is by no means certain that the Tory tax offensive has gained much ground.
Other ‘issues’ have been introduced at the morning press conferences at headquarters in Smith Square.
But some of these, defence and crime, for example, have been duds, of little election significance.
Mr Major believes that the question of Scottish and Welsh devolution, to which he is ardently opposed, is crucial.
He talks a lot about it.
But he does not engage the interest of English people indifferent to Scotland and Wales.
The Tory poster campaign, too, has been criticised for being too backward looking and negative.
Out on the campaign trail the marketing of Mr Major has often been unimaginative, betraying Central Office inexperience.
One objective of the campaign is to get the Prime Minister's picture in the papers but photo-opportunities are frequently dreary.
Mr Major and his managers believe that the walkabouts are good value.
The crowds are mostly supporters, but if there is barracking from a foe so much the better.
It is a stage-managed scrum.
Mr Major emerges from the bus and plunges into the crowd shaking hands.
He is surrounded by police, reporters and photographers who move with him like bees in a swarm.
The people are delighted to see the Prime Minister.
For his part, Mr Major, who feels the isolation from people that is an inevitable consequence of his position, is pleased to have contact, even if it means he is the occasional target of thrown eggs.
It serves his purpose if someone from the Socialist Workers jeers him, for he answers with jokes, then reminds his audience that the stooges are the ugly face of socialism.
Some say it is good for the Prime Minister to mix with the crowd and others that for a Prime Minister it is less than dignified.
But Mr Major likes the scrum and never stops smiling.
If only more people could meet him and see how nice he is, say his managers, we would win easily.
Last week's development of the walkabout was the famous soapbox which is now a talisman, like a Gibraltar chimp.
If it is lost or broken this week the Tories will lose by 100 seats.
If Mr Major wins it will be lodged under his chair at No 10 like the Stone of Scone.
His other pet campaign invention is a version of the fireside chat.
He sits on a bar stool in the centre of a circle of friendly faces, talking amiably.
It reminds me of days in the Wolf Cubs when we sat around Akela and heard about Mowgli.
The warm-up for this is conducted by Jeffrey Archer, the optimist and sprite.
‘When the Prime Minister comes on,’ he says, ‘ask him tough questions.
Have a real go at him.’
But who would bowl a beamer at nice John Major?
Asking him questions is like pressing a button on a coffee machine.
Press, and out comes an unfaltering milky flow.
But often the button gets stuck and the words splash out of control.
It is at times like this, I'm afraid, that he becomes an English windbag.
The campaign reaches its climactic phase with astrologers warning both Mr Kinnock and Mr Major of trouble on Tuesday and Wednesday, with a lot hanging on Mercury on Thursday.
Mr Major and his campaign team ended the week in a heartened frame of mind, particularly after the recovery from the jolt of Labour's sudden surge in the polls last week.
They felt they had hit the targets by going on about tax and emphasising the warning that votes for the Lib Dems would only help Labour.
They felt sure that at the moment of truth in the polling booth most voters will consider their wallets.
Over the past three weeks I have conducted my own scientific poll among the taxi drivers who have taken me to and from Conservative Central Office each day.
All three party leaders have their admirers and the feeling on the ranks is that it will be a hung Parliament.
But to be fair, none of the drivers had had that Mr Major or Mr Kinnock or Mr Ashdown in the back of the cab.
Election Focus: The Voters: The People's Voice
By JOHN GASKELL
JOHN MAJOR can relax.
News of his deliverance came from underneath the arches by London's St Pancras station on Friday at Doug's Diner, a venue barely known outside the licensed taxi trade (plat du jour: fresh wild salmon, new potatoes and peas, £3.95).
An opinion poll conducted among passengers by driver Tony Norris proves beyond a shadow of doubt that the Conservatives will confound the nation on Thursday.
Mr Norris has been button-holing passengers about their voting intentions.
‘Every single one of them had the same opinion as mine,’ he said.
‘They all want to see the Conservatives back in power.’
Translated into seats, the result of the Norris poll shows that the Tories will be unopposed in the Commons throughout the next Parliament with a working majority of 650, though psephologists may quibble about the low sample size — 30 — which could give a margin of error of about minus 60 per cent.
But while the passengers interrogated in London's black cabs may be wholeheartedly Conservative, taxi drivers themselves are wavering.
Once caricatured as far-Right-wingers, they were dependable for their unsolicited robust views on hanging, repatriation and grisly prescriptions for homosexuals.
Now, after two years of deepening recession and a dearth of tourists, they are moving to the Left, incensed by government proposals to deregulate the taxi trade and give licences to minicab drivers.
Above Doug's dark cavernous empire of cafe, taxi showroom and valeting stations, the trains overhead thunder from St Pancras station.
Doug Sherry, the proprietor of Doug's and the car-wash that camouflages its entrance, winces and puffs philosophically on a fat cigar.
‘Drivers of 20 years’ experience feel insecure.
Three years to do the knowledge, get the badge.
Then they must find £20,000 or so for a cab.
They must have no criminal record.
‘Even if they have mortgage arrears they can be called up by the Public Carriage Office for questioning.
‘So they are bitter about proposals which could leave them without a future.
Most have voted Conservative in the past but now they will go to the Liberal-Democrats and maybe even Labour.’
The social background of the cab driver has changed too, he says.
‘A lot of intellectuals have moved into the industry, ex-school teachers, artists, semi-professionals.
Once, 25 or 30 years ago, they were working class East-Enders who couldn't run a business but found in driving a cab a way to be free.
The Conservative philosophy fitted, so they moved from Labour to Conservative.’
The drivers, now cut up and veering to the Left, find voting for the party that has championed the self-employed harder to do.
But most will manage it.
Over one of Doug's 8oz breakfast steaks, Stanley Ricketts, a black-cab driver for 33 years, says: ‘The Conservatives are the natural party for the trade.
All my passengers say they hope Labour don't get in.
I don't know where the polls get their figures from.’
Barry Jones, a north Londoner, was loquacious but less confident.
‘The trouble is that people have short memories.
They forget that under the last Labour Government the cab trade was decimated.
For four years while Merlyn Rees was Home Secretary we didn't get a tariff increase.
Drivers left the trade, garages went to the wall.
‘But younger drivers haven't experienced a Labour government.
Like other young people, they want change if only for the sake of it.
I am unhappy about Europe, about the recession — talk about hating the one you love — and I think the NHS would be more efficient under Labour, their baby after all.
‘But then I think back: going cap in hand to the IMF, raging inflation 20 to 25 per cent; the awesome power of the unions.
The money markets are wiping out share values, there'll be a flight of money if Labour gets in and professional people will leave too if they can see better prospects abroad.
I just wish the Tories had some fresh ideas, precious few around as far as I can see.
Still, I'll vote for them all the same, it's the devil I know and I know them both.
‘That enough for you?’
Election Focus: The Voters: The People's Voice As speech coaches wish they could change the accent of the political debate, taxi-drivers make a fare assessment of the parties' prospects at the polls
By AMIT ROY
PHILLIPA DAVIES is not against Neil Kin nock —‘after all I am Welsh, too’— but she does wish he would drop some of the more irritating Welsh features of his speech.
As one of Britain's top voice experts, Miss Davies monitors the way politicians talk — their accent, their peculiarities, their little affectations.
If Mr Kinnock's voice is beginning to grate a little after less than a month's campaigning, is there a risk that the populace as a whole will not take to his Welsh lilt, should he get into Number 10?
And how will it feel after he has held forth on television for five years?
The omens are not encouraging.
Just before the campaign started, six Parliamentry candidates received voice coaching from Miss Davies.
She regrets Mr Kinnock was not one of them.
‘He has got this mannerism when he gets excited.
He thrusts his chin forward to over-emphasise words.
Kinnock is good with large crowds, not on TV.
He creates tension within himself and this roughs up his vocal chords.’
The result?
A ‘croaky’ Mr Kinnock.
John Major's speech-making qualities are, if anything, less impressive but nothing that six one-hour lessons from Miss Davies — £60 each plus VAT — would not have cured.
‘He says ‘wunt’ for ‘want’.
He has quite a lot of nasal resonance.
He can get away with his accent but he could do a lot to improve his tone.
I would teach him voice projection and the role that breathing plays in articulation.’
Joan Washington, accent coach at the National Theatre, accuses Mr Kinnock of exaggerating his Welshness.
‘He has become more and more Welsh as the campaign has progressed.
He is in danger of having a kind of professional Welsh voice.
‘The Welsh accent has this connotation of mendacity.
He does not have to shout to be powerful.’
Once politicians with regional accents worked hard to smooth them away.
Perhaps the only thing that Margaret Thatcher and Edward Heath shared was the same Rada voice coach.
‘Mrs Thatcher had her voice toned down by manipulation of the pharynx to lower the pitch,’ according to Brendan Bruce, former director of Communications at Conservative Central Office.
He reckons the pendulum has now swung to the other extreme where people acquire false regional accents to enhance their campaign cred.
‘The received wisdom is that a toff cannot win a modern TV election.’
There is no danger, of course, of Mr Major being mistaken for a toff.
‘He is the ordinary bloke from Brixton but he is idiosyncratic,’ says Mr Bruce.
‘He slips into Civil Service jargon — such as‘not inconsiderable’.’
The public's trust is aroused by the cultured Scottish accent —‘Edinburgh rather than Glasgow’.
For Mr Bruce, its best exponent is that ‘middle-class Edinburgh barrister’, Shadow Chancellor John Smith.
Mr Bruce's new book, Images of Power, analyses the effect of accent on that sense of trust.
‘If ever Kinnock did start sounding posh it would count against him.’
Election Focus: The Voters The party of your choice Valerie Elliott finds prospects of a tie are dampening plans for post-poll celebrations — or wakes
By VALERIE ELLIOTT
IF ONLY one side had a clear lead, what parties there would be: parties to welcome home John Major, parties to see off the blasted yoke of Tory rule, parties for the sake of parties.
But what is there to celebrate about a hung Parliament?
This Thursday the socialites — and socialists — will look in vain for the rivers of champagne and dancing until dawn of other election nights.
With the prospect of a hung Parliament, few wish to be hung over.
Even the inveterate party-giver Jeffrey Archer is holding back.
He plans to accompany Mr Major to his count in Huntingdon and will forgo the election night dinner he planned to host at the Mirabelle.
And the traditional Conservative chairman's bash at Central Office may have to go on without the chairman: Chris Patten, busy in Bath, may not get back in time to drink with his team.
But, as a sign that some things do not change, Lord McAlpine, former Conservative Party treasurer, is expected to host a small party for friends, many connected with the ancien regime around Mrs Thatcher.
Win or lose, Labour campaign workers will celebrate at party headquarters in Walworth Road and at the luxury offices at Millbank used as their campaign media centre.
Neil Kinnock will be in his Islwyn constituency in South Wales where local Labour supporters expect to arrange a small party before he heads for London.
Sir Michael Checkland, Director-General of the BBC, will host a party at Television Centre for some 50 guests — mostly Establishment, an insider confirmed — to watch the results.
They will be served a small buffet, drinks and a very early breakfast.
Over at ITN, the chief executive, Bob Phillis, has invited a similar number to share the excitement of election coverage —‘mostly television executives, and people in media and political commentators, who want to be where the action is.’
But the smartest parties will be at Claridges, where Lord Wolfson, chairman of Great Universal Stores, entertains 150 guests from the business world, and at the Savoy, to which Conrad Black, proprietor of the Daily and Sunday Telegraphs, has invited politicians, peers, academics and journalists.
A spokesman for Party Planners, the London party organisers run by the Queen's cousin, Lady Elizabeth Anson, confirmed last week: ‘People are just not doing anything big.
In fact we have just one booking — a small dinner in Kensington.’
Leading hotels have arranged election night dinners — £35 a head at the Dorchester, £75 a head at Cliveden, former home of Nancy Astor.
For diehard election party-poopers, however, there is still time to book into the election-free break being offered on Lundy Island, the National Trust's island in the Bristol Channel.
Television sets, radios and election talk have been banned.
The boat leaves on Wednesday.
Election Focus The Voters: After a draw a rematch Many people are unhappy at the thought of a hung Parliament.
Anthony King explains why
By ANTHONY KING
MOST voters expect a hung Parliament after Thursday but half are unhappy about the idea, according to Gallup's final pre-election survey for The Sunday Telegraph.
There is little enthusiasm among voters for a coalition government and more would prefer another general election than an arrangement between either the Conservatives or Labour and one of the minor parties.
Almost no-one wants to see the Tories or Labour do a deal with the Ulster Unionists.
The message of recent opinion polls has clearly got through.
Nearly three-quarters of voters, 71 per cent, expect no party to win an outright majority.
However, only 18 per cent positively welcome the idea.
Exactly 50 per cent are ‘unhappy’.
The remainder are ‘not bothered one way or the other’.
When Gallup offered voters several options for Thursday, including both Tory-Liberal Democrat and Labour-Liberal Democrat coalitions, only 29 per cent opted for either coaliton.
More than double, 65 per cent, would prefer the Tories or Labour to have an overall majority.
Gallup also asked: If the minor parties turn out to hold the balance of power in the new Parliament, what would you like to see happen?
Would you prefer to have another election so that one party could obtain an overall majority or would you prefer some kind of arrangement between the parties so there would not have to be an election for a number of years?
Hostility towards a second election is less widespread than might be supposed.
Forty per cent— including most Liberal Democrats — said they would welcome an inter-party arrangement.
If the minor parties hold the balance of power, somewhat more Liberal Democrat supporters would like to see them keep the Tories under Mr Major in power than want a minority government led by Mr Kinnock.
Forty-five per cent of Liberal Democrats prefer the Major option.
Only 41 per cent prefer Kinnock.
Gallup offered the alternative scenarios shown in the table — including a deal with the Ulster Unionists.
As the figures show, Conservative supporters are keenest that their party should govern on its own.
A larger proportion of Labour supporters favour a deal with the Liberal Democrats.
An arrangement between either major party and the Ulster Unionists, involving scrapping the Anglo-Irish agreement, finds almost no favour.
Among Tories, more than three times as many would want Mr Major to negotiate with the Liberal Democrats as with the Unionists.
The Gallup poll interviewed 1,043 electors face-to-face on Thursday and Friday in 95 districts across Britain.
Anthony King is Professor of Government at Essex University.
Mandrake: Double exposure for Mrs Thatcher
MRS THATCHER'S departure for America last Wednesday followed speculation as to whether or not she would go.
Some friends assumed that, after her campaigning successes, she could be induced to stay here.
So why did she decide to leave after all?
For a few days, to use a word for which she has a penchant, Mrs Thatcher ‘wobbled’.
She had done her crack troops proud, taking in 29 constituencies, including that of the anti-federalist MP Mr Bill Cash.
Some of her friends insisted that she remain in Britain to revive a flagging and mismanaged campaign.
(Recently, when Mr Major was privately asked why lacklustre ministers such as Mr Waldegrave were allowed to appear on the television so often, he replied: ‘I can't control them.’)
It has been assumed that there were two reasons why Mrs Thatcher decided to leave these shores.
The first is that if she stayed it would look as if the Conservatives were resorting to desperate measures.
In its panic the party was turning to its former leader, etc.
The second is that she left to escape all the criticism that might have ensued if she stayed behind.
Both of these are wrong.
One of the many things that Mrs Thatcher has learned during her time in politics is how to milk election campaigns.
This one is no exception.
She decided, I gather, that American soil would be an ideal place from which to do this.
My geographically inclined readers may have guessed why: time zones.
She told friends that the time difference between Britain and the United States would enable her to play a starring role by keeping one step ahead.
The poll results would arrive in America during its late afternoon.
This would give her the opportunity to say something in time for the next morning's American newspapers.
If she were still in Britain, it would be too late for her to say much in time for morning editions.
But her remarks in America would subsequently be picked up by the papers here — so she would have two platforms.
There is an obvious advantage, for her, if one of those platforms is American.
It will help her attract support for the Thatcher Foundation — the means by which she hopes to preserve her legacy.
MR Lindsay Anderson, the film and theatre director, is planning a television adaptation of The Cherry Orchard to star Mr Alan Bates and Miss Maggie Smith.
That is, if anyone can be persuaded to give Mr Chekhov a break.
The fecund Mr Anderson is, among other things, famous for bringing us the film classic If.
…Recently he had the script of Chekhov's play adapted for television.
The adaptation was then dispatched to Sky Television.
After a while, Sky sent back a polite letter of rejection.
It began: ‘Dear Mr Chekhov’.
Many thanks for the script, it said, but it was not the sort of thing that Sky was planning at the moment.
However, if Mr Chekhov decided to write anything in the future it would be delighted to have look at it.
Understandably, Mr Anderson is slightly put out, but he assures me he is not in the least surprised.
He once said that television was the ‘greatest single disaster in the history of mankind’.
He is sticking to this view.
‘This says something for the era in which projects have to be approved by television,’ he told me.
Meanwhile, this is a salutary warning to all writers hoping to be remembered by posterity, or, at any rate, the media.
FOR THOSE who watched the incomparable Sir Robin Day interview Mr Kinnock last week, here is the soundbite you did not hear.
It was also the soundbite the British Museum probably does not want to hear, but that Miss Melina Mercouri does.
That tempestuous lady once came here in her capacity as Greek Minister for the Arts.
She visited the museum and caressed the Elgin Marbles — upon which she, and successive Greek governments, had long had a claim.
Just before the interview with Mr Kinnock went on the air, Sir Robin asked the Labour leader a ‘rehearsal’ question to test microphone levels.
The question was sent in by a viewer and ran as follows: ‘Will Mr Kinnock, if he becomes Prime Minister, return the Elgin Marbles to Athens?’
The answer was typically equivocal, but it definitely veered towards the affirmative.
After grinning broadly, Mr Kinnock replied: ‘I continue to believe the place for the Elgin Marbles is in the Parthenon.’
He continued: ‘The Parthenon without the Elgin Marbles is like a smile with a missing tooth.’
Sir Robin tells me that Mr Kinnock is quite happy for this statement to be made public.
The British Museum had better prepare itself for the worst.
ACCORDING to acquaintances who move in the twilight world of Private Eye, the satirical magazine is hoping for a Conservative victory.
A Labour government, I gather, would bring no end of creative difficulties.
For many years the magazine's best feature was ‘Dear Bill’, the fictitious letters of Mr Denis Thatcher to a golfing friend (Lord Deedes of The Daily Telegraph).
When Mrs Thatcher fell, the format became one inspired by Adrian Mole: ‘The Secret Diary of John Major aged 47¾’.
If Labour wins, what will take its place?
A ‘Dear Joan’ feature, the letters of Mrs Kinnock to her chum Miss Joan Ruddock, does not have quite the same humorous potential.
Other suggestions might be ‘The Ealing Curry House’, a weekly epistle from the head waiter at the Kinnocks' local, or ‘Voice from the Locker Room’, the diary of a Welsh rugger player.
But at the moment Private Eye is flummoxed.
‘We're mulling over ideas,’ it said.
ANOTHER casualty of the election could be the market for politicians' memoirs.
Following what promises to be the closest contest for 50 years, publishers are dreading a rush of ink to the head.
During the past few years we have been almost suffocated under a pile of reminiscences.
Only a few politicians, such as Mr Healey and Lord Jenkins, have had anything entertaining to say.
How many of us have managed to plough through the memoirs of Lord Prior, whose writing I would describe as ‘grammatically challenged’.
At the moment publishers fear not so much the literary efforts of retiring politicians but those of MPs who have lost their seats.
Many of these losses will be unexpected.
Therefore the MPs in question are unlikely to have lined up lucrative jobs that preclude the hard slog of putting black upon white.
Collins, which is publishing Mrs Thatcher's memoirs, is one of those that expect a glut in the market.
‘It's just about saturated as it is,’ said an editor.
He advises MPs suffering from typewriter itch to restrain themselves.
‘MPs who lose their seats should definitely think twice about this,’ he told me.
MRS Thatcher's friends tell me that she has finally come around to the idea of going to the Lords after the election.
(Or being kicked upstairs, as the vulgarians call it.)
But this is not because she has suddenly decided to espouse the hereditary principle.
The reason is more prosaic.
She has been told that members of the Lords are permitted to use the facilities provided by the Commons — the bar, the library, etc — and trot up and down the Commons corridors.
On hearing this her eyes lit up.
This meant she could continue to level her basilisk stare (the one which she reserves for special enemies) at selected MPs.
Like Banquo's ghost her figure would be seen haunting her old stamping ground.
Not only would she be able to stand in the Commons bar and glare at Conservatives who betrayed her during the leadership contest, thus putting them off their ill-earned whiskies, but chastise those responsible for mishandling the Tory campaign.
So Mr Chris Patten, if he hangs on at Bath, and Mr William Waldegrave, who has a safe seat, had better stay clear of the bar.
Election Comment: The party goes with a 2 swing
By OLIVER PRITCHETT
WELCOME to my election-night party.
These parties of mine have become something of an institution, and I am expecting a large number of people to come in and give their comments on the results in various constituencies.
As you can see, we have specially adapted the sitting-room to accommodate our experts; I have removed my old mac from the back of the armchair to give the place a more ‘streamlined’ look.
We also have the latest in up-to-date technology — the TV set in the corner, which has a twin BBC-ITV facility, and, of course, a number of lights that can be turned on or off at the flick of a switch.
You can't see it from where you are standing, but in the kitchen we have an electric blender so that, if the need arises, replenishments of avocado dip can be provided at the touch of a button.
Now, although the polls have only just closed, I think that, on the basis of a sample of the replies to our invitations, we can make a projection about the number of people coming to this party and also say something about the ‘social mix’.
We now know for certain that the Theobalds are doubtful, that Percy and Lois Hollis will ‘do their best’, and we have had a late flash that Poppy Winterton thinks she has picked up a mystery virus.
The Williamsons are a special case — no babysitter.
The rest can be put down as uncommitted.
Normally, at these parties, the first to arrive are Bill and Ricky.
So, I'll now lift up the the curtain and look out into the street and see if there is any sign of them.
Well, as you can see for yourself, not much is happening out there as yet.
That is the garden path down which Bill and Ricky will come.
First, Bill will walk down the path and then Ricky will follow him.
Or it could be the other way round.
They may, indeed, walk down the path side by side.
At the moment, however, the street is deserted, so we'll come back to this view through the window a little later.
I imagine that shortly after Bill and Ricky have arrived, the other guests will start coming in thick and fast.
This is what usually happens.
But for now there is just you.
And you have come, as they say, ‘hotfoot from Dorking’.
Tell me, what is the feeling on the ground in Dorking?
I must interrupt you there.
I thought I heard something.
Let us go upstairs to the bathroom, stand on the stool, look out of the top of the window, craning our necks to the left.
Ah yes, quite a build-up of activity there.
I think we may have some news soon about Bill and Ricky.
Things are happening.
Two cars are drawing up outside Number 17 and quite a lot of people are going in the front door.
Now, we were talking about Dorking.
Before we go into the issues there, I notice that you appear to favour the dry-roasted peanuts as opposed to the more conventional variety of salted peanuts.
Would you say that if this pattern were to be repeated all through the night we would run out of dry-roasted nuts just before the important watershed of midnight, whereas we would still have a surplus of the ordinary variety?
Or is it too early to say?
I am hoping we can now arrange a telephone link-up with the Theobalds to discover whether they will, after all, be coming to the party tonight.
Hello, Theo Theobald?
I can hardly hear you.
There's a lot of background noise.
Sounds as if you are having a party there!
We'll get back to you later.
In the meantime, we'll try to make contact with the Williamsons.
Sorry, no good.
Only their babysitter seems to be home.
There is just time to lift the curtain and peep out at the scene in the street, then to dash upstairs, stand on the bathroom stool and see what the picture is like from that angle.
Lots of comings and goings at Number 17, but still no sign of Bill and Ricky.
I expect they will come in a late surge.
Now, as well as consuming the dry-roasted peanuts, you have also been making a close study of my wallpaper.
I am wondering if, at this stage, you see any pattern emerging.
I'd like, if I may, to bring in Mrs Frobisher.
She was walking her dog past the house just now and I thought I might bring her in.
And the dog, of course, which we could offer some peanuts of the ordinary salted variety.
I am afraid Mrs Frobisher is going to have to leave us now.
Right, let's have an update on the state of the party as it is now.
It is 2.30 am and things are very lively at Number 17 where it gets noisier by the minute.
There is still no sign of either Bill or Ricky.
In fact, you are the only person who has turned up.
Let's both go upstairs and stand on the bathroom stool.
I feel there is still everything to play for.
Now, we were talking about Dorking.…
Election Comment: Divided we stand — and queue PROFILE
WE BRITISH are defined by Parliament.
Many of us prefer to think of ourselves as English, Irish, Scots or Welsh, but we proclaim our political allegiance by electing members to the British House of Commons.
Yet our Members of Parliament often seem to know nothing of us.
Many of the topics they raise during this election campaign do not interest us at all.
Edmund Burke said that ‘people must be governed in a manner agreeable to their temper and disposition’, but the British Government frequently ignores or defies our temper and disposition.
Is Britain the Sun or the Independent; ITV or Channel 4; fish and chips or nouvelle cuisine; Christian or Muslim; white or black?
It is all these, of course, and much else besides.
The very word ‘Britain’ is a device to give a variety of peoples a single political identity.
‘Britain’ is an inclusive term for a great diversity of customs and beliefs, not all of them consistent with each other.
But if one looks for Britain's centre of gravity, it is found to be nearer the first in each pair of choices above.
The problem with many of our politicians is that they are biased towards the second.
Consider law and order.
In the middle-class residential areas where most MPs live, law and order may not be a serious worry, but it is of intense concern in poorer districts.
Fear of crime ruins many lives.
Streets that were safe have become too dangerous for residents to risk going out.
The law-abiding majority of the British feel they are no longer being protected by the police from a growing criminal and hooligan minority.
Our politicians are so often silent about law and order because they have nothing useful to say.
They oppose the one measure that would command strong popular support — the return of the death penalty — so arrange among themselves to raise the subject as seldom as possible.
Having flouted the people's wishes, they even have the cheek to call this state of affairs ‘democratic’.
Another subject that matters deeply to many of the British, and which most of our politicians refuse to discuss, is race.
Here there is an almost total lack of communication between our politicians and the mass of the British people.
It is easy to be tolerant of members of other races if one is confident of one's own standing in society; much harder if one is competing against immigrants for a council house and a low-paid job.
Tolerance of strangers may be morally right however threatened one feels, at least so long as the strangers respect the laws and customs of the country they have settled in.
But to have tolerance preached from Westminster by people living in much easier circumstances can seem a bit rich.
The same fate befalls British citizens living in Northern Ireland.
If the IRA were besieging Hampstead, the liberals there would soon realise that tolerance and compromise do not amount to a policy for fighting terror.
But the besieged British of Ulster have to make do with liberal platitudes instead of a tough security police.
Politicians are not wholly to blame for failing to know the British.
We value our privacy and would rather talk about the weather than enter into controversy or volunteer our innermost thoughts.
We are very hard to rouse.
Examine a British crowd of passengers waiting on a cold platform for a train that should have arrived long ago.
A few of us may become angry, but most of us have to be pushed a long way before we abandon our normal passivity.
Our young men tend to be rowdy, but even they are inclined to settle down once married.
When faced by political questions, the British are as hard to rouse as in everyday life.
We are slow to apprehend danger; would much rather ignore some threat to our way of life, hoping it will go away.
Baldwin's and Chamberlain's attempts to appease Hitler were in this respect thoroughly British.
But at length we are stirred to action, and then we surprise other people, and perhaps even ourselves, by our determination.
The thing that stirs us more than anything is war in defence of our nation.
As Enoch Powell observed (in The Sunday Telegraph Magazine in November 1976): ‘In the last resort, no less today than since the dawn of history, the test of nationality is war: on whose side will you fight, and for whom will you, if need be, die?’
This is a test that the English, Irish, Scots and Welsh have all passed time and again.
All make their contribution to the British Army, which is organised so that they can remain intensely proud of their Englishness, Irishness, Scottishness and Welshness, while fighting for Britain.
The Army exploits national differences, and indeed differences of class and sex, to enhance its strength.
It does not try to turn a Scot into an Englishman, or suppose a recruit's upbringing has no bearing on his suitability for officer training, or pretend that men and woman have identical abilities.
In short, the Army does not try to reduce ‘Britishness’ to some unhuman stereotype that might appeal to trendy politicians.
Instead the Army welcomes the differences among the British, as long as everyone acknowledges a fundamental allegiance to Queen and country.
The Prince of Wales has said he wishes to see more blacks in the Brigade of Guards.
As the late Sir John Biggs-Davison pointed out, this could best be achieved by raising a regiment of West Indian Guards, to serve alongside — and compete with — the Scots, Irish and Welsh Guards.
Anyone inclined to mock this suggestion should note that the armed services are perhaps the most respected institution in Britain today.
Compare them with our comprehensive schools, where an official attempt was made to trample upon the diversity of the British people.
In comprehensive schools, all the British were to be treated the same, despite the obvious differences between us of sex, class, culture, ability, religion, race, and so on.
This was a disastrous mistake, as most of us soon realised.
We British do indeed believe we should all be equal under the law, but in practice we reject social engineering which tries to make us equal in other respects.
There is considerable social mobility in Britain — see, for example, the careers of John Major, Neil Kinnock and the Archbishop of Canterbury — but mobility is not the same as equality.
It is a way in which diversity and the desire to better oneself can be accommodated.
As a touchstone for Britishness, Norman Tebbit's ‘cricket test’ is no substitute for the test of war.
Cricket is a game that appeals mainly to the English.
It is irrelevant to the Irish and Scots.
For them, the use of the term ‘British’ as a synonym for ‘English’is an insult, a fact that English Conservatives sometimes overlook: introducing the poll tax a year early in Scotland was probably the worst blow to British unity in recent years, for it made the Scots feel they were being treated like second-class citizens.
The Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985 had a similar effect on the British in Northern Ireland.
Nor does cricket help make sense of our relations with the European Conmunity.
We British have accepted our membership of the EC because we reckon we shall be more prosperous in than out.
We would rather be rich than poor, which even our politicians understand because they prefer being rich too.
But that does not mean we shall ever be willing to surrender ultimate power over our affairs to the EC.
The far-sighted politician must do a ‘thought experiment’ and apply the test of war: would the British ever be willing to see British troops fight and die at the behest of the successors of M Jacques Delors, without the British Government giving the final yea or nay?
Of course not, which is why a United States of Europe is out of the question.
Handing over our currency to the Germans is bad enough without handing over our foreign policy too.
We are not even likely to put up with our politicians' abdication of monetary responsibility for long, though it is another subject they try not to mention in front of us.
Mr Simon Heffer argued in last week's Spectator that welfarism is once more coming to characterise the British, having been repulsed during the Thatcher years: ‘The plaintive, dependent-relative voice of the something-for-nothing society, heard on almost every street in this campaign, was a little harder to find five years ago.’
He may be right that the centre of gravity among that supposedly central group of Britons, the skilled workers, or C2s, has shifted back in favour of higher state spending.
He is wrong, however, if he means to suggest a fundamental change in the British character.
We are a mixture.
Some of us are lazy; some, including many of our Asian immigrants, are industrious.
Mrs Thatcher tempered our sloth by appealing to our greed, Mr John Smith wishes to temper our greed by appealing to our sloth, but both strands in our character remain.
The trouble with the poll tax, as with comprehensive education, was that it took too little account of how we really are.
The columnist Peter Simple tells us most about the British, each Sunday in this newspaper.
He conveys our variousness because he includes the parts of our life that he hates, as well as those he loves, and notices the many almost unknowable communities in our midst, people only a little less mysterious than his group of Aztecs who came over in stone boats.
For the past 150 years our politicians have been droning on about the need to train the British worker to the level of the German, oblivious to the somewhat obvious fact that we are not Germans so cannot be expected to behave like them.
As for our upper class, in 1728 Defoe lamented our aristocracy's ‘voluntary and affected stupidity and ignorance’, and their preference for leaving politics to other people, so that the government fell into the hands of ‘knaves, politicians, mercenaries and screwed-up engines’.
The greater part of the British are anti-intellectual and anti-political to this day, and no amount of prating by the ‘knaves, politicians, mercenaries and screwed-up engines’ who govern our country is going to change that.
When they are dead and gone, we shall still be British, and all the better for it.
Election Comment: Why Britain must vote for Major
By CHARLES MOORE
EVER since Mrs Thatcher fell, there has been an undercurrent of Tory feeling which says: ‘The Conservatives deserve to lose.
They have replaced a great Prime Minister with a mediocre one.
They have sat there too long.
They are tired, and they have run out of ideas.
What they need is a purgative period in opposition in which they have time to think once more and sort themselves out.’
The logic of this view is that there is no harm in voting Labour or Liberal, or in not voting at all.
From time to time, I must admit, twinges of this feeling have afflicted me.
Urges to punish those who repudiated the woman without whom they would have got nowhere and been nobody have surged in my breast.
Contempt for the emptiness of the ‘caring’ rhetoric of people like Chris Patten and fear of the Euro-enthusiasm of people like Mr Heseltine (not that there are any people like Mr Heseltine, but there are many high in his party who seem to share his desire to join a United States of Europe) have welled up, and I have thought like Malvolio: ‘I'll be revenged on the whole pack of you.’
And if it were only the future of the Conservative Party that was at stake I would probably agree that electoral chastening would be a good thing.
But a general election is not about the future of a single party.
It is about the future of the country.
Perhaps it is time for a change, but the only change available is Labour, with or without Liberal appendages.
It is not time for Labour.
Labour's programme is the most repellent in its history, and being repellent is even worse than being extreme.
The word ‘socialism’ is expunged from the party manifesto, which instead is decked out with words like ‘supply side’and ‘investment’, but those words are worn like slogans on the T-shirts of Third World peasants, with incomprehension and a vague sense that they confer status.
I honestly cannot think of one good thing which Labour proposes to do.
Its ‘strongest’ areas are its weakest.
Its only proposal for health is to undo reforms which make administrators pay more attention to patients.
Its only idea for schools is to put them back in the power of local authorities.
The highest praise for its plans is that they are, in some areas, less bad than they might have been.
There will not be much re-nationalisation, for example, and the top rate of tax will not be as high as it was under Mr Healey (although it will start much lower down the scale).
The famously awful Labour manifesto of 1983 had at least a certain integrity.
If you read it, you read a clear, if unintended, exposition of why socialism is the most idiotic political creed ever taken seriously, and you could also discern a genuine, if sentimental, belief in the capacities of the people Labour was formed to represent, the British working class.
The 1992 manifesto has no integrity.
It is anti-working class and it is anti-British.
It represents the preoccupations of over-professionalised politicians and activist minority groups.
Labour will introduce state aid for political parties and pay salaries to local councillors.
It will insist on positive discrimination on grounds of race and sex, reduce the age of homosexual consent, ban the killing of foxes and encourage the killing of human foetuses.
It will ban tobacco advertising and invent a Ministry for the Arts and Media, and a Ministry for Women.
Imagine the disgust of Ernest Bevin.
This is an election to return representatives to the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
But Labour wants to shove Northern Ireland out of it altogether.
It wants to curtail Parliament's powers over the regions and impose regional assemblies.
Scotland will have a tax-raising parliament, but still, apparently, return MPs to Westminster, who can vote on taxes and everything else for the rest of us.
And, by the way, Labour will replace the House of Lords with something which will ‘act as a senate’ to protect our rights.
What does Mr Hattersley know about rights that sets him above the wisdom of the ages?
Mr Kinnock even refuses to tell the voters whether he will abolish the system by which, he hopes, they will put him in power.
He may have proportional representation, or he may not; he won't say.
It is as if the method of our democracy was a technical question with which the masses should not bother their pretty little heads.
Worst of all, Labour wants to transfer from the House of Commons its most basic power, the power over the nation's finances.
Under Labour, we shall have a single European currency.
Mr Kinnock not only likes the Social Chapter, he wants to throw the whole Book of Brussels at our constitution.
I really, strongly do not want to be ruled by such people — people with America's political correctness, but without the American love of liberty; people with the Continent's dirigisme, but without a Continental breadth of culture; people with a modern metropolitan's contempt for his own country's traditions, but a bumpkin's ignorance of economics.
And, without feeling wildly excited at the prospect, I do want to be governed by Mr Major.
Except on the vital matter of Europe, where the outcome is not yet clear, but where, at least, he is better than his opponents, I am quite confident that he will not do anything damaging to Britain.
He wants people to make their own choices, and not pay too much tax, and the United Kingdom to stay in one piece.
That is surely what most people want, and if only Mr Major had not taken Britain into the ERM and so impoverished them unnecessarily, they would be backing him in a clear majority now.
Since Mr Kinnock will keep them in the ERM and impoverish them still further, they will get no joy of him.
We commentators like to invest politics with romance.
By temperament, and out of a sense of what sells newspapers, we like great characters, great speeches, great moments and high dramas.
There are few in this campaign, and so we are rather tetchy.
But that does not make it right to encourage disaster in search of diversion.
By which I mean two things.
The Conservatives need John Major, not Michael Heseltine, and the country needs the Conservatives, not Labour.
Election Comment: What's at stake
IT WOULD not be a catastrophe if Labour won on Thursday.
The British would continue to enjoy one of the highest living standards in the world.
The middle classes would not take to the streets with their own version of Class War.
Financiers would not hurl themselves off City window-sills.
But if the electorate is indeed of a mind that it is ‘time for a change’, then it should consider carefully just what sort of change it would be letting itself in for.
It is not too alarmist to wonder whether this may be the last truly British election.
There is far more at stake here than people suppose: on this election could turn the future of Britain as an entity, the future of Britain in Europe and the future of Britain as a parliamentary democracy.
The idea has got about during the past three weeks that there is really not much difference between the parties, give or take the odd howl of anguish from the higher-tax-paying classes.
This is a tribute to Labour's smooth campaigning, in which the unacceptable faces of socialism have been either wreathed in benevolence or kept off the screen altogether.
It is also a mark of the wavering course the Tories have pursued, hopping uncertainly from blue-rinsed stage set to matey bar stool to Mr Major's rediscovered soapbox, but seldom pausing long enough to get across the gravity of their message.
For the changes that threaten this country, either from a majority Labour government or one kept in power by the Liberal-Democrats, are of an enormity that still has not sunk in.
Some Tories would argue that this is because the successors to Mrs Thatcher's clear-cut brand of Conservatism have moved towards the soft centre and have floundered in the quicksands of consensus.
There is truth in that: Charles Moore addresses the matter on this page.
Most, however, would argue that politically there was no alternative.
The poll tax had driven the Government to the lip of the abyss.
If the achievements of the Thatcher years were not to be consigned to oblivion, then a tactical retreat was necessary.
And John Major has pulled it off.
Those achievements are still intact.
The transformation of Britain that has taken place in the past 13 years is too readily taken for granted by some of those who have most richly reaped the rewards: the new home owners, the new share-holders, the employees freed from the shackles of militant trade unionism, the NHS patients who have felt the benefits of fund-holding GPs and self-administered hospitals, parents who have witnessed their children thrive in grant-maintained schools.
All these gains in individual freedom, every advance towards putting the consumer first, will be set at terminal risk by Labour's proposed policies.
They do not promise change in the sense of progress; they promise change in the same way that the apparatchiks of yesteryear want the Communists back in the Kremlin.
Businessmen know this.
Their jobs and those of their employees depend on foresight.
The plunge in the stock exchange during the election campaign is not just a case of City fat cats worrying about their wallets.
It is a sign that ordinary men and women at the workface of wealth-creation are appalled at the notion of a return to state intervention.
They are worried by a resurgence of union bullying.
They are dismayed at the prospect of what would be one of the most highly leveraged tax-grabs in the West, gaining the gainers very little, but losing the losers much.
They have a horrid vision of Mr John Smith raising inflation from the dead with the blessing of our Euro-competitors.
But this is not the end of it.
For not all of Labour's changes would be reactionary.
Some of them would indeed be radical.
As we pointed out at the beginning of this campaign, the Labour Party proposes nothing less than to pull up Britain by the roots.
A victory for anyone but the Conservatives on Thursday would result in a strengthened grip of the Brussels bureaucracy, a direct threat to the Act of Union, and a swift slide towards an alien voting system.
Proportional representation, for all its ‘fairness’, would destroy forever any future chance of real leadership and provide a power base for any extremist minority that could muster a dozen seats.
This is the manifesto that could ensure that no British election was ever the same again.
It is not scaremongering to raise these spectres.
Nor is it ‘negative’ to raise doubts about whether Mr Kinnock and his team would confine themselves even to these immodest proposals.
The most telling insights of the election campaign have come not from any of the parties' hit-men but from that seasoned pro, Sir Robin Day.
It was Sir Robin, amiably grilling the leader of the Opposition, who forced Mr Kinnock into the open about his Damascene conversions in favour of the European Community and against unilateral disarmament.
The Tories won no votes by describing Mr Kinnock as unfit to govern.
But it is pertinent to ask how well he really fits his born-again image.
The S-word, socialism, may not have been much in evidence in Labour's manifesto or campaign, but it infests every line of their real agenda.
Is this country really going to forget the lessons of its recent past, ignore the great sweep of European history and give socialism's tired and discredited maxims another chance?
In May 1979, partly out of desperation, we entered upon a great experiment.
We aimed to discover whether, by sheer exercise of the will, we could overturn four decades of debilitating liberal consensus.
The brave heresies which were uttered then, the great plans we had for Britain, our determination to allow people to keep a fair proportion of what they have worked for and won: must these noble hopes perish so soon?
And for no better reason than that it might be ‘time for a change’?
Surely not.
Election Comment: Double whammy that clinches it
By PEREGRINE WORSTHORNE
TWO statements by Mr Kinnock last week clinched my mind as to how to vote.
The first was that a Labour government was going to rely on economic growth to finance its increases in public expenditure, the second was that it would ban fox-hunting.
The first of these statements was such an insult to my intelligence that I wanted to punch Mr Kinnock on the nose, and the second so downright outrageous that I wanted to do something worse.
Why do I pick on these two statements?
Surely there must have been many others equally clinching.
As a matter of fact, there haven't — from any of the parties.
Nothing the Conservatives have said so far has caught my fancy, still less warmed my heart; or, I am glad to say, shocked me to the core.
In fact, barring these two statements by Mr Kinnock, the parties have confined themselves to offering me choices which I do not feel competent to make.
On balance the Tory ideas on the National Health Service and on the state system of education seem preferable to those of Labour, but without being an expert it is difficult to be sure.
When the issue about state education was simply for or against comprehensive schools, I was absolutely sure where I stood: against, on principle, the principle being that it was wrong to destroy precious educational institutions of great antiquity and the highest quality — the grammar schools — in favour of some abstract egalitarian theory.
Nowadays, however, there is little clear principle to guide one through the maze of technical arguments.
Something not dissimilar applies to the economy.
About nationalisation I never had any doubt.
Never could I possibly vote for a party that believed in the state ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange.
My objections were originally on the grounds of freedom, rather than efficiency, although in the event, so far as Britain was concerned, socialism led more to stagnation than to tyranny.
But now nothing on the political-economic front is as clear-cut as it used to be.
Listening to Mr Smith and Mr Lamont arguing on the radio last week I was unable to decide who was right and who was wrong; still less who was Right and who was Left.
The argument was not about principles but about figures.
Not for a moment am I suggesting that these figures, always in billions, are not important; only that I, an innumerate, cannot make head or tail of them.
Even in the matter of state spending on the arts the same difficulty presents itself.
Neither the Labour spokesman, Mark Fisher, whose father used to be a Tory MP and a friend, or the Tory spokesman, Tim Renton, another friend, are against state subsidies for the arts, as I am.
Both are equally enthusiastic for subsidies.
In the quality of their enthusiasm there is nothing to choose between them or indeed in the sums of money they are anxious to spend.
Where the difference lies…er, well, I cannot quite remember…something about the Tory expenditure being spread over several years and Labour splurging its all at once.
Not much comfort for me there.
Frustration, yes.
I've certainly felt that again and again, not so much at the inadequacy of the politicians, as at my own inadequacy.
With a politics of opinion, I am happy enough.
Free trade versus protection; re-armament versus disarmament; democracy versus autocracy; home rule or Westminster rule; about such issues I know where I stand.
With the politics of action too, I feel at home.
When Mrs Thatcher decided to break the miners' strike, if need be by force, there was no doubt where I stood; or at the time of the Falklands, or the Suez operation against the Egyptian dictator, Colonel Nasser: foursquare behind the Tories.
So would I be if they were ordering an early confrontation with M Delors.
Today, however, we do not really have a politics of opinion or of action — nothing is proposed that either stirs the blood or excites the mind.
Instead we have the politics of statistics, and unless a citizen has a pocket calculator at hand with which to check the figures being bandied about, he is virtually disenfranchised — until, that is, something is said which makes him sit up and take indignant or enthusiastic notice.
Which brings me back to Mr Kinnock.
Presumably I did hear him right saying that Labour's spending plans were predicated on assumptions about Labour's ability to produce economic growth.
At first I thought it must be April Fools' Day.
But it wasn't.
He was being serious, or as serious as he knows how.
Now as a serious statement, it is as preposterous as any statement could be.
Even I can see that Mr Kinnock knows nothing about economics; as little as did Sir Alec Douglas-Home, who at least never had the temerity to pretend that he did.
If President Mitterrand's brand of non-socialist socialism cannot work for France, is there any likelihood that Mr Kinnock's can for Britain?
If he had said Labour would put social justice before affluence, then we would have known where we were.
Or if he had said that, irrespective of making the cake larger, the poor would get larger slices, again we might have believed and respected him.
Yes, respected him.
For it is indeed time some party concerned itself with all those intangible forms of wealth that cannot be included in anything called so appropriately the gross national product.
But to encourage the underprivileged to put their faith in Mr Kinnock as the wealth creator, of all things unimaginable, that really is stooping to conquer with a vengeance.
As for the promise to ban fox-hunting, it was given with such a blithe nonchalance as to be spine-chilling.
Never before have I heard a would-be Prime Minister show such a crass insensitivity as to what can and cannot be done, with propriety, in this particular free society.
Fox-hunting may offend many.
But to many others it is a way of life with roots so deep in the national culture that any government at all respectful of individual liberty would be politically reckless to try to pull them up.
There will be deep trouble if it does — not unlike the deep trouble suffered by Mrs Thatcher as a result of her comparable crassness over the poll tax.
Just as the poll tax impost jarred on an historically raw nerve, so will the ban on fox-hunting.
Economic impudence plus political insensitivity combine to make a Kinnockian double whammy that I will vote Tory to avoid, however unenthusiastically.
Election Comment: A Disraeli waving a red rose
By FRANK JOHNSON
READERS of this column last week were introduced to Mr Shaun Woodward, the former television producer who, since he is the Conservatives'’ Director of Communications’, and therefore the senior Conservative spin doctor, was referred to here as Dr Woodward.
Since last Sunday, Dr Woodward has been appointed to a further post: scapegoat.
He is blamed for the Tories' allegedly disastrous campaign.
It is now suggested that ‘he doesn't know anything about politics’— in effect, that he is not medically qualified for his spin-doctoring consultancy.
It was reminiscent of one of those terrifying cases in which a hospital porter appears in court after donning a white coat, insinuating himself into the operating theatre, and setting to work on an appendix.
In a plea for leniency after a finding of guilty, defending counsel tells the court: ‘My Lord, my client is very much a Walter Mitty character.
But he also had a genuine vocation for healing — a vocation which he was unable to satisfy because his poor background prevented his going to medical college.’
The judge replies: ‘That may be so, Mr Arbuthnot.
I fear, however, that Woodward's vocation would have been better exercised if he had confined himself to hospital portering.
In passing sentence, I must bear in mind that, as a result of your client's ministrations, the unfortunate patient died.’
If Mr Woodward is to be scapegoat, it is unfair.
If the Tories lose, it will not be because of him, or the campaign.
It will mainly be because they have been in office a long time, and because of the recession.
But yesterday a friend who had been telephoning around Tories who are fighting marginal seats reported that on the doorsteps more voters were saying that, although they did not like the Tories, they liked Mr Kinnock even less.
So the Tories could still just about end up the biggest party, and we will hear no more about the disastrous campaign.
In bringing Labour to the edge of victory, Mr Kinnock has performed a near-miracle.
Mr Smith is the main reason why so many voters are prepared to trust Labour.
But Mr Kinnock created the party in which a Smith could flourish.
That could only have happened if the Left did not know what was going on, and it could only have not known what was going on if it was being tricked by one of its own.
Mr Kinnock is Labour's Disraeli, which is one of the reasons why Tory attacks on Mr Kinnock's apostasy are ahistorical.
Both rose via their party's brutish faction — in Disraeli's case, the landowners; in Mr Kinnock's, the Left.
Both factions needed a socially acceptable spokesman.
Disraeli was acceptable to the salons, Mr Kinnock to the talk shows.
But both politicians, having won the leadership, knew that their faction made their party unelectable.
Each used his knowledge of the faction to dismantle it.
This left both distrusted on the doorstep.
And in between his magnificent platform orations, Mr Kinnock has started to appear cocky.
So, perhaps the election — even though the unexpected severity of Mr Smith's budget towards the middle classes provided the unexpected issue — will turn on ‘personalities’ after all.
But the Tories would be unwise to harp on about Mr Kinnock's.
Perhaps illogically, if there is to be any ‘indulging in personalities’, voters prefer to do it themselves on the doorstep rather than to have it done for them.
I, however, discovered one other issue: the nature of education.
From beside me — in the High Street at Thornbury, Avon, last week — the Prime Minister, on his soapbox, was being heckled with considerable passion by a young man carrying a banner marked: ‘Castle School NUT’.
‘Are you a believer in progressive teaching methods?’
I asked, just out of interest.
‘Why do you assume I am?’ he asked.
‘Because of your general demeanour,’ I replied.
‘Write it down in your notebook: loony Left teacher shouts down Prime Minister,’ he advised me.
‘Go on, write it down.’
I fear the Tory tabloids have made it difficult for those of us anti-Leftists who consider ourselves to be of a more reflective disposition.
But I was beginning to like this teacher.
I asked him his subject.
‘History,’ he yelled, as we were both jostled about the packed and noisy street.
As for what I meant by progressive methods, he did not believe in just filling children with data, if that's what I meant.
He believed it had to be interpreted.
But who should do the interpreting, and according to what principles?
I asked, as two cameramen walked over both of us, and a television sound instrument entered my ear.
For example, who was his favourite historian?
‘A. J. P. Taylor,’ he bellowed, as the ebb and flow of the crowd carried him away from me.
Soon he was engaged in an argument with a youth who said he went to his school and was going to vote Tory.
Tempers rose.
‘Could we get back to A. J. P. Taylor,’ I cried out, above the sound of both mob and Prime Minister.
‘Yes, he was wrong about the origins of the First and Second World Wars,’ roared back the teacher, who later gave his name as Mr Nigel Varley.
‘He had his flaws, but he was still a great teacher.’
I suggested that A. J. P. hadn't needed the sort of public spending on teaching aids Mr Varley doubtless wanted.
Like Mr Varley, he had a personality.
‘He needed his students to have books, though,’ bellowed Mr Varley, ‘and now they cost twenty quid a time — twenty quid a time, that's what they cost.’
So, Mr Varley thought better education required more public spending.
I thought it required more teachers caring about their subjects as much as he obviously did.
There was an even deeper issue.
I suspect that Mr Varley is politically correct.
Labour would preside over the entrenching of political correctness in the classroom.
Only the Tories could stop this.
But there is a problem.
Much of the Tories' present difficulty is, in my view, caused by their having spent 16 months being politically correct themselves.
Election Comment: Never forget the damage Labour did Ambrose Evans-Pritchard recalls the chaos of the 1970s that led him to leave the country
By AMBROSE EVANS-PRITCHARD
MILLIONS of voters are too young to remember what Britain was like in the 1970s.
But for those who came of age in the dark years, the spectacle of national self-destruction remains the gauge of all that has followed.
I remember sitting in a cold school hall studying for my O-levels by candlelight.
It must have been the time of the miners' strike and the three-day week, though the chronology is all a blur now.
I remember the humiliation of a British Chancellor on his knees before the IMF.
I remember, vividly, the winter of discontent when the trains were never running and hospital workers were dealing only with emergencies, and mountains of rubbish were subsiding into the streets.
Above all, I remember the overwhelming sense of defeatism and moral chaos that pervaded public discourse.
During my last year at Cambridge the Prime Minister, Mr Callaghan, came to speak at the Union.
According to an apocryphal story he was stopped in the foyer and asked what advice he would give to an eager undergraduate embarking on a career.
‘Emigrate,’ he muttered gravely.
A few weeks later I did exactly that.
I left in June 1979 and did not return to live in Britain until last summer, having missed virtually all of the Thatcher era.
In those days the Continent had the lure of Mecca.
There was an enviable air of dynamism across the Channel.
Italy, once the laughing stock, was closing on Britain in the GNP league, while Germany seemed a prodigy of industrial discipline, boasting productivity rates 50 per cent higher than in Britain.
Our reputation was abysmal.
I recall a German friend saying, hurtfully, in the tone of voice reserved for self-evident truths, that ‘everybody knows British Airways is the worst airline in the world’.
It gives me some satisfaction to learn that 12 years later British Airways, privatised, efficient, and highly profitable, has become the biggest international airline in the world, while Lufthansa, struggling with high costs, has seen its reputation slip.
Indeed, today the whole picture is inverted.
Travelling to the Continent now I feel a gloomy foreboding, for there is a whiff of decline in the air.
The German trade unions are beginning to screech with a militancy that is all too familiar.
National debts are rising everywhere.
Governments are meeting demands for an ever higher standard of living by forcing business to provide extravagant benefits.
Working hours are getting shorter, holidays longer.
Much of Continental industry faces a chronic erosion of competitiveness.
Fiat is losing a share in its home market to Nissan — made in Britain.
Stepping on home soil, by contrast, I feel serene.
True, there is a constant whine about the quality of public services, but that is common to all affluent nations.
Listen to people on the Continent going on about the inadequacies of their own health-care systems.
The fact is no government can meet the insatiable demand for ever more sophisticated medical technology by an ageing population.
It would bankrupt any economy.
Overall, our public sector is one of the most efficient in the world.
I am optimistic about our economy.
This may seem perverse at a time when the old industries have shed the greater part of their workforce, and unemployment is pushing towards the three-million mark.
But Britain has already been through the ordeal of restructuring needed to meet the fierce competition from Asia and, increasingly, the Third World.
The rest of Europe still has this to come.
What matters is whether we have the creative drive to generate new production.
The figures suggest that we have.
Our share of world manufacturing exports increased from 7.9 per cent in 1985 to 8.7 per cent in 1990.
But the figures tell only the beginning of the story, for they are lagging indicators, snapshots of the recent past.
The future is to be found in attitudes, in decisions taken every day by millions of people trying new ways of doing things.
In 1979 there was a Luddite terror of new technology on the shop floor.
We fought over scraps of flesh and gristle as if the economy was a rotting carcass.
Now we have one of the world's more innovative cultures.
Mrs Thatcher succeeded in shifting the balance of power in our society from the reactionary state to the creative individual.
But the balance can easily tilt back again.
Indeed, the Labour manifesto is a blueprint for precisely that.
In essence, Labour is proposing the Swedish model in which the state controls the economy — rather than owning it — and taxes it ferociously to pay for a ballooning public sector.
This schema has led to the collapse of the Swedish system, and would doubtless have the same sorry result in this country.
In truth, the Tories do not deserve to win the election after having undermined our monetary policy by marrying sterling to the fickle D-Mark.
But it would be a calamity if the British people turned to Mr Kinnock out of pique.
Punitive taxes — and the insidious rhetoric that is invariably used to justify them, and then to raise them again — would eat away at the working spirit.
Within five years Labour's industrial policies would have wiped out the competitive advantage we have gained in the last decade.
The thought that the country might attempt suicide once again, so soon and by much the same means as last time, is almost too painful to contemplate.
Election Comment: It's a victory for sour power
By CHRISTOPHER BOOKER
IT MAY surprise readers of this column that I have never in my life voted Conservative at a general election.
For largely sentimental reasons I have usually voted Liberal.
Once, in a fit of aberration, I even voted Labour.
But one reason why on Thursday I shall for the first time be voting Conservative, with passionate conviction, may be illustrated by a meeting I attended in our constituency last Sunday, at which several hundred people were addressed by our four candidates.
One of the more striking features of the meeting was the extent to which three of the candidates — Liberal Democrat, Labour and Green — were almost indistinguishable from one another.
Whatever the topic under discussion, they automatically began with some resentful expression of moral outrage.
Whatever the Government had done, it was wrong, and it had not done enough.
Sooner or later it usually came down to ‘underfunding’.
What was needed was for the Government to spend much more money, in a more caring fashion.
And compared with so self-evident a need, the matter of where the money was to come from was quite irrelevant.
From the audience's applause it was obvious that most of them agreed, which led me to reflect yet again how this general attitude — exemplified by the average audience for the BBC's Question Time — has become almost the most familiar political stance of our time.
Whether the issue is education or health, pollution or overseas aid, one sees the same mishmash of self-righteous resentment, sentimentality and wishful thinking providing the same simple answers to every problem, without the slightest reference to the real world.
One has the awful feeling that at this election, because of the recession and the loss of conviction which has accompanied the ending of the Thatcher era, this tendency may at last be triumphant.
If so, it will be that sour and embittered Question Time audience which has won the day.
And what a fearful price there will be to pay for it.
IN A desperate attempt to cheer ourselves up at one particularly gloomy moment last week, my Somerset neighbour William Rees-Mogg and I were trying to construct the scenario of what might happen if Labour scraped into power.
For a start, we agreed, the new government would soon be faced by a severe financial crisis — run on the pound, soaring interest rates, forced devaluation.
Nevertheless, after his defeat, Mr Major, whose strengths as a Prime Minister would not best qualify him as a good leader of the opposition, would do the decent thing and step down, like Sir Alec Douglas-Home in 1965, agreeing to serve under whomever the party chose to succeed him.
There would then be a contest between the only two Tories whose stature has risen in the present dismal campaign, Michael Heseltine and Kenneth Clarke.
Nothing would weigh more heavily with many Tories than the thought that what above all had led them to throw away the 1992 election was the way the positive values and achievements of the Thatcher years had been allowed, through loss of nerve, to be obscured.
Clarke, as the architect of the two sets of reforms under the last Government which had shown most signs of being proved right, would best be able to draw on this feeling for Centre-Right support, and would win.
By this time the country would be in such a shambles under Kinnock, Smith, Hattersley, Cook and Co that there would have to be another election, which the Tories would once again be able to fight in a properly robust and combative fashion.
The voters would recognise just what they had thrown away by their mad urge to vote Labour or Liberal Democrat in April 1992 — and this, plus the sight of Mr Gerald Kaufman as Foreign Secretary, would be quite enough to do the trick.
The Tories would be returned to power under Prime Minister Clarke, with a handsome majority.
Of course, if enough people come to their senses in time, none of this may be necessary.
But at least it helped to console us that, whatever happens on Thursday, there can still be a happy ending.
AT THIS stage of the last election in 1987 I was in the middle of writing a column when I had a call to say that the Sunday paper in which it was to appear had closed down.
Among the items which therefore never saw light of day was one in which I suggested that there were individual candidates of all the parties in different parts of the country whom one might be tempted to vote for on purely personal grounds.
Not the least gloomy feature of this election is just how many of our more interesting and colourful political personalities have departed, leaving an extraordinarily faceless array.
It is remarkable how few candidates one might be prepared to cross over lines of party loyalty to support.
I suppose if I lived in Middlesbrough I might vote for Stuart Bell, the Labour barrister who fought such a courageous battle on behalf of the families in the awful Cleveland affair.
As for the Liberal Democrats, one recalls how not so long ago the Alliance included such instantly recognisable figures as David Owen, David Penhaligon, Cyril Smith and Clement Freud.
In larger-than-life personality terms, I'm afraid young Matthew Taylor or Jo Grimond's successor up in Shetlands, the dour Mr Jim Wallace, are scarcely worthy replacements.
On the other hand, there are certainly some Conservatives I could not bring myself to vote for — such as Mr Jack Aspinwall in my neighbouring seat of Wansdyke, who a few years ago was one of an all-party group of MPs who spoke far too warmly about the Ceausescu regime on a visit to Romania, and who lists as his only publication Kindly Sit Down!, a collection of ‘after-dinner stories from both Houses of Parliament’.
Election Comment: Not the right man for the job
by Paul Johnson
THE BRITISH public must reluctantly face the real possibility that, by the end of this week, Neil Kinnock will be installed in Downing Street as Prime Minister.
It is a daunting prospect and an outcome few people want.
Electors may put Labour in office because they hate the Tories or think it's time for a change or even because they like Labour policies.
But it is difficult to find anyone, even hardened socialists, who are voting because they believe Mr Kinnock will make a good, or even an adequate, national leader.
This lack of confidence in Mr Kinnock is evidently shared by the people running Labour's campaign.
Though, for TV purposes, he is the star of its set-piece showbiz extravaganzas, and of carefully staged ‘meet the people’ events where he is surrounded by the Labour faithful, he has been, throughout the campaign, the most carefully guarded party leader in our electoral history.
Neither journalists nor ordinary voters have been able to get at him.
What is so wrong with Kinnock that even his own courtiers dare not expose him to challenge?
It is not just his verbosity, his inability to make any statement or express any idea, briefly and in plain English.
That is irritating but not fatal: Ramsay MacDonald, three times Prime Minister, suffered from the same prolixity.
It is rather the inner emptiness or ignorance which the spate of words attempts to conceal.
Mr Kinnock has to be protected from questions because he is likely to give the wrong answers, even about specific Labour policies he is supposed to know by heart.
Why is he so prone to these mistakes?
It is not so much lack of intelligence, though compared with other Labour post-war leaders, Attlee, Gaitskell, Wilson, Callaghan and Foot, Mr Kinnock certainly does not shine.
His brain-power is at best no more than average, and that is why his speeches, so rich in adjectives, are so poor in sinewy argument.
The problem, rather, lies in Mr Kinnock's industry.
He is not an idle man in all ways.
In some respects he is extremely energetic.
He loves to move around the country, among ‘his’ people, chatting and kissing and glad-handing.
The spoken word is his chosen form of communication, and in so far as he learns anything, he absorbs knowledge through conversation.
But this is, unfortunately, an inefficient way of mastering a subject and one grotesquely inappropriate to the Prime Minister of a leading Western country in the last decade of the 20th century.
I first became fully aware of Mr Kinnock's lack of ease with the written word when he and I did a half-hour TV Breakfast Time discussion, shortly before he became Labour leader.
The subject was a book I had just published on the history of the world over the past 60 years.
It soon became apparent that he had not only failed to read the book but had not even succeeded in struggling to the end of the blurb, though this did not of course stop him talking at length.
Since he became leader, there have been many other occasions when his reluctance or inability to get through his homework have let him down and embarrassed his party.
I believe he is half aware of his problem and has made some effort to solve it by forcing himself to concentrate on what he is told to read.
But this intermittent assiduity cannot redress what seems to be a constitutional antipathy to long and complex documents.
Now you may say: does this really matter?
If Mr Kinnock grasps the principles at stake, are there not colleagues and experts and civil servants to deal with the minutiae?
Alas, the system has never worked like that, even in the cosy past.
As Palmerston put it in the mid-19th century, ministers, especially the Prime Minister, must be able to defend themselves in Parliament daily, ‘and in order to do this they must be minutely acquainted with all the details of the business of their offices, and the only way of being constantly armed with such information is to conduct and direct those details themselves’.
The work of Government has become vastly more complex since his day and the amount and density of paper which comes before the Prime Minister's eye has increased dramatically.
He can neglect it, but he does so at his and the country's peril.
Moreover, entry into the EC has added a new and ever-expanding dimension to the Prime Minister's homework, more than doubling it.
The EC is all kinds of things, good and bad, but it is above all a machine for producing proposed regulations embodied in documents.
A Prime Minister cannot safely delegate their scrutiny because, once enacted, these rules will affect the daily lives of 56 million British people.
He must not only master their content but be prepared to haggle away those items he finds unacceptable in acrimonious negotiations which may last many hours and in which ignorance is ruthlessly exposed.
Competing leaders from other EC states, who have mastered their briefs, will not hesitate to take advantage of an ill-informed plenipotentiary, at tragic cost to his people.
Some key bargaining takes place with only one adviser present — or none.
I tremble at the thought of Mr Kinnock entering the lion's den of Europe, going ‘naked into the conference chamber’, as his old hero Aneurin Bevan put it.
Britain, not being a founder-architect of the EC, has always faced immense negotiating problems there.
These handicaps have increased steadily as the EC becomes more supranational.
With her formidable industry, Mrs Thatcher, over more than a decade, acquired a grasp of EC detail which left her own experts trailing and, more important, often enabled her to wrong-foot hostile EC officials.
So she was able to fight her — our — corner.
John Major is not in the same league but one of his outstanding merits is the capacity to master a brief, even at short notice.
Following them, Mr Kinnock looks desperately vulnerable.
I foresee grievous and perhaps irretrievable errors, and not merely in handling the EC sharks.
With the country still in deep recession, Mr Kinnock has to superintend a set of domestic polities which are complex, high-risk and frighteningly expensive, with the risk of disaster unless he changes his whole approach to administration.
But that, in effect, means changing his character, and at the age of 50 he cannot do it: the mould is set.
No one should despise Mr Kinnock.
He has courage, he is warm-hearted, he means well and is anxious to rule wisely; as politicians go, he is reasonably honest.
But the job specifications for Number 10 are increasingly precise and alarmingly exacting.
Kinnock fails to meet them by a huge margin.
That is the stark truth electors have to grasp before it is too late.
Way of the World: What the papers say
By PETER SIMPLE
IN A thoughtful leader, The Feudal Times and Reactionary Herald deals with the issues of the forthcoming General Election: ‘A considerable number of our readers, we need hardly point out, are debarred by their rank (and a few for other reasons) from casting votes for the membership of the new House of Commons.
‘But all our readers, whether they dispose of votes or not, have a stake in the country, and must regard the composition of the new government as a matter of high import for the future of this Realm.
It is true that to the shame of all the factions the grand question of the continued independence of the Realm itself is not being presented as an issue.
That being said, it remains true that whatever their view of its deficiencies, our readers have a duty to lend their influence to support the Tory faction.
The alternative is too horrendous to contemplate.
‘That the campaign of the Tory faction so far has left much to be desired is undeniable.
It has imprudently striven to appeal far too much to the manufacturing and commercial interest and far too little to the landed interest.
Worse, it has sought to pose, in shameful surrender to the prevalent cant and humbug of the age, as the champion of that most detestable concept, the ‘classless society’.
‘It has lent credence to such manifest absurdities as the equality of the sexes and the equality of races.
It has done little to defend persons of rank and breeding against the envy and malice of the base-born, to support the better against the worse, the cultivated and civilised against the barbarous and ignorant.
‘It is difficult to judge how far this attempt to appeal to the baser sort is dictated by the mere desire to be re-elected (which, though by no means admirable, is, we suppose, understandable enough), rather than by any firm conviction; or how far a re-elected Tory government would seek to put these detestable principles into practice.
In this respect the outgoing government has little to boast about.
‘But that the so-called ‘Labour’ faction — the very name is an insult to the decent labouring men of our country who, scorning its proffered bribes and doles, have no other wish, as we firmly believe, than to earn an honest living from their labour — will, if it forms a government, try to put those principles into practice there can be no doubt.
Nor can there be any doubt that the result would be a headlong descent into ruin, confusion, naked revolution and the final doom of our country.
‘In the false name of justice and equality, the Labour faction would set the classes against each other and overturn the immemorial dispensation of ‘a place for every man and every man in his place’.
It would abolish honest, manly rural sports and customs and substitute the degenerate urban pursuits of the electro-galvanic amusement arcade.
‘It would let loose a ravening horde of hangdog malcontents, dull-witted levellers, disaffected schoolmasters and foaming radicals pell-mell across the country, to the final destruction of that sacred principle of private property which is the sole ultimate safeguard of decency and good order.
‘That these enormities have become even conceivable in our country is due, in the first place, we need hardly say, to the odious and as it may prove, fatal institution of universal suffrage.
Is it wholly chimerical to hope that a newly elected Tory government with an unassailable majority might do its duty, however painful for itself, and take the first steps to reverse this pernicious evil and restore the tried and tested order of our ancestors by which only those fitted to rule have any right to elect the government of this country under the Crown?
We greatly fear it is.
What more is there to say?’
Way of the World: Democracy
ELECTION fever is mounting hourly in the Stretchford Conurbation.
Canvassers for the main parties report ‘white-hot indifference’ mingled with ‘raging boredom’as householders slam their doors on them or attack them with peashooters and water pistols from upper windows with a degree of commitment to the democratic process which experienced observers described as ‘unprecedented’and ‘profoundly conducive to thought’.
A striking feature of the campaign is the firm grasp voters seem to have of the main issues, and the shrewdness and acumen they show in arguing not only for one side or the other but for all sides at once.
What effect will adherence to the European Exchange Rate Mechanism have on the cost of garden statuary?
Will Labour policy on the NHS mean that patients get treatment even before they fall ill?
Will the Conservative promise to abolish education bring them a landslide victory?
Is Neil Kinnock an environmental thought form?
These are a few of the questions debated by thoughtful voters at supermarket check-out points, in dentists' waiting rooms and factory canteens, on nature trails, in the linoleum-infested parlours of spirit mediums and in the halls of the mighty.
The proportion of ‘don't knows’, estimated at 95 per cent, is thought by opinion poll operatives to make results exceptionally difficult to forecast.
In the key marginal seat of Stretchford North, for instance, where John Grudge, nephew of the veteran retiring member Arthur Grudge, is standing for Labour against the Conservative Mike Jelkes (formerly known as the Hon M. S. B. St J. St X. Haggard-Jelkes) and the Liberal Democrat Frank Pale-Jones, a former official of the British Boring Board of Control, there is said to be such a degree of apathy that any one of the 26 ‘fringe’ candidates may easily win.
There are several rival Opinion Poll candidates, standing for the principle of opinion polls themselves as the most truly democratic form of government, with the prospect of a permanent general election.
A swing of 20 per cent to these, if repeated across the country, would produce an Opinion Poll Government, thought by some to be the ultimate embodiment of democratic values.
Tomorrow: Derrida, Horrida and the Postdeconstruction Factor.
Way of the World: Meanwhile
‘AN upsurge in Russian naval activity has mystified Western intelligence and led to speculation that ships and submarines have been sent to sea to prevent them causing trouble at home…the increased activity coincides with a statement by the navy's chief, Admiral Vladimir Chernavin, detailing ambitious — and expensive — plans for powerful aircraft battle groups able to operate independently anywhere in the world.
…‘(news report).
Letter to the Editor: Who now will speak for England?
AS Paul Johnson suggests (March 29), it is indeed strange that sensitive issues, such as our subjection to the EC, have been overlooked in the election debate.
The silent majority of Britons are unimpressed by the antics of the Brussels bureaucrats and the meek compliance of our domestic politicians.
But this silent majority maintain a dignified silence, confident in the mature outlook and conservatism that centuries of parliamentary democracy have bequeathed them.
They refuse to go along with the current vogues to which the impressionable Continentals pander.
This restrained aloofness has had its drawbacks: it has given the bellicose idealists of the Left freedom to ride roughshod with impunity over institutions which have hitherto maintained our nation as civilised and admirable.
But time marches on.
Is it too much to ask that our current politicians, Tory or Labour, who have abetted our national decline and now seek to end our independence, soon might have to face new and eloquent voices who will fill the patriotic void in our political spectrum, and reflect the views of the British people more accurately?
Robert HawleyLondon SW15.
Letter to the Editor: Who now will speak for England
AS Paul Johnson says, Labour is the party that hates England.
One has only to read the Scots and Welsh press and the immigrant press in England, such as the Irish Post, to see how its electoral campaign is based on race and bribes to every ethnic group at the expense of the English.
To this the Tory Party answers with obscure economic jargon which most of its members seem to have no understanding of themselves.
But neither Paul Johnson nor the party says what should be done about it.
Indeed the party insults the English, the only ethnic group in which it holds a majority, by hinting to the Scots that the party might be compelled to consider giving the English their democratic entitlement of seats if the Scots have devolution.
The wave of nationalism that is sweeping Europe is rapidly growing stronger in the UK, including England.
If the party now announced it was going to introduce real democracy by giving England her rightful representation this would cause a sensation, sweep aside the pat-ball politics and allow for the start of serious thinking about the future of the UK.
D. R. Reed London SE26.
Letter to the Editor: Who now will speak for England?
I HEARTILY agree with Paul Johnson.
I wish there were more comments from English journalists to rally Englishmen to what is happening to us today.
I feel the BBC is partly responsible for this.
It makes great play when the saints' days of Scotland, Wales and Ireland are due, but St George's Day is forgotten.
I hope your excellent paper will bring pressure to bear on the media and make April 23 a special day, and make the English realise they want to be ruled by their own countryman.
Melville Borlase Fakenham, Norfolk.
Letter to the Editor: Who now will speak for England?
PAUL Johnson refers to Labour as the party that hates England.
It would, however, apparently save both Twyford Down and Oxleas Wood, which the Conservative Government, to its shame, seems determined to destroy.
K. W. GrimesRustington, West Sussex.
Letter to the Editor: Who now will speak for England.
AMONG the four people Sir Gilbert Longden wrote (March 29) should be ‘unleashed’ to improve the Conservative Party's election campaign was the undefined ‘Parkinson’.
Assuming that he meant ‘Cecil’ and not ‘Michael’of that surname, I wonder whether such a step might have the reverse effect.
I distinctly remember, in a television interview at the last party conference, Cecil Parkinson declaring that before privatisation, the heads of the nationalised industries ran their organisations for their own benefit, not the public's.
It seemed a very strange perception, since everybody knows that the first thing such people did following privatisation was to double, and even treble, the already generous salaries of themselves and their colleagues.
The City Editor of your sister newspaper showed the greater insight when, in April 1989, he opined: ‘It [the Government]tries to get us to swallow the ridiculous story that [water]privatisation is good for consumers, rather than merely for executives.’
Sadly, his prophecy could not have been more accurate.
Roland Rench Beckenham, Kent.
Letter to the Editor: Who now will speak for England?
ARGUMENTS against electoral reform look rather threadbare when looked at against the reality that our constitution has already failed to prevent ideologies of the extreme Right and Left from seizing power at both local and national levels.
Before initiating the post-war socialist revolution, Labour leaders Attlee and Ernest Bevin were surprised and pleased to discover there was no constitutional barrier to their imposing an economic revolution on the nation.
Similarly, the huge privatisation programme of the Thatcher years came like a torrent, without even the democratic courtesy of a prior notice in the Tory 1979 manifesto.
Tory leaders thundering against the takeover of Liverpool city council by the militant Left in the 1980s scarcely mentioned that it happened despite a majority of the city's electorate voting against Labour.
Other great cities went in the same direction, without any questions being asked in central government, or by the opposition, about the electoral system.
Extremist ideologies have prospered with the ‘first past the post’ system, and deeply unsettled our post-war economy — we are bottom of the European economic league in the post-war performance, and the only nation left with an unreformed electoral system.
Who but a carpet-bagger would argue the case against reform?
Britain has a political problem — and it is a prime cause of its economic problems.
F. Hendry Liverpool.
Letter to the Editor: Let's be wary of Russia
XAN Smiley (March 29) supports uncritically the Nixon view that the West should put ‘truly big money’ into the former Soviet Union.
This is absurd.
First, one has to inquire whether any amount of aid, however massive, can save Russia and the other republics from imploding.
The situation is now so critical that the very structure that is needed to use the aid effectively has disintegrated.
Secondly, are the massive funds demanded available?
The IMF and the World Bank are not inexhaustible cornucopias — all they can do is to dispense whatever they receive from wealthy governments, ie, from taxpayers.
When a government has to choose between internal priorities and external largesse, selfishness prevails over charity.
In a democracy the needs of pensioners, nurses, teachers, hospitals, public transport, etc, take precedence.
In principle, everybody wants to help the Russians, provided that somebody else pays.
Thirdly, even if the stupendous funds demanded were available, should one not look a little more carefully at the begging queue?
Should the victims of the former USSR, the Baltic states, Poland, Czechoslovakia, etc, not be given preference?
Fourthly, what control can the IMF exercise over the proper use and distribution of aid?
Can the stifling effect that aid usually has on those who should learn to prosper through their own efforts be avoided?
Finally, the great strategic question: is it necessarily in our interest to hasten the advent of prosperity in the former Soviet Union?
The advocates of massive aid hint at all sorts of threats facing us if we do not hurry to the rescue, but are the dangers from a collapsing state greater than what could be expected from a revitalised Russia?
Moscow's centuries-old tradition of aggression and expansionism cannot be ignored.
Lionel Bloch London W1.
Letter to the Editor: Venue for the quarry inquiry
MIGHT I make a correction to the article ‘Quarry may take the waters’ in last week's Sunday Telegraph?
The public inquiry into ARC's application to extend Whatley Quarry, near Frome, Somerset, will not, as stated in the article, be held in Taunton, Somerset.
The inquiry, which opens this Tuesday, will be held at the Frome Rugby Football Club, Gypsy Lane, Frome, Somerset, and is expected to last until the beginning of May.
ARC's application has aroused strong local opposition in a neighbourhood already devastated by quarrying, so it is important that there should be no confusion as to the venue of the inquiry.
Violet Powell The Chantry, Nr Frome, Somerset.
Letter to the Editor: Horse sense
KENNETH Rose's item on the Queen's gift for naming her horses (March 29) struck a chord.
Was it Stainless Stephen, the popular comedian of the Thirties, who used to keep us informed about a certain impecunious Lord who had a horse named Final Demand by Every Post out of Somerset House?
G. E. Kalinowski (Mrs) Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk.
Ancient and Modern: Premium bonds
By PETER JONES
PARTIES try to win elections with on-the-hoof policies they hope will forge a polling-day bond with an electorate ignored for five years.
In ancient Rome, Mafia-like networks of bonds and obligations between powerful families and friends held the key.
The 2,800 election notices from Pompeii, hand-painted in red on house walls, show the system at work (fine example in the London ‘Rediscovering Pompeii’ exhibition).
They are personal (’ I ask you to support A’, ‘B urges you to support C for office’), with very few references to policy or interest groups.
The notices cluster along main streets and around candidates' homes, and analysis suggests they were not posted at whim, but organised by the candidates.
They highlight the strength of the bond between candidate and support.
Where obligation is the key, policy is largely irrelevant.
This comes out well in The Short Guide to Electioneering, a pamphlet Quintus Cicero wrote for his brother, the Cicero, when he was standing for consul in 63 BC.
Of non-consular family, the ‘new boy’ Cicero needed to work doubly hard to win.
Quintus stresses that he must ask those he has already helped as a lawyer to repay their obligation to him now, assure the powerful that they will not regret supporting him, and make friends where he normally would not.
Policy never appears.
Cicero won, and was soon composing ‘letters of support’ for friends seeking positions.
We know MPs forge secret bonds of obligation with business and unions.
The electorate is never consulted.
If your MP solicits your vote, say in your best Godfather voice: ‘Why do you come to me now?’
Floods and storms, signs of divine wrath, prevented an auspicium this week.
Why?
April 9 is a day forbidden to politics, the festival of the terrifying Great Mother, with her castrated priests.
Oh dear.
Peter Jones 
People: Notes, quotes and floating votes
By MARY KENNY
THERE are some Conservative voters who, believe it or not, are hoping for a Labour victory, on the simple logic that ‘it has to get worse before it gets better’.
‘They have to learn it all the hard way,’ sighs a businessman.
‘They have to learn that there isn't a bottomless pit for public spending, that taxing higher earners does not help the poor, that a statutory minimum wage costs jobs.’
As he spoke, he confessed he had already started moving funds out of the country.
‘Sorry, but if there is going to be a financial crash, the first instinct is survival.’
There is also, judging by the folks I talk to, a band of floating voters who feel that none of the major parties represents their aspirations.
The most resentful of these are anti-Euro-federalists.
It is not healthy to have such a consensus on Europe across the three main parties.
The anti-Europeans, however, are now pinning their hopes on the Danes, who in their forthcoming referendum will almost certainly vote against Maastricht, rendering the entire treaty null and void.
WHY are so many leading Tories so badly dressed?
Edwina Currie rightly criticised Mr Major for stomping around in a Barbour jacket.
These garments were designed for messing around in stables, not for meeting and greeting the electorate.
And Chris Patten — who admittedly has a killing schedule, helicoptering daily between Bath and London — looks so dishevelled.
Can't they supply him with a personal Jeeves?
Dear Norman Tebbit, one of the funniest and shrewdest figures from the Thatcher years, seems to be imitating Michael Foot's donkey-jacket look by appearing in an anorak.
The anorak is a terrible garment and — alongside jeans — is a major contributor to the general decline in standards of dress.
Please, Norman, take yourself off to Kilgour French in Savile Row and get yourself a decently cut coat.
Throw that anorak away immediately.
THE most sympathetic character in the whole election cast?
No contest.
David Blunkett's ailing guide dog, Offa.
GLENYS KINNOCK said in Scotland during the week: ‘I think abortion has to be a matter of individual conscience.
That's what the Labour Party has always said.’
Perhaps that is what the Labour Party says, but it is not how the Labour Party behaves.
On the contrary: Labour MPs are under constant pressure to conform to the abortion-on-demand Labour policy.
Some, like Frank Field, have been threatened with de-selection because their Christian consciences are troubled by the issue; Labour for Life, an anti-abortion Left-wing group, has been ‘de-recognised’ by Walworth Road.
On June 26 1990, the Labour front bench, led by Neil Kinnock, Jo Richardson and Harriet Harman, tabled an amendment to the embryo Bill, proposing a ‘blacklist’ of doctors and nurses who declined to carry out abortion on demand.
The idea was that their names be on an official list so that, in effect, they could be victimised, even not hired, as a result.
(It was defeated by 228 votes to 115.)
Once in power, Labour would no doubt revive this blacklist, and also, of course, extend British abortion law to Northern Ireland, where there is no democratic mandate for such legislation (Labour is absolutely committed to this measure).
A matter of conscience?
With a Labour Government in power — forget it.
It will be coercion and bullying all the way.
A POLITICAL prediction: surely Raine, Countess Spencer, the Princess of Wales's stepmother, will, in the fullness of time, re-enter the political arena.
As the Countess of Dartmouth, she was a dynamo in London politics in the 1960s.
These super-energetic, long-lived Cartland ladies need challenging employment, and politics would be all the richer for the involvement of ‘acid Raine’.
Maybe she could get the London Underground to run on time?
THE best book to read this week is Jeffrey Archer's spiffing First Among Equals.
It is a marvellous yarn, and it evokes quite brilliantly both the atmosphere of the House of Commons and the motives of men seeking political power.
Its close attention to the 1974 elections uncannily resembles the mood at the moment.
It reveals exactly how MPs were whipped into line over Europe, too — by horse-trading, bribery and backroom deals.
Archer is lamentably underrated as a writer by the literati, but future critics will see in his work a detailed analysis of politics in our time.
THIS election has seen a new phrase enter the common language: ‘The fabled C2s’.
‘C2’ was formerly a concept known only to marketing men.
Now, they have become a tribe.
‘Ethelred Higginbottom is a taxi driver and a C2,’ gushes Sue Cameron on Newsnight.
‘Persephone Mulligatawny is a barmaid and she, too, is a C2.’
The C2s (skilled workers to lower management, broadly) are courted, flattered and endlessly solicited for their opinions, since they are thought to be the deciding factor in the election.
Really, they should have been equipped with special badges: ‘Kiss Me, I'm a C2’.
IREGRET the departure of Edith Cresson.
She was no worse than most recent French Prime Ministers, and her femininity was exquisitely candid.
She complained that British men must be homosexual not to make a pass at her or look at her legs.
Most women over 50 loathe the way men ignore them, but they are too terrorised by Politically Correct feminism to say so.
Edith had the Gallic guts to speak the truth: she liked being seen as a sex object.
But then, as my Mama used to say, for a Frenchman no woman is too plain or too old.
An Unexploded Myth: Did the eagle really land?
Wartime rumours of a failed Nazi invasion of East Anglia have resurfaced.
Was there a cover-up wonders VChristy Campbell, or is the story just too good to be left alone?
By CHRISTY CAMPBELL
LIKE a builder's spade hitting an unexploded bomb, a great wartime mystery re-emerged last month at a tiny Suffolk fishing village called Shingle Street.
It began when a respected local historian, Norman Scarfe, claimed in the East Anglia Daily Times that, in the rumour-filled summer of 1940 when Britain faced an imminent Nazi invasion, a War Office file on the evacuation of the civilian population from the hamlet was mysteriously sealed until the next century.
He wondered why, when other wartime files have long been open to scrutiny.
The letter triggered a flood of wartime memories.
The paper's letters column has been full of old-soldiers' memories and tales of cover-ups and super-weapons.
A coastguard claimed he had been ordered to look out for ‘charred bodies’ in the water.
An artilleryman spoke of a ‘terrific flap’ at the village which was all hushed-up.
It was claimed that soldiers on a British training exercise had been caught by a fearsome ‘flame weapon’ which had burned dozens of them alive at the water's edge.
Then came the most dramatic theory of all — that German commandos dressed as British soldiers had stormed ashore on a summer's night in 1940.
The raid was targeted at the top-secret RAF radar research station at Bawdsey Manor, two miles away along the pebble strand.
Afterwards, it was said, Churchill ordered that the remains of the dead be taken away in sealed vans and bulldozed into a mass grave — and all records of the events at the village of Shingle Street, 20 miles from Ipswich, destroyed.
The controversy reached such a pitch last week that the local paper devoted a full page to a theory that friendly aliens in a flying saucer had landed in the village and handed over Nazi secrets to save embattled Britain.
On a raw spring day at Shingle Street last week, it was easy to believe that this tiny hamlet held some great mystery.
The sea crashing against the pebble beach whispered rumours of war in this ancient landscape.
There were signs of battle in the churned-up mounds of Saxon warrior chiefs, ravaged by tanks training for D-Day in the sandy heaths behind the village.
Stumpy Martello towers, built to repel Napoleon, stand sentinel on the shoreline.
The single remaining radar mast of Bawdsey Manor points skyward, two miles away down the strand.
Two US bombers from the nearby airbase circled lazily overhead, using the mast as an aiming point.
Half a century ago, the whole country was alive with rumours of invasion.
The British army had come back from Dunkirk with nothing but its rifles.
Home Guardsmen drilled with pikestaffs as Hitler's generals laid plans for a triumphant leap across the Channel.
A just-opened Ministry of Home Security file records the efforts of the ‘counter rumours bureau’.
In August 1940, this little team of propagandists was urgently soothing panicky policemen, as far apart as Kent and Cardiganshire, who were convinced the invasion had started.
There was a story about poisoned soap being dropped on Hartlepool — but no mention of Shingle Street.
Terry Charman of the Imperial War Museum says there are still many unresolved mysteries from the Second World War — and the ‘events’ on a Suffolk beach in that jittery invasion summer of 1940 could be one of them.
‘Secrets can be kept a long time,’ he says.
The tragedy at Slapton Sands in Devon, in which 700 US servicemen died when a D-Day invasion exercise went wrong, was ‘kept quiet for 40 years,’ he says.
The rumours of German raiders inspired the best-selling thriller, The Eagle Has Landed, in which paratroopers dressed as Allied Polish troops capture a mythical Norfolk villlage on a mission to snatch Winston Churchill.
The film of the book, starring Michael Caine as Luftwaffe colonel Kurt Steiner, was a huge international hit.
The central mystery is: why the stories of ‘terrible things’ happening at Shingle Street persist when other wartime rumours have long been discounted?
And why are certain government files on the place at that time still closed?
Local gallery owner John Rux-Burton, 33, claims his grandfather told him the secret of Shingle Street before his death in 1974.
The grandfather — John Edgar Burton, a wartime intelligence officer — told how he was ordered to investigate an incident at ‘a Suffolk beach’ in 1940.
He arrived at night to find the strand ‘covered in bodies’ charred beyond recognition, but identifiable as wearing British uniforms.
Burton found a burned out dinghy on the waterline with German markings.
A senior officer arrived in a staff car and ordered the boat to be removed immediately.
‘It was made clear the whole thing never happened,’ says the grandson.
‘Nobody was to know that Germans had made it onto British soil.
It would have been a devastating blow to morale in that summer, when everyone was on hair-trigger invasion alert.’
Kenneth Jarman, a former Royal Marine sergeant posted to the area later in the war, tells of villagers' stories of ‘a beach covered with bodies’ at Shingle Street and the ‘whole sea being set ablaze’.
Derek Johnson, author of East Anglia at War, insists there has been a cover-up.
‘Something very bad definitely did happen at Shingle Street in 1940,’ he says.
But he discounts the German raid theory and thinks there was a British chemical warfare experiment which went wrong.
‘Shingle Street?’ queried the lady at the Public Record Office.
‘We've had a flurry of enquiries lately but we can't find any file on why the village was evacuated.’
But certain files relating to the place and the time are listed as closed.
General Sir Edmund Ironside held a meeting with Home Guard commanders in the area in June 1940; the minutes of the conference are closed until 2014.
The file on RAF chemical warfare experiments conducted in Suffolk in 1940 is also sealed.
‘It's a tight-knit community up here,’ said Major Mike Marks, 69, who as a young soldier was on anti-invasion duties.
‘These stories have been going round for a long time, and they grow with the telling.’
Walking the Shingle Street strand last week, he suggested that the ‘RAF used the beach to test a precision bomb against a shelter’.
Retired local fireman Percy Darvell, 84, confirms the bomb theory.
He was called out with his unit for several nights that summer on emergency stand-by.
Last week he produced a photograph of himself and dambuster bomb designer Barnes Wallis on the beach at Shingle Street, taken some time in the autumn of 1940.
‘A twin-engined aircraft flew in and dropped something.
There was a lot of cheering.
Whatever happened, it hit the spot,’ he said.
The charred bodies story also fits.
Britain's ‘Petroleum Warfare Department’ was certainly at its busiest in the summer of 1940, desperate to find a defence against invasion.
A petrol-filled barge was ignited off Shoeburyness on August 8.
Two weeks later, a huge demonstration of the ‘flame barrier’ was held on Southampton Water.
A mixture of kerosene, petrol and heavy fuel oil was pumped from the shore through pipes, and ignited underwater by canisters of calcium phosphorus.
But there is something else.
In 1940, British ‘black’ propagandists merrily spread stories of burned German bodies to undermine the morale of the Wehrmacht — and it evidently worked.
AMERICAN journalist William Shirer's Berlin Diary records on September 18 that year: ‘The longest Red Cross train I've ever seen was at the Potsdamer Bahnhof.
Workman said the wounded were suffering from burns.
Can it be that the tales I heard in Geneva were true?
The stories were of attempted raids on the English coast, of drowned troops and burning barges.
The British used a new type of wireless-directed torpedo which spread burning oil on the water.’
One fact makes the German raid theory plausible — the accessibility of Bawdsey Manor.
It was here in the late 1930s that Robert Watson-Watt developed ‘radio direction finding’, or radar, which was to prove so vital to the outcome of the Battle of Britain.
The Bawdsey experiments were top secret.
Villagers still talk of ‘death rays’ that made birds fall out of the sky and car engines stop when the beams were switched on.
The Germans certainly knew about Bawdsey: in 1938 they sent a Luftwaffe general over in a Zeppelin to cruise the Suffolk coastline, snooping into the manor's electronic secrets.
A 1940 War Office file on possible invasion sites states that Bawdsey is a ‘Category A risk, liable to a seaborne attack, probably a smash-and-grab raid by up to 100 men, launched from a submarine or ship offshore’.
Its scientists were evacuated to Scotland on the outbreak of war, but German intelligence knew precisely how important Bawdsey still was to the defence of Britain.
As guard dogs barked at rabbits in the barbed-wire-ringed grounds, Bawdsey Manor last week looked uncommonly like a place with secrets still to harbour.
A neo-Jacobean pile proudly raised on a Suffolk dune by Edwardian telephone magnate Sir Cuthbert Quilter, the house is now for sale by order of the Ministry of Defence.
Its interior is a bizarre mix of shabby Edwardian gentleman's club and abandoned lunatic asylum.
Heavy oak doors open into an impenetrable warren of bleak rooms painted in regulation Ministry of Works cream.
Room 89 is haunted, according to the security guard, by the ghost of an RAF batman who still brushes his master's phantom uniform.
The most fearsome invader today is Japanese knot-weed, which has swamped Lady Quilter's sunken rose garden, complete with concrete pill-box, its machine-gun slit pointing seawards.
Back in Shingle Street, there were no signs that the Eagle might have landed here, merely a clutch of brightly painted holiday homes and coastguard cottages.
If the Germans had got this far, the British Goverment would have wanted it kept under wraps.
Likewise, if a commando raid had been defeated, the Nazis would have ruthlessly rooted out any witnesses.
The likely truth lies in those still-sealed files on chemical warfare experiments — but the riddle of Shingle Street refuses to be buried after more than half a century.