

Science: When suicide can be good for your long-term healthRoger Highfield discusses new insights into the body's ways of controlling its own development
By ROGER HIGHFIELD
THEY died for the greater good.
During your lifetime and throughout your body, cells are perishing on your behalf.
In a flourish of biochemical altruism, they manufacture deadly molecules and then turn this lethal cocktail upon themselves.
In effect, they commit suicide.
This extraordinary process of programmed cell death has long been regarded as essential to development, the process of growth from spherical egg to an entire human being.
In one example of biological origami, two flaps of tissue fuse to form the palate in the mouth; mass suicide of cells takes place at the join.
In the current issue of Nature, a bold suggestion is now made by Prof Martin Raff of University College London that cell suicide is more fundamental than previously thought.
‘Cell death occurs in all animals and all tissues, at least at some stage of development.
It occurs on a much larger scale than generally realised and in most cases the function is unclear.’
Cellular hara-kiri was first dubbed ‘apoptosis’(the second ‘p’ is silent) by Alastair Currie, John Kerr and Andrew Wyllie at the University of Edinburgh.
In just a few hours, a doomed cell separates from its neighbours and shrinks, while its nucleus changes shape and fragments.
The conventional view is that the body — somehow — tells these altruistic cells to do the honourable thing by activating a suicide programme.
But Raff speculates that it makes more sense that all cells are suicidal: to survive they have to be constantly reminded by signals from the body that they are loved and cherished.
He cites evidence from the developing nervous system.
Most nerve cells are overproduced in the embryo.
The cells seem to compete for survival factors released by target cells that the nerve cells contact; about half get enough to survive, the rest kill themselves.
The adult rat provides another example: it has been found that cells in its prostate gland need the hormone testosterone.
Without it, they commit suicide.
‘It seems an attractive idea that this might be a general scheme for all cells,’ he said.
It would act, for example, as a general mechanism to wipe out those that end up in the wrong place, say after a cut mixes cells between different layers of skin.
The traditional view of cell suicide focuses on development: it helps the tadpole to lose its tail; it dissolves the tissues of the caterpillar when the time comes for change into a moth; in a mother's womb, it severs the webs between the digits of a child's developing hands and feet.
Apoptosis also plays an important role in the ever-present battle against infection.
When white blood cells attack cells infected with an invader, this is murder, not suicide.
But suicide has been shown to have important roles in our immune system.
It eliminates white blood cells that could react against the body's own normal cells.
If these ‘self-reacting’ cells were not eliminated, they could cause auto-immune diseases such as arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
In a paper published this month in Nature by Dr Shigekazu Nagata from the Osaka Bioscience Institute in Japan, it was found that a strain of mice long known to suffer from auto-immune disease lacks a working version of a gene called Fas.
This finding suggests that the Fas gene is involved in the signalling mechanism that normally causes the self-reactive white blood cells to die.
In this way, Nagata found an intriguing connection between programmed cell death, auto-immune and hereditary disease that may lead to a deeper understanding of these diseases in humans.
Cancer researchers are also interested in apoptosis.
The growth of a tumour is regulated both by the rate at which its cells divide and the rate of apoptosis.
Aids researchers are now investigating if HIV is somehow triggering the suicide response of protective white blood cells, stripping the body of immunity.
To date, research has focused on the most obvious feature of living things: cell multiplication.
‘This is taking the idea one step further,’ Raff said.
‘Cells need signals not only to proliferate but also to survive.’
Science: Shape of sounds to come
By ROGER HIGHFIELD
ACENTURY-old mathematical problem that borders on the psychedelic has been solved: can you hear shapes?
The latest Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society resolves a question that came to light in the days of Lord Rayleigh, who showed how an idealised object called a black body radiates heat and light energy.
Whether two different surfaces of the same area have the same radiation signature was generalised to the point where mathematicians asked if drums of the same perimeter and area, but different shape, had different sounds: could one hear the shape of a drum?
The answer is no, say Prof Carolyn Gordon and Dr David Webb of Washington University in St Louis, with Dr Scott Wolpert of the University of Maryland.
This could have implications for engineers using changes in the sound of vibrating components to check for cracks and fractures.
With a geometrical approach using generalised surfaces called orbifolds and a recent theorem of French mathematician Pierre Berard, they showed that two differently shaped drum skins could produce the same sound.
Even with a perfect ear, you could not determine which shapes you were listening to, they say.
But Gordon concedes they ‘are unusual shapes’.
Business Technology: Treating Aids with a trick gene Christine McGourty looks at long-term therapy that could prevent the HIV virus reproducing
By CHRISTINE MCGOURTY
A LABORATORY will be built at Oxford University this summer to house a new research team studying gene therapy for the treatment of Aids.
It is being set up with more than £1 million over five years from British Biotechnology Ltd, one of a rare breed in Britain: a world-class biotechnology company successfully transferring technology from academia into the marketplace.
The new laboratory will employ six to 10 people in an area of science that is not expected to produce marketable results for five to 10 years.
The aim of the fundamentally new and untested approach to the treatment of Aids is to inject patients with ‘fake’ copies of the Aids virus, carrying an anti-Aids gene, to prevent reproduction of the real virus.
Using new ‘viral engineering’ techniques, researchers would use the protein ‘coat’of the Aids virus but remove harmful genes wrapped inside it.
In their place, they would insert a gene that prevents reproduction of the real virus.
‘The modified virus would go off and bind to the cells in the body that HIV normally binds to.
But instead of putting an HIV gene into the cell, it would put in a gene for an inhibitor,’ said Dr Alan Kingsman, who will head the new laboratory.
In HIV-infected patients the treatment could shut down production of the virus and prevent the onset of Aids and it could prevent infection in healthy patients.
‘We know broadly how to do it,’ Kingsman said.
‘We have already taken the first steps towards that goal.
We can make a safe virus that is a derivative of HIV and will still infect the cells susceptible to the Aids virus.’
At a meeting last week of Isis Innovation, Oxford University's technology transfer company, Kingsman said the technique was ‘exciting and new’.
‘It goes beyond conventional drug design.
We might be able to design other viruses that deliver tumour suppressor genes to prevent cancer.’
The main potential problem was the efficiency of the replacement genes designed to prevent the Aids virus reproducing itself.
‘We know we can get the inhibitor genes into a cell but we can't tell whether we'll be able to produce this inhibitor efficiently enough until we test it.
There are indications that it will be possible.’
He also said there were significant regulatory hurdles to be overcome before the new ‘gene therapy’ technique was accepted.
‘There are many reservations about whether it would be approved ethically.’
BBL has just opened a facility to make an Aids vaccine, a different product also based on technology developed by Kingsman.
The first trials on HIV-infected individuals are planned for later this year.
It will be the first Aids vaccine trial in Britain.
With Celltech and a handful of smaller companies, BBL represents the best of British biotechnology.
Though in America there are about 1,000 biotechnology companies, 100 of which are successful, in Britain they are rare.
Stephen Burrill, an analyst with Ernst and Young in San Francisco, and author of a new report on the industry, said promises had finally become reality in America.
‘Until now there's been quite an expectation gap.
People got carried away about how quickly the research would be commercialised.
Now it's being commercialised in earnest.’
In an astonishing burst of enthusiasm for biotech last year, 60 such companies raised a total of $3.7 billion in the public equity market.
California's Amgen, the jewel in the crown of American biotechnology, is set to become the industry's first to enter the Fortune 500 list of America's top companies, with revenue of $1 billion expected this year.
But the British industry is ‘way behind’, Burrill said.
‘It's been slow to develop, despite the fact that the science and technology is world class.
The UK is not very entrepreneurial.
Most of the entrepreneurs have come to the US because of the access to capital and the willingness to accept risk.
‘There's been a bit of a brain drain from Britain and relatively little real commercial activity there.
Things are changing but not with the speed you'd like.’
It could take as much as 10 years for the industry to mature to the stage that America's is at now.
Though its industry is behind, Britain's researchers still rank among the world's best in the science that underpins biotechnology.
A vote of confidence comes this week from Genzyme, one of America's top 10 biotechnology companies.
On Wednesday, the Duke of Kent will open a major new research and development centre at West Malling in Kent, which will host research into biotherapeutics, diagnostics and fine chemicals.