

Social fund fails the poor, claims study
By Our Health Services Staff
THE Social Fund — which was intended to target social security on the poorest — has failed, according to a report published today.
The Child Poverty Action Group says children are forced to share beds in households deprived of basics such as wardrobes and carpets.
Its report, based on interviews with 140 income support claimants by Bradford University researchers and the Family Service Unit charity, claims mothers regularly go short of food to ensure their children have enough, and that parents scrounge clothing from relatives or turn to charity or loan sharks.
Nearly all interviewees claimed they had been forced to cut down on food and fuel and many reported ill health.
Miss Fran Bennett, the group's director, said the report showed the ‘scale of deprivation among claimants’ and challenged the main political parties to put tackling poverty at the top of their agendas.
About 245,000 people receive community care grants through the social fund and one million get crisis loans.
The average social fund grant for furniture in 1990–1 was £377, excluding grants for washing machines.
Cash disputes halt beds for mentally ill
By Peter Pallot, Health Services Staff
A SCHEME by the Department of Health to provide beds for mentally ill people living rough has failed to help a single person, a group of leading charities says today.
Wrangles over funding between the department and local authorities have blocked the scheme, claims the group.
The dispute over who should pay for running costs has meant that not one of the 750 long-term units planned in London has been built.
Last night a department spokesman said the charities ‘appeared to be right’ in their claims although some other beds had been temporarily provided.
He confirmed that 150 beds should have been opened by the end of March.
This was expected to rise to 450 by March, 1993, under a package unveiled two years ago.
In January, Mr Waldegrave, Health Secretary, announced the total number of homes to be provided was being topped up to 750.
But the charities say plans have not even been drawn up to develop the homes and that housing associations have refused to start work on projects until they are promised funding for running costs.
They want the department to pay for the management and care costs involved in running the homes.
But the department spokesman said the money should come from a community care grant to local authorities for the mentally ill.
The charities — including Shelter, Mind, Crisis and housing associations — claim the Government has never specified where the money will come from.
They gave a warning that most of the 1,100 homeless people in London needing psychiatric care would continue to live in ‘cardboard cities’ unless agreement on funding was reached.
Ms Sheila McKechnie, director of Shelter, said: ‘It is scandalous that almost two years after the initiative was announced, not one unit has even got the go-ahead for development.’
A spokesman for the Housing Corporation, which regulates housing associations, said they were refusing to go ahead with the scheme without funding for running costs.
The corporation is understood to have appealed to the Department of the Environment to intervene.
But the Department of Health spokesman said the funding position had been made clear from the start.
‘It was said from the outset that revenue funding would come from the local authorities,’ he said.
Councils receive a special community care grant for the mentally ill.
When the Government postponed the introduction of community care in all services until 1993, it made an exception of the mentally ill because of the pressing need to act swiftly.
Fashion: Child care
THE Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths (FSID) and Early's of Witney have produced a leaflet on reducing the risk of cot death.
In addition to placing the baby on its back or side to sleep under a cot blanket, parents are advised to avoid duvets and sheepskins.
Send a large sae to FSID, 35 Belgrave Square, London SW1X 8QB.
Helpline: 071-235 1721.
Information about blankets from Early's of Witney, Witney Mill, Burford Road, Witney, Oxon OX8 5EB.
Tel: 0993 703131.
Letter to the Editor: ‘Money’ problems
SIR — The fallacy of simplified spelling is that English vowels, and some consonants, are spoken differently by speakers of different origins.
(Shaw himself had an Irish accent.)
For instance, in South-Eastern fashion, I name that commodity the love of which is said to be the root of all evil as ‘munny’; my Birmingham friend calls it ‘mon-ay.’
How would the system cater for this?
‘Muni’?
I would then vocalise this as ‘mewnni’.
In Birmingham it might be spelled (or spelt?) like the girl's name ‘Mona’.
J. M. FRANKAU Avening, Glos