

TV plea by leaders as civil war grips Bosnia
By Michael Montgomery in Belgrade
POLITICAL leaders in Bosnia-Hzercegovina made a desperate appeal for peace last night as the flames of civil war engulfed the central Yugoslav republic.
Hundreds of people were reported killed and wounded in a weekend of artillery and air attacks and clashes between Bosnia's three ethnic groups on the eve of possible EC diplomatic recognition.
Leaders from Serbian, Croatian and Muslim groups and a senior Yugoslav army general made a joint plea on Sarajevo television for an ‘absolute and immediate ceasefire’ and the resumption of talks on the republic's future.
The commander-in-chief of United Nations forces in Yugoslavia, Gen Satish Nambiar, also appealed on television to all parties to lay down their weapons, adding that a political settlement was being considered.
Earlier, the Bosnian president, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, ordered full mobilisation of territorial and police reservists after accusing the Serbian-dominated federal army and Serbian irregulars of attempting to seize large tracts of the mountainous republic.
By last night, five municipalities had declared a state of emergency.
Two days of pitched battles between Croatian forces and Serbian militiamen backed by Yugoslav troops and jets left many dead and wounded around the south-western Bosnian town of Kupres, Radio Sarajevo reported.
Reports indicated that Serbian forces counter-attacked yesterday after Croatian units, apparently using tanks and armoured vehicles, overran Kupres, in strategic highlands separating Serbian and Croatian-populated regions.
Belgrade Radio said several Croatian-populated villages were flattened in air attacks and part of Kupres was badly damaged in artillery bombardments.
Residents fled on foot through the wooded hills.
Chaos returned to the streets of the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, as at least nine died and 32 were injured.
Three of the dead, including two policemen, were shot overnight and the other six were gunned down by masked snipers as they made their way in a crowd of thousands of peace protesters into the city centre.
The protesters broke down the parliament's doors and said they would occupy it until the leaders of all three ethnic communities resigned.
Prime Minister Jure Pelivan, a Croat, resigned after talking to the demonstrators, an unofficial source said.
There was no immediate official confirmation.
Although Bosnia has teetered on the brink of war for months, the intensity and scope of the weekend fighting indicated that the three communities are preparing for the worst.
President Izetbegovic, a Muslim who represents the largest ethnic group, has appealed for UN help to stave off civil war.
He blamed Serbian militants for the rapidly deteriorating situation, saying they were trying to thwart international recognition of Bosnia.
EC foreign ministers are expected to rule on Bosnia's request for diplomatic recognition in Brussels today.
They are also due to take up a similar request by Macedonia and discuss whether Serbia and Montenegro alone can inherit Yugoslavia's international status.
Ethnic Croats and Muslim Slavs, who together make up over 60 per cent of Bosnia's population, support independence while minority Serbs have vowed to fight to retain links with Serbia, which borders Bosnia to the east.
Serbian leaders who have declared their own republic in Bosnia, accused Mr Izetbegovic yesterday ‘state terror’ against local Serbs.
The fighting cast a long shadow over the UN peace-keeping operation in Croatia, where the first infantry units arrived over the weekend.
Hungary denied allegations last night that Hungarian armed forces were helping Croat forces to fire at Serb positions in Croatia.
Leaning Tower ‘straighter soon’
By Bruce Johnston in Rome
THE Leaning Tower of Pisa is likely to be a little more upright within two years, according to a commission of experts appointed by the Italian government to decide how to stop it collapsing.
Scaffolding is expected to be erected this week, marking the start of work to halt the tower's tilt, which is growing by up to three millimetres a month.
Despite opposition to their plans from many independent experts, the commission says the angle is likely to be reduced by as much as half a degree within the two years.
Local cynics say fulfilment of the prediction would justify the name of the piazza in which the tower leans — the Field of Miracles.
But for Pisa, which has lost much of its income from tourism since the tower was closed more than two years ago for safety reasons, the real miracle is that work is to start at last.
Bitter controversy about the best way of saving the tower caused long delays.
The tower, it was generally believed, was unlikely to fall for at least a century.
But there were fears that it would soon lean too far to be corrected.
Now the first phase of recovery — strapping the lowest loggia with five steel bands between four and 16 inches thick — could be completed by Easter.
Their purpose, the commission says, is to apply what it calls ‘circumferential pre-compression’ to the tower at its most critical point.
Prof Piero Pierotti of Pisa University, one of the most vociferous opponents of the project, says that using metal bands instead of cables may damage the tower's marble.
‘Besides, that is not the point where it is weak,’ Prof Pierotti added.
Prof Pierotti also has doubts about the second phase — using 600 tons of lead weights under the base of the tower on its northern side to prevent the angle of incline growing.
He said that, besides reducing the tower's elasticity — which may have prevented it crashing before now — the weight of the steel and lead could lead to disaster by causing the soggy ground to give way.
The third and most lengthy phase of the operation to save the tower will involve pumping water into the land at strategic points ‘to make it give way to the north’.
Removal of water through artesian wells is held to be the reason why the tower began going off at an angle soon after building work began in 1174.
At a press conference in Pisa peppered with outbursts of bitter polemic, the president of the expert commission announced that he had ordered the wells to be closed.
Many bizarre proposals have been put forward to save the tower in recent years, including flying a huge helium balloon from its top, securing it with a giant safety pin, and lopping off its uppermost floor, which is a later addition.
The delay in starting rescue work has had one welcome effect.
Since the closure of the tower, Pisa's alarming suicide rate has fallen.
Fame at last for brickies' champion
By Godfrey Barker
MR MAJOR finally found himself as famous as Jeffrey Archer yesterday.
Leaping up the stairs and into the arc lights at Wembley Conference Centre, he was suddenly surrounded by celebrities — and they all knew who he was.
Grinning with surprise as if he had stumbled on to the This is Your Life set, his hand was pumped by Bill Wyman (the Rolling Stone vote), Roland Butcher (the cricketing vote), Gordon Banks (the goalkeeping vote), Elaine Paige (the musical vote), Patrick Moore (the moon vote), Andrew Lloyd Webber (the seriously rich vote) and dozens more.
It was the peak of recognition for The Boy from Eastlake Road.
Major, The Speech took second place to Major, The Showbiz Hero at a glamour rally to launch the final week of campaigning.
Few entrances have been warmed up like it.
No less than 64 minutes were devoted to Adoration of the Major before the final burst of Hail, the Conquering Hero Comes.
The opening impact was made by 180 repeats of the Lloyd Webber Variations on themes from Purcell and Peer Gynt, followed by Mr Tim Rice, laid back with greatness.
‘I am the Conservatives’ Jeremy Irons,’he murmured as apologetically as if he were standing at the rostrum with a brand new Oscar.
Mr Rice had a genuinely good joke.
He had met Snow White in Hollywood.
She had gone home from the Forest Supermarket to find the house on fire.
A voice came out of the flames: ‘Neil Kinnock is a man of integrity and consistency, a man who will never betray his principles.’
‘Thank God,’ cried Snow White, ‘Dopey is still alive.’
Mr Rice then tossed away the dwarf vote by lining up all seven for Labour.
Doc was John Smith (for doctoring the figures), Bashful was Gerald Kaufman, Sleepy was Roy Hattersley and Grumpy was John Prescott.
Happy was hard to find but was generously cast as Bryan Gould.
Sneezy was Robin Cook (‘he's going to catch a cold when he finds you cannot solve all problems by throwing money at them’) and Dopey, You Know Who.
The card-carrying celebrities loved it.
They were no less enthused when Mr Rice put up some film of seriously ordinary people, the sort of folk the average celebrity sees across a crash barrier.
Astonishingly, they all thought well of Mr Major.
‘He's more understanding of the bricklaying trade than any Prime Minister we've ever had,’ intoned one.
Messrs Gorbachev, Yeltsin, Bush, Kohl and Mitterrand followed but they, sadly, were all on silent film.
Finally, after Mr Luciano Pavarotti and the entire leadership of the rest of the world had appeared on the wall for Mr Major, a modest, smiling, bespectacled figure was suddenly seen on the stairs.
On the wall, a brilliant sunrise appeared, then a vivid blue sky.
Will it be like this on Thursday?
UK is facing break-up, says Major
By GEORGE JONES
MR MAJOR raised the stakes in the final phase of the election campaign last night with a passionate warning that Labour and Liberal Democrat policies threatened to lead to the break-up of the United Kingdom.
With opinion polls still pointing to a hung Parliament, he appealed to the electorate to ‘wake up’, before it was too late, to the dangers posed by Scottish devolution and other proposed constitutional changes, including proportional representation.
His impassioned speech came at the end of a day of increasing speculation over the likelihood that the Liberal Democrats could hold the balance of power after Thursday's general election.
Mr Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, toughened his terms for a deal yesterday.
He made it clear that, as well as a commitment from ‘day one’ to legislation on proportional representation, followed by a referendum, he would insist on being part of a coalition government with Cabinet posts for his MPs.
He said that if either the Conservatives or Labour sought to go it alone as a minority Government they risked an economic crisis and rising interest rates.
Mr Ashdown told supporters: ‘The prize is within our grasp.
We stand on the brink of an outstanding result.’
However, the Tories and Labour signalled that if either emerged as the largest single party they would put a Queen's Speech to Parliament and dare the other parties to vote them down — possibly triggering another election as soon as October.
Five out of six opinion polls yesterday showed Labour in the lead, pointing to a hung Parliament as the most likely outcome.
Mr Major, speaking at Wembley Conference Centre — his last big rally — scorned Labour's efforts to woo Liberal Democrat supporters by promising an inquiry into electoral reform.
He accused Labour and the Liberal Democrats of flirting with PR for party political gain.
‘Almost casually, they are toying and trifling with a new voting system.
One that would ensure permanent representation in power for the Left,’ he said.
It was the most strident speech Mr Major has made during the campaign and represented a further attempt to underline the differences rather than the similarities between the political parties.
He was also more Thatcherite in tone on Europe, accusing Labour and the Liberals of wanting to take Britain into a ‘United States of Europe’.
He launched a strong defence of the achievements of the past 13 years of Conservative rule and warned voters not to ‘fall in Labour's trap’ and ‘sleepwalk’into the election.
‘This is not a by-election.
It will determine who forms a government on Friday and who governs our country for five years,’ said Mr Major.
He urged people not to let the short-term problems of recession blind them to the long-term truth.
‘Don't throw away the policies — the outstandingly successful policies — of the last 13 years in an idle moment.
Because once you have let them go you can't begin to get them back for another five years.’
He added: ‘What I want is a country of real opportunity where everyone is free to choose.
A country with a head.
A country with a heart.
Wealth and welfare hand in hand.’
Mr Major's strongest words were reserved for what he believes is the threat to the constitution of the United Kingdom — which he described as the ‘sleeping issue’ of the election.
He said the Scottish National Party proposed a ‘fast route to divorce’ of England and Scotland.
Labour and the Liberal Democrats sought short-term political advantage from trying to appease, not wrestle with, the ‘demon’ of nationalism.
He said their proposed tax-raising parliament in Scotland would set the country on the road to bitterness, conflict and separation.
There would be no further debate or referendum — just a headlong plunge into something of disastrous consequence.
‘If I could summon up all the authority of this office [Prime Minister]I would put it into this single warning — the UK is in danger.
Wake up, my fellow countrymen.
Wake up now, before it is too late,’ said Mr Major.
Senior Conservatives now concede privately that they are likely to remain behind until polling day.
But they argue that factors such as regional variations, better Tory organisation in marginal constituencies and the ‘incumbency’ factor where sitting MPs are defending seats, could result in the Conservatives ending up as the largest party, if not with a narrow overall majority.
As well as stressing the dangers to the unity of the United Kingdom, the Tory campaign will concentrate this week on emphasising what ministers claim is the threat to recovery that would be posed by a Labour government, particularly the likelihood of an immediate increase in interest rates.
Labour, however, remains confident that Mr Kinnock is on course to enter Downing Street at the head of a minority government.
Last night he stepped up his efforts to broaden his appeal to floating voters by promising that a Labour government would seek consensus and willingly listen to the voice of the people.
At a rally attended by hundreds of Labour supporters from the arts, showbusiness and sport, he said that a Labour government would be in stark contrast to the ‘vanity and self-interest’ which had characterised the last 13 years.
Voters, he said, had a straight choice on Thursday between a fresh start under Labour and ‘more of the same’ under the Conservative Party.
It was either recovery or recession, modernising the health service or commercialising it, investing in all children or preserving opportunity for a few, said Mr Kinnock.
Although most polls suggest Labour's support has remained steady at about 40 per cent for much of the campaign, while the Tories have lost ground to the Liberal Democrats, the difference between the two main parties is still within the margin of error.
Gallup in yesterday's Sunday Telegraph put Labour and the Conservatives neck and neck on 37.5 per cent and the Liberal Democrats on 22.
Labour believes it can still secure a clear breakthrough over the next three days and plans to concentrate on its key themes: support for the public services, particularly the NHS, and measures to pull the economy out of recession.
In a series of interviews yesterday, Mr Kinnock pledged there would be no further increases in the proposed 25p, 40p and 50p income tax rates, and nine per cent National Insurance contributions proposed in Labour's first Budget.
It was, he said, a clearer pledge than President George Bush's ‘watch my lips’ commitment.
But, Mr Lamont, Chancellor of the Exchequer, wrote to Mr Kinnock last night, challenging what he described as the ‘lie’ at the centre of the Labour campaign.
He accused Labour of promising to increase expenditure massively without increasing taxation.
‘Without the money to pay for your promises, your manifesto is not worth the paper it is written on,’ said Mr Lamont.
Mother's distress as three-year hunt for murdered son ends
By Wendy Holden
A BRITISH woman may have found the body of her murdered 20-year-old son after a three-year hunt.
She was in a Canadian hospital last night suffering from exhaustion.
Mrs Denise Allan, 42, of Sowerby, West Yorks, led a campaign to find out what happened to her son, Charles, after he vanished while trekking across Canada.
A body was found on Saturday in Okanagan lake 200 miles east of Vancouver.
It was discovered in 130 feet of water in the exact spot where two anonymous letters written to Mrs Allan had said it would be.
A post mortem examination will take place in Vancouver later today to confirm identification from dental records.
Mrs Allan was taken to nearby Kelowna General Hospital after the body was found.
Her husband, Stuart, 52, said yesterday he had been in daily contact with her since she flew to Canada last month on the second pilgrimage to find her son.
‘She is suffering from exhaustion but otherwise fine,’ he said.
‘I spoke to her last night and she is under strict orders to have complete rest.
She is spending two days isolated from the world.’
Mr Allan, a garment manufacturer who married Denise five years ago, said she was ‘deeply upset’.
He plans to fly to Canada on Wednesday to bring her home.
‘It's been building up to this.
Everything has pointed towards a body being found.’
‘If it hadn't been for her courage and fortitude in going out there and taking on the role of investigator, private detective and motivator, those files would still be closed and the police would just have an unsolved case of a missing person.’
Police now considered the case a murder inquiry and were appealing for any information that would lead to the killer.
Mrs Allan's son disappeared in May, 1989, after a party during his back-packing trip across North America.
Nothing was heard from him after he faxed a message home giving arrangements for his mother to meet him to celebrate her 40th birthday.
She flew to Canada to retrace his steps a month later but had to return after running out of money.
After two years with no news, Mrs Allan sold her beauty salon in Bradford and raised a £20,000 loan to resume the search a month ago.
After she placed an advertisement in a Canadian newspaper, an anonymous hand-written letter was delivered to her motel.
It said: ‘We were partying with your son on May 26 and this is the last time we could establish that he was alive.
Two people knocked him out but he died.
His body is in Lake Okanagan by the bridge.’
An underwater search was launched.
Mrs Allan used her own funds to hire local divers and a submersible camera crew at a cost of £500 per day.
Then last week a second note, in the same handwriting, informed Mrs Allan that the search was on the wrong side of the bridge.
The body was found a day later.
Mr Allan, who likened his wife's campaign to that of the father of murdered British woman Julie Ward in Kenya, said: ‘It's most important we have something positive even though it is bad news.’
Martyr king's bones of contention
By Gerald Bartlett
MORE THAN a thousand years after St Edward the Martyr, King of England from AD 975 to AD 978, was murdered at Corfe Castle, Dorset, the Mayor of Shaftesbury is attempting to circumvent a legal log-jam and re-inter some of the Saxon monarch's remains in the ruins of Shaftesbury Abbey this year.
The relics were discovered in a lead box in the ruins of the abbey on land owned by two brothers, who had conflicting views on where the relics should be housed and who should own them.
A civil legal action was launched in the mid-1980s to resolve the dispute, but was halted through lack of funds.
Meanwhile, the relics — fragments of lumbar bones — were placed in a vault at the Midland Bank, Woking, until a High Court judge ruled in April, 1988, that they should be moved to the Russian Orthodox Church in exile at nearby Brookwood, Surrey, pending a final trial of the ownership action.
Negotiations with the present owners of the remains, the Russian Orthodox Brotherhood, are now being conducted by the Mayor of Shaftesbury, Mrs Janet Rider.
‘I thought a personal appeal to the Brotherhood for a relic for Shaftesbury Abbey would be much better than legal wrangling, and all I can say at present is that negotiations are going very well indeed,’ said Mrs Rider last night.
‘The poor man just can't rest in peace.
During a civil action that has been going on for years over ownership, he was made a ward of court and his bones kept in shoe boxes in a bank.’
The legal dispute over the relics has been between Mr John Claridge, who excavated them in 1931, and his niece, Mrs Georgina Smith, the daughter of his brother, Geoffrey, who died in 1986.
Mrs Smith is administrator of Geoffrey's estate.
King Edward was buried at Wareham, Dorset, after his death on March 18, 978.
According to the Anglo Saxon Chronicle ‘miracles soon followed’ and his relics were taken to Shaftesbury Abbey by Dunstan in 980 and he was declared a martyr in 1001.
King Edward's short reign was marked by a reaction against the pro-monastic policies of his father, King Edgar.
On Edgar's death, a faction sought to win the throne for his younger son, Ethelred, but Edward was elected king by the witan, influenced by Dunstan.
Edward was murdered while visiting Ethelred in Corfe.
Writing in the 12th century, William of Malmesbury provided further details: ‘The villain of the piece was AElfthryth, Ethelred's mother and Edward's step-mother, who wanted power for herself and her son.
‘Edward came to Corfe from a hunt, and while his attendants were seeing to the dogs she allured him to her with female blandishment and made him lean forward.’
‘After saluting him while he was eagerly drinking from the cup which had been presented, the dagger of an attendant pierced him through.’
William of Malmesbury said King Edward ‘clapped spurs to his horse, but one foot slipped and he dragged by the other through the wood, his blood leaving a trail until he was dead.’
The ‘wicked step-mother, who was very beautiful’ apparently expiated her crime by eventually becoming a nun at Wherwell.
Boy, 6, saves his two sisters left alone in blazing house
By A J McIlroy
A SIX-YEAR-OLD boy saved the lives of his younger brother and two sisters yesterday when fire broke out while they were alone in their home.
Alex Gair ran through choking smoke to telephone his grandfather, Mr Gerry Gair, who lives near their bungalow in Nursery Lane, Nutley, near Uckfield, Sussex.
Mr Gair, 56, an airline pilot, said it was his grandson's presence of mind that saved Michael, two, and sisters Katie, five, and four-year-old Angela.
He said Alex had already led the girls to safety by the time he arrived to rescue Michael, who had slept through the ordeal.
Mr Gair said: ‘Alex really saved the day.
He is a bright, intelligent young lad and he did all the right things.
‘He was woken by the smoke and heat and he alerted his sisters, then went straight to the telephone and called me.
‘When I arived he had led his two sisters out and they were standing by the front door.
‘His brother was sound asleep and he couldn't wake him, but he was in a room away from the fire and was safe and well.’
‘I searched the house for their mother but she wasn't there.’.
He added that the children's father was working in the United States.
Police said they were not naming the children's mother, who said later: ‘I'm still in shock.
There's nothing I want to say about it.’
Firemen were called to to extinguish the blaze, believed to have been started by a faulty electric blanket.
They were treated by ambulancemen after suffering the effects of smoke but were not taken to hospital.
Fire Brigade Station Commander Bruce Hoad said: ‘The children are very lucky to be alive.
It was the actions of the boy and his grandfather which saved them.’
Police said social services officers are to investigate why the children had been left alone in the house.
Three killed in level-crossing race to beat train
By Robert Bedlow
THREE people died and two others were injured at the weekend when their car crashed into a train it was trying to beat over an unmanned level-crossing near Doncaster, South Yorks.
British Rail investigators said the car, carrying the five home from a party at a local public house, ignored flashing red warning lights and zig-zagged round the automatic half-barrier at Moorends shortly before midnight on Saturday.
‘The car had driven round the barrier and was on the off-side of the road when it collided with the train,’ a BR spokesman said.
‘It smashed into the side of the train, rolled 180 feet down the track and ended up on its side.’
Miss Marie Garbutt, 28, her boyfriend Neville Swales, 27, and her sister Louise, 24, were all thrown out and died immediately.
Her brother, Peter Garbutt, 26, and Trevor Turner, 22, had to be cut from the wreckage of the Ford Capri and were ‘critical but stable’ in Doncaster Infirmary.
All of the victims are from Richmond Road, Moorends.
Emergency teams arriving at the scene found a woman's body 40 yards from the crossing, at the foot of the embankment.
A senior fire officer said: ‘It was total carnage.
The car was completely wrecked.
It was amazing anyone survived.’
The empty two-unit pacer passenger train was returning from Goole to its depot at Doncaster, with only the driver and guard on board.
It took half a mile to come to a halt after the crash and the driver was treated for shock.
Mrs Olive Davis, 47, was walking home with her husband, Joe, 59, when they saw the crash and she spoke of how Mr Swales died in her arms.
‘We had been to the pub down the road and were walking towards the crossing when we saw the train was coming, ‘she said.
‘Then suddenly the car appeared and swerved around the barrier, which was down and the warning lights were flashing.
‘I said something like ‘Jesus, they're not going to make it.’
It was awful.
The car went right into the train.
‘Two passengers were still in the back of the car.
I turned one over because he was choking,’ said Mrs Davis.
‘I then went to help Neville, who was lying on the track bleeding badly.
He and the two women had been thrown out.
He looked in a very bad way.
As I held him, he stopped breathing and died in my arms.’
‘I have seen other drivers race around the barriers in the past.
It would be better if they had full barriers, not this system,’ added Mrs Davis.
BR has always defended the half barriers as ‘perfectly’ safe, claiming they are lowered automatically before trains approached giving drivers plenty of time to cross.
‘We rely on people's good sense to use the barriers properly,’ added a spokesman.
The parents of the dead sisters, Mr Peter Garbutt, 58, and his wife, Joan, who had three children, were being comforted by relatives and friends yesterday.
A long-time friend of the family, Mr Ray Whittaker, 62, a council worker who lives nearby, said: ‘Peter and Joan only had three children and have nearly lost them all.’
‘We are praying that Peter pulls through.
I have seen both Peter and Joan and they were crying and she was sobbing ‘My girls, my girls will never come back’.’
It is the second fatal crash on a level-crossing this year but follows a series of similar incidents in previous years.
In September a woman was killed when her vehicle was hit by a train on a level-crossing near Reading and in 1990, 23 people died and 25 critically injured in 69 level crossing accidents, compared with 14 dead and 33 injured in 60 accidents the previous year.
The BR spokesman said an immediate inquiry had been launched but the barriers, warning lights and lights illuminating signs had all been working properly.
Yesterday the crossing was in operation again, amid local claims that the warning lights came on only 10 seconds before trains go through.
But the allegations were rejected by BR.
‘The minimum time for the lights to flash before a train appears is 30 seconds,’ said the spokesman.
‘We will want to know if the warning lights had only been flashing for 10 seconds and not 30.’
In August, British Rail was told to close all footpath and bridleway rail crossings in the wake of a report by the Health and Safety Executive into the deaths of Janet Smith, 34, her son Daniel, four, and Emma Brydon, seven.
They were hit by a northbound train on the London-Edinburgh East Coast mainline at the unmarked Carr Lane crossing at Bessacarr, near Doncaster.
Election ‘92: Only Access is alive, alive-o! as gloom shrouds Never Never Land
By SEBASTIAN FAULKS
A LARGE flashing screen on the wall of the shopping centre in Southend offers weekend shoppers the telephone number of the Samaritans.
It is an unusual piece of consumer advertising, but Southend is a town that seems to have lost its way.
Peter Pan's Never Never Land, a plastic amusement park, lies under heavy rain on the front.
Above it the Palace Hotel, a once grand Victorian retreat, now lets its halls to bingo and its rooms to the homeless.
When a poll last year showed a huge swing in Essex from Conservative to Labour, Sir Teddy Taylor, the MP for Southend East, did not dismiss it as unscientific, as he could reasonably have done.
Instead, he commented: ‘I think the poll reflects the misery of our part of the country.
I live in Southend and I have genuinely never seen so much hardship and depression before.
I say that as one who lived in Scotland for many years.’
The streets are full of For Sale notices, although close inspection shows they refer to repossessions in which Southend is the third worst case in the country outside London; the local paper carries two pages of bankruptcy notices a week.
Poverty is visible in the under-stocked shops and the perpetual sales.
It looks almost as bad as in the mining towns of Yorkshire after the pits had closed.
The Labour candidate in Southend East, which contains most of the town itself, is Graham Bramley, a teacher originally from Accrington.
He operates from an office in the Palace Hotel.
‘Seaside towns have lost their air of gentility,’ he said over a pint of Courage in the Royal, another gloomy relic of better days.
‘Blackpool, Brighton, Great Yarmouth and Torquay all have Labour councils now.’
But he has a long way to go to close down Sir Teddy's 15,000 majority.
Southend was once the ideal place for a day out from the East End.
In the 1960s the Conservative council made an effort to create employment.
It attracted a large Customs and Excise office and the Access credit card headquarters, but tourists were not encouraged.
There are no longer any large functioning hotels and there are no conference centres.
The trippers have gone to Spain.
Southend is left with fish and credit cards: cockles and Access alive, alive-o!
In the old town of Leigh, part of Southend West constituency, the cockle boats with their huge punts lie at anchor with small vessels that fish for plaice or sole on the Maplin Sands.
It is a picturesque favourite of visiting party leaders: those present remember fondly Sir David Steel's manful attempt to smile over a plateful of cockles during the 1987 election.
Southend pumps its sewage into the sea after primary treatment; the beach at Westcliff has just been called unsuitable for swimming by the Heinz Good Beach Guide.
The local Liberal Democrat candidate, Lina Stimpson, who first came to Southend on her father's works outing, says: ‘Sewage is a problem that is not going to go away.’
as if this were not enough, Southend is served by the so-called Misery Line, a blighted stretch of railway that shuttles Essex people irregularly into Fenchurch Street.
It has been given the lowest efficiency target in the country by the Government's new Passenger's Charter.
Yet Southend remains resolutely Conservative in both its constituencies.
Lina Stimpson thinks this is because the residents are mostly Londoners who have ‘bettered themselves’ and are ‘putting their confidence in what they aspire to be’.
Sir Teddy Taylor is a formidable opponent: tough, talktative and friendly.
Paul Channon, who inherited Southend West from his father, is easier to attack.
He's described as affable but often absent.
‘I will vote for him,’ said a retired woman in Westcliff, ‘but he doesn't deserve it.
We never see him.’
The Conservative vote is an act of faith that springs from the fear of something worse.
The woman behind the counter in the bookshop in Leigh old town sighed: ‘If Mr Kinnock gets in I think I shall have to shoot myself.’
Another case for the Southend Samaritans.
All the way up the coast, the Conservative reflex persists.
Frinton-on-Sea, in the Harwich constituency, is mocked as the deadest town in England.
It is cut off from the world by a level crossing which the Labour candidate, the genial Ralph Knight, another adopted Lancastrian, admits made him nervous when he first ventured over it.
It is difficult to find a single Labour voter in Frinton.
A determined search finally yielded an old lady in the former Grand Hotel, now a residential and nursing home on the front.
She was Labour, she said, but wasn't sure she could make it to the polls.
The matron promised to help.
Frinton's broad residential streets have names such as Third Avenue, or Fourth Avenue, but the resemblance to Manhattan is only nominal.
Frinton is old, self-conscious and prohibitive.
It may be the only town where you can see, as at Friday lunchtime, a Singer Vogue vacate a parking space for a Vauxhall Victor.
Essex is what the old travel writers used to call a ‘place of contrasting moods’.
While the new towns of the south have the most fickle vote, as skilled working class voters change from being C2s to Ds when they lose their jobs, the coast offers a strange picture of unresisted decay.
Election ‘92: Tiniest swing could decide fate of the nation
By ANTHONY KING
EVERYONE knows the election is on a knife's edge, but consider just how sharp the knife is.
Yesterday's polls looked much of a muchness — they were not ‘all over the place’— but concealed politically crucial variations.
The Daily Telegraph computer program compares each poll's current findings with the 1987 election results, and calculates how many seats each party would win on the basis of a uniform national swing applied equally to every constituency (leaving out those in Northern Ireland).
The program is a powerful beast — and only slightly simple minded.
As it lives on a diet of poll findings, it cannot perform better than they do.
In practice this means that the program is likely to underestimate SNP strength in Scotland.
The national polling organisations under-sample in Scotland's rural areas, where the SNP is likely to do well in seats like Sir Nicholas Fairbairn's Perth and Kinross and Mr Ian Lang's Galloway and Upper Nithsdale.
Also, in practice, the program — because of its diet of national polls — is likely to underestimate the effects of localised pockets of voting strength.
For example, a national survey showing the Liberal Democrats down several points compared with the Alliance's 1987 performance may well not capture above-average levels of Liberal Democrat support in west London suburbs, the West Country or rural Scotland.
Because the polls, and therefore the program, are likely to shortchange the minor parties, and because the minor parties are most likely to make gains at the Conservatives' expense, the program is liable to project somewhat too high a level of Tory parliamentary support.
Even so, when applied to yesterday's polls the program yields fascinating — not to say hair-raising — results.
At one extreme the Gallup poll for yesterday's Sunday Telegraph — showing the two main parties level-pegging, with the Liberal Democrats on 22 per cent— would result in a hung parliament, but with the Conservatives as the largest single party with 305 seats, compared with Labour's 298 and the Liberal Democrats' 24.
Mr Major would have a fighting chance (though not much more than that) of remaining in Downing Street.
He would, on the arithmetic, be utterly dependent on Paddy Ashdown.
At the other extreme, the NOP poll for the Independent on Sunday — giving Labour a three-point lead and putting the Liberal Democrats on only 17 per cent— would likewise result in a hung parliament, but this time one in which Labour would be the largest party with 317 seats, compared with the Tories' 296 and the Liberal Democrats' 14.
Mr Kinnock would almost certainly become Prime Minister, but he, too, would be utterly dependent on Mr Ashdown (unless he chose the highly unlikely course of forming an unholy alliance with the Ulster Unionists).
Every other combination within that range is possible, and so is change between now and Thursday.
The election is so close that the slightest shift in voter opinion during the next 80 to 90 hours not only could, but probably would, determine the outcome.
If it occurs on a sufficiently large scale, either main party might still win an outright majority.
If there is any net switching, which major party would benefit?
The indicators in the polls are as tantalising as ever.
On the one hand Conservative supporters seem more concerned about the outcome on Thursday and are fractionally more likely to vote.
On the other, whatever tactical voting takes place will benefit Labour and the Liberal Democrats, and — as any Tory canvasser will attest — many Tory waverers remain deeply unhappy about the Government's handling of the economy.
Recent history is not much help, either.
The last three elections were all foregone conclusions, and the last-minute swings against the party that was clearly going to win in two of them — against the Tories in 1979 and 1983 — probably only reflected some floating voters' desire not to see any party have too large a majority.
The February 1974 election turned out to be close, but few thought it was going to be close at the time.
Almost everyone thought Mr Heath, with his ‘Who governs Britain?’ slogan, would win.
The election's last-minute switch to Labour probably reflected a genuine desire on some voters' part to get the Tories out.
It could go that way this time.
Against that, Labour in the person of Harold Wilson had a more widely respected leader then it has now, and many experienced Tory canvassers are convinced that thousands of former Tory voters who are now thinking of defecting will gloomily return to the Tory fold within the next few days as they come face to face with the possible reality of a Kinnock government.
Of course, between now and Thursday something could actually happen.
Asked what has caused him the greatest difficulties as Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan is said to have replied: ‘Events, my dear, events.’
Some wholly unexpected event could yet tip the balance on Thursday.
No one in the Labour Party will ever forget the disastrous trade figures that dished Harold Wilson in the dying days of the 1970 campaign.
Anthony King is Professor of Government at Essex University.
Election ‘92: Vengeful undertaker waiting in the wings Godfrey Barker on the man who may succeed Kinnock if Labour lose
By GODFREY BARKER
GORDON BROWN, the heir presumptive to Neil Kinnock in the event of disaster next Friday, is heir also to John Knox.
A son of the manse, he lends to Labour the dark Church of Scotland tones that can make the recession sound as bleak as the wind that whips off the Firth of Forth in midwinter.
‘There's no recovery,’ he sombrely told journalists in Bristol on Friday, ‘and I think people are getting tired of the Chancellor for saying it.
The message which I bring you is, that on the Government's own figures, business failures will rise by 35,000 in the next 12 months and unemployment will rise much faster yet…’
The tone was that of the vengeful undertaker: ‘I come to bury Major, not to praise him.’
One shivered a little.
Mr Brown learned his Christian socialism and, one fancies, that strange oratorical mixture of Presbyterian doom and faintly self-satisfied righteousness, at the knee of his father, a Church of Scotland minister.
His pulpit tone, deployed against the fatuous optimism of the Treasury during the recession, can be severe, scornful and contemptuous.
Like many religious folk who have gone into politics, he seems to be two people, a man whose private persona is bafflingly at odds with his public.
Behind the ferocious piety and air of zeal which Brown he for the Commons and the conference, there lurks a mind as relaxed, deft and witty as, say, Michael Heseltine.
The second quality that makes Mr Brown the enigma of his party is his politics.
Like Mr Kinnock, he has travelled from Land's End to John O'Groats since 1983 in terms of the policies he believes in, but the impression that abides after his speeches is that he stays loyal to ancient socialism in a way that his more revisionist colleagues have abandoned.
Many believe that Mr Kinnock's heart may have been cut out and stamped on but that it beats anew in Mr Brown, and for this reason alone the party leader is credited with wanting the 41-year old Scot to succeed him in the event of disaster.
Is Brown more loyal to ‘socialist’ tradition than his new wave colleagues?
‘Normally I'm accused of the reverse,’ he says dryly, adding that you could not slip a playing card between him and the rest of the shadow Cabinet on policy.
But he insists that although his policies may have changed, his ‘values’ are the same.
‘What we've done, in reappraising policies in light of values, is to see our task not as we did in the past, as the relief of poverty or the advancement of equality, but as giving individuals the opportunity to realise their potential to the full,’ he says.
‘That means opening doors so that people are not denied the best education and the best health care; it means that we must have equal opportunity, greater fairness.’
But how do you get opposite policies from the same values?
‘You ask: how do you advance the public interest, how do you provide for it in the best way?’
Is this a 1992 socialist?
Catch him in Birmingham tonight and form your own judgment on the supposed heir to Bevan, Foot and Kinnock.
Election ‘92: Owen backs Major as best leader
By George Jones Political Editor
DR DAVID OWEN, the former SDP leader, gave his endorsement yesterday to Mr Major, saying he deserved to continue as Prime Minister.
He stopped short of issuing a blanket backing for the Tories, saying he would vote Liberal Democrat in his own east London constituency because he still believed in proportional representation.
Dr Owen's endorsement for Mr Major could help to swing some undecided voters back to the Conservatives.
Interviewed on TV-am, Dr Owen said the choice facing voters was who they wanted as Prime Minister.
‘John Major is streets away the best person…
Kinnock has made great changes and one admires the way he has manipulated the Labour Party towards reality.
But he has been wrong on so many political issues.’
Election ‘92: I've seen the future and there's no answer to it
By NOEL MALCOLM
THE DROWNING man, it is claimed, sees his whole life flash before him.
The drowning British electorate has a similar experience, but it sees the future rather than the past.
During the last full week of the election campaign we have had Kinnock interviews on television by Walden, Dimbleby, Day, Paxman and Brunson, as well as the other Dimbleby.
This is a foretaste of what things will be like — if the polls are correct — over the next five years.
Some of the finest brains in the land will be spending the lifetime of the next government trying to work out how to crack Mr Kinnock.
The evidence so far suggests that the interviewers will fail.
Neil Kinnock's performance throughout these interviews has been extraordinary.
It is as if he had spent several weeks at the headquarters of MI6 learning the techniques of counter-interrogation.
The first rule of any intelligence network, of course, is that each agent should know as little as possible.
This ensures that he or she has little to reveal under interrogation.
By that standard, the Labour leader is the perfect operator.
Since even Mr Kinnock does not know the secret of what he really thinks, what chance is there of anyone else finding it out?
Don't worry, Neil, your secret is safe with you.
Not realising the futility of their task, however, the interrogators have tried every method they know.
Mr Walden tried repetition, as usual, but Mr Kinnock out-repeated him.
Jonathan Dimbleby tried interruption, thereby revealing his unfamiliarity with the story of Brer Rabbit and the Tar-Baby.
Michael Brunson tried a rude personal question, but by the time it had been translated into official interviewese —‘Would you accept that there are worries about your being in Downing Street?’— it hardly sounded like a question, let alone a rude question.
Sir Robin Day, realising that drastic measures were called for, started to make funny faces.
But even when he managed a very convincing Frankie Howerd imitation — eyebrows raised, cheeks sucked in, mouth open in a little‘oh’ of mock surprise, Mr Kinnock seemed not to notice.
Things were getting desperate.
Could Jeremy Paxman save the day for the interrogators?
He who has yawned and smirked at every politician in the land — surely he could manage something more original than a couple of funny faces?
Perhaps Mr Paxman would at last achieve what we have always been waiting for him to do in one of his interviews: either fall fast asleep or choke to death on one of his own jokes.
Instead, he tried something almost unheard-of in recent weeks: a really old-fashioned difficult question.
‘If we look at all these issues — proportional representation, Scottish devolution, your relationship with Europe, the independent nuclear deterrent — you've changed your mind on all of these.
Have you finished changing your mind now?’
But there is no question so difficult that Mr Kinnock cannot think of a more difficult answer.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘if we went seriatim through it all, I might pick some holes in the idea that there was such a comprehensive list of mind-changing.’
In Mr Kinnock's verbal ju-jitsu, that is a move known as the lexicographical counter-block.
He knows that the real purpose of these television interviews is not to enlighten the people who actually watch them but to supply short quotes and sound-bites for the news programmes and the tabloids.
The Sun newspaper will happily run an ‘I boobed says Kinnock’ story, but it will never, ever, print anything with the word ‘seriatim’in it.
Of all the techniques of counter-interrogation practised by Mr Kinnock, the one he has utterly perfected is the old rule which was once memorably summarised by the Sundance Kid: ‘Keep talking, Butch, that's what you're good at.’
Election ‘92: Cook's 15 steps to NHS health
By Jon Hibbs, Political Staff
FIFTEEN steps to be implemented within a month of taking office in order to reverse the Conservative health reforms and set a new direction for the NHS were outlined by Labour yesterday.
Mr Robin Cook, health spokesman, said he would ‘move fast’ to start repairing a decade of neglect.
The measures range from renaming the health ministry the Department of Health and Community Care, with a Community Care Minister, to allocating the first tranche of extra resources to cut waiting lists.
Mr Cook said he would immediately cancel this month's rise in prescription charges and introduce a parliamentary order exempting over-40s from eye test charges.
He would also review the political balance among health authority chairmen.
‘I do not regard myself as bound by these appointments…
There may be some changes,’ he said.
Other steps are: Back a European ban on tobacco advertising.
Set targets for the reduction of inequalities in health.
Establish a Cabinet committee on health promotion.
Hold a conference with voluntary organisations on implementing the 1993 community care programme.
Allocate the first round of new nursing posts towards the target of 7,000 in two years.
Include a clause in the Finance Bill abolishing tax relief on private medical insurance for the elderly, and invite bids from regional cancer centres for investing the savings.
Establish an independent committee to advise on the objective presentation of health statistics and prevent their political manipulation.
Instruct health authorities to withdraw gagging clauses preventing doctors and nurses from speaking out.
Start a review of the GPs' contract to cut paperwork and remove financial pressures to lengthen patient lists.
Meet nursing leaders to establish procedures for resolving outstanding regrading appeals.
Discuss with junior doctors how to allocate extra resources to reduce hours.
Election ‘92: Ashdown in PR threat
MR ASHDOWN, the Liberal Democrat leader, stressed yesterday that without a commitment to proportional representation in the Queen's Speech the Liberal Democrats would seek to vote it down and force a second general election.
He used an interview with Brian Walden on ITV to outline his terms for a coalition with either Labour or the Conservatives.
Mr Ashdown made clear that the Liberal Democrats would prefer to be ‘locked together in a partnership’ with a minority government.
He said that they would be subject to the same collective discipline, would be able to carry a majority in the Commons and would be able to sustain the short-term unpopularity of some of the decisions that might be necessary to get the economy moving again.
He said: ‘We are saying it has to be a coalition.
It has to be a partnership.
It cannot be a Lib-Lab pact or a Con-Lib pact — a party on the Opposition benches pretending to support the Government programme.’
‘That is simply not strong enough to cope with the difficult challenges in front of us.
It has to be a genuine partnership at Cabinet level and all levels of coalition government of the sort that is absolutely established and highly stable on the continent.’
He conceded he was taking a risk by refusing to prop up a minority government without a commitment to PR.
Mr Ashdown said he could be blamed for forcing a second election, but he was seeking PR because it was central to a coalition that would ensure a stable government.
He said he did not pretend that a coalition with the Tories or Labour would not produce ‘difficulties and tensions’ in his party.
Election ‘92: Major's only phone calls
MR MAJOR, who will have the right to try to form a government if the Conservatives have the most MPs without having an overall majority, told a rally in Wembley, north-west London, yesterday that the constitution was under threat from Labour and Liberal Democrat policies on devolution, Europe and electoral reform.
One of his most senior colleagues, Mr Michael Heseltine, the Environment Secretary, indicated that, if the Tories were the biggest party in a hung Parliament, Mr Major would draw up a programme of legislation and put it to the vote in Parliament rather than seeking any formal deal with the Liberal Democrats or Ulster Unionists.
Mr Heseltine was asked on LBC radio whether, if the Conservatives ended up the largest party with, say, 320 seats, Mr Major would not get on the telephone to do a deal to secure an overall majority.
Mr Heseltine replied: ‘The only phone calls Mr Major will make will be to 20 of his colleagues, inviting them to join his government and prepare the Queen's Speech, which is clearly, in outline, to continue the reforms that are necessary in this country to continue to give us firm leadership and government.’
Mr Heseltine added: ‘John Major has made it absolutely clear that, in the present circumstances, the right thing to do will be to put the Conservative programme in a Queen's Speech.’
Asked whether, if the Tories lost the vote, the Queen would call for Mr Kinnock to form a government, Mr Heseltine said: ‘That would be a matter for the Royal prerogative.’
Earlier Mr Major urged voters not to let Britain ‘sleepwalk’ into a Labour government.
Election ‘92: Crucial role for the Queen Anthony King explains what happens at Westminster if there is no clear verdict in a General Election
By ANTHONY KING
Q: What is a hung parliament?
A: One in which no single party has an overall majority.
There are 651 seats in Parliament.
To have an overall majority a party needs to win 326 seats.
If no party wins this number, the new Parliament will be hung.
Why is a hung parliament so-called?
As in a hung jury — one that cannot reach a verdict.
If the new parliament is hung, does the Prime Minister have to resign?
No.
He remains Prime Minister until he chooses to resign or is defeated on a confidence motion in the House.
In February 1974, Mr Heath lost his overall majority, but remained in office for several days while he tried to do a deal with Mr Jeremy Thorpe and the Liberals to keep him in power.
He resigned only when the attempt failed.
In December 1923 Mr Stanley Baldwin lost his majority, but remained Prime Minister for five weeks over Christmas until the Liberals and Labour combined to defeat him on the King's Speech.
If there is a hung parliament and the Prime Minister resigns for whatever reason, what happens next?
The Queen would normally send for the person she deemed most likely to be able to form a government with majority support in the Commons.
That would normally be the leader of the largest party or, if he had resigned, the leader of the next largest party.
What if no party leader can form a government with majority support in the House?
The Queen might intervene to try to persuade two or three party leaders to form a coalition government.
More likely, whoever was Prime Minister would advise her to dissolve Parliament and hold another election.
She would accept that advice.
If Mr Major lost his majority and could not do a deal with another party, would he be entitled as Prime Minister to request a dissolution and a second election?
And would Her Majesty be obliged to accept that advice?
Not necessarily.
If the Queen judged that another party leader could form a government with majority support (say, Mr Kinnock with the support of the Liberal Democrats), she would be entitled to ask him to attempt to form a government.
If Labour on Thursday becomes the largest single party, would Mr Kinnock as Prime Minister be entitled to ask for a second dissolution?
Probably.
Mr Major would have resigned because his Government could not attract the support of a parliamentary majority.
Will the Queen summon the leader of the largest single party to the Palace and ask him to form a government?
No.
She will do so only if Mr Major resigns.
Until then he remains Prime Minister.
Have there been hung parliaments before?
Yes — after the elections of January 1910, December 1910, December 1923, May 1929 and February 1974.
In every case a minority government was formed.
Election ‘92: Glitterati turn out for Labour
By Jon Hibbs, Political Staff
IT WAS JUST like a genteel Hampstead tea party, at which celebrities mingled with the chattering classes among the cakes and biscuits and gossiped about the people who weren't invited.
Labour yesterday put on the biggest gathering of the glitterati in the election campaign so far to underline its claim to be the party most famous people will vote for.
Among about 400 guests in the Atrium at the Millbank centre, just along the road from the Houses of Parliament, were authors, entertainers, stars from stage, screen and sport — and a smattering of ordinary people from worthy walks of life such as ambulance drivers, nurses, teachers and charity workers.
They heard a mixture of poetry, prose and politics, with a speech from Mr Kinnock that featured all three.
‘Friends, this is a very good way to spend a Sunday afternoon,’ he said, so overcome with emotion at a tribute to his courage from Sir Richard Attenborough that he felt inspired to quote from a Shakespearian sonnet.
‘Haply I think on thee, and then my state, like to the lark at break of day arising from sun and earth, sings hymns at Heaven's gate: for thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings, that then I scorn to change my state with kings.’
That neatly upstaged both Sir Ian McKellen and Antony Sher, who had brought their Shakespearian training to bear on a range of literary readings which also featured more earthy contributions from the Liverpool poet Roger McGough, the Geordie writer Alan Plater, and Welsh wordsmith Danny Abse.
Pop singer Alison Moyet performed two hits and Ben Elton did a quick comic turn, describing Dr David Owen's endorsement of the Tories as a ‘poisoned chalice’ and being rude about John Major.
Though Labour intended to invite the ‘best and brightest’ from among a whole range of people who had achieved acclaim in their chosen fields, the audience for this informal reception had a distinctive literary bent.
Insiders dubbed it ‘Luvvies for Labour’.
As well as playwright Harold Pinter and biographer Lady Antonia Fraser, the world of books was represented by Douglas Adams, Martin Amis, Ben Okri, Sir William Golding, Ruth Rendell and Sue Townsend.
Mr Kinnock promised a patriotic Government with a sense of purpose to get Britain out of recession and rebuild the country's essential public services.
He pledged Labour in power would willingly listen to the voice of the people, in stark contrast to the ‘vanity and self-interest’ which had characterised the last 13 years of Conservative rule.
Voters on Thursday had a straight choice between a fresh start under Labour and ‘more of the same’ under the Conservatives.
Election ‘92: How the main parties are staking out their ground for a hung parliament
With the opinion polls pointing to no party securing an overall Commons majority, George Jones reports on the wheeler-dealing that began in earnest yesterday
By GEORGE JONES
MR BRYAN GOULD, Labour's environment spokesman, was dismissive yesterday of Liberal calls for a coalition.
Asked about Labour's attitude if it were the largest party, Mr Gould said on London Weekend Television that Mr Kinnock would accept the invitation to form a Government, would draw up a legislative programme and would put it to Parliament.
The minority parties, including the Liberal Democrats, would have to decide whether to support a Queen's Speech based on consensus politics ‘or whether to throw us back into the melting pot of a general election’.
Labour believes it would be difficult for Liberal Democrat MPs to vote down a modest package that includes devolution for Scotland and an official commission on electoral reform on which their party is fully represented.
Mr Kinnock indicated yesterday that, even if Labour became the majority government, he would make a strong appeal for consensus inside and outside Parliament and move away from the ‘confrontational’ politics of the past 13 years.
In an interview on radio's The World this Weekend, he said: ‘I've got a belief in the merits of consensus for itself.’
There was a need for concerted action that was not evidence of weakness but of ‘confidence and strength’.
‘A majority government should not be triumphalist in its majority.
It should seek to take advice, let's say, from doctors, engineers, from peo ple working in education.’
Mr Kinnock hoped a Labour government would be so successful ‘as to diminish the support for several parties who don't happen to be our political allies and are unlikely to become so.’
Election ‘92: Blue haven in a troubled land
By Philip Johnston, Political Correspondent
IT WAS a scene enacted up and down the country on the last Saturday before polling day.
In the shopping centre, the Conservative candidate and his supporters, decked in blue rosettes, thrust their campaign leaflets into largely willing hands and launched into a well-practised patter.
‘Who do you want to win next Thursday?
John Major or Neil Kinnock?’
Invariably, the reply came back: ‘John Major.
We don't want Kinnock under any circumstances.’
So, where was this bastion of Conservatism: Guildford, Esher, Reigate?
Dropped in, blindfolded, you could have been forgiven for thinking you were in Surrey were it not for the unmistakable twang of the Ulster accent.
This was North Down, a relative haven of tranquillity in a troubled land, hugging the prosperous southern coastline of Belfast Lough from Holywood to Bangor and inland to the housing estates of Dundonald.
If the scene in Bangor's newly-opened Bloomfield's Shopping Centre was typical of a mainland canvassing drive, it was unprecedented in modern Ulster politics.
For the first time, a national political party is contesting the General Election in Northern Ireland and in North Down, if nowhere else in the province, the Conservatives have a realistic chance of winning a seat.
The party's candidate, Dr Laurence Kennedy, 43 — a hospital consultant whose family was held at gunpoint last November by Republican terrorists who broke into their Holywood home — was at the forefront of a lengthy battle to force the Conservative hierarchy into allowing Northern Ireland's Tories to campaign officially for the party of government.
It took a vote of the Conservative conference to break down implacable ministerial hostility to the idea.
The Conservatives now have six representatives on the local council, where they are the largest party, and desperately need a victory in North Down on Thursday to establish themselves in the province.
No one pretends North Down is typical of Northern Ireland.
Geographically isolated and heavily policed because of the number of VIPs who live in the constituency, it is not an easy target for the gunman or bomber seeking a swift escape from his latest atrocity.
The Gold Coast, as the northern flank is known locally, is home to businessmen, doctors, judges and other leading figures of the Ulster establishment.
A mere 10 miles from the deprivation and divisions of Belfast, it is an overwhelmingly Protestant, middle-class community which would be unexceptionable anywhere else in the kingdom.
For 22 years, North Down has been the personal bailliwick of James Kilfedder, the former speaker of the ill-starred Northern Ireland Assembly and an independent Unionist who sits on the Conservative benches in the House of Commons but without the party whip.
Needless to say, Mr Kilfedder, 63, is less than happy at the intrusion of the Conservatives into his feifdom.
At the last election, his majority — once a healthy 14,000 — was slashed to under 4,000 through the efforts of Robert McCartney, a leading campaigner for ‘equal citizenship’— the right for voters in Northern Ireland to have an input into the democratic process of the kingdom as a whole.
Mr Kilfedder relies heavily on an unquestioning personal vote and a reputation, particularly among the older electorate, for local diligence and national prominence.
In Bangor's Good Temple Hall, where all five candidates held their only public meeting together under the auspices of the Christian Election Forum, Mr Kilfedder lost few opportunities to emphasise his lengthy Westminster experience to an audience of more than 300.
A perfunctory handshake with Mr Kennedy before the meeting betrayed Mr Kilfedder's disdain for the Conservative's presence.
Beside him on the platform was another cause of Mr Kilfedder's beleaguered countenance: the burly figure of Denny Vitty of the Democratic Unionist Party, a self-styled bible basher and ‘big Ian's’ man in North Down.
Such is the bewildering complexity of sectarian politics in Northern Ireland that Mr Vitty — who draws his support from the gut Loyalist working class housing estates on the eastern outskirts of Belfast — has been left in the lurch by the Official Unionist Party despite campaigning on a United Unionist ticket.
The Official Unionists, who are not contesting North Down, have thrown their support behind Mr Kilfedder.
The non-sectarian Alliance Party, represented in North Down by deputy leader Addie Morrow, hopes with its message of peace and reconciliation to benefit from public weariness at the squabbling of traditional Unionists.
But its calculations, and those of the Unionists, have been thrown by the presence of the Conservatives.
Dr Kennedy is skillfully playing two hands in this electoral poker game.
Deepening concern that Labour could form the next government at Westminster provides a potent message for the billboards which other parties, with links to neither of the two main protaganists, cannot match: ‘Vote Kennedy to keep Kinnock out.’
But he also recognises a genuine wish among a notoriously apathetic electorate for an alternative to the failed sectarian system, upon which even the Alliance must rely for its existence.
Helping Dr Kennedy in this campaign is a group of Labour supporters who want their national party to abandon its opposition to organising in Northern Ireland.
No stronger message could be delivered to Labour headquarters of the need to do so than a Conservative victory on Thursday.
The old parties in Northern Ireland scorn the Tory campaign.
Mr Kilfedder says: ‘You cannot transplant an English party into Ulster and think it will solve the problems here.’
An Alliance Party worker said: ‘The election in Northern Ireland isn't about a penny off income tax or hospital beds.
It's about blood and guts and death.’
The received wisdom in North Down is that Mr Kilfedder will shade it and begin his 23rd year as MP for the constituency.
But the unassuming and personable Laurence Kennedy might be about to spring one of the biggest surprises of the election.
1987: James Kilfedder, 18,420.
Robert McCartney (Real Unionist), 14,467.
John Cushnahan (Alliance), 7,932
Election ‘92: Tory fury at ex-MP's poster
By ROBERT SHRIMSLEY
MR JOHN BROWNE, former Conservative MP for Winchester, who was ousted by his party and is now running against the Conservative candidate, is circulating election literature describing himself as the ‘Conservative’ and telling unsuspecting Tories not to ‘split the vote’, writes Robert Shrimsley.
Electoral law does not forbid him from describing himself as Conservative but his rival, Mr Gerry Malone, will describe himself on the ballot paper as The Conservative Party Candidate.
Mrs Felicity Hindson, Mr Malone's campaign director, said: ‘It is entirely against the idea of party loyalty.’
Mr Browne said: ‘The challenger being put up has made it a tighter fight and is endangering the seat.’
Election ‘92: Mock polling captures the younger vote
Reports by Jenny Rees
Girls THERE has been an important early election result.
The very small constituency of Westminster Grey Coat Hospital School has gone to the Liberal Democrats.
Susannah Hamilton, 18, captured the popular vote for her party on the issue of homelessness.
Her own family has suffered the anguish of repossession, and her personal story of how her local Liberal Democrat-controlled council helped them made her the winner in the school's mock election.
The Grey Coat Hospital School, a comprehensive in Westminster which takes girls from all areas of London, is at the heart of the political arena.
Many of the pupils come to school past Downing Street and the House of Commons.
The four school candidates, Susannah Hamilton for the Lib Dems, Kathie Wright, 14, for Labour, Marina Skelhorn, 14, for the Conservatives, and Sarah Hill, 14, for the Green Party, have been busy campaigning in the lunch break and at morning assembly.
According to Miss Mary Turner, a history teacher who organised the campaign and acted as returning officer, it was a ‘clean’ fight.
Katie Wright, whose father is a Labour councillor on Conservative-controlled Westminster Council, and Marina Skelhorn, are friends anyway.
But Katie confesses that she had to forget their friendship in the heat of the battle.
She said: ‘One of my slogans was, ‘If the Tories haven't got it right in 13 years, then they never will.’
She had to face a lot of questions about Labour's plans to tax the better-off.
Katie said: ‘Those are the people who can afford to pay.’
Marina, who travels to school every day from a housing estate in the Labour-controlled borough of Brent, used her own experience to warn of the dangers of voting for socialists.
She said: ‘The state of the housing in Brent is dreadful.
It is not nice living on those estates and the schools are awful.’
Sarah, who lives in Wandsworth, was cross because, in the end, all the other candidates encroached on her territory of the environment.
But it was Susannah's passionate appeal to the girls to support her party because she believes the Liberal Democrats care about the homeless that made her the winner.
‘I think education is one of the solutions to homelessness,’ she said.
‘Young people become homeless because they cannot get a job and they cannot get a job because they have not had a good education.’
Election ‘92: Mock polling captures the younger vote
By JENNY REES
BOYS GERALD STERLING, 13, the Conservative candidate, had to cut short his speech because he had a music lesson.
Alex Orton-Green, 15, of the Funky Junky Party, wore his long hair in a pigtail, and Robert Hutchinson, 15, representing the Football Supporters-Normal Persons Party, was standing for everyone who thinks rugby is boring.
The Big Election Debate took place in the Goddard Library of the boys’ school of Haberdashers' Aske's Hatcham College in New Cross, south London, which is a City Technology College.
Polling day is on Wednesday.
The mock election has been organised by Mr Ian Gerrard, a history master, chairman of the Literary and Debating Society and returning officer, who confessed that it had been a bit of a ‘sleazy’ campaign.
Gerald Sterling neatly summed up the Conservative case: ‘Voting Labour means high taxes, high taxes mean less to spend, less to spend means fewer things bought, fewer things bought means fewer things produced, and fewer things produced means less work for everyone.’
His exit left the floor open for the political twins, Matthew Jackson, 13, for the Socialist Workers, and his brother Thomas, for the Lib Dems.
Matthew's style was snappy: ‘John Major was the Chancellor who got us into recession and he is the Prime Minister who isn't going to get us out…’
His brother's party was no better, in his opinion.
‘The Liberal Democrats have changed their policies eight times in seven years,’ he said.
Thomas Jackson accused his brother of being a Communist.
But he bravely touched on the issue of CTCs, which he said his party would scrap.
Sam Stopps, 14, for Labour, was serious and intense, but caused giggles when he raised the subject of crime.
‘To improve crime, we will put more money into the police,’ he pronounced.
Magnus Fehn, 13, was representing his own creation, the New Democracy Party, which plans to fleece the rich and tax the Queen.
Both policies got a big hand.
Alex Orton-Green wanted to go further.
The monarchy should be abolished and the land of the aristocracy confiscated to pay for putting England back on its feet.
The most senior candidate, Adam Matthews, 16, of the Socialist Labour Party, said his party would abolish the Queen, generals and public schools, put the Royal Family out to work as wardens in nature parks, and prosecute Arsenal under the Trade Descriptions Act for calling themselves a football team.
Easter eggs ‘gimmickry’ condemned
By Toby Moore Environment Correspondent
EASTER egg packaging should be posted back to manufacturers, say the organisers of a ‘return to sender’ campaign launched today to highlight unnecessary wrapping.
The Women's Environmental Network, a non-political pressure group, said women — who were responsible for three-quarters of all decisions about shopping — were well placed to make a stand against companies which overwrap, adding to both bills and rubbish.
It described extravagant Easter egg packaging as ‘a gimmick which has nothing to do with protecting the contents, let alone Easter’.
Ms Ilana Cravitz, a spokeswoman for the group, said that £10 out of every £65 spent on shopping paid for packaging.
She said: ‘Producers need a powerful signal and a good way to send one is by returning non-refillable and non-returnable packaging.’
The £5 billion UK packaging industry consumes six per cent of total energy but claims to be responsible for just one per cent of waste.
A spokesman for Cadbury Schweppes, which makes about half of all Easter eggs, said people wanted eye-catching eggs.
‘They're gifts and wrapped accordingly.’
The Country Landowners' Association has urged its members to clean-up roadsides and farmyards as part of the Tidy Britain Group's National Spring Clean.
Village pupils are past masters at acting up in class
By Colin Wright
SCHOOLCHILDREN in a pit village are experiencing first hand the Victorian values much loved by certain politicians.
Dressed in period costume and clutching lunches of bread, cheese and cold pies, wrapped in cloth, they are taking part in a living history experiment.
They learn for a day the art of copperplate handwriting on slates.
They chant their tables before playtime with tops, skipping ropes and hoops.
The project in Mickley, Northumberland, involving hundreds of children aged from seven to 11, was made possible by the chance discovery in the old school's attic of equipment which would have been used in 1892.
Mrs Margaret Godwin, the head teacher, has used the collection of writing slates, a globe, handbell, desks and inkwells to recreate a Standard Two Victorian classroom in which 40 pupils can experience teaching methods of a hundred years ago.
The only discovery which has definitely not been incorporated in the project is the dreaded tawse once used to beat the wayward.
She said: ‘It was like stepping back in time.
I found artefacts dating back a century and felt that it was important not just to preserve them, but to use them in the education of today's children.’
The project is already fully booked for the next year for children all over the county studying the Victorian era as part of the national curriculum.
Lessons are taken by a black costumed Mrs Lesley Hayman, the education authority's living history projects teacher, who poses as the stern ‘Miss Bracegirdle’.
She starts each day by calling the register, holding a religious assembly and reading the punishment book.
It ends with class recitation and boot inspection.
Mrs Hayman said the children prepare their own costumes and are encouraged to do their own research into the Victorian period before going to Mickley.
She said: ‘It encourages the children to go and talk to their grandparents and great-grandparents and other old people about their days at school.
‘We talk about the domestic life of yesteryear, religion and child labour in addition to education.’
‘The children love it and are absolutely fascinated by everything they see and learn.
They all find it a most rewarding day.’
Dyslexic boy fights on for compensation
By Alexandra Frean
A SCHOOLBOY demanding compensation from his education authority for not identifying his dyslexia until he was 11 will continue his campaign despite an apparently unfavourable court ruling last week.
Thomas Bland, now 14, from Colchester, is hoping to use legal aid in his fight for compensation from Essex county council for his years of frustration and loss of opportunity.
In a separate case last Friday, Mr Justice Popplewell ruled in the High Court that the courts were not an appropriate place to decide a child's educational needs.
‘It is entirely up to the local education authority to decide what it considered to be the child's needs,’ the judge said.
Dr Harry Chasty, director of the Dyslexia Institute, believes the ruling will work against dyslexic children with special educational needs.
‘If parents cannot turn to the law to ensure that education authorities fulfil their obligations to every child in their care, then where else can they go?’ he said.
Mr Michael Bland, Thomas's father, said yesterday it was too early to know exactly what bearing the ruling would have on his son's case, but he said their campaign would continue.
Thomas had experienced learning difficulties since he was five, but experts used by his local authority failed to spot his dyslexia.
‘Thomas is an extremely bright boy, but for years he was made to feel stupid because he was falling behind his classmates and nobody could understand why,’ said Mr Bland, a communications con sultant.
It was only when his parents sent Thomas to a private specialist when he was 11 that his dyslexia was diagnosed.
‘If only his teachers and psychologists had identified his problems earlier on, we could have saved him years of anguish,’ his father said.
Thomas was sent to £2,500-a-term boarding school in Norfolk, where with specialist help he has made an enormous improvement.
Thomas is seeking to recoup from Essex the fees his parents have had to pay to make up for the lack of state-funded special tuition available to him.
He now reads as well as other children his age, although there is still room for improvement in numeracy.
Although the main result of dyslexia is the inability to read, there is a hidden problem in the damage dyslexia does to a child's confidence, said Mr Bland.
‘His biggest problem was always behavioural and emotional, resulting from his frustration at being treated as a difficult or educationally backward child.’
Although Essex finally agreed to provide Thomas with special teaching in a state school, his parents are dissatisfied with the quality of tuition on offer and have appealed for help from Mr Clarke, Education Secretary.
Last Friday's ruling concerned the case of a 14-year-old dyslexic boy from Salford, Greater Manchester, who claimed that his education authority had failed in its statutory duty to provide him with adequate extra lessons to help him cope with his disability.
The boy's parents said he was determined not to give up and would appeal.
They claim that the education authority's official statement of his learning difficulties failed to specify the amount of extra teaching he should have, and that his school was unable to provide the five hours a week one-to-one lessons they believe he needs.
According to the Dyslexia Institute, at least one child in 20 suffers from dyslexia, an inherited disability in the brain which affects their recognition and ‘processing’ of letters and symbols.
Local authorities are obliged under the 1981 Education Act to provide tuition for special educational needs, yet the institute believes only a small proportion of dyslexics receive adequate help in state schools.
Asians in row over anti-Aids campaign
By Amit Roy
THE Health Education Authority is spending thousand of pounds on an anti-Aids campaign aimed at Asians — although its figures show that only one per cent of victims are Asian or Oriental.
Leaders of the Asian community are protesting that the wrong conclusions will be drawn from the advertisements.
Mrs Shirley Daniel, headteacher of Villiers comprehensive in Southall, west London, said: ‘I find this campaign very worrying.’
‘Why target the Asians?
It does not take into account the intrinsic morality of this group.
I would have thought they are the least vulnerable group.’
Mrs Daniel, whose school has 1,000 boys and girls, added: ‘If parents see a boy and a girl even holding hands in the park, they are in next day, to ask what we are doing about it.’
‘We say we can't keep an eye on them all the time, but the girls are under strict control.’
She says her students get adequate sex education, including Aids warnings, at school.
‘I don't think many Asians are affected by Aids,’ she said.
‘This campaign seeks to undermine Asians.’
The advertisements are currently appearing in Asian magazines and newspapers, backed up by further information on ethnic radio stations and telephone helplines.
Messages are available in English as well as the main Asian languages — Gujarati, Punjabi, Urdu, Hindi and Bengali.
The advertisements show photographs of Asian families as well as obviously well-heeled young people.
According to Lindsay Neil, manager of the authority's HIV, Aids and sexual health programme: ‘Members of these communities are no more or less at risk of HIV infection than others.’
But the authority's figures show that up to September, 1991, of the 4,916 Aids cases reported six per cent were black and only one per cent Asian or Oriental.
The authority launched its campaign after a study at St Thomas's Hospital, London, indicated that a high proportion of pregnant black women carried HIV infection.
A spokeswoman for the authority said: ‘Some people think their community protects them.
They don't believe people are having sex outside marriage.
We take a pragmatic view.
We are looking at young people who are likely to be sexually active.’
‘They are born and brought up in this country and subject to peer group pressure from the dominant culture in the 16–24 age group.’
Hunt for missing mother and sick five-year-old son
By Wendy Holden
POLICE hunting a missing mother, said to be ‘very depressed’, and her sick five-year-old son were increasingly concerned yesterday for the boy's safety.
Marie Welsh, 34, from Fearnville Close, Gipton, Leeds, was last seen at Leeds city railway station on Friday with her son, Luke, who needs urgent medical attention for brain damage after undergoing heart surgery.
Mrs Welsh suffers from agrophobia and depression and a police spokesman described the couple as ‘vulnerable’.
The boy lives with his aunt but his mother, who is estranged from Luke's father, often has him to stay for a couple of days.
The alarm was raised on Saturday when his aunt went to collect him and found them gone.
They were last seen by a taxi driver who dropped them at the railway station more than 24 hours earlier.
A West Yorkshire police spokesman said: ‘We have alerted police throughout the North of England and British Transport police nationwide.’
‘We are checking rail stations but it seems you can catch a train to anywhere in the country at 5pm on a Friday from Leeds and so they could be absolutely anywhere.’
Luke, who has a large scar from heart surgery from his throat to the left side of his body, needs regular medication to prevent fits.
His mother also takes medication.
Police added: ‘She did not say anything to the boy's aunt and left no notes before leaving.
Her depression is to do with her son's heart condition.
He is frail and it is upsetting for her.’
Marie's mother, Mrs Irene Welsh, 57, a baker's shop assistant, from Gipton, pleaded for her daughter to come home.
‘We all love you, Marie, and we want you and Luke back safe with us,’ she said.
Marie Rose is 5ft 8in, slim, with long bleached blonde hair, and was wearing a black mini-skirt, black tights, black shoes, mustard jumper and dark red coat.
Luke is four feet tall, slim with short brown hair.
He was wearing black track suit bottoms, black white and yellow T-shirt and three-quarter length yellow coat.
He has a large scar down his throat.
International: Italian coalition fights to survive
By Robert Fox in Rome
ITALIANS began voting yesterday in a general election billed as one of the most decisive for decades.
For the first time, the ruling Christian Democrats — mainstay of every government since the war — have not been able to trade on fears of Italy's communists, once the largest Communist Party in the West.
Now the communists are divided, and the larger wing, the Democratic Left, wears such liberal colours that it could be accepted by other parties as a partner in future coalitions.
The poll has become a referendum on the ruling Christian Democrats and their coalition partners, the Socialists, Social Democrats and Liberals.
In the 1987 election, they took 53.6 per cent of the vote.
If they fail to win 50 per cent this time, they are not expected to be able to rebuild the alliance.
Signor Bettino Craxi, leader of the Socialist Party, which took 14.3 per cent of the vote in 1987, has said he will not go into government if his party loses support.
The Christian Democrats — 34.3 per cent last time — are expecting a small loss, but a drop to below 30 per cent would be seen as disaster.
There has been a rising chorus of opposition to the governing parties from across the political spectrum.
The regime is blamed for a rise in corruption, Mafia crime, public debt and a lack of public responsibility.
The Mafia struck again on Saturday when a detective was shot dead near Agrigento in Sicily.
A higher turnout than in 1987 was reported in the Bergamo-Brescia constituency in Lombardy, native turf of the Northern League, which wants northern Italy to be a separate republic in a new Italian federation, free of the burden of taxes and inefficient and corrupt rule from Rome.
The League could overtake the Christian Democrats in Lombardy, and win nearly a tenth of all seats.
International: Gangsters bagged
By TIM BUTCHER
FRENCH police claim to have uncovered a £50 million money-laundering operation at the weekend after becoming suspicious of Japanese businessmen who appeared uninterested in profit, writes Tim Witcher in Paris.
About 100 people, including a senior French Customs officer, were arrested after the Japanese failed to claim back VAT on high-fashion handbags bought in Paris.
Police believe the purchases were to use up profits from Tokyo brothels and gambling dens.
‘It just did not ring true,’ said a Paris police spokesman.
‘They were losing about 10 per cent of their profit by not claiming back the tax, and no Japanese businessman does that.’
An investigation found that scores of Chinese and Vietnamese immigrants were paid by the gang leaders to pretend to be Japanese tourists, queuing to buy handbags from high-fashion shops, and paying in high-denomination notes.
The bags were then collected and sent back to Japan.
International: EC to back UN sanctions on Libya despite threat to unity
By Boris Johnson, EC Correspondent, in Brussels
THE European Community will agree today to implement limited United Nations sanctions against Libya, in the first stage of a process British diplomats hope will force Col Gaddafi to surrender the two Lockerbie bombing suspects for trial in the West.
Britain and France will almost certainly find unanimous support from other Common Market countries for the UN measures, which include halting flights to and from Libya, a ban on weapons sales and reductions in Libyan diplomatic personnel.
But EC diplomats admitted last night that any further tightening of the pressure on Libya could badly strain the Community's fragile unity.
With a large proportion of Italian oil imports coming from Libya, Signor Gianni de Michelis, Italian Foreign Minister, warned at the weekend that his country would react ‘cautiously’ to any proposal for an oil embargo, the economic sanction which would hit almost instantly at Col Gaddafi.
He is likely to remind his colleagues meeting in Luxembourg today that ENI, the large Italian state-owned holding company, still has substantial interests in the Libyan petroleum industry, Italian diplomatic sources said last night.
‘We have very significant interests, unique interests.
It would surprise me very much if we agreed to a boycott,’ said one Italian analyst.
Thus far, however, the Rome government is concerned above all not to evoke memories of 1986, when Italy found itself unable to support the US bombing of Tripoli and Benghazi, and the EC appeared hopelessly at odds with itself.
Officially, Italian sources said their government was prepared to accede to whatever measures were agreed by the UN in New York.
But, privately, the Italians say they should receive some understanding for their previous efforts to disengage from Libya.
These involve an expensive extrication of part of Fiat from Libyan hands, and the reduction of Italian professionals in Libya from 15,000 to 2,000 since 1986.
Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, Foreign Office Minister, will join his French counterpart, M Roland Dumas, in insisting that the two Lockerbie suspects be handed over for trial in the West.
French resolve against Libyan-inspired terrorism, which was in doubt during the US raid in 1986, has been stiffened by Libya's action in blowing up the UTA flight from Brazzaville to Paris on Sept 19, 1989, in which 171 died.
Washington, London and Paris are unanimous that the suspects cannot be fairly tried in Libya, as Col Gaddafi has proposed.
They say the two men should stand trial in Scotland or the United States, though it is not clear how the West would react to Col Gaddafi's suggestion, now apparently retracted, that it could take place in another Arab League country.
Today's meeting comes after a weekend in which the Libyan leader accused the West of starting a ‘new global conflict between Christianity and Islam’.
He warned the West against military action, saying: ‘Libya is a hell at 58 degrees (136 F) with deserts, mountains, foxes, lions, wolves.
They will not be able to move in it or live in it.
I am sure they don't know this reality.
Let them come and get a shock.’
International: Kohl setback over poll swing to Right
By Robin Gedye in Bonn
GERMANY'S extreme Right-wing Republican Party yesterday gained an unprecedented 11 per cent of the popular vote in Baden-Wurttemberg, causing Chancellor Kohl and his party serious personal and political setbacks.
The political refugee issue, which dominated campaigning in the nation's richest state and which the Republicans handled with overt racism, brought a 20-year majority reign by the Christian Democrats to an end.
At the northern tip of Germany, the Social Democrats were desperately trying to cling to an absolute majority in Schleswig-Holstein, seat of party leader Bjorn Engholm.
While the SPD's share of the vote fell by 7.5 per cent to 47.3, the Right-wing Deutsche Volks-Union came from nowhere to rack up 5.1 per cent and a place in the local parliament.
Early voting projections, which left the CDU with 41 per cent of the vote in Baden Wurttemberg and a drop of between eight to nine per cent over the 1988 election, also stripped Chancellor Kohl's CDU of its last overall majority in a west German state.
The CDU, which has been weakened steadily in state elections since the December 1990 general election, now only rules the east German state of Saxony with an absolute majority and is in the minority in Bonn's Bundesrat, or upper legislature.
It was a black day for Chancellor Kohl whose personal popularity has been steadily eroded over the past two years and whose ability to provide the CDU with effective leadership will be questioned more seriously than before.
‘This could be a day of destiny for Helmut Kohl,’ wrote the popular Bild newspaper before the results were known.
‘If the Christian Democrats suffer a dramatic collapse, it would be the beginning of the end for him as chancellor.’
International: Rivals dish the dirt in a weekend of malice
By Patricia Wilson in Washington
RIVAL Democratic presidential candidates Mr Bill Clinton and Mr Jerry Brown taunted each other at the weekend as mudslinging in the battle for votes in tomorrow's crucial New York primary reached a new low.
Tempers flared as each man dashed from one campaign appearance to the next in a last-minute effort to woo New Yorkers.
Mr Clinton's problems were compounded by fresh questions about his Vietnam War draft status, and controversy over remarks by his outspoken wife, Hillary.
In explaining how he managed to escape active military service during the war by signing on for an officers' programme, Mr Clinton apparently omitted to mention that he had already received his call-up notice when he sought to join the Reserve Officers' Training Corps.
He has been similarly evasive in answering questions about his marital fidelity and marijuana use.
Mrs Clinton has apologised for suggesting in a magazine interview that her husband has been the victim of double standards over claims of adultery.
She told Vanity Fair that it was well known in Washington that President Bush had had an extra-marital affair.
The White House denied the allegation, and New York's tabloid newspapers screamed: ‘Hillary's Revenge’ and ‘Bill's Wife Dishes the Dirt’.
Mr Clinton, Governor of Arkansas, had some dirt of his own to dish.
He directed it at Mr Brown, calling him childish and accusing him of launching the sleaziest-ever attacks in US politics.
Mr Brown, former Governor of California, shot back: ‘He's the one becoming the prince of sleaze.
This guy is like (former President) Dick Nixon.
He's got his own little black book and his own sting operation.’
Appeals from Democratic Party leaders for the candidates to cool it have apparently fallen on deaf ears.
Meanwhile, Mr Paul Tsongas, the former Massachusetts senator who suspended his campaign for the Democratic nomination a month ago, hinted yesterday that he might re-enter the race if Mr Clinton did poorly in New York.
He said he would make an announcement about his plans on Wednesday.
International: Beregovoy appointment criticised
By Tim Witcher in Paris
FRANCE'S new Socialist Prime Minister, M Pierre Beregovoy, came under fire at the weekend over his appointment of M Bernard Tapie, a business tycoon and football club owner, as Minister for Cities.
M Roland Castro, who was head of a department trying to improve rundown suburbs, quit his post after describing M Tapie as ‘a predator’.
M Francois d'Aubert, an opposition MP, said his UDF party would call for an inquiry into M Tapie's financial affairs.
His football club, Olympique Marseille, has come under police scrutiny.
An opinion poll in the Journal du Dimanche yesterday said 47 per cent of those questioned thought M Tapie was ‘a liar’ and only 43 per cent thought he was ‘sincere’.
M Tapie, a failed pop singer, racing driver and footballer, rose from the Paris slums by putting rundown companies on their feet.
International: Rotten to the core, but Big Apple is a plum prize for Democrats
By CHARLES LAURENCE
IT is one of the quieter moments in a campaign as raucous as a New York gridlock.
Jerry Brown, the Democrats' dark horse in the presidential primaries, is settled in a worn armchair, cradling a 10-month-old baby called Peter, whose eyes are vacant because he was born with both cocaine and the HIV virus in his veins.
Peter, and hundreds like him, represent the ghastly far frontier of American urban degeneration, life and death wrapped up together in a tiny, bright-red jumpsuit.
All eyes are on Mr Brown, watching for his reaction.
He is calm.
He studies the little dark face and massages a limp hand until the fingers curl around his own.
Then he turns towards the wizened, worn-out figure of the 87-year-old woman sitting beside him and says: ‘He is doing all right, there seems to be some response.
What is so amazing is that this stuff keeps going on.
In America, babies like this keep being born, houses are left to go derelict.’
The old woman nods in quiet agreement.
She says she has 17 kids like this right now.
She is Clara Hale, known mostly just as Mother Hale, and since she first laid a row of cots across the living room of her flat on 122nd Street in Harlem in 1943, she has become the Mother Teresa of New York's black slums.
Brown has come on a kind of pilgrimage to the heart of urban blight.
For a man who followed his terms as Governor Moonbeam of California with a stint working for Mother Teresa in Calcutta, it is a natural campaign stop.
Against the odds, he has carried it off.
The cynics who have stopped by to check out the television cameras quip that Bill Clinton, the front-runner and Mr Brown's target, will be along shortly.
In fact, he turns up at the Harlem Hospital, a few blocks north, two days later, and is heckled as he walks along the wards.
New York is the campaign equivalent of a minefield to an advancing army.
It has to be crossed because it offers the second-greatest prize in nomination delegates, but it is almost impossible to clear the field without some casualties.
The hazards are internal; as the pressure-cooker microcosm of the nation's Balkanisation, it is impossible to court, for instance, the Jewish vote without offending blacks, and vice-versa.
There are also external hazards; too much effort here is offering ammunition to the Republicans, with every campaign word a potential hostage, for the Republicans have already made it plain that they plan to use New York to frighten voters who live elsewhere.
New York, they say, is the great example of the Democratic Welfare State; a million and more on welfare, hospitals in chaos, 2,000 people murdered each year, the nation's highest concentration of Aids sufferers, kids shooting kids in the schools, and all in return for the highest levels of tax in the United States.
Vote for the Democratic Party, they say, and bring New York to your neighbourhood.
The attack strategists of the Grand Old Party have a point.
Mr Brown's trip to Harlem has brought us into an urban landscape known to tabloid headline writers as Beirut-on-Hudson, an advance on their earlier versions of, first, Naples-on-Hudson, and then Calcutta-on-Hudson.
Block after block is blasted and burnt.
Vagabonds huddle in the gaps between empty buildings, the fine stucco boasted by their Dutch merchant builders lying like pebbles on the pavements.
Shopkeepers keep their riot-cladding drawn, opening narrow doors for customers, and the cash-registers and shotguns nestle behind bullet-proof glass.
Central Park looms to the south with its jewelled fringe of MidTown skyline, but it seems like a mirage beyond the grasp of Welfare City.
More than half New Yorkers are ‘minority’ voters, and roughly two-thirds of them live on or below the poverty line.
No candidate in pursuit of local votes can ignore them, so we have seen both Mr Clinton and Mr Brown at Synagogues — Clinton promising a kosher kitchen in the White House, and lambasted for it — in Chinatown, in Spanish Harlem and most of all in Harlem and the Bronx.
It is Mr Brown who emerges with the Rev Jesse Jackson at his side.
Rev Jackson, who ran his own campaign for the Democratic nomination last time, remains America's most influential black politician.
His boosting of Mr Brown speaks loudly for the future of Mr Clinton's ‘classic coalition’ of blue-collar whites, blacks and Liberals.
New York is uncommon political turf, and Mr Brown has been helped mightily by a press that prides itself on its aggression and which does not much like Mr Clinton.
‘It is my stated purpose,’ wrote one New York Post columnist, ‘in this primary season to run Bill Clinton right back to the segregated golf course.’
But the city has also revealed something about the American voter, something that belies the conventional wisdom that all that counts is the big-buck campaigns with their television adverts and ‘issues’ tailored to every fractured constituency.
Mr Brown's potential for surprise was on clear view in Harlem.
Common people notice his lack of secret service retinue, limousines and hotel suites.
They are comfortable with his easy patrician manner, his second-generation-in-power lack of overt ambition, his casual ability to avoid saying too much.
He looks like a leader, and his name could have been invented for a passport to cross the maze of ethnic boundaries.
All this still counts.
That is the note that has played softly behind the media blare of New York.
International: Exodus as Slavs pack their bags in ‘little Switzerland’ Their pride wounded and fears growing, Russians are leaving Muslim Central Asia.
John Kampfner reports from Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan
By JOHN KAMPFNER
TENS of thousands of Slavs have gone, and more are on their way.
Even in Kyrgyzstan, one of two republics trying to go the way of democracy and keep the fundamentalists at bay, the Slavs are packing their bags.
Each wild rumour adds new impetus to the exodus.
Two weeks ago, President Askar Akayev, a quantum physicist by profession and a liberal of impeccable credentials, was forced to issue a statement denying that a mass deportation of Russians was planned.
Near panic had set in when Tass news agency quoted a woman who had just arrived in Novgorod, near St Petersburg, as saying that she had fled Kyrgyzstan a few days before the ‘evictions’ were to begin.
Like Kazakhstan, the bigger brother to the north which it seeks to emulate, under Mr Akayev, Kyrgyzstan is moving quickly towards economic reform while trying to resist any manifestations of ardent nationalism.
Those Russians who choose to remain are pinning their hopes on him.
He wants the Slavs, who accounted for a quarter of the 4.4 million population, to stay, to help keep the wheels of industry and the civil service running.
But the main deterrent is that in much of Russia and Ukraine the bureaucrats, Servicemen and scientists who rode roughshod over the locals while living ‘abroad’ cannot find homes or jobs.
Now, after a century of colonisation from Moscow, first by the Tsars and then the Bolsheviks, the gentle people of Kyrgyzstan, descendants of nomadic herdsmen, are finally standing on their own.
For Delves Dzhenchurayev, a Kyrgyz married to a Ukrainian, the confusion is acute, compounded by the ethnic complexity of his family.
His late father was a Kyrgyz who proudly served as a border guard for the KGB in far-flung regions of the former Soviet Union.
His many medals and Order of the Red Star testified to his father's unwavering faith in the system.
The first name ‘Delves’, he confided, is an acronym for ‘The deeds of Lenin are carried on by Stalin’.
His mother is a Tatar, while his wife, Alexandra, comes from Ukraine.
But they never thought in those terms.
They were, after all, Soviet citizens, who lived in the Soviet Union, not Russia or Kirghizia as it used to be called.
Each family member had his own way to express his sense of disorientation.
In the centre of Bishkek, formerly Frunze, where grandiose marble buildings intrude into the paradise of fir trees and mountains that surround them, Alexandra bemoaned the end of empire.
Whatever lingering nostalgia he might have felt, Delves chose to look ahead, to concentrate on the new business opportunities that Mr Akayev is keen to encourage in his ‘little Switzerland’, most of which has only in recent months been opened up to foreigners.
In time, the tourist hordes will be drawn to the mountains that cover most of its land mass.
Delves said he was trying to strike a deal with an American corporation to build a hotel in the mountains.
But apart from limited mineral resources and abundant meat, Kyrgyzstan will struggle for a long time.
As with the whole of Central Asia, it was made dependent on Moscow's centralised economy.
International: Yeltsin pledges to fight hardliners
By John Kampfner in Moscow
ON the eve of the most crucial test yet for Russia's radical reforms, President Yeltsin made clear yesterday he would not cede any of his emergency powers to parliament, although he said some aspects of his economic programme would be softened.
Mr Yeltsin told a new liberal forum that hardliners would seek to gain revenge at today's Congress of People's Deputies, the highest parliament, by sabotaging the transition to free markets.
‘They must be repulsed,’ Mr Yeltsin told a largely sympathetic audience.
There were scuffles outside the Rossiya Hotel, where the ‘Russian Citizens’ Conference’was being held, as a mob of a few hundred tried to prevent delegates entering.
Later, a few thousand hardliners rallied on the other side of Red Square to call on the government to quit.
Clearly worried by growing opposition to reforms that have drastically eroded living standards, Mr Yeltsin reshuffled his government last week in an attempt to shield some of the younger, more radical ministers he appointed last autumn from the wrath of the Congress.
He stressed yesterday that he was planning to bring more industrialists and entrepreneurs into his administration as part of ‘constant re-adjustments and correctives’ to his reforms.
The changes included lowering taxes and giving extra help to the farming sector.
Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the speaker of parliament and one of the key power brokers, described the government team as ‘people who have no idea what agriculture is and people who do not know what industry is’.
Mr Yeltsin stressed, however, that he would fight any attempts to cancel the emergency powers granted to him by the last Congress in October.
He said that in some countries the president was no more than a decorative figure.
But in a Russia, which is in the throws of a deep crisis, ‘a transition to a parliamentary form of rule would be extremely difficult, unwelcome and inadmissible’.
Strong presidential powers were vital for the next two to three years to prevent reforms from becoming bogged down in ‘pseudo-democratic ritual’.
The Congress, which is expected to last 10 days, is due to consider the economic crisis and hear a state-of-the-nation report from Mr Yeltsin.
It will also discuss up to five drafts of a new post-communist constitution.
At the core of the fight over the constitution is the relationship of powers between the presidency, government and parliament.
Mr Yeltsin has instructed his closest aides to present their own plan, guaranteeing strong presidential rule.
He can expect solid support from about a third of the 1,000 delegates, with a third belonging to the camp of malcontent communists and nationalists, and about a third undecided.
Pressure is growing from several camps to adopt a more strident tone towards other republics, to give up attempts to bolster the Commonwealth of Independent States and allow Russia to go it alone, especially on military matters.
Relations with Ukraine and Moldova further deteriorated over the weekend after a visit to Russian strongholds in both republics by Mr Alexander Rutskoy, Russia's Vice-President.
The Moldovan authorities accused Russia of ‘gross interference’ in its internal affairs as Mr Rutskoy toured former Soviet army units in the separatist TransDniestr region and spoke out in favour of local self-rule.
Earlier, in a visit to the headquarters of the Black Sea fleet in Sevastopol, Mr Rutskoy said he favoured a referendum on whether Crimea should be returned to Russia, 32 years after Khrushchev presented it to Ukraine.
President Kravchuk said he would resist any attempts by Russia to take over the Black Sea fleet or to change the status of Crimea.
‘Trying to scare Ukraine is impudent and fruitless,’ he declared.
International: Premier calls for Norway to join EC
By Our Scandinavia Correspondent
NORWAY'S Prime Minister, Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, called for membership of the European Community at the weekend, ending months of speculation on her position.
Norway voted against membership in a deeply divisive referendum in 1972.
But Mrs Brundtland left little doubt that she saw her country's recession deepening if it stayed outside the EC.
International: Aids revenge by spurned doctor
By Our New York Staff
A doctor jilted by a nurse took revenge by falsely diagnosing that she had the Aids virus.
Dr Thomas DiGiovanni, 35, put his ex-girlfriend's name on a sample of blood from an Aids victim, but later admitted what he had done, and resigned from the Baltimore hospital.
A Maryland medical board ordered him to perform 100 hours of service in an Aids clinic.
International: Veil of justice
By Our New York Staff
A judge in De Funiak Springs, Florida, ordered that an inscription of the Ten Commandments on a courthouse wall must be covered during a murder trial, after the defence lawyer argued that the words ‘Thou Shalt Not Kill’ might deprive jurors of their freedom of conscience.
International: Death clashes
By Our Jammu Correspondent
At least 25 people, including 16 militants, were killed and 32 arrested in clashes over the weekend between Muslim separatists and security forces in the northern Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
International: Holy disorder
By Our Madrid Correspondent
A meeting of two Easter penitent brotherhoods, discussing Holy Week processions in Lorca, south-eastern Spain, broke up in a brawl yesterday.
Five penitents were injured.
International: School sex row
By Our Tel Aviv Correspondent
The Mayor of Tel Aviv, Mr Shlom Lahat, has installed condom machines in the city's high schools despite opposition from religious parents.
INSIDE ISRAEL Voice of unity in a divided region Israel Radio has Arab fans, writes Anton La Guardia
By ANTON LA GUARDIA
EVERY day at 12.30pm, the electronic pips of the radio time-signal reverberate around the Ottoman vaults of the souk in the Muslim quarter of Jerusalem's Old City.
Arab voices recount the morning's events: perhaps a Palestinian killed on the West Bank, or the latest tussle between Israeli and Palestinian delegations supposedly trying to make peace.
Israeli soldiers watch with bored hostility.
It may not be unusual to see Arab shopkeepers listening to the lunchtime news, except that this broadcast is Israel Radio's Arabic service.
For Palestinians, this is the voice of the Israeli occupier.
And yet many of them tune in regularly.
Perhaps even more surprising is to meet a Syrian taxi driver in Damascus describing what he heard the other day on Israel Radio.
Syria still likes to portray itself as the sworn enemy of the Israelis, but the Ba'ath Party officials who rule with an iron hand appear to have given up trying to stop their citizens tuning in to the ‘Zionists’ wavelength.
Israel Radio's popularity in the Arab world is remarkable, given the decades of war and hostility between Arabs and Israelis.
The postbox at Israel Radio is filled with letters from Arabs in Israel and Palestinians from the occupied territories.
But there is also a healthy crop of missives from Jordan, Egypt, Syria, Lebanon and Saudi Arabia.
Sometimes messages come from as far away as Senegal and Pakistan.
‘The letters we get are usually very friendly; sometimes I even get birthday cards from listeners who have never met me,’ said Mr Edmond Sehayek, director of the Arabic service, an Iraqi Jew who emigrated to Israel in 1963.
Throughout most of the Middle East, Arabs are banned from having direct contact with Israel.
So Israel Radio's listeners are asked to send their letters to a special post office box in Geneva.
Even the most committed Palestinian activists listen to Israel Radio to find out about incidents in the occupied territories and to obtain important practical information about curfews and changes in regulations on, say, crossing the border to Jordan.
Whatever its faults, Israel Radio is seen by many as preferable to the wooden programmes broadcast from Arab capitals.
In the rest of the region, Israel Radio's coverage allows those living in the Arab world to hear about events that are censored by their own governments.
Mr Sehayek insists that the Arabic service's output is not dictated by the Israeli government, but he does admit to ‘close co-operation’.
Commentaries respond to criticism and accusations in the Arab world and explain Israeli policy.
‘Whether we like it or not, we have to be the voice of Israel because in the Arab world radio stations are the representatives of the government,’ said Mr Sehayek.
‘There is a lot of disinformation about Israel.
We try to give a picture of Israel as a democracy, a country that has strengths and weaknesses, that has reasons for being distrustful.’
But he continued: ‘Although we represent the Israeli point of view, we give out the whole picture.
Arabs listen to us because of our credibility and speed.
There is no political censorship to slow down the information.’
This is not strictly true.
Israel Radio, like all Israeli media and the foreign press, is subject to military censorship, particularly on security issues.
However, restrictions are less onerous than in most other parts of the Middle East.
The radio's coverage of Arab issues is perhaps more objective than in other Israeli media.
Not all teenage stone-throwers are ‘terrorists’ in the language of the Arabic service, Palestinians are described as Palestinians and not ‘the Arab residents of Judea and Samaria’, and their leaders are frequently interviewed.
Down the corridor from Mr Sehayek's office, Eman Kassem, an Israeli Arab who presents a range of chat shows and interviews with personalities, displays her pile of fan mail.
She picks out one letter from Damascus, sent via Geneva.
‘It is a love poem,’ she says with a smile.
The writer, a Syrian student, compares a snow-covered landscape to a beautiful white dress, describing the sunshine on the sea and the joys of love-making.
He concludes: ‘I am very sad that a friend can only write to another friend through a third country because of the border that separates us.’
International: Sudanese rebels lose strategic town
By Scott Peterson in Nairobi
THE strategic town of Bor in southern Sudan has been recaptured by government forces, with little resistance from the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army, or SPLA.
The Islamic Sudanese government's biggest offensive against the mostly-Christian SPLA in nine years of civil war received a shot in the arm on Saturday, when Omdurman Radio announced that rebels had been driven from Bor, home town of the rebel leader, Col John Garang.
The month-old ‘final offensive’ has been most successful this year because a split that erupted last August among rebel ranks has not yet been patched up in the face of Khartoum's assaults.
‘Garang's troops call it a tactical retreat,’ said the political head of the breakaway SPLA faction, Dr Lam Akol.
‘But the Bor defeat is very serious for his troops.’
Troops loyal to the breakaway faction, led militarily from the town of Nasir, on the Ethiopian border, by Cdr Riek Machar, are now on alert expecting an attack from the town of Malakal ‘at any time’, Dr Akol said.
Khartoum's soldiers have already broken through Cdr Riek's front line once in mid-March, moving south on Col Garang's position.
But Col Garang appears to be evacuating more towns than his troops are fighting to retain.
They blame Cdr Riek's faction for assisting Khartoum, and hope that the seasonal rains will come soon and seriously hamper government advances.
Sudan's leader, Lt-Gen Omar Hassan al-Bashir, has said that defeat of the SPLA in the south is ‘imminent’, and that rebels ‘have begun to flee en masse even before the successful attack by government troops’.
The rains may intervene to save the rebels from re-equipped government forces.
Last year, the rains came on time in April.
But the year before, they did not arrive until July.
A similar delay this year could spell the end of Sudan's civil war, unless the SPLA can regroup and mend differences.
‘Every dry season the government has the advantage,’ said Dr Akol.
‘As guerrillas, we are confident that these gains are only temporary.’
International: Levy strikes a deal with Shamir
By Ohad Gozani in Jerusalem
MR DAVID LEVY withdrew his threat to resign as Israel's Foreign Minister yesterday in a surprise deal that produced fresh tensions within the governing Likud bloc.
Mr Yitzhak Shamir, Prime Minister, who announced the compromise at the start of a delayed Cabinet meeting, said later it was made ‘in the shadow of’ the forthcoming general election.
But Mr Moshe Arens, Defence Minister, attacked the agreement, calling it ‘capitulation’ to unfounded claims of racial discrimination.
He warned that the deal would hurt the party in the June 23 balloting.
Likud faces a strong challenge from the Centre-Left Labour Party, which had a stronger showing in the latest opinion poll published at the weekend.
Mr Levy, a Moroccan-born former building worker, who aspired to be the next Likud leader, announced his intention to resign last week in a power struggle with Mr Shamir.
His threat reflected anger at the results of an internal party election that relegated him to the number four spot in the party leadership and his supporters to inferior slots on the party ticket.
There were also racial overtones, with Mr Levy, a Sephardi Jew, blaming his political setback on the condescending attitude of Mr Shamir and his allies, who are mostly Ashkenazi, or European-born Jews.
The two men also have been at odds over Israel's Middle East policy, with Mr Levy pushing for greater flexibility in talks with the Arabs and against straining relations with the United States.
At the Cabinet meeting at which he was supposed to give his formal resignation letter to Mr Shamir, Mr Levy said instead: ‘The agreement is to my full satisfaction.’
Elaborating later at a news conference, Mr Levy said Mr Shamir had assured him in writing that he would retain his positions as Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, and one of his followers would be named to the next Likud-led government.
‘There are no winners or losers,’ Mr Levy said, adding that Mr Shamir promised that Mr Levy's supporters would get key jobs in parliament, party committees, and the quasi-governmental Jewish Agency, which arranges migration to Israel.
International: Mandela under pressure to separate from ‘wayward’ wife
By Christopher Munnion in Johannesburg
THE African National Congress leader, Mr Nelson Mandela, has been urged by colleagues to announce his official separation from his volatile wife, Winnie, and to strip her of political office to avoid continued embarrassment to the organisation.
The ANC yesterday made a discreet ‘no comment’ on the latest rumours that the couple are on the verge of divorce.
However, an influential group of central committee members made it clear they felt that Mrs Mandela's behaviour was damaging the image of the organisation and the reputation of her husband, who appears to view her as ‘a wayward child’.
The sources said he is infuriated with her after a row that erupted last week, and is likely to distance himself from her.
The row is over her attempt to evict Xoliswa Falati, who was accused with her in last year's sensational kidnap and assault trial, from one of the Mandela homes in Soweto.
Falati was allowed to stay on at the house after the intervention of Mr Mandela.
But the following day she telephoned a local newspaper, the Sowetan, saying she feared for her life, and asked for protection.
When reporters arrived at the house, they were told by neighbours that Falati had left in a car accompanied by several men.
She spoke to reporters from a ‘secret location’ at the weekend, describing how Mrs Mandela had arrived at the house early in the morning.
She said the self-styled ‘mother of the nation’ was ‘drunk, in a foul mood and brandishing a Makarov pistol.
She came at me like a madwoman.
She was screaming at me that I was going to prison,’ said Falati.
She said she was ‘not prepared to go to jail for that ungrateful woman’ and told ANC intelligence officers: ‘This is just the tip of the iceberg.
It would take me two weeks to reveal all that I know.’
Mrs Mandela and Falati were convicted last year of kidnapping and assaulting four township activists, including ‘Stompie’ Moeketsi, whose body was later found in the bush near Soweto.
They were each sentenced to six years' imprisonment, but were released on bail pending an appeal which has still to be heard.
Falati had been employed as a housekeeper at the Mandela's old home in Soweto, the house which featured in the trial as the place to which the youths were taken.
ANC sources said Mrs Mandela was enraged after hearing that Falati had been ‘spreading a different version of events concerning the night Stompie was killed’.
Her behaviour towards Falati was in breach of a promise she had made to her husband before the trial that she would curb her temper and her excesses and maintain a low profile, the ANC sources said.
Nine people were injured at the weekend when a bomb exploded in a dustbin at the Rand Easter Show in Johannesburg.
A Right-wing extremist group, the White Wolves, yesterday claimed responsibility for the attack.
At least 36 people died in black political violence around the country.
Twenty-one people died in one attack on a squatter camp in Katlehong, east of Johannesburg.
Leading Article: Unstable stability
We cannot expect to swallow everything that politicians say in the heat of an election, but listening to the leader of the Liberal Democrats yesterday it was difficult to believe one's own ears.
Mr Paddy Ashdown appeared on two television programmes to emphasise the importance of stability in government.
Mr Ashdown's definition of stability is unique.
For him it means a coalition government, with his party as the junior partner, which immediately introduces legislation for proportional representation, and gives him a job in the Cabinet.
For the rest of us, stability means something rather different.
It means a government commanding a clear majority in the House of Commons.
It means a government whose chief policies were offered to the voters before the election rather than concocted in political trading after it.
It means a government confident in its support from more than 40 per cent of the voters, rather than one nervously beholden to the conditional backing of about 20 per cent of them.
In short, it means a government in which Mr Ashdown's party has no share.
Mr Ashdown is not content with imposing his version of stability as a temporary expedient, a regrettably necessary short-term tactic.
He wants to make it permanent.
He hopes to bully Mr Kinnock — Mr Major's refusal to contemplate such a deal is absolute — into establishing PR for ever, something for which only a fifth of the electorate will have voted.
He is trying to force through an entirely new system of democratic election by exploiting an arithmetical vagary of our existing one.
We cannot blame him for this — he has his career to think of — but we must protest when he puts on his most earnest face and lectures the other two parties.
Politically, Mr Ashdown is a mountebank, not a moralist.
There is something absurd, as well, in the extravagance of the Liberal Democrat demands, for history has shown that the party which holds the balance of power finds itself compromised.
In 1923, when the Liberals found themselves in much the same situation as Mr Ashdown is hoping for today, Asquith told them that they ‘were not sent here by your constituents to play the part of soldiers of fortune’, but that was exactly the part they found themselves playing then, and will find themselves playing now if we get a hung Parliament, and they will be unsuccessful mercenaries at that.
If the Liberal Democrats threaten rebellion, Labour will say: ‘We have a programme to get Britain out of recession; we want to get rid of the poll tax; we want to rescue the health service, and you are standing in our way in order to get petty party advantage.
Do so if you wish, but if you do, we shall go to the voters once more, and the voters will tell you what they think of you.’
Mr Ashdown would not only be brave to take such a risk, he would also be extremely foolish.
The great danger of the last days of the campaign is that those voters who wish to punish the Tories, but do not want Labour, may not understand the situation.
They may succumb to Mr Ashdown's charm.
They should ask themselves what he can actually deliver.
The answer is one of two things — a Labour government which he cannot influence for the good, or a Labour government which he turns out in a few months, provoking another election.
Do they want either?
There is no women's Utopia lurking in the shrubbery Although Labour has captured the election initiative on feminist issues, ROBIN LEE remains unconvinced.
She fears that its plans will confine her sex to a social ghetto
By ROBIN LEE
WILL women be better off if Labour wins?
The question is one that the Tories are dodging at their peril.
Feminism, like every extremism and special interest, flourishes in a climate of electioneering, and Labour is gaining ground on the ideological battlefield.
Labour is not the only party with an agenda for Britain's women.
Ever since Maastricht the Tories have been wringing their hands over how best to restore their ‘caring’ image among the feminists they enraged by opting out of Europe's Social Chapter.
In the Conservative manifesto's section on Women and Opportunity there are cringing pledges to implement the EC Directive on ‘pregnant workers’, expand childcare facilities, maintain child benefit and generally encourage more women to work.
Under the Conservatives, government departments will ‘adopt a strategic approach to the employment and development of women staff’ and will ‘publish plans for between a quarter and a half of public appointments to be held by women by 1996’.
Elsewhere there are commitments ranging from more women-only taxi services to the ironic symbolism of transferring responsibility for ‘co-ordinating government policy on issues of particular concern to women’ from the Home Office to the Department of Employment.
All this makes it difficult for the Tories to mount a convincing assault on Labour's drastic plans for Politically Correct social engineering.
The difference between Conservative voluntary measures and Labour's coercive legislation is there, but nearly impossible to glean from the Tory side of the argument.
Ever dodging the issues of principle, the Conservatives proffer only cautious protestations that they will defend the interests of women part-time workers.
Labour, by signing up to the Social Chapter and introducing a minimum wage of £3.40 an hour, will make flexible jobs for women with families far too expensive for most employers to contemplate.
Despite this, it has the gall to parrot the vocabulary of Tory ideology.
As Neil Kinnock's foreword to the Labour manifesto asserts: ‘at the core of our convictions is belief in individual liberty’.
Labour's mimicry of Burkean convictions does not, however, hide the basic contradiction between feminism's aims and the interests of society as a whole.
By denying women their individuality and treating them as a class, the feminist movement confines them to a political ghetto, with the movement's leaders as overseers.
Women are transformed into a single constituency and denied their choice of allegiances.
Labour, wholly in thrall to this feminist cause, will create a Ministry of Women (as well as a Minister for the Disabled and a Minister for Children) to generate ‘legislation for women’.
Thus men will have all Government ministries and departments at their disposal, but a woman's ‘concerns’ will be handled by members of her own sex.
All women out of step with ‘Women’ will be effectively disfranchised.
Special privileges for women who establish businesses are among Labour's measures which will create a two-tier measure of achievement, with a woman's career success accorded to the feminist movement rather than the woman herself.
There will be a ‘nationwide childcare strategy’ to institutionalise more children at a younger age.
The NHS will uphold the ‘right’ of women to be treated by women GPs and consequently rig the number of women who become doctors.
Quotas for women in positions of authority will be introduced; a commission ‘will take measures’ to increase the number of women judges.
‘Labour is committed to changing the passive nature of our sex discrimination laws to require positive action to promote equality for women…’ says a Shadow Ministry of Women consultation document.
‘Employers and service providers will be required to take measures to remove past discrimination.’
THE principle of retrospectively punishing men for their past supposed disadvantaging of women is a feminist catch-all by which a counter system of justice arises.
Redefining the legal standing of women, and men in relation to women, is central to Labour's ‘sweeping programme of law reform’.
The policy paper of March 2, A Safer Britain for Women, sets forth the core of Labour's programme to interpose the state between men and women, artificially dividing them and their interests as effectively as, on a larger scale, it plans to prise apart the peoples of the United Kingdom.
Domestic violence will be the pretext to ‘tackle’ what Labour designates ‘the perpetuation of stereotypical attitudes towards women in our educational system, the world of the media and society at large’.
Labour is outraged that only one third of defendants on trial for rape are convicted.
But, rather than proposing that fewer should be wrongfully accused, they suggest that the legal system should be changed so that fewer will be found innocent.
This will be achieved by abolishing the court warning against uncorroborated evidence, widening the definition of rape within marriage, and using video-links so the accuser need not face the accused, an attack on the fundamental principles of jurisprudence.
The object is to re-define the rapist so that almost no man is outside its scope.
Labour will also instigate a ‘positive action programme’ for employing women in transport, despite the good reasons why many women feel safer when there is a man in charge.
Women designers and planners will be empowered to create a safer, ‘non-threatening’ environment.
In its early days, the Reagan administration made a laughing stock of itself by blaming trees for pollution.
Labour is equally ludicrous: it is committed to banning ‘trees and shrubs that could make more women feel vulnerable to attack’.
The drafters of Labour's manifesto must surely sense that their party's embracing of the feminist cause, as defined by a tiny, vociferous group of feminist leaders, is in direct contradiction to their stated belief in individual liberty, not to mention the beliefs of ordinary women.
The question is whether the voters will realise it in time for polling day.
Leading Article: Time to step down
EDITH CRESSON, scourge of the English male and the Japanese export, has gone, but it is unlikely that her successor can do much to revive the flagging fortunes of the French Socialist Party.
M Pierre Beregovoy was an able Finance Minister, keeping the franc strong and bringing inflation down to a level below that of Germany.
As Prime Minister, however, he does not look the person to rally the forces of the Left after their drubbing in regional and local elections.
That task will fall to President Mitterrand, whose promotion of M Jack Lang and inclusion of M Bernard Tapie, the wealthy industrialist, in the new government may be a start in that direction.
Yet it is doubtful whether M Mitterrand can repeat his success of the 1970s and weld the fractions of the Left — what Mme Cresson called ‘progressive forces’— into a whole.
The past few years have seen a hardening of presidential arteries.
France's distinct, Gaullist perch in international affairs has crumbled with the ending of the Cold War.
At home, a series of scandals has convinced voters that the government is no longer listening to them.
M Mitterrand, in short, has run out of steam.
The prospect for the rest of the European Community is of a France politically paralysed at a time when important decisions have to be made — whether on European integration or the future of world trading under GATT.
Having won less than 20 per cent of the vote in the recent polls, the Socialists will have difficulty in finding partners within the National Assembly to help them pass legislation.
And the outcome of the general election, due next year, would seem to be either a hopelessly splintered parliament or a second period of ‘co-habitation’ between a Socialist president and a conservative prime minister.
The best thing would be for M Mitterrand to introduce constitutional reform reducing the presidential term from seven to five years and step down in 1993.
In the meantime, the challenge for the Centre-Right is to find an inspiring leader.
The fact that it captured only a third of the vote indicates that the public has had enough of the bickering between its two old war-horses, M Chirac and M Giscard d'Estaing.
Unless a rejuvenated Centre-Right can mount an effective attack on Socialist dirigisme, the way will be open for M Delors to return from Brussels to the Elysee.
Letter to the Editor: Bullying Lib
SIR — Following your article on the Liberal Democrats (April 1), may I ask when the media are going to stop ‘being nice to Paddy Ashdown’?
His sanctimoniousness and hypocrisy make some people around here regard him with great distaste.
The impression given is that the media are afraid to state the truth.
In Yeovil, we have the rare fortune, if that is the word, of having not only the Liberal Democrat leader as the local MP but also a Liberal Democrat council.
Lib Dem councillors are dictatorial, humourless, unsympathetic to public opinion and extremely hostile to anyone who ventures to disagree with them.
J. D. GANE Yeovil, Somerset
Letter to the Editor: Free to change
SIR — To suggest, as J. G. Girling does (letter, April 1), that the British Parliament is no longer the supreme legislative body of our country is to argue that Parliament is incapable of repealing its own legislation.
The Treaty of Rome, with the consent of the British people, was given force in this country by our EC Act of 1972; Brussels has no power to legislate for us that we did not give it.
By the same token we are free to pull out of Europe whenever we wish, simply by repealing the EC Act.
There can be little doubt that any government would rapidly do so should it become politically expedient.
Brussels does not impose its will on us, we accept its rules because we wish to do so.
This right to say yea or nay clearly indicates the continuing supremacy of the British Parliament.
CAROLYN TEN HOLTER Holsworthy, Devon
Letter to the Editor: Decent chap
SIR — Even his political opponents are on record as saying that John Major is a decent chap.
Some press and television people — even some of those who support him — talk of his apparent decency in this election campaign as if it were a vice.
Would it so break the mould of British politics on Thursday if we were to elect a government led by a decent man?
ROBERT SMITH London SE11
Letter to the Editor: Titanic error
SIR — As a master mariner of nearly 40 years' standing, I am continually upset by the criticism of Captain Lord (report, April 3).
The real villain of the piece is the master of the Titanic whose reckless onrush across the north Atlantic at full speed into waters known to be strewn with icebergs was quite unforgivable.
If I behaved in a similar fashion I would expect to lose my ‘ticket’ and be imprisoned for a considerable time.
JOHN STUBBINGS Bradford-on-Avon, Wilts
When the unions held power Britain was a very different place in 1979, when Labour were last in office.
MAURICE WEAVER recalls an era of industrial paralysis
By MAURICE WEAVER
IF YOU had been in Whitehall one day in April 13 years ago you would have witnessed a remarkable sight.
Along Downing Street (which was not railed off in those days) and on the thresholds of other public buildings, pickets from the four main Civil Service trade unions were noisily demonstrating their disdain for the authority of a Labour government that was already on the skids.
Ignoring pleas for moderation from the Prime Minister, James Callaghan, and the TUC General Secretary, Len Murray, the unions pulled out the stops in pursuit of a pay claim still subject to negotiation.
The Foreign Secretary, Dr David Owen, entering his office, said: ‘I have pleasure in crossing this picket line.
This is one of the most irresponsible strikes I have ever seen.’
To call it a remarkable sight is to set it against today's standards.
The Daily Telegraph, in a leading article of April 3, 1979, found it ‘almost an interlude of light relief’ after a winter of grim industrial strife.
This was the last throw of what Callaghan termed the ‘winter of discontent’ but Geoffrey Howe, the Shadow Chancellor, chose to call the ‘winter of bloody-mindedness.’
Britain was a different world, groggy and cynical after years during which the government was betrayed by a left-dominated trade union movement which it mistakenly believed had been tamed under a ‘social contract’.
It was an era that demonstrated the incompatibility of labour and government as bedfellows.
And those last months, when strike leapfrogged strike, were the catalyst that led to a Conservative landslide and the desperate recasting of Labour policies.
It was a time when commonsense and reality seemed to be in suspension.
As a Daily Telegraph labour correspondent then, I recall starting each day with a work schedule that sometimes involved keeping tabs on a dozen running disputes, from claim (it was usually over pay) through the gritty ritual of offer, rejection, negotiation, walk-out, stand-off, vilification, arbitration, mass meeting and settlement.
Only gradually did my colleagues and I come to realise that we were reporting on a social phenomenon — an aberration triggered by fear of being left behind in a pay race, aggravated by mounting greed and, finally, sustained by sheer bolshieness.
Whole industries ground to a halt, rubbish piled up in the streets, transport stopped.
The 1979 gravediggers' strike in Liverpool, which necessitated plans (never executed) for mass burials at sea, shamed us all but by then it was too late to correct a runaway madness.
In January, Eddie Bradin, an official of the National Union of Public Employees in East Anglia, stood outside a picketed hospital warning that if the Army was brought in to help, ‘services like blood transfusions will be blacked.’
A picket stopping supplies to a Liverpool hospital was quoted as saying: ‘If someone has to die then so be it.’
The militants had gained control and it didn't seem like Britain at all.
The Labour government under Harold Wilson, which had succeeded in ousting Edward Heath's Conservative administration in 1974, founded its hopes for economic recovery on the social contract — a document crafted by the TUC in June that year.
It offered union co-operation on pay claims in return for the government's pledge to curb prices and inflation, but it was never underwritten by individual unions — a key weakness as it turned out.
T HESE were wobbly times.
The Liberals, like the Lib Dems today, sensed the possibility of a narrow majority and were, in the words of their leader, Jeremy Thorpe, ‘unashamedly committed to breaking the two-party system’.
When, three years later, a series of by-election defeats resulted in a hung parliament, James Callaghan, having succeeded Wilson in 1976, forged the Lib-Lab pact.
The effect of that has not been forgotten by either of the main parties.
In particular, they remember a speech by David Steel (Thorpe's successor) in May 1978, in which he questioned the future of single-party government.
The price for Liberal co-operation, he said, would be the elected government having the ‘courage and internal discipline’ to drop some of its manifesto proposals and take others on board.
The pact lasted 14 months.
Then, as now, devolution was an issue.
Labour urged the Welsh and Scots to ‘vote yes and take power’.
But in 1979 the Welsh voted four-to-one against a devolved assembly while in Scotland fewer than 33 per cent supported the idea, far short of the 40 per cent required by parliamentary decree.
It was a humiliating defeat for Callaghan.
But it was as nothing to the humiliation which the unions would pour on his government in the last two years of its term.
A firemen's strike necessitated the emergency use of ‘Green Goddess’ military vehicles, a dustmen's dispute left tons of rat-infested refuse in city centres.
The TUC's ‘barons’ were not firebrands; such men as Sidney Weighell of the rail union, David Basnett of the General and Municipal Workers and Moss Evans of the Transport Workers were reasonable men who wanted to support ‘their’party.
But the militants at grassroots level ruthlessly exploited discontent over pay and strikes spread like a virus.
Between 1976 and 1977 the number of working days lost trebled to 10 million (compared to 759,000 last year).
Schoolteachers, power workers, post office engineers, staff at the Royal Mint and sections of the newspaper industry were among those who either struck or worked to rule in a bid to break the pay policy.
Then, in November 1978, Ford, battered by a lengthy stoppage by 57,000 workers, rebelled and agreed a 17 per cent deal.
The government, trapped by its own policies, had no choice but to retaliate, ‘blacking’ the company's products in the public sector.
But the floodgates had been breached.
At British Leyland there was open war between moderate shop stewards and militants.
A bakers strike led to bread shortages, tanker drivers stopped petrol and fuel-oil deliveries, and an engineers strike hit Christmas TV.
A New Year appeal by the Premier went unheeded.
So did a plea from the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Desperate moves to find an accord with the unions, by offering them an unprecedented role in economic planning, met with a snub from a TUC General Council whose members demonstrated an intransigence bordering on arrogance.
A Gallup poll in this newspaper showed that 84 per cent of the population felt the unions had become too powerful.
The writing was on the wall but nobody noticed.
Flying pickets and rent-a-mob Trots operated anywhere at will.
Thousands of ordinary people were forced into the fray.
As much as the militants' venom, I recall the desperation of pickets who said they ‘just want to get it over with’ and strikers' wives wondering where the next meal was coming from.
On January 3, 1979, road transport drivers stopped work over a 25 per cent claim, paralysing dock movements, starving industry of supplies, putting thousands on short time and causing panic buying of food and threats of rationing.
Peregrine Worsthorne, writing in The Sunday Telegraph, pointed out that if a foreign country had caused such havoc it would be termed ‘the enemy’.
Mrs Thatcher's phrase ‘the enemy within’ came later.
W HEN Callaghan returned, tanned but tired, on January 11 from a Caribbean summit he was asked about the state of crisis and his tetchy reply was paraphrased in the tabloid headlines as ‘Crisis — What Crisis?’
Such apparent complacency stung the voters and, in a way, it was the epitaph of the Labour government and its attempt to share responsibility with the unions.
On May 4 that year a demoralised Labour Party lost office, its credibility in tatters.
The factory-gate braziers went out and the militants retreated.
The folk memory of a deranged era — a time of stalled transport systems, stilled production lines and working people bewildered by their own impotence — has faded.
It was only 13 years ago but it really was a different world.
Peterborough: Lek to leek
ATLANTIC College, a bewilderingly polyglot school at Llantwit Major on the Welsh coast, has admitted two Albanians.
Elena Pinguli and Mentor Belalla, both 17, are the first Albanians to be allowed to study abroad for 50 years and are throwing themselves into college life with typical Albanian verve.
‘They've settled in remarkably well,’ says the college's Richard Jones, who has students from 77 countries.
‘There was a problem at the airport because the immigration chaps had never seen Albanian passports.
But now they're here it's all going splendidly.
They each have to do a community service: Elena visits old people and Mentor has become a lifeguard.’
While the pair are still finding their feet —‘It's like a big dream,’ says Miss Pinguli — they have already given classmates a taste of Albanian high-life.
‘They joined in our eastern European evening,’ says Jones.
‘They did a wedding dance, folk songs and so on.
It went down very well.’
ION Holender, the late Eberhard Waechter's surprise replacement as director of the Vienna State Opera, is a canny operator.
When the former impresario and agent assumed office as the opera's secretary general, he considered it would be only proper to relinquish control of his business interests.
The solution was simple: he passed it on to his son.
‘It was all very, very Viennese,’ smiles one seasoned observer.
Peterborough: Doorstepping
JONATHAN Dimbleby's interviews with the party leaders for the BBC's On the Record yesterday came from some interesting venues.
Neil Kinnock and Paddy Ashdown both chose to be filmed — on separate days — at the Travellers' Club in Pall Mall, while John Major opted for Downing Street once again.
Not Number 10, but Number 12, which is home to the Government Whips.
During elections, Number 10 cannot be used for party political purposes.
So the Prime Minister has popped along the connecting corridor to face Messrs Walden, Brunson & Co, and also to take part in last Friday's Tory election broadcast.
As Major leaned forward over a desk, the backdrop of people walking in St James' Park could have fooled anyone into thinking it was Number 10.
HEADLINE from the Reigate and Banstead Independent: ‘Police hunt handbag snatcher in stolen car.’
Peterborough: Fifty ways to leave your lodgings
SHOULD the worst come to the worst, John and Norma Major will at least be able to make a dignified departure from Downing Street.
Officials at Number 10 are planning for all contingencies, as usual, and have put a removal van on standby in case the couple have to move out next weekend.
The man in charge of arrangements for a possible transfer of power to Neil Kinnock is Andrew Turnbull, the Prime Minister's Principal Private Secretary.
But matters of a domestic nature are delegated to Peter Taylor, the veteran office manager and major domo.
‘We're not going to advertise the name of the removals firm,’ says Downing St, ‘but appropriate arrangements have been made.’
Should Major win, the staff at Number 10 will give him a special welcome.
In November 1990, they lined up inside the front door to shake the Majors by the hand; following an election victory, protocol decrees that Turnbull should lead his colleagues in applause.
However, if Kinnock is the one getting the applause, the Majors should be able to make a smooth exit.
They still have not moved in properly, and do not have anything like the quantity of clothes, books, porcelain and paintings which took the Thatchers three days to pack up.
But for Major's official papers, the pantechnicon drawing up at the back door might be unnecessary.
The Majors themselves could decamp straight to Huntingdon (though a London billet would also be needed).
Contrast that with the Churchills, who repaired to Claridge's in 1945, and the Douglas-Homes, who slipped sheepishly out of the back door bound for Chequers.
It was made available by Harold Wilson, who was to exit in identical fashion in 1970.
Four years later the equally homeless Edward Heath took refuge in the Westminster flat of Sir Timothy Kitson, his PPS.
Heath had left Number 10 by the front door.
‘There was nothing dishonourable about my going,’ he says.
‘But my piano had to follow me out.
It wouldn't fit through the back door.’
Peterborough: Ecurious case
THE TEXT of the Maastricht Treaty, which finally went on sale at Her Majesty's Stationery Office (HMSO) in London last month, has been withdrawn, apparently because of a row over the spelling of ‘ecu’, the European currency unit.
One impatient customer, David Pollard, has taken things into his own hands and is rushing out his own edition in time for the general election.
‘It's utterly ridiculous,’ says Pollard, an Oxford physicist.
‘The HMSO told me to phone Brussels.
The chap there said, ‘I really shouldn't tell you this, but there has been a political dispute over the spelling of ecu.’
They are puzzling over whether it should be spelt ‘E.C.U.’
or ‘ecu’.
I just don't believe it, I'm afraid, but he wouldn't tell me any more.’
Pollard is working round the clock to have the 200-page paperback out on Wednesday.
‘I managed to get hold of a copy of the treaty and decided to publish it,’ he says.
‘I've checked with Brussels and there are no copright problems.
We're printing 500 copies initially.’
Pollard is confident that his version will be snapped up.
‘I have an arrangement to print thousands more,’ he says, adding, ‘I hear the HMSO edition will be delayed for another six weeks.’
Peterborough: Double first
NEIL KINNOCK is not the only member of his family facing a date with the examiners.
His son Stephen, who made his campaign debut at Labour's London reception yesterday, is boning up for his finals next month.
The gangling 22-year-old, a modern linguist at Queens' College, Cambridge, is said to have a serious chance of becoming ‘the first Kinnock in a thousand generations’ to achieve first-class honours.
‘Stephen is sharp and earnest,’ says a fellow undergraduate.
‘He's certainly capable of a first.’
This, of course, has provided an extra excuse for the highly protective Kinnocks to keep him out of the firing line.
Meanwhile his sister Rachel, 20, has had only one encounter with the media — at her parents' glitzy silver wedding anniversary party at London's Inner Temple.
Her good looks made quite an impression.
Kinnock fils, who is no mean performer on the rugby field, has developed a taste for academe.
Far from trooping off for ‘milk round’ interviews, he is contemplating postgraduate studies.
Like his father, he has mellowed.
In his early undergraduate days, he was banned for three months and fined £100 for driving dad's car at 112mph.
THE new television advertisement for the Volkswagen Golf shows a car being dropped, removed and returned as a cube of twisted metal — to prove that it is recyclable.
In fact two vehicles are used.
‘The scrunched up one is a Golf,’ says the advertising agency, ‘but it's an old model.
One crushed car looks much like another and we weren't going to waste a completely new one.’
Not even if it is recyclable?
Commentary: In search of the lost chords
By W F DEEDES
TOLERABLY familiar with a general election's orchestration, I have been wondering why the music in this one is so unfamiliar.
General elections are primarily about the national interest, but since 1987 our national interests have become increasingly subordinate to Europe's interests.
I am not complaining, only pointing out that it makes a difference to the tone of a campaign.
It leaves gaps, as if certain musicians had left the orchestra.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer, for example, can hardly be expected to explain publicly the extent to which our joining the ERM has tied his hand.
It is difficult logically to claim that Scottish — or Welsh — devolution would undermine national sovereignty, while at the same time preparing to surrender national sovereignty.
I thought it plucky of the Labour party to sing Jerusalem at one of Mr Kinnock's beanos last week.
Does Labour really think it is in accord with the spirit of the times?
To the public, subordinating national interests to Europe's requirements is of small account, so long as we sustain competitive sport.
Nationalism is out of fashion — except on playing fields and running tracks, where it is overdone.
All this makes for a sea change in our lives, yet passes without comment during this campaign.
No wonder the music sounds odd.
MARY Whitehouse, a long-standing friend, sends me The Viewer and Listener's election manifesto, which is headed, ‘Vote for Decency’.
Some hope!
‘It is difficult to believe otherwise,’ she says in an editorial, ‘that certain television professionals have deliberately ‘pushed out the boat’in calculated attempts to normalise language and behaviour which has previously been seen — and then only occasionally — in very late/early morning films.’
She describes as a calamity the declaration by the Director of Public Prosecutions that there is ‘insufficient evidence’ to initiate proceedings against Juliette by the Marquis de Sade.
But she quotes approvingly our television critic, Richard Last, a month or so back: ‘Melvyn Bragg's controversial A Time to Dance (BBC1) ended on a believably tender note, suggesting that it was his producer or director, rather than the author, who miscalculated the grossness of earlier episodes.’
Miscalculated?
What a generous fellow Last is.
Mrs Whitehouse reports that the use of the F-word on television has increased sixfold in 1991.
I have shamefully mixed feelings about the F-word, because the valorous riflemen I served with in the last war could hardly utter a sentence without it.
But I am old-fashioned enough to dislike hearing it flung about in railway carriages by mixed school parties.
Observing our Mr Anthony Hopkins joyfully clutching an Oscar for his part in The Silence of the Lambs, a degenerate movie if ever there was one — and, like all degenerate movies, a box office winner — I concluded that Mrs Whitehouse, contra mundum, is unlikely to get her vote for decency next Thursday.
For further reading, I recommend Oswald Spengler's Decline of the West.
TO BE alone and without flying experience in an aircraft with a dead pilot is the stuff of nightmares.
After being talked down by a flying instructor last week, Mr Alan Anderson was said to be under sedation.
Yet I recall an episode many years ago in which a man deliberately put himself in this predicament.
A wealthy man, without flying experience, was flown from London to Paris by his pilot.
There, for some reason or other, the French impounded his plane.
After a day or two, the owner became irked, and went to the airport to inspect his plane.
He begged permission to look inside it, which the airport authorities granted, knowing that he could neither fly nor navigate.
While he was doing this, an Imperial Airways airliner, due to fly to London, prepared to lumber off across the Channel.
It occurred to the owner of the light plane that if he followed it, his navigational problems would be solved.
Unlike Mr Anderson last week, furthermore, he had some elementary knowledge of how the controls worked, having sat beside his pilot.
So he took off.
Paris alerted Croydon, where both planes were due to land and in due course a pilot went up from Croyden to guide him down.
The first attempt was almost a disaster, but he got the plane up again and came round for a second shot.
This time he made it.
I would love to have such strong nerves.
Villagers fight to block sale of ancient common
By Charles Clover, Environment Editor
THE sale of a common in Hampshire which has hardly changed since the Norman conquest has been attacked by residents who dispute that the vendor owns the land.
A price of £200,000 is being asked for Newtown Common, 139 acres of rare lowland heath and woodland three miles south of Newbury, by the Tunbridge Wells office of the estate agents Hurley Lloyd Thorpe.
The agents claim that the purchaser could harvest standing timber, charge the owners of properties on the land for access and ban local people from using the common.
At present valuations, the figure being asked is around three times the price valuers working for the county council expect for common land with ancient rights over it…
The attempted sale has not impressed residents, the Open Spaces Society, Hampshire County Council or Basingstoke and Deane District Council.
The dispute over the freehold ownership of the common began in 1987 when the present claimant to ownership, Mr Michael Farrow, and his company the Historical Records Agency, bought the lordship of the manor from the Earl of Carnarvon for £4,200.
Mr Farrow is understood locally to have taken the conveyance between the Earl of Carnarvon and himself over the lordship of the manor to mean that he was owner of the common.
In 1990 he tried to register ownership of the land but his claim was opposed by the county council and residents.
Meanwhile, he sold the lordship of the manor to Mr Brian Hibbert, a commoner, who lives at Newtown Grange, for £12,000.
Mr Hibbert disputes Mr Farrow's ownership of the freehold and believes that he holds rights over the land.
‘I bought the lordship partly as a bit of fun and as a protective device to maintain the status quo.
‘In addition to being one of the few remaining commons in the area Newtown Common is a very valuable home for wildlife.’
‘This little oasis is a great pleasure to everyone in the area and it would be a travesty if it were ever to go the same way as everywhere else in the Newbury district — for commercial gain.’
Experts in commons legislation do not see how a future purchaser could exploit timber, withdraw public access or charge for access on Newtown Common.
But the agents and their solicitors are equally determined that they could.
Mr Lloyd of Hurley Lloyd Thorpe, said: ‘My client has a title to the land, not 100 per cent, but two barristers have told him he has title.’
‘Land can be sold without its title having been registered.
A hearing over the disputed title will be reinstated in due course.’
Gunman's home to be razed
THE house built by Albert Dryden, the man who shot dead a council planning chief in front of television cameras, is being demolished by his own family while he serves a life sentence for murder.
The ramshackle bungalow at Butsfield, Co Durham, that so obsessed Dryden that he murdered Derwentside planning chief Harry Collinson following a lengthy planning feud, now sits in its grassy hollow with the roof off.
Dryden's sister Elsie Donnelly said yesterday: ‘The family was given the option of taking it down ourselves by the council.’
Mr Collinson's brother, Roy Collinson, 52, a farmer, said: ‘It just emphasises how unnecessary the whole thing was.
I would have liked to see the bungalow demolished on TV so that people who violate the laws will know in future what can happen.’
Former steelworker Dryden, 51, was jailed for life at Newcastle upon Tyne Crown Court for the murder of Mr Collinson.
The shooting was seen by millions on television.
Dryden spent his £13,000 redundancy money on the plot of land where he illegally built the bungalow.
He fought council demolition moves for 18 months before his fatal confrontation.
Anger over quarry plan in Mendips
By Paul Stokes
CONSERVATIONISTS are opposing the extension to a large limestone quarry which they claim would damage irrevocably the Mendip Hills in Somerset.
A public inquiry begins tomorrow into plans by quarry company ARC to increase its existing operations on 61 acres at Whatley Quarry, near Frome, by another 21 acres.
The extension would provide workings for a further 25 years in the heart of an environmentally sensitive area.
Mr Ben Plowden, energy and minerals campaigner for the Council for the Protection of Rural England, said: ‘There could be no worse time to allow an extension to Whatley when major changes in national minerals policy are almost inevitable.’
‘The Mendips are of irreplaceable value.
Destroy them and we will impoverish future generations simply because we are unable to live within our environmental means.’
According to Department of Environment forecasts in 1991, the demand for aggregates such as sand, gravel and crushed rock will be around 500 million tons by the year 2011 compared to just under 300 million in 1990.
Mr Plowden added: ‘Last year's forecasts of a 66 per cent rise in demand over the next 20 years brought home the enormity of the environmental threat posed by current minerals policy.’
‘Nothing could illustrate this more clearly than the Whatley Quarry, already one of the biggest holes in Europe, in the heart of the lovely Mendip Hills.’
Obituary of Harford Thomas
Harford Thomas.
Aged 77.
Joined the Guardian in 1963, and served successively as deputy editor, managing editor and City editor until 1974.
Best known for his column, in which he was an early champion of green politics.
Obituary of Peter McCunn
Obituary of Alan Cowan
Alan Cowan.
Aged 76.
Assistant secretary, Scottish Development Department.
CBE 1971.
It is not time to give the other chap a chance
By AUBERON WAUGH
JOHN SMITH's promise of a 59p in the pound tax rate concentrates the mind wonderfully.
A thousand reasons why Labour's economic and social policies are all wrong — won't work, must never even be tried — suddenly spring to mind.
But I do not think it is this threat alone which explains the sick feeling of dread — rather like the feeling of a man who knows he is to be hanged in a fortnight — which clouds the prospect of a Labour victory.
Apart from the influence of many young voters who have no memory of what it was like to live under a Labour government, the biggest thing going for Labour in this election is an Englishman's sense of fair play.
It is time to give the other side a chance.
The Tories have more or less run out of good ideas which inspired them in the early Thatcher years, and are left only with a few bad ones: the creation of new, ever more incompetent ‘private’ monopolies; the vindictive pursuit of aged war criminals; the idiotic struggle to knock a penny off income tax, which will benefit nobody, when so much more could be achieved with a little imagination — by abolishing all discriminatory rates, abolishing capital transfer tax and other taxes on savings, allowing domestic wages (as all other forms of employment are allowed) against personal taxation…
This last reform, which would simultaneously go a long way towards solving the unemployment problem and the housing problem, would also transform the social scene.
But one can hope for none of these things from the Conservative Party.
It lacks the vision, the panache, the self-confidence it once had under Mrs Thatcher, before she went sour.
Waving her around at this stage only serves to remind Conservatives of what they have lost, while it reminds the undecided 33 per cent of electors of what they most came to detest.
This sense of fair play might well be subdued by consideration of Mr Smith's genocidal tax rate, at least among those to whom it will apply.
All the best paid journalists in the country — Peter Jenkins of the Independent, Hugo Young of the Guardian — are appalled by it.
The problem is to convince those who are not so immediately affected.
We all know, of course, from the American experience, that the higher the marginal rate, the less the revenue.
Discriminatory and punitive rates, like Mr Smith's 59 per cent, not only put many of the most agile brains in the country to work to find ways of avoiding them but create a profound disinclination to work harder or take risks when you have to give nearly 60 per cent of it to the Government.
But I don't think that the 59 per cent threat is the only, or even the main, reason for viewing the prospect of another Labour government with gloom, disgust, despair.
The real reason will differ for everyone.
In my own case, it is the knowledge that a Labour victory has the effect of a firework in a stagnant pool, in that it brings all the scum to the surface: not just the trade union ruffians, who have been biding their time, but the Left-wing teachers, the child abuse and anti-smoking fanatics, the Hunt Saboteurs, all the ugly underside of British life will suddenly have a powerful voice in the nation's councils.
Mr Kinnock and Mr Smith may not do much to frighten us, but by the system of patronage — some would call it deference or sycophancy — which operates in this country, we will find, overnight, that respectability somehow has a new meaning: that judges, policemen, journalists, school teachers, even the local sanitary inspectors or environmental health officers, suddenly start looking at things in a different way.
It is the whole of official Britain that swings behind Labour.
Every aspect of administrative life is influenced by what is most fatuous, wrongheaded and vile.
Having said all of which, I have to admit that I may not be able to vote on Thursday.
I shall be in London, and my vote is in Taunton, a safe Tory seat.
The Member, David Nicholson, is an amiable, dishevelled figure who voted like a hero on St Valentine's Day against the measure to stop everyone else from hunting.
But he also supports hanging.
Having attended a trial or two in my time, and having kept an eye on the changing standard of juries, police, barristers and judges, I am convinced that if hanging were reintroduced, they would not just occasionally hang the wrong person, but do it pretty well every time.
I would not like to contribute to that, although I suppose that Mr Smith's vicious tax might just persuade me to brace my shoulders and cry ‘traps away’.
But then there is always the danger that these crazy policemen and judges might succeed in hanging me or my nearest and dearest.
That is a thought to concentrate the mind, too.
Obituary of Col Frank Morgan
COLONEL FRANK MORGAN, who has died aged 99, served with the Imperial Camel Corps in the campaigns against the Turks in the First World War, and with the Royal Corps of Signals in the Second.
Morgan — variously known as ‘Monocle’ and ‘Pinpoint’— was chief air formation signals officer in France in 1940 and in the Middle East and Italy from 1943 to 1945.
Between the wars, and after the second, he farmed in west Wales.
When blindness compelled him to give up farming in 1966 he learned Braille and carried on with his public duties, being much in demand as a witty public speaker.
Morgan had a broad range of knowledge which included literature, history, law, mathematics, agriculture and science; he contributed articles to newspapers and magazines and throughout his life wrote light verse.
Frank Stanley Morgan was born in 1893 at Seoul in Korea, where his father, a commissioner of the Imperial Chinese Customs, was on a tour of duty.
His mother was a niece of his father, and young Frank claimed this relationship made him his own great-uncle.
He spent much of his childhood in China but returned home to school at Marlborough.
He then read law at Christ Church, Oxford.
In 1914 he enlisted in the Pembroke Yeomanry but two years later was seconded to Signals, then a branch of the Royal Engineers.
He subsequently served as signals officer with the Imperial Camel Corps, taking part in cavalry battles against the Turks in Egypt and Palestine.
Of the Imperial Camel Corps he would say that it comprised an aristocratic element among its officers and complete ruffians in the ranks; all they had in common was a disdain for danger.
When he asked once for a volunteer bugler, a particularly blackguardly fellow stepped forward.
‘Can you blow the bugle?’ asked Morgan.
‘Oh, no,’ replied the man, ‘I thought you said burglar.
I am very good at that.’
When the major objectives of the Palestine campaign had been achieved Morgan was transferred back to France to serve in the trenches as an expert on telephone communications.
Hundreds of miles of telephone cables were laid in France, sometimes by horses, sometimes by men and sometimes by dogs with small drums on their backs.
Lines were often cut by shell fire, and in repairing them it was not easy to know whether one was joining one's own line or one of the enemy's.
Morgan was the first to learn of the Armistice in the trenches, where he intercepted instructions from the German GHQ ordering the generals to lay down their arms.
After the war he returned to farm his estate in Wales.
In 1920 he joined the newly-formed Royal Signals (TA), and then transferred to the Supplementary Reserve in 1925.
During this period he was active in public service in Wales, and devoted himself to the development of scouting, and became a friend of Sir Robert Baden-Powell, the founder of the Boy Scout movement.
He was awarded the Order of the Silver Wolf for his services to scouting.
In 1939 Morgan went to France at OC2 Air Formation Signals and played a key role in organising telecommunications between the French and British forces: for this he was appointed CBE.
Just before leaving France in 1940 he had given a final dinner party at the Ritz in Paris to members of his unit, but had inadvertently left without paying the bill.
When dining there again in 1945, after the Liberation, he found the old bill laid respectfully beside the new bill by his plate, without comment.
After the fall of France he had become chief signals officer, Aldershot Command.
He was deputy chief signals officer, Western Command, from 1941 to 1942; and then CSO Air Formation Signals, Home Forces, in 1943.
Next Morgan was posted to the Middle East and from 1944 to 1945 was CSO, Air Formation Signals, Middle East.
During the period he had also taken part in the invasion of Italy.
He retired from the Army in 1948 and returned once more to his estate at Bishopton, where he devoted himself to farm improvements.
He became a county councillor, sat on the Gower Bench, served on innumerable committees (including the governing body of the Church of Wales) and was appointed a Deputy Lieutenant for Glamorgan in 1948.
A volume of his light verse, appropriately called Lines of Communication, was published on his 80th birthday.
At the age of 98 he contributed a preface to the biography of Col De Lancey Forth, of the Imperial Camel Corps.
Morgan was honorary Colonel of 50 and 80 Air Formation Signal Regiments from 1952 to 1960 and was awarded the ERD.
He was a tall, hawk-like figure, noted for certain eccentricities.
He had lost an eye as a child and wore an eyeglass in the remaining one.
He could eject this by jerking his head upwards, and then catch it again in the socket.
He said he found this a useful trick when addressing restive or sleepy audiences.
Perhaps the most remarkable feature of ‘Monocle’ Morgan was his adaptability.
Brought up at a time when military aircraft would have seemed a fantasy, he later became an expert on one of the most complicated of signal functions, air-land co-operation.
Yet he never forgot that when the Pembroke Yeomanry had been mustered in 1914 the occasion had all the marks of a medieval call to arms.
City: Paint protest
GREENPEACE members are being urged to write to chemicals manufacturer ICI, saying they will not buy Dulux paints until the group stops making chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs.
ICI has promised to stop CFC production by 1995.
Regional Railways: Sharing lines makes light of the future
By LYNNE EDMUNDS
REGIONAL RAILWAYS sees the spread of light rapid transit systems in our cities and suburbs as a development that can be harnessed to serve its interests — and not as a potential for poaching passengers.
Since it set up its own light rapid transit section three years ago, Regional Railways' active co-operation has helped the evolution of the Tyne and Wear project, the Manchester Metro and the South Yorkshire Supertram out of Sheffield.
It has handed over sections of line, even complete routes like the Tyneside loop serving Whitley Bay.
The sharing of part of its freight line corridor at Sheffield is a sign of things to come, since the running of light rapid transit vehicles along existing British Rail track, interspersed with its own services, is under investigation.
(It has been going on successfuly with Irish Rail and the Dublin Dart for years).
Light Rapid Transit Project team member Mark Haslam explains: ‘Our function is to take the corporate view — and present it to whoever is sponsoring individual light rail schemes.’
‘We are happy to support local schemes which won't worsen our mainstream business, and while hitherto we've waited for passenger executives or consortiums to come to us with a proposal, we might in the future consider taking more initiative.’
He points to the benefit of having the two major Manchester rail stations linked for the first time by the Manchester Metro, and explains how LRT systems, connecting outlying communities to the mainline service, can open up new passenger markets.
‘They can serve these routes because they can accommodate steeper gradients and sharper corners, for example, and can run through inner city areas where main lines would be too intrusive.’
Any decision over handing over a section of line, or even a route, to LRT is taken at the top by Regional Railways' managing director Gordon Pettitt.
The base line for agreement is that, at worst, the effect should be ‘cost neutral’ to Regional Railways…and preferably bring benefit.
On the latter basis, it agreed to the LRT acquisition of two lines covering several miles at Croydon, so acquiring a link between two stations on differing London lines — Wimbledon and West Croydon.
With its more participative stance it is identifying lines with potential for LRT co-operation — such as the stretch from Cardiff's suburban Queen Street station north to the heads of the Welsh Valleys.
It is likely in this kind of case that Regional Railways might seek a partnership operation with a local council or one of the passenger transport executives to establish a light rail line.
The operating agreement it has set up with the Manchester Metrolink — due to start running along several sections of former BR track today — could provide a good foundation.
In Manchester the handover has allowed it to offload heavy costs such as bridge maintenance, while in Sheffield the running of the tram system into British Midland's station has turned it into a major transport terminus, which includes buses.
Its signalling conversion work at Sheffield should be finished by Easter next year.
Another vital aspect of the work Regional Railways does on LRT systems concerns safety.
Whether handing over stretches, or allowing light railway lines to be built alongside BR lines, it insists on running special training programmes for the LRT workers to ensure their security on the track.
But the biggest jump of all will be seeking out existing Regional Railways' lines which can also accommodate LRT services.
British Rail's Special Projects team is assessing the advantage of this approach.
‘Until now, British Rail has, with the support of its Railways Executive, been adamantly against shared track,’ says Michael Taplin, chairman of the Light Rail Transit Association.
‘But this is now definitely on the horizon and there is a shift of operation coming up.’
In Nottingham the Hucknall and Robin Hood lines could be among the first to be ear-marked for sharing.
Regional Railways: Stop-go on the scenic route
By NICKY KIRKWOOD
THE BEST of Britain's outstanding scenery, from the wild Cornish coastline the Highland peaks, is waiting for travellers on Britain's Scenic Railways.
As part of its drive to put pleasure back into rail travel, Regional Railways is invoking lyricism, literature and local history to capture the scenic flavour of its Great Railway Journeys.
Routes it highlights include the Tarka line in Devon, the Settle-Carlisle and Fort William-Mallaig lines, and routes through Wales, the Lake District and East Anglia.
‘More and more people are looking to this kind of holiday — a bit of walking through spectacular landscapes, punctuated by train rides,’ says Mark Livock, product manager
‘We want them to feel they can join us, hop off for a bit, and re-join further down the line.’All-Line Rail Rover tickets which offer unlimited travel on British Rail for seven days are £210 (£340 first class).
Two weeks cost £340 (standard) or £525 (first class).
For those who don't wish to travel for a complete week or fortnight, there are a range of cheaper Flexi Rovers which allow you to choose which days you travel.
Eight key routes form the principal targets of the Scenic Railways promotion.
Furthest north is the spectacular three-hour journey crossing Scotland from the North Sea to the Atlantic coast on the Inverness to Kyle of Lochalsh line.
A North Highland seven-day Rover costs £39.
For the same price the 164-miles West Highland line threads its way from the heart of Glasgow past Loch Lomond to the pretty fishing port of Mallaig.
Crossing desolate Rannoch Moor and glimpsing Ben Nevis, it is arguably the most beautiful in Britain.
Other scenic areas include Wales, the South West, the Borders, Settle-to-Carlisle, the Heart of England, East Anglia, and the Peak district.
Prices quoted are valid from May 10 1992.
Full details of all Rail Rover tickets are available from main BR stations (or telephone 081 200 0200 for a copy).
Regional Railways: Decade to be spent making the right signals
By QUENTIN COWDRY
THE coming of age of Regional Railways as a fully-fledged business within British Rail is expected to trigger investment in signalling equipment over the next decade.
Approval is being sought to install state-of-the-art electronic systems to control the busiest parts of the rail network outside London.
Regional Railways has only one Integrated Electronic Control Centre (IECC), at Yoker, near Glasgow.
By the year 2000 it hopes to have similar centres in its six other urban hubs — Edinburgh, Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, Birmingham and Cardiff.
The total cost would be around £300 million.
The new equipment is so advanced that, theoretically, a single IECC could handle BR's entire signalling requirements.
In practice such signalling boxes need to be much smaller to be safely operated.
The largest planned for Regional Railways would mastermind train movements on about 100 miles of track.
If ‘line crunching’ power is their chief advantage, the centres also offer benefits in ease of use.
In a typical electrically-operated signal box of the kind the IECCs will replace, staff track the progress of trains on solid panels up to 90 feet long.
In the electronic boxes, trains are monitored on personal computers which can call up any section of track in seconds.
On the rural services there will be extended use of radio signalling to replace ageing mechanically-operated boxes.
Such systems, which are relatively cheap, have already been installed in the remoter parts of Scotland, Wales and East Anglia.
Expansion of radio-based signalling will lead to a further cut in technical staff on the rural lines, but this is not expected to cause great discontent.
BR has had difficulty filling vacancies for signalling staff in the wilder outposts of its empire.
The position is less clear in the case of the 3,000 miles of inter-urban routes, which account for 60 per cent of Regional Railways' track.
Signalling needs to be upgraded to increase service reliability and overall efficiency, but engineers are undecided about the solution.
‘The problem is that neither of the two new systems being applied to our urban and rural services is suitable in the case of these long lengths of medium-use track,’ says David Wilkinson, Regional Railways' signalling and telecommunications engineer.
‘The lack of an off-the-peg solution means there is going to have to be an intensive research effort over the next few years involving us, the Railway Technical Centre at Derby and the railway supply industry.’
His staff are also involved in trying to find a solution to leaves on lines, BR's perennial embarrassment.
In certain weather conditions, heavy falls of vegetation can create a thick mulch over lines which reduce the effectiveness of trains' brakes and disrupt signalling.
One outcome of the review now under way is likely to be an increase in trackside maintenance to keep embankments free of overhanging trees and thick undergrowth.
But engineers think that the kind of lightweight rolling stock increasingly used on the network will remain vulnerable to autumn leaves.
The need to maintain and, if possible, improve passenger safety is the dominant priority of the organisation's signalling and telecommunications division.
Wilkinson, however, says the margins for safety improvement are small.
He says: ‘What we're talking about are refinements — fine-tuning.
I'm not sure the safety advances we have seen recently can be compared to the quantum improvements that came, say, when continuous brakes were first built into trains or when inter-locking signals and points were first introduced.’
Business Technology: Driving cards
THE Isle of Man has become the first British authority to issue plastic identity card driving licences with tamper-proof colour photographs, using a £30,000 digital imaging system developed by Hitachi and NBS Card Systems of Weybridge, Surrey.
Business Technology: Free directory
A NEW directory of scientific research projects at Oxford University is available free for companies looking for opportunities to collaborate with academics or transfer their technology to the marketplace.
It was compiled by the university's research support and industrial liaison office and describes projects in about 50 departments.
Making a stand for real motives behind the call for change
By MICHAEL PARKINSON
IT IS a clear sign that an elec tion is getting tight when politicians start taking sport seriously.
Both main parties have now declared that they would review the recommendations in the Taylor Report that soccer grounds become all seated.
Mr Hattersley said that the next Labour Sports Minister would review the matter urgently.
He added that the Minister might be a woman.
Soccer fans wouldn't mind if the job was given to a hermaphrodite, provided it had a place in the Cabinet, an important voice in decision-taking and an avowed policy to improve sport in Britain, not just soccer but across the board.
What we will end up with, no matter who wins, is a Minister for Sport who sits some distance from the corridors of power, who will likely be attached to some other ministry like Agriculture and Fisheries (file ‘Sport’ under ‘Codswallop’) and who will spend a parliamentary career powerless, penniless and potless.
Am I being unduly cynical?
Not a bit of it.
I am merely reporting on the fate to have befallen every other Minister for Sport you can care to mention which is one of the reasons why we are still debating the kind of football stadiums we should have for the future when every other country besides Botswana and the Cocos Islands have already built theirs.
The present concern for sport as polling day approaches is typical of how politicians are adept at using the subject for short-term gain while ignoring its long-term problems.
For instance, it would be wrong to reconsider the Taylor Report because some fans say they prefer to stand at football matches and there is a likelihood that less wealthy clubs will be forced out of business.
We should never forget why Lord Taylor was called upon to make his report.
I had thought that the ghastly images of that awful day had been burned forever in the minds of anyone who saw them.
Apparently not.
Sadly, because the people who run soccer are incapable of seeing further than the next television contract, the real purpose of the Taylor Report is reduced to an argument about whether or not spectators should stand or be seated.
WHAT the Taylor Report offered was a chance for everyone concerned in soccer — officials, players, spectators, politicians even — to sit down and create a blueprint for the game for the next 100 years.
Anyone who comes to that debate mithering about standing up instead of sitting down or worried about the fate of Aldershot Football Club should be excluded on the grounds that he has not yet understood the difference between the future and tomorrow.
I am allowed a say on this question of standing up at football matches because I first planted my feet on the terraces at Barnsley when I was five and spent the next 15 years or more rooted to the spot.
My position changed according to my rate of growth.
For the first few years I rested my chin on the concrete wall separating the spectators from the players and saw many wondrous things.
We had a centre-half called Kitchen who specialised in sliding tackles designed to take the winger and the ball into touch.
They were spectacular efforts often launched some distance from the target, who would be dillying and dallying with his foot on the ball when, suddenly and without warning, he would end up in a twisted heap at the bottom of our wall amid a terrible noise of stud on bone.
Kitchen rarely missed.
He was like a heat-seeking missile.
Once locked on to his subject, they were doomed.
There were those who swore that Kitchen had so perfected his technique that midway through his sliding tackle he could swerve around obstacles, like team-mates, who got in the way.
I can't confirm that but I do remember the one occasion that he missed his target.
The winger jumped at the last minute and Kitchen slid underneath him like a runaway bull and hit the concrete wall full on.
The damage was considerable, with concrete chips flying in all directions.
The result was so spectacular that those of us in the front line who were showered with debris turned up at future games wearing motorbike goggles to protect our eyes and in honour of our hero.
What visiting wingers who had to patrol our touchline made of us, I don't know.
Not that they expected anything other than a hard time when they visited Barnsley.
One of Mr Kitchen's victims was stretched on the turf awaiting urgent medical attention when he heard one of the Barnsley supporters shout at the trainer: ‘Don't revive him.
Bury the sod.’
Similarly, the chorus from the terraces whenever a member of the opposition was hit in the unmentionables and was being approached by the trainer with magic sponge and slopping bucket, was: ‘Nay lad, don't wash ‘em.
Count ‘em.’
In those days trainers looked like window cleaners and the likelihood was that when they weren't looking after players on a Saturday afternoon, they might well shine windows for a living.
Similarly, the winger you cheered so lustily on Saturday afternoon might well be working alongside you down the pit on Monday morning.
If you waited long enough after a game at Oakwell, you could travel home on the same bus as your hero.
In those days there was a proximity between fans and players, a relationship betwixt the community and the club.
All that changed, as inevitably it had to, but it was lovely and warm and fulfilling while it lasted.
Those were the days before the songs of support and the concerted chanting.
This was the time when the lone and often despairing voice of dissent was heard from the terraces.
Brentford were playing at Barnsley one day and had in their ranks a full-back called Gorman.
He was a good player but bald as a coot.
It was a sunny day and Gorman's head was glistening in the sun.
He went to head a ball and it slid from his pate for a throw-in.
‘Tha’ wants to put some bloody chalk on it Gorman,’said a man standing near to us.
ALF RAMSEY, already an England player and calm as a judge, came to Barnsley with an unsullied reputation.
Johnny Kelly turned him inside out, dizzied him, nutmegged him, played with him like a yo-yo and when Ramsey finally collapsed in the mud as Kelly cut inside him, a voice on the terraces said: ‘Ramsey, tha'rt about as much use as a chocolate teapot.’
Those were the days when fans of both teams were allowed to stand together and there was intelligent competition for the observation of the day.
The standard was high and excluded foul language.
My all-time favourite remark was made by a visiting Chesterfield supporter who watched silently as his team prepared to take a penalty in the dying seconds of a game at Barnsley which would have given them the draw.
In those days, games between Chesterfield and Barnsley were always keenly fought when Chesterfield had defenders like Ray Middleton in goal, Kidd and Milburn, as formidable and frightening a pair of full-backs as ever kicked a winger, and forwards of the quality and class of Linacre and Capel.
Capel was the captain on this day and he ordered up his brother to take the important penalty kick.
The unfortunate Capel Junior made a terrible hash of things and belted the ball yards over the bar.
As the ball disappeared into the Kop the Chesterfield fan said, to no-one in particular: ‘Nepotism.
Bloody nepotism’.
It was greeted in silence because no-one understood what he had said.
It was only when I got home and looked up the dictionary that I realised what a gem it had been.
But all that changed long ago and it's no good yearning for what's disappeared.
Lord Taylor wasn't required to change the game I grew up with.
He had to deal with what it had become; out of date, out of touch and dangerous.
The next step is the most important that the game has taken since the formation of the present League system.
The most difficult job will be to rehouse and reshape soccer while remembering just who it really belongs to.
We, who grew up on the terraces, had it by right.
The big question is — can it be given back by design?