

Writer Isaac Asimov dies aged 72
By Hugh Davies in New York
ISAAC ASIMOV, the writer who believed science fiction frequently preceded reality, died in New York yesterday of heart and kidney failure.
He was 72.
Noted for his prolific output — 10 books a year was normal — he published nearly 500 titles.
His last novel, Forward the Foundation, was completed two months ago.
Born in Petrovichi, Russia, he migrated to the United States with his parents at the age of three.
A biochemist by training, he began writing while at Columbia University.
Over the years, he wrote a two-volume guide to Shakespeare, an annotated Paradise Lost, a book on Don Juan, a volume of lecherous limericks and the 1971 tome The Sensuous Dirty Old Man.
Writing, he said, was a pleasure; 4,000 words was a normal day's work.
Asked once what he would do if he knew he had six months to live, he replied: ‘I'd type faster.’
He cheered himself with the thought that there was not ‘an idea I've ever had that I haven't put down on paper.’
Beatle gives the guru party rock solid support
By Jenny Rees
GEORGE Harrison gave his first full-length concert in this country last night since the Beatles last performed together in 1969.
Before an audience of 5,000 at the Royal Albert Hall, Harrison performed songs he had written over the past 25 years, and some Beatles classics.
The evening was billed as an ‘Inspiration to the Youth of Great Britain’.
It was also the start of three nights of concerts to celebrate the formation of the Natural Law Party, which is an offspring of the worldwide movement founded by the transcendental meditation guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, from whom the Beatles received instruction in India in 1968.
The party has 310 candidates standing in the general election and aims to ‘create a disease-free, crime-free, pollution-free society — Heaven on Earth’.
A spokesman for the party, based at Mentmore Towers, Beds, said that when full-page advertisements were placed in national newspapers last month announcing its formation, Harrison had called to offer his support.
On stage with Harrison, 49, were a group of musician friends, mainly from Eric Clapton's band, whom he had asked to play for him.
The set was opened by the American guitarist, Joe Walsh.
Harrison and his friends gave a rousing version of his Beatles composition, Taxman, in which the names of former prime ministers Mr Heath and Mr Wilson were replaced by those of Mr Major and Mr Kinnock.
Ringo Starr played drums in the two-song encore.
Tickets for the concert, priced between £15 and £20, were sold out within days of being made available last Thursday.
But a spokesman for Harrison said that after overheads there was unlikely to be any money left for the party.
Harrison last performed with the Beatles in 1969 on the roof of the Apple Records building in central London.
Two years later the group officially broke up.
His only other live appearance in this country was with Starr at a Prince's Trust concert in 1987.
Harrison, who is to vote for the Natural Law candidate in Henley-on-Thames, said: ‘I know some of the people from the party and they are nice.
‘I know what their intentions are, which are to enhance the individual's life so that collectively we are all enhanced — to try to do stuff out of the mould of the old politics, which the three main parties are dealing with.
‘We've got left, right and centre, but they are all the same.
They're like the arms of the same monster.’
The Natural Law Party, said Harrison, offered the only option to create the ‘beautiful nation we would all like to have’.
Ringo on the road again
By JAMES DELINGPOLE
RINGO Starr is going back on the road, but unlike his fellow former Beatle, George Harrison, his performances will have nothing to do with Transcendental Meditation, writes James Delingpole, Arts Correspondent.
While Harrison prepared yesterday to play a benefit concert at the Royal Albert Hall for the Natural Law Party, 51-year-old Starr said he was playing a series of dates in Europe in July for rather different reasons.
‘I started out with a dream when I was 13 to be a musician…
I forgot that for a while during the '80s but I'm back now,’ Starr said.
Having spent the last decade appearing in television mini-series and narrating Thomas the Tank Engine, Starr has rediscovered his musical roots.
He opens the tour in Sweden promoting Time Takes Time, his new album.
The Arts: Decoding post-Babel babble
By LEWIS JONES
‘AND the whole earth was of one language, and one speech.’
Before Babel (for BBC2's Horizon) had a brilliantly effective opening, giving us those familiar words first in Amharic, intoned by a splendidly arrayed Ethiopian, before supplying the English in voice-over.
As the lesson continued (’ And they said: ‘Go to, let us build a city and a tower whose top may reach unto heaven’’), the results of our expulsion from that linguistic Eden were wittily demonstrated.
Each verse was given an increasing number of translations, all in voice-over, and soon a babble arose, noisome to the ears, and a great confusion was made.
Having established the imaginative truth of the Babel story, the film set out to chart our path into the current maze of some 5,000 languages — and back again.
Modern linguistic genealogy began in the 18th century, with Sir William Jones's comparative studies of Sanskrit, Greek and Latin, which revealed the Indo-European family of languages.
More recently, Russian philologists have proposed a super-family of languages, bigger than Indo-European and deriving from a proto-language (Nostratic) twice as old.
The next step is to posit from a core vocabulary — words for water, milk, parts of the body and so on— the common language of Homo sapiens some 10,000 to 15,000 years ago.
While the lovely voice of Juliet Stevenson uttered sounds like ‘Eurgah!’ in tones of ecstatic nostalgia, the film illustrated the point with scenes in sepia slow-mo of hunter-gatherers stalking antelope.
More orthodox scholars are inclined to scoff at such theories.
But the avant-garde has found support for its imaginative approach from such sciences as biology.
The Basque language of Euskara, for example, has no known family; and DNA tests have confirmed that the Basques are genetically isolated as well .
The film took a firm course through its vast subject, avoiding the rocks of donnish rancour.
In passing it gave much diverting information.
Recent American studies, for example, show that the evolution of vowel sounds is effectively directed by the central figures in any given speech community.
This brought to mind Mr Major's curious pronunciation of such words as ‘want’ and the way in which the politicians around him have taken to saying wunt.
Will it catch on, I wunder?
The Arts: Who's in the class of 2001?
There's a wealth of directorial talent waiting in the wings of British theatre.
Here Robert Gore-Langton assesses the field and picks next century's big names
By ROBERT GORE-LANGton
BEING young and talented in the theatre is old hat.
Peter Hall and Trevor Nunn made their reputations within a few years of leaving Cambridge.
The glam young directors who surfaced in the 1980s are already part of the scenery.
Nicholas Hytner is booked up years ahead on both opera and theatre.
Deborah Warner has become a cult figure for stark and emotive work.
And Kenneth Branagh is careering towards an early knighthood.
Who, though, are the hot twentysomethings set to make the running in the British theatre in the next century?
Certainly there is no lack of talent, though any relish for structured theatre careers seems to have vanished.
Hytner, Warner and Branagh have declared themselves uninterested in the executive hassle of running our large subsidised companies.
The same holds true of the new wave of talent highlighted here, though one or two are committed to working with building-based companies.
Freelancing is now the name of the game.
Indeed, most young directors fantasise about being Peter Brook, working unhindered on weird projects with endless rehearsal time.
There is an ascetic streak, too.
The idea of ‘showbiz’ or making money is regarded as a vulgar distraction (most do not have families yet).
All of them, however, speak of their work with a sincere and passionate commitment.
It is also encouraging that my list could have been longer.
Dominic Dromgoole, of the excellent Bush Theatre; Julia Bardsley, co-director of the Leicester Haymarket, and Phyllida Lloyd, whose superb production of The Virtuoso at Stratford has just come to the Barbican, are just a few of the other names I could have included.
But here are my chosen few.
The Arts: ANNABEL ARDEN
AS A small girl Arden saw A Flea in Her Ear and knew she had to go into the theatre.
Aged 32, she is a performer/director and a founder member of the weird and wonderful Theatre de Complicite.
She went to Cambridge and loathed it.
Having cut her teeth touring with a socialist theatre collective, her formal training has been by a battery of French mime gurus.
Her best show for Complicite, a nightmarish version of Durrenmatt's The Visit, was snapped up by the National Theatre.
Her latest production is an equally energetic staging of The Winter's Tale at the Lyric, Hammersmith.
‘I'm interested in being part of a subversive band of people who live or die by what they put up in front of an audience.
I get so disappointed when I see work that is not personal to the people involved.
My whole raison d'etre of this job is to assemble the most fabulous team.’
She believes many English actors lack the performance skills that give Complicite its continental flavour.
‘I do get depressed when I think about a career based in England.
For me the European theatre is where it's at — a physical art rooted in the circus.’
The Arts: STEPHEN DALDRY
AT 30, Daldry is widely considered to be an inspired choice as the artistic director-designate of the Royal Court, London's embattled home of new writing.
After a rural upbringing and Sheffield University, he turned down many freelance jobs to run the minuscule Gate pub theatre, putting on the kind of rare European plays that critics adore.
Actor Brian Cox calls him ‘an entrepreneurial maverick’.
He is an unpredictable, politicised and highly imaginative director, as seen in Damned for Despair, his lethally good revival of a forgotten Spanish classic.
‘I'm certainly not a natural freelancer.
I will always want to work with companies and I actually enjoy being based in buildings.
The Gate was wonderful, if surreal.
My ambition for the Royal Court is simply to create the most exciting theatre in London.
My tastes are catholic: it will be a broad church.’
Will he be conscious of the building's associations and traditions?
‘No, I'm avoiding all that.
For me it's Pol Pot time: year dot.
We're starting anew!’
The Arts: TIM SUPPLE
SUPPLE leapt to prominence with a hilarious Accidental Death of an Anarchist at the National Theatre.
Aged 29, he is the son of academics, educated at Cambridge.
His laddish image led one colleague to describe him as the Nigel Kennedy of the National.
Kenneth Branagh hired him to direct his Coriolanus at Chichester this summer after seeing his Billy Budd in Sheffield.
John Sessions says he is ‘the sort of director in whose judgment you have an instant and absolute faith’.
Supple's best work is wonderfully exuberant.
Having worked in a regional rep, would he ever want to run one?
‘Never!
Not out of contempt, but because under the present circumstances, they're a killer — people emerge exhausted; you can't get artistic satisfaction.
My ambitions are really just for quality.
Ken Branagh is a fascinating man and he has an amazing sense of duty to other people, but I just don't have his kind of energy.
My ideal is just to do one or two things a year with great care and probably as a freelance.
Earning money is becoming a priority I'm trying to sit on — I could do with one big hit, though!’
The Arts: KATIE MITCHELL
WIDELY tipped as a promising talent.
Mitchell, now 27, was president of OUDS at Oxford.
She became noted for her work on the Fringe and is now at the RSC with a fine version of A Woman Killed with Kindness.
She has been influenced by her travels in Eastern Europe — most of her shows include weird bits of folk ritual.
She founded Classics on a Shoestring in the late Eighties, an excellent, unfunded, unpaid company.
She has yet to prove herself on a large stage.
‘I don't care where it's done — for me the play is the thing,’ she says.
‘Watching actors work as an assistant director has been helpful, as was my experience in Eastern Europe.
The idea with Classics on a Shoestring was to achieve maximum working flexibility.’
She sets much store by making classical theatre relevant.
‘Women of Troy at the Gate Theatre was done as a response to the crisis in the Middle East.
As I say, for me the important thing is the play, not any feminist axe-grinding.
I've really no ambitions except to make good theatre.’
The Arts: SAM MENDES
ONCE described by Judi Dench as ‘disgustingly talented’, he has been entrusted — aged 28 — with running the revamped Donmar Warehouse, opening as a fully commercial West End venture in the autumn.
He gained a First in English at Cambridge and was a cricket blue.
Mendes rescued a Chichester revival of London Assurance at short notice and turned it into a hit.
His Kean at the Old Vic was very bankable.
But his best work so far was arguably at Stratford, where he staged an outstanding Troilus and Cressida and a fine Alchemist.
His great knack is to mix intellectual clarity with enjoyable accessibility.
‘My ambition at the Warehouse is to build up an audience and exercise my own tastes.
The theatre as a whole is I think becoming less abstemious, more expressionistic and romantic in style.’
But does he see himself as becoming part of the theatrical establishment in his middle-age?
‘I haven't the faintest idea!
The shoes of Nunn and Hall will never be filled again.
The age of those mighty, entrepreneurial artistic directors has probably come to an end.
Besides, when you see what those jobs do to people's private lives you have major doubts.
‘My immediate future will all depend on the Warehouse breaking even.’
The Arts: Change of step
By KATHRINE SORLEY WALKER
A SMOOTH and sensible transition from classical ballet to modern dance has been made by Mikhail Baryshnikov, who has arrived with his small, recently-formed group, White Oak Dance Project (White Oak Plantation is in Florida), at Sadler's Wells.
Always a favourite in London, the Russian star who opted for the West in 1974 is now in his mid-forties — absolutely the right time to change over to a repertoire well within his present compass.
The new Baryshnikov still dances — yes, with immaculate grace and fine co-ordination — but instead of launching into bravura virtuoso variations he applies his artistry to less spectacular works, modestly remaining very much one of a good professional team.
The programme comprised assorted pieces that were often amusing and novel but generally short and slight.
Only one, a revival of Martha Graham's powerful 1940 creation El Penitente, had any true substance.
Couched in stylised formality, it is a religious mystery play from south-west America, presented by three characters, the Christ Figure, the Virgin (doubling as Mary Magdalen) and the Penitent (Baryshnikov's role).
More scope for personal interpretation came with the Mark Morris solo Ten Suggestions.
Set to Tcherepnin's Bagatelles, it was an adult equivalent of items seen at dancing-school shows.
Baryshnikov, in pink pyjamas, danced with a hoop, a length of ribbon, a hat and a chair, compensating for the inevitable choreographic cliches by a highly polished performance.
A primly sober pas de deux for two men (Baryshnikov and John Gardner), the Duet from Concerto Six Twenty-Two by Lar Lubovitch, looked uneasy and undeveloped out of its context in a longer suite.
Mark Morris's Canonic 3/4 Studies however, a lively ensemble work, was full of tongue-in-cheek wit with plenty of jokes that depended on clever timing or neat contrasts between popular romantic music and unexpectedly awkward steps.
The most wildly eccentric offering of the evening was Nocturne, a solo choreographed by Martha Clarke, in which Carol Parker depicted a disabled sylphide whose pathetically spasmodic and halting movements were incongruously linked to one of Mendelssohn's Songs Without Words.
Peterborough:
THE playwright Alan Bennett can be strangely shy.
Or so I heard the other day over lunch from Patricia Routledge, best known as television's appalling social climber, Hyacinth Bucket.
The bouncy Miss Routledge, whose run in Bennett's Talking Heads has just come to a close, explained: ‘Alan just selects someone, writes the piece and posts it through the letterbox.
The first I heard of my part in Talking Heads was when the script was pushed through my letterbox.
I just told him I wished he'd ring the bell next time.’
Peterborough: Giving a XXXX for the Tories
THE MAN who masterminded those famously spunky advertisements for Castlemaine XXXX lager has emerged as the Tory Party's last minute secret weapon.
James Lowther, creative director and deputy chairman at Saatchi and Saatchi, was quietly drafted in by Conservative Central Office over the weekend to spice up the closing stages of John Major's campaign.
‘They needed some extra input,’ says the soft-spoken Lowther.
‘Things are obviously becoming very busy and I went in over the weekend to do a bit of work.
I can't really go into details I'm afraid, but, yes, it's for the final push.’
Conservative Central Office is coy about his involvement, still maintaining that Major writes his own speeches.
But it admits that there are ‘ideas men’ on board.
Lowther, who regularly pops up at advertising awards ceremonies and is more at home in the pony-tailed world of agency ‘creatives’ than nervy politicians, penned the Tories' election broadcast on defence.
He says, loyally, that the Tories' campaign has been ‘easily as good as Labour's’.
Advertising rivals hold Lowther in high regard.
‘He's an unusual beast,’ says Paul Bainsfair, a former colleague.
‘As a youngster he was sent out to Australia to work as a jackaroo on a sheep station.
‘He once did a trial Castlemaine ad — a group of Australians standing at a bar, all one-legged after crossing an alligator-infested river to get there.
The client said it was disgracefully tasteless.
It transpired that his mother only had one leg.’
And Lowther's politics?
‘He's fascinated by getting the message across.
But it looks like a further sign of the Tories’ concern that they're drafting him in.’
Whatever happens on Thursday, Lowther has a bolthole to escape from the electioneering.
He owns Holdenby House, Northants, once the largest house in England.
There he conducts old English games such as‘dwyle flunking’, a blindfolded chase with mops dunked in beer.
Not so different from party politics, really.
Sixth Column: Darlings, it's time to decide
By OLIVER PRITCHETT
ATTENTIVE READERS of this column will know already that I am one of this country's leading authorities on ‘celebrology’— this is the study of the role of the celebrity in general elections.
It is now clear that celebrology is going to play an increasingly important part in what remains of this campaign.
Fascinating data could be found in yesterday's reports of showbiz personalities, glitterati, sports stars, writers and miscellaneously famous people lining up and simpering in support of either Mr Kinnock or Mr Major at the weekend.
My computer is still analysing the guest lists to determine whether a Sir Denis Compton for the Tories cancels out a Melvyn Bragg for Labour.
Now the celebrologist is faced with another question.
Anxious readers of the Daily Telegraph have been writing to me in their thousands to ask: what happens to these celebrities in the event of a hung parliament?
It is certainly true that if neither of the main parties emerges with an overall majority after Thursday there will have to be some intense horsetrading.
Both parties would be under pressure to drop some of their most cherished celebrities.
The Tories would not be allowed to keep Jeffrey Archer and Labour could be forced to distance itself from Ben Elton, who is known to frighten off some middle-of-the-road autograph hunters.
Let us consider the possible scenarios.
If Mr Kinnock found himself head of a minority government and decided to ‘soldier on’ he might find that Sir Richard Attenborough, that grand old trouper in ‘Luvvies for Labour’, could turn out to be an embarrassment.
Though Sir Richard has controlled public displays of emotion lately, he might suddenly burst into tears on the steps of 10 Downing Street and cause a run on the pound.
A Labour government would be wise to send him off to make a very long film in India.
Similarly, a Tory government would not be helped if Patrick Moore, the astronomer, kept popping into Number 10 for a nightcap.
That monocle would be no good for the classless image.
Mr Moore might have to be sent into space as part of the new government's ‘Celebrities in Orbit’ programme.
While considering these scenarios we must forget the constitutional role of the monarchy.
On Friday, after an inconclusive result, the Queen would have to consult her advisers and then send for someone to invite them to top the bill at the Royal Variety Performance.
For Labour it might be Lady Antonia Pinter singing the poems of Roger McGough while accompanied by Larry Adler on the harmonica.
For the Conservatives it would probably be the Rolling Stone, Bill Wyman, singing medleys from Andrew Lloyd Webber.
Of course it is possible that neither of these political showbiz programmes would actually survive even until the interval.
It might be necessary to do a deal with the Liberal Democrats to bring in a ‘variety show of all the talents’.
The Liberal Democrats would obviously demand some good ‘spots’ in such a show.
Their one celebrity is Paddy Ashdown.
I am told he has been preparing some appropriate acts.
There is a display of juggling; there is Paddy, the Caring Ventriloquist (’ He lets the dummy have a say’) and there is one big Paddy Ashdown song to close the show —‘Do It My Way’.
Obituary of Isaac Asimov
ISAAC ASIMOV, who has died in New York aged 72, was best known for his works of science fiction, a genre in which he reigned supreme, but he could also claim to have written more books about more subjects than any other author.
Of his 467 works, many were non-fiction.
They included a two-volume guide to Shakespeare's plays, an investigation into the authorship of the Book of Genesis, a commentary on the poems of Kipling and Byron, a biographical encyclopaedia of all the scientists who have ever lived, musings on music and humour and a series of informative books with titles beginning How Did We Find Out About…? on subjects ranging from black holes and life in the deep sea to number theory.
‘I write as a result of some inner compulsion,’ he once remarked, ‘and I'm not always in control of it.’
A bearish, messianic figure with mutton-chop whiskers, frequently clad in cowboy boots and ‘bolo’ tie, Asimov was stoically resigned to his own eccentricity.
He liked to attribute his success to a ‘lucky break in the genetic-sweepstakes’.
Asked if he had been a child prodigy, he would answer: ‘Yes I was — and I still am.’
Isaac Asimov was born at Petrovichi, Russia, on Jan 2 1920, the son of a rabbi who took brought him to America at the age of three.
The family ran a candy store in Brooklyn, where little Isaac had access to the science-fiction magazines which proliferated in the 1920s.
Asimov taught himself to read English at five, and began writing soon afterwards.
His first short story, Marooned off Vesta, was published when he was 18, and his next work, Nightfall, appeared three years later.
As a student at Columbia University, New York — where he took a degree and a doctorate — and subsequently as a teacher of biochemistry at Boston University, he continued to write in his spare time.
By the mid-1950s his growing reputation enabled him to concentrate on a literary career.
For the next 35 years, almost without a break, Asimov produced 90 words a minute, eight hours a day, seven days a week, first on a typewriter and later on a word processor, and he invariably wrote three books at once.
His only respite was in travel.
Curiously, for a man who wrote so much about spaceships, he detested flying, and went everywhere on cruise liners, usually paying his way by giving popular science lectures to the passengers.
A master of spontaneous oratory, Asimov could hold forth on almost any subject with brilliant lucidity — as in his much-cited off-the-cuff description of how human life depends on the Sun: ‘All of us are living in the light and warmth of a huge hydrogen bomb, 860,000 miles across and 93 million miles away, which is in a state of continuous explosion.’
His most celebrated science fiction work was The Foundation Trilogy, published in instalments in the early 1950s.
It sold millions of copies and in 1966 won a special Hugo Award as the best science-fiction series ever.
Set far in the future, it told of the fall of a mighty Galactic Empire, and of the efforts of Hari Seldon, a great social scientist, to build a new and better empire out of the ruins of the old.
Few novelists have created a character as cunningly idealistic as Seldon, who used the science of ‘psychohistory’, a combination of history, mathematics, sociology and psychology, to predict and control the future.
Although the hero met his death within the first 30 pages of the trilogy, the vast and mysterious intricacies of his ‘Seldon Plan’ still amazed the reader after 700.
Just before his own death Asimov completed Forward the Foundation, a new novel about Seldon's last years.
In spite of his success, Asimov steered clear of literary pomposity.
When asked about the ‘meaning’ of his Foundation cycle, he was apt to burst into a song which he had adapted from the Gilbert and Sullivan opera, Patience: ‘Success is not a mystery, just brush up on your history, and borrow day by day/ Take an Empire that was Roman, and you'll find it is at home in/ All the starry Milky Way.’
Asimov advised aspiring writers to take their models from history and the classics.
Too much invention, he argued, resulted in gratuituously enigmatic plots.
In one short story, In a Good Cause (1951), he explored the idea that political strength could lie not in unity but in disunity.
The plot centred on mankind's confrontation with a Galactic enemy called the Diaboli.
While the enemy were creatures of absolute mental conformity, the human protagonists were in perpetual conflict.
When it came to war the humans won overwhelmingly — because their internal fights had given them plenty of military experience, while their enemies, although more formidable on paper, had had none.
Asimov took the idea from the tales of the feuding Greeks' victories over the united Persians who so vastly outnumbered them.
Yet for all his protestations at being a plain old wordsmith, and a plagiarist at that, Asimov displayed one of the most dynamic imaginations in the sci-fi business.
Long before the advent of robots and personal computers, he invented a race of super-intelligent robots.
Many of these machines were indistinguishable in appearance from human beings, but not all — one of his stories described a race of intelligent motor-cars which, once parked for the night, would zoom away to sex orgies.
Besides the Foundation stories, Asimov's best known book was probably his second, I, Robot (1950), in which he promulgated three unalterable ‘Laws of Robotics’— first, that a robot may not harm a human being, or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm; secondly, that a robot must obey the orders of a human being, except when this would conflict with the first law; and thirdly, that a robot must protect itself, except when this would conflict with the first and second laws.
Asimov's kindly robots succeeded in transforming the image of the conscienceless marauders which had long dominated the pages of pulp sci-fi.
Robots and the Galactic Empire remained the pivotal themes of Asimov's novels.
Taken together, they offered a picture of humanity in millennia to come — spread across the galaxy, with Earth but a distant memory — yet still in thrall to its sublunary nature.
Asimov also thought deeply about time.
One of his most striking novels was The End of Eternity (1955), about how time travel could threaten freedom.
In a classic portrait of a ‘nanny state’, a group of initially well-meaning bureaucrats has the task of manipulating ‘Eternity’ to maximise human happiness.
But because this ruled out all danger or adventure, Eternity became destructive to the spirit, and the bureaucrats had themselves to be destroyed.
This plot gave expression to one of Asimov's pet hates, ‘pseudo-science’, which he saw as a threat to liberty.
‘Some people,’ he said, ‘say they have ‘absolute proof’that alien beings have landed on Earth.
I've never found a way to convince them otherwise…
It turns out they read it in sensational newspapers at the supermarket checkout counter.’
One of the hallmarks of Asimov's fiction was that its science, though sometimes mindboggling, was nonetheless convincing.
Indeed, as a leading member of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal, he conceived it his duty to draw attention to any person or event which might bring science into disrepute.
Most notably, he co-wrote a scathing attack on the gullibility of the Reagans, after it was learned that the First Lady consulted an astrologer.
Asimov's extraordinary output of 10 books a year did not let up, even after he suffered a heart attack in 1977 and triple bypass surgery two years later.
But the operation marked a turning-point.
Formerly he had been prone to pessimism, full of gloomy prognoses about over-population and wars, which would prevent mankind from ever fulfilling its dream of colonising other planets.
After the surgery, told to lose 50 pounds, he duly transformed himself into a jogging optimist.
‘If I can pull myself up by my own bootstraps,’ he declared, ‘then so can the human race.’
In contrast to his fiction, Asimov took nine months to write his autobiography, which was considerably longer than War and Peace.
‘I wanted it to be unanalytical, without wisdom,’ he explained.
‘I wanted to show the reader what it was like to be me.
A genius, maybe, but also a schmuck.
It's a big effort for me to behave like other people.’
Asimov is survived by his second wife, Janet, and by two children from his first marriage.
Chess: Australian has Miles worried
By Malcolm Pein, Chess Correspondent
THE untitled Australian Ben Martin continues to lead England's grandmaster Tony Miles at the Netway Masters in Auckland, New Zealand.
Martin scored his fifth straight win to lead Miles by a full point after five of the scheduled eleven rounds of the 12-player all-play-all.
After four hours' play of the sixth round Martin showed the first sign of faltering as he slipped into a bad position against fellow Australian grandmaster Ian Rogers, who is in joint second place with Miles on 4/5 in third place.
Miles, who has already conceded half a point to Ian Rogers, had a lucky escape when he was held to a draw by the New Zealand champion Martin Dreyer.