

New twist in Baftagate drama
By Jane Thynne Media Correspondent
BAFTAGATE, the television's industry's most gripping drama, took a new turn yesterday when the four Bafta judges who complained about last month's award of a prize to ITV's Prime Suspect, demanded that Bafta produce the ballot slips.
Mr Alan Bleasdale, author of the Channel Four serial GBH, which the four jurors say should have won the best serial prize, joined the row, saying he wanted to share the award.
Miss Lynda La Plante, author of Prime Suspect, said she wanted another vote to be held if it emerged the initial ballot was unfair.
The four judges — Archie Tait, David Reid, Loius Marks, and Ross Devenish — said they had all voted for GBH, and the decision was ‘inexplicable’.
The judging panel had seven members.
After an internal investigation on Monday, the Bafta council rejected allegations of vote-rigging.
It said there had been seven votes cast and a clear majority for Prime Suspect.
There was no possibility of changing the voting procedure.
Last night the four jurors said: ‘We suggest the easiest way to resolve the matter is for each member of the jury to identify his own hand-written ballot paper.’
Mr Tony Byrne, Bafta's director, said yesterday the ballot papers had been routinely destroyed before the award ceremony.
Donovan waives £200,000 award to save The Face
By Colin Randall
JASON DONOVAN offered yesterday to waive 70 per cent of nearly £300,000 awarded to him in High Court libel damages and costs against The Face magazine.
The Australian singer's manager, Mr Ray East, said Donovan would accept payment of the remainder over 18 months in a gesture aimed at ensuring that the magazine did not go out of business.
Donovan was awarded £200,000 damages, plus costs.
These were estimated by Mr East at less than £100,000.
In addition, Wagaddon, publishers of the magazine, had its own legal bill, but this was said to be less than £35,000.
The singer, starring in the West End production of Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, sued the magazine for insinuating that he was homosexual, and a hypocrite for denying it.
Mr East said the singer would expect the Conde Naste publishing group, which has a 40 per cent stake in the magazine, to contribute to an agreed settlement.
Although he added that no formal response had been received to the offer, it appeared last night that The Face was hoping to negotiate a further reduction.
The magazine yesterday launched an appeal, which it called ‘Lemon Fund’ to raise money for an eventual settlement or to finance an appeal.
The name is a reference to Mr Donovan's evidence that he sometimes applied lemon juice to lighten his hair, although never bleach.
Mr East expressed surprise at the fund name and asked: ‘How do you think that makes Jason Donovan look?’
But he said later the singer was content to leave the public to form its own conclusions.
Punch's last laugh
By Jane Thynne, Media Correspondent
SMILING all the way to the grave, the last edition of Punch is published today.
Datelined Doomsday and with a cover photograph of Mr Punch walking into the sunset entitled The End, Punch's valedictory edition is replete with black humour.
‘Mr Punch.
1841 to 1992.
Not as alive as he used to be,’ runs the caption to one cartoon.
Mr David Thomas, the editor, claims that losing his job was a deliberate tax avoidance strategy.
‘It is in fact the first flowering of fiscal revolt against the high taxes of the 1990s.
‘Admit it — as scams go — this one is absolutely brilliant,’ he says.
Only United Newspapers, which announced the closure last month, does not attempt to raise a smile.
‘Punch is an institution,’ it says.
‘It is with sadness, but with realism, that it closes.’
Private Eye, Punch's chief persecutor, has taken out an advertisement in the final edition to woo potential readers.
The boy who made Peter Pan grow up Writer's son sees his dream come true
By Jenny Rees
THE PRINCESS of Wales took Prince William and Prince Harry to their first London movie premiere last night — but their awfully big adventure was eclipsed by the thrill for one other boy in the packed audience.
He was Jacob Hart, 12, who was responsible for Hook, Stephen Spielberg's £65 million modern Peter Pan story, being written in the first place.
His father Jim, wrote the script after Jacob, then aged six, asked him the question: ‘Dad, did Peter Pan ever grow up?’
Mr Hart, 45, has been a screenwriter for 10 years, but Hook is his first major film.
He is in London with Jacob, his wife Judy and daughter Julia, 10, and before they set off for the Odeon, Leicester Square, last night, he said: ‘None of us would be here today without Jake's idea.’
He explained: ‘He's been talking about Peter Pan since he was three years old.
He drew one of those pictures that only parents can appreciate.
There were a lot of dots and squiggles and he said that it was a picture of the crocodile eating Captain Hook.
‘But Jake then said that Captain Hook got away.
And for the first time I began to think of rewriting Peter Pan in a fresh and different way.
‘If Captain Hook were alive and well — he would be available for vengeance.’
For the next three years, Mr Hart searched for his story which has now reached the screen with Robin Williams and Dustin Hoffman.
In 1986, the Hart family sat round a table playing a game of ‘What if…?’
Mr Hart said: ‘It's a game we play to help me get ideas to help pay the rent.
Jake asked me if Peter Pan ever grew up.
I told him that, of course, he didn't, Peter Pan never grew up, don't be so silly.
‘But he persisted and asked, ‘But dad, what if Peter Pan grew up?’
‘That moment was the key, one of those moments when the heavens open and the choirs sing.’
He added: ‘I told Jake that if Peter Pan grew up, he'd be just like us.
We grow up, we become career-orientated, obsessed with status and we stop believing we can fly.
‘An hour later I sat down and began to write the script.’
For four years he tried to find a studio that was interested.
Mr Hart said: ‘They all turned it down, they told me I was nuts.’
But he did finally find producers and then finally Stephen Spielberg became involved in the project two years ago.
In Hook, Peter Pan has grown up and is now Peter Banning, a 40-year-old attorney, with a loving wife and two healthy children.
According to Robin Williams, who plays Peter, the character has the business world at his mercy.
But he says: ‘He has lost touch with something wonderful — he has forgotten to let the child within him take flight.
‘He's forgotten his early life as Peter Pan and put all the energy into his work that he used to put into Neverland.
Instead of leading the Lost Boys, he's now leading the Lost Executives.’
Peter, he says, is the ultimate Yuppie.
Screenwriter Hart moves the story into the 20th century by suggesting that Peter was an orphan taken to Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children in the mid-1960s by Wendy Darling, played by Maggie Smith, and then adopted by an American family.
The film took something of a battering from US critics.
USA Today described Dustin Hoffman's portrayal of Hook as ‘technically precise, but mirthless’.
While Julia Roberts, as Tinkerbell, ‘swallows so many syllables she might as well be chewing gum’.
But Clive Barnes, the arts critic of the New York Post, wrote in The Daily Telegraph that Hook is ‘a delight’.
But it has taken £69 million at the US box office since it opened at Christmas — all of which will delight Great Ormond Street Hospital, to which J M Barrie gave the rights of Peter Pan.
The famous hospital gets all royalties from the books, and has already received £287,000 for the film.
It will benefit by another £300,000 from last night's premiere.
The Princess, the hospital's president, was presented with flowers by Susan Peek, 10, and Andrew Tedder, 14, who have been treated at Great Ormond Street.
Also present were 50 patients, their families, nurses and doctors.
Wednesday Matters:At last, my secret love seizes the day
By LESLEY GARNER
THE late Bruce Chatwin once said that when he worked at Sotheby's he became acutely aware of indestructible objects of art surviving over the years while generations of human flesh decayed around him.
I got the same overpowering sense of mortality when I went to my old school reunion last week.
The front door was the same.
The tennis courts were the same.
The classrooms, the staffroom, even the unheated lavatories, were unchanged.
The smell of dust and gas in the chemistry lab was immediately, nostalgically, recognisable.
But who were these crowds of grey haired, bearded, balding, plump middle-aged people?
‘Nobody's changed at all,’ said somebody.
The self-delusion of it.
The very existence of all these middle-aged people was inescapable proof of one's own ageing process.
So why did I, as middle-aged and grey haired as the rest, find myself so ridiculously pleased to see them?
I suppose the main reason was that I was so astonished to find that they existed at all.
School was so long ago that we had passed into each others' mythology, like people who met distantly in another country.
I could not have been more bemused if characters from books had come up and started talking to me.
Decades had passed with no contact and yet here were the people who had shared seven years of my adolescence; seven years climbing the same wall bars, sitting on the same grass, staring at the same view of Box Hill out of the window.
We'd spent seven years rehearsing the same plays, playing in the same team, calling the same teachers by their nicknames and falling in love with the same classmates.
But it wasn't just the hope of seeing old friends which had drawn me back.
It was the school itself, and the hope of seeing again that handful of teachers who make a difference in anybody's life.
It wasn't a famous or an outstanding school.
It was just a good school.
Dorking County Grammar, a mixed provincial grammar school of around 600 pupils, moved with the times and became the Ashcombe School, a mixed comprehensive of 1,000 pupils.
Little else seemed to have changed.
The pupils of Ashcombe School, like the pupils of Dorking County Grammar, get good exam results and go on to university.
A group of them are taking a truck of supplies out to Romania at Easter.
They put a strong emphasis on drama like we did.
And they seem to be, as my history teacher, Miss Macaulay, wrote on her retirement, just as we were, ‘a supremely friendly school’.
What happened to us in our seven years at the grammar school was that we felt safe and we felt encouraged.
This is not to say that we didn't experience all the anguish you expect in your schooldays, the pains of unpopularity or difficulties with hated subjects.
I just mean that the school, in the shape of its teachers, expected you to have a go at a lot of things and do well.
The great and universal charge of low expectations which Her Majesty's Inspectors throw at teachers today did not apply.
The value of our education wasn't in buildings and materials, although the view was nice.
It was in the human factor.
It was being thrown into the presence of older people who thought we were bright enough to appreciate M. R. James at 11, act in Shakespeare at 12, sing Handel and Haydn at 13.
And that was what we remembered.
One boy, sorry, man, had brought old photographs and yellowing reviews of the school plays we had been in.
Another was rediscovering choral music, in mid-life, because, as he said: ‘Dr Morgan got to me.’
Dr Morgan, by sheer force of personality, got most of the school to sing an oratorio and an opera every year, banging it into us by ear and I am sure most of us couldn't sight read.
He banged it into us very successfully, but singing Mozart's Requiem 30 years later I found I knew most of it by heart.
And here was an astonishing thing, this ridiculously optimistic approach to their pupils obviously suited the teachers as well.
They hadn't changed at all.
In their eighties they looked just the same as they did in their fifties, though I suppose, when we were teenagers, anything over 30 was indistinguishably old.
Or maybe a process of natural selection had winnowed out the overworked and discontented, the theoretical and jaded and left the few who were propelled back to the school by the same affection, curiosity and remembered enthusiasm that had drawn us.
One thing was clear.
A good education is a comfort but not a protection against the hazards of life.
One of us had committed suicide.
One had multiple sclerosis.
Five of us met up in a local pub afterwards and only one of us was still married.
All of which brought home the final lesson I had to go back to school to learn.
My old English teacher, regretting that retired freedom had coincided with the onset of arthritis, leant on her stick and said: ‘Do things while you can.’
So to the middle-aged man who came up to me in the car park and confessed that in the fifth form he had been silently in love with me — why didn't he say so at the time?
Carpe diem as Robin Williams told his boys in Dead Poets Society.
Seize the day.
The Arts: A hero strikes a chord Thomas Pride watches as ex-Beatle George Harrison goes ‘live’ again after 23 years
By THOMAS PRIDE
ENOUGH has been said about George Harrison and the Natural Law Party.
What occupied our minds at nine o'clock on Monday night was the fear that our hero would be revealed to have hands of clay; that, in short, he was not the musician we thought we remembered.
It was his first live performance of any note since 1969.
Then it was on the roof of the Apple building playing Get Back with John, Paul and Ringo.
At the Albert Hall it was bits of Eric Clapton's band, Andy Fairweather Low and one of the Heartbreakers, with Katie Kissoon and Laura Niles sumptuously on the side.
The spontaneous burst of goodwill when George followed this excellent band on stage could be measured in volts.
Everyone wanted it to go well — and, after a tentative start, it did.
By the third number, he had found his confidence and switched from electric to acoustic guitar for Give Me Love — the only sadness being that the slide guitar part was played on a synthesiser.
This was the pattern more or less throughout, with only occasional snatches of George's lead playing on show.
Most notable were the razor-sharp bottleneck on Cloud Nine and the familar, sliding refrain of Something.
It is all too easy to forget the sheer number of songs the man has written that have become pop standards, most of which were included in the two-hour show.
Each was wildly greeted from the opening bars — Taxman, My Sweet Lord, and, best of all, All Those Years Ago, his tribute to a friend and mentor.
‘God bless John Lennon,’ he proclaimed, for those who might not have got the message.
Ringo Starr was rolled out for the encores and thrashed about enthusiastically enough.
George, wisely, didn't try to compete with guest Gary Moore and simply strummed his way through While my Guitar Gently Weeps as Moore's Les Paul sobbed inconsolably — but by then it was all over bar the cheering.
For one night at least, one member of the quartet who hijacked the course of popular music lived up to the hopes of those who had waited 23 years for the moment.
The Arts: Light touch of a genius Before his death at the age of 25, Richard Parkes Bonington blew an English breeze into French art.
Richard Dorment examines his impact on landscape painting
By RICHARD DORMENT
BRITISH painting has always had a tendency to look in upon itself, but never more so than when the Napoleonic wars rendered travel on the Continent impossible.
Though J. M. W. Turner, Thomas Girtin and other painters made quick dashes to Paris during the Peace of Amiens in 1801-2, it was only in 1815, after the final restoration of the Bourbon monarchy under Louis XVIII, that English travellers were free once again to explore Paris, the Louvre, the French ports, and Venice.
Among those who took advantage of the peace was Richard Bonington, a Nottingham drawing master hit hard by the post-war economic depression.
In 1817, at the invitation of the French Government, he emigrated to Calais to help with the establishment of the lace-making industry in France.
With him went his 15-year-old son, Richard Parkes Bonington, destined to become one of the greatest of all British painters.
Indeed, this boy's early death from tuberculosis in 1828, one month before his 26th birthday, robbed the British school of painting of its most naturally gifted genius since Turner.
This is ironic: apart from three visits to London in 1825, 1827 and 1828, Bonington spent his entire adult life in France.
To the French he was a great innovator, an artist who brought a startling lightness to the execution of his pictures, and with it introduced a fresh breeze of English naturalism into French landscape painting.
On this side of the Channel we tend to think of Bonington very differently.
For all the splendid bravura of his work, Bonington's art is considered the art of a youth, not a mature man.
Whether working in watercolours or oils we see him as a real painter's painter, a technical wizard, but not a great imaginative talent.
Both views are correct.
In the 1820s Constable and Turner were painting some of their most innovative pictures.
These artists extended the range and subject-matter of art.
Their work radically challenged the very definition of what a finished picture could be.
Bonington, by contrast, worked almost entirely within existing visual traditions, perfecting rather than expanding long-established conventions of rendering landscape.
Though we will never know how he would have developed had he lived, in the eyes of the British he is no more an innovator — though a far greater artist — than contemporary watercolourists like Samuel Prout and Thomas Shotter Boys.
What is more, to his British rivals, Bonington's very success smacked of the meretricious.
Whereas Constable's landscapes met with hostility and indifference when first exhibited, Bonington's small-scale cabinet pictures found instant favour with collectors.
Constable wrote of him: ‘There is a moral feeling in art as well as everything else — it is not right in a young man to assume great dash — great completion — without study or pains.’
An account of his career from the French point of view would be much more generous.
Trained in watercolours by his father, the precocious Bonington had already exhibited at the Liverpool Academy before his family left England.
In Paris he studied at the atelier of David's pupil Baron Gros, and formed a close friendship with the young Eugene Delacroix, with whom he briefly shared a studio.
By now almost wholly French in his artistic outlook, in August 1824 he was as amazed as his French contemporaries when Constable's Hay Wain and Hampstead Heath were exhibited at the famous Salon Anglais.
These masterpieces showed Bonington (and Delacroix) how to achieve a new breadth of handling, a more assured command of form, and a more naturalistic use of colour in their pictures.
The following summer in London the bilingual Bonington conducted Delacroix and Eugene Isabey around the Royal Academy and the British Institution.
From then on, it is reported, Bonington could hardly stop speaking about Turner.
But, if he became more conscious of his English roots at this time, he also began to turn out superb little costume pieces in the manner of Delacroix, dramatic vignettes from French and English history and literature, charming manifestations of the early Gothic revival.
The fashion for Bonington among French collectors can be explained in part by the wave of anglophilia that swept France under the Restoration.
But remember that the reverse was also true.
As the leader of the Romantic school of young French painters, Bonington took London by storm when he first exhibited at the British Institution in 1826.
To the French, Bonington brought with him from England the genius of the British school of watercolour painting, working in oils very much in the way he approached watercolours.
He would start by making a fairly detailed pencil or pen drawing from nature.
Back in the studio, he would cover his canvas with a white ground, over which he would make a precise underdrawing in sepia.
After this he would fill in the forms with a loaded brush, slapping the colour on with a wonderful deftness of touch and sense of control.
The white ground has the effect of making light seem to emanate from within pictures like the great Picardy Coast Scene with Children — Sunrise owned by HM the Queen or A Fishmarket near Boulogne from the Yale Center for British Art.
The firm drawing beneath the broadly handled colours never lets us lose sight of the underlying structure of rocks, houses, ships and figures.
Technically assured from the very outset of his brief career, Bonington constructed his landscape compositions with the rigour of the Dutch old masters, balancing areas of light against dark, or figures seen close to with far distant prospects.
He knew how to create extraordinary visual effects simply by changing the direction of his brush stroke, so that light streams down from an unseen sun, or a horizon line is conjured up out of three horizontal bands of subtly modulated shades of blue.
A cloud made with an impastoed brush stroke in a lively blue sky irrationally suggests a soft breeze.
The marvellous exhibition of Bonington's paintings, drawings and watercolours at the Petit Palais in Paris includes a large number of works executed during and after his stay in Venice in 1826, as well as paintings by the artist's French and British contemporaries.
Delacroix, Turner, Isabey and Prout are all here, as are less familiar landscape and genre painters like Paul Huet and Eugene Lami.
The result is a satisfying blend of Bonington retrospective and survey of landscape painting in the 1820s.
In terms of Parisian exhibitions, it often seems to be a case of feast or famine.
At the moment, we are being offered a banquet.
Bonington will be on view until May 17; a major exhibition devoted to the 18th-century French sculptor Clodion will be at the Louvre until June 29; and the superbly renovated Jeu de Paume (now one of the most delightful exhibition spaces in Paris) is exhibiting works by the American painter Ellsworth Kelly until May 24.
Go!
The Arts: How the good life in Pompeii came to an end
By LESLIE GEDDES-BROWN
IF A volcanic eruption were suddenly to cover Retford, say, or Camborne, under 12 feet of ash and lava, archaeologists working 2,000 years hence would be unlikely to find a town nearly as civilised and comfortable as Pompeii.
With about 20,000 inhabitants, it was roughly the same size as these two English towns, and was just as provincial and bourgeois in character, but its people really knew how to live.
They didn't, however, know how to die, poor things.
The first exhibit of the exhibition, Rediscovering Pompeii (Accademia Italiana, Rutland Gate, London until June 21, sponsored by IBM) is a resin cast of a corpse of a girl, struck down by poisonous gas as she fled the eruption with a purse full of gold and jewellery.
This is an important reminder for, on seeing the beautiful objects excavated from this charming little town, it is all too easy to forget its horrible end.
Pompeiians, until August 24, 79 AD, led a lovely life — though their slaves and gladiators often did not.
They did little but eat, drink, chat, bathe and exercise, surrounded by fertile gardens, well-proportioned buildings decorated within by elegant frescoes (several are in the show) by muralists whose skill we can hardly emulate today.
Research has shown that they ate lasagne, pizza (though tomatoes had not been discovered) and ice-cream, along with dormice, sow's teats and a disgusting sauce made of sun-dried, salted fish-guts.
Bowls with the remains of their dessert figs, prunes and olives still in them are here on show.
The townspeople also spent a lot of time scribbling on walls — love letters, advertisements, sexual boasts and political slogans (’ Vote for Lucius, he is an honest man’)— while a mortgage on wax was also discovered under the ash.
When Pompeii was found more than 1,600 years after the eruption — almost by accident, since no one knew where it was — it created the biggest stir of the 18th century.
This, in turn, led to the founding of antiquarian societies, the invention of archaeology, and the arrival of the neo-classical movement in art and architecture all over Europe.
The Italian Government has taken an extremely sporadic interest ever since, and research continues only in fits and starts, though over two million people a year visit the site.
Watercolours — always an English passion — seem to have become almost entirely the preserve of elderly amateur or semi-professional artists.
Or, at least, this is the impression given by the Annual Exhibition of the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours (Mall Galleries, 17 Carlton House Terrace, SW1, until April 20).
The show runs to about 600 entries and — giving the lie to the recession in the art trade — is crowded both with visitors and red stickers.
If only the work were worth it.
The technique throughout is nearly always good, sometimes splendid but, oh dear, the subject matter: twee little harbours with neat fishing boats, oast houses (Rowland Hilder has a lot to answer for), Highland lochs and flower arrangements are the main preoccupations.
Susannah Creese's Asparagus Triptych, which won the young artists' award, was the best thing in the show, even if it seemed hardly to be a watercolour.
And Andy Wood's gruesomely gooey Glace Cherries was both realistic and funny — but, like the rest of the show, had overdone the sugar.
The Arts: Richly comic stew
THE Restoration playwright Thomas Shadwell (c 1642-92) is probably best remembered now for Dryden's withering attack on him in MacFlecknoe.
‘The rest to some faint meaning make pretence /But Shadwell never deviates into sense,’ wrote Dryden in his verse satire.
But the great thing about The Virtuoso (1676), which the RSC has brought to light almost 300 years after its last professional performance, is the very fact that it doesn't deviate into sense.
It is a magnificent piece of nonsense.
Phyllida Lloyd's production, first seen at the Swan in Stratford last year and now triumphantly installed in the Pit theatre at the Barbican, is no dusty exercise in theatrical archaeology.
It has a zany energy to match Shadwell's prodigious comic invention and there are many moments which reduced this critic to helpless hilarity.
The virtuoso of the title is an amateur scientist, for part of Shadwell's intention was to satirise the dottier pursuits of the recently formed Royal Society.
In his laboratory (evoked with a delightful jumble of esoteric clutter in Anthony Ward's design), Sir Nicholas Gimcrack gives madmen transfusions of sheep's blood, rejoices like a wine connoisseur over his collection of bottled air and, most ludicrously of all, learns to swim by imitating a frog in a jam-jar suspended in front of his nose.
His wife is a nymphomaniac, with an alarming resemblance to Morticia in The Addams Family, who desperately wants to sink her amorous fangs into two young likely lads about town.
They, however, are far more interested in her husband's delightfully giggly and flirtatious nieces.
All this, you might think, would be enough for any playwright but, with reckless abandon, Shadwell keeps flinging further ingredients into his rich comic stew.
There's a disgusting dirty old man with a taste for corporal punishment (’ I was so used to it at Westminster School’) and not one but two splendid fools.
Sir Formal Trifle is a melancholy, po-faced rhetorician who will never use one short word if he can get his tongue round 50 long ones, while Sir Samuel Hearty hilariously lives up to his name.
This Billy Bunterish buffoon is constantly but cheerfully beaten up as he pursues his doomed amorous adventures, for no man outdoes him in ‘passive valour’.
Somehow Shadwell contrives to create a more or less coherent narrative out of all this, and Lloyd's manic production, which combines Restoration costumes with kitsch trimmings from the 1950s, moves at a pace which leaves the audience breathless.
Just occasionally, as in the orgiastic masquerade — complete with jazz band — near the end, it all becomes too much and one slumps back in exhaustion, but for the most part the show's farcical delirium is irresistible.
Linda Marlowe puts the vamp into vampire as the sexually voracious Lady Gimcrack, her every word and gesture fantastically exaggerated, while Christopher Benjamin plays her husband with a delightfully smug complacency.
Barry Lynch, Sean Murray, Saskia Reeves and Josette Bushell-Mingo bring an exuberant sexuality to the young lovers, but the twin comic peaks of this production are Guy Henry's lugubrious Sir Formal Trifle and Richard Bonneville's irrepressible good cheer as Sir Samuel Hearty.
The latter spends much of the evening dressed in drag as a Restoration Avon Lady, and the scene in which Sir Formal makes violent amorous advances on him in a darkened cellar is the crowning glory of this marvellously entertaining show.
The Arts: Saga of a grubby life THEATRE
Charles Spencer reviews a trio of London plays with themes that are familiar, compulsive and achingly funny
By CHARLES SPENCER
WHEN actors say they are ‘resting’ it doesn't necessarily mean that they are lying on the sofa all day waiting for the phone to ring.
Often they take casual jobs, and William Gaminara has turned his experience as an out-of-work thesp into a sparky new play at the Hampstead Theatre.
Back Up the Hearse and Let Them Sniff the Flowers is based on his own time as a water-filter salesman, ringing on doorbells and brow-beating mug-punters into believing that their lives won't be complete without the little gizmo on offer (at £230 plus VAT).
The play has a satisfying documentary detail (the title is salesman's jargon for frightening people into buying the product, in this case by saying that their health won't be safe without it) and it gives a fascinating insight into the tricks of a dubious trade.
The characters at Virgin Waters Ltd, from the spieling, cocaine-sniffing boss to an innocent young newcomer to the racket, are sketched with skill and the dialogue crackles along.
But a worrying pall of familiarity hangs over the proceedings.
The American dramatist David Mamet has given a far more penetrating and disturbing account of salesmen on the make in Glengarry Glen Ross, and I can remember at least two other British plays on virtually the same theme.
You leave the theatre with the empty feeling that comes from watching a piece which (like a salesman) promises much more than it actually delivers.
Gaminara draws only the most banal conclusions from his detailed subject matter and, by the end, the play (his first for the stage) has become contrived, sentimental and gratuitously violent.
Nevertheless, John Dove's production is highly watchable, and boasts a fistful of fine performances.
I was particularly taken by Debra Gillett as the likeable innocent who takes some hard knocks before the night is out, while Danny Webb offers a memorable portrait of the sharpest and most driven of the salesmen, cruelly torn between elation at his own success and a growing awareness of just how grubby the whole operation is.
There are just four days left to catch Declan Hughes's excellent Digging for Fire at the Bush Theatre, Shepherd's Bush Green.
This funny, fierce and finally comfortless piece was the big hit at last year's Dublin Festival and chronicles a college reunion in the Irish capital of a disparate group who graduated in 1983.
As the booze begins to flow, so does Hughes's writing.
All seven characters are drawn with illuminating detail and superbly played by an outstanding young company.
The confessions, recriminations and bubbling bile of this long night's drinking into dawn make for increasingly compulsive viewing.
We watch as friendships come apart at the seams, as lives of promise collapse under the weight of illness or despair or disillusion, but there is a reckless exhilaration about it all.
Anyone who has ever had a close encounter with that lethal spirit tequila (accurately described here as liquid plutonium) will experience an agreeable sense of schadenfreude as the characters toss back the shots with reckless abandon, while the evocation of the hideous, hungover morning-after is hilariously achieved.
The play's bleak message is that friendship is the most unreliable of investments and, despite all the wild laughter in Lynne Parker's fine production, you leave the theatre gagging on the taste of dust and ashes.
The Arts: Where the limelight never fades At Brinsworth House, old variety stars spend their retirement swapping stories and writing their memoirs.
Byron Rogers takes a step back in time
By BYRON ROGERS
AS SOON as I heard that voice the decades fell like playing cards.
I was a boy again in a world where other people always knew best.
And among the voices, this was the bossiest voice of all.
It said things like, ‘Right James, this is what we'll do.’
Only this time it said, with the old rasp, ‘I'll have four sugars.’
Four sugars in a cup of tea?
‘Used to be three,’ said Ben Warriss.
But there was more to it than nostalgia.
It wasn't just a matter of meeting an old comedian; I was meeting someone out of the dustier corners of my private pantheon.
For years, I bought the Radio Fun comic in which Warriss and his partner (and first cousin) Jimmy Jewel were the leading strip-cartoon.
It could have been Dan Dare in the nursing home.
The hair, though white now, is still swept back, and, as he nears 83, the bottom lip protrudes as crossly and the eyes bulge as they have always done.
I gave him his four sugars.
‘You were in my comic,’ I said.
‘And didn't get paid a penny for it,’ snapped Ben.
‘Chap came round to the Palladium one night, said we could be in it if we liked, only there was no money, just publicity.
We were all in it then — Arthur Askey, Stinker Murdoch, Cardew Robinson.
No payment, he said, just the publicity.
Ooh, the cheek of it!’
His eyes bulged even more.
Ben has been in the home since the beginning of the year when, while appearing as the Sheriff of Nottingham in a panto in Whitchurch, he was taken ill in his digs.
‘I went North with a nurse to get him,’ says Peter Elliott, secretary of the Entertainment Artists' Benevolent Fund.
‘He has made a remarkable recovery and was working last night, addressing the British Musical Society.
‘David Lodge saw him last year in The Entertainer and said he was wonderful.
And Jimmy [Jewel]came to see him the other day and we walked across the road to the pub.
They threw us out at four o'clock and in all that time I hadn't said a word, just listened.
It was like having lunch with the Sunshine Boys.’
Brinsworth House in Twickenham was opened as a retirement home for old variety artists in 1907.
Once a grand place in its own grounds, suburban London had crept up and round it, trapping it among the terraced streets.
Six hundred people in the business coughed up £2 10s 0d each, thereby becoming known as the Noble Six Hundred; subsequent donations and the proceeds of Royal Variety performances meant that a nursing wing was added two years ago, and today there are 36 residents with a staff of 60 to look after them.
‘You have to have been a variety artist or a dependant,’ says Elliott, formerly a dancer and the late Dick Emery's manager.
‘Though if you haven't been in the business yourself it does upset the others.
Recently we changed the rules to include TV people.’
Seeing the expression of surprise on my face, he adds, ‘It was bound to happen sometime, you know.’
A piano tinkled in the long afternoon, all afternoons being long now; an old lady, her eyes closed, hummed a relic of a long-forgotten act, not that it would be forgotten here.
Cloudy trophies lined the hall and stairwell: theatre bills bawling the names Lupino Lane, Gladys Morgan, Donald Peers, for appearances in theatres that closed long ago.
‘How do they react to the lack of attention?’ echoes Peter Elliott.
‘Oh, there's no lack of it at all, that's what this place is for.
We're here to bolster each other 's egos.’
In the bed-sitting rooms, scrapbooks bulge with yellowing reviews and crumpled photographs, and there is the tap of typewriters as the memoirs get written slowly and very pleasurably.
‘This will tell how in those far-off days, I, as a little girl, with many times an empty tummy, found the time to dance…
’ Her name is Barbara Stetson, she is now 82, but in fishnets and suspenders was once, as Red Stetson, Britain's highest can-can kicker.
‘She was the most beautiful thing I'd ever seen,’ says Elliott reverently.
I mentioned this to Miss Stetson.
‘I was a smasher, my dear,’ she agrees.
In a room full of fluffy toys, she opens her scrapbook and it is pre-war Paris where she danced the can-can and was photographed in cafes with sleepy-eyed men and cigarette smoke.
‘I wasn't a smasher when I started, I became one,’ observes Miss Stetson.
She was 5ft 4in (’ though I could make myself 5ft 5in’), had a 23in waist (’yes, I was a normal girl’), and could kick so high that two legs became a straight line.
On the walls of her room, there are posters from the time she was Ma'moiselle de Paris, and the going was good, before the theatre attendances dwindled and the managers played their last card, the posing nude.
Ma'moiselle's billing shrank as Roxanne and Carla and Yvonne brought goose-pimples to the stage.
‘And every time the pose was over they'd be off on their scooters,’ broods Miss Stetson.
‘Theatre after theatre, all in one night.
Just standing.’
Ben talks at the top of his voice about the old days.
‘I was 19 and playing a winter.
And there was this old comic called Jack Daw, who'd missed the boat on account of booze.
On stage he says to me, ‘Get me a Lancashire cocktail, my man.’
Now we hadn't rehearsed this so I turned to go off, only he called me back.
’‘Do you know what a Lancashire cocktail is?’
And of course I had to admit in front of everyone that I didn't.
He said, ‘A Lancashire cocktail is a pint of bitter with a pig's trotter in it.’
He came up to me afterwards and said, ‘You have to learn your trade, my boy.’
And I did.’
He remembers clubs and halls, the £1,500 a week he was paid when that would have bought half a street; and then he remembers Leslie Grade.
‘The biggest Grade of all he was, and the only one not made a Sir.
Anyway, the day came when he asked to see Jimmy and me.
We flew down from Blackpool and I did the talking.
I mapped out our plans — the Palladium, the TV series — must have been £50,000 of work.
‘Jimmy, who hadn't said a word, suddenly said, ‘You know, Leslie, you've been a bit of a bastard, haven't you…
’ And he just went on and on and on.
Our agent, he put his head in his hands, but Leslie just sat there, half-smiling.
Jimmy was only saying what was right, only all that work just disappeared.
‘Some time later I was in this little Jewish club when Leslie came in with his minder.
I think he'd had a stroke by then, but he came up to me and said very quietly, ‘How's your comical friend then?’
I remember that.
‘How's your comical friend?’
‘Shortly afterwards we turned it in.
There were other acts by then like Morecambe and Wise and they were doing to us what we'd done to others in our time.
Slowly we slipped out of the limelight.’
He settled back in his chair, his tea forgotten.
‘We had a wonderful life,’ he bellows.
On the way out I noticed a photograph of a benign-looking chap and read about his gifts to charity.
I was in the Leslie Grade ward.
As Mrs Thatcher observed, it is a funny old world.
Channel 4's ‘Short Stories’ will feature Brinsworth House on Friday at 8.30 pm.
The Arts: A clear election winner TELEVISION
Richard Last names the interviewer who wins his vote
By RICHARD LAST
WHETHER it was Major, Kinnock or Ashdown who made the greatest impression on the viewers, we shall know on Friday morning.
Meanwhile there's little question that the TV election was won by an outsider barely rated last time round, Channel 4's Vincent Hanna.
In his BBC days, Hanna used to be overweight and combative.
Now he's slimmed down and laid back.
He leans back, crosses his legs, and looks like a man having an agreeable conversation in his club.
Under Hanna's chairmanship, Midnight Special (Channel 4) almost made the election bearable.
Its civilised debates introduced topics largely ignored elsewhere and calmed down even the kind of politician who always seems to be addressing a public meeting.
Among other achievements, it gave a platform to Mary Whitehouse, lured Edwina Currie into a cheerful admission that the Tory campaign had made John Major look like a stump orator and Neil Kinnock like an incumbent prime minister, and mounted an irreverent debate on political morality.
Midnight Special's contribution to the hustings was to make the politicians seem almost human.
Disappointment of the 1992 TV election was Sunday's Channel 4 Debate.
It degenerated into a three-sided football match, with blue, yellow and red-lit supporters all but waving rattles in support of their teams.
Most of the principals had come with the intention of delivering their manifestos, irrespective of the line of questioning.
The exception was Charles Kennedy, the absurdly youthful-looking Lib Dem President, who scored off fellow juveniles Tony Blair and David Mellor almost without trying.
How, Mellor wondered, would the Lib Dems respond to the unlikely scenario of getting a working majority on a 33 per cent poll?
‘We'd use it as a mandate to change the present disgraceful system,’ Kennedy replied.
There was none of this nonsense when The Granada 500, a group of Gallup-picked electors who had travelled from marginal Bolton to reach London's Grosvenor House Hotel on Monday for World in Action (ITV).
They were offered, as Sue Lawley proudly pointed out, the only opportunity of quizzing all three party leaders under the same roof, though not at the same time.
Sturdy Lancastrian independence produced some unexpected lines of questioning, frequently as hostile to a tired-looking Kinnock as to a hopeful-looking Major.
‘Do you seriously expect us to forgive and forget the inhumanity of the poll tax?’ demanded one of the 500, offering Major the chance to say ‘Sorry’.
He didn't.
Another accused Ashdown of ‘arrogance’, but quickly withdrew the charge.
Paddy retired virtually unhurt after a characteristic bit of Para boldness under fire: ‘Who would you rather have as Foreign Secretary: David Steel or Gerald Kaufman?’ he demanded, inviting a show of hands.
He got the decision.
But it was close.
Jonathan Dimbleby put in sterling work with the daily Election Call (BBC1 and Radio 4).
Sometimes I wished he could have been harder on long-winded questioners, at others that he would resist the temptation to get into a private clinch with the politicians.
But the programme remained one of the staples of the democratic process.
It even unleashed the dog that almost hasn't barked throughout the election: the unions.
‘What about the block vote?’ demanded an elderly caller from Gillingham of John Smith.
I felt as taken aback as he looked.
Education — the election debate that never happened Labour and the Liberal Democrats would take our school system back to the bad old days, argues ANTHONY O'HEAR — so why haven't the voters been told as much?
By ANTHONY O'HEAR
AS THE election campaign has unfolded, it has become clear that the future of education in this country is at stake.
We are being presented with two very different and dramatically opposed visions.
In an election otherwise relatively free of ideological difference, education starkly divides the parties.
The Conservative vision is now in the process of being implemented by Kenneth Clarke.
It is one of independence, diversity and choice, leading to higher standards in an area previously hobbled by centralisation, bureaucracy and mediocrity.
For too long education has been a state within a state, with its own corporatist culture of welfare dependency, and levelling dogma and practice — practice for years endorsed and encouraged by the supposedly independent inspectorate of schools.
The results are there for all to see: dismal standards in key areas, constant undermining of the curriculum for ideological reasons, generations of children under-educated and under-skilled.
Parents knew what was wrong, but were powerless to act, because they had no effective choice of schools or of curriculum; they simply had to suffer the advice of ‘experts’ and the diktats of local officials.
It is this state of affairs which Labour and the Liberal Democrats would have continue.
Under the Conservatives, things have begun to change.
Schools must now publish results of nationally determined tests.
Popular schools have to admit pupils up to capacity; unpopular schools lose money and will eventually close.
Schools have control of their own budgets, with the freedom that entails.
Even more important, they are allowed to opt out of local authority control.
Opted-out schools are funded directly according to the number of pupils they attract.
As a result, over two-thirds report being able to employ more teachers and purchase more books and equipment.
In contrast to schools under local authority control, opted-out schools are able to appoint new staff promptly and in the manner they wish.
They are also able to choose how and where to conduct in-service training.
After ballots of parents, 215 schools have so far opted out: but another 2,000 are known to be keen to do so, given that grant-maintained status offers them money and freedom.
The reason they are hanging on until after the election is because both Labour and the Liberal Democrats are pledged to return opted-out schools to local authority control, with all that implies in terms of victimisation and possible closure.
Both these parties would also abolish the assisted places scheme by which children of poorer parents are able to benefit from some of the best schools in the country, and will hand City Technology Colleges over to local authorities.
They will also abolish A-levels in favour of new types of certificate — in theory broader, but inevitably of lower standard, thus undermining the one area of our school system where academic excellence has been allowed to flourish.
Labour and the Liberal Democrats, are, in other words against diversity, parental independence and pupil opportunity in education.
They are in favour of increasing the very centralisation and bureaucratisation which is the root cause of our present educational malaise.
They would both maintain the present cycle of welfare dependency in education, whereby parents are unable to exercise their proper responsibility, as a result of which the spirit of freedom atrophies and schools run down.
Labour and the Liberal Democrats would compound the centralisation from which the education system is just beginning to break away.
Labour proposes an Education Standards Commission; both parties would set up a General Teaching Council.
There is no need for the former, given that the schools already have to publish examination results and that under the Conservatives they will have to be inspected by a new form of genuinely independent inspecting agencies.
THE Education Standards Commission would doubtless be manned by members of the old educational establishment.
It would be a way of fostering the corporatist education ideology from which we are beginning to escape.
No doubt it would combine with the proposed Ministry for Women to inflict ‘anti-sexist’ and ‘equal opportunities’dogmas on teachers and pupils alike, and, with the re-centralised inspectorate, to enforce questionable notions of good practice in teaching.
Labour and the Liberal Democrats believe that spending a lot more of taxpayers' money on education (Labour £600 million, the Liberal Democrats £4.6 billion) and denying parents a say over their children's education, will somehow improve things.
In fact, Britain under the Tories already spends a higher proportion of GDP on education than either Germany or Japan.
Education has less to do with ‘resources’ and rather more to do with the attitudes of those who are providing it and their accountability.
Labour, for example, wants next year to throw £20 million at a ‘reading recovery scheme’ for which there would be absolutely no need had reading been properly taught in the first place (something which requires little in the way of ‘resources’).
In his recent initiatives on the curriculum, testing, primary education and teacher training, Mr Clarke has begun to change the culture of our body educational.
Against bands of ‘experts’ and administrators, he has stood up for sensible methods of teaching and testing.
He has begun to remove teacher training from the colleges which have served us so ill in the past and to put it in the hands of the best schools.
As a result there is some prospect of schools once more becoming places where children are expected to learn and teachers to teach.
There is a lot of talk in both Labour and Liberal Democrat manifestos of nursery and higher education.
But this will avail us nothing unless we get primary and secondary schooling right.
In these areas, Labour and the Liberal Democrats are threatening us with more of what has brought us down.
The Conservatives have begun to show the way forward.
It would be tragic if, just when we were beginning to see something better for our children and for our nation, the door were to be slammed in our face.
I cannot imagine why the Conservatives have not been campaigning harder on this issue.
It is one which is central to the Conservative vision of the future of Britain.
Anthony O'Hear is professor of philosophy at the University of Bradford.
Letter to the Editor: Jeevesian wisdom on celebrities
SIR — I do understand Anthony Lejeune's bafflement and irritation with the swelling world of ‘celebrity endorsement’(letter, April 7).
There really is no phrase to describe it which doesn't sound grotesque.
I think the purpose is more to encourage the faithful than to change minds or hearts.
Parties will suffer as much from supporters who don't turn out to vote as from those who have switched allegiance: perhaps we loathsome glitterati can help there?
I confess I'm groping.
For my part, I am desolated that my own forays into the grown-up world of politics have marred Mr Lejeune's potential enjoyment of Jeeves and Wooster.
Of course Jeeves would disapprove: but then he is a hard man to please.
I am certain that he would also feel that the only fit subject on which to correspond within the columns of a newspaper would be the unseasonal sighting of a cuckoo.
The Duke of Dunstable, however, a Wodehouse creation, was never happier than when firing off letters on the subject of the government's iniquitous rates of income tax.
It looks as if Mr Lejeune will soon be able to emulate His Grace.
STEPHEN FRY London WC2
Letter to the Editor: Trollopeian hero
SIR — Should the unthinkable happen, an apt political obituary for John Major might well read: ‘It was impossible to help liking such a man at first sight.
His artlessness was boyish and so were his acuteness and his transparent but somewhat belated good sense.
After he had shown you all he had in him, you would have seen nothing that was not gentlemanly, honest and clean.’
The extract is from a biography of Mr Major's favourite author, Anthony Trollope, whose wife's maiden name was…
Heseltine.
The author was Julian Hawthorne, an American critic, who first met Trollope in 1879.
DAVID SPARK Great Ayton, N. Yorks
Letter to the Editor: Is clarity foreign?
SIR — After reading Malcolm Hayes's interview with Nicholas Kenyon, the new Controller of Radio 3 (April 6) I find his comments on the Radio 3 announcers quite bewildering.
Has he had an opportunity to hear their French colleagues on France Musique, Radio 3's French equivalent?
Not from them do we hear clearly and distinctly every non-French name.
All are announced at great speed as if their names were actually French.
Worse still, in their programmes of records, of which there are many, it is common practice to have to endure several minutes of discussion on the item to be played.
Is this what he wants to hear on Radio 3?
What a relief it is to know the name of the instrumentalist or conductor concerned and to listen to a programme of records where music takes precedence over ‘talk for talk's sake’.
A. G. E. de NERVAUX East Grinstead, W. Sussex
Peterborough: Blue period
AS NICHOLAS Serota, director of the Tate Gallery, opened the Stanley Spencer exhibition in Liverpool yesterday, he was smarting from a vitriolic attack on his stewardship of the gallery by Robin Simon, editor of Apollo, a monthly art magazine.
Simon complains of ‘the unsuitable blue chosen by Mr Serota’ for the Tate's walls and adds: ‘If there is some deep strategy for this marginalisation of the British collection it is certainly making an impact, for there are fewer pictures on view than ever before.’
Serota is having none of it.
‘As far as I'm concerned the collection is in exactly the right building.
Simon has misunderstood what we're trying to do.’
A WRY scheduling choice by BBC 1 for Friday.
Eight hours of election result coverage will be followed by ‘Goodbye to the Old Days’.
Peterborough: Shanty tune
EVERY time that jaunty music to the children's television series Captain Pugwash is broadcast, Johnny Pearson doubtless allows himself a smile.
Pearson, who wrote, among others, the themes to News at Ten and All Creatures Great and Small, holds the copyright.
But the man who actually played the Pugwash music — recorded at an informal session in1954 at his farmhouse — was a Northumbrian accordionist called Tommy Edmondson.
He was given £2 for his troubles.
Pugwash's creator, John Ryan, has just discovered that Edmondson is still alive, tending a cemetery in Rothbury.
Generously, Ryan sent him £100.
‘I was thrilled when I first heard the Trumpet Hornpipe tune being used on Pugwash,’ says Edmondson.
‘Money never bothered me, I was just pleased that people enjoyed my music.’
The stirring sea shanty, he says, was based on a traditional tune.
Pearson's agent comments: ‘Pugwash is more than just the signature tune, and it's not just the accordion.
There were the other things that were written at the time — there are at least 15 cues.’
Edmondson, meanwhile, has bought himself an adjustable music stool with some of his £100, and given the rest to charity.
A COLLEAGUE overheard a heated discussion in a pub in Dorking, Surrey, about whether Fred Astaire was dead.
In the end the drinkers decided to ask the barmaid if the great hoofer was still with us.
‘Hmmm,’ she said.
‘Does he drink here?’
(Astaire died, aged 88, in 1987.)
Peterborough: Vaclav Havel
A FTER persuading the American singer Madonna to become a vice-president, those ageing adventurers at the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA) have come up with another star for their letterhead — President Havel of Czechoslovakia.
At a recent board meeting the ICA decided to invite Havel to become their president, a new position invented in an atmosphere of genteel frenzy.
‘He is ideal because he is both a statesman and an artist [he used to write rather stodgy plays], and we believe he shares the values we stand for,’ says an ICA spokesman.
The Marquess of Queensberry, an ICA development board member and accomplished potter, is delighted.
‘I think it's absolutely terrific that the ICA is becoming more international and reflecting all the changes in Eastern Europe,’ he says.
Havel, who opened a series of talks on Eastern Europe at the ICA two years ago, has yet to accept the unpaid post.
If he is in a bargaining mood, he might like to ask them to furnish him with a new typewriter.
His old one was stolen by the Czech secret police in less happy times.
Caroline back
Radio Caroline was back on air yesterday broadcasting from the Ross Revenge in Dover harbour after winning a four-week community radio licence.
The pirate station, which ran aground last November, is using equipment and records donated by listeners.
Obituary of Molly Picon
MOLLY PICON, the diminutive Jewish-American actress who has died at Lancaster, Pennsylvania, aged 93, was the leading exponent of Yiddish drama during its golden age in New York in the early part of the century; an outstanding performer on the international variety stage between the World Wars; and a notable legitimate player on Broadway and in London in the 1960s and 1970s.
In 1972 Miss Picon starred opposite Topol in the film of the musical comedy Fiddler on the Roof.
She gave a delightful, whirling performance of well-meant matriarchy as the village match-maker in turn-of-the-century Tsarist Russia.
Her family had once eked a precipitous existence in similar circumstances, near Kiev in the Ukraine, and she used to say she saw her pre-nascent life in the film.
Molly Picon was born on June 1, 1898, in New York, where her parents had fled from an impending pogrom.
Brought up bilingual in English and Yiddish, young Molly made her stage debut in an English-language variety act at the local nickleodeon when she was five.
Yiddish theatre was then the main stronghold of preservation for Jewish immigrants.
‘Now,’ said Picon a few years ago, ‘when you read an obituary of someone with a Jewish name you know you have lost another member of the audience.’
Accordingly, she went on to play primarily on the Yiddish stage, where, with her impish manner and tiny build — her toes, she said, never reached the end of her stockings — she soon became a star.
As a teenager she toured America playing Topsy in a Yiddish version of Uncle Tom's Cabin; and after several years in rep at Philadelphia, in such plays as The Silver King, Medea and The Kreutzer Sonata, she spent three years in cabaret and variety.
In her twenties she acted with her husband Jacob Kalich's Yiddish rep company in Boston, before touring Europe.
On her return to Broadway Miss Picon played a string of leads — all in Yiddish — at Kessler's Theatre, and won such acclaim that while still in her early thirties she was top of the bill at the Palace, America's leading vaudeville house, and had a New York theatre named after her.
After a number of years on tour with her husband, in Europe, the near East, South Africa and the Argentine, she returned to Broadway in the mid-1930s.
In 1937 she also did another season of variety, for which she always insisted on having her material specially written.
Her most popular turn was New York Symphony, which she brought to London that year.
At the end of the Second World War she spent six months touring concentration camps in Europe, with a programme of Yiddish songs and sketches, and met hundreds of survivors of Hitler's persecution.
‘They were spectral figures in pyjama stripes,’ she recalled, ‘too weak to eat the food their liberators offered them.’
At one of the camps Miss Picon asked a woman at her concert why she had brought her baby, who never stopped crying.
‘My child has never heard the sound of laughter,’ said the woman, ‘and I don't want him to die without hearing it.’
In Paris, where she and her husband performed for refugees, the theatre was so crowded that there was no room for many parties of children who had lost their parents and were in the care of relief organisations.
‘In the end we asked them to come and sit at the back of the stage,’ Miss Picon recalled.
‘They were terribly restless all through the show.
I thought it was because they could not understand the language.
Then I learned why.
‘While the show was going on they were peering at other faces in the audience and saying things like ‘I think I can see my mother’ and ‘I think I can see my uncle.’
At the end of the show they were racing through the theatre in search of parents and relations.’
Miss Picon and her husband were so profoundly affected by their experiences that for a long time after their return to New York they were unable to work.
Subsequently, Miss Picon inclined more and more to the legitimate theatre, both on Broadway and on tour.
In 1960 she won golden opinions in Britain in Leonid Spigelgass's study of autumnal courtship, A Majority of One (Phoenix), in which she starred opposite Robert Morley.
The spectacle of the small, but agile and resilient widow from Brooklyn holding her own against the vast, imperious bulk of Mr Morley, hilariously cast as an oriental potentate, was touching and often very funny.
Miss Picon's other major postwar success was on Broadway, in the musical Milk and Honey (1961), as an American widow looking for a husband in Israel.
Besides several revivals of A Majority of One, her performances in the 1960s and 1970s included the lead in The Front Page (after Helen Hayes); Libby Hirsch in Dear Me, The Sky is Falling; Matilda Mousse in Madame Mousse; Hortense Brand in Paris is Out! and Dolly in Hello, Dolly!
She also appeared in her own one-woman show in Yiddish, Hello, Molly!
At the age of 81 Miss Picon wrote and performed in Those Were the Days, a revue which recapitulated her career on New York's Lower East Side, the home of Yiddish theatre in America.
She wrote a family biography, So Laugh a Little(1962), and co-wrote her autobiography The Sound of Laughter (1979).
Her husband, who wrote some 40 shows for her, died in 1975.