

City reconciled to hung parliament
By Anne Segall, Economics Correspondent
THE CITY appeared reconciled yesterday to a hung parliament, with share prices, the pound and government bonds all showing modest gains after a period of sustained weakness.
The improvement in sentiment was helped by reports of a big buying order for sterling, followed by rumours of a favourable opinion poll for the Conservatives.
The pound closed half a pfennig higher at 2.8426 after falling to 2.8365 on Monday.
According to dealers, a group of British fund managers switched German marks and dollars worth roughly £500 million into sterling.
Although the thinking behind the switch was unclear, foreign currency experts believe institutions are anxious to square their books ahead of the election, fearing that, whatever the outcome, the next government will adopt narrow bands for sterling.
The three leading parties have all said they favour such a move.
There is concern, too, that Labour might raise interest rates to protect the pound, leaving speculators vulnerable to a sudden surge in demand for sterling.
The Central Statistical Office reported that its longer leading index of economic activity continued to suggest hat the economy turned last summer while its shorter index points to recovery at the end of last year.
Both indices have weakened somewhat in recent months, however, a pattern consistent with the view that recovery has been delayed by political uncertainty and will occur once the election is out of the way.
A leaked International Monetary Fund document yesterday endorsed Mr Lamont's Budget forecast of one per cent growth this year and faster growth in the first half of 1993.
It predicts a reasonably robust US recovery, with the industrial world's economy expected to grow by 3¼ per cent this year.
Shares did well for most of yesterday, with the FT-100 index up 17 points at one stage.
But weakness on Wall Street and second thoughts in London cut gains, and the index closed 3.3 points ahead at 2,404.2.
City Report — P27 
Staff seek a new image in Unison
By Kevin Maguire Labour Correspondent
THREE public service unions planning a merger to create a 1.4 million-strong organisation are to simply call it Unison and not use the term union in its name.
The ruling executives of the three TUC trade unions involved will finalise the amalgamation proposals today.
The organisation is due to come into existence in July next year.
Leaders of the three, who will form Britain's biggest union, agreed on Unison as its title after a competition among members produced a short list of five names market-tested by the designers Wolf Olins.
Senior officials in the National and Local Government Officers' Association, National Union of Public Employees, and Confederation of Health Service Employees hope the term will project a modern image of workers in harmony with themselves and the public.
The four short-listed names rejected were Unity, Arc, Public Services, and Essential Services Union.
Unison are the latest organisation to hire consultants and drop the term union to improve a tarnished image.
Women make up one million of the new union's members and will be guaranteed two-thirds of its executive seats to give them effective control, although the three top salaried posts will be filled by men.
Mr Alan Jinkinson of Nalgo will become Unison general secretary, Mr Rodney Bickerstaffe of Nupe, general secretary (external) and Mr Hector Mackenzie general secretary (internal).
In 1995, Mr Jinkinson will retire and Mr Bickerstaffe will be nominated as his replacement.
Media & Marketing: Thoughts for the chairman
By BRENDA MADDOX
AS DECISION day looms, one leader who can relax is Marmaduke Hussey, chairman of the BBC.
Last year the Home Secretary reappointed him for five years: the first of the BBC's 17 chairmen since incorporation in 1927 to receive a second full term.
And not until mid-1993 will any incoming government get a chance to tinker with the existing composition of the Board of Governors.
Then the terms of the vice-chairman, Lord Barnett, and four of the 12 governors expire.
Those who replace them may, with a change of regime, be bolder than present incumbents in criticising the chairman.
But until then Hussey should continue to enjoy a smooth ride.
Some think that, if the Tories lose, Hussey will be replaced.
They are wrong.
His position is unassailable.
Political as it was, it was made by Queen in Council and cannot be overturned by a mere change of government.
Safe, too, is John Birt, Hussey's choice as director-general-designate, although morale is so low within news and current affairs at the BBC that rumours are circulating of a secret haven within ITN where ammunition is being collected from dissident BBC executives to try to blast Birt out.
The mutiny will not take place.
Birt will succeed Sir Michael Checkland as director-general in March 1993, barring something totally unexpected, such as his own decision to return to commercial television.
That seems unlikely.
Having forsaken the millions he would have made had he remained at LWT, Birt will at least want the prestige and power of the DG-ship.
Together he and Hussey can then complete the task on which they agree: creating a leaner, fitter BBC.
Hussey could not better help Birt and the BBC by standing back.
An earlier chairman, Lord Swann, found a shrewd metaphor for the ideal relationship between the chairman of the governors and the director-general.
The director-general should drive, said Swann: the chairman should read the map.
Hussey has been doing more than both driving and reading the map.
Fortified by the support of gleeful Tories and powerful connections (his brother-in-law is Health Secretary William Waldegrave; his wife is lady-in-waiting to the Queen), he has been cracking the whip.
In January 1988 he dispatched the then director-general Alasdair Milne.
To be sure, Hussey was later thwarted in his choice of the new D-G.
The governors rejected David Dimbleby and chose Checkland, who then demonstrated his independence by rejecting Dimbleby as deputy.
That turn of events made Hussey determined not to be thwarted again.
When Checkland's contract came up for renewal, it was renewed only for a token year.
Hussey disdained the usual public invitation for applicants and gave the governors a choice of one for Checkland's successor.
Hussey denies the charge that he has been too much of a ‘hands-on’ chairman.
He probably believes this, underestimating the overbearing effect on his underlings of his great height, his formidable courage in overcoming a physical handicap (he lost a leg in the war) and his high connections.
It probably has also escaped his notice that some of the BBC's most cowardly-looking decisions — to drop the controversial film, The Last Temptation of Christ, to withdraw the Panorama programme on the economy and to decree that during the election campaign opinion polls should not lead the news bulletins — constitute genuflections to the Tories.
HUSSEY has done a lot of good at the BBC, making it more accountable.
But working near the top of the BBC is said to be a nightmare, with Checkland a lame-duck, Birt not speaking out and Hussey acting like an executive.
Before new legislation, some sensible shorter-term improvements could be taken.
The governors now meet every two weeks: that is too often for any non-executive board.
Another step toward better management would be to put the two channel controllers on to the board of management.
What is the BBC about if not the making of programmes?
The BBC needs stronger managing and less governing.
As chairman, Hussey should content himself with what he does well — making speeches defending the BBC's independence and licence fee.
Having got his way for so long, he should now relax and let the chair revert to what it it was in the past: a part-time job.
Media & Marketing: Squashed chicken and a bag of water DIRECT MAIL
The advertising industry gathers tonight for its annual awards ceremony.
There will be one notable absentee, reports Eric Bailey
By ERIC BAILEY
WHY A squashed chicken?
The question may have niggled at the 7,776 advertising talents who entered their work for the prestigious Design & Art Direction Awards, some of whom will turn up tonight at a glittering Grosvenor House junket to find out whether they have won one of the silver or gold pencils.
The squashed chicken featured on the front of this year's D & AD postal entry form in a photograph taken by Tomoko Yoneda; the poor fowl was apparently being pinned to a padlocked door by a ghostly hand, and was accompanied by a typographical fiesta which was practically unreadable.
It must have been especially significant to those who had entered the D & AD direct mail section, in which silver pencils have been notoriously few.
In the past 10 years only one has been awarded.
This year, again, the judges made no awards in this category.
But the squashed chicken was, after all, the D & AD's own piece of direct mail.
Was this what was expected of them?
There is not much doubt that in the past direct mail has been a blunt instrument and often still is.
But the industry feels there have been enough new and creative uses of the medium for the lack of recognition to become suspicious.
‘It's more to do with the term ‘direct mail’,’ says one senior account director at a direct marketing agency.
‘It has a rather tarnished downmarket image to others in advertising.
They think we are people who just put things in envelopes — there is a certain snobbery about it.’
Ian Ramsden, development director of direct marketing agency Eurocom DMA, believes the D & AD awards are decided by ‘classical’ admen who don't understand the blood ‘n’guts approach of direct selling.
In fact, he suggests, their kind of advertising is not about selling at all.
‘There is still a great deal of prejudice against direct marketing — it's a lack of understanding by classical agency people.
Direct marketing is more sales oriented; classical advertising says it can set the scene, build brand awareness, paint the big picture.
They see direct marketing as the tacky end of the business.’
But some think there is another, darker connotation to the lack of prizes.
‘They can have really glossy wonderful ads which win the awards,’ says another direct marketing account director.
‘But they have no idea how many products they actually sell.
The fact that we can judge precisely the response to a particular ad is a slightly dangerous idea.’
Dangerous?
He means that the rationale that an ad must actually justify itself in terms of products sold does not march well with the unbuttoned creativity celebrated at Grosvenor House.
Ramsden says the two disciplines ought to complement each other, but that most on the classical advertising side are unwilling to compromise their careful concepts with phone numbers or mailshot back-ups.
He argues that creativity in advertising cannot be as divorced from selling as it is in these awards.
‘They'll look at one of our ads and say, ‘Oh we don't like it.
It looks a mess’,’ says Ramsden.
‘But I can do an ad for a few thousand, then show them the sales figures.
They can't do the same for ads costing £2 million.’
Aziz Cami, a director of The Partners agency, and also on the executive committee of D & AD, believes the section needs reorganising.
‘Direct mail is a very broad category — we need to redefine it,’ he says.
‘The problem is that the judges are looking at extremes — maybe comparing an ad selling commemorative medals of the election with one featuring designer Christmas cards.
It's not comparing like with like.’
There have been some attempts to do this.
Last year the judges awarded points but did not discuss the entries; this year they did.
This year, the D & AD committee asked only graphic designers to judge the work — so that it was never considered by other advertising professionals.
In a sense, this was the final insult to a medium which must sell to survive; it was lumped with other categories such as packaging and corporate identity, also judged by designers.
CAMI agrees that direct marketing is an opportunity for effects as creative as anything that television can do; his company recently produced a brochure for a property development called The Fountains which featured a front cover made of plastic, filled with water and a handful of coins.
In its way, it was as funny and arresting as anything from television, but it lacks the scale and presence of a few hundred thousand pounds' worth of television commercial.
It was several points short of a pencil.
There is evidence, however, that direct marketing is becoming more attractive to clients, and that, as part of the supporting cast rather than the main event, it can become more exciting.
Certainly it is one of the few areas of growth: between 1985 and 1990 the advertising spend in Britain grew 75 per cent, but the spend on direct mail grew 101 per cent .
Some £930 million was spent on direct mail in 1990.
Ben Casey, director of the Chase agency and a member of the design sub-committee of D & AD, was a judge of the direct mail section in 1991.
He points out that the pencils are notoriously difficult to get, and says the simple fact is that the judges have not seen sufficient innovation.
What did he think of the squashed chicken leaflet?
‘I don't particularly like it.’
Could that be something to do with the fact he couldn't read it?
‘That comes into it, yes.
But this is an interesting attempt.’
And the squashed chicken?
‘Not sure.
You'll have to ask the designers.’
He came closest to a silver pencil, he thinks, with a submission made five or six years ago.
It was a mailshot for his own agency, which was then starting up, to potential clients.
The fact that this at least made it into D & AD's showcase book of work indicates the kind of thing direct marketeers should aim for if they want to improve their awards performance.
‘The idea was to explain the philosophy of the agency,’ says Casey.
‘I'd heard a programme about an Indian craftsman who made wooden elephants.
They asked him how he did it, and he replied, ‘I just put away the bits of wood that don't look like elephants’.
That summarises design for me.
So we put a wooden elephant into every package.
It cost £10 a go, but in terms of the cost of a double-page spread, say, it was very cost effective.’
The message is clear for those seeking the high acclaim and rocket-propelled career progress that a D & AD award confers.
Perhaps a squashed chicken and a wooden elephant?
City: Disney groups agree truce
By Mary Brasier
FRENCH building contractors who had threatened to disrupt this weekend's opening of the Euro Disney theme park in Paris yesterday reached an eleventh-hour truce with the company over cost overruns.
Sixteen companies and around 300 sub-contractors had claimed £85m of extra payments on the £2.3 billion theme park.
Disney said yesterday it had reached a settlement with one group of contractors for an undisclosed sum.
Other companies still in dispute with Disney have agreed not to press their claims for the time being and will call off plans for a demonstration at Sunday's opening ceremony.
Disney, which has always refused to concede contractors' claims, declared yesterday that its payment to CGCE which has undertaken £13.5m of work on the Paris theme park was related ‘only to those of the group's claims which are judged to be well-founded.’
The deal includes guarantees by CGCE that it will settle matters with its sub-contractors and suppliers.
Disney is still arguing with several contractors over the final bill for the theme park.
Two cases have been referred to arbitration, up to six more are the subject of court action.
City: P&O £55m sale to China
By Andrew Griffiths
CHAIRMAN Lord Sterling has bolstered the Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation Company's prospects in the Far East by selling a stake in one of the biggest container terminals in Hong Kong to the Chinese.
China Merchant Holdings, one of China's two biggest shipping operators, is paying £55m to P&O, which is reducing its interest in Modern Terminals from 23 p.c. to 14 p.c.
Another 6 p.c. is being sold by the Commonwealth Development Corporation, giving the Chinese a 15 p.c. interest and binding them into partnership with P&O and other shipping lines such as the Danish Maersk.
Lord Sterling is keen to maintain strong links with China and establish a strategic alliance with a major user of the terminal as P&O embarks upon expansion in the region.
The sale also gives him a £49m profit to pay for acquisitions.
He said yesterday: ‘We are putting some of our best people out there to build up operations in what are the fastest growth areas in the world.’
With a Hong Kong stock market listing for P&O obtained last September, a new company, P&O Asia, is to be launched in Hong Kong within the next few weeks.
It will incorporate the group's interests in Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia and India.
City: Dagenham falls to £2m
DAGENHAM Motors, the London and South East-based Ford dealer, sold nearly a fifth fewer new cars last year contributing to a fall in profits of more than a third to £2.1m.
Turnover edged ahead to £127m from £125m.
David Philip, chairman, described trading conditions as the ‘poorest for many years.’
A maintained final dividend of 4p payable on May 28 gives an unchanged 53/4p for the year.
The shares were down 1 at 113p.
City: Addison £16m rights issue flops
A £16m rights issue from Addison Consultancy, the market research company, flopped yesterday with only 2.4 p.c. of the 151m shares on offer at 12p each taken up.
The 9-for-4 share offer, underwritten by merchant banker Robert Fleming, was to help fund the purchase of a large slice of AGB Research from the administrators of the private companies of the late Robert Maxwell.
The stock market slide which took Addison shares below the rights price last week hit the issue, while the warning from MAI, the services group headed by Lord Hollick, that it would sell its stake after the AGB acquisition did not help.
But the company and its advisers put a brave face on the outcome yesterday.
Elizabeth Holt, a Fleming director, said: ‘Given the share register we regarded the rights as more of a placing.’
The MAI stake is down from 25 p.c. to 7 p.c. and the holding of Virtus — the French company which had 26 p.c. — has dropped to 8 p.c.
The shares were ½ lower at 10½p.
City: Boosey plays a high note
A FINE performance in Japan, backed by sharply higher royalty earnings, enabled Boosey & Hawkes, the instrument maker and music publisher, to shrug off the recession in Britain, the United States and Australia, last year and extend its growth record.
Richard Holland, chief executive, announcing a 24 p.c. rise in full-year pre-tax profits to £4.01m, said the Far East, principally Japan, accounted for 20 p.c. of the group's profits, compared with just 8 p.c. in 1990.
Publishing arm profits rose 31 p.c. to £3½m.
But with earnings up 22 p.c. to 60p a share, the dividend total is being lifted 22 p.c. to 20p, with a 144p final on May 29.
The shares closed 40 higher at 950p.
City: IMF plots 3¼pc growth
By Jonathan Confino in New York
THE International Monetary Fund expects the industrial world to achieve 3¼ p.c. economic growth in 1993 after 2 p.c. in 1992.
The Treasury's forecast, indicates gross domestic product in Britain this year will increase by 1 p.c., rising to 3 p.c. in the first six months of 1993, compared with the same period the previous year.
The world recovery will be led by the United States, according to the IMF, where growth is expected to pick up to 3½ p.c. next year.
Late last month, IMF managing director Michel Camdessus said: ‘The world economy is emerging from a period of slow growth, but with hesitation.’
Some of the main factors behind weakness last year, such as high oil prices and high consumer and corporate debt, were dissipating he said.
The economic growth figures have already been marginally trimmed in the last month and may be revised further in a review that will be carried out just before before the publication of the World Economic Outlook on April 23.
City: Cadbury £3m for Alma pair
CADBURY Schweppes is paying just over £3m for the Hacks and Victory V cough-sweet brands owned by Alma, the Scottish confectionery group which went into receivership in February and was subsequently closed down.
The deal also includes associated production equipment at Alma's Keillers plant, which will be moved into one of Cadbury's Trebor Bassett factories, and the small Angus plant in Dundee which makes chocolate-covered nuts and raisins.
But the news brings little cheer for the 770 Alma workers laid off by the receivers.
It is believed restaffing the Angus plant will create only about 20 jobs.
City: Tesco hails end of slump as profits rise to £545m
By Marc Popiolek
SUPERMARKET giant Tesco hailed the end of the recession yesterday, saying that sales at its stores have moved ahead from the low point reached last November.
‘It is a recovery,’ said chairman Sir Ian MacLaurin, announcing profits up by 31 p.c. to £545m before tax for the 53 weeks to February 29.
‘Since Christmas, sales have moved ahead.
Confidence is starting to return.
The recession is moving away.’
Although the headline figure for sales at Tesco last year showed growth of 13 p.c. to £7.6 billion, the volume of goods passing through its shops actually fell slightly when the effects of a rapid store-opening programme are taken into account.
In the second half of the financial year, the bottom of the recession according to the company, sales volumes on a like-for-like basis fell by 2 p.c.
Since Christmas, however, and especially in recent weeks, the trend in like-for-like volumes has turned modestly positive.
Profits last year were boosted by £69m of interest savings from the £572m rights issue a year ago.
But operating margins widened from 6.6 p.c. to 7.1 p.c. as the group strove to raise efficiency through initiatives such as wastage reduction and automatic re-ordering, made possible by the growth of scanning at checkouts.
Sunday opening is extremely popular with the public, Sir Ian claimed.
‘There is a huge demand for it in the United Kingdom,’ he said.
Half a million shoppers visit Tesco shops every Sunday.
This is mainly as an alternative to shopping on Friday evening or Saturday, although seven-day opening had brought a ‘small increment’ in sales.
Reaction to the results from stockbrokers was mixed.
Philip Dorgan of Goldman Sachs said: ‘Their performance represents quite a big turnaround in the past few months.
The current year has definitely started well.’
Tony Shiret of Credit Lyonnais Laing was more sceptical.
‘We are still unconvinced by their sales performance,’ he said.
‘There were a lot of one-offs in the figures.’
The group continued to push ahead with an ambitious expansion strategy, fuelled by the rights issue proceeds.
It opened 24 further superstores during the financial year, adding another 977.000 sq.ft of selling space.
The total number of outlets is now 396 stores, which represents 10.4m sq.ft of retailing space.
A further 28 stores are expected to be added in the current year.
Total capital expenditure, £852m in the 12 months to February, will be maintained at almost the same level in the current period.
Diluted for the extra shares issued as rights, earnings per share grew from 16.6p to 20.0p.
Total dividends rise from 5¼p to 6.3p, with the final of 4.3p payable on July 1.
On the stock market the shares put on 5 to 256p yesterday.
City: Buoyant Next back in black with £12m
By Karen Cooper
NEXT, which a year ago reported one of the biggest losses ever by a British retailer, yesterday announced a return to dividends and provided the hardest evidence yet that the troubles of recent years are behind it.
Under the guidance of chief executive David Jones, the fashion retailer made a pre-tax profit of £12.3m in the year to January — a strong recovery from its 1990-91 pre-tax loss of £40m and total losses that year of some £220m.
After nearly two years without dividends, shareholders will receive a final payout of 0.75p, payable on July 1.
Directors said they expect to pay an interim and a final in the current year.
‘We have gone one-third of the way to where we want to be,’ Mr Jones said of the restructuring which has sold off the Grattan mail-order business for £167½m, cut debts in the Club 24 credit operation, improved trading in the core retail division and strengthened the balance sheet.
Net cash in January was £35m after an inflow during the year of £25m.
The profit beat City expectations and the shares, which have more than doubled in the past year, rose 5 to 71p.
Next's 8 p.c. fewer high street shops, to 312, returned to profit in the second half and sales rose 6 p.c. year-on-year after a 9 p.c. second-half rise.
This was despite 7 p.c. lower selling space as unprofitable shops were shut.
Profit from the shops was £9m in the second-half and £6.4m for the year (£2.3m loss previously) after a loss in the clearance shops.
Next Directory increased profit to £4m.
City: Stempel power curbed at GM
By JONATHAN CONFINO
A BOARDROOM revolt by non-executive directors at loss-making General Motors, the world's largest industrial company, has curtailed the power of chairman Robert Stempel, writes Jonathan Confino in New York.
The board acted just weeks after GM disclosed the biggest loss in corporate history.
It ousted Mr Stempel as chairman of the board's executive committee which effectively runs the company between monthly board meetings.
He is to be replaced by non-executive director John Smale, former chairman and chief executive of Procter & Gamble.
Mr Stempel's chosen president, Lloyd Reuss — who was last night due to receive a ‘leadership award’ from the Engineering School of Detroit — and finance director Robert O'Connell were demoted.
Mr Reuss, who had been in charge of the North American car operations for five years, will be replaced by vice-chairman John Smith, who transformed GM's ailing European operations in the 1980s.
City: WMI shares leap on grey market
By Marc Popiolek
SHARES in Waste Management International, the waste disposal group being floated in London by its American parent, were priced a shade lower than expected at 585p yesterday, before jumping to 612p on the grey market.
The parent, Waste Management Inc of Chicago, advised by Merrill Lynch, edged the price of the £439m international share offering down from 590p–600p to ensure a buoyant after-market and to keep institutional investors in Britain happy.
Broker Cazenove, responsible for marketing the UK tranche of the share sale, failed to drum up the same level of enthusiasm exhibited in other centres.
Merrill could have sold the whole issue several times over in the US, but Waste Management International intends to acquire British companies, funded by future share issues, and needs to create a shareholder base in Britain to facilitate this.
Dealings proper start on April 15.
Under US rules, Merrill Lynch is allowed to intervene meantime to ‘stabilise’ the price.
City: Utd Friendly paying more
UNITED Friendly, the insurance group floated last July, is lifting the payment to shareholders 20 p.c. to 12.3p, with an 8.1p final on May 29, after pushing profits up from £18.8m to £20.1m in 1991.
Lower interest charges saw investment income fall 17 p.c. to £8.4m, but losses on the group's general branch business were reduced by 25 p.c. to £4m, with a 52 p.c. jump in losses on motor insurance to £5m, offset by an improvement in the property underwriting account from the previous year's losses to break-even.
Life profits also moved strongly ahead, rising 15 p.c. to £10.7m, despite increased spending on the development of the company's unit linked business.
City: Governor slams accounts
CRITICISM of the way companies present their accounts and the lack of interest in reform among investors was voiced last night by Robin Leigh-Pemberton, Governor of the Bank of England.
He told the Institute of Chartered Accountants that recent failures had highlighted weaknesses in accounts.
Changes in auditing practices might be needed to bridge an ‘expectations gap’ about the role of auditors.
Imprecise accounting standards and unsatisfactory enforcement had allowed directors to ‘window-dress’ their accounts.
‘The market should expect open and honest reporting as a matter of right and those who fall below the required standard should be brought to account,’ said the Governor.
Reforms would not be enough without cultural change among companies, institutions, analysts and investors.
Concentration on yardsticks such as earnings per share or gearing had contributed to a lack of understanding of the wider business.
Accounts were no longer automatically fully trusted to give a clear and unbiased representation of a company's performance, the Governor told the institute's annual dinner in London.
He welcomed reforms proposed by the Financial Reporting Council and its satellites and supported moves to introduce a British version of the American-style management discussion and analysis in the annual report.
‘We must think in terms of corporate reporting rather than just financial statement,’ said the Governor.
City: Dealer linked with Ferranti
By Jonathan Confino in New York
THE American government has seized assets of a Chilean arms dealer who allegedly took part in a complex $1 billion (£575m) fraud that brought defence group Ferranti to the brink of collapse.
Federal agents have seized dozens of bank accounts and about $30m in Florida office buildings, homes and other properties owned by Carlos Cardoen.
The action was over allegations that Mr Cardoen supplied Iraq with 29,000 cluster bombs during its war with Iran and laundered the money through his Florida property portfolio.
US Customs Commissioner Carol Hallett said: ‘We have dropped a cluster bomb on Carlos Cardoen and his organisation.’
While not yet formally charged, Mr Cardoen has separately been accused by investigators of helping American arms manufacturer James Guerin to swindle Ferranti.
Mr Guerin, who sold his International Signal and Control company to Ferranti in 1987 for £420m, has admitted creating numerous fictitious arms contracts that helped to create the illusion of prosperity.
Mr Guerin was to have been sentenced yesterday but this has now been delayed by up to two months.
City: Cuts help sustain Meggitt
By Matthew Doull
PROFITS at engineering group Meggitt fell £400,000 last year to £23.5m, thanks to rationalisation and a reduction in interest charges after the company's £40m autumn rights issue eliminated net borrowings.
Turnover slipped from £305m to £302m, but chairman Ken Coates called the performance ‘remarkably resilient’.
Despite sales falls in several areas, almost all of the group's businesses increased profits.
Weakness in British markets was offset by strong continental sales.
Stocks were reduced 17 p.c. thanks to ‘just in time’ stock control and staff cuts were made.
Comparing the last two years, Mr Coates said: ‘We achieved the same result with 900 fewer people.’
At the year-end, Meggitt still had £22m of spare cash, which will help finance its £30m purchase of Endevco, an American aerospace engineering group that specialises in accelerometers.
The final dividend is being raised to 2.4p, payable on July 3, to bring the total to 3.6p, up from 3.41p.
City: Price war robs pollsters of election gold
By Sonia Purnell
NEWSPAPERS, radio and television have commissioned an orgy of more than 100 polls during this election campaign but the five main pollsters — MORI, Gallup, Harris, ICM and NOP — have embarked on a price war likely to leave them with little profit.
Four pollsters pitched to carry out polls for a BBC current affairs television programme, of which one soon dropped out, two bid between £70,000 and £80,000 and the fourth only £45,000.
As one of the losing bidders said: ‘This is not sour grapes but political polls may be great for promoting our name with the public and for cashflow but they are definitely questionable on profit.’
A typical rate for a political poll of 1,000 people would be about £7,500.
Robert Waller of Harris, owned by the American Gannett newspaper group, said political polls account for just 3 p.c. of turnover in non-election years, rising to 10 p.c. in the election year of 1987.
If there are two elections this year — which all the pollsters are naturally hoping for — he believes political polls may account for up to 15 p.c., with market research accounting for the rest.
He said: ‘Polls give us a high profile.
We have regular arrangements with some of our clients at loss-leader rates to maintain name recognition for our commercial work.’
Gordon Heald of Gallup, which is owned by its four working directors, said polls published outside election campaigns were more useful for name recognition.
Mr Heald however, pointed to a rise in demand for commercial research.
‘Business started to improve again in November and February was one of the best months ever.
Our problem now is to accommodate both political polls and commercial research,’ he said.
Neverthless, most pollsters agree their firms have lost some of their glamour since the late 1980s when financial and media group MAI paid £16m for NOP in 1989, a year it made just £400,000 profits.
A few years ago, MORI sold a 25 p.c. stake to venture capitalists 3i for £2m, but 51 p.c. is still owned by director Bob Worcester, who abandoned plans to float.
ICM — the newcomer that rose from the ashes of Marplan — is owned by its management.
City: Fuller head in shake-up
FULLER Smith & Turner, the London brewer of London Pride and Chiswick Bitter, has announced a management reshuffle which will see Anthony Fuller, chairman and managing director for the past decade, split his two roles.
Mr Fuller, 52, said yesterday the move would allow him, as executive chairman, to take ‘half a step back to focus on policy and strategy’ at a time of market upheaval for regional brewers and pub owners.
Michael Turner, the wine and marketing director, and part of the original Turner family, will become managing director, and David Williams, head of Fuller's hotels, will move up to deputy chairman.
The reshuffle comes not long after a difficult first half in which profits fell 17 p.c.
City: Sterling buy order cheers City and eases rate fears
By Anne Segall
THE City's mood improved yesterday after a big buying order for sterling gave the currency an early boost.
The order, put at about £500m, was reported to have come from a group of British fund managers acting through Barclays Bank in London.
Dealers said there was also some buying of pounds out of Singapore.
Suggestions that the Bank of England may have been behind the operation were rejected by market professionals.
They believe the decision to buy was taken on straightforward commercial grounds.
Sterling has been weak throughout the election campaign and, with just two more working days before the vote is counted, fund managers are believed to have decided to close short positions.
The pound closed half a pfennig higher at Dm2.8426 and was steady against the dollar.
The improvement in sterling eased fears of a sharp rise in interest rates, although money market professionals yesterday were still discounting a half-point rise to 11 p.c. in bank base rates.
Opinion on the exchanges was divided about the likely reaction to Labour as the party with the most seats but no overall majority.
A senior dealer warned that yesterday's improvement in the pound might turn out to have been just ‘a temporary bit of relief’.
The operation by fund managers was thought to be purely tactical, to avoid the risk of a sharp fall in the currency followed by an equally sharp rise should the next government decide to apply the remedy of higher interest rates.
There was also some nervousness at the prospect of the next government deciding to adopt narrow bands for sterling as a way of underpinning the currency.
That would leave those short of pounds at current levels exposed to large losses.
Dealers are worried that a minority government, which might have to consider seeking a firmer mandate by calling a second general election later in the year, would be hard pressed to keep sterling within its exchange rate mechanism bands during a period of continuing uncertainty.
City: Li Ka-shing confirms interest in O&Y assets
By Hugo Gurdon in Hong Kong
BUSINESSMAN Li Ka-shing is interested in properties owned by Olympia & York, the troubled developer of London Docklands' Canary Wharf development.
But Hong Kong Land, the colony's major property company, denied yesterday it plans to help the developer.
A senior executive at Jardine Matheson, Hong Kong Land's parent, said: ‘We have not talked to Olympia and we have no intention of doing so.’
Hong Kong Land's low gearing, and chairman Simon Keswick's suggestion that he could snap up property at depressed prices, triggered hopes the company was interested in Canary Wharf.
But Li Ka-shing, head of Cheung Kong, confirmed he is ‘interested in some of Olympia's assets, but has not come up with any solid plans’.
He resigned from the board of Hong Kong & Shanghai Banking Corporation, a large creditor, last week, apparently to avoid a conflict of interest.
But Hong Kong analysts say he is unlikely to be tempted by Canary Wharf, preferring North American property.
Olympia & York missed a $62m annual interest payment late last month on an $800m Eurobond secured by a New York office block.
The tower is fully let, leading to speculation that funds were diverted to deal with its liquidity crunch.
O & Y said the company had until next week to find the money.
City Comment: Stock Exchange stirs up backwater shares
THERE are shares which are technically quoted on the Stock Exchange but in which there have been no dealings for a year.
County NatWest this week ceased to act as market-maker for more than 30 infrequently traded shares, freeing capital for more productive use elsewhere.
For companies whose shares no longer have two market-makers, it will mean relegation to the ‘Delta notice board’— the Stock Exchange's equivalent of the newsagent's window — which lists shares waiting to be bought or sold.
This is the untold story of an exchange which rightly prides itself on an ability to offer efficient markets in leading shares but which cannot cope with the unattractive smaller companies.
The exchange's members helped encourage this backwater, however.
During busier days they brought companies to the unlisted securities market but required owners to sell only 15 p.c. of their shares to outsiders — who often turned out to be long-term holders lined up in advance by the issue's brokers.
Sometimes owners had to promise not to issue new shares for two more years.
Not surprisingly, there is now little trade.
There are success stories of companies which have used this unlisted market as the first step to the big-time, but too many have remained stuck with a quotation but no business in their shares.
Founding shareholders are reluctant to dilute their controlling holdings or to sell shares at depressed prices.
Yesterday, therefore, the exchange finally sought to increase the liquidity in 120 of its least traded shares.
It is passing the market-makers' responsibility on to the companies' own stockbrokers, who will match buyers to sellers.
The brokers will upgrade the newsagent's window to include more facts on the company and its shares in the hope that information encourages trade.
But the change will further enhance the power of companies' sponsoring brokers, who are already frequently the only analysts providing research on these illiquid shares.
The third market has already been sorted out by closing it down; now is the time for an equally drastic solution for these untraded quoted shares.
Short of creating a stock market boom, the exchange should consider forcing these companies to free more stock, either by making current controllers sell shares or by issuing new ones.
City Comment: The only poll that matters
NOW that the only poll that matters is tomorrow's, it is worth reflecting on how worthless some of the recent commercial polls have been.
It does not matter how many people are questioned and how well the answers are added up and averaged out — asking the wrong people the wrong question will produce the wrong answer.
People can only tell the pollsters what they know.
When asked who they will vote for, they are being asked as experts because they know about their own vote; ask them who will win the election and they can only guess, rely on anecdotal information or regurgitate polls or commentators they have read.
It has not stopped businessmen being asked what they think will happen to the economy if the government changes, however, even if those businessman can do nothing better than guess or regurgitate or express hopes and fears.
As even the Treasury probably does not have a sufficiently sophisticated model to calculate where exchange rates or interest rates will go, the cleverest entrepreneur cannot be expected to give a correct answer.
What he gives is his opinion, whereas when he is asked who he will vote for he gives a fact.
The pollsters' findings on the economy's future are thus a fair measure of businessmen's thinking — but little guide to what will actually occur.
The pollsters might as well ask them who will win the Derby and whether the weather will be fine.
Thinking that something will happen does not make it happen.
The people who backed Docklands Express and Brown Windsor in last Saturday's Grand National can attest to that: they backed their opinion with real cash — but for all their money, they couldn't make either horse win.
Free City opinions are worth just as much.
City Comment: Tesco trolley tells a tale
TESCO chairman Sir Ian MacLaurin not only has some of the deceptively unassuming John Major manner but also shares some of the objectives of the Prime Minister.
Alongside his impressive profits, the supermarket retailer issued a five-point manifesto for business confidence yesterday.
Tesco wants inflation and interest rates kept in check, opportunities for disposable incomes to rise, management talent to be retained and real jobs to be generated — including the encouragement of overseas investment.
This is all eminently sensible.
Tesco is not publicly endorsing any political party, but reading between the lines there is little doubt where the sympathies of Sir Ian and his top team lie.
After all, if anyone has flourished in the past 13 years it has been the supermarkets.
Margaret Thatcher's governments encouraged the old nationalised industries to sell derelict sites which retailers snapped up for building superstores.
More and more people were able to join the fruit juice, fresh veg and ready-meal eating classes.
Perhaps Sir Ian should lend Mr Major a hand by telling us what the average shopper's trolley contained in 1979, and what it contains today.
City Comment: Bondholders get tough at Heron
HERON'S bondholders told the company what they think of its refinancing requirements yesterday: they demanded repayment and knocked down the price.
The £450m (nominal) of bonds are the only quoted part of the property and garages empire, and while some edged higher yesterday, others fell from Sf43 to Sf36 on the Swiss exchanges — far from the Sf100 repayment level which holders had expected in 1995 and which they yesterday demanded immediately.
Managers of four of the 11 bond issues have declared Heron to be in default and sought instant redemption.
It may be an obvious and technical claim, but it demonstrates the problems which potentially lie ahead.
Swiss-owned stockbrokers Phillips & Drew are trying to soothe the Swiss bond managers, but the betting must be that this group of investors will be far more successful than Heron's bankers in demanding sweeteners for accepting late payment.
City: US banking failures could soar
THE American government predicts that up to 239 American banks, with assets of $116 billion (£67 billion), will fail this year.
As a result, the depleted bank insurance fund, which guarantees deposits of up to $100,000, will lose between $7 billion and $9 billion.
City: Wall St plunges
WALL Street plummeted on profit taking and worries about the continuing fall in Tokyo.
The Dow Jones index fell 61.94 to 3,213.55, its lowest since November.
Some traders expect it to fall to 3,100 within the next few weeks.
In Tokyo, the Nikkei stock index lost 644.82 to close at 17,791.55, its lowest since the end of 1986.
City: Oil prices steady
OIL prices remained firm yesterday after the latest flurry caused by Middle East tension and the start of what is expected to be a new round of petrol price rises.
Prices of North Sea Brent oil for May delivery marked time at $18.89 a barrel with June quotations 4 cents lower.
City: Boost for Wardle
WARDLE Storeys, the safety equipment and car-parts maker, increased pre-tax profit by £68,000 to £4.36m in the half-year to February, despite the recession reducing turnover from £39.8m to £38.2m.
The interim dividend is being held at 4p.
It will be paid on July 1.
All the sales fall was in the technical products division which makes seat covers and other motor fittings.
This was the only division to report lower profits too.
Wardle has a cash balance of over £30m.
City: Staff buy Brewin
BREWIN Dolphin, one of Britain's oldest and largest private client stockbrokers, is being sold to its management for £6m by Scandinavian Bank, which bought the business in 1987.
Fifty staff are putting in £13/4m for 85 p.c. of the equity with venture capital backing from Baronsmead and 3i.
City: Shipping tragedy
LLOYD'S Register, the largest ship registration organisation, is being sued in America over a ship fire that killed 159 people two years ago.
Law firm Healy & Baillie has accused the agency, which is an offshoot of Lloyd's of London insurance market, of negligence after it allegedly inspected the passenger ship Scandinavian Star and approved its safety shortly before its tragic voyage.
City: Outhwaite cash
THE £116m settlement won by litigating members of the Outhwaite syndicates at Lloyd's will be paid to the agents of the 817 members and any debts for losses of other syndicates will be deducted before any cash is fowarded to individuals, David Coleridge, chairman of Lloyd's emphasised yesterday.
Members had hoped to get the cash direct and still resist payments for losses.
City: Pittencrief plan
PITTENCRIEF, which allowed a £3.9m bid for oil minnow AmBrit International to lapse following the arrival of a higher bid earlier this year, is considering demerging its oil and gas interests.
The announcement accompanied full-year figures showing a 73 p.c. rise pre-tax profits to £3.51m, which excludes a £400,000-plus profit on the sale of its 29.9 p.c. stake in AmBrit, and a one-third rise in dividends to 6p, with a 3½p final on May 21.
City: Credit revelation
FROM July next year credit reference agencies will be allowed to supply financial information only about a person applying for credit, the Data Protection Registrar, Eric Howe, said yesterday.
The agencies have previously provided information by address.
City: Agnellis claim
THE financial holding company controlled by the Agnellis of Fiat fame yesterday denied press accounts which reported that the family had acquired 3 p.c. of HJ Heinz.
City: Pizza profits slip
CITY Centre Restaurants, the Deep Pan Pizza and Garfunkels group, saw profits fall 15 p.c. to £9.1m last year, despite a strong second half recovery and a 5 p.c., rise in sales to £79.8m.
A 1.01p final dividend on June 5, lifts the total from 1.39p to 1.45p.
City: CORRECTION
A REPORT in Money-Go-Round on March 14 suggested incorrectly that company car users may include travel to and from work as part of their business mileage when calculating tax liabilities.
City: QS climbs to peak £7.79m
QS HOLDINGS, the South of England clothing retailer, turned in another recession-beating performance last year, pushing profits on from £7.2m to a record £7.79m pre-tax, on sales 8 p.c. higher at £45.6m.
With £10.8m cash under its belt, and earnings up 7 p.c. to 12½p a share, the payout is being lifted from 4.31p to 43/4p, with a 3.3p final on July 7.
Letter to the City Editor: Aged aunt safe from liabilities
SIR — My aunt, aged 93, is selling her house to move into a private residential home.
Her companion for many years has agreed to move out in return for a sum of £34,000.
Will there be any tax liability?
JA Surrey KT16 8AJ THE amount paid to the companion by your aunt is in order to achieve an enhanced interest in an asset she already owns, i.e. the ability to sell with vacant possession.
Assuming she has lived in the house for her whole period of ownership and has never nominated elsewhere as main residence there is no question of a CGT liability when she sells.
Similarly the companion should have no tax liability as it is presumably the disposal of an interest in his/her main residence that gives rise to the receipt of £34,000.
Letter to the City Editor: Inheritance tax on a husband's legacy
SIR — A recent article on inheritance tax assumed a husband left an estate above the top of the nil band to his wife and there was no inheritance paid at that time.
It implied tax on the total amount so transferred to the wife will be payable on her death.
This assumes she still has that amount of money.
Most husbands leave money to support the wife in her declining years and quite possibly a large amount of what he left to her will have disappeared on her death.
Is the tax really payable on the amount the husband left, irrespective of how much is left when the wife dies?
MC Cornwall TR3 6HR THE inheritance tax changes announced in the Budget did not become law so the nil rate band will have increased automatically by the RPI to £147,000 on Monday.
Textbooks and newspaper articles tend to assume that there are no changes in legislation or personal circumstances in order to illustrate a principle.
If you die leaving £347,000 to your wife it is assumed that she still has it when she dies, so £200,000 is taxable then.
If it has grown to £447,000 then £300,000 is taxable on her death but if it falls to £247,000 her estate will only pay tax on £100,000, assuming that the nil rate band did not change.
Inheritance tax is levied on the value of a deceased's estate on the date of death, with certain lifetime gifts added back in.
ANSWERS supplied by chartered accountant Grant Thornton in association with The Daily Telegraph.
Grant Thornton is authorised by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales to carry on investment business.
This information is for guidance only and you should not take action without specific advice.
Midweek Money-Go-Round: Looking to the future free of inflation fears
By DUNCAN HUGHES
FIONA Saunders, 24, made a small piece of personal finance history when she became the 50,000th saver with Britain's oldest and largest investment trust.
Yesterday's annual meeting of the Foreign & Colonial heard how Fiona decided to invest in shares through a savings scheme because they will provide inflation-proofing without her having to worry about investment timing.
Fiona said: ‘With a bank account you only receive a standard rate of interest unless you have a big deposit.
The other problem with savings accounts is that inflation eats the investment away.’
The F&C trust increased net assets 21.6 p.c. to 184½p a share in 1991 and raised its final dividend by 11.6 p.c. to 2.12p (1.9p), making a total of 3.19p (2.9p).
The number of investors has risen from 26,618 at the end of 1989.
The increase is partly attributable to the success of the group's savings scheme, introduced in 1984.
An investor who placed £30 a month into the savings scheme for 10 years to March 31 would have amassed £8,495 after expenses.
This compares with £5,987 for an investor who placed £30 a month in the average performing unit trust on a offer-to-bid basis.
The best performing unit trust over that period would have produced £9,481.
By comparison, an Equitable Life 10-year endowment policy, with monthly premiums of £30, would have produced about £8,399.
Fiona admits she still does not know how to check the performance of the fund and that the only information she has received from the company is the annual report and accounts.
Midweek Money-Go-Round: Labour's genteel poverty trap Economics Correspondent Anne Segall assesses
the costs of Labour for professionals in the capital
By ANNE SEGALL
THE Labour party's fiscal policy has been presented as ‘fair’ on the basis of national averages.
But many people in the South East who enjoy large salaries also have large fixed debts and overheads.
If Labour wins tomorrow these people face a massive cash squeeze, with little hope of adjusting their expenses in the short-run.
The predicament of this group could have severe economic repercussions for the region as a whole.
Those caught in the ‘genteel poverty trap’ can expect little sympathy from people earning the national wage of £15,790 or less.
But the effect of Labour's proposals in the South East could be dramatic.
Inland Revenue statistics show that the region already pays more than 10 times more income tax than, for example, the North of England.
There are nearly seven times as many taxpayers in the South East, where the average wage is £17,000, but Labour's proposals would sharply increase the tax burden they bear.
There are four and a half million people earning above average incomes and therefore potentially vulnerable to Labour's tax squeeze.
We have chosen the example of two professionals in their middle thirties, living in a terraced house in London bought four years ago with the help of a £90,000 mortgage.
This is not uncommon in the South East and well within the building society norm of two and a half times income.
To enable the wife to work, the couple have employed a nanny and have also decided to educate their children at private London day schools.
The main difficulty faced by this couple is that national taxes take no account of the costs associated with living in the capital.
Mortgage relief is available only up to £30,000 while childcare expenses cannot be offset against tax.
Whereas 70 per cent of working women rely on relatives to provide childcare support, this option is often unavailable to professional women working full-time in demanding jobs.
Another problem is that local taxes have to be paid for out of taxed income, whereas local taxes in other countries such as America can often be offset.
Our example was prepared with the help of Reward, the pay research group.
It shows that the impact of Labour's taxes is magnified at the level of disposable income.
In our example, the London couple will experience a relatively modest decline of 5 p.c. in its after tax income after allowing for higher child benefit under Labour.
This may seem reasonable or even ‘fair’.
But, after allowing for fixed costs, the couple's disposable income will be severely squeezed.
The amount left over shrinks by 16 p.c. to £12,734 which is just enough to cover day by day living expenses, as extrapolated from the National Expenditure Survey, without allowing for higher basic costs in London and the costs associated with employing a nanny.
The bottom line is even bleaker.
It shows that an apparently affluent London couple will have virtually nothing left to pay for holidays, consumer durables or for saving under Labour.
Questor Column: Sherwood leaves the rest behind
Edited by Marc Popiolek
JUST when you thought frilly knicker and bra design had gone as far as it could, Sherwood Group is set to go further.
Europe's biggest lacemaker has just taken delivery of five Textronic machines which will churn out new ‘three-dimensional’ lace.
With new products such as these in the pipeline, chairman David Parker says the group's future is bright.
By the looks of Sherwood's 36 p.c. rise to a record pre-tax profit of £14½m in 1991, the past was not bad either.
The latest results mark a milestone for Sherwood, which now claims to be Britain's biggest sock-maker, pumping out a million pairs a week, and is a supplier to that favourite of underwear retailers, Marks & Spencer.
Having raised turnover from £9m at its float six years ago to £118m last year, the 165-year-old group has outgrown the unlisted securities market and will move up to a full quote in May.
Sherwood is also hoping to make its shares more attractive to private investors with a 4-for-1 bonus issue.
Dividends are up by a quarter to 11.4p, after a final of 7½p payable on May 27, with earnings growing in line to 54½p.
Cheap and essential, lingerie and socks are good businesses in a recession, although even more upmarket items such as stretch lace have done well.
They also have overseas appeal — half of Sherwood's sales are abroad, mainly in Continental Europe.
Gearing is 44 p.c. after buying sock-makers Seden last May, and Charles W. Hall in January.
Nearly £8m was invested in plant last year and another £9½m is earmarked this year.
House broker County NatWest forecasts a 1991 profit of £18.9m, which puts the shares, up 10p yesterday to 790p, on a forward multiple of 13.
Not too demanding, but after a good run.
The upside may be limited in the short-term.
Questor Column: Sunny St Ives a fine place to be
MOST company chairmen proudly trumpet the number of jobs that they have cut during the recession.
Not Bob Gavron of St Ives.
It is true that employee numbers have been reduced by around an eighth over the last few years but only as a by-product of the printer's massive £130m capital investment programme.
Mr Gavron cheerfully admits that he has more staff than he needs to handle the currently depressed workload.
Yet he is loath to part with skilled people who could prove difficult to replace come the upturn.
Unlike most of his rivals, Mr Gavron can afford to take a long-term view — even running at 75 p.c. capacity St Ives is still making decent money.
Despite a further weakening of demand, St Ives managed to hold pre-tax profits at £10.1m in the six months to January.
As the United Kingdom's biggest magazine printer, St Ives has shared the pain of publishers hit by the severe slump in advertising.
Scores of weaker titles have been closed and the survivors are all too often shadows of their former selves.
But St Ives has won more than its fair share of new business — such as the new PC Magazine computer title — and although magazine profits were down, that was offset by impressive market share gains in financial printing.
Mr Gavron believes that the company has never been in a stronger position.
Its balance sheet, with net cash of £3½m, is the envy of the industry and St Ives is the clear technical leader in Britain, if not in Europe.
The interim dividend is steady at 1½p, due on June 5, although Mr Gavron hinted that the final could be raised given some improvment in demand.
But of that there is no sign.
The boom days of the 1980s will never return and though profits should recover well when the upturn finally comes that is largely in the price.
On upgraded full-year forecasts of around £19m the multiple is 18 at 243p falling to 15½ for 1992-93.
Questor Column: Still a long way to go for Waterford
THIS year Waterford Wedgwood is set to make its first profit since 1988 and the first of any size since 1986.
But there is no need to rush out and buy the shares.
The rehabilitation of the troubled fine china and crystal maker is likely to continue to be slow and painful.
In 1991 the second half was definitely cheerier than the first, hit by the Gulf war.
Sales, 11 p.c. down at the interim stage, finished the year only 5 p.c. lower at I£292m.
Had it not been for another round of cost cutting, the group would have crept back into the black last year.
In the event, the loss before taxation was I£2.7m, down from I£21.4m, after taking I£5.3m of exceptional charges, against I£18.4m last time.
For the third year running there is no dividend.
The Irish side, Waterford Crystal, made strong progress, cutting its loss from I£4.8m to I£1.2m in 1991.
Wedgwood, traditionally more successful, experienced a rather worrying drop in profits, from I£17.9m to I£12.8m but will benefit from recent action to reduce costs by closing three old and inefficient production facilities — one of which is old enough to be subject to a preservation order.
Financially, the group is not in too bad a state, with debt at I£50m, giving gearing of 36 p.c.
Most of its factories remain on short-time working however and prospects for recovery are hampered by the uncertain outlook for a recovery in sales.
Chairman Donald Brennan said yesterday: ‘The adverse trading environment has continued into the early months of the current year.’
The shares, which were up 1 to 27p in London yesterday, are still speculative at this stage and it is likely to be 1993 before they are supported by anything other than hope value.
But investors who have clung on grimly for the past five years should hang on a while longer.
The Market: Small rise follows volatile session
By Paul Murphy
NEW issues in London are taking on a decidedly international feel, with the 75m share offering by Waste Management International being the latest example.
America's Merrill Lynch, broker to the issue, will be operating an American-style ‘price stabilisation’ programme for up to 30 days, similar to that enacted by Warburgs in the aftermath of the most recent British Telecom float.
Merrill Lynch has effectively sold Waste Management short and will cover its position by picking up stock from any investors stagging the issue (or ‘flipping’ in transatlantic speak).
Similar innovations are expected with the GPA float and the Wellcome Trust offering.
However, Merrill Lynch is running the risk of suffering a substantial loss if the market price holds on to any substantial premium.
On yesterday's new grey market, the shares rose from an issue price of 585p to 612p.
In America, brokers acting as price stabilisers arrange what is known as a ‘green shoe’— an agreement which allows them to go back, cap in hand, to the issuing company and simply ask for more new shares to cover their position.
But Waste Management is a British issue and Merill Lynch does not enjoy such a luxury.
‘I presume they have not gone too short,’ remarked one dealer.
Elsewhere, dealers staggered through another volatile session.
A firm pound and a slight easing of money market rates encouraged a couple of attempts to push the FT-SE 100 index up towards 2420.
Both failed, although the 2400 mark did provide something of a support level.
Real business remained very slack and, with Wall Street heading south in the afternoon, the Footsie slipped in to a 2404.2 point close, up 3.3.
The futures index for June settlement ended at a 29 point premium, 7 points above ‘fair value’.
Sterling's showing and the sighting of a few overseas buyers helped longer-dated gilts add £½ on average.
Leading shares presented a mixed picture.
Cheery figures from both Tesco (up 4½ at 255½p) and Next (gaining 5 to 71p) put consumer-related stocks on a firm footing from the outset, with J Sainsbury adding 6 to 386p, Kingfisher up 2 to at 463p and Argos rising 3 to 234p.
Most issues ended below their best, however.
Whitbread ‘A’ enjoyed a bit of bounce after Monday's debt provision warning, the shares adding 4½ to 363p but other brewers were still reacting, with Grand Metropolitan falling 10 to 876p and Bass off 3 at 515p.
Far Eastern reports of imminent bid terms from Hongkong & Shanghai Bank caused some early excitement in Midland Bank and, despite a denial, the stock held on to a 10 point rise to 345p.
RTZ has performed strongly this year, given a special boost by defend-against-Labour advice, suggesting a switch into stocks with heavy overseas exposure.
Yesterday the shares ticked on another 10 to 579p before settling at 574p, putting the rating at about 15 times on Smith New Court's expectations of a 9 p.c. growth in earnings this year.
The broker reckons RTZ is an excellent late-cycle recovery stock, pointing to its control of a significant portion of the world's metal production, together with strong technical and financial management, not to mention a break up value put at £2.6 billion more than its current £5.8 billion capitalisation.
Trading in Bunzl was fast and furious, volumes topping 6m as the market quote firmed a penny to 94p.
Dealers pointed the finger at Credit Lyonnais Laing, which has been chasing the stock for a fortnight and whose paper and packaging expert, Henry Poole, has spotted the company's recovery potential, advising clients to get in quick.
Mr Poole says the company is taking a robust approach to chopping back unproductive non-core businesses and controlling its cash well.
It also brings in a good two-thirds of its profits from overseas.
ICI shrugged off a decision by house broker Hoare Govett to pull its current year forecast back within the market average (cutting from £1.04 billion to £900m pre-tax), the shares ending the session 9 higher at £12.58.
The broker is still recommending the chemicals giant as the ‘perfect election heldge’— if the Tories get in, the big blue chips cannot fail to attract support; if Labour prospers, well, at least there will be a few capital allowances washing around and, in the words of one dealer, ‘fund managers will have to buy something on Friday morning’.
Followers are still guessing as to what Hanson will do with its ICI stake.
Most reckon that, with the holding in Hanson's balance sheet as a fixed asset, Lord Hanson will probably hold on for maybe 18 months before placing it with an alternative international predator.
Owners Abroad had a nervous session, analysts spotting the unexplained depreciation of one of its aircraft tucked away in its newly-issued report and accounts.
Few convincing answers were forthcoming and the stock ended 6½ lower at 89½p.
Young Group, the open cast coal miner that is soon to lose its quote on the unlisted securities market, was a peculiar market.
The stock jumped from 6p to 16p before settling at 13p.
The corporate finance unit at house broker Smith New Court confessed to being ignorant as to what was going on.
Another dealer explained: ‘There are some punters who will buy a stock just because it has fallen a long way.’
BET suffered another nervous session amid reports that house broker Cazenove had confirmed the market's belief that the dividend is to be cut.
The shares ended 3 lower at 114p.
Cable & Wireless was hit by James Capel shaving its profits estimate, the stock easing 5 to 523p.
City Diary: Strictly on their merits
FALL-OUT at Credit Lyonnais Laing, where I hear that 12 staff from UK research, equity sales, dealing and settlements were bid farewell a week ago.
‘It is a sad fact of life that we have been fortunate enough to recruit staff with even greater levels of excellence,’ says the company's diplomatic chief executive, Michael Kerr-Dineen.
Among the departed is financial services analyst Richard Furlong, who also currently appears in the election pamphlet of Anne Holmes, Labour candidate for Kensington, endorsing her policies.
Co-incidentally, the head of Credit Lyonnais Laing's corporate finance department, Mark Evans, is president of Kensington Conservative Association.
City Diary: Directors show some enterprise
THE Institute of Directors has weighed into the election campaign with a late but confident vote for Toryism.
Declaring ‘British business is a success.
Let our enterprise keep it that way,’ a group of institute members has hired ad agency J Walter Thompson for a three-day campaign in the newspapers.
‘There isn't a budget for this,’ says JWT's joint managing director William Eccleshare, but a quick tally of advertising costs per paper shows the campaign could have cost up to £450,000.
City Diary: Hadley above power politics
A RASH of political interest at the City headquarters of National Power, where leaflets promoting the candidature of a Graham Hadley have been appearing on noticeboards.
Hadley is NatPower's new business development director but happens to share his name with the Responsible Independent parliamentary candidate for Wimbledon.
NatPower's Hadley lives in Putney, next door to the constituency of his namesake — who, incidentally, is a former City salesman.
‘Quite a number of our staff live in Wimbledon and some practical jokers have been putting up the other Graham Hadley's pamphlets,’ he says.
‘This is very unusual.
I would just like to say that I neither support nor oppose him.’
City Diary: Election job for Maxwell aide
SHADOW chancellor John Smith's personal assistant in the election campaign, Helen Liddell, was formerly the Scottish spokesman for Robert Maxwell.
Liddell was Maxwell's official mouthpiece on matters concerning the Scottish Daily Record and Sunday Mail, where she held directorships.
A Mirror Group Newspapers spokesman adds: ‘Since Mr Maxwell died, Helen Liddell has been helping out with the group.
She is not working here this week but should be fielding calls for us after the election.’
Liddell was not available for comment.
City Diary: Mad dash into investment trust
PUCE complexions at Foreign & Colonial Investment Trust, where plans to commemorate the 50,000th investor suffered an unexpected hiccup yesterday.
Britain's oldest and biggest investment trust invited the lucky investor, Fiona Saunders, and fiance Graham Grant, up for a day in London from their home on the Isle of Wight.
A chauffeur-driven Mercedes arrived at Waterloo to collect them for the agm at Skinners' Hall but while the driver was searching the station his car was wheel-clamped.
Only a mad dash got them to the meeting on time.
City Diary: Gavron prints on either side
WITH the printing industry no longer a political hot-bed, Bob Gavron, chairman of St Ives, is sanguine about the prospect of a Labour government.
As Britain's biggest book printer, his eyes light up at the mention of Labour's proposals for an extra £10 per primary school child for books.
But there is a catch: St Ives is leading printer of takeover documents, annual reports and other City bumph.
Gavron says that a Labour victory would extend the current hiatus in bid activity — but not for long.
‘I am a great believer in the egos of company chairmen,’ he says, adding hastily ‘and their concern for the good of the country.’
City Diary: Bomb threat floors Trump
SUPPLIES of Ivana Trump's new novel were cut short on Monday after an anonymous bomb hoax.
The book, For Love Alone, tells the story of a Czech woman who loses her husband to a leggy, honey-blonde with a soft Southern drawl.
Donald Trump left Ivana, a Czech, for Georgia peach Marla Maples and now plans to sue his former wife, who agreed to a gagging order over their marriage as part of her $10m divorce settlement.
Her attempts to promote sales of the book by signing copies at a Long Island store ended abruptly when, following the bomb threat, police evacuated the store until closing time.
Property: When homes turn to dust Householders are suffering an unexpected legacy of Cornwall's mining years, discover Marcus Palliser and Tom Rowland
By TOM ROWLAND
BUILDING societies were called to an emergency meeting by the Department of the Environment this week in an attempt to defuse the growing crisis, over contaminated concrete blocks which is threatening to make unmortgageable up to 40 per cent of the housing stock in Cornwall and parts of Devon.
More than 40,000 Cornish houses are affected, say surveyors who report blanket bans by many societies on loans secured against properties containing any concrete.
Only a small proportion of this total are in fact suspect, say the surveyors who accuse the societies of over-reaction in the wake of the discrediting of the standard test used to monitor impurities.
When present, the impurities cause concrete made from mining spoil, ‘mundic,’ to crumble in damp conditions as trace elements slowly combine with the cement to reduce the lattice structure to a mush.
Local builders looked for a cheap and plentiful source of sand to make concrete blocks after Portland cement came into use, and the excavation tips were close at hand.
Now some blocks made of this material have begun to disintegrate.
Around 4,000 older homes could be at risk — the problem is to identify which concrete is about to crumble and which is sound.
‘The lenders’ behaviour has been disgraceful,’said Charles Stimson, a local surveyor and chairman of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors' (RICS) special mundic committee.
He is concerned the societies have acted fast to protect their own interests.
‘They are ignoring their social responsibility, yet they have invested here and stand to lose as well.’
The discredited test involves test chemical analysis of dust samples taken from suspect properties.
In future, core samples will have to be examined microscopically to determine the likelihood of failure, but development of the new test is not yet complete and will not be available until summer at the earliest.
‘I think we have now convinced the Council of Mortgage Lenders that the new testing regime is acceptable, but they haven't yet taken the brakes off,’ Stimson said.
A spokeswoman for the Council of Mortgage Lenders said: ‘Some lenders are imposing bans on all concrete buildings, but once the new test is operational there will be no need for such caution.’
Worst hit are areas around Cornwall's old tin, zinc and copper mining centres, Camborne, Redruth and Perranporth, but the problem is also found in Truro and Penzance.
Most likely to suffer are concrete block houses built in the Twenties and Thirties and earlier buildings where shuttered concrete was employed.
Use of mundic tailed off in the Fifties.
Where mundic has been found houses have been condemned, others are unsaleable.
Some are on offer at site value.
The discredited test was used since the Seventies to identify impurities, and many owners were given clean bills of health on houses which subsequently were found to be contaminated and are now in danger of collapse.
There predicament is complicated by the far larger number of owners who cannot sell perfectly sound concrete houses.
Both groups have been lumped together under the ban by the building societies.
‘The ban is causing unnecessary hardship for people who want to sell,’ said Geoff Frost, managing director of Millers, one of Cornwall's largest estate agents.
Owners of contaminated houses want to know if they have any comeback, those of houses which are not contaminated want the ban on their properties lifted immediately.
The RICS is adamant liability does not rest with its members.
Adrian Britton, director for general practice, says that mortgage valuers rely on experts in specialised engineering tests.
‘All they can do is recommend a test.
But they do not carry it out,’ Britton said.
Would buyers not assume that a valuation based partly on an expert test implied endorsement of that test by the surveyor?
‘The surveyor would take a judgment as to whether the test was professionally sound, but not on the suitability of the test,’ Britton said.
Truro MP Matthew Taylor wrote to the Government asking for action under the Housing Defects Acts of 1984 and 1985.
These provide compensation for faulty concrete construction in council homes sold to private buyers.
The Minister for Housing, Tim Yeo, said those Acts do not apply.
‘They concern methods of construction used on a national basis, but mundic is a local problem.’
He pointed to House Renovation Grants as a solution.
These are means tested and supervised by local authorities.
A house built of mundic shuttered concrete at the turn of the century in Park Road, Camborne, has been condemned and is for sale at a site value of only £5,000.
Building societies believe the Government is responsible for establishing a new test and surveyors should take any risk on their professional indemnity insurance.
Graham Rogers, a Penzance pensioner, lost heavily after his house failed a chemical analysis test.
‘I sold my house for £78,000 but then the building society wanted a mundic test and as a result I had to knock £11,000 off.
‘The man who drilled for the test said it was among the hardest block he'd ever seen.
I wonder if the building society checked thoroughly into what they were doing.’
With no approved test in place, no sign of compensation and the property market blighted by nervous lenders, Cornish houseowners wonder if they are being fairly served.
Property: A dream among the debris Fifteen years ago, Lachie Stewart set sight on his ideal home, on the windswept Highlands.
Now his vision looks set to be fulfilled.
Rupert Bates reports
By RUPERT BATES
THE smartest venues for New Year's Eve 1999 have already been booked.
But the most romantic new millennium celebrations — masons and money permitting — will be at Ballone Castle on a promontory between the Firths of Dornoch and Moray in north-east Scotland.
Owner Lachie Stewart aims to have re-built the 16th-century fortress he bought two years ago by December 1999.
The farmer who sold it was happy to rid himself of a wreck which was no more than a dangerous playground.
Stewart, a 35-year-old architect who also runs a firm manufacturing tartan fabrics and ceramics, is no get-rich-quick developer looking to convert the castle into a Highland theme park.
He wants to restore it to its original castellated glory to provide a home for wife Annie and two sons and realise a 15-year dream.
‘That was when I first saw the ruins.
I have always dreamt of living in a castle.
It sounds very romantic.’
First, the crumbling structure must be stabilised.
The castle may have been built to fortify, but it no longer has a defence against attack from Highland wind and rain.
‘Most of the masonry is here,’ says Stewart.
‘The building work will hopefully start this spring with repointing and making the structure safe.
The foundations are in good order and the quality of the original lime mortar is excellent.’
A builder would probably ask £1 million for the restoration work.
Stewart hopes to keep the bill under £100,000.
‘We will set ourselves a budget each year and do only as much as we can afford.
It is the labour that is expensive.
We will have to spend a lot initially to make the castle wind and watertight,’ says Stewart, who drew the plans.
He is awaiting a decision from Edinburgh on his application for a Historic Buildings grant, but once completed the castle loses its scheduled monument status and becomes a listed building.
This dream is no castle in the air.
Two years ago the couple took a long holiday.
Armed with a book on Scottish castles and an Ordnance Survey map, they drove from Dumfries to Caithness in search of a wreck to salvage, until Stewart remembered the castle he had first seen as an architectural student.
Never conventional homeowners, the Stewarts, from the West Coast of Scotland, lived in an 18th-century house in Spitalfields when they took their textile business to London.
The castle's history is sketchy.
It is thought to have been built by the Earls of Ross in about 1590 and a new wing, including a brewhouse and bakery, added in 1623.
It was later occupied by the Earls of Cromarty and the MacKenzies of Ardloch-Assynt, but has been empty for 200 years.
The Z-plan design was built around two diagonally opposite towers, one round, one square, with corbelled stair turrets leading from the timbered banqueting hall to the upper floors and the Laird's tower.
Under the vaulted ground floor was a guardroom and small prison.
It will be some time before Stewart can begin on the interior decor, but the furnishings are likely to be medieval in flavour, if contemporary in colour, with heavy tapestries draped from the walls and fittings boxed into the panelling.
Permission has to be sought for every stone turned or material used.
When he is not knee-deep in tartan in the Anta fabrics factory or knee-deep in sandstone rubble on the Portmahomack peninsula, Stewart designs traditional Scottish farm cottages.
Such work is painless compared to turning a 16th-century military fortress into the ultimate 21st-century family home.
The Daily Telegraph Individual Homes Show is at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham over the Easter Weekend, April 18 to April 21.
Details 071-757 7523, or see the coupon on page 16 today.