

Asthma study aims to arrest rising deaths
By Peter Pallot Health Services Staff
EVERY death in asthma patients is to be studied in an attempt to find out why the number of deaths is rising despite the apparently excellent treatments, doctors announced yesterday.
The project, backed by the Department of Health, comes amid fears that symptom-relieving inhalers may be causing some of more than 2,000 deaths a year.
Dr Peter Barnes, professor of thoracic medicine at the National Heart and Lung Institute in London, said there was international concern that asthma could be aggravated by over-use of ‘puffers’, which relieve symptoms but do not tackle the cause.
Steroids, which attack the root of asthma, are widely recommended by doctors but they also have side effects and take effect only after about a week.
Asthma affects one in 10 children and between two and three million people in Britain.
The research team, backed by the National Asthma Campaign, will confidentially question doctors, ambulance crews and relatives in an attempt to unravel the factors that caused a death.
Ozone layer over Europe thins by up to 18 per cent 
By Toby Moore Environment Correspondent
THE OZONE layer above Europe thinned by up to 18 per cent this winter because of pollution from industrial gases, a 17-nation study reported yesterday.
The reduction in the protective layer, which filters harmful ultraviolet rays from the Sun, prompted warnings from Government scientists yesterday that people should ‘take extra note’ of medical advice to avoid midday sun.
But Dr Neil Harris, of the European Arctic Stratospheric Ozone Experiment, which carried out the four-month study, said its conclusions, although serious, were not yet cause ‘to walk around London with a hat on’.
The study found that the the protective layer, which filters harmful ultraviolet rays from the sun, was depleted by up to 18 per cent over Belgium.
On average, the loss ranged from between eight and 15 per cent between November and February according to the study, the most comprehensive ever undertaken, with monitoring from ships, aircraft, rockets and ground stations.
However, the seasonal loss was not great enough to cause an ‘ozone hole’ of the sort above the Antarctic, where at times the layer has reached a wafer-thin 10 per cent of normal this winter.
The United Nations Environment Programme has predicted 600,000 additional skin cancers and up to three million more cataracts if there is a sustained 20 per cent loss of ozone.
More than 300 scientists took part in what was billed as the most comprehensive snap-shot yet of depletion cause by industrial gases above the northern hemisphere.
They admitted findings were complicated by the spewing of volcanic ash from Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines and exacerbated by unusual high pressure weather conditions over Europe.
However, the scientists say they believed the layer would continue to thin every winter at least for the next eight years, after which a ban on use of certain gases will start to have a beneficial effect.
Thinning ozone particularly threatens wildlife, with the ultraviolet light interfering with breeding cycles
Greenpeace gave a warning yesterday of a loophole which allows the EC to promote production of another raft of chemicals, known as HCFCs, now recognised as damaging to the ozone layer but not covered by the Montreal Protocol of 1989.
That set the first targets for reduction of chlorofluorocarbons and halons but excluded HCFCs.
Signatories to the protocol are meeting in Geneva to review the original treaty.
Greenpeace and other environmental organisations want HCFCs phased out, not increased to 300,000 tons a year as the EC proposes.
The winner of the general election will have to face an unprecedented question of protocol: whether to attend Trooping the Colour on June 13, the Queen's official birthday or the UN Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, government sources disclosed yesterday.
Mr Major and Mr Kinnock have said they will attend the summit, and Downing Street officials were consulting the history books yesterday to see whether there are any precedents for the Prime Minister to be absent from the traditional spot on a stand in Horseguards Parade with foreign dignitaries.
Brightness faced starvation in the wild, says trainer
By Stephen Mulvey in Laspi Bay, Crimea
THE NEW trainer of Brightness, the recaptured Beluga whale, said yesterday she was against keeping wild animals captive, but she supported his return to Crimea, because he could not survive at sea.
Miss Alla Azovtseva, 29, who will perform in a circus-type display with Brightness, and a second Beluga whale from the beginning of May, said: ‘I think oceanaria and zoos should not exist, but since he is now dependent on them, it makes no sense to set him free.’
She said Brightness, who arrived back in Laspi Bay at 5am yesterday, was lively and eating well, but very thin, after fending for himself, since he escaped from an aquarium last year.
She said: ‘He has forgotten how to hunt.
Either there were not enough fish for him in the Black Sea, or he couldn't catch them.
‘I think he chose the life he wants.
He went out into the sea, but he was drawn to human beings.
It proves a domesticated animal, accustomed to being fed by hand, cannot live without man.’
She said she had not heard that British scientists wanted to return him to Arctic waters, but warned that going back to cold temperatures, coupled with the need to hunt for food again, would be fatal.
And she believed the whales would remain at Laspi Bay at least for the summer, and had not heard of the widely criticised plans to take them on a travelling display.
Miss Azovtseva also denied that the escaped whales — one of which is still in the Mediterranean — had been taken to Sevastopol from the Pacific coast for military research.
But she did confirm that they had been deposited in the Kazachi Aquarium, which is surrounded by military bases, and not open to the public, before their bid for freedom.
The whale's new home is an enclosure in a children's health cure resort at Laspi Bay, seven kilometres from the spot Mikhail Gorbachev chose for his presidential dacha in the Crimea, and 20 kilometres from the closed city of Sevastopol.
The crystal-clear blue water rarely falls below 20C, or rises above 25C all year round.
Aromatic juniper-covered slopes fall gently down to the sea from dramatic limestone outcrops.
Brightness shares the pool with two dolphins, and another Beluga whale, called Yegor, which arrived at Laspi Bay 10 days ago, from the dolphinarium in Novorossysk, Russia.
Yegor and Brightness kept close company yesterday as they swam and floated around the pool, occasionally rammed by the dolphins who appeared to be jealous of the new arrivals.
Commentary: In alliance with science
By ALLAN MASSIE
IT IS more than 20 years since the novelist C P Snow delivered his Rede Lecture, The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution, and 20 since F R Leavis delivered his swingeing assault on Snow, which made the whole thing a subject of violent controversy, adding somewhat to the gaiety of that small part of the nation interested in academic ding-dong.
At the time, as I recall, it was generally thought that Leavis had had the better of things, partly because he made his a personal attack, and dealt Snow's reputation as a novelist, which was then high, a blow from which it has never really recovered.
(He was wrong there; Snow was a limited, but still considerable, novelist, and anyone who wants to understand the way the British establishment thought in the middle decades of this century will still learn from him.)
But if Leavis won the battle, he has lost the war; and quite right too.
Ignorance of science may still be widespread, but few people are proud of it, as many of my generation were.
Most people, I think, would now agree that contempt for science didn't do Britain any good, and most would go further and admit that it is absurd to grow up ignorant of science in a world dominated by its theories and their application.
Indeed, one might suggest that anyone ignorant of science (or, incidentally, of economics) is ill-fitted to the modern world.
So things have changed, and the change is reflected, as Snow would have wished, in the school curriculum.
In the early 1950s, I did one year of General Science.
It failed to engage my interest.
That didn't worry me.
Later, along with two other historians who had, like me, secured entry to Oxford or Cambridge, I was given a few science tutorials in my last term at school.
I learned a little.
One thing I learned was how much I had missed.
NOW ALL is different.
Everybody, it seems, does some science.
When parents are presented with the blocks from which their children must select their GCSE subjects, they realise it is now impossible to avoid choosing one, or probably two, of the sciences.
So one may take it that everyone receives at least a smattering; and more flexible A-level and university courses make it possible for people to combine more advanced science with arts subjects in a way that was virtually impossible in my day.
So it might seem as if Snow could lie purring in his grave, and as if the two cultures were coming together.
Yet I wonder if this is really so.
I wonder how far GCSE science really takes anyone, if the study of science stops there.
And then I wonder if another means of acquiring something of a scientific education might not be found.
History of art A-levels seem very popular nowadays but I have never encountered anyone who is doing an A-level in the history of science.
Perhaps it isn't possible.
If so, why not?
Couldn't such a course serve as the best sort of bridge between the two cultures?
The history of science is the history of what men have thought about the physical world and is an essential part of the history of Western culture.
IT IS impossible to understand the Victorian age without understanding why Darwin's theory of the origin of species was so disturbing; and perhaps it is equally impossible to understand the argument over evolution without learning why it was so fiercely resisted, by scientists as well as laymen.
There is nothing new in the recognition of the importance of the history of science and technology.
One of the greatest modern historians, Herbert Butterfield, wrote a book 40 years ago called The Origins of Modern Science.
The researches of Frances Yates into the relationship between science and what is loosely called magic at the end of the 16th century are enlightening.
The French historians of the Annales school have explored the influence of changing technology.
But generally these researches have been regarded as a branch of historical studies, suitably only for professed historians.
They are such a branch, but they also offer a means for non-scientists to acquire an understanding of the importance of science in shaping the modern world, and therefore a better appreciation of science itself.
The subject could be equally valuable for scientists, and rescue them from their imprisonment in the immediate present.
A course in the history of science would lead those students of the humanities to a better understanding of the nature of science; it would also give scientists a better understanding of the place of science in the history of culture.
Daffodil with no name is best bloom
By Fred Whitsey
A WHITE daffodil with a long cup, which is still awaiting a name and which was raised by Mr Clive Postle, has won the prize for best bloom at this week's Westminster Flower Show of the Royal Horticultural Society.
Mr Postle, winner of the Engleheart Cup for a set of 12 varieties of his own raising, is leading daffodil exhibitor and also won a gold medal for his trade group.
Gold medal for daffodils also went to Brian Duncan, J Walker and the Society's Narcissus and Tulip Group.
Camellias from Burncoose and South Down, also gold medal winners, include new varieties which extend the range of colour of the hardy Williamsii type.
Trehane has new camellias bred from the indoor reticulata species with very large flowers.
The vast range of camellias now available is revealed in the unusually high number of entries in the annual competition.
Winner of the Leonardslee Bowl for the best set of 12 varieties is Mrs C Petherick, of St Austell, Cornwall.
The gold medal exhibit from the Society's Lily Group offers a chance of seeing the fritillaries that grow on arid hillsides in Turkey, often of bizarre colouring.
Among the varied stands of bulbous and low growing perennial plants, the star is clear blue Corydalis flexuosa brought from light woodland in western China only in 1989.
The original cyclamen species appears in the trophy-winning set of plants in the Alpine Garden Society's competition.
The winner is Mrs K Dryden, of Sawbridgeworth, Herts.
The best plant, winner of the Farrer Medal, is Dionysia revoluta from Iran, shown by Mr N Fuller, of Wadhurst, Sussex.
Exhibits can be seen by the public in both Horticultural Halls until 5pm today.
Honey bee hives hit by parasite
By David Brown, Agriculture Correspondent
A BLOOD-SUCKING parasite from Asia is attacking Britain's bees for the first time and honey supplies could be affected.
The pest, a tiny fawn-coloured mite called varroa which can cause havoc in commercial hives, has been discovered at an apiary run by the Torbay Beekeepers' Association.
Beekeepers have been banned from moving bees within a four-mile radius of the apiary, which is used for training.
Ministry of Agriculture officials held an emergency meeting in London to decide how to control the outbreak.
All beekeepers have been urged to inspect their hives and report suspected outbreaks.
A pesticide used on the Continent, where varroa is widespread, is not licensed for use in Britain, but beekeepers are asking the Ministry of Agriculture to let them to use it.
Although honey supplies could be affected if the infestatation spreads, people are not at risk, experts say.
Varroa originated in the Far East where it lives as a parasite on the Apis cerana species of honey bee.
Over the past 15 years or so it has spread through Russia and then to Western Europe.
The mite is just visible to the naked eye and feeds on honey bees and their grubs by sucking their body fluids.
Although the mite rarely kills bees, it weakens and deforms them, reducing their ability to make honey.
Mr Kingsley Low, general secretary of the British Beekeepers' Association, said: ‘We have been expecting to find varroa for some time as it is so widespread on the Continent.
Many beekeepers have been examining their bees carefully for the past few years in efforts to find the mite.
Now we must redouble our efforts.’
The quality of honey was not affected by the mite, he said, but production could be hit if numbers of the mites multiplied rapidly throughout the country.
‘It may not be possible to get rid of the mite completely but we can learn to live with it.
If so, beekeepers will have to learn how to control it using technics followed by Continental beekeepers.’