

The Arts: The Week's Other Releases
Final Analysis (15, 125 mins) Implausible psychological thriller from Phil Joanou, starring Richard Gere as a smooth psychiatrist embroiled in an affair with the sister of a patient.
The patient (Uma Thurman) seems to have undergone a severe childhood trauma; the sister (Kim Basinger) is married to a handsome Greek gangster (Eric Roberts) and runs amok at the least taste of alcohol.
Who is fooling whom, and why?
A series of increasingly disconnected twists leads, via murder, the courtroom and the madhouse, to a pseudo-Hitchcockian climax atop a storm-lashed lighthouse.
Still, if you ever find yourself in court, it might be interesting to plead ‘pathological intoxication’.
The Doctor (12, 123 mins) William Hurt stars as Jack, the arrogant heart surgeon who finds the operating tables turned when he contracts throat cancer.
Compassion is not Jack's strong suit: he advises a woman, worried about a scar, to tell her husband that she ‘looks like a Playboy centrefold — and has the staple-marks to prove it’.
Despite fine playing from Hurt and Christine Lahti as his wife, Jack's conversion to a caring attitude seems a shade pat.
It comes through friendship with June (Elizabeth Perkins), an attractive young woman dying of a brain tumour, and through the mortifying experience of hospital bureaucracy from the other side of the counter.
Here at least is an honourable attempt to deal with a serious theme; though based on a true story, it still leaves a lingering suspicion that life is not quite so neat.
Meet The Feebles (18, 96 mins) Psst!
Wanna see a dirty movie with Muppet look-alikes taking drugs, dying of Aids and making blue movies?
No?
Then don't meet the Feebles at all costs.
They're gross, offensive, and they're not even funny.
The Arts: Tragedy in the rainforest
At Play in the Fields of the Lord (15, Plaza, MGM Trocadero, 186 mins) Salmonberries (12, Metro, 94 mins) AMONG the forthcoming burst of US-made films centred on the human and ecological tragedies of the Amazonian rainforest, Hector Babenco's At Play in the Fields of the Lord leads the pack.
Spectacularly shot in Amazonia under the most arduous physical conditions, it is a long, beautiful, serious-minded and profoundly sad film which does full justice to the complex forces at work in the hidden world of the Amazon Indians.
It also bears the hallmarks of a long-cherished project.
The film's producer, Saul Zaentz, waited 20 years to obtain the rights to the Peter Matthiessen novel on which it is based.
Babenco, Argentine-born and long resident in Brazil, has shown an enduring preoccupation with the fate of powerless or politically marginalised people in films such as Pixote and Kiss of the Spider Woman.
Jointly scripted by Babenco and Jean-Claude Carriere, the film explores the bitter consequences of contact between white civilisation and the Niaruna Indians who still pursue their ancestral way in the heart of the forest.
And the bleak conclusion is that it makes little difference whether the intruding whites are well- or ill-intentioned: the result, for the Indians, is disease and destruction.
Two American soldiers of fortune, Wolfie (Tom Waits) and the half-Cheyenne Moon (Tom Berenger), arrive in a remote river outpost.
With their papers impounded by the local police chief, they are persuaded to bomb the Niarunas.
However, Moon has a change of heart when he sees the place, and later, after a night spent drinking hallucinatory ayahuasca, parachutes in alone, strips off his clothes, and persuades the Indians to accept him.
Meanwhile Protestant evangelists, led by the inflexible Leslie Huben (John Lithgow) and his wife Andy (Daryl Hannah), plan to revive a mission abandoned by their Catholic rivals.
Martin Quarrier (Aidan Quinn) is sympathetic to the Indian culture; his unhappy wife, Hazel (Kathy Bates), loathes the forest and everything in it.
Privation and danger slowly expose the weakness, misery and bad faith of the whites; for the Indians, however, their presence becomes — literally — the kiss of death.
This is not a film for those in search of easy entertainment or simple dispositions of good and evil.
Its meandering length sacrifices narrative pace in favour of character development.
Yet the time taken to tell the story draws us into the timelessness of the forest and gives the unfolding tragedy its full, ironic measure.
Percy Adlon's Salmonberries is a quirky foray into the territory of exile and homelessness.
Set in Alaska, it stars the Canadian folk-singer k. d. lang as Kotz, an orphaned Eskimo of ambiguous sexual identity and brooding potential violence, who latches on to Roswitha (Rosel Zech), a middle-aged German emigree librarian still hanging on to memories of lost happiness like the jars of preserved berries she keeps in her bedroom.
When the two women set off to Berlin together in search of Roswitha's past, the film becomes an exploration of the power of affection to transcend boundaries of age, background and sexual orientation.
The mood of wintry intimacy is enhanced by lang's evocative track, Barefoot; the journey, however, is a slow one.
The Arts: Never more in Neverland Hugo Davenport on Hook, Steven Spielberg's sad betrayal of J. M. Barrie's classic; a kiss of death in Amazonia; and k. d. lang in Alaska
By HUGO DAVENPORT
THE word ‘hook’ is Hollywood slang for the distinctive twist in the plot set-up of an otherwise familiar generic story.
It is designed, like a fishing lure, to catch the audience's eye and yield a rich haul at the box-office.
And, just as an effective fishing lure may be fabricated from cheap, shiny metal, it is generally possible to summarise a commercial movie's hook in one sentence.
What, then, is Hook's hook?
The fearsome implement (fashioned in this case from expensive, shiny metal) that sparkles so on the poster?
No, the true Hollywood hook of Steven Spielberg's film is just the sort of bold, fatuous one-liner that gladdens the hearts of Hollywood producers.
To wit: Peter Pan grows up.
Never mind that this idea destroys the fundamental premise of J. M. Barrie's story, which ends with a vision of Wendy's descendants continuing to visit the Neverland with an eternally youthful Peter ‘so long as children are gay and innocent and heartless’; nor yet that Captain James Hook has somehow escaped from the jaws of the ticking crocodile to dream of a return engagement with the leader of the Lost Boys.
There is also the small point that the original Peter had paid the price of rejecting his family when he returned to find his window barred and another little boy in his bed.
Strange, then, that Spielberg's grown-up Peter must recover his original, youthful Hook (U, Barbican, MGMs Baker Street, Chelsea, Odeons Kensington, Leicester Square, Marble Arch, UCI Whiteleys, 141 mins) self in order to reclaim his estranged family.
In Hollywood, we must remember, anything is possible.
In this sense, it is unlike Barrie's Neverland — a place which, however fantastical and fey, is governed by the alternative rules that must underpin any convincing alternative universe.
If anyone should object, the film-makers can always retort that the idea of Peter Pan growing up came originally from the six-year-old son of one of the scriptwriters.
QED, huh?
With a budget of $70 million, Spielberg has splashed out on elaborate sets and fancy effects, while the bigger stars deferred their salaries in favour of a share of profits.
At 44, the director can say, seemingly without blushing: ‘I'm also Peter Pan.
I've always been Peter Pan.
That's why I wanted to do this movie.’
Perhaps he hoped thus to outmanoeuvre those critics who have accused him of infantilism.
What he has done on screen, however, is to reduce the Neverland to the lowest common denominator of American junk culture.
The film is brash, forced, overblown and soulless.
It has none of the spontaneity of Barrie, nor any of the wistful melancholy that lies submerged beneath the bright surface of the tale.
Alternately manic and twee, it has, instead, only the ugliness of wilfully arrested adolescence.
Through the wonders of adoption, Peter Pan has become Peter Banning (Robin Williams), a 40-year old wheeler-dealer American lawyer too busy with his mobile phone to turn up at his son's baseball games or take much heed of his daughter.
And he has quite forgotten his past until, during a London visit to his erstwhile playmate, the 92-year-old ‘Grandma Wendy’(Maggie Smith), Hook (Dustin Hoffman) spirits Banning's children away to Neverland in an attempt to lure his old adversary back.
So Banning (note, if you please, the repressive implications of the name change) must learn to fly again, put on his tights, and lead the Lost Boys once more into battle.
He is coaxed along by Tinkerbell (Julia Roberts), still sufficiently enamoured of Peter to grow woman-sized at one point in order to obtain from him ‘a real kiss’.
In an American film, we must expect characters derived from our native tradition to acquire a pervasive transatlantic twang.
Here it grates more than usually, despite British voices in the mix: the unmistakable tones of Maggie Smith; Bob Hoskins taking a break from a long run of phoney American accents to play a cockney Smee.
Dustin Hoffman, essaying Old Etonian, comes out like a poor take-off of Terry-Thomas.
The cultural onslaught is not just a matter of intonation.
Spielberg's film swamps the Neverland with baseball and basketball, with burgers and skateboards and rap music.
John Williams's score is a triumph of meaningless assertion.
Amber Scott, playing Banning's daughter, entertains the sighing pirates with a ballad of such sick-making sentiment that it makes Shirley Temple look like Billie Holiday.
The Lost Boys romp in what Banning knowingly describes as ‘a Lord of the Flies free-school’, hurling multi-coloured food and gross insults.
When their interim leader, Rufio (Dante Basco), a leather-clad street punk, kneels before a 40-year-old man with a shaven chest to whisper in awe, ‘It's The Pan’, one is tempted to shout ‘No, it's The Close-Up!’.
For Hollywood seems to understand the word ‘pan’ only as a horizontal camera movement.
Knowingness, in fact, is everywhere.
Spielberg's last attempt at an adult theme was the nave, saccharine spirituality of Always; and yet, paradoxically, his children's Neverland lacks innocence.
All directors, including Spielberg, grow up, and in this film the result is not a pretty sight.
The Arts: Carry on leaning
By RICHARD LAST
JOURNALISTS regularly stand indicted for being interested only in the abnormal, the freakish and the catastrophic.
Well, of course we are.
It's called News.
Should anyone remain unconvinced, I rest my case on the Leaning Tower of Pisa syndrome.
When the tower was being constructed at the end of the 12th century, it started keeling over.
As a result, it has become one of the great monuments of the world and a national symbol, like the Eiffel Tower, the Statue of Liberty and the Great Wall of China.
If anyone points out that these artefacts have achieved international renown while remaining perfectly upright, I shall sulk and not reveal the most significant point in last night's QED (BBC1) documentary, Propping Up Pisa.
Namely, that the last people who want the tower restored to the vertical are the Pisans.
At a stroke, they would lose a flourishing tourist trade and their place on the world map.
QED indeed.
On the other hand, as Cynthia Page's fascinating and delightful documentary revealed, if something isn't done PDQ, all they will have is a pile of marble rubble.
Good for tourism in the short term, maybe.
Hardly a long-term investment.
Most people who have visited Pisa know that the Torre Pendente began toppling while it was still being built.
Few will previously have been aware that it started out leaning the other way, then righted itself, and — after a 100-year gap when the money ran out — went into reverse.
Or that it describes a daily shudder of one whole millimetre in all directions as the marble expands and contracts under the Italian sun.
The guru behind these startling revelations was John Burland, Professor of Soil Science at London's Imperial College of Science and Technology, and a member of the latest commission to examine the problem.
He thinks the Pisans are lucky to have a tower at all.
‘If it had been built in one go,’ he claimed, demonstrating with a model and bucket of clay, ‘it would have fallen over.’
The spectacular aerial shots, Prof Burland's lightly worn erudition, the delicious dollops of Verdi and Rossini and the ever-so-slightly tongue-in-cheek commentary added up to a ‘Carry on Leaning’ that I felt obliged to watch all over again.
Not out of obsession with the abnormal; just for the pleasure.
I'm beginning to worry about Inspector Morse (ITV).
He has always majored, like Pisa's tower, in eccentricity, but now the complexity of the stories and some of the directorial quirks are becoming self-defeating.
Last night's mystery was set in an open prison so relaxed that you wondered if the female governor went round tucking up the inmates at night.
Chief Supt Strange, once a likeable fusspot, seems to be going round the bend, and Morse got the answer wrong a whole reel before the end.
Only Lewis, unshakeable symbol of dependability, stays his old self.
The Arts: Suitable subjects to sing about?
Charles Manson, terrorists and Steve Biko feature in new operas.
Geoffrey Wheatcroft wonders if murder strikes quite the right note
By GEOFFREY WHEATCROFT
IN DR JOHNSON's all too familiar phrase, opera is an exotic and irrational entertainment.
Is it becoming more irrational and exotic than it can handle?
Several recent or forthcoming operas sound as if they were designed for — or perhaps by — what in Soho are known as people of strange and unusual tastes.
These works raise a serious question as to whether their subjects are suitable cases for treatment — that is, by librettists and composers.
The Death of Klinghoffer, with music (if that's the word) by John Adams, had its European premiere in Brussels last year.
It is based on a real-life episode of seven years ago: the murder of an elderly Jewish-American tourist on a Mediterranean cruise ship by Palestinian terrorists.
Next month sees the world premiere in Birmingham of Biko, by Priti Paintal and Richard Fawkes.
And now comes John Moran's opera, The Manson Family.
This work was commissioned by the Lincoln Center in New York for its Serious Fun! festival and performed recently with the composer himself playing the mass murderer, whose victims included the actress Sharon Tate.
Now opera has rarely been a naturalistic medium, and never an understated one.
For more than its first hundred years, in the 17th and 18th centuries, its stories were all set in classical antiquity.
Some were based on historical fact — L'Incoronazione di Poppea, Giulio Cesare — but most were mythological.
And the most outre modern librettist makes no advance in terms of weirdness or bloodthirstiness on these tales: have a look at the story of Orfeo or Idomeneo, human sacrifice and all.
The great advance in Mozart's time was operas set in the here and now.
Some of these were again off-beat or disturbing: the stories of Cos fan tutte and Fidelio are both shocking in their way, though both are supposedly based on real life.
In the early 19th century, the historical opera was reborn in Italy under the impact of the Romantic movement, Schiller's plays and Scott's poems and novels.
Despite the way these are sometimes now staged, these ottocento operas were meant to be taken seriously.
And they dealt with gruesome subjects.
One of the very first of them was Rossini's Elisabetta Regina d'Inghilterra, which revolves around a real enough subject: the execution of what might now be called political prisoners.
Verdi's Don Carlos — just opened at the ENO in a fine new production — contains an auto-da-fe scene.
And Wagner's operas are in a class of their own: blood, thunder, and a sex scene in which a chap gets off with his sister.
And yet we are shocked — we are certainly meant to be — by ‘daring’ contemporary operas.
The ENO's stagings of Henze's The Bassarids (still more classical mythology with Bacchic orgies and killings) and Greek by Mark Anthony Turnage (with a foul-mouthed, violent libretto after Steven Berkoff) would fall into this category.
ENO is distressed that ‘opera has not generally been the property of the youngest type of creative talent’.
And so it has now set its ‘education and outreach’ department ‘to encourage young people from across Britain to use their music and song to tell their stories’.
The New Visions, New Voices initiative is restricted to ‘anyone under 30’.
But among the oldies who have given the project their support are Malcolm McLaren and Elvis Costello, which suggests that the ENO is looking for something a little off the beaten operatic track, not to say strange and unusual.
These strange and unusual subjects may be relevant — but will they be ‘suitable’?
As I wrote on this page recently, opera is barely a living art form any longer.
The living ‘opera’ of today is arguably the musical.
Until not long ago that form, too, had its conventions, and on the whole steered clear of ‘unsuitable’ or even grown-up subjects.
There were exceptions, again, like Carousel, which is being revived at the National Theatre later this year, and which has a plot bizarre by Verdi's standards.
Then came Sondheim.
His shows are serious and grown-up, by his lights, and they certainly have storylines so odd as to make The Ring look like a sit-com.
Sondheim's latest New York musical, due here in the autumn, is The Assassins.
One of its characters from real life is Squeaky Fromme, she who tried to assassinate President Gerald Ford, who sings a duet with John Warnock Hinckley, the would-be assassin of President Ronald Reagan.
And Squeaky, it may be remembered, was a member of the Manson ‘family’…
It might say something about the Americans that they remain so obsessed with this repellent, perverted killer and his pathetic entourage.
But it may say something also about the condition of the musical theatre that this subject has caught the attention of two composers.
In the end, no subject is too serious for opera to treat, or necessarily too unpleasant, or too poignant.
What matters is how it is handled.
Perhaps the most unbearably poignant opera of the last half-century is The Emperor of Atlantis, which was written in Theresianstadt concentration camp, while composer and librettist waited to be sent to Auschwitz.
The poignancy of that piece is the circumstance of its composition, not its subject matter.
An opera set in the camps would be a very different thing.
There are, after all, considerations of taste or, if that's too namby-pamby, of simple decency.
Of course, the subject can be dramatic and terrible.
Steve Biko, a brave and remarkable man who met a tragic death in the course of a patriotic struggle: this is the very stuff of opera.
Any number of romantic operas likewise deal with patriotic heroes, from Rossini's William Tell, just revived at the Royal Opera, to Smetana's Dalibor (which is due for a revival).
But it all depends on the treatment.
This is what is wrong with Klinghoffer.
The murdered tourist left a widow whose permission was not asked before the work was written.
Adams was the composer of the ‘minimalist’ score (which means that its musical content is minimal), and his librettist was Alice Goodman, but its begetter was the ubiquitous director Peter Sellars, whose work is clever, gifted, silly and camp.
There was indeed something rebarbative — as there may prove to be about The Manson Family when and if we see it on stage here — about the use of a serious story for a work which struck many as frivolous and even posturing.
Opera can take almost, if not quite, any subject and make something worthwhile of it.
What matters is the making.
The Arts: Gay's dark laughter
By CHARLES SPENCER
AFTER a dismal start to the new Stratford season with Bill Alexander's glum staging of The Taming of the Shrew, it is good to report that the RSC has quickly recovered its form with a splendidly enjoyable production of The Beggar's Opera.
Despite the fame of John Gay's ballad opera, which broke all box-office records when it opened in 1728, it is performed surprisingly rarely these days.
I still shudder at the memory of the only previous production I've seen, which attempted to drag this 18th-century masterpiece kicking and screaming into the 20th century with the help of rap and reggae music and rewritten dialogue that sounded like a rejected Minder script.
John Caird makes no such mistake at the Swan Theatre.
This is an ensemble show in the RSC's great tradition of Nicholas Nickleby and Les Miserables (Caird was co-director of both with Trevor Nunn) and it could well repeat their success at the box office.
Right from the start the production creates a seething sense of life, as the underworld characters swarm over Kendra Ullyart's ramshackle wooden set of tilted balconies and ladders.
The effect is of an animated Hogarth painting and, like Hogarth's work, The Beggar's Opera combines a surface vitality with a bleak and bitter vision of fallen humanity.
Caird's achievement is to capture the sheer energy of the piece while also doing justice to its underlying darkness.
Fears that the staging might be a little too picturesque are quickly dispelled as realistic dummies drop from the ceiling on ropes and dangle above the actors' heads.
The shadow of the gibbet is a constant presence in The Beggar's Opera.
Gay conjures up a nightmarish world, in which ‘thief-takers’ inform on fellow criminals for the £40 reward, marriage for love is regarded as a family disgrace, and man is presented as an animal of prey.
‘Every one of us preys upon his neighbour, and yet we herd together,’ says Lockit, the Newgate jailer, and Caird's production memorably suggests the huddled, vicious humanity of London low-life.
It's also a real pleasure to encounter a show with so many fine tunes.
Gay added his own elegant and often ironic lyrics to traditional airs and ballads which have been atmospherically arranged by Ilona Sekacz for an excellent band.
Without the radio mikes which have become de rigueur in most musicals, some of the solo singing sounds a little thin, and it's a shame that Gay's excellent words aren't always audible.
But a few rough edges are welcome in these days of vacuous, glossy musicals, and numbers like Over the Hills and Far Away and Macheath's bitter hymn about Tyburn Tree to the tune of Greensleeves are beautifully performed.
There are some great set pieces — a brilliantly evoked highway robbery, with Macheath's gang riding invisible horses and commandeering a stage coach suggested by just a table and a few boxes; and a grotesque parade of whores, some of them played by men in drag, in which the ladies of the night emerge through a trap-door like beauty contestants from hell.
Some of the individual performances could do with more definition and detail, but there's terrific work from David Burt, who has exactly the right mixture of romantic swagger and ruthless cynicism as Macheath, as well as a first-rate singing voice.
Paul Jesson has some memorable moments of pitch-black comedy as the fence and thief-taker Peachum, as well as sudden outbursts of vicious violence that wipe the smile right off your face.
As Polly Peachum and Lucy Lockit, Elizabeth Renihan and Jenna Russell battle entertainingly for Macheath's dark heart, and there's strong support from Susan Jane-Tanner as an entertainingly sour Mrs Peachum, Anthony O'Donnell as a rotund Lockit, Nick Holder as a hilarious Brummie highwayman and from Alan Cox as the beggar who has supposedly written the opera.
It is he who draws the moral, declaring that the low-life characters are no worse than the corrupt ruling class, the only difference being that the poor are punished for their vices.
His reluctant agreement to append an entirely unconvincing (but uproariousy staged) happy ending to the show is a coup de theatre that still seems strikingly modern more than 250 years after the premiere of this bracing comedy.
The Arts: Courtroom drama in the case of the bogus Picassos
By MICHAEL PYE
SUPPOSE you have a print by Picasso, Dali, Miro or Chagall, or sold one in the past few years: you have a special interest in a Brooklyn courtroom this week.
Hilda Amiel, alleged to be the very godmother of fake art, has been arraigned for her part in what the US Attorney calls the ‘single largest worldwide source and distribution network of bogus prints’.
(She pleads not guilty.)
The Feds claim to have seized 75,000 prints at the family firm, known with a nice irony as Original Artworks Ltd.
They say there were blank sheets bearing Dali's signature alongside 20,000 fake Miros and 650 fake Chagalls.
The Picassos, according to Sotheby's valuer, were ‘sloppy’.
Amiel is the first reputable dealer to be prosecuted, but more than 100 others as well as auction houses across America are now under subpoena to explain what they thought they were selling.
And the prints have been sold across Europe — there's been one arrest in Denmark already — including Britain.
The art world is very close to its own Watergate.
THE St Petersburg National Opera (the ‘National’), Chaliapin's company, is in New York for the first time.
The management of the Kirov, that other opera house in St Petersburg, are furious.
The core of the problem is simple: the National was invited to New York only last November, and the Kirov is planning to tour this summer.
Both are presenting the great Russian warhorses, Boris Godunov and The Queen of Spades.
Both companies expected to bring the bass Vladimir Ognovenko to sing Boris and the mezzo-soprano Irina Bogatcheva.
(Russian singers don't spend their lives with one company any more.)
But Kirov's management, Satra Arts International, felt badly upstaged.
Under pressure from Satra, Kirov told singers to choose between the companies.
The National's Boris Godunov was built around Ognovenko; he had to stay home.
The mezzo Irina Bogatcheva, wife of the National's artistic director Stanislav Gaudassinksy, agreed to limit her roles.
But that wasn't enough.
For daring to come at all, she was cut from the Kirov team.
She went home in tears at the weekend.
But her husband did have consolation on Saturday, as we talked over Scotch and Peking duck: the sound of American cheers for his robust version of Boris Godunov.
LA MAMA ETC — for ‘Experimental Theatre Company’— is a tiny cauldron of a theatre on the Lower East Side, the creation of the extraordinary Ellen Stewart.
Like any house that's demanding, idiosyncratic, small and truly experimental, it's in trouble — $150,000 in the red, with the serious prospect of closing.
La Mama is the heart of the New York theatre avant-garde, a true anti-institution.
But it has distinguished alumni: Billy Crystal, who talked between the Oscars, and Oscar contenders Bette Midler and Nick Nolte among them.
You might expect them to rush to La Mama's aid.
But Stewart snaps: ‘I don't want to be disappointed so I'm not going to ask for their help.’
Instead, she's been saved for the moment by an old-fashioned storyteller, worth millions — George Lucas of Star Wars.
And virtue is rewarded.
Nolte, Midler, and Crystal don't even win Oscars.
Lucas did.
IN THE crusade to make everyone guilty about everything, there is a new technique: tetranalysis, the study of colour, sound, motion and form in movies.
The National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People tried it to scourge Hollywood; but Hollywood just giggled.
The NAACP denounces The Silence of the Lambs because Hannibal the Cannibal shares his name with an African general, and the killer is Buffalo Bill (yes, that's a white man's nickname, but the buffalo, NAACP explain patiently, is associated with Native Americans).
It gets worse.
In Bugsy, limos are black, cars are red and taxis are yellow; all are ominous objects, the NAACP says, in colours associated with racial minorities.
Political correctness, just as we suspected, will be perfectly grey.
Letter to the Editor: Hardy's actress
SIR — I am distinctly uneasy about Peterborough's account of Emma Tennant's new book on Thomas Hardy (April 3).
I knew Mrs Bugler in the Sixties when she came to stay with my cousin Snaebjorn Jonsson, the translator of Hardy's work and poems into Icelandic, at Portchester, Hants.
I was privy to all their discussions on Hardy, as both had known him during the First World War.
They discussed gossip about Hardy being in love with Gertrude Bugler, but agreed that he was only obsessed with her fine portrayal of Tess on stage.
Since Gertrude was only 16 when she first met him, she was, of course, chaperoned all the time.
(Mrs) SIGRIDUR DALLIMORE Petersfield, Hants
Letter to the Editor: Wainwright beyond revision
Sir — How unfortunate that you used the headline ‘Wainwright on the wrong path’(article, April 4).
It implies that in some way Wainwright himself was to blame for the outdatedness of some of his copious details.
We might just as well grumble about Constable's omission of tractors from his landscapes.
As a user and devotee of Wainwright's books, I am convinced that he wrote them primarily as works of creative art, for sharing with those of like mind.
He had no expectations or intentions that they would ever become constantly updated guidebooks for the use of millions.
So what is to be done?
Ban his books, because they are a bit out of date?
To do so would be to deprive English art and literature of a unique 20th-century contribution.
Update them?
If so, how often?
From my personal experience of writing a Wainwright-inspired, though only palely comparable, book about York's alleyways, I have learnt that updating is a never-ending task, with a new edition necessitated every two years.
Who could update Wainwright, with the impossible task of retaining the inimitable stamp of his personality?
Wainwright's books must continue to be available to all who are prepared to accept his own work, as he wrote it, and as the product of his own generation (and preferably bearing the cherished stamp of the Westmorland Gazette).
His books should always be to hand, to enlighten and inspire us.
But for practical walking purposes, we will need in our other hand an up-to-date 1:25,000 Ordnance Survey map, with a compass in our pocket, and knowledge of how to use it.
We will also need an ever greater sensitivity to our own responsibilities when we set forth to enjoy the countryside.
That, dare one suggest, is what Wainwright would have expected of us.
MARK JONES Bulmer, York
Peterborough: Take three
SQUEAKY voiced Lene Lovich, who hit the pop charts 13 years ago with a bizarre song called Lucky Number and whose dancing debut three years later, as Mata Hari, was received less kindly, is pursuing a third career — as a novelist.
Although only halfway through her first effort (based, oh dear, on a dream) she already has an agent and has made the shortlist of a first-time fiction writers' competition, the Ian St James Awards, for a story drawn from the book.
Miss Lovich, 43 and living in Norfolk, was attracted to writing because ‘it has nothing to do with what kind of hairstyle you have’.
Anthony Burgess and Iris Murdoch might agree.
Her musical career continues — she has just been asked to write a song for a new album by Belinda Carlisle.
Questions about Miss Lovich's writing, however, elicit a modest response.
‘I hardly read any books,’ she says.
‘It's hard to say who my influences are.
One person I do like is the late Angela Carter.
I met her last year, you know.’
AS SOON as she arrives back from her American lecture tour tonight, Mrs Thatcher will head straight for a glittering parlour in central London.
Her destination: the election night party being thrown by Lord McAlpine, former Tory Treasurer, and Sir Gordon Reece, her ‘image maker’.
The occasion will, I hear, attract Mrs T's staunchest supporters.
Peterborough: Shady lady
THE Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, better known as film director Henry Herbert, has found an unusual cast member for a short film about his ancestors.
Floating about the staircase of Wilton House, the family seat since the 16th century, is the ghost of a nun.
I found Pembroke yesterday delving in his 14,000 acre garden.
‘She's quite a friendly ghost — one feels a warm presence,’ he said, wiping the sweat from his brow.
In the film, which traces Pembroke's family history back almost to the Reformation, she will be played by Anna Massey.
The film will be shown to the public in a mini-cinema just opened at Wilton, near Salisbury.
Pembroke's major cinematic achievement to date was introducing Koo Stark to the silver screen.
She starred in his ‘soft porn’ movie Emily, shot in the grounds of Wilton, a former abbey.
CLASSIFIED advertisement in the Windsor and Eton Express: ‘Wanted.
Bird cage and stand, good condition please, for pensioner.’
Peterborough: Special brew
THE players of the English Shakespeare Company have been wowing audiences in the African bush with a production of Macbeth.
They are playing this week at the Ntcheu refugee camp, Malawi, having previously graced venues in Sierra Leone and Ghana.
Next stop: Namibia.
The cast has suffered tummy upsets, and Macbeth himself (actor Don Warrington) resorted to a local herbalist.
Malawi's answer to Dr Finlay examined Warrington thoroughly, diagnosed ‘problems in the marriage area,’ and prescribed a draught of aphrodisiac tea.
It is not certain that Warrington, best remembered as Philip in Rising Damp, actually swallowed the medicine, but his performances have since had great zest.
Warrington had some unexpected help in Sierra Leone, when a party of schoolchildren joined him in his ‘tomorrow, tomorrow’ speech, reciting the words faultlessly in the Queen's English.
Director Michael Bogdanov's production was tailored to local tastes.
The hubble bubble scene has been elaborated — audiences have shown special interest in the recipe for the witches' brew — and the plot's tyrannical shenanigans have struck a chord with those who have experienced the benevolent rule of Dr Hastings Banda, Malawi's president for life.
Obituary of Brian Shaw
BRIAN SHAW, the former leading male virtuoso dancer in the Royal Ballet, who has died aged 63, was a meticulous and suave performer, never more so than as the male partner in the Bluebird pas de deux in Sleeping Beauty.
Although the Bluebird appeared only in the last act, Shaw's performance was widely considered the highlight of the evening's entertainment; and his brisees volees — little beats of the feet as he appeared to fly through the air — amazed even the Russians, on the company's original visit to the Maryinsky.
Shaw joined the company in 1944 and was still only 17 when Ashton used him as one of the three male dancers in Symphonic Variations.
Ashton continued creating roles for him in Birthday Offering, Monotones and Ondine Act III, and he excelled as the Blue Boy in Les Patineurs.
All that Shaw lacked to become a danseur noble were the necessary inches.
His medium stature condemned him to character parts — unless a choreographer created something especially for him, as John Cranko did in Prince of the Pagodas and Bonne-Bouche and Kenneth MacMillan in Noctambules.
A Yorkshireman, he was born Brian Earnshaw on June 28, 1928, and was taught by Mary Shaw and Ruth French before joining the Sadlers Wells (later Royal) Ballet School.
Shaw was one of the star pupils of Vera Volkova, who taught both the company and school from 1943 to 1950, before going off to Copenhagen where for 25 years she revolutionised, and Russianised, the style of the Royal Danes.
With his precision of line, careful musicality and swift little steps close to the ground, Shaw, in ballets like Les Rendezvous, embodied everything that was best about Ashton's choreography and which made the Royal Ballet unique.
His career as a virtuoso dancer came to an end in the 1960s, when he suffered an injury, but he continued to take on character parts, notably as the widow Simone in Ashton's Fille, and remained with the company until 1989.
From 1972 he was also a dancing master and served as principal teacher until his final illness in 1991.
The Royal Ballet remained very much the centre of Shaw's world, and his pithy comments revolved around its artistic and social manoeuvres, but the mainspring of his life — the glory and challenge of being a supreme athlete and artist on stage — could not be replaced.
Intelligent and witty, Shaw became somewhat embittered, and at times his company teaching could seem perfunctory.
He seldom corrected, and could not bring himself, as company teachers should, regularly to attend company performances to watch his pupils in action.
But he would give generously of his time to such organisations as the British Council, helping to audition young people with ambitions to dance.
A discriminating host, he was cherished by a wide circle of friends, and in conversation was humble and diffident about his own success.
The Royal Academy of Dancing awarded him its Queen Elizabeth II Coronation Award in 1975.
Shaw never married.
Obituary of Karl Tunberg
In London aged 83.
American-born scriptwriter.
He worked for nearly three decades in Hollywood, where his early successes included such musicals as Down Argentine Way (1940), starring Betty Grable and Carmen Miranda, and Orchestra Wives (1942), which featured Glenn Miller and his Orchestra.
He was nominated for an Oscar for his screenplay for Ben-Hur (1959).