

Pioneering operation that brought grief and joy
By Wendy Holden
SEVEN years ago tomorrow, Carly Reich, a Siamese twin separated in a pioneering operation, gave up her fight for life.
Holly, her twin, now seven and living with her parents in Houston, Texas, will remember nothing of the sadness that marred her recovery.
She was the first Siamese twin of her kind after an operation in March 1985 performed at Great Ormond Street Hospital by Prof Spitz.
At just a few days old, she and Carly, who were born in Rush Green Hospital, Romford, Essex, joined at the chest and upper abdomen, sharing a liver heart cavity, were separated in seven hours of surgery.
Holly had a normal heart and made good progress but Carly, who had a heart defect, died on April 10 1985, after a three-hour operation to clear a bile duct.
Mr Ronnie Reich and his wife Gillian took Holly home five months later.
At the time, Mrs Reich, then 30, said: ‘I never thought this day would come.
I don't think the doctors really believed that she could be saved.’
For three months Mrs Reich nursed Holly back to health at her parents' home in Dagenham, Essex.
In November 1985, she took her home to Mr Reich, an American electrician in Texas.
The team of 28 medical, nursing and technical staff at Great Ormond Street, feared both children would be lost at one point in the operation.
Born with a combined weight of 7½lb, they were separated after doctors feared the twin with the malformed heart might become desperately ill, forcing an emergency operation.
Cliffs are tombs for ancient algae
By Roger Highfield Science Editor
THE white cliffs of Dover are graveyards consisting of trillions of coccoliths, skeletons of microscopic marine algae that help control the climate.
In today's issue of Nature, a team of scientists at the University of Bath and the Natural History Museum has taken the first step to explain why their shapes can be as diverse and striking as those of snowflakes.
The find could show how the vast range of armoured algae evolved from a single ancestor 230 million years ago, one shaped like a sphere bristling with what look like washing-up bowls.
It could also throw light on the process by which they trap carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
‘They are very important to science,’ said Dr Jeremy Young, of the museum.
‘They play a role in global warming and they are important for dating rocks for the oil industry.’
The algae, known as Coccolithophores, take up huge amounts of the carbon dioxide linked with global warming.
They use it to fashion the coccoliths shown here, their armoured skeletons made of chalk or calcium carbonate plates.
If you examined Dover's chalk cliffs with an electron microscope you would see their myriad forms, about one millionth of a metre across, the remains of trillions of these microscopic plants.
In today's Nature, Professor Stephen Mann and Dr Jon Didymus from Bath University, working with Dr Young and colleagues at the Natural History Museum, have found that in spite of their varied appearance, the chalk crystals of which they are built are organised in the same way at the atomic level.
‘They have a very complex structure and at first sight they appear not to be connected in any way,’ said Professor Mann.
The scientists analysed their crystal structure by measuring how the coccoliths scatter light rays and electrons and found that they all shared common features of crystal organisation throughout their history.
‘The crystals always grow in the same direction and then they are shaped,’ they say.
They believe that each armour plate is formed from a ring of 20 to 30 single chalk crystals, with each adjacent crystal growing in alternate directions.
However, though they now understand the atomic organisation of the plates, Professor Mann said more work had to be done to find out how the cell provided a template for the exotic shapes to emerge.
Blooms of certain species of coccolithophores are so vast that they can be seen from space and, as a result, will provide information on global climatic changes.
Up to 100 million can occur per litre of sea water, as a result of blooms measuring several hundred miles across.
This makes the water appear chalky white when seen from an orbiting satellite.
New vaccine will protect against pneumonia
By Peter Pallot, Health Services Staff
SCIENTISTS have developed a vaccine against types of pneumonia, meningitis and blood poisoning which claim thousands of lives in Britain a year and 10 million lives worldwide.
The advance is to be announced today by Prof Graham Boulois, head of microbiology at Leicester University, who hopes the vaccine will be given routinely to children to protect against meningitis.
The bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae causes about a third of some 3,000 annual meningitis cases and an estimated 250 deaths in England and Wales.
But Prof Boulois said the vaccine would save most lives by protecting against the most common type of pneumonia, which often followed influenza and was widely misdiagnosed.
It would also protect against septicaemia in which bacteria multiply unchecked in the blood, possibly causing death without prompt treatment.
A moderately effective vaccine exists against some types of streptococcal pneumonia.
But Prof Boulois said he and colleagues Dr Peter Andrew and Dr Tim Mitchell had discovered a common component in all 83 types of the organism.
The component had been genetically engineered to produce a vaccine highly effective against all strains.
The Dutch Institute of Public Health has split a £300,000 grant between Prof Boulois and researchers in Adelaide, Australia, who are collaborating to develop the vaccine further.
The institute will hold the patent and distribute the royalties.
It will also arrange tests on volunteers in order to establish safety and effectiveness.
The researchers, who have been studying the organism for more than eight years, say it will be several years before a vaccine becomes widely available.
‘The organism is the only bacterial infection to feature in the top 10 killers in the Western World,’ said Prof Boulois.
‘It is extremely prevalent in developing countries.
It is a serious threat to the elderly and to young children.’
People who have a poor immune system through diseases such as Aids or because they are taking medication are also at risk.
As often happens with medical advances, the scientists stumbled across the vaccine by chance.
‘We were originally studying how this organism causes disease and the vaccine possibly came out of that research,’ he said.
Last night the Meningitis Trust, based in Stroud, Gloucestershire, welcomed moves towards a vaccine against a strain which accounted for 82 of 246 meningitis deaths in England and Wales in 1989.
Vasectomy reversals in demand
By David Fletcher Health Services Correspondent
VASECTOMY operations, once regarded as an irrevocable form of male sterilisation, are increasingly being reversed as more men remarry and change their minds about wanting children.
A London clinic specialising in reversal operations said yesterday that more than six out of 10 operations are now successful compared with fewer than two out of 10 only three or four years ago.
Miss Jacquie Sullivan, managing director of the clinic, the Surgical Advisory Service, said the improving success rate was the result of advances in micro-surgery coupled with better post-operative care.
About 40,000 men a year undergo vasectomy, but with one in three marriages ending in divorce, increasing numbers are forming new relationships and wanting to have a second family.
Miss Sullivan said: ‘The typical person coming to us is a divorced man in his 30s or 40s who has remarried, often to a woman in her 20s, and wants to start a family.
‘We cannot forecast the success of a reversal operation in an individual case, but we can now tell each patient that it is more likely the operation will succeed than fail,’ she said.
The reversal operation is carried out as a day treatment under local anaesthetic at a cost of £950 plus another £50 to £100 for pathology services.
Move to save red kite under threat
By Toby Moore Environment Correspondent
THE MINISTRY of Agriculture has been accused of threatening efforts to save endangered red kites in England by taking three months to discover that a dead bird was illegally poisoned.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds says the Ministry now has only three months to find the person responsible and mount a prosecution.
The dead bird, one of fewer than 200 surviving red kites in Britain and tagged by the RSPB, was found on farmland near St Austell, Cornwall, on Dec 16.
It was reported to the Ministry within days, but the cause of death was not confirmed by scientists until mid-March.
The delay has infuriated the RSPB, which believes it has serious implications for a recovery programme to save the species.
‘Because of the delay in establishing the cause of death there is now very little time left to find out who was responsible and to initiate a prosecution if appropriate,’ said Mr Andy Jones, head of investigations at the RSPB.
‘The Scottish Office Agriculture and Fisheries Department can establish cause of death within two days.
They must do that down here.’
The Wildlife and Countryside Act of 1981 stipulates that prosecutions must be brought within six months of the discovery of a carcass.
The killing of the bird caused dismay to the RSPB because it was released in Scotland and is thought to be the first to have made its way to southern England from a release programme.
The RSPB is jointly mounting a recovery programme for the birds with Government environment agencies.
Government scientists found traces of alphachloralose, a strictly controlled pesticide used to kill rats, mice and pigeons.
Red kites are one of the most protected and endangered species in Britain.
They are the subject of an intensive release programme in central Wales where there are just 70 breeding pairs.
Waste-water cycle hope for farmers
By David Brown, Agriculture Correspondent
DROUGHT stricken farmers may be able to use the same water time after time to grow crops if experiments by scientists in Hampshire are successful.
The work is aimed at developing a method of cleaning up and recirculating water used to irrigate plants in glasshouses to minimise the need for fresh supplies.
Growers in the South and East are keen to recycle the surplus irrigation water that runs off fruit, vegetable and nursery plants in glasshouses, but by doing so they risk re-cycling expensive diseases which could wipe out their crops.
Now scientists at the Government-supported Horticulture Research International research station at Efford, near Lymington, are trying to find efficient methods of purifying the waste water.
They say that the water may have to be treated with chlorine, blasted with ultra-violet light, pasteurised and given other treatments before it can be re-used.
The scientists are examining the rate at which disease spreads among plants within recirculation systems in glasshouses.
Another problem is how to modify the levels of nutrients which are often included in hydroponic systems where plants are grown in water instead of soil.
Already they have found that growers who want to invest in water collection and recirculation systems may have to spend considerable sums on facilities to clean up the water.
There are too few farm ponds to help growers beat seasonal water shortages, a water consultant said yesterday.
Commenting on warnings that East Anglia faces a fourth year of drought and restrictions on the use of water for irrigating crops, Mr Peter Ferguson, a director of Halcrow, a firm of consulting engineers, in Colchester, Essex, said: ‘Farm ponds provide storage for surface or ground water sources and can be filled at times of the year when there is more water than the crops require.’