

No blood transfusion risk-free
By Peter Pallot Health Services Staff
THE National Blood Transfusion Service said last night that it could not rule out a patient contracting the HIV virus as Arthur Ashe did.
A spokesman said no transfusion was risk-free, even though blood was tested for the Aids virus.
Blood from a donor infected within the past three months would not be picked out because the test detected antibodies that are not produced for three months.
‘The three-month window means it would be foolish to say we can guarantee supplies cannot be infected,’ the spokesman said.
‘No operation is risk-free from a surgical point of view, nor is it from a transfusion point of view.’
However, he believed the risk was minuscule as would-be donors were urged not to give if they were in risk categories.
The Government set up a £12 million fund two months ago to compensate 75 people who, like Mr Ashe, contracted HIV while undergoing surgery.
Twenty-five of the patients have died and awards will go to relatives.
They were given contaminated blood before tests were introduced in 1985.
Lawyer is undone in case of the loose shoelaces
By Paul Stokes
A DEFENCE lawyer was ordered out of court yesterday because he appeared before magistrates with his shoelaces undone.
Mr Bill Loveluck-Edwards, voted best-dressed solicitor in town two years ago, failed to meet the high standards required by the bench in Bridgend, Mid Glamorgan.
Mr Byron Butler, 52, the chairman, told him to make the necessary adjustments out of court before proceeding with sentencing in a drink-drive case.
He told him: ‘Your shoelaces are undone.
Please leave the court to tie them up.
There may be some people who would like to see you break your neck, but I am not one of them.’
Mr Loveluck-Edwards, 54, otherwise resplendent in a black jacket, striped trousers and gold pocket watch with chain draped across a black waistcoat, promptly walked out.
He marched back in with his shoes duly laced up, before telling the court: ‘I have been made to look like a child in a legal institution and take it very badly.’
The chairman, wearing a fawn sports jacket, said he apologised if he had ‘caused any offence’, but said he was annoyed because Mr Loveluck-Edwards had been reading a novel in court.
‘That is something I will not tolerate,’ added Mr Butler.
After the hearing, Mr Loveluck-Edwards said: ‘We are quite good friends, apart from this explosion of pomposity.
I used to be in school with Byron.
I was a prefect and he was in a lower form.
I can't recall bullying him, but that's obviously what he is trying now.
I've never heard anything like this before in any court in the land.’
He said: ‘I had brand new shoes on; it was warm and they were uncomfortable so I undid the laces.
I never dreamed anyone would take offence because my feet are always under the court benches.’
Mr John Charles, clerk to the court, said: ‘Mr Loveluck-Edwards drew attention to his clothing by reading a novel during a case.
We always like to tie up the loose ends in this court.’
Two years ago Mr Loveluck-Edwards won the Law Society's annual Golden Dick Award as best dressed solicitor in Bridgend.
A smile pays off handsomely for haggling bargain hunters
By Virginia Matthews Consumer Correspondent
THE ONLY way to haggle is to dazzle your quarry with a winning smile, says a guide to effective negotiation out today.
While the adoption of the inscrutable poker face has a role to play in cutting the price of a house or boosting a pay rise, the negotiator's chief weapon is sheer niceness.
Although the book's authors concede that ‘bluffing, exaggeration and obfuscation are all part of the game’, they believe that honesty, friendliness and fairness may be more than their own reward.
When allied with judicious use of the ‘Columbo Technique’— named after the American TV detective who disarms opponents by feigning ignorance — the haggler's smile can be ‘devastating’.
A salesman's ‘lust for settlement’ is an important weapon when the haggler goes shopping, but the authors advise haggling over seconds rather than on top-quality goods.
The book advises buying in bulk to secure a discount, or opting for ex-demonstration models, returned items and otherwise faulty goods.
At work, smiling may be misinterpreted to mean that an employee is enjoying his job.
Hagglers seeking a better rise are therefore advised to ‘accidentally’ drop the business card of a rival firm on the negotiating table.
Where card-dropping, smiling and niceness do not work, hagglers should choose a ‘well-timed emotional outburst’ such as‘screaming, crying or becoming otherwise unreasonable’, say authors Leonard Koren and Peter Goodman.
But they advise sparing use of such melodramatic tactics ‘unless you think you can consistently use your reputation as a high-strung hysteric to your advantage’.
Hagglers need nerve, particularly the ability to keep calm when they have just turned down an offer but cannot yet be sure that another is forthcoming, says the book.
And they also need a catch-all range of facial expressions to help clinch the deal.
Hagglers require acting skills, staying power, quick-wittedness plus persistence, concludes the guide, but their chief ally is to smile and be nice.
The Haggler's Handbook, by Leonard Koren and Peter Goodman.
Century Business, £12.99 hardback or £6.99 paperback.
43 children told to claim for Pindown
By David Graves
THE OFFICIAL Solicitor has written to 43 children, who were detained under the Pindown regime in four children's homes run by Staffordshire County Council, urging them to claim compensation.
Staff in the Official Solicitor's office, which represents the legal interests of children in care, are concerned that the children could be left out of a possible £2 million compensation agreement offered by the council's insurers.
None of the children, many now over 18, or their families, has formally claimed compensation or approached the steering group of 18 solicitors which is handling claims.
Mr Kevin Williams, the solicitor who exposed Pindown and led the campaign for a full inquiry into the regime, said yesterday the Official Solicitor had asked the children to seek legal advice about compensation if they had not already done so.
Representatives of the steering group are due to meet the Labour-controlled council's insurers, Municipal Mutual, next month to negotiate the final details of the compensation agreement.
At least 132 children were kept under Pindown.
Last August the insurers offered to pay them £500 a day for the first week they were detained, and then £300 a day for each subsequent week.
The children who were in Pindown for the longest periods could receive more than £50,000.
A six-month inquiry concluded last May that children, some as young as nine, were kept in solitary confinement for weeks, sometimes months, at a time by care staff using the Pindown system.
They were not allowed to speak to anyone, had no books or entertainment and, in despair, some tried to kill themselves.
Patient died after 11 hours on a trolley
By Alastair McCall
AN ELDERLY woman died after being left for 11 hours on a hospital trolley, an inquest was told yesterday.
Nurses claimed she had waited most of that time for an ambulance to take her to another hospital.
Mrs Mary Bennett, 81, died on Dec 17 at Mile End hospital in east London from bronchial pneumonia and heart disease.
Twenty-four hours earlier she had been admitted to the Royal London Hospital, Whitechapel after a fall at her home in Stepney.
Neither ailment had been positively identified when she arrived at the Royal and it was decided to transfer her for further investigation.
Dr Douglas Chambers, the Poplar coroner, recorded a verdict of death by natural causes, prompting claims of a ‘cover-up’ from Mrs Bennett's family.
They claimed that records of tests which nurses said they carried out on Mrs Bennett had gone missing from the Royal, and details of her case presented to the coroner differed from what they had been told.
Mr Albert Towndrow said he had accompanied his mother-in-law to the hospital on Dec 16.
She was examined and X-rayed.
‘They said there was nothing wrong with her, but they were concerned about marks on her hips and would keep her in to see what was the cause,’ he said.
‘Then they said they would need the cubicle and wheeled her out into the corridor opposite a phone.’
Mr Towndrow left his mother-in-law, a former pianist, at 4pm having been told it would take two hours to deliver her to Mile End, two miles away.
When he went there at 7.30pm she still had not arrived.
Staff contacted him the following day and told him Mrs Bennett had arrived at 2.30am and was unconscious.
Mrs Bennett died at about 4pm despite being treated with steroids and antibiotics.
Mrs Lowe Lauri, a sister at the Royal, said she understood a request for an ambulance had been made at 5pm.
She made three calls herself.
During one, she was told there were 55 emergencies waiting to be dealt with.
‘I have never known a patient wait for 10 hours for an ambulance for an inter-hospital transfer — and I hope never to know it again,’ she said.
But Mr Russell Mansford, a London Ambulance Service controller, said the first recorded request was at 10.30pm.
All incoming and outgoing calls were recorded on tape and logged on paper.
‘It would be possible to lose one booking; it's very rare to lose two in one day, and to lose the tape recordings as well would be unheard of,’ he said.
Emergency units under pressure
By David Fletcher Health Services Correspondent
HIGHLY-publicised incidents of patients who die on trolleys in accident and emergency units while waiting for a hospital bed are the rare consequences of the extreme pressure under which most units work.
As many as one in five of the population attends an accident and emergency unit every year, yet staff shortages are so acute that a quarter of the 239 units in England and Wales do not have a trained consultant in charge.
The Government has recently accepted a recommendation by the British Association of Accident and Emergency Medicine for a doubling in the number of trained consultants, currently 216, but it will take 10 years before they are all in place.
Problems have arisen at King's College Hospital, London, where large numbers of patients have had to wait on trolleys for up to 30 hours in the accident and emergency unit while waiting for a bed.
A 75-year-old stroke patient died there last December when he fell from a trolley outside the casualty unit.
Two weeks later, another patient, an 84-year-old man, died after being on a trolley for 13 hours.
In My View: Call of the Third Age
By TOM SCHULLER
ALL POLITICAL parties agree that education is a major election issue.
Most arguments focus on schooling and preparation for work.
A few deal with higher education.
It is time to broaden the focus and look at one of the fundamental, longer-term challenges facing society: the ageing of the population.
More than a third of the British — some 14 million — will soon be aged 50 or over.
What kind of opportunities are they being offered?
Put crudely, the over-50s may be looked upon in one of two ways.
If employed, they can be seen as having obsolete skills in which it is not worth investing.
If they have stopped working, they are likely to be seen as dependents — to be looked after more or less generously by the provision of pensions and health services, but with little relevance to educational policy; simply, they are seen as a cost.
Alternatively, they can be offered the chance to contribute to society economically, socially and culturally.
They not only deserve opportunity (especially those who benefited little from the post-war expansion of the welfare state), but can offer much as educated citizens and workers.
Older adults have the same abilities as other groups — and more experience than most.
Let us look first at training at work.
Employment training guidelines discriminate directly against older people.
Over-50s are excluded from the two groups to whom resources are directed: 18-to-24 year olds who have been unemployed for at least six months; and 25-to-50 year olds unemployed for more than a year.
The Government is sending exactly the wrong message to employers who already labour under prejudices about the value and potential of older workers.
So, the first requirement is that older workers should be included in the drive for a more skilled workforce.
Second, general educational opportunities are under threat.
For many older people, adult education classes are a lifeline.
Local authorities are struggling to maintain provision at a time when they should be expanding efforts to meet the needs of this sector of the population.
Seen simply as a preventive measure, education for older adults is a good investment.
It costs upwards of £300 a week to keep someone in residential care.
If education postpones such dependency it will have paid its way.
Enabling people not just to keep alert but to feel they are still learning and growing makes economic as well as moral sense.
Some older people want classes specially for their own age group; others want simply to participate in adult education generally.
The University of the Third Age is an encouraging initiative which stimulates older adults to teach and learn from each other, but we need a full range of imaginative provision.
Recent legislative changes have not helped.
The campaign to protect adult classes against the original proposals of the Education Bill was led by the Women's Institute and backed by a range of voluntary organisations.
They succeeded in getting some of the more divisive ideas modified, but the Conservative emphasis remains narrowly on job-related training for younger people.
The Labour manifesto includes a commitment to introduce a return-to-learn entitlement.
This supports educational opportunities for those over 50.
A good idea, but would it be delivered?
It is subject to the general proviso of ‘as resources permit’.
Just as important as the specific commitment is the general recognition that older people have potential in the same way as the rest of the population, and that this should be given the chance to develop.
Who will give priority to education for the Third Age?
Tom Schuller is director of the centre for continuing education at Edinburgh University.