

National's footlights beckon
By James Delingpole, Arts Correspondent
A COVENTRY schoolgirl who helped form a theatre company at the age of 14 and took a play to Russia on a 10-day tour two years later could soon be working at the National Theatre.
Rachel Karafistan, now 18, who co-founded the Bare Essentials Youth Theatre, will know soon whether she has won a day at the Olivier theatre, working with actors and directors including Anthony Hopkins, Ian McKellen and Richard Eyre, as part of the Lloyds Bank Theatre Challenge.
The West Midlands theatre group raised £5,000 to take Sticks and Stones, the play they wrote, directed and produced themselves, to Russia.
Miss Karafistan said: ‘Two of my friends held a 24-hour sponsored ‘stay awake’.
And I was sponsored to be bored to death by a friend, who talked to me non-stop for three hours.’
Funding also came from firms including Cadbury's and Massey Fergusson.
Her work on the project is strongly tipped to win her a place among the nine finalists of the competition, whose work will be developed at at National Theatre workshops involving members and patrons in July.
Sticks and Stones, itself a collaborative project, has no script, and was devised in a series of theatre workshops.
Miss Karafistan said: ‘It's about the class system in schools, bullying, and the way children are given stereotypical names like good, bad, ugly and smelly.
It may seem over the top, but that's because such things seem so much more terrible to a child.’
Union fears BBC cuts
By Jane Thynne, Media Correspondent
CONCERN over possible job cuts at the BBC yesterday prompted the union representing 14,000 of its staff to promise to unveil ‘plans to dismantle the corporation’.
Meanwhile, Sir Michael Checkland, BBC director general, sent a letter to all staff saying there was no ‘secret agenda’ to cut 10,000 jobs, though the already stated target of 3,000 job cuts by 1993 still stood.
Nor was he planning to turn the BBC into a ‘publisher’ rather than a maker of programmes.
‘I know how concerned many of you are at the suggestion that 10,000 jobs might go if we decide to run down many of our services,’ Sir Michael told staff.
‘Can I make it absolutely clear we do not intend this to happen, will not let this happen and will not introduce change in a way which might cause it to happen?’
The question of how many of the BBC's 25,000 jobs will be shed after next year, and before the renewal of the Royal Charter in 1996, is provoking unease at Bectu, the Broadcasting, Entertainment and Cinematograph Technicians' Union.
Bectu claims that the BBC has ‘secret plans to dismantle the Corporation in advance of public debate on the charter renewal’ and that reports by 15 task forces formed to provide a blueprint for the BBC's role and function include possible job cuts.
Union members are voting on whether to start industrial action on May 15, when the BBC governors consider the task force recommendations.
Modern Times: Revenge of the plain brown wren MODERN TIMES
A new blockbuster aims to give voice to the rage of wives abandoned in favour of more youthful versions.
Mick Brown goes to New York and meets its indignant author
BY MICK BROWN
THREE years ago Olivia Goldsmith went through an ugly, painful and expensive divorce.
Angry and embittered, she considered ‘the usual options’: castration, murder, wreaking havoc in her former husband's life.
‘I promise you,’ she says, ‘there isn't a woman who doesn't come out of a bad divorce thinking the same thing.’
Eschewing the razor blade or the Saturday Night Special, Goldsmith wrote a novel instead.
Its cover goes some way to explaining its theme: an immaculately manicured female hand crushing a pair of golf balls.
The First Wives Club is a book about emasculation (Goldsmith prefers the word ‘empowerment’), a story of three wives, jilted by rich, powerful, selfish, conniving husbands, who decide to take their revenge.
Annie has suffered the indignity of being dumped by her husband, Aaron, for her sex-therapist; Brenda has been swindled out of her alimony by greedy, unscrupulous Morty, a discount electronics magnate; Elise has quietly suffered for years at the hands of an adulterous ne'er-do-well and has retreated into alcoholic stupefaction.
All have been replaced by younger, sexier, more brainless models, what in America have become known colloquially as ‘trophy wives’.
Together they plot to undermine and ruin their errant spouses by hitting them where it hurts corporate types the hardest: their egos and bank balances.
‘Call it instant karma,’ says Goldsmith, with a smile.
The First Wives Club is a very American book: in its deification of designer labels and dinner at La Cirque, in its fashionable political correctness (having taken revenge on their rich, white, middle-aged husbands, the ex-wives find true love with, variously, a lesbian, an impoverished Puerto Rican lawyer, and a younger man), but, above all, in the phenomenon it describes.
The notion of trophy wives, of executives ‘trading in’ their tired old spouses for younger, slinkier models, may seem like a joke, the product of some bizarre and implausible satire on misogyny.
In fact, it is a trend, certified by business magazines such as Fortune.
‘These trophy wives,’ says Fortune, ‘make the 50 and 60-year-old executive officers feel they can compete sexually with younger men, the kind of ego boost that doesn't hurt when going up against Young Turks at the office.’
‘It's sad,’ says Goldsmith.
‘This is not just becoming more common, it's actually expected of older, successful businessmen to take up with younger wives.
‘It's a terrible shame that, after all these years of feminism, women should be back in the place where they are regarded as expendable.
Women believed the first phase of feminism was all that was necessary, but it wasn't.
I think we're now in the third phase, where women are expected to have a job, but at the same time to look after the family and keep themselves alluring to men.
We live in a tremendously reactionary era.
But the people in power will always fight to maintain the status quo.
And any group that tries to storm the barricades will find themselves flung off.’
Men, she says, are still in power.
Some 53 per cent of American marriages end in divorce, usually to the detriment of the women.
The stereotypes presented to women are more tyrannical than ever.
While the median age of women in America is rising each year, fashion models are becoming statistically younger and thinner than ever.
The average model weighs 25 per cent less than other women of their height.
‘Men of 45 or 50 have the opportunity of a second summer, having children by a second partner; women of the same age don't have that.
If you've squandered your life with a man who abandons you, there's going to be a lot of bitterness.’
Goldsmith talks with some conviction, but she is the first to admit that she is a phoney.
That is not her real name.
The platinum tresses falling around her shoulders are not her real hair.
The sunglasses, decorated with parakeets, are from a New York novelty shop.
What we have here is another American phenomenon: the marketing ploy.
Before writing The First Wives Club, she was an author of children's books (and she is not telling who); before that, a marketing executive, a role, she says, which instructed her in the ‘fear and loathing’ with which corporate America regards women, and the depths to which it will stoop to deny them equal status.
Only when the head of accounting (’ an ‘acceptable’woman's role’) took her to one side and showed her the company's payroll did she realise that while she was bringing in the most revenue, she was being paid the smallest salary.
‘I was the only woman, of course.
But I was the Annie character — you know — if you were a good girl you'd be rewarded, and it isn't nice to make a fuss.’
Her own divorce shortly afterwards was of the ‘extremely nasty and boring common-or-garden variety.’
She had been married for five years and it took as many years again to finalise the divorce.
‘I can't say I'd given everything to make my husband what he was, or that he'd cheated on me.
But he was both obstructionist and very, very sneaky.
It cost me two years of impoverishment, spending every dime on legal fees.
The courts don't give you what's fair; they give you what's legal.
And why?
Because most of the lawyers and judges are of an age where they've considered, or are already, divorced.
It was unfair, it made me angry.
That was the obsession that made me write this.’
That and money, of course.
Years spent ‘buying groceries on my credit-card advance’ instilled a determination to write a blockbuster rather than attempt anything as daunting as literature, and to stop at nothing in selling it.
Goldsmith describes her true self as ‘a plain brown wren’.
And while glamour should not, she suggests, be a requisite for a first wife, a caricature of glamour is an asset for a first novelist.
‘When I'd finished writing the book I had lunch with a publisher; she walked in with this crestfallen expression on her face, saying, ‘I expected somebody taller, blonder, and just more…
I could see her thinking, ‘We can't send this one on a book tour.’
There's only one thing less attractive to the media than an angry woman.
And that's an angry plain woman.’
The First Wives Club was intended to be ‘tongue-in-chic’, but it has struck a nerve.
Last year, the case of Elizabeth Broderick, who was jailed for killing her husband and his new wife, became a cause celebre among feminists.
Wives in search of revenge has become a favourite theme on America's afternoon television ‘people shows’.
And The First Wives Club has been described as ‘the Thelma and Louise of the corporate world’.
‘I say living well is the best revenge, but you can't do that unless you get angry and go forward.’
By those standards, Goldsmith's revenge has been good.
She has a nice (and one would guess, younger) boyfriend, The First Wives Club has been a bestseller, and she has bought a country house on the proceeds of the film rights, which have been taken up by Sherry Lansing, who produced Fatal Attraction.
Lansing was one of three women producers who bid for the rights.
There were no men.
‘It's kind of ironic,’ says Goldsmith.
‘Sherry says it will be easy to budget and cast because there are so many women available at cheap prices compared to men.’
If somebody's got to benefit from inequality, her shrug suggests, it might as well be her.
The First Wives Club is published on April 16 (Heinemann, £14.99)
The Arts: The Smiths are miserable now
BY TONY PARSONS
JOHNNY MARR and Morrissey, the brains and the looks behind the late, lamented Smiths, are back together again — but only in a design studio.
The greatest songwriting team since Lennon and McCartney are designing the artwork for a Smiths' compilation to be released in a few months by WEA, who recently purchased the group's mouth-watering back catalogue.
Warners sound as though they are going to be worthy custodians of the Smiths' glorious heritage.
Starting in 1993, the label plans to re-release all the Smiths albums on compact disc in chronological sequence.
Meanwhile the first major biography of the Smiths phenomenon appears later this month.
On April 30 Omnibus publish Johnny Rogan's epic account of the rise and fall of the Smiths, Morrissey and Marr: The Severed Alliance.
Rogan is a respected pop writer — he wrote a good book about Wham! and probably the best analysis of band managers ever written — but his latest tome has already been denounced by Morrissey.
‘Anyone who buys this book needs their head tested,’ he says.
‘It hasn't even been reviewed yet and is already completely rubbish.
I would sooner lose the use of both legs than read it.
Some books are considered to be ‘unputdownable’ but this one seems to be ‘unpickupable’.
Personally, I hope Johnny Rogan ends his days very soon in an M3 pile-up.’
Yes, but is it any good?
Johnny Rogan himself is at a loss to explain what he has done to provoke the wrath of the former Smith, while Morrissey says that the book contains certain inaccuracies about his Mancunian past.
But the furore is certain to bump up Rogan's sales among Smiths fan who — even after all these years — are still pining for the last great rock band.
The great Morrissey is currently putting the finishing touches to his new solo album, and a single engagingly entitled We Hate It When Our Friends Become Successful will be in the stores about the same time as Johnny Rogan's book.
WHO would have thought that those Spandau Ballet boys would have turned out to be such fine thespians?
But Martin and Gary Kemp were magnificent as Ron and Reggie in The Krays and, while Martin recently did some fine work on British television in Growing Rich, Gary seems poised on the edge of Tinseltown glory.
For Kemp's next role he will portray the manager of a singer, played by Whitney Houston, in The Bodyguard, starring Kevin Costner.
‘I called on my experience with rock managers who will remain very nameless,’ says Gary.
‘With a lot of managers it's like an obsessive, unrequited love affair with their client.’
SPOTTED in the crowd at U2's Madison Square Garden gig last week — Gary Oldman, William Kennedy Smith and Bruce Springsteen.
There have been three Springsteen records released recently — two by the Boss and one by John Cougar Mellencamp.
Just kidding!
Though for years denounced as a cheap copy of Springsteen, Mellencamp sounds remarkably human on both his new CD, Whenever We Wanted, and in an astonishingly open interview with the American edition of Esquire magazine.
‘I am never going to write a song as good as Blowing In The Wind,’ he says.
‘I am never going to make a movie as good as A Streetcar Named Desire.
Why ever pretend?
If I'm just a footnote to Springsteen — that's okay!
I can live with that now.’
HAS the market for rock memorabilia ever been more buoyant?
The most recent pop auction at Christie's raked in an impressive £221,776 with 80 per cent sold by value and lot.
Now Christie's are preparing for next month's pop auction — they have two a year — and among the exciting stuff on offer is John Lennon's leather jacket, Prince's purple suit and the uniform that made Elton John look like a soldier on a box of Quality Street chocolates.
Also, Christie's tell me that their film and entertainment sale of December 1991 saw a mere 10 per cent unsold by value and a paltry 25 per cent unsold by lot, which of course does not add up to‘a third of the lots’ unsold, as I wrongly stated last week.
Sorry.
They certainly are doing bonzo business down there in South Ken.
I will definitely be hanging on to the sweat-stained handkerchief that Tom Jones tossed to my mother back in the Sixties.
Some day it might fetch a pretty packet.
Although of course I would rather have a Pissarro.
The Arts: RECORD OF THE WEEK
BY MARK COOPER
EVER SINCE the emergence of the Smiths in the mid-Eighties, the ‘independent’ rock scene has been preoccupied with sexual denial.
Indie rock is the traditional playground of scruffy teenagers approaching college age who prefer to celebrate gazing at the stars than admit to peeking at the opposite sex.
Confronted with the crass sexual exploitation of mainstream pop, alternative British rock shrouds itself in shapeless jumpers and stares heavenwards.
Morrissey, formerly lead singer of the Smiths and now a solo artist, is the central figure in this demi-monde and he has successfully mounted a long career based on a delightfully British blend of prurience and prudery.
Morrissey is always taking off his shirt but he is also proudly and publicly chaste.
If indie men are anything but macho, indie women tend either to be tomboys or angels.
Bands like Curve and the Sundays float careers on their female vocalists' cheekbones, playing down their looks even as they pose bashfully for the cover of yet another music magazine.
Polly Harvey may record for a small label called Too Pure, but she has managed to become the rising star of the indie world by tackling issues of sexuality head on.
She comes from Somerset and her trio, P. J. Harvey, plays a tense, supple rock music that alternates moments of sudden quiet with intense bursts of fury.
The front cover of Dry, their debut album, captures Harvey's lipsticked mouth smudged against glass.
The image suggests a distrust of conventional female sexuality, which surfaces again and again in songs like Dress and Sheela-Na-Gig with their disconcerting blend of violence and eroticism.
One moment Harvey sounds like she's trapped in a particularly unpleasant psychodrama, the next she's singing an exuberant snatch of I'm Gonna Wash that Man Right Out of My Hair.
Harvey may refuse the usual ‘women's role’ but she has taken the indie scene by storm by writing some starkly troubled sexual vignettes while sounding as if she's profoundly at ease in her own skin.
Her songs are still at the rough-and-ready stage but Harvey's power comes from her ability to stare men and women right in the eye.
It's a refreshing change from all the bands who've been too busy staring at the stars or their shoes to risk a glimpse at one another.
MARK COOPER
The Arts: Standing up for God and country Johnny Cash, minstrel of hard liquor, soft women and the myth of the Old West, still looks good at 60.
He tells Tony Parsons ‘I do it the way I feel it’
BY TONY PARSONS
WHEREVER Johnny Cash goes, he takes a pocket of Nashville with him.
His hotel looks like a remake of The Wild Bunch.
You would never guess we are in Chelsea Harbour.
The London hotel corridor is full of minders, all sporting various degrees of cowboy drag, and a manager with a belly the size of Memphis.
Time is tight.
Various members of Cash's country-singing supergroup, the Highwaymen, are escorted in and out of rooms to service the massed ranks of media.
Kris Kristofferson walks by, as silvery and twinkling as Captain Bird's Eye.
But Cash is the centre of it all, even with this band, which comprises Cash, Willie Nelson, Waylon Jennings and Captain Bird's Eye.
Cash is the first among equals.
And he wants to go home.
He is putting on his long black coat, a sure sign that he is ready to head for the hills, or at least his hotel suite.
A busy man, Johnny Cash, with a notoriously short attention span.
Only one way to grab his interest — give him a Winston Churchill Commemorative Crown at the outset of our allotted five-minute interview and hope we have the chance to exchange more than names.
It works.
Cash collects coins.
‘Oh!
Thank you!
Terrific!’ he cries with touching enthusiasm, placing his reading glasses on that craggy face and peering appreciatively at the Churchill Crown.
‘Winston Churchill!
This is terrific!’
Coin-collecting seems an unlikely hobby for The Man in Black, but then the bad boy of country music has always confounded expectations.
At a time when rock fans expected country folk to be psychotic rednecks ready to gun down anyone with hair over their ears — pace Easy Rider — Cash came along and fought for Indian rights, recorded with Bob Dylan, and received death threats from the Ku Klux Klan.
In the Sixties Cash was a wild man — arrested in 1966 at El Paso airport with 668 amphetamine tablets and 475 tranquillisers hidden in his guitar — but he has grown into respectability incarnate, married to June Carter for 23 years with a growing brood of children and grandchildren.
And still Cash is full of surprises.
Only last year he was the patriot who told his friend George Bush that he was against the Gulf war.
‘I'm my own man,’ he says.
‘I say what I believe.’
Once Cash seemed destined for an early grave like his friends Elvis Presley and Roy Orbison.
As recently as 1980 Cash became addicted to morphine after an operation to crushed ribs sustained in a fight with an ostrich (his home in Hendersonville, Tennessee, is said to be a real menagerie).
Now these traumas are behind him.
He cleaned up his act, quit taking uppers and downers with the help of his wife and the Betty Ford Clinic, and now looks set to go on for another 40 years.
Old cowboys don't die.
They start drinking mineral water.
‘Oh, I may still have a black dog in me,’ he says.
‘He barks once in a while.
Everybody's got a black dog in them.
But I manage to keep him corralled.’
Cash was the first country star since Jim Reeves to break out into the pop charts.
Even people who didn't like country liked Johnny Cash.
He sang of big men made small by love, prison cells and cattle towns, soft women and hard liquor.
‘Actually I only ever drank the odd beer,’ he says.
He had big hit singles.
‘There has always been honesty and integrity in my performance.
I do it the way I feel it.
And people know it.
Take it or leave it.
That's the way I do it.
That's the only way I do it.’
Hell, for a 60-year-old man who has been busted for drugs, received death threats from the Klan and had triple-bypass heart surgery, you look damn good, John.
‘I walk every day.
I don't drink.
And I smoked my last cigarette years ago right here in Sheffield, England.’
Cash's liberalism only extends so far — he has always stood for old-fashioned values like God, country and being handy in a knife fight.
On stage in America he does a routine before his hymn to the Stars and Stripes, Ragged Old Flag.
‘Every time we leave this country, when we come back we love it a whole lot more than when we left,’ he growls.
‘I thank God for all the freedom we have in this country, I cherish it — even the right to burn the flag [boos from the audience].
BUT,’ continues Johnny Cash, silencing the mob with a manly lift of his jaw, ‘we also have the right to bear arms and if you burn my flag — I'LL SHOOT YOU!’
He gets a standing ovation.
It's great stuff but an act that should not be taken too literally.
When I light-heartedly suggest that he should use Klan members who still harass him for target practice, Cash is genuinely shocked.
‘I would never shoot a human being,’ he growls, reproachfully.
‘Never.’
The Highwaymen is a country coalition that began in 1984 and is now touring Europe.
‘Like a band of gipsies going down the highway,’ sing these menopausal Monkees, ‘we're the best of friends.’
On stage each of the Highwaymen does his greatest hits, but it is when Cash is growling Ring of Fire, Folsom Prison Blues, Ragged Old Flag and Boy Named Sue that the show really brings the house down.
Cash only contributed one song to the second Highwaymen album, Highwayman 2, a number called Songs that Make a Difference.
Significantly, it was written one night when Cash was sitting around at home with the likes of Bob Dylan, Joni Mitchell and Graham Nash.
‘We were talking about 1968 and 1969 and the songs that changed the face of country music — Sunday Morning Coming Down, Boy Named Sue, Lay Lady Lay, Both Sides Now — someone said they were songs that made a difference.
I said, ‘Hey, that has to be the title of a song.’’
Cash inspires a respect among his fellow musicians that borders on awe.
‘Maybe he is the father of our country,’ says Kris Kristofferson.
And in the weather-beaten flesh Johnny Cash is a mighty impressive man.
Unlike the two other big country stars of the last 40 years — sentimental Jim Reeves and podgy Garth Brooks — Cash plugs right into the myth of the Old West.
He may be a grandfather who has survived heart surgery and likes nothing better than spending time with his family but, like a retired gunslinger who can only be pushed so far, he gives the impression of still being capable of strapping on a Colt 45 and facing up to a gaggle of tobacco-stained desperadoes.
Even if he would never actually shoot anyone.
‘Sure I still shoot my guns,’ he growls.
‘But only for target practice.
I would never take another man's life.’
Johnny Cash — a cowboy who fires blanks?
When you say that, partner, you better smile.
The Arts: Never more in Neverland FILMS
Hugo Davenport on Hook, Steven Spielberg's sad betrayal of J. M.
BY HUGO DAVENPORT Barrie's classic; a kiss of death in Amazonia; and k. d. lang in Alaska
THE word ‘hook’ is Hollywood slang for the distinctive twist in the plot set-up of an otherwise familiar generic story.
It is designed, like a fishing lure, to catch the audience's eye and yield a rich haul at the box-office.
And, just as an effective fishing lure may be fabricated from cheap, shiny metal, it is generally possible to summarise a commercial movie's hook in one sentence.
What, then, is Hook's hook?
The fearsome implement (fashioned in this case from expensive, shiny metal) that sparkles so on the poster?
No, the true Hollywood hook of Steven Spielberg's film is just the sort of bold, fatuous one-liner that gladdens the hearts of Hollywood producers.
To wit: Peter Pan grows up.
Never mind that this idea destroys the fundamental premise of J. M. Barrie's story, which ends with a vision of Wendy's descendants continuing to visit the Neverland with an eternally youthful Peter ‘so long as children are gay and innocent and heartless’; nor yet that Captain James Hook has somehow escaped from the jaws of the ticking crocodile to dream of a return engagement with the leader of the Lost Boys.
There is also the small point that the original Peter had paid the price of rejecting his family when he returned to find his window barred and another little boy in his bed.
Strange, then, that Spielberg's grown-up Peter must recover his original, youthful estranged family.
In Hollywood, we must remember, anything is possible.
In this sense, it is unlike Barrie's Neverland — a place which, however fantastical and fey, is governed by the alternative rules that must underpin any convincing alternative universe.
If anyone should object, the film-makers can always retort that the idea of Peter Pan growing up came originally from the six-year-old son of one of the scriptwriters.
QED, huh?
With a budget of $70 million, Spielberg has splashed out on elaborate sets and fancy effects, while the bigger stars deferred their salaries in favour of a share of profits.
At 44, the director can say, seemingly without blushing: ‘I'm also Peter Pan.
I've always been Peter Pan.
That's why I wanted to do this movie.’
Perhaps he hoped thus to outmanoeuvre those critics who have accused him of infantilism.
What he has done on screen, however, is to reduce the Neverland to the lowest common denominator of American junk culture.
The film is brash, forced, overblown and soulless.
It has none of the spontaneity of Barrie, nor any of the wistful melancholy that lies submerged beneath the bright surface of the tale.
Alternately manic and twee, it has, instead, only the ugliness of wilfully arrested adolescence.
Through the wonders of adoption, Peter Pan has become Peter Banning (Robin Williams), a 40-year old wheeler-dealer American lawyer too busy with his mobile phone to turn up at his son's baseball games or take much heed of his daughter.
And he has quite forgotten his past until, during a London visit to his erstwhile playmate, the 92-year-old ‘Grandma Wendy’(Maggie Smith), Hook (Dustin Hoffman) spirits Banning's children away to Neverland in an attempt to lure his old adversary back.
So Banning (note, if you please, the repressive implications of the name change) must learn to fly again, put on his tights, and lead the Lost Boys once more into battle.
He is coaxed along by Tinkerbell (Julia Roberts), still sufficiently enamoured of Peter to grow woman-sized at one point in order to obtain from him ‘a real kiss’.
In an American film, we must expect characters derived from our native tradition to acquire a pervasive transatlantic twang.
Here it grates more than usually, despite British voices in the mix: the unmistakable tones of Maggie Smith; Bob Hoskins taking a break from a long run of phoney American accents to play a cockney Smee.
Dustin Hoffman, essaying Old Etonian, comes out like a poor take-off of Terry-Thomas.
The cultural onslaught is not just a matter of intonation.
Spielberg's film swamps the Neverland with baseball and basketball, with burgers and skateboards and rap music.
John Williams's score is a triumph of meaningless assertion.
Amber Scott, playing Banning's daughter, entertains the sighing pirates with a ballad of such sick-making sentiment that it makes Shirley Temple look like Billie Holiday.
The Lost Boys romp in what Banning knowingly describes as ‘a Lord of the Flies free-school’, hurling multi-coloured food and gross insults.
When their interim leader, Rufio (Dante Basco), a leather-clad street punk, kneels before a 40-year-old man with a shaven chest to whisper in awe, ‘It's The Pan’, one is tempted to shout ‘No, it's The Close-Up!’.
For Hollywood seems to understand the word ‘pan’ only as a horizontal camera movement.
Knowingness, in fact, is everywhere.
Spielberg's last attempt at an adult theme was the nave, saccharine spirituality of Always; and yet, paradoxically, his children's Neverland lacks innocence.
All directors, including Spielberg, grow up, and in this film the result is not a pretty sight.
The Arts: Shakespeare with fizz
BY CHARLES SPENCER
I FIRST came across Theatre de Complicite seven years ago in a show called More Bigger Snacks Now, which featured a definitive demonstration of just how much mess it is possible to make with a few packets of crisps and a couple of cans of Coke.
In those days they were basically a mime company, though their grotesque appearance, and their ability to wring wild laughter from the depiction of desperate, squalid lives, marked them out as something special.
Nevertheless, if anyone had told me then that one day this company would be performing Shakespeare, I'd have thought they were mad.
Yet here they are at the Lyric, Hammersmith, with a magical production of The Winter's Tale, which honours this great play while doing full justice to Complicite's distinctive eccentricity.
This is not a show for those who like their Shakespeare straight.
Great liberties are taken, and the verse-speaking from the multi-racial cast is at times atrocious.
Yet you never feel that the company is introducing novelty for novelty's sake.
Complicite's use of movement and body language brilliantly illuminates the text, and almost every scene has a vitality that forces you to consider the play afresh.
As a result, you find yourself hanging on to every word and gesture.
The play begins with disco music, popping champagne corks and manic games of blind-man's-buff, yet it quickly becomes clear that the party spirit is not shared by Leontes.
Simon McBurney brings a fidgety, sweaty intensity to the role of the troubled king, and in one superb scene he is discovered standing on top of a wardrobe, gazing miserably down on the happy innocents beneath him as his heart is gnawed by destructive jealousy.
Annabel Arden's production captures harrowingly the full trauma of the first half of the play, as Leontes creates a winter world of death and despair.
The physical and emotional violence McBurney brings to the tormented king as he rages among the toys in his young son's nursery has the sickening impact of a kick in the solar plexus.
In the second half Complicite let their hair down in their own inimitable way.
The scenes in Bohemia have an infectious, anarchic energy, with a vintage comic performance from Marcello Magni as that normally tedious rogue Autolycus.
Jettisoning Shakespeare, and talking in a ludicrous mixture of Italian and heavily accented English, he comes on as a hilarious parody of a libidinous Latin, pinching handbags from the audience, flogging dodgy cassette tapes and offering healing laughter after all the grief of the earlier acts.
In a haunting, slow-motion procession, with the nine-strong cast changing into costumes of mourning as they march, the production takes us back to Leontes's tragic court.
There is a stillness in these final scenes which forms a fine contrast with the earlier manic activity, a real sense of wonder as the dead come to life and the divided family are miraculously reunited.
The moment when Leontes embraces the ‘statue’ of his wife Hermione and cries ‘She's warm’achieves an astonishing depth of emotion.
The cast double and treble their roles (even McBurney plays the clown as well as Leontes), and all make memorable contributions.
There must be special praise, however, for Kathryn Hunter, who is not so much an actress as a human chameleon.
In the course of the show she plays a young child (Mamillius), a passionate middle-aged woman (Paulina) and a comic old man (the shepherd) with a verisimilitude that beggars belief.
But then Complicite, in the seven years I have been watching them, have never lost their power to astonish.
CHARLES SPENCER
The Arts: Fun of a family plot
BY CHARLES SPENCER
IN A West End awash with naff musicals and compilation shows, an intelligent new comedy deserves a warm welcome and, for its first half at least, Ronald Harwood's Reflected Glory at the Vaudeville is a cracker.
It also brings Albert Finney back to the London stage in a commanding comic performance that serves as a potent reminder that we see him far too rarely these days.
He is undoubtedly one of the greatest actors of his generation, and you can't help wondering what sort of impact he would make if only he'd agree to beef up the ranks of the RSC or the National Theatre.
Still, it is good to see him at all, and I suspect his performance in Reflected Glory will linger in the memory…
The play is set in an old Thames warehouse which has been converted into a fringe theatre (the seats certainly look authentically uncomfortable).
At the start a group of actors and friends are preparing a surprise party for the director, Michael Manx (Stephen Moore), but it is his older brother Alfred, played by Finney, who strides on to the set first.
Alfred exudes a hilarious bumptiousness and bonhomie, and it seems that he must be the more successful of the two siblings.
He boasts of his restaurant in Barnes, assures the actors that as a restaurateur he, too, is something of a performer (’ flambe is not flambe without flair’), and laughs delightedly at his own jokes.
In an uproarious performance, Finney comes over like a Mancunian Tigger, insufferably bouncy and crassly insensitive.
But gradually it emerges that it is Michael who is the real success.
He has become a famous dramatist, and the two brothers haven't spoken for a decade, as Alfred feels Michael has betrayed the family by travestying them in his plays.
There is a funny, touching reconciliation scene, and then Michael drops his bombshell.
He has now written a play about Alfred called Brother Mine, and Finney's pugnacious indignation is a wonder to behold.
Sadly, in the second half, the play begins to fall apart at the seams as Harwood attempts to combine comedy with more serious themes.
Despite some hilarious interjections, Finney is largely confined to the sidelines as we watch the play itself, a dreadful parade of pretentiousness, with Pseud's Corner voice-overs, eerie sound effects and sub-Coronation Street dialogue.
As a parody of fringe theatre at its worst, all this is quite funny, but Harwood is trying to have his cake and eat it too.
Despite the evidence in front of our eyes, we are required to accept that Michael is a writer of real stature so that Harwood can conduct a somewhat stodgy debate about the way art feeds off real life, and transforms reality in the process.
The mixture of cheap jokes and pretentious philosophising becomes increasingly hard to stomach, however, and there are far too many moments when it is not clear whether you are supposed to be laughing at the characters or taking them seriously.
As the recriminations between the brothers become more explosive, and the wounds of jealousy reopen, I've a horrible suspicion that Harwood wants us to be genuinely moved, but after all the superficial comedy, his attempt to lend the play emotional depth arouses embarrassment rather than pity.
The director, Elijah Moshinsky, is unable to disguise this fatal uncertainty of tone, and most of the supporting roles are alarmingly one-dimensional creations.
But even the second half has some good moments, most notably a hilariously petulant temper tantrum by Nicky Henson as the actor playing Alfred in Michael's awful show.
Indeed throughout Harwood has some excellent jokes at the expense of the affectation and ludicrous self-absorption of actors, though he is even more unsparing on the playwright, who is gradually exposed in Stephen Moore's performance as a devious, self-regarding little swine.
It seems churlish to denigrate a show that offers as much humour and sharp observation as this one, but it is impossible to escape the conclusion that Reflected Glory finally adds up to less than the sum of its parts.
CHARLES SPENCER
The Arts: Sex ‘n’ drugs and the RSC Godfather of punk, Ian Dury, is the new bard of Avon
By ROBERT CHALMERS
‘WHO is he?
What does he do?’ asked the lady on reception.
The fame of Ian Dury — godfather of punk, creator of Sex ‘n’ Drugs and Rock ‘n’Roll and, as he describes himself in rhyming slang, ‘Britain's best-known raspberry ripple’— has not yet reached every corner of the Royal Shakespeare Company at Stratford.
Unsurprising, you might argue, given the chequered history of pop singers in the theatre.
Johnny Hallyday's Hamlet, for instance, was not widely seen as threatening the supremacy of Olivier and Gielgud.
Alvin Stardust — boldly cast as the Marquess of Queensberry in a recent stage version of the life of Oscar Wilde — left many critics unconvinced.
And Jerry Lee Lewis, who played Iago in a pop version of Othello, alienated Shakespeare purists when, on discovering the corpse in Act V, he exclaimed; ‘Great balls of fire!
My friend Roderigo!’
Dury, however, is a theatrical voice to be taken rather more seriously, as I discovered when I met him in his current lodgings, adjacent to the Swan Theatre.
There I found the author of Hit Me with Your Rhythm Stick sipping mineral water, tapping a hand-drum and singing to himself in 17th-century verse.
Dury, paralysed down his left side since contracting polio at seven, waded unsteadily across a floor littered with slang dictionaries and history books.
‘There is research to be done,’ Dury said, sitting down at a table strewn with photocopies from obscure-looking reference books.
‘There is history to be read.’
Dury is writing new songs, in period English, for a production of A Jovial Crew, a play which was written in 1641 and last performed in 1724.
Its author, Dury told me, was Richard Brome, an employee of the playwright Ben Jonson.
’‘E wasn't ‘is amanuensis or nuffink,’ Dury explained.
’‘E was just ‘is servant.’
It would take an exhaustive knowledge of the phonetic alphabet to do justice to Dury's vowel sounds on paper.
His voice is rough, slightly slurred, almost impossibly cockney.
It is as redolent of the capital's smoke-filled nightclubs and low bars as John Arlott's was of a West Country cricket ground on a midsummer evening.
Dury's vocabulary, on the other hand, is bookish.
Latin phrases, of which he is fonder than most former punk rockers, are pronounced in the same accent which once allowed him to rhyme ‘Trevor’ with ‘feather’.
Dury, who says he has problems getting past the RSC doormen, but is ‘persona grata in the Dirty Duck’, is the only man I have ever heard glottal-stop a dead language.
His work on A Jovial Crew (the story of two middle-class girls who leave home to join vagrants on the road) has required him to study Caroline street language in some detail.
Slang, and especially rhyming slang, is close to Dury's heart.
‘I see it as an expression of style,’ he says.
‘One of the actors come up to me last week, and he says: ‘I'm having real trouble with my April.’
I said ‘What?’
And he says: ‘April in Paris —‘arris; ‘Arris-totle — bottle; bottle and glass — arse.’’
Dury, the son of a chauffeur, grew up in Upminster and was educated at Chailey Special School, Sussex, and High Wycombe Grammar (’ the first place I ever really hated’).
He attended Walthamstow Art College and the Royal College of Art, where he met his friend Peter Blake.
When he made it big, in the mid-Seventies, Dury was a 35-year-old former art college lecturer in callipers.
He was an improbable star.
His 1977 LP New Boots and Panties, a witty, vulgar celebration of low-life in Billericay and Shoeburyness, was released at a time when other British groups were singing about California in counterfeit mid-Atlantic accents.
Since the departure of his musical collaborator Chaz Jankel, in the early Eighties, however, Dury has rarely recaptured his rude panache on record.
Recent years have seen him broaden his horizons: he currently presents Metro, the London Weekend arts programme; he wrote songs for Caryl Churchill's Serious Money; and established a career as an actor, appearing in Jim Cartwright's Road and Peter Greenaway's The Cook, The Thief, His Wife And Her Lover.
Dury is convivial, affable and engaging.
He seems highly sensitive to criticism in the press.
At one stage, for instance, he complained about an interviewer who had mentioned his being kind to a bird — not, you would have thought, a major libel.
‘I thought that would be interesting to anyone, a little pigeon living on my balcony.
But for that I got described as ‘professionally nice’.’
In the late Seventies, Dury acquired a reputation for being surrounded by London demi-monde characters of menacing disposition.
Even now his face lights up when he talks about minders with names like ‘The Sulphate Strangler’.
A former student promoter told me that, when he was unable to pay Dury in cash, ‘he threatened to have me chain-whipped by one of his companions whom he said had recently been released from prison’.
Peter Jenner, who once managed Dury, says: ‘I think he liked to cultivate that tough image.
Because of his disability, he had to feel that he could stand up against anyone, which indeed he could.
But underneath it all, he's really a softie.’
Other testimonials to Dury's character proved hard to come by.
Old hands from the music business — usually loquacious if invited to reminisce — were struck by collective amnesia when I asked them about Dury.
From one of his former associates, the question ‘Was he easy to work with?’ elicited rather different responses on the record (’Oh yes.
Very, very easy; polite and professional’) and off it (’ A right royal pain in the arse.
Difficult, mentally heavy.
When he started getting drunk, he could become very unpleasant’).
Dury's reputation as something of a hellraiser has been sustained by a couple of recent incidents: what he describes as his ‘bit of bother at the opera’(a minor fracas enthusiastically reported by the tabloid newspapers) and an appearance on Nicky Campbell's Radio 1 show, when Dury, who had dined well before going on air, spoke with unusual frankness on a number of subjects.
Nevertheless, it seems likely that Dury is considerably less of a pain in the ‘April’ these days.
‘Fame does something to people,’ he says.
‘Looking back on the time when I was really big, around 1979, I was the saddest and most miserablest I've ever been.
I knew why I was famous: I was a good lyric writer and had ability on stage.
What I didn't understand was why I didn't feel happy walking down the street afterwards.
Even today, in London, I don't walk down the road on my own.’
It seemed odd that he should feel ill at ease among the people whose vernacular he has espoused so wholeheartedly.
‘It's because I'm embarrassed,’ Dury says.
‘If you're disabled, children point at you and say ‘What's the matter with him, mum?’
Well I used to ignore that; I used to make a lot of noise in the street.
But nowadays they look at me, see I'm disabled, and then recognise me.
I think that's the trouble; I'm very recognisable; much more so than Paul McCartney walking through Soho in a beard.’
For those of us who have admired Dury's talent over the years, the main concern is whether he will ever recapture the charm, compassion and humour of his early recordings (all recently reissued).
A great deal is riding on his recent reconciliation with his former musical mentor Chaz Jankel.
‘We recorded 17 songs last year,’ Dury says.
‘Chaz wrote some great music, but my lyrics were just pony, man.
Good songs, with a life of their own, are hard to find.
Harder than…what are those birds that breed and people go to watch them?’
‘Pigeons?’
I ventured.
‘No, the ones in Scotland…ospreys.
Good songs are like ospreys.
When I produce the new album, it's got to be good.’
Meanwhile, Dury continues to devote his attention to A Jovial Crew, which opens on April 21.
Does he miss the lucrative contracts and the packed arenas?
‘Up here I earn about £200 a song,’ he says.
‘I get £14.50 per diems.
A couple of pints, a bit of subsidised supper.
I've got electric light and hot water.
During the day I sit banging my drum and watching good actors singing my words.
In other words, I feel rich.’
The Arts: Balanced beastliness
BY RICHARD LAST
WHILE the voters voted and the counters counted, it was instructive to note what TV fare our opinion formers thought fit to celebrate the nation's release from the 1992 Election.
Michael Grade chose close-of-poll hour to unleash the first TV showing of Scandal (C4), which showed the Conservative party in a pretty bad light (admittedly, a 30-year-old bad light).
Channel 3 played safe with a re-run of Taggart (ITV), which I suppose you could argue showed only the Scots in a bad light.
And Alan Yentob's channel provided relief from the computer predictions with a Comic Strip (BBC2) confection starring Adrian Edmondson as John Major and Robbie Coltrane as Mr Speaker, which showed just about everybody in a bad light.
More interesting than any of this, though, was the dog which was allowed to bark in the night, presumably on the grounds that it no longer had any bite.
I refer to Spitting Image (ITV), which last time round was held in check until the polls had safely closed, but this time was allowed an outing on Wednesday while the electorate were still technically making up their minds.
A spokesman for Central TV explained gravely that this particular edition had been carefully monitored for balance of beastliness.
After watching feeble jokes about Norma Major's voting intentions and Neil Kinnock's image, I wished it could have been monitored for an injection of humour.
But that ceased to be part of Spitting Image's remit several series ago.
Much the funniest poll night offering — with the possible exception of Have I Got News For You (BBC2), which was still being edited as I write — was the scheduled repeat of Porridge (BBC1).
Sometimes I wonder if the BBC is doing itself any favours by re-transmitting this 18-year-old series.
It is so perfectly scripted, so beautifully acted, so full of humanity and so stomach-clutchingly funny, that it makes almost every contemporary TV comedy look wan.
I do not, in general, belong to the they-don't-make-'em-like-that-any-more brigade, because mostly they never did.
Porridge is one of the all-time exceptions.
In the fourth part of Israel: A Nation Is Born (C4), Dr Abba Eban was celebrating a 25-year-old victory, the Six Day War, in which a coalition of Arab nations led by Egypt's President Nasser set out to destroy the Jewish state and got a bloody nose from the Israeli pre-emptive strike.
The Middle East is still suffering from the consequences of Jewish beastliness (why couldn't they have waited to be attacked first, like gents?), including what someone euphemistically described as the ‘re-unification’ of Jerusalem.
You couldn't blame Dr Eban, who played no small part in his country's survival with his jet-setting diplomacy, for sounding a touch smug.
The strike rate of what he described as ‘the most unwanted war in Israel's history’ still resounds in Israeli folk lore.
I wish that the producer of the series, Haggai Pinsker, could slow down his own breathless strike rate of stills, archive film, quickie interviews and manic music.
It's like being on a runaway roundabout.
The otherwise admirable Young Musician of the Year (BBC2), due to close tomorrow, has been exhibiting an even more infuriating mannerism, namely, cutting across the virtuosic teenage performances with superfluous interviews.
Some of them were gauche beyond belief.
‘Don't you think all those people in 19th-century black playing old-fashioned music are irrelevant?’ one trend-setter asked a dedicated 17-year-old who was pouring her soul into a French horn.
I looked for the name of yoof goddess Janet Street-Porter on the credits.
But for once she was guiltless.
RICHARD LAST 
Letter to the Editor: Callaghan did say ‘What crisis?’
SIR — Maurice Weaver is wrong to suggest that James Callaghan's phrase ‘Crisis, what crisis?’, which did so much to bring down Labour in 1979, was simply a misleading paraphrase by the tabloids (April 6).
When the 10th anniversary came round, it was claimed that the incident was invented by the nasty Tory press.
But I remember having a day off from teaching at the time, probably because of the various strikes, and watching the lunchtime television.
I saw Mr Callaghan come down the steps of his plane, stop at the foot and greet the throng of journalists waiting on the tarmac to question him about the current discontents.
Perhaps unwisely, he was still in an avuncular mood after his trip abroad, and duly uttered those fatal words.
I immediately rang my sister-in-law, another teacher stranded at home, and she had seen it.
We agreed that the prime minister had now definitely lost the coming election.
But, by the six o'clock news, that tarmac scene had been replaced by a news conference in the airport lounge with the usual polished platitudes.
Has that early bit of film or tape been lost, I wonder?
GEORGE BICKERSTAFFE Oldham, Lancs
Letter to the Editor: Gilbertian creation
SIR — Stephen Fry gives too much credit to P. G. Wodehouse, for it was W. S. Gilbert who, in 1881, created the Duke of Dunstable — a gallant officer of the 35th Dragoon Guards who sacrificed himself in marriage to the Lady Jane to compensate for her misfortune in being distinctly plain.
PAT RYAN Farnborough, Hants
Peterborough: Loss leader
WITH a triumphant twang of the zither, the City University of London has filled the first Joe Loss Research Fellowship in Jewish Music.
The job has gone to Alexander Knapp, an ethnomusicologist from Cambridge who reckons he can trace musical modes all the way from ancient synagogal cantillation to Irving Berlin and Gershwin.
‘Many of the composers who made good on Broadway were Jewish refugees from the 19th-century pogroms in Europe,’ says Knapp, who is not quite as dry as he might sound.
‘I'll be looking at all sorts of music, from liturgical chants to Fiddler on the Roof stuff and Hassidic Rock.’
The latter is what the youth of Tel Aviv like to hear on their transistors these days.
The fellowship was named in memory of Loss, the eye-smartingly popular bandleader, when his family contributed some sponsorship.
It is, says the university's Prof Malcolm Troup, ‘the first fellowship of its kind in the world’.
But then, there was only one Joe Loss.
Peterborough:
ANDREW Lloyd-Webber has joined the jury of an architectural competition.
Lloyd-Webber will help choose the recipient of the £145,000 Carlsberg Prize.
‘Andrew's interest in architecture,’ says a sidekick, ‘is in the Classical and Victorian fields.
But he doesn't veer to the same extremes as Prince Charles.
He has an apartment in Trump Tower in New York — that's pretty modern.’
Peterborough: Tyred out
AN American biologist called Roger Knutson has produced what is surely, to date, the year's most disheartening book.
Flattened Fauna, which has just hit the streets, presents itself as a Field Guide to Common Animals of Roads, Streets and Highways.
It is a handbook of squashed wildlife.
Knutson's two-dimensional observations are detailed.
‘Those nondescript spots and blotches of fur and feathers are the wildlife we tend to see most often,’ he writes.
‘Yet nowhere has there been a guide to their identification.’
Well, now there is.
Thoughtfully, Knutson provides silhouettes of the unfortunate ‘blotches’.
The book is filled with the outlines of toads, bats and squirrels which did not move quickly enough out of the way of oncoming traffic.
Pity the badger — when squashed it becomes ‘the largest, flattest creature on the road’.
Knutson's book has a scholarly feel, with a long bibliography.
The most dramatic entry is that of the poor rabbit.
‘Even adults sometimes overestimate their capacity to avoid danger,’ writes Knutson, ‘and find themselves half-an-inch high and roughly rectangular.’
His epitaph is equally phlegmatic: ‘Death in the fast lane is a way of life for many rabbits.’
Peterborough: Star-struck
ASTRONAUTS have saved an example of Stalinist nomenclature: the Kirov.
When the opera and ballet company's home town of Leningrad reverted last year to St Petersburg, the Kirov hoped to follow suit by returning to its old name.
Founded in 1860, it was originally called Maryinski, after the Empress Mary.
But in 1937 it switched to Kirov, in honour of a local party commissar (it transpired he was assassinated by Stalin, who thought him too popular).
Oleg Vinogradov, Kirov director, now finds he is stuck with the name.
Shortly before it was due to be changed, American astronauts decided to call a newly discovered planet Kirov Ballet.
‘We felt we had to keep the name to avoid any insult,’ says Vinogradov.
The company, which entertained the Princess of Wales at Covent Garden last night, has now decided on a cumbersome compromise: the Kirov Opera and Ballet of the Maryinski Theatre.
THE World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts is to revamp its image with new uniforms, including ‘100 per cent polyester chiffon’ saris and woollen capes.
Jan Holt, director, explains: ‘I realised something had to be done when, on a recent trip abroad, I was mistaken for the hotel lift attendant.’
Carving of dying lion rediscovered
By Robert Bedlow
A RELIEF carving on limestone of a dying lion dating from between 668 and 627 BC has been rediscovered.
It was last seen shortly after being excavated 150 years ago.
The carving, measuring 31cm×17cm, is from the North Palace of King Ashurbanipal, at Nineveh, the large Assyrian capital on the banks of the Tigris, opposite present-day Mosul in northern Iraq.
It is the only remaining piece of a frieze from the palace, found during excavations at Nineveh in 1845–1855 by W K Loftus and his artist companion, William Boutcher.
The lion is shown in its death-throes, blood gushing from the mouth, the muscles and sinews straining to keep the head up; the mouth and nostrils contorted in pain.
An arrow protrudes from just below its kneck.
Dr John Curtis, Keeper of the Department of Western Asiatic Antiquities at the British Museum, said yesterday that there was nothing like it in the world.
It was ‘priceless’.
He said he had received a letter ‘out of the blue’, asking if the museum would like it.
‘At first I could not believe it, but when I saw it hanging on the wall of this house, I was flabbergasted,’ he said.
‘It was one of the most exciting moments in my life.
It was quite unbelievable.
We knew of its existence from a photograph taken in the 1850s, but it has been missing for 150 years.
The world of Asian art and archaeologists will be astounded when they learn of its existence.
‘Its superb quality and the naturalism achieved by the artist who has captured the lion in its death-throes set it apart from most other Assyrian sculptures,’ said Dr Curtis.
‘The detail is incredible.
It is one of the museum's most important acquisitions that I can remember.
‘It was given to us by a descendant of Boutcher, who wants to remain anonymous.
I still can't believe it.’