

Poll helps pound
By Richard Northedge, Deputy City Editor
SHARE prices and the pound rose during the night as election results showed a better-than-expected performance by the Conservatives.
By 2 am the pound was up two pfennigs against Wednesday's price for the German mark to stand at DM 2.87.
Shares in privatised companies reacted strongly to the possibility of a Tory-dominated hung Parliament.
The 100-share index was 43 points up at 2,436.5 when trading on the Stock Exchange officially closed at 4.30 pm, reversing the fall of the past week.
But several leading London broking firms continued dealing throughout the night, watching election results as they were declared.
BT, which closed in the 101p to 103p range, was trading between 107p and 112p while electricity stocks also gained.
PowerGen, which closed at 211p to 215p, was up to 220p–221p, and National Power, which closed at 201p to 204p, rose to 210p–217p.
The stockbrokers EBZW reported strong interest in gilt-edged securities.
‘It's coming from all over the world,’ one dealer said.
New CBI chief is appointed
By Our Business Editor
Mr Howard Davies, 41, controller of the Audit Commission, was yesterday confirmed as the next director-general of the Confederation of British Industry at a starting salary of around £175,000.
He said he had briefly been a Labour Party member in 1974.
Banks deny job cuts cover-up
By Kevin Maguire Labour Correspondent
TWO High Street banks have been accused of trying to conceal up to 2,500 redundancies by announcing them on election day.
National Westminster told its staff that 1,900 branch posts would go, while up to 600 jobs will be lost in Barclays' trust company.
At the same time, the Royal Bank of Scotland confirmed that a review of its business might also result in job losses.
Both National Westminster and Barclays said earlier this year that there would be significant manpower reductions when their annual results were published.
But the Banking, Insurance and Finance Union claimed yesterday that polling day had been selected to announce details of the first cuts to minimise public attention.
Mr Ed Sweeney, Bifu's deputy general secretary, said yesterday: ‘Both banks have been working on these cuts for months and then choose today to axe jobs.’
Barclays is expected to shed 2,500 jobs this year and 10,000 by 1995, and National Westminster 4,000 worldwide by the end of 1992 and 15,000 over the next five years.
National Westminster denied that it had used the election as a cover.
A spokesman said yesterday this was the earliest that details could be given to its workforce.
The Royal Bank of Scotland said a union claim that up to 5,000 of its 21,000 staff faced the axe was ‘nonsense’.
City: Japanese shares slide rattles Group of Seven
By Anne Segall
FINANCE ministers and central bank governors from the Group of Seven leading industrial countries will meet in Washington later this month amid mounting concern about the risks for the world economy posed by the continuing slide in Japanese financial markets.
Japanese share prices have been falling for three years and have more than halved in value since the peaks reached in 1989.
But it is the speed of the latest falls which has prompted widespread international anxiety.
European monetary officials are particularly concerned about the strains on the Japanese banking system caused by the share slump in Tokyo.
Japanese banks, alone of the big international banks, rely on share portfolios for part of their capital.
These have been falling in value, exposing the banks to the dangers of a shrinking capital base.
The banks are believed to be reaching the point where their capital will fall below the minimum required under rules imposed by the Bank for International Settlements.
Unease about the financial stability of the Japanese banking system has been reflected in a 40 p.c. fall in the value of bank shares since the beginning of April.
Officials see little need for early ‘crisis’ talks on the situation in Japan but believe that the G7 meeting on April 26 is almost certain to focus on the Japanese situation, with the International Monetary Fund expected to set the scene with new forecasts for the global economy.
It is understood that the IMF has scaled back its expectations for growth in the main industrial economies this year from nearly 3 p.c. to just under 2 p.c.
City economists said yesterday that the American decision to cut the Fed Funds rate by ¼ point to 33/4 p.c. may have been taken with the international as well as the domestic situation in mind.
A stronger rebound in America would provide a useful counterbalance to the deteriorating picture in Japan and Germany.
Japanese banks were all-powerful in the 1980s but have been reducing their international involvement for the past 18 months in order to focus on their domestic problems.
Japanese banks, once fierce competitors in the British banking market, have all but disappeared.
But they still hold substantial portfolios of international shares and the fear is that they could attempt to sell these, setting off a chain reaction in other financial markets.
The G7 meeting will also deal with the question of Russian membership of the IMF.
Deputy finance ministers from the G7 will meet this weekend to finalise details of the $6 billion rouble stabilisation fund which will be financed through the General Arrangements to Borrow, a mechanism for channelling large amounts of cash aid without drawing directly on IMF resources.
The GAB was last used in the mid-70s when both Britain and the United States were forced to seek international financial support to prop up their economies.
City: Chemical industry spending cut back
By Roland Gribben
CHEMICALS companies have made further cuts in capital spending this year and only a modest improvement is in prospect next year before a further fall in 1994, according to an industry survey published yesterday.
Investment over the 1992–1994 period at £5.4 billion is forecast to be 22 p.c. down on the 1989–91 levels after allowing for inflation and the lowest since 1984–86 but still 30 p.c. higher than the depth of recession in 1981–1983.
Spending last year is estimated by the Chemical Industries Association to have fallen by 13 p.c. to £1.86 billion and is likely to be down by another 10 p.c. to £1.76 billion this year.
Companies are facing another tough year in 1992, Keith Wey, economist, told an association conference in London yesterday.
Government estimates of a 3 p.c. increase in production last year with pharmaceuticals achieving a 10 p.c. increase are disputed by the industry.
The survey also points to a considerable rise in research and development investment, largely tied to pharmaceuticals, and says that the proportion of environmentally-linked spending should be 24 p.c. of the total in 1994, against a level of 10 p.c. in 1991.
Plant cost inflation is predicted to drop marginally from 6 p.c. last year to an average above 5 p.c. up to 1994.
However, increasing water, electricity and gas bills are adding to production cost pressures, the association says.
City: BAe buys Astra arm
BRITISH Aerospace, currently involved in extensive rationalisation, was on the acquisition trail yesterday with its Royal Ordnance subsidiary reaching an agreement to buy an offshoot of the failed Astra Holdings company, the business caught up in the Iraq supergun affair.
Ordnance is believed to have paid less than £10m to buy British Manufacture and Research from Cork Gully, the Astra receivers.
British Manufacture employs 300, mainly at Grantham, Lincs and has a turnover of between £20m and £30m a year.
City: Skandia £244m bid for Hafnia
By Mary Brasier
A MASSIVE shake-up among Scandinavian insurance companies was unleashed yesterday with a £244m bid by Sweden's Skandia for the smaller Hafnia group of Denmark.
The bid, via a share swap, will merge their operations to make the Swedish group the 20th largest European insurer.
It also ends a long wrangle between Skandia and its two largest shareholders, Hafnia and Uni Storebrand of Norway which had been trying to use their combined 43 p.c. stakes to force a three-way merger.
Skandia will swap part of its international reinsurance operations for 21 p.c. of its shares held by Uni Storebrand.
It will also acquire, with the Hafnia merger, a 33 p.c. stake in Hafnia's Danish rival Baltica.
Both share stakes are expected to be put up for sale over the next few months if the Hafnia merger goes ahead, and could allow a large French company to buy a key stake in the Nordic market.
Union des Assurances de Paris is tipped to buy the 21 p.c. stake in Skandia.
Skandia chief executive Bjorn Wolrath, who will head the combined group, said the merger cleared up the ownership uncertainty surrounding Skandia.
City: Wembley forced to call on reserves
By Sonia Purnell
WEMBLEY, owner of the national football stadium and producer of Ken Russell's Lady Chatterley's Lover film for the BBC, plunged into losses of £8.4m last year and was forced to raid its reserves to pay an uncovered dividend.
Wembley blamed the Gulf war and the recession for trading profits falling a third to £14.6m and the gloom was deepened by a £7.5m exceptional charge against its investment in Leisure Resource Group, redundancy costs and a £3.2m restructuring of its American ticketing business.
The final dividend, payable on July 1, was slashed from last year's 1.5p to 0.9p.
The losses were in line with forecasts given at the time of Wembley's £37m rights issue in January.
There was a further extraordinary loss of £700,000.
Chairman Sir Brian Wolfson said Wembley is to stage 13 concerts this year — up from three in 1991.
After an investment of £23½m over five years in its American business, it made a profit last year.
Ticketing in Britain — held in a venture encompassing Keith Prowse, First Call and Wembley Stadium Box Office — was not profitable.
City: Nikkei slithers to lowest since 1986
By Matthew Doull
TOKYO's stock market continued its free fall yesterday as a wave of late selling wiped out early gains.
The Nikkei index of 225 leading shares lost a further 577.38 points to close at 16,598.15, its lowest since November 1986.
It was the third consecutive day on which the index plummeted by almost 3½ p.c. in an alarming acceleration of Japan's two-year process of asset deflation.
Yesterday the market came under heavy selling pressure in the afternoon as investors sought to take advantage of a morning bounce in which the Nikkei had risen more than 400 points to 17,585.
Most of the damage was again done in the financial sector, where worries about scandals and the recession abound.
The market is also highly sensitive because trading volumes are running close to 10-year lows.
Most observers see the index touching bottom before 15,000 but some believe it could go as low as 10,000.
Westerners are beginning to do some cautious bargain-hunting among blue chips that have fallen from the three-figure earnings multiples of the 1980s to more reasonable ratings.
Nicholas Knight, equity strategist at broker Nomura, believes the major degree of risk lies in the United States.
‘The market in New York is walking a tightrope between a recovery that is too weak and one that is too strong.
It is a no-win situation.
‘People should be selling the United States rather than Japan.
Tokyo is going to get worse — it will go to 15,000, but I want to buy,’ he said.
Share prices in Hong Kong and Sydney were both knocked by Tokyo's late sell-off, with the Hang Seng index closing 98.19 lower at 4,729.39 and Sydney's All Ordinaries index down 9 points at 1454.3.
City: Prices leap on late Tory backing
SHARE prices in London surged ahead yesterday as investors took a last-minute gamble on the Tories retaining power, writes Paul Murphy.
The main FT-SE 100 index of top companies jumped more than 43 points to 2436.4.
Dealers said both institutional fund managers and private client investors — having seen the latest opinion poll results pointing a much closer finish to the election than previously expected — decided that the potential gains following a surprise Tory victory this morning actually outweighed the risks associated with the formation of a Labour government.
Analysts believe the FT-SE 100 could fall by about 150 points if Mr Kinnock gains power; if Mr Major holds on, the index could jump 300 points or more, especially since the resultant strength of sterling might produce room for an interest rate cut.
Market specialists said yesterday's price rises were exacerbated by a shortage of stock in many leading companies.
Market makers have been running ‘flat’ trading books over the last few days to minimise their risk.
Market report — P26
City: Davies named as CBI chief
HOWARD Davies, 41, controller of the Audit Commission, was swiftly presented with an ‘agenda’ yesterday after being confirmed as the next director-general of the Confederation of British Industry at a performance-related salary estimated to be starting at £175,000.
But Mr Davies, who leaves behind a lower paid £85,000 at the commission, conceded he would have little difficulty in signing up for the business priorities agreed by the CBI's governing council for the incoming government.
They echo the theme set in last year's CBI Business Agenda for the 1990s with the emphasis on controlling inflation, public spending, strengthening the Department of Trade & Industry and giving it responsibility for the National Economic Development Council and opposing a national minimum wage.
The appointment of Mr Davies brought a mild objection from a member who felt it might have been better to have a change rather than a clone of Sir John Banham.
Mr Davies, annoyed at comparisons with Sir John, will bring a different style and approach to the job and feels his period at the Foreign Office and Treasury as an adviser to Nigel Lawson, former Chancellor, will be useful for the CBI and might help avoid ‘lobbing bombs over the wall’.
City Diary — P26
City: Ex-Tate man for Kingfisher
JAMES Kerr-Muir, managing director of Tate & Lyle's British operations until leaving last November, has been appointed finance director at Kingfisher, the Woolworths and B & Q retailer.
His appointment, after an ‘exhaustive’ five-month search, fills the void created when Archie Norman left in December to take the helm at debt-burdened food retailer Asda.
Mr Kerr-Muir, 51, will be the third ex-sugar industry executive working at Kingfisher.
Chairman Geoff Mulcahy and corporate affairs director Nigel Whittaker both came to the group 10 years ago from British Sugar, now owned by Tate & Lyle.
City Diary — P26
City: Wall St regains 43 points
By Jonathan Confino
in New York
WALL Street soared yesterday after the Federal Reserve Board, the nation's central bank, lowered short-term interest rates to prevent the economic recovery from stalling.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which had crashed nearly 100 points in the two previous sessions, closed 43.61 higher at 3,224.96.
The index had topped 3,231 in early afternoon trading.
In a sign that the rebound may be running out of steam, the Fed disclosed last night that the widely watched M2 measure of money supply, a barometer of economic activity, plummeted $7.1 billion in the week ending March.
This put M2 below the bottom level of the Fed's targeted band.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond jumped nearly a full point in price to $1012232, thereby pushing long-term interest rates down to 7.85 p.c.
City Comment — P25 
City: Dignum steps down at Dixons
By Karen Cooper
DIXONS Group financial director Tony Dignum will step down from the electrical retailer's main board early next month but will remain finance director of its shops in Britain and America.
The group, headed by Stanley Kalms, said his resignation would ‘enable him to concentrate fully on the financial management and control of the group's retail businesses.’
Robert Shrager, who as corporate finance director has shared the finance role with Mr Dignum, will effectively become group finance director.
Mr Shrager is better known in the City.
He said yesterday that as Mr Dignum spent most of his time looking after the stores, which include the troubled Silo chain in America, the move ‘reflects the reality of the situation which has existed for some time’.
It would also solve the confusion of having the group's financial controller reporting to two people, he said, and having two financial directors on the main board.
Mr Dignum, 52, has been group financial director since 1988 and was appointed finance director of the stores in January.
He spent six months running the Silo chain last year.
One stores analyst described Mr Dignum's resignation as ‘quietly removing an anomaly’.
City: Harry Ramsden's frying tonight in Hong Kong
By Sonia Purnell
EXPATRIATES in Hong Kong, homesick for real fish and chips do not have long to wait.
The success of a week's promotion at the colony's airport in September 1990 persuaded Harry Ramsden's, the world's only quoted chippie, to set up a restaurant in the heart of Wanchai on Hong Kong Island.
Opening in July, the 200-seater restaurant and take away will be a replica of the original 64-year old Harry Ramsden's in Guiseley, West Yorkshire, complete with chandeliers, tablecloths and carpet imported specially from Bradford.
A British-style bar will stock John Smith bitter while the traditional menu of haddock, chips, mushy peas and bread and butter will be supplemented by chips with garoupa and pomfret, two popular Pacific fish.
But there will be few variations from the original theme.
Harry Ramsden's chairman John Barnes said yesterday: ‘There won't be any chop suey or snakes on offer.’
The Hong Kong restaurant will be Harry Ramsden's first takeaway outside Britain, where it now has four sites in Glasgow, Blackpool, Guiseley and Heathrow Airport.
But it also plans a franchised Harry Ramsden's in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, for the autumn.
Harry Ramsden's has taken a third of the equity of a new company, Bluelane, capitalised at £750,000, which will manage the Hong Kong restaurant and franchise further outlets in the Pacific Rim area.
‘There's tremendous growth in this area and plenty of Westerners pining for fish and chips.
The Chinese also like it a lot, particularly those educated in England,’ Mr Barnes said.
The other backers include Andrew Bull, a Yorkshireman showbusiness promoter now a Hong Kong resident, and a French-Egyptian investor.
Mr Barnes said that trading was ‘holding up well’ in Britain, particularly at the company's new restaurants, but that the whole country would not be able to accommodate more than a total of 12 restaurants.
‘We need international expansion,’ he said.
‘Ramsden's restaurants are not like high street fast food outlets.’
City: All clear for Goldman on MCC deals
By Matthew Doull
A CONFIDENTIAL report has cleared Goldman Sachs of breaching Stock Exchange rules in dealing in Maxwell Communication Corporation shares and options between August 1990 and February 1991.
The report was prepared by a working party set up in January to investigate large positions the American investment bank built up in MCC shares during that period but failed to disclose.
At the time, Goldman had granted put options to companies controlled by Robert Maxwell and was buying heavily in the market to be able to fulfil its obligations.
Goldman's defence was that, as a market-maker in MCC shares, it was exempted from having to disclose its holdings, even though they rose above the 3 p.c. threshhold above which investors other than market-makers must make public disclosure.
The report concludes Goldman had ‘a valid basis for relying on the market-makers’ exemption,’and there was no evidence to support speculation that there had been ‘some form of illegal share suppport operation by Goldman ‘.
In August Goldman admitted a technical breach of the Companies Act for failing to disclose MCC shares held as security for loans to Maxwell family companies.
Eugene Fife, chairman of Goldman Sachs International, said: ‘We have constantly maintained that Goldman Sachs did not manipulate the securities market and we are very pleased that this has been confirmed in the independent review undertaken by the Stock Exchange.’
The Stock Exchange's exoneration does not affect the Serious Fraud Office's investigation into Maxwell share-support schemes and the report does not cover transactions outside the period named.
Administrators to Bishopsgate Investment Trust and other companies controlled by the Maxwell family are still interested in payments made to Goldman between April and September last year.
City: Power users put pressure on Littlechild
By Roland Gribben
LARGE companies are ready to demand the resignation of Prof Stephen Littlechild, the electricity industry regulator, if they fail in a new attempt to gain cheaper electricity.
They are also planning to renew calls for a Monopolies and Mergers Commission investigation into the electricity generators, National Power, PowerGen and Nuclear Electric.
The ‘showdown’ strategy has been agreed by the Major Energy Users' Council, which includes companies such as engineering group GKN, Blue Circle Industries and British Coal as part of a ‘high profile’campaign to step up the pressure on government and the regulator.
Peter Rost, the council's chairman, who is a former Conservative MP and ex-member of the Commons Energy Select Committee, said yesterday: ‘The council intends to make it clear that we will no longer accept fobbing-off, soothing noises from politicians, regulators and suppliers, the decision makers who should be helping us.’
Large companies are facing price increases averaging 20 p.c. this year and say that efforts to cushion the rises through a recent Nuclear Electric auction were a flop.
Mr Rost says electricity users are fully justified in their ‘angry determination’ to have a showdown.
‘We were promised a competitive privatised market.
It has not happened yet.’
Investigations by the council show British Rail will have to ‘pay 23 p.c. more for electricity at Victoria Station’ while the National Health Service is ‘lumbered’with contract rises up to 28 p.c.
The council is to press for a speed-up in changes to the power pool and implementation of recommendations in the Commons report.
Mr Rost says the council aims to co-ordinate its lobby with the Confederation of British Industry, the Chemical Industries Association and the Energy Intensive Users' Group.
City: Mobile radio businesses to be merged
THE General Electric Company and Vodafone are merging their private mobile radio businesses after disappointing results in a market serving haulage fleet operators and other transport businesses.
Vodafone recently took control of its system from its original partners, Philips, Securicor and Aircall.
City: Lyonnais slips
PROFITS of French state-owned bank Credit Lyonnais fell nearly 11 p.c. last year to Ffr408m despite an increase in new business.
The fall partly reflected write-downs on the securities portfolio.
The group said it increased its share of deposits outside France and had been active in capital markets, where it gained notoriety last year for backing Giancarlo Paretti, the failed MGM film studio owner.
City: Nylex offer
BTR's Australian arm BTR Nylex has increased its offer to the 15 p.c. minority shareholders in Westinghouse Brake & Signal from A$10 to A$10.20 a share.
BTR acquired 85 p.c. of the company with its takeover of Hawker Siddeley.
City: HCI in Russia
THE privatisation of the Russian health service has begun with an agreement under which Hospital Corporation International will take over the management of Moscow's Granovskovo (formerly Kremlin) Hospital.
City: Tilney sale
SALE Tilney, the insurance-to-foods group, has sold its British dried pasta distribution business and its James Marshall (Glasgow) subsidiary for a total of £1.27m cash.
City: Sindall slumps
WILLIAM Sindall, the Cambridge-based builder and civil engineer, slumped to a pre-tax loss of £4.2m last year, after an exceptional write-down on land values of £5m.
Turnover fell from £85½m to £64m.
With another ‘difficult’ year expected, Sindall has passed its final dividend.
City: Chinese attack
THE Bank of China has attacked the proposed takeover of Midland Bank by Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, claiming Midland is ‘one of the four worst-performing clearing banks in Britain’.
It says that, given Hongkong Bank's good profits, ‘its purchase of another less profitable bank is believed to be of concern to major shareholders’.
City: Porth talks
PORTH Group, the Christmas decorations maker, has issued a statement saying it has completed talks with its bankers, National Westminster and Societe Generale, over its bank facilities for this year.
Two local authorities, Rhondda Borough Council and Mid Glamorgan County Council, have agreed in principle to provide partial guarantees subject to any legal restrictions.
City: Kemps buy-out
SERIF Cowells, the Ipswich-based printing and packaging group, has sold its Kemps Publishing business to its management for £300,000 cash.
The purchasers are also taking on board £748,000 of Kemps' bank borrowings.
City: Lucas contract
LUCAS Industries has secured further business from Jaguar for wiring assemblies for its XJ6 model.
At current levels of demand, the additional work is valued at about £4m a year.
City: Tunisian deal
GEC Alsthom, the Anglo-French turbo-generator manufacturer, has signed a £140m contract to design and build a 350 megawatt, combined cycle gas-fired power station near Sousse in Tunisia.
City: ICI completes
ICI has completed the sale of its rock salt and white salt business to an investment group for £40m.
City Comment: America losing way out of the wilderness
HOPES that the United States will lead the world out of the economic doldrums were dealt a blow yesterday when the country's central bank admitted that the incipient recovery is in danger of petering out.
To ease the credit policy, the Federal Reserve Board cut interest rates to their lowest level since November 1964 after chairman Alan Greenspan admitted that January's and February's surge in growth may have been caused only by a mild winter after all.
The decision to cut the federal funds rate — the level at which banks borrow from each other overnight — from 4 to 33/4 p.c. is a far cry from market concerns of a few weeks ago that the Fed might soon tighten monetary policy.
Then, economists were openly predicting that the recovery would be more in line with previous post-recessionary periods, but that optimistic bubble has now burst and most experts are admitting that the recovery will be painfully slow.
No one should be surprised.
Debt that was amassed during the go-go years of the 1980s remains high while confidence remains low.
The first sign of trouble came with March's poor employment report but first-quarter company results are also proving disappointing: profits are just 5.8 p.c. higher than this time last year when America was fighting in the Gulf.
More bad news is expected next week when the government discloses March retail sales which may have declined by up to 0.8 p.c.
At least the Fed's further monetary easing will not lead to a resurgence of inflation.
Only yesterday America reported that wholesale prices edged up a tiny 0.2 p.c. last month and today's consumer inflation figures — like Britain's — should also be encouraging.
But the Fed's timing may not have been based entirely on domestic considerations.
The central bankers have a vested interest in allowing their Japanese counterparts room for further interest rate cuts in Tokyo in an attempt to prevent further haemorrhaging on the Tokyo stock market which has hit stock prices in New York.
If that was the plan then Wall Street certainly reacted correctly last night and the Group of Seven industrialised nations can be expected to discuss how to take the initiative further at this weekend's meeting.
This is election year in the United States as well as in Britain and Japan however, and the Fed is under pressure to lower interest rates further in the next couple of months.
Voter concern about the economy means that President Bush is likely to face as difficult a task as John Major has done.
City Comment: Littlewoods needs better sales pitch
RETAIL goods are notoriously hard to shift in these dark days of recession but most high street chains manage to offload last season's stock with a bit of discounting and persuasive salesmanship.
Clearly Littlewoods, the pools group and retailer, does not believe in either solution — or perhaps it does not really want to sell.
Its mail-order business, coyly put on the shelf for sale more than a year ago, is still sitting there gathering dust.
This week, Germany's Quelle group — seen as an enthusiastic bargain hunter in Britain's underdeveloped mail-order sector — became the latest in a stream of prospective purchasers to have looked but walked away.
Littlewoods could be on the verge of a decision over the future of the mail-order operations but making the business an irresistible buy will take a dramatic burst of salesmanship by the Moores family which owns this Liverpool group, and their merchant bankers at Kleinwort Benson.
Like the Conservative government, they dithered and have been overtaken by a recession which reduced their chance of success.
There has been a sharp difference over what its price tag should look like.
Frontline bidders were Quelle and Kingfisher — which had the edge of being a domestic buyer in a market that had already seen Otto Versand of Germany buy Grattan and the French Redoute group carry off Empire Stores.
But their offers were around £400m to £450m, while Littlewoods clearly expected the price of more than £500m.
But according to one retailer who thinks that the mail-order operation needs a lot of work to modernise and improve it: ‘It represents cannon rather than rifle shot — it is old fashioned and they do not target customers properly.’
Littlewoods should perhaps ask some of its own retail managers now it can brush up its selling technique to shift a big ticket item like this.
City Comment: Klesch will put pressure on Heron
IN TURNING to Gary Klesch, Heron International's bondholders have found a man with first-hand knowlege of debt.
Their choice to negotiate for them over the property group's restructuring is the American financier who, after a colourful career in the more maverick corners of the Euromarkets, agreed to buy the Marshalls money-broking business from British & Commonwealth but failed to find the cash.
It says much for Mr Klesch's negotiating stamina however, that five years later, the £280m is still unpaid but British & Commonwealth has gone bust.
Nor has he been idle since 1990, when he was apparently left without a City role after relinquishing executive control of money-brokers R P Martin, and the closure of his Quadrex Securities.
He has set up Klesch & Co to trade loans in troubled companies such as Heron and to advise on corporate restructurings.
The concentration on Heron's bond issues in Switzerland, where only lead managers can call a default, leaves a potential conflict of interest if the banks which issued the bonds for Heron sought now to negotiate against the company.
Mr Klesch is thus being asked to step in as the disinterested negotiator.
His close knowlege of debt last year allowed him to spot Olympia & York, ADT and Lonrho, as well as Heron, as the companies most likely to run into financial trouble in 1992.
Heron cannot have enjoyed being on his list but the prospect of negotiating with Mr Klesch can only encourage the company to settle quickly and generously.
City: IN BRIEF 
City: Rathbone passes £3m milestone
RATHBONE Brothers, the asset management and private banking group, is celebrating its 250th anniversary by lifting the payout to shareholders by a quarter to 10p, with a 7½p final dividend on July 1, on the back of record 1991 profits.
Oliver Stanley, the chairman, in announcing a 22 p.c. increase in pre-tax profits to £3.12m, said: ‘We wanted to mark our 250th anniversary in 1992 with good results and we have done so.’
Following the completion of the acquisition of Framlington's private client fund management business in January and the recruitment of five new investment managers in Liverpool, he is looking for increased investment revenues in this year.
Mr Stanley said: ‘Whatever the outcome of the General Election, private clients will still need Rathbones to advise on and manage their personal affairs and investments.’
He also disclosed that the company is considering moving up to a full listing.
‘If such plans develop, we will need to look at the company's existing share structure and a 1-for-1 capitalisation issue would seem appropriate.’
The shares closed 13 higher at 393p.
City: Whatman in full-year 16pc tumble to £9.2m
By Ra Tickel
THE recession caught up with Whatman last year, dealing a blow to the Maidstone-based filtration and purification products group's consistent growth record, with pre-tax profits falling 16 p.c. to £9.21m, on sales £5m ahead at £49.6m.
Sales growth was evenly spread across the group, but all three divisions continued to feel the impact of the recession in Britain, and, unlike the previous year, suffered from the downturn in North America.
Profits are after charging reorganisation costs of £300,000.
Expenditure on marketing, research and development and capital equipment, saw a £378,000 interest charge replace a £733,000 credit.
But the company said its investment programme helped raise its visibility in a relatively lifeless marketplace and, in the American laboratory market in particular, helped shield it from the worst effects of the recession.
With year-end gearing under 5 p.c., spending on marketing and product development this year will rise as a proportion of sales, albeit at a slower rate than in 1991.
Investment in plant and equipment is expected to slow towards the end of the year.
Earnings are down 19 p.c. to 26.7p a share, but with the benefits of its expansion programme expected to show through, the dividend is being lifted 12 p.c. to 8.7p, with the payment of a 5.8p final.
City: Britannia passes final after £690,000 loss
BRITANNIA Group, hit by difficult conditions in property and construction and further provisions against falls in land values, is passing its final following a tumble from a £631,000 profit to a £690,000 pre-tax loss in 1991.
With turnover down 27 p.c. to £27.1m, reflecting both the tough trading climate and the group's reluctance to compete at uneconomic margins in the construction market, profits slumped from £1.83m to £410,000 before providing £775,000 (£1.2m) for the fall in land values and reorgnisation costs of £325,000.
Christopher Powell, chairman, said negotiations continue in the construction division on a number of projects due to start this year.
While continuing to promote the sale of small land holding, the development side took options during the year on two parcels of agricultural land near Rugby totalling 169 acres.
The residential arm is also taking advantage of lower land prices to buy sites within, or close to, urban centres, although the target for new sites is they should not exceed a 12-month sales life.
City: Setback at Gold Fields
MARCH quarter results for the six gold mines in the Gold Fields of South Africa stable, are down marginally on the preceding quarter.
Gold production rose by 144 kilograms to 29,594 kilograms, despite a 3 p.c. dip in the amount of ore milled to 3.51m tonnes.
But a lower average Rand gold price, saw revenue slip from R956 to R946m, and net profits fall by R4.03m to R208m.
Kloof, benefiting from a higher gold yield, lifted net profits R4.77m to R97.7m, despite production losses over the December–January holiday period and a fall in the tonnage of ore milled.
Driefontein and Deelkraal both marked time at about R132m and R16.7m respectively.
Attempts to increase gold production at Venterpost proved unsuccessful and with the yield falling, the mine tumbled from a near R2m profit to a R3.26 net loss.
With an underground fire contributing to a 50,000 tonne fall in ore milled at Libanon, losses at the mine jumped from R1.92m to R3.18m.
Progress was made in getting production back to planned levels at Doornfontein, where losses marked time at about R7m.
Elsewhere, Gold Fields Coal saw profits fall 29 p.c. to R6.05m following a 8.8 p.c. fall in sales and lower sundry revenue.
City: HK ship owners explore bolt hole
By Hugo Gurdon in Hong Kong
TEN Hong Kong ship owners completed a ‘fact-finding mission’ to Singapore yesterday, and are now weighing its advantages as a pre-1997 bolt hole before Communist China retakes Hong Kong.
Singapore is building on its base as the world's biggest container port, which it won from Hong Kong two years ago, and is offering tax incentives to shipping companies which move there.
As Peking's takeover draws closer, analysts expect more and more companies to follow Jardine-Matheson and Hongkong & Shanghai Bank, and move their official bases outside the territory.
One Hong Kong company, International Maritime Carriers, has already decided to rebase in Singapore.
Director Jack Seth said: ‘1997 was certainly a factor.
Senior staff turnover had become very high.
In Singapore, once somebody joins they stay.
They are not emigrating to Canada or Australia.’
Hong Kong Marine Director Tony Miller described competition between the two countries as ‘something of a myth’.
The Hong Kong government is worried enough that, from today, it is capping harbour fees to attract the biggest ocean vessels.
It also plans to exempt Hong Kong-registered ships from all profits tax.
‘We had been disadvantaging ourselves,’ Mr Miller conceded.
Questor Column: AMEC counting its blessings
Edited by Marc Popiolek
AMEC chairman Alan Cockshaw said yesterday: ‘Bless oil, gas and petrochemical engineering’.
Without it, a painful 1991 for the contracting group would have been even more unpleasant.
Twelve months ago, when AMEC raised £111m via a rights issue at 200p per share, many forecasters expected 1991 to be a year of recovery for the construction industry.
In the event the opposite was true.
In all three AMEC divisions, trading worsened, leaving profits before exceptional items down from £63.4m to £50.1m.
But a particularly bleak outlook for housebuilding and property development —’ We think it will be very rough indeed’said Mr Cockshaw-prompted substantial write downs on its land holdings.
Totalling £60m, two thirds on the housing side, one third on a few commercial developments, these combined pushed AMEC into a £9.9m loss for the year.
The final dividend of 6¼p is unchanged, and payable on July 1, for a total of 10¼p.
It was easily affordable: the rights issue last year strengthened the finances and left year end net cash of £77m.
Oil and gas work, mainly maintaining and updating North Sea platforms, had a ‘superb year’ but was swamped within the overall result.
Building and civil engineering profits fell from £30.3m to £24.2m, mechanical and electrical engineering from £38.6m to £33.6m, and housing and property, even before the massive provisions, increased its loss from £700,000 to £11.3m.
Orders in the contracting division are down only 8 p.c.
Nevertheless, as AMEC was at pains to point out yesterday, for the next couple of years making money from housebuilding is set to be a struggle.
The shares rose 11 to 149p thanks to the same-again payout, and the yield is a fat 9.2 p.c.
However, with 1992 unlikely to bring any respite for the industry, it is too early to buy.
Questor Column: Secure yield prop for Dowding
DOWDING & Mills has hardly hogged the headlines since going public in 1946.
There was a flurry of excitement in 1975 when it fought off a bid from General Electric of America.
But otherwise it has survived on a diet of small deals while making a nice living rewinding British industry's electric motors.
Then in September it burst back into life launching a £14m hostile bid (its first ever) for Torday & Carlisle.
Despite Torday's protestations the fit looked neat.
So defeat was a bitter blow to Dowding.
In view of the £632,000 of bid costs announced with yesterday's figures the company was quick to stress that it has no other hostile targets in its sights.
That will leave management free to concentrate on the existing businesses which are not having an easy time of it.
Dowding does best when its customers are working their equipment flat out.
That means it breaks down more often and they are prepared to pay Dowding's premium prices for fast service.
When things are quiet they can afford to shop around.
Dowding has held its rates, maintaining its gross margins, but inevitably lost some business.
In the six months to December turnover was down £3m to £38m with pre-tax profits £1.4m lower at £3.7m.
However, Dowding can afford to raise the dividend by 5 p.c. to 0.92p, payable on May 8.
Repairing electric motors is hardly a growth business (British Coal is not the only customer in long-term decline) and Dowding already has about a quarter of the market.
So for future growth the company is looking at related service businesses and expansion overseas.
Meanwhile, the company should make about £7m in the full year, which puts the shares at 55p on a demanding multiple of 16.
But they are safe enough, if unlikely to excite, and are backed by a secure yield of almost 6 p.c.
City: German rates ‘won't fall yet’
By Robin Gedye in Bonn
THE Bundesbank indicated yesterday that there were no immediate plans to reduce interest rates and pleaded for a rigorous savings campaign by Germans to combat rising debts.
The bank's annual report said ‘debts on a level with 1991 are no longer sustainable’ and that total public sector debt had soared to Dm1.32 trillion from Dm1.18 trillion in 1990, corresponding to nearly half the country's gross national product last year.
It said that a continuing strong demand for credit showed that higher interest rates, whose effects were mitigated by direct subsidies and tax relief, were not holding down investment.
It expressed particular concern over the debts arising from investments in east Germany which will absorb an extra Dm180 billion (£63 billion) this year, a rise of 30 p.c. over 1991.
It warned that inflation continued to be a threat as delays in economic recovery abroad dampened growth prospects.
‘Risks to price stability continue in 1992.’
It said that while recovery in east Germany had begun, the east would remain dependent on the west's financial aid for longer than expected, while taxes might have to be raised again.
City: Bonn rejects pay claim
THE first strike for 18 years among Germany's 2.3m public sector employees was threatened yesterday as the government rejected a 5.4 p.c. pay rise recommended by arbitrators, writes Robin Gedye.
The swift rejection by the interior ministry, which leads public employers in wage negotiations, pre-empted a meeting between union and employers' negotiators on Monday.
One government politician estimated the increase would add Dm20 billion (£7 billion) to an already over-strained public sector budget.
‘The recommendation by arbitrators is not a reflection of the true economic situation and thus cannot be a base for a solution to the conflict,’ said Rudolf Seiters, Interior Minister.
‘The employers will continue attempts to reach a justifiable solution through negotiations’.
Monika Wulf-Mathies, leader of the public service employees union, warned state and local community employers that if they rejected the arbitrators' recommendations her union would call an immediate strike ballot.
The union had originally asked for 9½ p.c.
City Diary: Better thrown out than thrown in
FURTHER to my revelations yesterday about Richard Branson being thrown out of Sir James Goldsmith's Mexican estate after pushing the financier into his own swimming pool, I learn that Goldsmith is taking his new-found environmental conscience very seriously.
Around the inner compound of his ranch house, Goldsmith has built a moat in which he is sheltering a large number of crocodiles — a notoriously threatened species.
Any foolhardy handbag manufacturers intending to raid this moat should be warned: the reclusive multi-millionaire also has a small regiment of guards armed with sub-machine guns to protect them.
City Diary: Packer leaves Sheehy standing
TALKING of Goldsmith, I hear reports from Australia that his old partner Kerry Packer — together they bid for BAT Industries in 1989 — has had another run-in with BAT's chairman, Sir Patrick Sheehy.
Packer and Sheehy were both taxiing around Sydney airport in their respective corporate jets on Tuesday when they accidentally collided.
Unlike the last occasion they ran into each other, this time Sheehy came off worse and his plane was grounded as a result of the damage.
While Packer flew on to his destination, Singapore-bound Sheehy and his party were forced to book a commercial flight.
City Diary: Labour party aberration
HOWARD Davies, 41, director-general designate of the CBI, confessed yesterday that he had once been a member of the Labour party, but regretted it as a ‘bizarre incident’.
A member of the Islington branch for six months in 1974 while working as a Foreign Office diplomat, Davies owned a flat in the same house as Chris Smith, currently a member of Labour's Treasury team.
He soon found, though, that he had not been eligible to join, having refused to join the top civil servants' trade union which was then attempting to block a Foreign Office shake-up.
‘To be a member of the Labour party you had to be a member of the staff association but I didn't know at the time,’ says Davies.
City Diary: Sugar link adds spice to story
KINGFISHER director Nigel Whittaker insists that new finance director James Kerr-Muir's background at another sugar company is ‘pure coincidence’.
Whittaker, his chairman Geoff Mulcahy and late chairman John Beckett all worked at Tate's rival, British Sugar, before taking over Kingfisher 10 years ago.
Whittaker says there was a five-month search for Archie Norman's successor but admits that his and Mulcahy's knowledge of Kerr-Muir as a former competitor at Tate & Lyle was ‘quite helpful’.
‘I don't want to make too much of it though, as if there was only one person we could want.
We did have a very broad search,’ adds Whittaker.
‘It's an amusing link but I don't think its the key to his appointment.’
Incidentally, Mulcahy and Kerr-Muir also knew each other at Harvard Business School.
City Diary: New shoes available
IN THE unlikely event that Stephen Hargrave, youthful former chairman of Pathfinders Group, does not get on with his new boss Hugo Biermann — who recently reversed into the company — he now has another venture to concentrate on.
The former writer and fund manager, now deputy chairman of the renamed Maddox Group, has just backed his younger brother, Paul, and a partner in buying the Hush Puppy factory in Kilmarnock from Burlington International, the shoemaker which called in the receiver last month.
‘We have put in entirely our own money,’ says Hargrave, who has been far from down-at-heel since Biermann's arrival.
‘As a result, I will be wearing nothing but Hush Puppies from now on.’
City Diary: American code of malpractice
AMERICA'S Equal Employment Opportunity Commission is suing a temp agency in Florida which it accuses of sending coded messages to racist employers.
The code developed by Personnel One included ‘NQW’ for not quite white, ‘blackberry’and ‘blueberry’for different shades of black people and ‘international’for Haitians and Hispanics with accents.
Whites were referred to as ‘all American apple pie’ or ‘your lily white blonde American w-a [with-a]brain.’
Most likely to irk the feminists is ‘F O long blonde hair,’ referring to women attractive enough for the front office.
The Market: Cries of anguish from the bear pits
By Paul Murphy
WITH a huge ‘bear squeeze’ under way, agonised screams could be heard in the vicinity of the futures pits of London yesterday.
There was talk of one independent dealer losing £50,000 yesterday alone; another was said to have found himself £150,000 out of pocket over the week.
Many of the futures exchange's ‘local’ members, in anticipation of a big market correction in the aftermath of a possible Labour victory, had taken sizeable ‘short’positions in the June FT-SE 100 contract.
They were badly caught out by Wednesday night's opinion poll results, which suggested the Tories were still in with a chance.
As a result, the exchange's members were forced to close out their positions while voters were still at the polling booths.
In the main cash market, dealers who have progressively flattened their trading books over the past two weeks were caught on the hop by the sudden decision of several large institutions to buy stock while voting was still going on.
Demand came from those brave fund managers acting in the belief that a reactive fall in the market after a Tory defeat this morning will be limited to about 150 points on the main index.
On the other hand, the chance of a ‘surprise’ Conservative victory (bringing with it a soaring pound and a quick cut to interest rates, which would in turn boost the economy) gave rise to the thought that the index might go up by 300 points.
There was also talk of demand from private clients, with ShareLink, the execution-only broker, reporting some brisk business among leading Footsie stocks.
The inevitable effect was to exaggerate price movements.
As the fall-out on other international stock markets was again shrugged aside, the Footsie moved higher, exacerbating the pain for the futures bears.
Helped along by a bounce on Wall Street's new session, the final reading in London was 2436.4, up 43.2.
Dealers left for a quiet early evening drink in the sunshine, ready to return ahead of the first ‘exit polls’ last night.
The utilities, the best political barometer, were obvious beneficiaries.
The electricity package jumped £93 at £2353, having been £120 ahead at one stage.
Among the individual stocks, Northern Electricity's rise from 240p to 258p was typical.
Anglian Water raced on 14 to 331p, Severn Trent added 13 to 315p and Thames Water put on 15 to 344p.
Trading in the the generating companies was particularly heavy, pushing PowerGen forward 7 to 213p, National Power on 4 to 203p, while Scottish Power was up 7 at 83p.
Broker Robert Flemings believes both National Power and PowerGen qualify as each way bets on the election.
It says that, even under a Labour government, hostility to British Gas would reduce competition to the generating companies.
Long term dividend growth might average 10 p.c.
Other sectors to benefit from the market surge included the life insurers, where Prudential rose 11 to 219p and Legal & General added 14 to 339p before settling at 335p.
Stores were also again in demand, with Argos up from 233p to 247p, Boots rising 12 to 419p and Mark & Spencer up 10 to 301p.
Among the banks, both NatWest and Barclays, the sector members who have suffered most from the recent Heron International/Olympia & York debt panic, enjoyed a quick buying spree.
NatWest rose 14 to 284p, while Barclays ended 9 better at 304p.
Demand did not stretch to either Lloyds, which struggled to end 4 firmer at 359p after reports of a large line of stock being offered around the market both late on Wednesday and early yesterday, or Abbey National, off 2 at 266p.
Other leaders to miss out included Eurotunnel (down 10 at 403p), where dealers in the units are still fretting about the possible need for a further refinancing.
Reuters, marked down on Wednesday in response to selling in New York, shed a further 20 to £10.85, with profit-takers still trying to off-load some stock.
Away from the politics, dealers in ICI were humming first thing with the story that the chemicals giant is poised to sell its fibres division to America's Du Pont for £300m.
The suggestion is said to have emanated from a specialist chemicals magazine, but ICI refused to comment.
ICI shares ended the day 14 better at £12.73.
Fisons enjoyed another buoyant session, helped along by a few comforting words from broker Hoare Govett, who hosted a presentation to institutions on Wednesday.
The shares gained 15 to 338p in heavy trading.
Gardiner Group was a poor market.
Having fallen back 4 to 19p late on Wednesday, a badly handled ‘sell’ order yesterday morning had market makers scrambling to cut back prices.
Stock was changing hands for as little as 14½p before the company put out a statement saying it knew of no reason, ‘other than the general economic climate’, for the fall.
The recovery was only partial, the price closing down 1½ at 18p.
Office supplier Nobo Group enjoyed a 15 point jump to 92p, compliments of James Capel, who were reported to have put out a ‘buy’ recommendation.
Despite the recession, since Trevor Tarring was appointed chairman of Metal Bulletin in September 1990, shares in the publishing and conference group have gained almost 65 p.c.
Yesterday, the stock held at 201p, as Mr Tarring told the annual meeting that, having reached the company's retirement age of 60, he is relinquishing his executive duties.
Group managing director Tom Hempenstall is moving up to the new post of chief executive.
Gilts followed favourable moves in the short-sterling futures index.
With demand for short and medium term paper picking up, most issues registered gains of up to £3/4.
The long-end Treasury 113/4 p.c. 2003–07s ended the session at £1121532, up £2532 on a yield of 9.8 p.c.
The Market
PERHAPS foreshadowing a few desperate reactions this morning life-jacket, parachute and ejector seat specialist Wardle Storeys rose 12 to 376p.
On Tuesday the company unveiled pre-tax profits slightly ahead at £4.4m.
House broker Smith New Court is said to have been promoting the stock to its clients.
City: Harland disposals
HARLAND Simon, the process controls group whose shares have lost over 80 p.c. of their value since a profit warning in February, yesterday confirmed that it has put all its mechanical engineering operations up for sale.
New chairman David Mahony said it has been decided to concentrate on its electrical and electronic businesses.
Harland is in discussions with a number of parties and in the case of Vickerys, which makes equipment for the paper and water industries, a potential purchaser has signed a letter of intent.
The company said that the potential disposals will realise ‘well in excess of their collective book value and represent full value to shareholders’.
Harland's shares rose 15 to 94p compared with 585p before the profit warning.
Racing: Musicale and Hatoof on trial for Guineas
By Tony Stafford
LADBROKES, reportedly swamped with election bets,(at highly-profitable margins), still took time yesterday to take anticipatory action before the participation of Musicale and Hatoof in today's 1,000 Guineas trials at Newbury and Maisons-Laffitte respectively.
Musicale, unbeaten in five races for Mr Robert Sangster last year, now shares Guineas favouritism with her French-trained rival at 6–1.
She has been moving well in home gallops and defends her record in the Gainsborough Stud Fred Darling Stakes.
Two-year-old form suggests Culture Vulture will be the toughest rival for Musicale.
She edged out Hatoof in a tight finish to the Prix Marcel Boussac at Longchamp on Arc day and holds Central City — also in today's Newbury field — on earlier running in the Queen Mary Stakes at Royal Ascot, when the pair were second and third to another unbeaten filly, Marling.
Mr Sangster, who tees off first at 8am today in a pro-am golf tournmament in Jersey, is hoping to arrive at Newbury about half-an-hour before the Fred Darling Stakes.
His filly, a daughter of The Minstrel, showed progressive form throughout last season, but this trial is highly competitive.
Apart from Culture Vulture — well beaten later in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile Fillies race — and Central City, Oumaldaaya and Rose Indien had good winning form in late-season Newmarket races last year, and Wiedniu, the likely outsider today, is held in high regard.
Hatoof, owned by Sheikh Maktoum Al Maktoum, whose stud sponsors the Newbury race, stays at home in Paris for the Prix Imprudence over Maisons-Laffitte's straight seven furlongs, on which trainer Criquette Head's Ravinella prefaced her Newmarket 1,000 Guineas win four years ago.
Walter Swinburn, her likely Newmarket rider, travels over to partner Hatoof, who faces just five rivals, including her pacemaker Plume Magique, ridden by the American Corey Black.
Kenbu, from the Francois Boutin stable, looks the only threat today to Hatoof.
Cardoun, one of the leading French two-year-old colts of 1991, should win the nine-runner Prix Djebel.
He beat Tertian in the competitive Criterium de Maisons-Laffitte over course and distance, and his trainer, Ellie Lellouche, believes today's trial is the ideal Newmarket preparation.
Botanic, a once-raced Khalid Abdulla colt trained by Andre Fabre, may follow Cardoun home.
The financial constraints on Ayr racecourse are reflected in much-reduced prize-money for today's Scottish Champion Hurdle, which features a rematch between Fidway, fourth in the Champion Hurdle, and Granville Again, who fell when challenging at the second-last.
Despite a higher-grade field, the first-prize penalty value is down to £7,644 from last year's £13,876.
Granville Again, who was going well when he came down, is the probable favourite.
But Fidway's Cheltenham supporters can also claim a little bad luck — the winner Royal Gait bumped him just after the final flight.
Jinxy Jack, with three consecutive jump wins to his credit, ran well on a rare Flat appearance in a Doncaster handicap.
He and the useful mare Winnie The Witch should contest third place behind the principals.
Stan Mellor withdrew his smart novice chaser King's Curate from valuable races on two days of the Cheltenham Festival last month, and also from another good event at Liverpool.
His stable star will get the easy ground he needs at Ayr today, but the Friendly Hotels PLC Station Hotel Ayr Novice Chase also offers modest prizes considering the decent line-up.
Beachy Head is a potential star from the Chris Thornton yard.
He should make short work of his rivals in Ayr's opener (2.0).