

Letter to the Editor: TV presenters' arrogance
SIR — I write to support Lord Orr-Ewing's letter (April 9).
Yesterday morning the BBC's Today programme, possibly surprised, even disappointed, by a Conservative victory, switched its emphasis toward support for proportional representation.
Frequently the perhaps unconscious arrogance of presenters invokes their saying to those they are interviewing, ‘What you are saying is…’ rather than‘Are you saying that..?’
In common with other taxpayers, and in the best interests of all parties, I believe the time is long overdue for impartiality to be compelled upon this publicly funded corporation.
Lord BROOKES of WEST BROMWICH Santon, Isle of Man
Letter to the Editor: TV presenters' arrogance
SIR — On the BBC World Service news, at 0300 local time, the headlines began by stating that ‘the ruling Conservative Party were heading for a massive defeat in the British General Election’.
This broadcast was immediately preceded by a report where predictions were already showing that the Conservatives were very likely to gain an overall majority.
H. B. F. GOW Reno di Leggiuno, Italy
Letter to the Editor: Don't sell furniture from Houghton
SIR — It was with considerable alarm that I read (article, April 6) that William Kent furniture at Houghton may be sold at auction because the many items ‘are additional to those on view’ and that their loss ‘would not be evident’.
Lord Cholmondeley's mother once showed me some of the sets of seat-furniture that were in store at Houghton.
Some of them clearly formed part of the furnishing of principal rooms in Sir Robert Walpole's house which was supervised by William Kent.
Each item of such a carefully considered scheme will have been intended to stand in a specific position in Kent's rooms.
To get rid of such furniture because it happens not to fit into present arrangements is rather like pulling down one wing of the house concerned just because it is not for the moment in use.
Furniture of that quality formed part of the interior architecture, just as much as the fine chimneypieces and doors.
One can sympathise with owners of great houses, faced with tax and running costs, but let them not think that furnishings of the standing of Kent's at Houghton can simply be dispensed with as ‘surplus to requirements’ and that their loss from the house would not in future be regretted.
They are part of the house, not loose chattels.
Some other means should be found to raise money so that the totality of Kent's magnificent scheme can be preserved.
P. K. THORNTON London, W8
Letter to the Editor: Before Pugwash
SIR — Peterborough attributes the Trumpet Hornpipe, the signature tune of Captain Pugwash, to Johnny Pearson (April 8).
But I knew the tune before its television debut, having learnt it from William C. Honeyman's Strathspey, Reel and Hornpipe Tutor.
Honeyman died in 1919.
Two versions of the tune appear in the collections of Captain Francis O'Neill of the Chicago Police, a contemporary of Honeyman, and Alastair Hardie includes it in his Caledonian Companion, where he acknowledges its publication in Kohler's Violin Repository of 1885.
I have been playing the tune now for nearly 40 years.
L. WILSON Kirkwall, Orkney
Odd Man Out: A tough face to be climbed
By MARTYN HARRIS
’ TURNOVER?
Gawd, I'd have to ask my wife.
She does the books.
I've got the circulation somewhere…
’ Nick Logan, owner of The Face and Arena magazines, flaps through a ragged notebook to a page of pencilled figures.
‘Here y'are; 73,000 and something.
Not too bad…
We might be able to pay for Jason Donovan, but only by cancelling the new computer stuff…’
We're in The Face's office, up six flights of cement stairs that smell of Dettol.
A whitewashed loft with sanded floors and cast-iron pillars.
One wall of windows looks over the rusted iron fence of an empty lot, the other on the junk stalls of Finsbury's Exmouth Market, with their cracked plimsolls and burned-out kettles.
There's a lot of sheer face to The Face.
A magazine that virtually invented the ‘designer’ lifestyle of Soho and Covent Garden, but which operates from the light-industrial slums of London's Farringdon Road; which obsessively dissects the most costly clothing, but whose editor, Sheryl Garratt, is a friendly size 14 in sloppy shirt and leggings; a paper that lists 40 smart writers on its masthead — but buys in their columns and doesn't employ them on its staff.
All magazines and newspapers are a kind of conjuring trick — they put a gloss of coherence upon chaos.
The Face runs on a shoestring but sits on the same shelf as Vogue and Vanity Fair, the shiny starships of megalomedia, and it is usually better looking, nearly always a better read.
The Face pulls a bolder trick than most, and one that has now blown up in its own, er, face, with the £200,000 libel damages awarded to Jason Donovan.
Donovan has waived part of the sum, but the case will still cost the magazine £90,000.
SHERYL Garratt says her heart dropped when she saw the ages of the jury.
Until the trial, few of them would probably have read The Face.
Hardly anyone over 40 does, though they will have absorbed its influence in a hundred ways, from the design of their daily paper to the styling of the latest television lager ad and the clothes and music their children consume.
If you wanted to list the five magazines which have had the most impact on popular culture since the war, they would have to be Picture Post, Queen, Nova, the Sunday Times Magazine — and The Face.
The title comes from the Mod era of the mid-Sixties, when a ‘face’ was the coolest kid on Carnaby Street — the one with six Mr Fish suits, all the Otis Redding albums, and the Lambretta with the bored-out 300cc block.
Nick Logan wasn't one of these; he was a ‘ticket’, a mod who came up to town by train, from Walthamstow in his case, which was where he grew up, left school at 15 and joined the local paper.
At 20 he went to the New Musical Express, and edited it through the 1970s, when it became the bestselling rock mag in Britain, with a rich crop of young writers such as Julie Burchill, Tony Parsons, Danny Baker, Paul Morley and Charles Shaar Murray.
HE left NME to create the equally successful Smash Hits and then decided to go it alone with £4,000 from his building society account — all of which went into the first edition of The Face.
‘The ad manager,’ says Logan, ‘could never explain to anyone what The Face was about’— and it still isn't easy.
The club scene of course, and clothes; good film and book reviews; political polemic from Burchill and Parsons; knockout design by Neville Brody; trend spotting and category counting…
‘Really it's just things that interest me,’ says Logan, and in the deserts of ad-get publishing it's a formula to gladden the heart.
In this month's issue, by way of illustration, The Face conducts an interview with Bono of U2 in which the rock star strips naked in the middle of a restaurant, while other members of the band are photographed in drag.
Jim McLellan profiles film star Julia Roberts under the uncompromising headline ‘Pretty Vacant’ and on another page conducts a scathing dissection of instructional sex videos.
There are pieces on gospel choirs in the Deep South, Gaultier penknife combs, and the new Manchester club fashion for wearing a plastic robot around your neck.
For gritty realism there is a piece on London squats, which goes to some lengths to avoid sentimentalising its subject: ‘Dirty dreadlocks, dogs on strings, and cans of Special Brew.’
A typically Thatcherite product — classless, consumerist, guiltless — The Face always had a left-liberal stance on racism, feminism and homosexuality.
This is what made the Donovan libel action so daft.
Way of the World: And so farewell
By AUBERON WAUGH
IT IS many years since I looked at Punch for anything except the advertisements.
There is nothing shameful about that.
Its American equivalent, the New Yorker, has been read for its advertisements in this country for as long as I can remember.
The last issue of Punch has a satisfactory collection of advertisements for cigarettes, beer and whisky and one or two bizarre items for the connoisseur — a two-page spread for Kimberly-Clark lavatory paper and a single colour page for ‘the ultimate collection of Sportsman's Knives’.
I am particularly taken with one for a charity based in Rusper, Sussex, called ‘Care for the Wild’.
At the top is a cartoon by Tony Husband which shows a man opening his front door to an elephant and saying ‘Yes?’
This is captioned: ‘Elephants have feelings too!
Foster parents required.’
It ends with a space for the respondent's name and address, saying: ‘Yes! please send me details on how I can foster an orphan elephant.’
Halfway through this advertisement, I started worrying about whether it might not have been intended as a joke.
Punch jokes have never been tremendously funny, but one particular line, ‘Fostering prices start from just £14.95’, strikes me as quite droll.
The idea that one can adopt an orphan baby elephant in Kenya and supply it with food and medicine for under £15 would be even more droll if I did not remember adopting a number of black babies in Africa as a schoolboy, and giving them foolish names like Chrysostom or Donaldina or Ambrose, at five shillings (25p) a time.
So this item is almost certainly intended as a genuine advertisement.
Reading on, I grow more doubtful.
An article purporting to be by Richard Littlejohn, the Sun's star columnist, headed ‘Who Gives a Monkeys’, is dressed up to look like an advertisement.
Yet it advertises nothing, and is certainly intended as a joke or satire.
It seems rather a mean trick to disguise jokes and articles as advertisements in the hope that we will be tempted to read them.
In any case, it did not work.
We are well rid of an ugly, vulgar and confusing publication.
My Choice: Broadcaster Paul Gambaccini
By JAMES DELINGPOLE
I SAW Angels in America — an extraordinary play.
It's very difficult to deal with Aids in a way that is not polemical, depressing or sentimental, but somehow the author Tony Kushner has managed to do so, and in the bargain deal with Judaism and Mormonism.
Marcus D'Amico is an absolute revelation.
The intensity of his performance is incredible, and his Olivier nomination for Best Actor is well-deserved.
I also found Henry Goodman totally involving as Cohn.
The Cottesloe is on a winning streak because it also has Uncle Vanya, with a host of fine performances.
Ian McKellen is better suited to small spaces than large ones, because a lot of what he does involves gesture, expression and nuance of voice.
This is the best and most evenly-balanced Uncle Vanya I've ever seen.
In the Lyttelton, it's such a thrill to see Alan Bennett blossom in another line of work, by which I mean a full-length piece like The Madness of George III.
Nigel Hawthorne's performance is wonderful: he is becoming a finer and finer actor.
My Own Private Idaho is a rare and classic example of the mixed film.
Some of it is exquisite and some very rough.
River Phoenix continues to be a miracle, having earned his Oscar nomination in Running on Empty.
I can't imagine he has ever had to search for his mother, or had narcolepsy, or become a hustler, yet he does all three so brilliantly in the film it breaks your heart.
There is a scene where he's sitting in his bathrobe, where he looks like a woman from Coronation Street.
It makes you wonder what reserves this young man has reached into, to come up with this.
He is one of the great young talents in America at the moment.
I am probably the only person around who is enthusiastic about At Play in the Fields of the Lord.
It's three hours long, but I didn't mind that at all.
Some films, though flawed, are beautiful exercises in tone.
Barry Lyndon comes to mind, and this is another.
There are fine performances by Kathy Bates and Daryl Hannah.
Several characters repeat their main point a few times, but I see this as mantra-like rather than repetitive.
Interview by JAMES DELINGPOLE
Critics' Choice: THEATRE
By CHARLES SPENCER
The Pope and the Witch New farce by the anarchic Dario Fo about a heroin-addicted Pope who campaigns for contraception, cut-price drugs and the excommunication of the Mafia.
Reviews from the West Yorkshire Playhouse where the show was first seen last year suggest that it might be funnier than it sounds.
Comedy Theatre, London SW1 (071 867 1045).
Opens Mon after previews.
The Revenger's Tragedy Debate still rages over whether the play was written by Tourneur or Middleton, but its unlikely to make much difference to the Cambridge Theatre Company which is relocating the Jacobean drama to New York in the '40s.
Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, Guildford (0483 60191).
Opens Mon for one week, then touring.
The Alchemist Young director Sam Mendes finds the gold in Jonson's great comedy of 17th-century confidence tricksters.
First seen at the Swan in Stratford last year, the show now transfers to the Barbican's main stage, with Jonathan Hyde, David Bradley and Joanne Pearce repeating their fine performances as the unholy trinity of con artists.
Barbican Theatre London EC2 (071 638 8891).
Opens Wed after previews.
RECOMMENDED The Recruiting Officer Fine production by Nicholas Hytner of Farquhar's glorious restoration comedy about military and romantic intrigue, based on the dramatist's own experience in provincial Shrewsbury.
There are excellent performances from Alex Jennings, Sally Dexter, Ken Stott and the great Desmond Barrit, but the Toytown set is a mistake.
National's Olivier Theatre, London SE1 (071 928 2252).
Heartbreak House This enigmatic but fascinating Shaw play features one of the starriest casts seen on the West End stage in years, with especially good performances from Imogen Stubbs and Paul Scofield.
Even so lucid a director as Trevor Nunn, however, has trouble in making complete sense of a work which appears to welcome wholesale destruction with open arms.
Haymarket Theatre Royal, London SW1 (071 930 8800).
Critics' Choice: CONCERTS
By ROBERT HENDERSON AND MICHAEL KENNEDY
Chicago Symphony The First Symphony of 54-year-old American composer John Corigliano, whose music is characterised by its deliberately accessible style, is given its British premiere conducted by Daniel Barenboim.
It is juxtaposed, in a change to the advertised programme, with orchestral excerpts from Wagner's ‘Ring’ cycle, in the second concert of the Chicago Symphony's visit to the Royal Festival Hall, London SE1 (071 928 8800), tonight.
Rossini Bicentenary Soprano June Anderson, mezzo Cecilia Bartoli, tenor Justin Lavender and bass Simon Estes join the Philharmonia and conductor Giuseppe Sinopoli in Rossini's ‘Stabat Mater’, coupled with the improvisatory ‘Quadrivium’ by Bruno Maderna.
Royal Festival Hall, London SE1 (071 928 8800), tomorrow.
Messiah Anniversary Harry Christophers conducts the voices and orchestra of The Sixteen in Handel's ‘Messiah’ on the very day of the 250th anniversary of its Dublin premiere on April 13, 1742.
Barbican, London EC2 (071 638 8891), Mon.
Maxim Vengerov Young Russian violinist Maxim Vengerov, unanimous winner of the last Carl Flesch Competition, plays two performances of Tchaikovsky's Violin Concerto with the London Philharmonic and conductor Zubin Mehta.
Also included are a Stravinsky symphony and the first suite of Ravel's ‘Daphnis and Chloe’.
Royal Festival Hall, London SE1 (071 928 8800), Wed, Thur.
RLPO's Berio The Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra and Electric Phoenix, conducted by Matthias Bamert, juxtaposes Berio's Sinfonia, with its quotations from other composers, and Stravinsky's Rite of Spring.
Philharmonic Hall, Liverpool (051 709 3789), tonight.
The Arts: OPERA
By ALAN BLYTH
The Fiery Angel (Prokofiev) Galina Gorchakova and Segey Leiferkus sing Renata and Ruprecht in David Freeman's new production of the composer's raw-edged, powerful work, conducted by Sir Edward Downes.
This is the first-ever staging at the Royal Opera.
Covent Garden, London WC2, Tues, Wed, next Sat.
Don Carlos (Verdi) Rosalind Plowright as Queen Elisabeth of Spain, Gwynne Howell as Philip II and Jonathan Summers as the defiant Posa, all not to be missed in David Pountney's rather severe, economical production of Verdi's masterpiece, superbly conducted by Mark Elder.
Coliseum, London, WC2 (071 836 3161) tonight, Tues, next Sat.
Revival of ‘Madam Butterfly’ with Susan Bullock in the title role, Wed.
The Marriage of Figaro (Mozart) The Opera Company's new production conducted by Timothy Dean, with Susan Gritton as Countess Almaviva and William Dazeley as the Count.
Trinity Arts Centre, Tunbridge Wells (0892 544699), tonight, Mon — Wed.
Hermione (Rossini) Promising Italian soprano Anna Caterina Antonacci sings the title role in first British performances, in concert, of this Rossini rarity.
Mark Elder conducts.
Queen Elizabeth Hall, London SE1 (071 928 8800), tomorrow.
BOOK NOW The Thieving Magpie (Rossini) Opera North's tribute to the composer of the year is an eagerly awaited new staging (by Martin Duncan) of this rarely performed opera semiseria.
Grand Theatre, Leeds (0532 459351), opening Apr 24.
Critics' Choice: DANCE
By KATHRINE
Moscow City Ballet Return visit with ‘The Sleeping Beauty’.
Sadler's Wells, London EC1 (071 278 8916), Mon to Apr 18 (including Good Friday).
Stars of the Bolshoi Classical ballet group from Moscow led by Natalya Bessmertnova in divertissement programmes.
Dominion Theatre, London WC1 (071 580 8845), Mon (Royal Gala in aid of leukaemia charities; separate booking on 071 497 9977); then Tues to Apr 18 (including Good Friday).
Adventures in Motion Pictures Modern dance group in ‘Deadly Serious’.
The Place Theatre, London WC1 (071 387 0031), today, Mon to Apr 18 (including Good Friday).
The Turning World European modern dance season.
Rosas group (Netherlands) in ‘Achterland’.
Queen Elizabeth Hall, South Bank Centre, London SE1 (071 928 8800), Tues, Wed.
Birmingham Royal Ballet ‘Giselle’ Mon, mat and eve Tues, Wed; ‘Les Sylphides’, ‘The Burrow’and ‘Elite Syncopations’Thur, mat and eve Apr 18.
Congress Theatre, Eastbourne (0323 412000).
Rambert Dance Company ‘Completely Birdland’, ‘Plain Song’ and ‘Roughcut’Mon to Wed; ‘Wildlife’, ‘Still Dance’, ‘Island to Island’and ‘Winnsboro Cotton Mill Blues’Thur, Apr 18.
Northcott Theatre, Exeter (0392 54853).
Irek Mukhamedov and Company Divertissement programme with Royal Ballet dancers.
Derngate Theatre, Northampton (0604 24811), Tues; Apollo Theatre, Oxford (0865 244544), Wed; Alhambra Theatre, Bradford (0274 752000), Apr 18.
Critics' Choice: ART
By RICHARD DORMENT
Alexander Calder As sweet an exhibition as you can find in London.
Brightly coloured mobiles rotating from the ceiling, as well as drawings, jewellery and prints by the great American sculptor.
Royal Academy of Arts, London W1 (071 439 7438), until Jun 7.
Hogarth and Piranesi: Engravings and Etchings Two 18th-century contemporaries whose work in black and white retains its power to mesmerise the viewer.
Courtauld Institute Galleries, London WC2 (071 873 2526), until Jun 7.
The Saatchi Gallery: Five Young British Artists Disturbs and delights in equal measure.
This time its offerings include a dead shark floating in a tank of formaldehyde.
No kidding!
Saatchi Collection, London NW1 (071 624 8299), through the spring.
Van Gogh in England: Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man A show that uses prints, texts and works of art to document the young Van Gogh's response to living in London in the 1870s.
Gloom and doom.
Barbican Art Gallery, London EC2 (071 382 9104), until May 4.
Critics' Choice: FILMS
By HUGO DAVENPORT
At Play In The Fields Of The Lord (15) Hector Babenco's lengthy (over three hours) but stunningly-wrought ecological tragedy, shot entirely on location in Amazonia, centres on a group of missionaries and a Cheyenne half-breed who set out in different ways to ‘save’ a tribe of rain-forest Indians but bring them only death, disease and destruction.
Plaza, London W1 (071 437 1234), MGM Trocadero WC2 (071 434 0031).
La Belle Noiseuse (15) Now offered in two versions — the full, four-hour marathon or the two hour ‘Divertimento’— Jacques Rivette's luminous film explores the tensions generated when an elderly artist essays a final masterpiece using the beautiful girlfriend of a younger painter as his model.
Full version: Chelsea Cinema, London SW3 (071 351 3742), Metro W1 (071 437 0757), Renoir WC1 (071 837 8402).
Divertimento: from Wed, Minema Knightsbridge SW1 (071 235 4225).
Hear My Song (15) Gloriously funny, uplifting romantic comedy, loosely based on the story of Irish tenor Josef Locke, who fled to his native Ireland in the '50s to escape the taxman.
The film charts the efforts of a dodgy theatre manager trying to lure the singer back for a last encore.
Barbican, London EC2 (071 638 8891); MGMs Chelsea SW3 (071 352 5096), Fulham Rd SW10 (071 370 2636), Haymarket W1 (071 839 1527), Tottenham Ct Rd W1 (071 636 6148); Odeons Kensington W8 (0426 914666), Marble Arch W1 (0426 914501), High St, Richmond (081 948 8143), West St, Brighton ((0273 25890); UCI Whiteleys W2 (071 792 3303).
Apocalypse Now (18) Another chance to see Francis Ford Coppola's brilliant Vietnam adaptation of Joseph Conrad's ‘Heart of Darkness’ in a new, 70 mm print.
MGM Shaftesbury Ave W1 (071 836 6279).
Combine it with a visit to Hearts of Darkness — A Film-maker's Apocalypse, Fax Bahr and George Hickenlooper's superb documentary about Coppola's difficulties in getting the film made, and the achievement seems all the more impressive.
MGM Swiss Centre W1 (071 439 4470).
Critics' Choice: JAZZ
By MARTIN GAYFORD
Arturo Sandoval This wizard trumpeter of Latin bebop is among the most spectacular latter-day disciples of Dizzy Gillespie.
His sojourn in London provides some consolation of the non-arrival of the great Diz himself.
Ronnie Scott's Club, London (071 439 0747), until Apr 24.
Billy Cobham Band Jazz-rock drumming is not something I can claim to relish, but — setting prejudice aside — Billy Cobham does it better than almost anyone.
He performs on this occasion in company with the saxophonist Ernie Watts.
Jazz Cafe, London NW1 (071 284 4358), Tues to Apr 19.
Ken Colyer Trust Easter Parade Here is a weekend tailor-made for the true believer in British trad.
Among other New Orleans-style ensembles, the Original Crane River Jazz Band will make an appearance.
Pontin's Sand Bay Hotel, Weston-Super-Mare (0934 622548), Fri to Apr 20.
Further information 03722 72496.
Scott Hamilton The suave American mainstream saxophonist completes his tour this year with gigs at Birch Hall, Oldham (061 624 4391), Tues; Pizza Express, London W1 (071 437 9595), Wed and Thur and Apr 18; The Stables, Wavendon (0908 583928), Fri; and The Sixth Form College, Cambridge (0223 620986), Apr 19.
Critics' Choice: FOLK
By COLIN RANDALL
Four Men and a Dog Latest candidates in the search for a new Planxty, Bothy Band or De Dannan.
So far, the basis seems thin (one good album), but live performances are reputedly special.
Weavers Arms, Newington Green Rd, Islington, London N1 (071 226 6911), tonight, tomorrow; Half Moon, Lower Richmond Rd, Putney, London SW15 (081 788 2387), Mon; Cellar, South Hill Park, Bracknell, Berks (0344 484123), Tues; Old Manor Ballroom, Salisbury (0722 336262 x3224), Wed; The Theatre, Chipping Norton, Oxon (0608 642350), Thur.
Discovering Afghanistan Festival of Afghan culture, billed as London's first of its kind, which may or may not come as a great surprise.
The country's painful recent history is told in film, arts and craft displays and music, the latter supplied by a band led by Aziz Herawi, playing rubab and dutar (stringed instruments).
Watermans Arts Centre, High St, Brentford, west London (081 568 1176), next Sat, Apr 19.
The photographic exhibition, ‘From Resistance to Assistance’, continues until Apr 30.
Poynton Festival featuring Tansads, the Boat Band, George Borowski, Dan Ar Braz, Gary and Vera Aspey and Caught on the Hop.
Folk Centre, Poynton, near Stockport (061 483 6521), Fri — Apr 19.
Edinburgh Scotland's early bid to tire everyone out before the start of the six-festivals-a-weekend season.
The highlight ought to be Clan Alba (Queens Hall, Apr 19), less supergroup than super-ensemble (Dick Gaughan, Sileas and stray moonlighters from Ceolbeg and other bands); look out, too, for the McAlmans, the Kathryn Tickell Band, Hamish Moore and Dick Lee, June Tabor and Mark Emerson and Carolina Shout.
Queens Hall, Edinburgh University Students' Union, Teviot Row and other venues (031 220 0464), until Apr 19.
Critics' Choice: ROCK
By DAVID CHEAL
John Mellancamp Though thrust on a disdainful market in the mid-'70s as the posturing rock rebel Johnny Cougar, this talented songwriter has subsequently reverted to his real name and found a niche as an accomplished performer and composer of Mid-Western adult rock songs.
Wembley Arena, London (081 900 1234), today.
Boo Radleys /Pale Saints Grunge city!
Co-headline appearance from two indie bands whose sound consists of a deafeningly loud wall of guitar noise, through which wispy vocals are occasionally distinguishable.
It doesn't always work, but when it does it can be rather stirring.
Leadmill, Sheffield (0742 754500), today.
Randy Crawford Veteran soul diva whose live shows often features a maudlin rendition of that old John Lennon chestnut, ‘Imagine’.
But don't let that put you off; she remains the lucky owner of one of popular music's most distinctive voices.
Hammersmith Odeon, London W6 (081 748 4081), today; Apollo, Manchester (061 273 3775), Mon: Colston Hall, Bristol (0272 291768), Tues; Corn Exchange, Cambridge (0223 357851), Thur; Arts Centre, Poole (0202 685222), Fri.
BOOK NOW Gary Moore Versatile former Thin Lizzy guitarist who, having dabbled in an impressive variety of styles, including heavy metal, jazz rock and folk, finally woke up one morning and decided that he was a blues guitarist.
And rather good at it he is, too.
Hammersmith Odeon, London W6 (081 748 4081), Jun 7, 8; NEC, Birmingham (021 780 4133), Jun 19; Bournemouth International Centre, Bournemouth (0202 297297), Jun 20.
The Arts: Closing the understanding gap
By FRITZ SPIEGL
LIVERPOOL is looking wonderful in spring and I recommend a visit — not forgetting the Tate Gallery in its spectacular Albert Dock setting, where you can see four exhibitions: Stanley Spencer, American Expressionists, European abstracts and modern Korean art.
You will just have missed one on ‘Blackwomen's Creativity’.
This brings me to my point: for as a pinkman columnist I can report seeing recently an article about ‘the great Blackman Louis Armstrong’, a ‘Wellwomans [sic]Clinic’ at our local health centre; and ‘Funnyman Roy Hudd’.
It suggests a new trend in punctuation, or lack of.
A sports writer who might previously have written ‘a live wire mid field man’(one who shows much sports man ship, presumably) actually took the trouble to put ‘livewire midfieldman’.
The Germans have long made a national sport of running long words together to make longer ones; as have the Irish, eg in place names like Newtonabbey, Maguiresbridge and Patrickswell.
Perhaps that is why James Joyce was also fond of wordsnakes, though some modern poets copied him to excess, becoming abitovabore about it.
My commitment to the hyphen is unswerving.
When the Independent crows ‘Let's face it, a sick bag is a sick bag’ I feel that this is no way of speaking of some unfortunate woman; or of another who, according to her husband, ‘had cast off clothes at the jumble sale’.
But since some writers do seem to have an aversion to the hyphen — just as they have lost the art of splitting words in the logical places (tran-sport, winds-creen, ins-pector, screwd-river, etc)— let them run them together for clarity.
We shall then be able to tell a shortfall from a short fall, a blackguard from a black guard, their funnybone from their funny bone, and babies that are stillborn from those still born.
And is ‘one of the great silent film stars’ like Arnold Schwarzenegger, a star who doesn't say much, or a great filmstar of the silent days?
There are plenty of precedents — sawbones, jawbones, midshipmen and palefaces, to name only a few.
But also anomalies: a reader asks why we have Yorkshiremen but not Northamptonshiremen.
The Arts: Cop in a time warp
By LEWIS JONES
SOME actors are consummate chameleons — Ian McKellen, for instance, or Harry Enfield — able in a blink to assume characters quite different from their own.
There is a rival school, though, whose followers pursue successful careers by simply pretending to be themselves (Roger Moore and Stephen Fry spring to mind).
Most actors in soap operas are of the latter school.
There was little difference between the performances JR and Sue Ellen gave on Wogan and those they gave on Dallas.
It is hard not to sympathise with those simple-minded viewers and tabloid newspaper editors who mistake the characters for the actors.
Nick Berry is a promising young member of this school.
For many years — or so it seemed — he appeared in EastEnders as the lovable barman Wicksy.
Now he appears as a policeman, but in more or less the same character, as the star of his own series.
The premise of Heartbeat (ITV), which is the travails of a rough diamond cockney uprooted oop North, is familiar from various Dennis Waterman vehicles in a similar vein.
A period twist is given to the proceedings — the story is set somewhere around 1964, to judge from the careful references to Christine Keeler — and is adapted from Nicholas Rhea's Constable books.
Berry plays Nick, a bobby from Hackney somewhat improbably posted to the remote village of Adenfield (’ I'm your new village copper,’he obligingly explains to a local) and equally improbably married to a posh doctor played by Niamh Cusack.
The appeal to programmers of a doctor-and-copper combination is understandable, and Berry and Cusack make an engaging enough couple.
But in the first episode the combination was uncomfortable, moving from one foot to the other like a rozzer with corns.
The doctor introduced a modern element of feminism to the proceedings, but this was undercut by the tenor of the main storyline, which was depressingly unreconstructed and featured a particularly cruel stereotype of the sex-starved spinster fantasising about rape.
At the climax of the episode Dr Kate ministered to this Miss Havisham figure (’ She needs help, not punishment’), while hubby was out doing an OK Corral number with the mods and rockers down at the village dance.
The naffness of the period is lovingly reconstructed, with the care one associates with Regency crinolines and carriages: there are Crimplene pinnies, an old Triumph Herald, and British motorbikes galore.
The language, though, is gratingly anachronistic — no one has actually said ‘hopefully’ yet, but I fear it is only a matter of time.
In dramatic terms the mix is much the same: cosy periodity, with some mild swearing, the odd whiff of sex and Peckinpah-style slo-mo for the violence.
The supporting cast make a fair fist of their characters — notably Derek Fowlds as Berry's bullying sergeant — but the sheer weight of cliche proved too much.
It made Friday night seem like Monday afternoon.
The Arts: What have they done to our cities?
Planners hope that fashionable street furniture will lend Continental glamour to our city centres.
How wrong they are, writes Kenneth Powell
By KENNETH POWELL
AN OUTSIDER revisiting one of Britain's great provincial cities — Manchester, Glasgow, Liverpool, Birmingham, or Leeds — after a gap of a quarter-century or so is set for a shock.
The once-familiar Victorian grime has gone — along with many of the buildings which it coated — and so, regrettably, has a good deal of the local character.
The planning policies of the 1960s and 1970s are usually blamed for the faceless shopping centres and office blocks, the loss of historic buildings and long-established activities.
Politicians, planners and architects — who teamed up to create many an urban disaster area — are now united in the view that there is something seriously wrong with British cities.
In the Sixties, their chosen models for the urban Britain of the future were American.
In the Nineties, they are, inevitably, European.
Paris, Milan, Amsterdam, Stuttgart, Lyons, Copenhagen, and, above all in 1992, Barcelona, are the cities that everybody wants to emulate.
Some of them are, of course, capital cities, comparable only to London, but most of the others (we tend to forget) have equally been great urban centres for many hundreds of years, while Britain's biggest cities are mostly products of the Industrial Revolution.
No matter, the Barcelona-on-Aire (or Irwell, or Tyne) syndrome is everywhere.
A little less than a year ago, the Labour leader of Leeds City Council, Jon Trickett, unveiled plans for a transformation of the city's central shopping streets.
‘A bright and lively atmosphere’ was promised, with a city centre ‘which is unique, feels and looks European, and is a pleasure to spend time in’.
All a long way from a pint of mild and a bag of chips after a night at the City Varieties…
Leeds is now the third largest city in England and the 20th in Europe, so it is right that it should have international ambitions.
Yet ‘Landmark Leeds’(as Mr Trickett's pet project is known) is a rather dubious asset to the city.
Recently completed at a cost of £3.6 million, it includes new paving, lights, litter bins, planters, telephone kiosks and seats — all the usual paraphernalia which fills every city street from which the traffic has been taken away.
More unusual (and central to the concept evolved by architects Faulkner Browns) are the ‘gateways’ or ‘symbol structures’which mark the corners of the principal streets.
These consist of steel towers, as high as neighbouring buildings in some cases, with pieces of wavy-coloured metal attached.
At the very centre of the ‘precinct’(pedestrianised in the 1960s), the architects have let rip with yards of steel rails, attached to posts and festooned with lights, encircling a ‘performance area’.
The Leeds scheme, rushed through the planning process with very little public consultation, is not a popular success.
Apart from the fact that much of it is badly executed — the uneven paving is a disgrace in a city full of fine Victorian craftsmanship — it seems to many meretricious and, above all, out of place.
THE scheme takes its inspiration from the new street furniture and public spaces in Barcelona and, more generally, from the Deconstructionist look fashionable in schools of architecture and design in recent years.
Its relevance to Leeds is not obvious.
Crammed into narrow streets, which retain many excellent Victorian and Edwardian buildings, the ‘gateways’ and other structures are a disfigurement.
Why spend so much money on mere clutter?
In adjacent streets, there are disused and even derelict buildings which would far better repay investment.
Leeds is not alone in going Continental.
Birmingham's Centenary Square, which could be the Piazza San Marco of the Midlands, is a bleak, rather pointless space linking existing civic buildings with the new Convention Centre.
Yet it is being presented as a model for other cities.
This is not to say that ‘public art’ and the campaign for better public spaces should be dismissed lightly.
There is a fine tradition of monumental sculpture, for example, in the leading British cities.
But the best public art (as Venice proves) is architectural art, the enrichment of buildings at which the Victorians excelled rather than extraneous pieces of sculpture and other items dotted around the streets.
Not that a few really bold gestures would come amiss.
Yet when it was proposed to erect a massive ‘brick man’, designed by sculptor Anthony Gormley and funded by a band of enthusiasts, on a derelict site close to the main railway line into Leeds, the local authority took fright and vetoed the idea.
Local politicians do not like anything too challenging…
It is no accident that ‘street furniture’ and ‘public art’are seen to best effect in a context which is entirely new — like London's Broadgate office centre — or radically changed, such as the revived dockland areas in London, Liverpool, Cardiff and Swansea.
The Leeds pedestrian precinct and Centenary Square in Birmingham fail in several ways.
Alien in themselves, they represent a rather pathetic attempt to enliven city centres which are essentially lifeless.
In contrast to their counterparts in Spain, Italy and France, British cities apart from London have no street life.
After the shops close, their centres are dead.
Brash and often violent pubs are the only centres of activity.
Restaurants and civilised bars do not exist.
The opening of a McDonald's is a major event.
The streets are dominated by chain stores.
The blame for all this rests partly with planners and politicians, but even more with the big financial institutions which have a stranglehold on property, pushing up rents and driving out small businesses.
(The same process is now also affecting smaller, ‘historic’ towns.)
It is these same institutions which are responsible for the many second-rate modern buildings which make any comparisons between Barcelona and Leeds, Manchester and Milan, ludicrous.
Climate and national character apart — and Mediterranean joie de vivre is not a quality found in the typical Briton, except when he is drunk — it would take a revolution to make Britain's cities as enjoyable as those of our European neighbours.
No amount of ‘symbol structures’ or fancy paving is likely to shake their utilitarian glumness and empty commercialism.
The Arts: Free spirit of a Russian virtuoso Malcolm Hayes talks to violinist Viktoria Mullova, who plays in London tomorrow, about emigre life, music and motherhood
By MALCOLM HAYES
THE West first became aware of Viktoria Mullova when she won the violin section of the Tchaikovsky Competition in Moscow in 1982.
It was clear from the television film of that contest that her mastery of the instrument was awesome.
Mullova then made headlines beyond the music world a year later when, during a concert tour in Sweden, she sought asylum in the West with her accompanist Vato Jordania.
Jordania left his wife and two children behind in the Soviet Union, and he and Mullova moved to New York.
Her career quickly took off at top international level; his did not, and eventually he went back to Russia.
Some time after this, Mullova went to live in Vienna with Claudio Abbado, who was then music director of the Vienna State Opera.
His and Mullova's relationship ended when Mullova became pregnant; she moved with their baby son Misha to London, where she now lives.
I met Mullova at her London flat.
She is 32, but looks about 18, with the same clear, icon-like beauty that shone from that television film of a decade ago.
She doesn't dodge questions; at the same time, she gives next to nothing of herself away.
There are some artists whom you feel you have got to know a little after a one-hour interview.
Mullova isn't one of them.
She was born and brought up near Moscow, studied the violin at the conservatoire there, and says she was restless from the start.
‘I always wanted to leave,’ she told me.
‘All our careers were decided by one central agency, and these were not musical people — just bureaucrats.
The engagements used to go to the artists who brought them back the best presents from their tours abroad.
It was all like that.’
So it was for the sake of her playing that she defected?
‘No, I wasn't thinking about my career.
Everyone needs to earn a living, and when I went to New York, I was glad that I could earn mine by my playing.
But the important thing was that I just wanted to be free.’
Our conversation was interrupted in midstream by the arrival of 14-month-old Misha.
The studio was instantly transformed into a toy-strewn, Russian-speaking nursery as Misha took the place over.
I noticed his mother's Stradivarius violin on a shelf, a few crucial inches out of reach.
Mullova's break with Abbado was far from amicable.
In a subsequent newspaper interview she had voiced her hurt and anger that Abbado had not then even seen his child.
I asked how things were now.
‘I wasn't pleased about that interview; I don't like to be misquoted.
It's true that I did feel that way at the time.
But he has seen him now — when we did a concert together — and it is all much better.’
Some emigres take to life in the West better than others; Mullova appears to have adapted almost completely, and says she has no regrets about having left Russia.
‘I did go back recently on a concert tour.
Naturally, they made getting my visa as difficult as possible, even now after all the changes.
Things there are very bad.
Before, people had no hope; they felt condemned.
There is hope now, but there's no food.
People are desperate.’
Doesn't she miss her country at all?
‘No.’
As always, the self-possession seemed absolute.
‘Everything from there that I need, I carry within me.’
Viktoria Mullova plays at the Barbican tomorrow at 4pm 
The Arts: Recycled jewels Alan Blyth welcomes on to CD more great performances from the age of black disc
By ALAN BLYTH
THE COMPANIES' recycling at mid-price of back catalogue continues apace with notable benefit to the consumer.
Most of the well-ordered collections are conductor-led — and why not when so many famous batons are healthily represented on disc?
The most interesting of the latest batch comes in Decca's ‘Historic’ series and includes performances from the earliest days of LP.
Clemens Krauss was then at the peak of his powers, as can be heard in his versions of Richard Strauss's Ein Heldenleben and Don Juan with the Vienna Philharmonic.
The mono recording hardly shows its age and the playing is gorgeous (425 993–2).
Krauss's direction of the other Strauss's Die Fledermaus is another irreplaceable set, now coming up fresh-minted (425 990–2), with Julius Patzak as the most beguiling of all Eisensteins and Wilma Lipp a delightfully coquettish Rosalinde.
A bonus on this disc is a New Year's Concert of Strauss waltzes in which Krauss was a master.
The same series features George Szell in vital and refined accounts of Brahms's Third Symphony and Dvorak's Eighth with the Concertgebouw (425 994–2), readings to lift the heart.
Klemperer's live account of Mahler's Kindertotenlieder with the same orchestra may not be in such good sound, but with Kathleen Ferrier as soloist this is another important document, and it is coupled with an unrivalled version of Brahms's Liebeslieder-Walzer from the 1952 Edinburgh Festival.
This performance was one of my earliest musical experiences, and memory isn't disappointed.
Seefried, Patzak and Ferrier, together with the less well-known Horst Gunter, make up the quartet of soloists; Clifford Curzon and Hans Oppenheim are the two pianists.
All perform with innate artistry.
A two-disc box of another doyen of the Decca catalogue, Ernest Ansermet, brings his notably authoritative versions of all Ravel's orchestral music (425 997–2).
Finally in this indispensable series comes Britten's first, 1944 recording of his Serenade for tenor, horn and strings, with Peter Pears and Dennis Brain as the soloists (425 996–2).
It remains unsurpassed, as do Pears's 1954 versions of the composer's Michelangelo Sonnets and Winter Words, with Britten accompanying, on the same CD.
EMI has been busy adding to its ‘Beecham Edition’.
Delving deep into its archives it has come up with some winners, not least a luscious 1947 performance of Bax's The Garden of Fand that I once possessed and enjoyed in its original, 78 rpm form.
For its CD reissue (CDM7 63405–2), the sound has been carefully refurbished, and it has been sensibly coupled with Bantock's roughly contemporaneous Fifine at the Fair.
These pieces represent English Romanticism at its peak and nobody did them better than Beecham.
For good measure Lord Berners's quirky ballet suite The Triumph of Neptune is included.
Another early purchase of mine was Beecham's 78 rpm version of Sibelius's Sixth Symphony recorded in 1947.
It is a tribute to EMI engineers of the time and their faithful successors today that this and the even earlier (1937) version of Sibelius's Fourth Symphony come up sounding so truthful (CDM7 64027 2).
This disc, running almost to 80 minutes, also includes his accounts of other Sibelius works — Leminkainen's Return, The Tempest and The Bard, all in authoritative readings.
A favourite composer of Beecham's was Berlioz, so it's good to have back in circulation his famous 1957 performance of the Symphonie Fantastique with the French National Radio Orchestra (CDM7 64032 2) coupled with the overtures King Lear, made with the RPO, and the pre-War and still vivid Carnival Romain with the LPO; even if the recording of the last is a bit confined.
All show the conductor's empathy with the composer displayed in lyrical lines and incandescent climaxes, poetry and fire nicely balanced.
Completing this issue are vivid accounts of other Beecham favourites, Franck's D minor Symphony and Lalo's in G minor (CDM7 63396 2), both with the French National Radio Orchestra, and a disc of lollipops (CDM7 63412 2) with the RPO.
These are all stereo originals and sound as fresh as the day they were made.
EMI's ‘Great Recordings of the Century’ features two discs of British music conducted by Beecham's near-contemporary, Sir John Barbirolli.
With his beloved Halle and its attendant choir he performs John Ireland's These Things Shall Be and, with the orchestra alone, Bax's Third Symphony (CDH7 63910), music that doesn't deserve the neglect into which it has fallen since these 1940s performances.
Even better are his accounts of Vaughan Williams's London and Eighth Symphonies from the 1950s (CDM7 641972).
But even this pales slightly in the face of Walton conducting, in the same series, the first-ever recorded version of Belshazzar's Feast, featuring Dennis Noble as the incisive soloist, a wartime set that caused a sensation at the time.
It comes up brightly in its new transfer (CDH7 63381 2), coupled with other Walton pieces conducted by the composer.
EMI is also reissuing all its recordings made with Otto Klemperer and the Philharmonia.
These are too extensive to list here.
Although all exhibit Klemperer's integrity of purpose and objective approach to the music in hand, he is heard for preference in Beethoven, Bruckner and Mahler.
In less serious music and the 20th-century repertory he can be heavy-handed.
All the recordings bear the stamp of Walter Legge's mastery as producer and also indicate the conductor's welcome preference for having the second violins on his right, giving a better spread to the string sound.
Meanwhile, Leonard Bernstein is being celebrated by Sony in a remastering of its huge archive of the conductor's recordings.
This is entitled the ‘Royal Edition’ with a somewhat odd marketing ploy — paintings by Prince Charles on the front of each CD.
The discs are to be issued in alphabetical order of composer: the first tranche includes some Bartok, the nine Beethoven symphonies, the Brahms symphonies and works by Bernstein himself.
Not to be overlooked are EMI's reissues of Vittorio Gui's Glyndebourne sets of Rossini's operas — Il Barbiere di Siviglia (CMS7 64162 2), La Cenerentola (CMS7 64183 2) and, best of all, the late comedy, Le Comte Ory (CMS7 64180 2).
To all of these Gui brought an elan that kept the high spirits bubbling delightfully.
The casts, drawn from Glyndebourne singers of the 1950s and early '60s, with the exception of De los Angeles brought in for Rosina in Barbiere, are part of a tightly knit ensemble.
The recordings remain excellent.
Just out in RCA's continuing Toscanini Collection are an electrifying interpretation of Verdi's Otello (GD 60302) with Vinay's anguished Otello and Giuseppe Valdengo's insinuating, inspired Iago, and the questionably cast but compelling account of Beethoven's Fidelio (GD 60273).
To supplement these is a superb 1939 account of the Eroica Symphony, freer and more accomodating than later ones but just as taut (GD 60269), coupled with a 1939 account of the Eighth Symphony.
These are taken from broadcast acetates and the sound is more spacious than those made in the notorious Studio 8H.
Alan Blyth's new book ‘Opera on CD’(Kyle Cathie paperback, £8.99) is published on Thursday.
The Arts: A little easier to swallow
By COLIN RANDALL
BE IT Coquilles St Jacques on an Atlantic-facing terrace in Brittany, or battered cod in the office canteen, I am a sucker for seafood.
But not, curiously enough, for oysters.
For some time, I wondered whether this might explain an inability to find the Oyster Band wholly digestible.
But a more legitimate complaint concerns the attempts that have been made to turn a talented, energetic and fashionably leftish folk-rock group into rock stars.
With the exemplary Freedom and Rain in 1990, I began to relent, although that was made with June Tabor, with whom they could hardly fail.
After a two-year silence, along comes another Oyster album.
The accompanying press release tells us they are ‘heading into a harder, rockier realm’.
Most of the album itself heads nowhere of the sort.
But strip away the hype and there is more original thought, substance and strength than on any of the pre-Tabor offerings.
Distinctive guitar riffs and Ian Telfer's racy fiddle runs distinguish the powerful, literate songs — all their own, save for a punk-folk thrashing of Pete Seeger's politically correct tour of Welsh mining communities, pit closures giving a metaphorical edge to the accusing refrain ‘who killed the miners?’.
It adds up to just what we might expect, in fact, from a talented, energetic and fashionably leftish folk-rock group.
When not banging on about the sins of Vin Garbutt, the shaggy-haired Teesside warbler responsible for Little Innocents and other anti-abortion songs, certain feminist folkies have taken to conducting vigilante patrols through Folk Roots magazine in search of new sources of offence.
The Doonan Family, hitherto blameless Geordie-Irishmen, were caught recently.
A publicity photograph had shown one of the Doonettes, the electrifying step-dancing duo which performs with the band, caught with skirt raised at the back to reveal considerably less than might be observed on Whitley Bay sands, let alone the Riviera.
The Doonans' speciality is lacing traditional songs with rock arrangements, or applying folk themes to rock.
On the new album, Bring it on Home to Me stands out: mean Tyneside vocals and Irish pipes gloriously underpin the moody soul structures of Sam Cooke's classic, the pipes taking off at one point as if on a Claptonesque guitar solo.
On first hearing, I prematurely thought Vin Garbutt had given abortion a rest.
Tipperary Girl tells sympathetically, but ultimately with disapproval, of a pregnant Irish teenager opting for the English solution.
After the furore over the schoolgirl rape victim, he risks having a controversial but respectable viewpoint mistaken for insensitivity.
He also tackles issues — ecology, the Kurds, Page Three girls — on which he is ideologically right-on.
The abortion obsession is in danger of becoming a bore, but open minds will take to By-Pass Syndrome, not least because of the title track's delightfully nave rejection of the road-building craze.
It is not so much Davy Spillane's playing of the uillean pipes, good as it is, as his tireless experimentation that has brought him his revered status.
Pipedreams bursts with stirring sounds we probably have no right to expect from the instrument.
It deserves to succeed, and hints more than a little at a film soundtrack.
Fairport Convention still have much to offer, but these days suffer unfavourable comparison with earlier stages of their 25-year career.
The Woodworm Years, a compilation from more recent recordings, has its moments, but not nearly so many as the 1970 House Full and Full House re-issues.
The 1992 line-up sounds fresher in its contributions to the invigorating album by Beryl Marriott, who looks like a homely, old-fashioned music teacher but rises admirably to Fairport's description, the ‘Jerry Lee Lewis of folk’.
At her fingertips, the piano seems the most natural instrument for jigs, reels and airs.
News of Clive Gregson and Christine Collister splitting up as a couple sadly signalled the end, too, of a fruitful artistic union.
Fortunately, they decided they could bear each other 's company long enough for a farewell tour, starting next month, and also a valedictory album.
It has the usual big, doleful ballads, smartly arranged and sung, but written with a dictionary of cliches too close to hand.
As they part company, Gregson will surely find ample work as a respected producer and musician, while Collister's voice, sultry and robust, should break down the doors it fails to open.
Who knows, with the right song and promotion, she could even head into a harder, rockier realm.
The Arts: Pop's gunning for gospel
By MARK COOPER
SEVENTY-EIGHT-year-old Pop Staples belongs to that great generation of bluesmen who moved up from Mississippi to Chicago in the 1930s.
Muddy Waters, Willie Dixon and John Lee Hooker are his contemporaries, but while they were busy shaping the urban blues, Pop stuck to gospel with his family group, the Staple Singers.
In the '70s, the family enjoyed a number of hits on Stax and, while Pop retains a firm belief in the efficacy of prayer, he continues to wrap his social and spiritual concerns in the funkiest of backbeats.
Staples has a reedy, careworn voice that is oddly uplifting, and his music has a country sense of space.
The family reunite on the Los Lobos-penned title track, Bonnie Raitt and Jackson Browne sing on the opening World In Motion, and Ry Cooder produces the album's highspot: a version of the traditional Down in Mississippi that sounds truly Muddy.
Naturally, Pop worries over the state of his people in songs like America and Miss Cocaine, but his caring stoicism is a voice from the rocking chair that seems almost too dignified and decent for the '90s neighbourhood.
Homeboy Ice T from south central Los Angeles also has an anti-cocaine song, The Winner Loses, but while Pop is singing I Shall Not Be Moved, Ice T is chopping up his racist mother and shooting cops in the face.
This time out, Ice T has abandoned hip-hop for hardcore rock in a fairly blatant bid for crossover.
His new band, Body Count, are a routine hardcore outfit who mostly fail to ignite Ice T's rants.
His lurid comic-strip tales are always designed to shock, but Ice T outdoes even his own psychopathic, misogynistic track record on Cop Killer.
This is a macabre impersonation of a white racist's worst nightmare or crowd-baiting at its most mindless.
Either way, it's bound to treble his life insurance payments.
Soul II Soul take a British approach to race relations and pull off the difficult trick of combining black pride sentiments with a benevolent multiracialism.
Their debut album, Club Classics, Volume I, was a massive hit both here and in America and, while the follow-up was short on ideas and melodies, Volume III is a return to form.
Group leader Jazzie B is a kind of Ellington for the '90s, deploying a range of different vocalists with elements drawn from reggae, hip-hop and American soul.
Original vocalist Caron Wheeler makes a welcome return on Take Me Higher, but my favourite moments are provided by Jazzie B himself, whose pseudo-scientific raps are delivered with a London accent and all the assurance of a crackpot dictator.
Back in America, Chaka Khan and Ce Ce Peniston offer very different takes on the role of the soul diva.
Ce Ce, though all of 21, has a high-pitched voice that sounds as though she's going to break into giggles.
This can be infectious in small doses, and her catchy anthem, Finally, is pop at its most celebratory.
A couple of piano breaks make Ce Ce's youthful exuberance seem delirious.
Chaka Khan has been around forever, and recently her trademark whoops and screams have sounded a little forced.
On The Woman I Am, Chaka takes control again and, while the arrangements struggle to fill every available space with drum patterns and horn fills, she keeps swooping in like a dive-bombing seagull and forcing songs and producers into submission.
The recent single, Love You All My Lifetime, should have been a bigger hit and shows that Chaka can still sound as if she's bursting with all the joys of spring.
Brief mentions for three very different American rock gods.
Z Z Top are perhaps the only boogie band with a sense of irony, and their Greatest Hits package shows how brilliantly they combine John Lee Hooker with T-Rex.
Every song has an unflinching backbeat, a droll lyric and a concise guitar solo smack-dab in the middle.
Tom Verlaine was the driving force behind New York art punks Television, whose Marquee Moon debut remains a rock classic, and who are about to release a comeback album after some 15 years apart.
Meanwhile, here's a delightfully low-key set of instrumentals that suggests he should write the score for one of those film noir remakes set in small town America.
Lou Reed's critical rehabilitation is threatening to turn the old sourpuss into rock ‘n’ roll's first Professor of Literature.
This three-CD retrospective of his solo output is a timely reminder that his career has been as interesting for its disasters as its triumphs.
The Arts: Discreetly freaky
By MARTIN GAYFORD
Arthur Blythe Hipmotism (Enja) John Coltrane The Major Works of John Coltrane (Impulse)
THE ALTO saxophonist Arthur Blythe is just about the most accessible performer to come out of the free jazz movement of the '60s and '70s.
At one stage he was expected to make the breakthrough to mainstream popularity.
But it never quite happened to Blythe, or to any other free-jazzer — indeed, with the exception of some of the hippier bits of northern Europe, out-and-out freedom never found much of an audience.
But there is a good deal in Blythe's music that is enjoyable in an old-fashioned, unfree way.
There are admittedly some lingering reminders of the love decade — chanting and a hint of prayer bells on one track, a couple of discreet freak-outs.
Much of it, however, sounds like a looser version of one of the little blues bands with which Blythe started out, or even a New Orleans marching band.
The latter impression is largely due to the work of the tuba player, Bob Stewart, who plods along throughout in a delightfully flatulent way.
It is quite a shock to move from this charming, if slightly aimless stuff back into the original cacophonous maelstrom.
The late John Coltrane was the most restless of great jazz musicians.
At various points in his career, he played wonderful jazz, but by the time these four pieces — OM, Kulu Se Mama, Selflessness, and Ascension — were made in 1965 his relentless search for The Truth had brought him to the most uncompromising of unstructured freedom.
Even when nirvana and gibbering frenzy were in the air, these were difficult listening.
Now they seem impossibly self-indulgent and prolix.
The two unendurable takes of Ascension (38 and 40 minutes) provide an aural equivalant to dentistry without anaesthetic.
These are not the major works of John Coltrane.
The Arts: Lenny stands back from the brink of bathos
By MICHAEL KENNEDY
THIS Bernstein recording of Mahler's Ninth Symphony is historic because it preserves the only occasion on which he conducted the Berlin Philharmonic, on October 4, 1979 (with a repeat the next evening).
It was generally believed that there was some animosity between ‘Lenny’ and Herbert von Karajan, although this has never been shown to be true, so the atmosphere in the Philharmonie was electric.
But it is true that Bernstein was never invited back.
Karajan saw his orchestra have major successes in this symphony under two guest conductors, Barbirolli and Bernstein, and he took good care to record it himself (magnificently) in 1982, also at a Berlin Festival Week concert which was recorded ‘live’, as was Bernstein's.
Now that all these gladiators are dead, we are the beneficiaries of their markedly different but equally rewarding interpretations of one of the 20th century's overwhelming masterpieces.
I much prefer this Bernstein performance to his later one with the Amsterdam Concertgebouw Orchestra, which is so self-indulgent and slow that the final Adagio loses both shape and momentum.
He identified so closely with this work — for what seem to me all the wrong reasons — that his interpretation tended to tremble on the edge of bathos.
But this time, faced with an orchestra which apparently was at first slow to respond to his blandishments, the musician took priority over the Mahlerian moraliser and he revealed many details and subtleties of the score while keeping its huge overall span firmly within his sights.
The playing is truly memorable, the recording faithful.
It is an expensive issue, though, 82 minutes of music spread over two full-price CDs.
Some rival issues add another work and others get the symphony into one disc.
Whether one agreed with his view of a work or not, Bernstein was never dull.
Of so many recordings issued these days one might say, ‘It's perfectly good, but was it necessary?’, because of a lack of character and musical insight.
So I welcome Neeme Jarvi's interpretation of Mahler's Fourth Symphony with the Royal Scottish Orchestra because it is the work of a conductor who has looked closely at the score and not been afraid to give full personal rein to what he found there.
There is, for example, a marvellous account of the scherzo, with its crazy fiddler and sense of Grand Guignol not too far away.
The music comes to vivid life under Jarvi's direction, as it does in the sometimes surprising but always purposeful fluctuations of tempo in the first movement.
This, one feels, was a revolutionary symphony, and still is.
The Chandos recording is, as usual, excellent.
My only reservation is about the choice of Linda Finnie for the ‘child's view of heaven’ song in the finale.
She is far too earthy and voluptuous, but she sings the Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen cycle very well indeed, a few sustained high notes excepted, in another refreshing interpretation.
It is strange to think that these two extraordinary symphonies came from the composer of the student-exercise Piano Quartet movement which has been recorded by the Alpe Adria Ensemble.
It has its pointers to the future, but I would have forgiven any Vienna professor in 1876 who failed to predict what was to follow.
Mahler needed to become a conductor of other men's music before he became a real composer.
But this is a delicious disc, containing not only a winning performance of Beethoven's early Septet but the first recording of a trifle called Hymn to the Veneration of the Great Joachim.
This is a waltz for two violins and double-bass composed for the violinist's 22nd birthday in 1853 by an uncharacteristically unbuttoned 20-year-old Brahms, under the pseudonym Gioseppo.
Today I suppose he'd have written variations on Happy Birthday, but this is more fun.
More ‘live’ recordings show Gunther Wand as classicist and modernist with the North German Radio Symphony Orchestra.
In Schubert's Great C major Symphony, he presents a Boult-like long view of this inexhaustible masterpiece, savouring the sense of adventure that must accompany any worthwhile exploration of it.
A companion RCA disc contains four 20th-century works, the earliest (1913), being Webern's Five Pieces, op 10, polished epigrams, and the latest, Fortner's interludes from his opera Blood Wedding (1957), which sound much older than the Webern.
Between them come Stravinsky's Dumbarton Oaks concerto and Frank Martin's Petite Symphonie Concertante, a work that grows in stature with every hearing, especially when conducted and played as well as it is here.
Yet none of these works can rival, for sheer novelty and strangeness, Sibelius's Sixth Symphony, still one of the most mystifying and mesmerising orchestral utterances of the century.
Its vacillations of mood, from white-hot passion concealed behind a frosty stare to an almost insouciant dance-like gaiety, are beautifully captured in a generally distinguished performance by the Danish Radio orchestra under Leif Segerstam.
The disc is filled out with the tone-poems Pohjola's Daughter and En Saga, the latter (I always think) just five minutes too long.
Abbado's latest disc as Karajan's Berlin successor is devoted to Brahms: cogent and altogether admirable performances of the Fourth Symphony and Haydn Variations to join the many others of which the same could be said.
What makes this disc worth having is the setting for chorus and orchestra of Schiller's Nanie, composed in memory of a friend.
This is Brahms at his most radiant and affecting, music of such intimacy that one is not surprised to learn that its suitability for public performance was questioned.
Elgar must have known it.
The Berlin Radio Choir sings beautifully.
This single DG disc, incidentally, contains 74 minutes of music.
Compare that for value with the Bernstein Mahler.
The Arts: Unexpectedly energetic
By GEOFFREY NORRIS
ILLNESS played its part this week in throwing up some distinctly unusual, unanticipated performances.
Alfred Brendel, who at the moment (but, one hopes, not for long) is incapacitated by tendonitis, had to withdraw from the London Symphony Orchestra's Barbican concert (sponsored by Nikon UK Ltd), but in his place Dmitri Alexeev played Beethoven's ‘Emperor’ Concerto.
One of the enlivening aspects of Alexeev's temperament is that you rarely know what to expect.
An intensity of energy is always present in his performances: it can be potent and concentrated (as in late Brahms), or it can be layed out on a more expansive scale, as in Rachmaninov or here in the ‘Emperor’.
Head almost buried in the keyboard, he worried at the chords, arpeggios and flourishes, producing a big yet unforced sound and a sense of re-creative excitement and scope, not wholly matched by the orchestra.
In the slow movement, he generally retired into his own thoughts, poetically outlining the melodic shapes with a lyrical softness, but then, suddenly, landing lumpily on a note, as if the reverie had reminded him of a reality.
It was all quite extraordinary; but it was also exhilarating, in that it explored new expressive possibilities in the concerto while maintaining utter idiomatic integrity.
The brave idea of starting the concert with Luciano Berio's Sequenza VI for solo viola (Paul Silverthorne) alerted us to the fact that, in orchestral concerts, we have become accustomed to concert ‘themes’ and the overture /concerto /symphony format.
And such adventure was far more interesting than Kent Nagano's mundane performance of Prokofiev's Sixth Symphony.
Carlo Maria Giulini was indisposed for the Philharmonia's Festival Hall concert (sponsored by AFC) and, maybe as a result, large sections of the potential audience seemed indisposed to attend.
Yevgeny Svetlanov took on the programme as advertised but, in the first half, those who failed to occupy seats missed little.
Svetlanov realised that the Philharmonia could count three in a bar, and in the Polonaise from Tchaikovsky's Eugene Onegin for the most part kept his hands regimentally to his sides, waggling his fingers every now and again.
Rozhdestvensky does this sort of thing, but much more engagingly.
In Tchaikovsky's Second Symphony, Svetlanov allowed some brash brass and unrefined woodwind, seemingly relying on a performance routine rather than applying to the score any insight into the instrumental detail, the folk intonations which can bring it to life in terms of rhythm and melodic inflection.
His Debussy Prelude a l'apres-midi d'un faune was the strangest I have ever heard: drably overcast, not so much seductive as comatose, and so deathly slow that audible flute breaths were essential in the pauses.
However, in the same composer's La mer, what the piece lost in any distinguishable subtlety, it at least gained in Svetlanov's belated awakening of interest in orchestral colour and the way to deploy it vividly and with some discretion.
Svetlanov's way with La mer might easily have been refracted through the prism of early, Russian-orientated Stravinsky who, as it happens (and should certainly have been the case), was one of the composers featured in the London Sinfonietta's Queen Elizabeth Hall contribution to the ‘Towards the Millennium’ series, which, every year until 2000, will digest systematically a particular decade of music from 1900 onwards.
Now we are in the years 1911 — 1920, and Stravinsky, who was then in the throes of The Rite of Spring, found time, too, for his Two Poems of Balmont and the Three Japanese Lyrics.
Webern was writing his Five Pieces for Orchestra, Prokofiev his Classical Symphony, Ives his Holidays Symphony, Falla his ballet El amor brujo, and Schoenberg his weird song Herzgewachse, with celeste, harmonium and harp accompaniment.
What this long-term series will undoubtedly show is that there are no fixed trends in composition of the music of any given day, in this century (or any other for that matter): the fluxes, the divergences, as well as the common interests and occasional influences, are what make music such a perpetually fascinating art.
The Arts: VIDEO CHOICE
By TRISTAN DAVIES
Boyz N the Hood The neighbourhood in question is South Central Los Angeles, a curious half-ghetto half-Brookside with Uzis, where Tre (Cuba Gooding Jr) and Ricky (Morris Chestnut) stand at a crossroads: will they make it to college and become middle class or be gunned down in the crossfire between rival gangs?
Tre's parents may have separated, but dad is strict and mom has made it; while Ricky's home life is a shambles.
The moral is obvious.
Despite the bad slang and street soundz, director John Singleton takes a quietly thoughtful look at the choices facing some of America's black youth.
A remarkably affecting film given its small budget ($6 million) and the age of its creator (23).
(Columbia Tristar, 15, rental only) Stanley & Iris Once one has got over the novelty of seeing Jane Fonda and Robert de Niro don blue collars to play working-class lost souls, Martin Ritt's adaptation of the novel Union Street (set on Teeside) is fairly absorbing.
The gutsy widow Iris helps Stanley, a quietly dignified illiterate, learn to read and write; he in turn helps with her crushing loneliness.
In the end we are all drowned in a sea of schmaltz.
(Warner Home Video, 15, £10.99) The Commitments Alan Parker's tale of north Dublin layabouts forming a soul band, based on the novel by Roddy Doyle, will have you rocking in your seat: not only with mirth at the individual foibles but in time with the beltingly good music.
(Fox Video, 15, rental only)
The Arts: It's a serious failing
By TRISTAN DAVIES
‘WHEN YOU do comedy you're not sitting at the grown-ups’ table, you're sitting at the children's table.’
So Woody Allen was quoted as saying in 1978, a watershed year in which he Got Serious, swapped tables and made Interiors, a polished homage to Bergman that was certainly grown-up but was as enjoyable as shingles and carried as many jokes as the average court summons.
The good news is that Interiors isn't on video, so there's no need to revisit this austere tale of middle-class American family breakdown, no matter how slickly it was filmed and acted.
The better news is that almost every other film — Allen has averaged around one a year since the late 1960s — is available.
Anally-retentive collectors will be pleased to note that, from Monday, Virgin Vision is packing some of them into two handy, three-tape boxed sets, available from Our Price record shops.
At around £30, they're hardly an impulse buy, but any volume that contains Broadway Danny Rose, The Purple Rose of Cairo and Hannah and Her Sisters (PG and 15) is worth saving for.
(The films can of course be bought individually elsewhere, at around £11 each.)
Available in a boxed set with Crimes and Misdemeanours (15) and September (PG), Another Woman (PG) is the story of Marion (Gena Rowlands), a planet-brained philosophy lecturer who rents an apartment in which to write a book.
She starts out smug, married and cerebral; but hearing, via an air vent, snippets from the psychotherapist's next door, begins her own self-analysis.
She puts her intellect to work on why she's been such a pain for the last 50 years, and ends up a little less smug and a lot less married.
Sadly, her character shows too little flesh for one to care over-much.
The movie, made in 1988, is a good pointer to what has happened to Allen: the targets he once pricked with flip but divine one-liners — the shrinks, the Life /Death /Weltschmerz question — are no longer a laughing matter as America's greatest contemporary wit approaches the mid-September of his days.
You won't tear any major muscle groups laughing during Crimes and Misdemeanours or Hannah and her Sisters, for example; but you may marvel at a film-maker at the height of his powers.
In Crimes, Allen achieves the seemingly impossible by raising complex issues of good and evil, moral ambiguity and guilt, in a way that is both witty and compellingly entertaining.
Zelig (Warner, PG) is smaller in scope but, perhaps, more easily digested because of the brilliant technical execution of its central idea — that of a human chameleon who, via clever archive montage, pops in and out of history.
Unashamed nostalgia makes Radio Days (RCA /Columbia, PG) a gem to wallow in as a family of Jewish misfits huddle round their wireless at the start of the Second World War.
The earlier classics — Annie Hall, Manhattan, Love and Death, Sleeper et al— are all available from Warner at around £11, and each should be collected and brought out again and again like a favourite sweater.
Sadly, Allen's first film, What's New, Pussycat?, of 1965, is no longer available on video.
An unashamed sex frolic set in and around Paris, it starred Peter O'Toole and Peter Sellars, and saw Ursula Andress parachuting into O'Toole's sports car.
Utterly daft and unsophisticated, it elevated Allen to the very head of the children's table — and is sheer delight.
Books: Mean streets' Goodfella
By LINDSAY ANDERSON
WITH the release of his most commercial film, a remake of the 1960s thriller ‘Cape Fear’, Martin Scorsese's is a name that is being buzzed all around the media.
Here is the story of his life and of the succession of movies, remarkably similar in tone and most of them featuring actors like Robert de Niro and Harvey Keitel, which have raised him to the status of (perhaps) the world's most famous film director.
From ‘Mean Streets’ to ‘Goodfellas’, his films have consistently shown a preoccupation with the macho qualities of violence and the Roman Catholic conception of guilt.
They have also shown an increasing technical, or stylistic skill.
And yet it still seems questionable whether Scorsese's work has the range and the depth which would properly carry him beyond celebrity to ‘greatness’.
A question like this would surely not occur to Mary Pat Kelly.
She is a terrific admirer of Martin Scorsese.
That is why her biography, which she describes as ‘an oral history’, including interviews with his collaborators, actors, writers, cinematographers, parents, and so on, does not try to interest readers, but takes all that for granted.
‘If you are reading this,’ she says in her introduction, ‘I am sure that Scorsese's films have inspired animated discussion for you…
I hope so because that is the premise of this book.
The movies, of course, speak powerfully for themselves.’
That ‘of course’ is not the language of a critic.
Early on, Mary Pat Kelly became fascinated by what she read about the film which Scorsese made when he was still a student.
She wrote to him and he sent her a 16mm print, together with letters 12 and 15 pages long, ‘jammed with such an enthusiasm for movies that words ran together and the pressure he applied to the keys left the paper riddled with holes’.
That is the way Scorsese talks.
And also the way he makes films.
Mary Pat Kelly met him first in the mop room of the convent where she was studying to be a nun.
As a student, her favourite subjects were James Joyce and the movies.
Fellini, Antonioni and Bergman used, she says, the cinematic equivalent of Joyce's stream-of-consciousness, non-linear narrative.
And Scorsese, presumably, is of the company.
The parallels are stated, not reasoned.
This is that kind of book.
The ‘journey’ that Martin Scorsese took started on New York's Lower East Side, and proceeded through the Catholic Church (his early ambition was to enter the priesthood), via New York University, where he majored in movies.
He was intoxicated by cinema from the start, and his films came directly out of his own experiences and from a total dedication.
He emigrated to Hollywood, worked as an editor and made ‘Boxcar Bertha’ for Roger Corman.
Since then, he has made a succession of movies, from ‘Mean Streets’ and ‘Alice Doesn't Live Here Any More’to ‘Raging Bull’and ‘Goodfellas’.
All are hot-blooded, hectic and recognisably personal.
Martin Scorsese is a very subjective artist, if not one with much sense of perspective.
He has made comedies, but seems quite without the vision that elevates humour to satire.
Perhaps this is why his films and his personality are so emphatically of today.
He is a ‘movie’ man; and nothing does him greater credit than his energetic campaign to get Kodak to mend their stock, so that colour-films of the past do not automatically fade and turn green.
His own work certainly deserves to survive.
Try to get his movies from your local video store, and you will find that they will tell you as much as this book.
Books: Paperbacks
By MAX DAVIDSON
This Is the Life by Joseph O'Neill (Faber, £4.99)— The paths of a failed lawyer and a highly successful one cross when the latter encounters matrimonial difficulties and needs a solicitor who will do what he is told without asking too many questions.
But even failures have minds of their own…
Joseph O'Neill's first novel lifts the lid off the arcane world of the law and paints a wry picture of the humdrum, uninspiring existence which lies beyond the thrills and spills of the courtroom.
It is an excellent debut, crisply written and full of dark observations on the fragility of worldly success.
Still Life & A Classical Education by Richard Cobb (Hogarth Press, £9.99)— Richard Cobb's double autobiography has an impressionistic quality, which makes a welcome contrast to the excess of detail and interminable name-dropping of most contemporary memoirs.
Still Life: a Tunbridge Wells Childhood anatomises that most genteel of English towns from the perspective of a precociously observant boy.
A Classical Education deals with Cobb's time at Shrewsbury and Oxford.
The focus for this second volume is his friendship with a boy called Edward who, while charming in many ways, proceeds to murder his mother.
It is a bizarre tale, and Cobb makes it memorable by hitting just the right note of horror, amusement and disbelief.
The Urban Survival Handbook by John Wiseman (Harvill, £10.99)— John Wiseman's follow-up to The SAS Survival Handbook is a paranoic's charter, drawing the attention of the unwary to the dangers of everything from extension ladders to Japanese wisteria and providing useful hints on how to combat them.
The old soldier is best on home ground and there are some vivid illustrations of what to do with muggers' testicles.
The writer's po-faced style occasionally irritates: do people really need reminding that cases of bubonic plague should be treated immediately?
All the Pain that Money Can Buy: the Life of Christina Onassis by William Wright (Gollancz, £5.99)— The author's explanation of why people devour books about the rich is appropriately cynical: ‘We examine their bounteous lives on the modest condition that they suffer and come to a bad end.’
Christina Onassis suffered in spades and there is something of Greek tragedy about her increasingly desperate search for the human affection of which she was starved as a child.
If ever fame and wealth proved two-edged swords, they do here.
Wright tells her story with great professionalism.
The Five Gates of Hell by Rupert Thomson (Penguin, £5.99)— Moon Beach sounds like a pleasant place to take a holiday but is the complete reverse.
Located partly in America and partly in Rupert Thomson's fertile imagination, the place is crawling with funeral parlours and peopled by characters each more disturbed than the last.
Violence is endemic and Thomson fashions a stylish off-beat thriller which occasionally meanders but is shot through with genuine menace.
A Strange and Sublime Address by Amit Chaudhuri (Minerva, £4.99)— This languid novella paints an enchanting portrait of a prosperous Calcutta family as seen through the eyes of a small boy.
Sandeep, used only to life in a Bombay high-rise, is hypnotised by the daily rituals going on around him — his aunt rubbing oil into her black hair, his uncle retiring to the lavatory with an ashtray, a newspaper and a pair of reading glasses.
The evocation of place is superb.
Books: How to become a screen goddess
By JAMES PARK
WHEN John Boorman took on the job of co-editing this anthology, which is intended to be an annual event, and writing the chronicle of 1991 which comprises almost half its contents, he cannot have imagined that he would be revealing so much about the reasons for his own creative decline.
Once a director able to work his obsessions into powerful narrative films like ‘Point Blank’ and ‘Deliverance’, he has drifted towards autobiographical whimsy, with predictable consequences: much of his diary is taken up with the crisis of confidence after the failure of his ‘Where the Heart Is’.
Fortunately, the diary reveals the same strengths as Boorman's early films — his outsider's eye.
He writes, for example, a fine satiric account of a Hollywood producer's stag party where the guests are compelled to sit in a circle, bang drums and earnestly articulate their feelings about the groom.
In LA, it seems, they take Robert Bly's Iron John seriously.
Between sharply-recounted anecdotes, high-grade gossip and a heavy load of obituaries, Boorman fulminates against Hollywood's baleful influence on creative film-making and the ‘callously manipulative’ movies that constitute the bulk of studio output.
He wants us to believe that the ‘system’ is responsible for the fact that, at year's end, he has nothing to show for his effort apart from the diary, a self-indulgent television film and debts from an aborted project.
But while Hollywood produces a lot of pap it can also stimulate those who have the courage to work against its constraints (as Boorman once did).
Revealingly, not one of the 24 leading directors invited to fantasise in Projections about what they would do with complete creative freedom and limitless cash can make any sense of the question.
‘I'm afraid,’ writes Sidney Pollack, ‘I would find my imagination not up to the challenge of working with no limits whatsoever.’
The directors interviewed (Gus Van Sant, Michael Mann) seem happy to follow Boorman's former practice, weaving their own concerns into current possibilities.
And Jonathan Demme, the Oscar-accoladed director of ‘The Silence of the Lambs’, declares with disarming frankness that ‘all films are exploitation films’.
Perhaps the truth is that film-making is a young man's game.
In their ambition to produce a cinema version of Granta, the editors have not solved the problem presented by the fact that film-makers who want to write about their films probably are not making them.
Two of the best pieces here are Emeric Pressburger's entrancing memoir of his Berlin hobo days in the 1920s, and the cinematographer Nestor Almendros's insights into what a woman needs to become a screen goddess; neither helps justify the book's claim to be about what is happening in movies now.
But Projections is a good idea.
If its editors can elicit combative prose from a wider range of directors, future editions could yet provide an antidote to the star-struck hype that makes up most of what is written about the movies.
Books: A weak pulse under kitsch
By KEVIN LOADER
PILLARS OF GOLD by Alice Thomas Ellis Viking, £14.99 CANDLES AND DARK NIGHT by Grace Ingoldby Heinemann, £13.99 AN HONOURABLE DEATH by Iain Crichton-Smith Macmillan, £13.99 THIS DAY AND AGE by Mike Nicol Bloomsbury, £15.99 THERE is little repose in the Kentish Town described so vividly in Pillars of Gold.
The novel opens like a thriller — a husband reads in the local paper that a woman's body has been dragged from the canal — but its real purpose is to take a biopsy on the corpse of Camden; to establish whether, beneath the litter and kitsch of its decadent streets, there still weakly beats the pulse of a community.
The husband belongs to Scarlet, a woman whose life of quiet desperation threatens to overwhelm her.
She is abandoned in the home all day, unable to communicate with her teenage daughter, Camille, and her only proper friendship is with a neighbour, Constance.
Constance was born in the area and remembers when it was still possible to buy a mop or a washing-up bowl in the local shops.
Now the market caters to tourists and students.
She may regret this change, but colludes with it by making and selling ethnic jewellery of her own.
She, more than the working husband, is the strong presence in Scarlet's life, full of New Age vigour and ancient practicality.
Another neighbour, Barbs, is missing.
As the three principal women make the connection between this disappearance and the drowned body, the novel's main debate begins.
Should they report their suspicions, or does that constitute an invasion of privacy?
Are their respective men capable of murder?
(Quite possibly.)
What is the individual's responsibility to others in a modern city?
Not much happens in the novel.
Its narrative is largely made up of women talking to one another.
But along the way Alice Thomas Ellis creates an ironic and vivid portrait of London, brilliantly catching its degradation and waste.
Constance claims: ‘I haven't got politics, just common sense.’
This is disingenuous of her, and of Ellis: you do not use a quotation from Blake's ‘Jerusalem’ as your title if you do not want to write a ‘state of the nation’novel.
THE COMMUNITY in Grace Ingoldby's fourth novel is both closer-knit and harsher than anything found in north London.
Candles and Dark Night describes a poetic, mythical countryside, recognisably British yet ravaged by civil war and impossible to date, though it has the atmosphere of the 1950s.
Ingoldby's heroine is young, middle-class Dora, who leaves the town with her fiance, Stephen, to return to his home village of Carver, a bleak, inhospitable place of dusty snowfalls and chalk hills, where the locals farm sheep and say little.
Dora's life immediately becomes schizophrenically divided in achingly empty days.
In the recent past Stephen has been a rebel hero, and despite his good intentions he is pressurised into rejoining the terrorist cause.
Eventually he disappears, leaving Dora stranded alone, and the last two sections of the novel deal with her attempt to rediscover herself.
Ingoldby's style is brilliantly poetic, her descriptions of the landscape beautifully wrought.
She writes long sentences without verbs, as if the rocky terrain inevitably makes action difficult.
The overall effect is of something precisely imagined yet vaguely, almost mythically, placed in time and geography — an effect which gives this novel a resonance that remains vividly in the mind.
IAIN CRICHTON-SMITH also writes about the plight of the outsider, that of the officer who has risen through the ranks.
An Honourable Death is an imaginative recreation of the life of Hector MacDonald, the son of a Highland stonemason who ran away to the Army when 17 and by the end of the last century had become the hero of several adventures in far-flung parts of the British Empire.
Hector is a brilliant soldier because he never loses the NCO's love of discipline through drill.
His greatest triumphs occur in the Sudanese campaigns after the murder of General Gordon, when he trains a native battalion to match the ferocity of the Dervish forces.
In middle age, the fire of battle gone, his emotional needs unsatisfied, he is finished by a scandal.
This book will appeal to lovers of military history, but its characterisations often seem thin and schematic.
Its clear narrative thrust is appropriate for the subject, though perhaps surprising in a novel by a poet.
MIKE NICOL's first novel was generally categorised as a South African version of ‘Magic Realism’.
This Day and Age also runs away with many of the currents of that loosely-defined genre — a dark, religious undertow, political brutality, and a struggle for survival rooted in peasant experience.
History, for Nicol, is not the simple matter that it seems for Crichton-Smith, ‘because afterwards is where we live, where we can resolve what happened, according to one, according to another’.
Some might think this historical evasion, but its lack of conclusiveness should be seen as a valiant struggle to understand the complexity of South Africa's past and future.
Books: Tricked out of land by Daniel Boone
By DAVID HOLLOWAY
THE TITLE says it all: the ‘stolen continents’ were the lands in North, Central and South America where gentle loving souls lived in some sort of earthly paradise, happily harvesting luxuriant crops and enjoying a stable regime with only ‘low-key’wars.
Then came the invaders from unstable, religiously divided Europe to turn paradise into hell.
Ronald Wright's re-telling of the fate of the indigenous people is far more than another manifestation of the popular pastime of Columbus-bashing designed to ensure that this year's quincentennial celebrations should be suitably controversial.
Indeed, in Mr Wright's version of the story, Columbus barely gets a look in.
The author divides his story five ways, describing how the invaders affected the society of the Aztecs, the Mayas, the Incas, the Cherokees and the Mohawk confederation.
He presents the stories of each community, first as they reacted to invasion and conquest, then as they were treated a couple of centuries later as white settlers took over their lands, and, finally, how the few surviving descendants of these once-proud people are faring today.
Taken as a good read, this is an excellent book.
Mr Wright is an accomplished narrative historian and has made very good use of the few surviving scraps of contemporary, or nearly contemporary, accounts written by members of the various civilisations.
For instance, there is a 1520s lament by the Aztec poet Tlatelolco which begins: In the roads lie the broken spears…
Without roofs are the houses, And red are their walls with blood.
Maggots swarm in the streets and squares, And the ramparts are spattered with brains.
Powerful stuff, which represents the sort of passionate writing that Mr Wright himself goes in for.
He hates the invaders, from not-all-that-stout Cortes via de Soto, the first to encounter the Cherokees, and the treacherous English and French who made life hell for the Mohawks, right up to the Quebec police who fired on the Mohawks as they protected their remnant of land against the building of a golf course.
Often the tone is shrill: when talking about the occupation of the Cherokee lands, Mr Wright tells us that ‘the White settlers were desperate people from the slums of Europe and the Atlantic seaboard’.
All right, many of them were, but not all.
The diseases, like smallpox, which wiped out so many of the various indigens in a succession of plagues worse, Mr Wright tells us, than the Black Death, were not deliberately introduced as a population-control measure.
They just happened in the natural order of things.
Forget, he says, the fact that the people (I am desperately trying to avoid using the words ‘Red Indian’ and refuse to opt for the hopelessly inadequate euphemism, Native American) whom the Spaniards and others found had not discovered the wheel and had no draught animals.
They were good astronomers, had complex religious beliefs (human sacrifice is conveniently forgotten) and, on the whole, benevolent rulers.
One would have thought that the Incas might have invented a llama cart, given other ingenuities that they displayed.
But life never stands still.
There have always been movements of people across the world who have changed the way of life in the lands they have occupied.
Who knows whether the first Americans who came across the Bering Strait in pre-history were indeed the first.
They too may have wiped out an earlier people, even more idyllic in their life-style.
True, not all changes were for the good.
Certainly, the most poignant part of Mr Wright's history is the fate of the Cherokees.
They genuinely tried to become, to use a horrid word, acculturated with the white invaders, even if they had no desire to be assimilated.
Yet they were tricked out of lands by Daniel Boone and others and forced to take part in the ‘Trail of Tears’, the enforced march from Kentucky and Tennessee to northern Oklahoma, during which 4,000 out of 16,000 Cherokees died.
It is, perhaps, ironic that those who hid away and escaped expulsion and quietly re-established themselves in their homelands are now the most prosperous redskins around.
The ultimate fate of the Mohawks is even sadder.
While those in Canada are pushed around, those on the other side of the border have been given permission by Washington to run bingo halls, the only legitimate gambling in the area.
Needless to say, this has led to gang warfare and all the other horrors that might be expected.
I think Mr Wright realises he has produced a piece of special pleading that does not wholly stand up, but it is difficult not to feel sympathy with his assertion: The past cannot be changed, but what we make of it certainly can.
The new nations of America will never take root in its soil until they confront what is hidden by their myths and make reparation to the survivors of the holocaust that began five centuries ago.
So, one cheer for Columbus and two for those he ‘discovered’.
Books: Chipping away at the regime
By ALLAN MASSIE
DIDEROT (1713–84) is the most solid of the three great intellectuals of 18th-century France; he is also the least known.
Even today, most educated people could probably tell you something about Voltaire and Rousseau; Candide and the Confessions still appear in popular editions, and are therefore read.
Diderot is hardly more than a name.
How many English readers know even the title of anything he wrote?
One phrase has passed into general circulation: it was Diderot who spoke of ‘strangling the last king with the guts of the last priest’, but, if the phrase is remembered, its author is probably forgotten.
Those who identify him take some pleasure in the thought that this sturdy independent was also the pensioner of the Empress Catherine the Great.
The first merit of P. N. Furbank's admirable biography is that it should revive interest in Diderot.
Mr Furbank is well-suited to the task, for he is best known as the biographer of E. M. Forster, and there was some similarity between the luminaries of Bloomsbury and the philosophes of the Enlightenment Salons.
Of course, the philosophes were much more important.
Nobody would now hold them responsible for the Revolution in France, but the Encyclopedie, which Diderot inaugurated (and edited with D'Alembert) and to which he contributed hundreds of articles himself, undermined the authority of the regime, and argued for a re-ordering of society on rational grounds.
This was a risky enterprise.
Diderot endured imprisonment in the Chateau of Vincennes, and was threatened with the Bastille.
There was real heroism in his commitment to free thought.
In like manner, but without the risk, Bloomsbury chipped away at the standards inherited from Victorians.
Diderot was a provincial, from Langres in Champagne, where his father was a master cutler, who would eventually leave him a comfortable inheritance, a little less than the salary of a professor at the Sorbonne.
Intended for the priesthood, Diderot lost his faith and for some years scraped a living as a tutor, hack journalist and translator.
Mr Furbank gives an excellent picture of this hand-to-mouth existence, not so different from that which Samuel Johnson was leading in London at the same time.
It was one of these translating jobs which led to the Encyclopedie.
This great work, appearing over a quarter of a century, was intended to sum up all available knowledge.
It was, on account of the censorship, conducted under difficulties.
The philosophes found it necessary to use coded language in their assault on Christianity and the Church.
Articles were written which could be construed as orthodox, but still interpreted by sympathisers in their intended subversive sense.
A system of cross-references was used for this purpose, for example anthropophagy: see eucharist, altar, communion.
This mystification was to Diderot's taste.
It was, Mr Furbank comments, ‘the inspiration of some of his most original and powerful writing’: the novels, Rameau's Nephew and Jacques the Fatalist, neither published in his own lifetime; also his art criticism, which seems to me to anticipate Proust.
The project flourished because France was an authoritarian, but not totalitarian, state.
Diderot and the other philosophes never lacked sympathisers in high places, even within the government.
In fact, Malesherbes, the director of publications from 1750–63, was a consistent supporter.
On one occasion, when the first two volumes were banned by Royal Decree, and the order went out to seize the unpublished texts and plates, Malesherbes suggested that the best place to conceal them would be his own house.
Touchiness was the least attractive quality of Diderot and his friends.
It went with a certain complacency.
The self-righteousness of the group has a whiff of the self-righteousness of today's advocates of Political Correctness.
Personally, however, Diderot seems to have been genial and agreeable.
He quarrelled with Rousseau after being on intimate terms with him, but then everybody did.
He was jealous of Voltaire's renown, but his judgment of him, not entirely favourable, was sound enough.
He made, like many intellectuals, rather a fool of himself when flattered by people in power — in his case, Catherine.
All the same, despite his intelligence and charm, Diderot is perhaps less interesting in himself than as a symptom and influence.
Mr Furbank is aware of this.
There is an excellent chapter on Diderot's ‘Afterlife’, and his analysis of Rameau's Nephew shows how Diderot anticipates problems of personality which were not to become common currency until the 20th century.
The result is a continuously interesting biography, which is also a chapter in the cultural history of France, and indeed Europe.
My one reservation is that Mr Furbank sometimes seems uncertain as to the extent of knowledge his readers are likely to have.
I think he could have done with a general chapter on the French State, which would have placed Diderot more firmly in his times and made clearer the difficulties he encountered.
No doubt Mr Furbank thought this unnecessary; yet if he assumes a readership which knows the general background, why does he need to devote a page to the nature and status of the parlement of Paris?
Books: Solar systems for breakfast
By LUDOVIC KENNEDY
STEPHEN HAWKING: A LIFE IN SCIENCE by Michael White and John Gribbin Viking, £16.99 THE MIND OF GOD: SCIENCE AND THE SEARCH FOR ULTIMATE MEANING by Paul Davies Simon & Schuster, £16.99 I HAVE cause to remember the name of Stephen Hawking.
Early in 1989 his book, A Brief History of Time, toppled my autobiography from No 1 to No 2 on the best-seller list, which positions we retained for the next 13 weeks.
After that I dropped to 5, 7 and out, but he sailed on magisterially.
His book has sold in hardback some 10 million copies worldwide.
In order to discover what had outshone me, I bought the book, but by page 25 had entirely lost my way (Bernard Levin, I read, managed to get to page 29).
However, I can tell you what it is about: Hawking's work, in the light of the Big Bang that created the universe, to reconcile Einstein's theory of relativity with quantum mechanics.
Bully for you if you know what that means.
I do not, but am in good company.
Richard Feynman, said to be the greatest theoretical physicist of modern times, stated that no-one understands quantum mechanics.
How then to explain Hawking's sales?
My own view is that for readers to be promised even a glimmer of understanding as to the origins of our world and the universe was tempting enough, but the further promise that it was to be told briefly was irresistible.
Also, by the time of publication, the world had already heard of Hawking's genius; FRS at 32 and Lucasian Professor (Newton's former chair) at 37; a brilliant mind trapped by motor neurone disease in an ever-wasting body.
Now Michael White and John Gribbin have given us Stephen Hawking: a Life in Science, or rather Mr White has given us the life and Mr Gribbin the science; the latter is awash with black holes, white dwarfs, protons, pulsars, quasars and quarks and is therefore no more comprehensible than Brief History; also, what is one to make of a writer who speaks at one moment of ‘tiny black holes’ and the next of ‘black holes which could eat solar systems for breakfast’?
Mr White, incredibly, begins the book with an account of the movie actress Shirley MacLaine visiting Dr Hawking (she was late, her car having been clamped) to ask if he believes in God and he tells her he does not: end of story.
Later in the book he expands on this, saying: We are such insignificant creatures on a minor planet of a very average star in the outer suburbs of one of a hundred thousand million galaxies…that it is difficult to believe in a god that would care about us or even notice our existence.
Mr White, meanwhile, is chronicling the doctor's undergraduate days at Oxford and, in tabloid-Press prose, writes of college balls where ‘the female companion of an Old Harrovian or Etonian would in all probability be the daughter of a baron or duke, wrapped in the best silk’, while on the river ‘the navigators of punts…and those on the grassy banks lifting a glass of champagne to their lips’ strike Mr White as ‘an earthly paradise in freeze-frame’.
Happily Mr White soon abandons this sort of yuk and reveals much that is interesting in Hawking's life at Cambridge and later abroad; his progress from stick to crutches to wheelchair to electric car, from whispered speech to tracheotomy to a computerised voice machine; the problems of finding suitable accommodation, exacerbated by an unhelpful bursar; the birth of his three children; difficulties with his wife Jane, to whom he owed so much, and their eventual separation; his love of dancing and dinner parties, and always his stubborn courage in refusing to regard himself or allow others to regard him as anything but normal.
Almost the best chapter, however, is on how Brief History came to be written, edited, marketed and sold in ever-increasing numbers.
You could be forgiven for thinking that a book entitled The Mind of God was a work of theology, but you would be wrong.
Paul Davies is a guru of mathematical physics and his book covers the same territory as that of Hawking (whom he cites often) and Gribbin and is almost as impenetrable; however, he makes every effort to take the layman along with him, so that by judicious and generous skipping you do gain something of value.
To the question ‘What happened before the Big Bang?’ the professor answers: ‘There was no ‘before’.
Space first came into existence with the Big Bang.
So did time.’
QED.
The last sentence of this book reads: ‘We are truly meant to be here.’
It is the only wholly unscientific statement in an otherwise wholly scientific book.
Books: Just because there was no flying carpet Paul Bailey bemoans the semi-obscurity visited upon Angus Wilson
By PAUL BAILEY
‘ONE of the outstanding books of this 20 years,’ wrote Sean O'Faolain in his review of Angus Wilson's first collection of stories, The Wrong Set, on its appearance in 1949: He is a satirist with a lyrical touch; trenchant, ruthless, often very funny, sometimes very frightening; and he can write as a duck can swim.
It may be this rare combination of sharp wit and soft heart that makes one reader at least believe that this man is marked out for fame.
O'Faolain's prediction proved to be accurate.
Angus Wilson soon consolidated his brilliant debut with another equally remarkable volume of stories, Such Darling Dodos.
By 1952, when the novel Hemlock and After was published, he had definitely ‘arrived’.
Four years later, with the publication of Anglo-Saxon Attitudes, which was both widely reviewed and highly praised, his reputation as a leading novelist was secure.
It continued to be so through more than two decades, and then — in the mid-1980s — it seemed, almost inexplicably, to be secure no longer, despite his having only recently been honoured with a knighthood for services to literature.
By the time of his death, in May 1991, none of his many books was available in paperback, and sales of the hardback editions had dropped to a very low level indeed.
He was out of favour, out of fashion — a name from the past.
How, and why, had this happened?
The one certainty is that there is no single, clear-cut reason.
Perhaps the critical success, and consequent popularity, of the genre loosely known as ‘magical realism’ had something to do with it.
Set beside the works of Marquez et al, those of Angus Wilson must have looked distinctly unexotic, weighed down with sociological observation and liberal-humanist philosophising.
His characters do not travel by flying carpet or converse with wild animals or meet up with angels and demons, in the manner of other contemporary fictional heroes and heroines.
His novels — it was, and is, argued — are constructions from the 19th century, throwbacks to a great but vanished age.
They are, in short, old-fashioned.
The truth is, they are not, even if that is how they appear superficially.
That Angus Wilson respected the baggy monsters of the Victorian era is unquestionable.
What is more, he learned from them, and applied that learning to his creative benefit.
A novel like The Middle Age of Mrs Eliot, for instance, could be regarded as a latter-day Middlemarch, with Meg rising up and breaking free as Dorothea does, and it is possible to detect the influence of Wilson's favourite writer, Dickens, in works as dissimilar as Anglo-Saxon Attitudes and No Laughing Matter.
Wilson felt obliged to pay his respects to the tradition he had inherited, and then moved on.
He found his own voice, and — thanks to his incredible gift of mimicry — the voices, male and female, of a vast range of different, and vividly differentiated, people.
The phrase ‘He's a very Angus Wilson sort of person’ was much in the air when Wilson's career was at its height.
It accounted for any number of recognisable types.
Yet Wilson is not just a clever impersonator, as his portrait of Sylvia Calvert in Late Call continually demonstrates.
His talent for empathetic understanding reaches its peak with Sylvia, who has not read a good book in her entire life.
He shows, without condescension, that Sylvia is inherently decent for all that her culture is founded on women's magazines and television serials.
A lesser novelist would have supplied a built-in sneer, to indicate his obvious superiority, but for Wilson the temptation is not even there to be resisted.
He denies his readers the pleasure of feeling superior, too: they must come to terms with Sylvia and her kind, who are not so rare as is commonly supposed, and a novel is a good place in which to begin the process.
Is empathy unfashionable?
Perhaps.
What is in fashion — among literary critics and judges of prizes — is a curious form of esotericism, whereby the novelist reminds us that he is no mere novelist but an extraordinary intelligence as well.
The rot started in Italy, with Umberto Eco's The Name of the Rose — a banal thriller decked out with a myriad medieval trappings.
The trick here, and in the scores of near-novels that have followed in its wake, is to make the reader, or disciple, imagine that he or she is just as erudite into the bargain: no need to struggle through Dante or The Song of Roland when it is all there in one fat detective story.
And then there is the international novel, which is particularly easy to translate because it is set in a generalised Nowhere and has no idiosyncratic language to disturb its translators.
And then there is ‘dirty realism’, which treats of stunted lives in exquisitely honed prose.
All these schools of writing, if that is the right term, are variously popular at present, but may soon vanish.
The irony is that Angus Wilson is, in the best sense, an experimental writer, by which I do not mean that he makes holes in the page or shuffles his paragraphs around.
He is alert to all the means at his disposal, and employs parody and even the stream of consciousness when it suits him.
He was not always praised for deserting the naturalistic mode: old Mr Rent-a-Plot himself, John Mortimer, chastised him for doing precisely that in The Old Men at the Zoo.
Unlikely as it may seem now, it was Evelyn Waugh who came to Wilson's defence and acknowledged the brilliance and aptness of the book's main conceit, which — given the turn of events in Eastern and Central Europe — is apropos once more.
Wilson's stature, it becomes increasingly clear, is dependent on the sheer variety of his talents, for he can do, effortlessly, what most novelists now fashionable could not begin to effect if faced with a firing squad — create Sylvia Calvert, for a start; pin down a very minor, but necessary, character in a couple of sentences; employ fictive skills to celebrate human qualities that are not marked by intellect.
And that is to mention only three.
The cruel semi-obscurity visited upon Angus Wilson in his declining years is ghastly to contemplate.
Let me now vouch for his kindness and generosity, for he was as good a friend to me as he was to dozens of others, not all of them writers.
He felt his neglect bitterly, but he was not, essentially, an envious man.
His criticism survives to prove it.
I hope that the re-issue in Penguin of his complete works, starting on April 30, will be met with serious celebration.
His virtues, old-fashioned and modernist, must not be overlooked, or worse, taken for granted.
In the time of Nicholson Baker's Vox, God help us, his voice and voices ought to be heard in the land.
Books: Earthly vehicles
By WENDY COPE
ANNIE BESANT: A BIOGRAPHY by Anne Taylor.
OUP, £25 ‘I DON'T care for life if I can't fill it with work,’ Annie Besant often declared to her friends.
She was, indeed, an extremely hard-working woman, and it is fitting, in a way, that the story of her life should be hard work to read.
It was not the fault of Annie Besant's biographer that I often longed to put this book down.
Anne Taylor's account is well-written, scholarly and balanced.
The problem is the nature of her subject.
Besant was an earnest Victorian, with equally earnest friends and associates, all of them convinced that human nature, the universe and everything were perfectible, if only they could find the right answer.
In their pursuit of the answer they were tireless — reading, writing, joining societies, quarrelling, changing their minds, resigning from societies and founding new ones.
The reader needs to be very alert to keep track of all the periodicals and organisations, as well as people, that Taylor is obliged to introduce.
Annie was born in 1847 and educated, after the death of her father in 1852, by a wealthy philanthropic Evangelical, Ellen Marryat.
‘Personal self-denial for the good of others was the first important lesson Annie learned,’ says Taylor, ‘and it was a principle by which she stood for the rest of her life.’
Miss Marryat also emphasised the value of finding things out for oneself.
At the age of 18 her pupil was enthusiastically tracing the origins of Christian doctrine, reading works that were normally of interest only to scholarly clerics and ecclesiastical historians.
In 1867 she married a clergyman, Frank Besant.
This marriage was ‘the beginning of great unhappiness for both of them’.
After the birth of her second child, Annie began to have religious doubts and returned to her preoccupation with theology.
To the great embarrassment of her husband, she published a pamphlet questioning the divinity of Christ.
In 1873 the couple separated.
Annie now embarked on her remarkable public career, first as an associate of the atheist Charles Bradlaugh in the National Secular Society, then as a Fabian socialist and strike leader (of the London matchgirls), and as one of the first members of the London School Board.
An outstanding speaker and prolific journalist, she displayed tremendous courage in defying public opinion on several issues, including birth control.
In the late 1880s, dissatisfied with atheism, she came under the influence of Madame Blavatsky of the Theosophical Society.
After Blavatsky died in 1891, Annie became ‘Chief Secretary of the Inner Group of the Esoteric Section’ and, later, the society's President.
Drawn to India by her spiritual and political interests, she spent much of the rest of her life there.
She founded a Hindu College at Benares, adopted the 14-year-old Krishnamurti, whom she believed to be the earthly vehicle of the new World Teacher, and played an important part in the campaign for Indian self-government.
She died at the Theosophical Society's headquarters in Adyar in 1933.
Taylor's final verdict on Annie Besant is that ‘she gave proof of much valour’.
The author also points out that her subject had almost no sense of humour or capacity for original thought, that she thirsted for power, and that ‘Righteousness was what Annie earnestly desired for others…she felt no lack of it herself.’
She deserves our respect and admiration, but she is difficult to like.
Books: Small naughty slices
By A A GILL
WEDDING CAKES AND CULTURAL HISTORY by Simon R. Charsley Routledge, £30; £9.99 THOSE of you who could not put down Rites of Marrying: the Wedding Industry in Scotland are in for a treat: now you can have your cake.
Like an archaeologist who digs up a tiny shard in the desert and from it extrapolates a whole civilisation, so Simon Charsley lifts an inconsequential marzipan confection and uses it to illuminate the shifting sands of Western civilisation.
The wedding cake is a masterfully chosen subject.
Marriage is, after all, a crossroads that most of us come to, some of us more than once.
Mr Charsley begins by pointing out that a Martian who found himself invited to a wedding would imagine that the whole affair had been laid on to honour the cake (the question as to who would invite a Martian or to which side of the church the ushers would show him or why best men seem to turn into Martians when it comes to speeches, he quite wisely avoids).
Mr Charsley's socio-anthropological pen leads us exhaustively through history, rites and recipes; no bannock, tart or biscuit is left unturned.
Under some of them he finds truly delicious morsels.
The prudish Victorians attempted to divert attention from the overtly sexual nature of weddings and invented the cake as we now know and probably dislike it.
By dressing both the bride and the cake from top to bottom in virginal white, they created a wholly unintentional but blissful metaphor.
The bride and groom jointly wield a knife or sword and, with much giggling, push it through the hard white icing into the dark, damp, sweet, rich cake.
As they do it they make a wish, presumably for children.
Having just metaphorically done in front of the vicar, small children and grandparents what they are about to do in the bridal suite, they offer everyone a small, naughty slice.
Mr Charsley's prose owes a lot to the Open University — what one might call bearded functionality or poly-correct.
His style lends itself to much deadpan humour: when describing the old custom of cutting the cake by breaking it over the bride's head, he does it without as much as a wink.
The final chapter — on whither the wedding cake — had this reviewer in helpless stitches.
Books: Forest vagrant in Poll Tax protest
By PETER LEVI
AS A LONGSTANDING admirer of the poetry of Ted Hughes, I had looked forward to his prose book about Shakespeare.
Alas, in prose he is not a very sober writer.
Nor is he an old-fashioned, bookish poet with antiquarian tendencies like Tennyson.
Matthew Arnold would have said his mind is the product of this deplorable age — shaggy, wild, intuitive, uncastigated, and like a magpie in a library — which is radically uneducated.
And yet there is something about him, a crude glint or an unexpected flicker in a cave, that may well betray genius.
Shakespeare brings out the worst in him, and this book is fuller of phoney, slapdash theories, illegitimate leaps and rushes where angels fear to tread, and discredited references, Sufic influences, Shamanic initiations, dreams, Black Elk, and Idries Shah on the Rosicrucians, than anything since Robert Graves.
All those who are thanked for encouraging this publication are hereby disgraced, except for Craig Raine, who at least made him rewrite his book more lucidly.
It is hard to decide whether the result is better seen as self-indulgent twaddle, or, as Robert Lowell said of the Oxford Book of Modern Verse: ‘Maybe it's the ultimate Larkin poem’, so maybe this is the supreme Ted Hughes fiction.
But the strands of insight are dull and rational: all the wild stuff is irrelevant to them.
The boar with a flower in his mouth is just a conceit and an obsession.
To take one small matter: who remembers Idries Shah?
He was an Afghan who bemused Robert Graves, and in this book must be regarded as a bee which escaped from that capacious bonnet; his Kabul cousins thought him a figure of pure comedy.
He leads the Laureate into a queer disquisition on masons and Rosicrucians.
But Mr Hughes is a keen pupil; he has discovered Doctor Dee and Hermes Trismegistes from Frances Yates, and while he follows her he treads at least a wavy line, he does not loop the loop.
At other moments, he is like some kind of Jewish magus, all too liberated.
The note on the boar as a hermaphrodite and the sprays you can buy in sex shops, and his views on Christ and Marduk, will surprise clerical readers.
We should take a more substantial point, though as one grapples one's way through the forest they are not always easy to identify.
He thinks Shakespeare in most or all of his works followed a single deep myth, first announced in Venus and Adonis, the Roman Catholic form, and The Rape of Lucrece, the Protestant.
He brushes aside simpler explanations.
But the idea that in many of his works Shakespeare shows something exquisite or innocent threatened or crushed is not new: it is to be found in the writings of Hereward Price (1947) and in an ordinary introduction to Venus and Adonis.
It had even occurred to me.
This theme has a curious persistence, but one does not need a song and dance about it.
Mr Hughes should be judged not on this, then, but on the detail that his work throws up.
He believes Venus and Adonis, with its attendant sonnets, makes Shakespeare the only writer to have Adonis refuse the advances of the goddess.
He gives the obvious explanation that Shakespeare has read Ovid on Salmacis, and spices it with the assurance that Adonis stands for the Earl of Southampton, whom he keeps calling Wriothesley.
This theory is quite untrue, as Mr Hughes could have discovered from the simplest textbook.
Greene has Adonis refuse the goddess in Perimedes the Blacke-Smith in 1588; Spenser has the same thing in The Faerie Queene, and Marlowe in Hero and Leander.
So no reliance can be put on any ‘fact’ in this book.
On the other hand its linguistic snorting and cavorting can be jolly.
I like the idea of the text of ‘Lear’ as ‘that gigantic seraph-pterodactyl’.
The boar's ‘vaginal grin’ is less attractive, but par for the course.
Falstaff as ‘a masculine decayed cornucopious form of the love goddess’ is amusing as a paradox, though how the boar can be both Mars and Persephone I do not quite see.
The Laureate plunges into Eliade, he flirts with Wrestling Jacob and the Grail, he is in love with the idea of ideas, but he does not appear to grasp how organised research should be carried out.
So, tending the sick becomes not a Christian duty but ‘Hermetic rosicrucian dulia’, Hercules is ‘another shamanic astronaut’ and we are introduced to ‘God and his female form the Shekinah’.
But the speculation that Sycorax has to do with Colchian magic, because that was the land of the Coraxi, sounds as if it might be true.
The speculation about Dido that accompanies this view has a gossamer base, but I wanted to accept it.
If this bit, then another, and then the whole preposterous bag of tricks?
Never.
Comparative mythology combined with psychiatry is a mixture of dangerous brews.
The rejected Venus of the early poem becomes the Boar, and the Boar combines with Adonis to produce Shakespeare's tragic hero: that is what we are asked to credit.
Of course it is piffle, but not without a streak of crazy intelligence.
It is as if Ted Hughes were himself the patient, suffering maybe from impotence or castration fears, and was here attempting an autotherapy with Shakespeare as a dummy.
And yet his view of ‘Pericles’ rings close to truth.
But even from that the soaring fantasy needs to be pruned: Dryden believed Pericles to be Shakespeare's earliest play, presumably his ugliest apprentice work, dug up from the pre-Titus Andronicus strata of foul papers (in one of those great trunks that he probably left in the Mountjoys' attic, in Silver Street, to be destroyed in the Great Fire), and now rewritten under pressure for a new kind of play for the Blackfriars stage.
That would explain the familiar juvenilian ring of several passages in the first two acts.
First you must cut out the airy speculation inside the brackets, then you must examine in what ways this is and is not a new kind of play, and then rephrase juvenilian, which at present totters between juvenile and some reference to that difficult writer of Roman satires, Juvenal, who may be an influence on Marston, but hardly on Shakespeare.
And in ‘Macbeth’, ‘when Tarquin ‘rapes’ the crown, and the Boar climbs into Duncan's slashed skin and stands up King of Scotland’, one must simply groan, because for all the tortuous extravagance of metaphor, and the twists and turns of myth intended to give it power like twisted elastic, one is not being told anything novel.
To say that Miranda on the island and Rosalind in the forest ‘correspond to the soul of the ducal crown which cannot remain with the illegal usurper, but must live in exile with the rightful ruler’ uses queer and difficult language without helping matters one jot.
And by the way, why is a violet a ‘blood-flower’?
We end up with the Shakespeare we knew savaged and refashioned in the Laureate's own image with ‘an almost pathological psychic alienation from the culture within which his plays triumphed’: the Blackamoor, the naked, essential man, hovelled with swine, revealing himself to Lear and to Timon in their extremity.
This is against all the evidence, but it is a compelling image, and one that clearly derives from this present age in our history, which now has the Shakespeare it deserves: an old, sex-obsessed vagrant in the Forest of Dean, refusing to pay his Poll Tax.