

Therapists asked: have you had sex with your patient?
By David Fletcher, Health Services Correspondent
MORE THAN 1,000 psychologists are to be asked to reveal whether they have ever slept with a patient.
A confidential study designed to assess the extent of professional abuse, follows investigations in America that showed one in 10 counsellors developed sexual relationships with those they should have been helping.
In Britain, one has already been struck off and three others are facing disciplinary hearings for improper sexual conduct with patients, the British Psychological Society disclosed at its annual conference in Scarborough yesterday.
Complaints by patients against two more are being investigated and three others have been cleared.
Dr Sue Llewelyn, a lecturer in psychology at Edinburgh University, said psychologists were aware there was a problem, but did not know the extent of it.
She said: ‘The first time I heard of a case I could not believe it.
But I have since come across three other instances.
‘Most therapists have, at some stage, experienced feelings of attraction to clients, but that is quite normal when you are in an intense relationship behind closed doors.
‘But to give way to those feelings, and start a sexual relationship with the patient was a betrayal of the therapist's role, which could only damage the patient.
‘If you are someone's therapist, you cannot be their lover.
All the evidence is that it is overwhelmingly harmful to the patient.’
Letters have been sent to 1,000 psychologists, asking them to reply anonymously to questions about their relationships with patients.
One question asks bluntly if they have ever had sexual intercourse with any of them.
Mr Bruce Napier, a chartered clinical psychologist once in charge of the society's disciplinary procedures, said: ‘If you go to see a therapist for an hour a week to talk about your most intimate feelings, it is understandable you may develop more powerful feelings for him than you would for your bank manager or solicitor.’
He said a skilled and ethical therapist would resist such an advance, knowing the harm it might cause the patient.
Children still see their mothers as responsible for domestic chores while their fathers relax and watch television, says a study of eight to 11-year-olds.
Dr Margaret O'Brien, a chartered psychologist at East London Polytechnic and author of The New Man, told the conference: ‘Though there have been many changes in family life over the century, it is surprising to discover that children seem to have such a traditional view.’
As part of her study, she asked children to draw pictures of their family and was surprised to find they nearly always placed their mother — but never their father — in the kitchen.
Fathers were shown watching television or involved in DIY.
When she asked the 56 children in the study who they would go to if worried about something, they chose their mother; not one said they would go to their father.
More cash for free condoms
By Peter Pallot Health Services Staff
FAMILY doctors are to be urged by health authorities to issue free condoms.
The authorities have been given a record £181 million for 1992/3 to develop Aids services and were told by the NHS management executive yesterday to increase supplies to surgeries.
A letter says authorities ‘should in particular consider expanding the role of local GPs in family planning by supplying them with condoms for free distribution to any patient whether or not at high risk if this is thought desirable as a means of preventing HIV [the Aids virus]’.
Some authorities already give condoms to GPs but the service is patchy.
A Health Department spokesman said: ‘The 1992/3 allocation of £181 million specifically for Aids services is £44 million more than 1991/2.
‘The management executive is saying that some of that money can be spent on supplying condoms to GPs so they can be given to patients.’
The British Medical Association welcomed the move.
‘We hope this extra cash means that doctors who wish to give condoms from the surgery will be able to do so,’ a spokeswoman said.
Authorities are also urged to review family planning services following a sharp fall in the number of teenagers using family planning clinics since the mid-1980s.
A department report in January said numbers had fallen every year since 1984, when 238,000 teenagers attended a clinic.
Last year the figure was 156,000.
A steady rise in teenage pregnancies suggests teenagers are not using contraceptives.