

Instant diagnosis from Doctor Robot
by Robert Matthews Science Correspondent
SCIENTISTS are testing a revolutionary computer technique for diagnosing medical conditions by mimicking the brain processes of human consultants.
The breakthrough follows research into so-called neural networks, in which ordinary computers are instructed to behave like the human brain, enabling them to be ‘taught’ to solve problems, rather than be laboriously programmed.
A conventional computer is turned into a ‘thinking machine’ by programming it to behave as if it consisted of a collection of brain cells — neurons — which will respond to a stimulus.
The computer is then trained to become an expert in medical diagnosis in exactly the same way as a medical student: by being presented with lots of case histories, and being told what the correct diagnosis is.
After hundreds of training cycles, the computer arrives at its own rules for reaching the same diagnosis as its human mentor.
It can then be set off on new cases.
British scientists at a conference last week, organised by the Institute of Physical Sciences in Medicine and held at the Royal Marsden Hospital, London, described neural computers able to diagnose a host of medical conditions — from heart problems to eye defects — with up to 98 per cent accuracy.
Dr Michael Turega, of the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, has worked with a casualty ward consultant to produce a desk-top computer consisting of just 35 ‘brain cells’ to give reliable diagnosis of chest pain in patients.
The UMIST computer was trained by feeding it details of 70 patients, such as pulse rate, temperature, age and data on previous heart problems.
It was then shown the correct diagnosis in each case, broken into five categories, ranging from flatulence to angina.
The UMIST computer automatically deduced rules which enabled its ‘brain cells’ to respond to similar cases with a level of diagnostic skills comparable to a consultant.
When put to work on new patient data, the neural computer reached the same diagnosis as the consultant in almost 90 per cent of cases.
The accuracy of so relatively simple a ‘brain’ surprised even those involved in building it.
Other researchers have built neural networks to solve the problem of checking the vast amount of data gathered during mass screenings for fatal diseases such as cancer.
Each year four million cervical smears are taken, and each one needs at least five minutes to check for the signs of disease.
Neural networks can, in principle at least, work tirelessly but accurately on such huge problems.
A team at the University of Dundee reported on a neural computer that checks cervical smears containing up to 200,000 cells and decides whether they are abnormal or not with 96 per cent accuracy.
Researchers at the University of Warwick are training a neural computer to examine brain-scanner images to recognise the symptoms of mental diseases.
Although impressive, some scientists are concerned about how neural networks reach their answers.
As they are not programmed, it is impossible to tell precisely how they work.
‘You can only evaluate a neural network empirically; you cannot guarantee up front that the neural network will work correctly,’ warned Professor John Stonham of Brunel University.
But since neural computers can carry out highly skilled tasks tirelessly, they will inevitably replace humans in some medical tasks.
Prof Stonham said: ‘Neural networks are the only way forward for solving real-world problems.
If, as the politicians say, we need to improve efficiency then we've got to remove people in the long-term.’