

MANDRAKE Rushdie's minders jump for joy
THE gloomiest election-night gathering in London (apart from the one in Walworth Road) was a small party attended by Mr Salman Rushdie.
Mr Rushdie, who recently declared on television that he was no longer prepared to remain shut away from the world, spent the evening with a few favoured friends.
He must have wished he had stayed at home.
Mr Rushdie has been getting out and about a fair deal recently.
He consented to give the address at the funeral of Angela Carter, the novelist.
Last month he travelled to America, where he accused the British of ‘bitchiness’, to promote the paperback version of The Satanic Verses.
Thursday night's outing, therefore, was no surprise.
Mr Rushdie spent the evening in the company of those of a similar intellectual and political persuasion.
They included Mr Melvyn Bragg, the novelist-television-arts-person, and Mr Harold and Lady Antonia Pinter.
They sat and watched television.
The evening, needless to say, was subdued.
As the Labour losses and Conservative holds flashed on the screen, desperate looks were exchanged.
What made things more disconcerting was a strange banging noise that seemed to be coming from the ceiling.
As the evening went on, it showed no signs of abating.
Finally, they could bear it no longer.
‘What's that noise?’
Mr Bragg said.
The light dawned on Mr Rushdie.
He explained that it was the delighted reaction of his bodyguards upstairs to the successive Tory victories.
FEW of us can be more disappointed by the election result than the aforementioned Mr Pinter.
It not only puts another nail in socialism's coffin, but deprives him of a peerage.
At a recent London dinner party, attended by Mr Kinnock, Mr Pinter and Lady Antonia, Mr Kinnock leaned across the person next to him and announced: ‘We'll make Harold a lord.’
Apparently Lady Antonia replied: ‘Oh, how very nice.’
Though Mr Pinter has been a loyal and vociferous supporter of Mr Kinnock he sometimes needs to be cajoled.
He was asked to appear in a Labour election broadcast.
The filming was to take place at the National Theatre under the eye of the distinguished director Mr Hugh Hudson.
Mr Hudson was late.
Mr Pinter gave him up to 15 minutes or so, and when he did not arrive, left.
But what of Mr Kinnock's other friends?
Possible peers would have included Mr Bragg, Sir ‘Dickie’ Attenborough, and television's Sir Denis Forman.
Sir Denis is very popular at Walworth Road, the Labour Party HQ, even though it cannot spell his name correctly.
During a recent election broadcast he featured as Sir Denis ‘Foreman’— as in the foreman of a building site, rather than of Granada of which he used to be deputy chairman.
ON THE eve of polling day the Prime Minister was asked whether, on reflection, it would not have been a good idea for him to have debated with Mr Kinnock on television.
He replied that he had wanted to.
He added that Mr Kinnock would have been the better orator, but that he would have won on detail and facts.
‘But they told me I could not,’ he said.
He did not say who ‘they’ were.
Probably the people whose advice had put him behind in the polls during the first weeks of the campaign.
ALL is sweetness and light again between the Tory Party and its advertising agency, Saatchi and Saatchi.
The Saatchi brothers made their names helping Mrs Thatcher to three election victories.
Last December Mr Maurice Saatchi, chairman of the agency, met Cabinet ministers in a search for new vote-winning policies.
He also helped Mr Shaun Woodward prepare a 30-page dossier for Mr Patten on campaign strategy.
Then the honeymoon went sour.
What annoyed Mr Saatchi most was the campaign's lack of direction: it was a question not only of ‘wobbly Thursday’ but wobbly Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday.
There were frequent rows at Central Office.
Senior Tories were particularly angry about the mishandling of Mr Major's rally at Wembley.
It was hoped that his speech would make the lead item on the BBC's Nine O'Clock News.
But Mr Major failed to finish until five past nine, five minutes too late.
Arguments then ensued as to who allowed other speakers to continue for more than their allotted time.
But if all is well once more with Mr Maurice Saatchi, relations are like ice-pack between Central Office and Sir Tim Bell, the brilliant advertising man and Thatcher favourite.
The other day Sir Tim was dining at Mark's Club with Miss Eleanor Goodman, the television presenter.
He proceeded to take pot shots at the campaign.
Unbeknown to him, Mr Bill Muirhead of Saatchi and Saatchi, one of Mr Major's key strategists, was sitting at an adjacent table and heard every word.
DESPITE his criticisms, among those who predicted the outcome of the election with astonishing accuracy (and subject to hoots of disbelief at the time) was Sir Tim.
At a lunch on polling day — not at Mark's Club — he assured fellow guests that the Conservatives would win an overall majority of 20 seats.
Another seer who forecast a Tory majority — without compromising his impartiality — was Sir Robin Day.
MR Oliver Letwin, the Conservative candidate for Hampstead who lost to the somewhat more primal Miss Glenda Jackson, should take heart.
Mrs Thatcher has credited him with helping to win the election.
This is not because Miss Jackson's presence in the Commons will ensure that Labour never forms the Government, but because Mr Letwin is one of the people credited with having invented the poll tax.
Mrs Thatcher has told friends that the poll tax won the election for the Conservative Party.
She believes that it prevented many Labour supporters from registering on the electoral roll (in the hope of avoiding payment), thus depriving Mr Kinnock of a large number of votes.
She puts the figure at about one million.
THE Catholic Herald, Britain's best known Roman Catholic newspaper, has appointed a woman editor.
Miss Christina Odone, a journalist who currently runs a business charity in Washington, takes up her position this week.
The Herald, which was founded in 1884, hopes that her financial aplomb will turn around its ailing circulation of 18,768.
However, the appointment of Miss Odone, 31, has caused consternation among traditionalists who fear the that the paper will go tabloid, with shots of bishops ‘opening their hearts and their homes’.
Miss Odone, though, denies this.
‘I have no plans for a revamp,’ she told me.
Revamp or not, she may be forced to update the tone of the Herald, which has gained a reputation for propagating earnest 1960s opinions.
‘I have the financial and business experience they want,’ she said.
According to the outgoing editor, Mr Peter Stanford, she also has glamour of a kind that has rarely been seen in the paper's musty offices.
‘She'll make a few heads turn in Bishop's House,’ said Mr Stanford.
Herald readers must be wondering what has hit them.
Mr Stanford recently co-wrote a book about Catholics and sex to be published by Heinemann at the end of the month.
He has left his post as editor of the paper to research a biography of the Earl of Longford…
ON AN entirely apolitical note, Mr Michael Holroyd's house is falling down.
The industrious biographer of Bernard Shaw has just completed the fourth volume, but it appears as if bricks, not books, will finish him off.
Mr Holroyd lives in the Notting Hill Gate area of London, where it seems unusually difficult to find builders.
Such is the state of his house that a part of the ceiling recently fell on his head.
‘I said that when I'd finished the Shaw book, I'd disintegrate,’ he told me.
‘I didn't, but my house did.’
ANCIENT AND MODERN Get-out clause
By PETER JONES
A TORY Government!
Were the bird auspices wrong?
Of course not.
We just got the flight orientation wrong.
Next time we shall make it right to left Tory and left to right Labour.
Until midnight on polling day it looked like a hung parliament.
Here's how they dealt with that sort of problem in Athens.
About mid-winter every year the members of the Assembly were asked if they wanted to hold an ostracism.
If they did, it was held two months later.
Any citizen attending could inscribe on a piece of pottery the name of the person he wanted ostracised, without speeches or debate.
As long as at least 6,000 valid ostraka were handed in, the man who gained most votes was forced to leave Attica for 10 years, though not in dishonour (he was still allowed, for example, to draw income from his properties, and he returned a free citizen when his time was up).
Thousands of ostraka have been dug up, the most famous being a batch of 191 with Themistocles's name inscribed on them by only four separate hands — either fraud or an anti-Themistocles hit squad ensuring that the illiterate did not miss the chance to vote.
The Assembly (free males over the age of 18 with Athenian parents) made every political decision.
Men like Pericles controlled policy not through any power vested in them but only so long as they could persuade the people.
The problem was that the will of the people could vary from week to week, from speaker to speaker, making consistency almost impossible.
When the Assembly felt itself pulled in too many directions at once, an ostracism did the trick.
If the issue of a hung parliament arises in the future, we should be asked if we want to hold an ostracism.
If not, the hung parliament stays.
If we do, we can banish one of the parties and return to one-party rule.
Polling day auspicium: Labour 14, Lib-Dem 4, Tory 3.
Albany at Large: Promote Needham
By KENNETH ROSE
‘HE HAS nursed Northern Ireland like a marginal constituency,’ the Duke of Abercorn remarked to me of Richard Needham in the early hours of Friday morning.
That tribute from a former Ulster MP and tireless worker for the province to the Under-Secretary for Northern Ireland is more than deserved.
Certainly Needham's constituents in Wiltshire North recognise his quality.
He has just increased his majority from under 11,000 to over 16,000.
Now it is up to the Prime Minister to promote this lively Irish peer — he does not use his title of 6th Earl of Kilmorey — for all he has done, with his wife Cissy, as a mere Under-Secretary at Stormont since 1985.
I suspect he would have been rewarded by now had a private conversation of his on a car telephone not been picked up and leaked a couple of years ago.
In it he said of Mrs Thatcher, in the jocular way he addresses us all: ‘I wish that cow would resign.’
That should now be forgiven and forgotten.
There was one memorable moment during Needham's canvassing in Chippenham last week.
An aged elector told him: ‘I was a floating voter until Captain Cazalet came along.’
Victor Cazalet was Tory MP for Chippenham from 1924 until his death in an air crash with General Sikorski in 1943.
Old world and new SIR Kenneth James, formerly our man in Mexico, is retiring after five years as director-general of Canning House, the institute in Belgrave Square that maintains good relations with Latin America and the Iberian peninsula.
He is to be succeeded by another ex-ambassador to Mexico, Sir Michael Simpson-Orlebar.
Last week James and his wife were given a valedictory dinner by the Argentine ambassador, Mario Campora, and his wife at their handsome embassy across the square from Canning House.
Few have worked harder than this quartet to repair the links between Britain and Argentina broken by the Falklands War.
The oldest Argentine citizen at the dinner was Sir Frank Roberts, formerly our ambassador in Moscow and Bonn.
Though entirely English on both sides of his family, he was born in Buenos Aires in 1907, where his father had gone out to establish a branch of Unilever.
He thus technically became an Argentine citizen, and it needed eight years of negotiation between the two countries to relieve him of his obligation to do military service in Argentina.
Two other links went unnoticed on Wednesday evening.
Lady James is related through her mother to General William Beresford, who briefly captured Buenos Aires in 1806.
And the Argentine embassy used to be the London house of the 7th Duke of Richmond, one of whose great-grandsons was also among the guests: Lord Nicholas Gordon Lennox, formerly our ambassador to Spain.
Chianti campaign AT the age of 19, Philip Brutton fought in the Welsh Guards from the ruins of Cassino to the Alps: one of the harshest infantry campaigns of the war.
It was followed by hateful orders to hand over 2,200 anti-communist Yugoslavs to imprisonment or death at Tito's hands.
But the young are resilient and Ensign in Italy: a Platoon Commander's Story (Leo Cooper, £19.95) is without a trace of self-pity or mock heroism.
It also contains cheerful indiscretions not to be found in the official regimental history.
There was the celebratory dinner on coming out of the line near Cassino, when Captain Sir Hugh Arbuthnot slung a full bottle of wine down a long table at Lieutenant-Colonel Sir William Makins, to whom he had developed a sudden antipathy.
It missed him and smashed against the wall:
‘No one paid any attention.
In the candlelight it may not even have been observed.
Everyone continued their conversation.
The mess waiters remained expressionless and imperturbable.’
I should jolly well hope so.
An equally spirited occasion was an all-ranks Christmas dinner in England when an unliked commanding officer of the battalion rashly made a speech of greeting in Welsh.
A guardsman got up and thanked him in English for granting the battalion a week's leave.
Still in chains DO you remember the French student riots of 1968 that almost toppled General de Gaulle?
They were led by a young German, Daniel Cohn-Bendit, and the home-grown Alain Geismar.
Cohn-Bendit is today deputy mayor of Frankfurt.
And Geismar?
He has just been appointed head of the private office of Jean Glavany, France's Secretary of State for Technical Education.
THE OTHER ME Falling for the Romanesque
David French, head of Relate, has a passion for fine architecture, finds Anthea Hall
BY ANTHEA HALL
DAVID FRENCH is the man who took over the Marriage Guidance Council, renamed it Relate and persuaded the Princess of Wales to become its patron, thus demonstrating that he was both tough and persuasive.
Rather than follow the family tradition of joining the Navy — and he has a suitably brisk and military manner — David French's original inclination was to become ordained.
Instead, he ended up in charity administration, but his earlier sense of a religious vocation has left him with quite another side: a passion for Romanesque churches.
What he calls the ‘fancy explanation’ for this architectural love is that he was baptised in a Romanesque font in the Dorset village of Stoke Abbot, but the reality is that as a student at Durham he was profoundly influenced by the majestic presence of the cathedral:
‘How could I not be?
It is a magnificent building which has been described as the greatest church in Christendom.
Durham Cathedral stands vast, an enormous monument, virtually of a piece and in an incredible position, with the river running round it and steep banks.’
Not for him the intricate miracles of Gothic architecture.
He speaks with feeling about the magic of a solid, round arch: ‘You go into wonderful places like York Minster with its beautiful tracery, but, for me, the sheer strength and solidity of Romanesque architecture — its robustness and simplicity — are endlessly fascinating.
‘My college was right opposite the cloisters.
For a term I lived in a room which looked out straight across to the tower.
And I walked past the cathedral almost every day for three years.’
He married a bishop's daughter and, appropriately, they live in St Albans, in a house that is handy for the local Romanesque cathedral, which David French boasts he can see when he is lying in the bath and, while he is shaving, reflected in the mirror.
His three sons are cathedral choristers: ‘There haven't been three brothers together in the choir for about 12 years,’ he says, with some pride.
He knows every corner and brick of the cathedral and points out the glories of the 11th-century (Romanesque) triforium with its later, inferior, 14th-century equivalent: ‘You do see, don't you?’
He makes no apologies for choosing to worship in a spiritually inspiring building: ‘The decision to put our children into the cathedral choir was a quite conscious one.
If you grow up surrounded by beautiful things, beautiful sounds and beautiful buildings you become a different kind of person.
It influences the kind of person you become and I think we certainly recognise the relationship between worshipping in beautiful buildings and the nature of one's belief.
Going to church in a tent in the desert would not be the same.
‘Nor do I think there is any point making churches into multi-purpose buildings.
It never works.
You can't combine a church and a parish hall.
A church has to have an intangible atmosphere, a kind of presence which you are aware of.’
as if such Romanesque glories on his doorstep were not enough, summer holidays are dedicated to voyages of further discovery, chiefly in France.
‘I feel I haven't had a holiday unless I've taken in two or three Romanesque churches here and there.
The circumstances in which we visit most of these places is that D. French is desperately keen, whereas S. French and the three little Frenches are saying, ‘Oh, Daddy, not another Romanesque church.’
’ One has to balance these things carefully: they're capable of erupting if churches are inflicted on them at the rate of more than, say, one every other day.
‘I plan the holidays and what the others don't know is that, in the course of planning, I've developed the precise art of finding somewhere to stay where, when you open your bedroom window, in front of you is the most splendid bit of Romanesque architecture.
‘We found one such last summer.
On our first night in France, exhausted after a ferry crossing, we just happened to fetch up in this little village on the Loire, in a hotel on the second floor of a hotel where, indeed, we opened the shutters — and we were looking at the west end of the Romanesque Abbey of St Benoit sur Loire, which is a most striking church where the remains of the saint are interred in a little casket in the crypt.
Remarkable chance, really…
‘Last year we went to Jumieges which is a magnificent and vast ruin between Rouen and le Havre on the Seine.
Normally I am completely turned off by ruins.
But this was complete and whole and I was very struck by the sheer scale and splendour of it: walls and roof but no windows.
It was a magnificent summer day, with the fabulous, rounded arches and the clear blue sky.
‘I've visited all the notable churches and cathedrals but I very much enjoy discovering places that aren't particularly prominent in guide books: going around a corner in a village in France and discovering a gem.
‘I found a church with an amazing 12th-century carved stone altar in Beaujolais in a village called Avenas: Christ and the 12 apostles intricately carved, virtually intact.’
This year, the D. French expedition is covering new ground.
‘We're breaking out into Austria.
We've got France pretty well licked.
And I'm beginning to discover there is some notable Romanesque architecture in south Germany.’
Books: The master misogynist
David Robson revels in the undiminished ferocity of Kingsley Amis's new novel
BY DAVID ROBSON
The Russian Girl by Kingsley Amis Hutchinson, £14.99 SOME writers show signs of mellowing when they reach 70, but Kingsley Amis is not one of them.
The Russian Girl finds him as sarcastic and caustic as ever: the day may come when he suffers fools gladly, but it is not yet in sight.
The bile just spews out and, in the character of Cordelia Vaisey, he had created one of his most memorable female monsters, leaving his fellow misogynists trailing far behind.
Richard Vaisey is a mild, well-mannered, old-fashioned type who lectures at the London Institute of Slavonic Studies and is a respected Russian scholar.
‘You're out of date because you know a lot’, one of his colleagues tells him.
He is fighting a Canute-like battle to keep the study of Russian texts in the original on the syllabus when an awkward conundrum crosses his path in the form of the lovely Anna.
Anna is a Russian poet, visiting London to drum up signatures for a petition protesting against her brother's imprisonment in the Soviet Union.
Richard would dearly like to help her.
He would dearly like to do lots of things with her.
But there are two problems.
First, her brother is self-evidently a petty fraudster better off behind bars.
Secondly, Anna's poetry is excruciatingly bad.
For him to endorse her as a ‘major literary figure’ sticks in his gullet.
What with Anna being such a charmer and what with the fact that he is now sleeping with her, he does his level best to find some small saving grace in her writing, something he can praise without hypocrisy.
But there isn't anything.
The more he reads, the more certain he is that it's garbage — and how can you diplomatically conduct a love affair with a poet whose work you view in that light?
Everything works out in the end, although there are a few hiccups along the way.
Amis takes the reader on a Cook's tour of Slavonic London with its lethal parade of bores (’ Professor Radek…
Dr Nachna-Kuthara…
Miss Strbny…
Mrs Polinski’, go the introductions at one party) and uses comedy to make the serious point that politics kill literature.
There are also bouts of alcoholic excess which he continues to describe with a verve no other writer can touch.
But the crowning glory of the book is Richard's unspeakable wife, Cordelia.
Cocooned in an ivory tower of antique furniture and unfinished jigsaw puzzles, she spends an inordinate amount of time doing simple things like pouring hot water into a teapot; then she gets on the telephone to her friends and either hangs up just as they reach the receiver or asks them if they wouldn't mind coming round to tea and picking up some skate from the fishmonger on the way.
As a study in manipulation, it is a vintage piece of caricature and ensures the reader's continuing sympathy for Richard as he fumbles toward love and sanity with his dark-haired poetess.
Books: Potato panic
Quietness can charm, finds Max Davidson
BY MAX DAVIDSON
Pillars of Gold by Alice Thomas Ellis Viking, £14.99 ‘I CAN'T read books by men,’ says one of the characters in Alice Thomas Ellis's new novel.
‘They will go on about their willies and chopping blondes to bits, and who cares?’
Not Alice Thomas Ellis, for one.
Pillars of Gold starts off with a woman's body being fished out of Camden Lock and a woman called Barbs going missing.
It is possible that the two women are one and the same, or that there is a serial killer on the prowl, but as none of Barbs's friends or neighbours give a damn where she is, her continuing absence occasions little comment.
Male readers anticipating some grisly denouement will be disappointed.
Life, Ellis seems to be saying, is smaller than fiction.
For women at the coal-face, there is no such thing as drama.
This deliberate use of anti-climax is effective up to a point, but it gives the book a rather flat, colourless quality.
There are too many scenes of people talking about nothing in particular and, when characters are differentiated, not by what they do, but by what the author says about them, the effect can be static and unsatisfying.
Scarlet the heroine has a therapist, for example, but we never actually meet the therapist and, as a result, only engage with this segment of her experience at second hand.
The book's corresponding strength is its evocation of suppressed panic.
Peeling potatoes and worrying how best to retain their vitamin C, Scarlet has plenty of time to worry about other things, such as why she is so much more timid than her best friend Constance and what she can do to improve relations between her dour, monotonic husband and Camille, her daughter from her first marriage.
She is aware of ‘something lovely somewhere, something that is gone, or hidden, or yet to be attained’, but why this urge to scream her head off at the sight of an uncleared breakfast table?
Comfort can be taken from hoping that her daughter will grow up into ‘a brilliant and glorious human being’, but it soon becomes clear that, beneath her cool, confident exterior, Camille too is damaged and vulnerable.
Ellis's sense of the quiet solidarity between women, and of the bonds of love that bind the generations together, is so sure that it more than compensates for the novel's occasional listlessness.
Books: Low tricks and good lays
Matthew Parris tries his hand at composing a Michael Dobbs-style political thriller
BY MATTHEW PARRIS
To Play The King by Michael Dobbs HarperCollins, £9.99 ‘THE young man reached across his desk, grabbed the cup, and took another slug of Mrs Stagg's disgusting tea.
It was all you could get, at Conservative Research Department.
Since time immemorial ‘Staggy’ had been drip-feeding ambitious junior researchers with toxin, preparing them for the stronger poisons which lay ahead.
Hungry for political office, they knew this was only an inoculation.
‘Mick Dobbs was bored.
Worse, he was disillusioned.
A large, fleshy, amiable bloke with a shock of gingery brown hair and a chummy manner which concealed a burning desire to be somebody, to get on in the world, Mick (how his new girlfriend, Amanda, hated that nickname!) had no real interest in the ideological struggle.
He spat a mouthful back into the cup.
Was this where he should be?
Was party politics the best way up the ladder of fame?
He glanced at his young colleague, Matthew.
‘Matt Parris.
Less relaxed than Mick.
Tense, almost.
Thought himself something of a political philosopher.
Chris Patten had recruited them both at about the same time.
1977 had been an odd vintage, at CRD.
’‘Ha!’
Mick thought: ‘So Matt thinks he's going to be an MP.
Well, maybe he will.
But he'll never be more than a pawn in their game.
He lacks ruthlessness.
And then there's his private life.
Some of those clubs, those walks on the wild side…
’ Oh yes, Mick had overheard the gossip, caught the telephone calls, noticed the raised eyebrows.
Beneath that bland amiability, Dobbs was no fool.
‘Parris will never get anywhere,’ he thought: ‘but what about me?’
‘He looked up.
Caroline had bustled in with some photocopies.
Why were all the women here called Caroline?
She leant, lower than usual, across his desk.
Mick stared hungrily at her breasts: small, pale, and tight, like under-ripe fruit…he thought of Amanda…forbidden fruit.
Mick bit the end of his pencil, harder than usual.
’‘Strange world,’ he thought, ‘this world of sex, intrigue and ambition I'm moving into…’
’‘Or am I?’
He had never asked himself that question before.
But now, here, this morning, in this pokey little office in Queen Anne's Gate, spring in the air in St James's Park outside his windows, the sound of military music drifting across from Buckingham Palace as the guards marched — all the elements of human and political drama so clear in his mind — Mick wondered whether it really was his destiny to be no more than a player: just another player.
What about playwright?
He had seen it from the outside.
Soon, with his promised posting to Mrs Thatcher's office, he would see it from inside the office of the Leader of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition.
Why not write about it?
He fingered a cheap paperback he had bought to read on the tube.
The usual stuff.
Blood, bullets, low cunning and high finance…a good lay every 35 pages or so, daringly, but not too daringly chronicled.
Bloody hell.
He could write this sort of thing.
As well as the rest of them — and he had more to write about than most.
Soon, he would be a political insider.
What material!
Why, there would be books, sequels…maybe even a TV series.
‘He would bide his time, then.
While his chums, nervous young Matt, that ambitious new researcher Michael Portillo, fresh out of college, and their boss, Patten, auditioned for starring roles, Mick would play along with the chorus, watching, waiting, taking notes…
‘He would be as famous as any of them, one day.
And richer.
Far richer.
Rich beyond their wildest dreams.
And they would call him Michael, not Mick.
Amanda would see to that.
Oh yes, Mick's time would come.’
Matthew Parris is parliamentary sketch-writer for ‘The Times’.
Books: The road to murder
Jane Shilling tackles three novels charting personal disaster
BY JANE SHILLING
AN Irishman, an American and a Scotsman — not the line-up for a bad music-hall joke, but the principal characters of a trio of novels concerned with the slow decay of personality.
Francie Brady is The Butcher Boy of Patrick McCabe's remarkable second novel (Picador £14.99), a child whose enquiring, ironical cast of mind and dire, small town Irish background (his father has done his mother wrong, and she in turn is obsessed with the gloomy ditty from which the novel takes its title) make him a fancied candidate for an early place in the reform school or the graveyard.
There is an inexorable logic about McCabe's observation of the process by which the child Francie's engaging, restless, questioning personality is gradually mutated by a brutalising absence of love or understanding or any sort of kindness, into that of a deranged adult murderer, behind whose insane and degraded behaviour, are still to be seen the vestigial lineaments of an injured child.
This is a dark, dense novel and it makes demanding reading.
The curious leaps of Francie's mind require close attention from the reader.
Violent, funny, pitiful and emotionally exhausting, The Butcher Boy is a work of black brilliance.
Jonathan Carroll's After Silence (Macdonald, £14.99) comes complete with a curious endorsement from Stephen King: ‘I would say that only five writers have written serious novels which incorporated scenes of fantasy or the inexplicable and still qualify as literature,’ writes the doyen of domestic horror, prompting the thought that it all depends what you mean by literature.
Whatever its place in the literary league tables, After Silence is undoubtedly entertaining: Carroll's style has a high gloss, twinkling with near epigrams: his novel is packed with cute, intelligent or attractively wacky characters — cartoonist Mac Fisher, his lover Lily Aaron, her little boy Lincoln, the temperamental gay owners of the restaurant where Lily works, all inhabit the warm, cutesy, feel-good world of an Armistead Maupin novel.
Carroll first ingeniously sets in place, and then begins to undermine, his creation.
Is Lily what she seems?
Are there flaws in her story?
And how exactly did she acquire her charming little son?
But as the chill of doubt takes hold, underpinned by Lincoln's development from an enchanting small boy into an adolescent from hell, Carroll's novel abruptly veers off the rails, lurching from an interesting and astute study of an ordinary man faced with a monstrous moral dilemma into a considerably less interesting fantasy about (I think) cyclical existence and reincarnation.
Iain Crichton Smith's An Honourable Death (Macmillan, £13.99) remains firmly rooted in fact, tracing the career of a real and profoundly troubled figure, Hector Macdonald, a crofter's son who joins the army on impulse at 17 and rose brilliantly through the ranks to become Major-General Sir Hector Macdonald, the real hero of Omdurman, before homosexual scandal ended his career and his life.
Crichton Smith avoids any overt psychological probing of Hector's impulsive decision to flee his civilian job and join the army, of the sterility of his loveless marriage, and the contrasting warmth of his affection for his fighting men and presents instead a series of almost filmic images of orioles and hoopoes in the mountains of embattled Afghan istan; of ghostly white dervishes attacking spindly-legged Sudanese troops; and finally, of a heavy, tormented man, alone in a Paris hotel room, with nothing before him but disgrace and death.
Books: Shaw's life after death
John Gross on an unexpected extension of Michael Holroyd's massive life of GBS
BY JOHN GROSS
Bernard Shaw.
Volume IV: The Last Laugh by Michael Holroyd Chatto & Windus, £10.99 HAVING served up George Bernard Shaw in three stout volumes, Michael Holroyd now offers us a slim postscript — an account of the first 40 years of Shaw's afterlife.
It is sprightly, well-written, witty, bitty and in conclusive.
Much of the tale is testamentary.
When Shaw died in 1950 he was a very rich man — the net value of his estate was eventually assessed at around £6,250,000 in terms of today's money; and the closest Holroyd comes to a sustained narrative is in tracing the fate of his various bequests.
Notoriously, he hoped that the bulk of his money would be spent on alphabet reform.
As soon as My Fair Lady began gushing dollars, however, two of the residuary legatees, the British Museum and RADA, decided that his will was worth contesting.
Holroyd gives a brisk account of the legal battles that followed.
In the end Shaw's wishes were largely thwarted: a group of loyal disciples laboured on, but the phonetic version of Androcles and the Lion which was published in 1962 was a lonely salvo in a campaign that got nowhere.
Few of us are likely to shed many tears.
The scheme was a dismal attempt at wholesale social engineering, at wiping out the past and beginning all over again — although it has to be said that the new phonetic script itself, based on a design by someone called Kingsley Read, was rather attractive.
(A sample page is reproduced in the end papers.)
Meanwhile the money has kept flowing.
Most of it has gone to three institutions: the British Museum, RADA and the National Gallery of Ireland.
The question of how it has been spent, by the first two of them at least, raises important issues of public policy, but even Holroyd cannot succeed in making such matters positively en thralling.
He has a bit more fun with the wrangles over Shaw's house at Ayot St Lawrence (it was left to the National Trust), while Mrs Shaw's will, which was also contested in the courts in the Fifties, provides a lively sideshow.
She had stipulated — a stipulation which was upheld — that part of her fortune was to be spent teaching the people of Ireland ‘self-control, elocution, oratory and deportment’.
Readers of Holroyd's earlier volumes will derive further pleasure, sometimes melancholy, from finding out what happened to the minor players in the Shaw story — his sharp-tempered secretary Blanche Patch, for instance, and poor Dr Lowenstein, the zealous bibliographer with the unfortunate manner.
And a new character joins the cast at the last minute — Eric Batson, a forceful campaigner and organiser who put new life into the Shaw Society.
(He subsequently went mad and threw himself in front of a car.)
Then there are the film adaptations since 1950, almost all of them missed opportunities, and the fluctuating fortunes of the plays in the theatre, of which Holroyd provides a compact summary — though not so compact that he does not find room for such items as a musical version of Antony and Cleopatra called Her First Roman, which opened (and closed) in Boston in the late Sixties.
And then there are the universities, where Shaw Studies have boomed, and the schools, where lessons in Shaw have flourished.
By the Eighties Holroyd tells us, there were no less than 50 Study Guides and Notes to his plays issued for the benefit of students.
It is not what he himself would have wanted.
What does it all add up to?
At the end of this fourth volume, I am still not certain whether I have been reading about a great man, any more than I was at the end of the third volume, or the second, or the first.
But at least Holroyd leaves me in no doubt that I have been reading about a great phenomenon.
Books: Over-sexed and over-rated?
Joan Smith takes issue with the latest biographer of Georges Simenon, the promiscuous creator of Maigret
BY JOAN SMITH
The Man Who Wasn't Maigret: A Portrait of Georges Simenon by Patrick Marnham.
Bloomsbury, £17.99 THERE is a persistent myth about Georges Simenon, inventor of Inspector Maigret, which holds that he has never received proper recognition as a novelist.
I do not know when this piece of nonsense first became currency but it is as prevalent as ever: a recent poll of literary luminaries in France placed Simenon in the category of most under-valued prose writers of this century.
It is true that Simenon didn't, as he predicted, win the Nobel Prize in 1947, or indeed in any year.
On the other hand, an impressive array of novelists and critics from Thornton Wilder to Henry Miller to Somerset Maugham have competed with each other to hail his prose style, his plots, his insight into human nature.
Andre Gide, apparently taking leave of his senses, described him as ‘the greatest of all, the most genuine novelist we have had in literature’.
Yet what does Simenon's literary output actually amount to?
If we disregard the 200 or so pulp novels written early in his career, we are left with 193 novels of which the Maigret series is the most famous.
Both types of books, the Maigrets and the one-off crime novels, rely on simple language — Simenon famously restricted himself to a vocabulary of 2,000 words — and a length of around 150 pages.
Their subject-matter is les petites gens, the ordinary people Simenon is said to understand so well, and their tumultuous lives in which jealousy, blackmail and greed generally lead to suicide or murder.
It is, I suspect, Simenon's breaking of the rules, his identification of the villain as hero, which makes his books so popular.
Le Destin des Malou (The Fate of the Malous), for example, begins with the mysterious suicide of Eugene Malou, a bankrupt businessman, and the rest of the novel is concerned with his younger son's discovery that his father was both a crook and, as one of his criminal friends puts it, ‘a man.
And that, believe me, as you will find out for yourself one day, is a rarer thing than being respectable’.
Similarly, in La neige etait sale (The Stain on the Snow) which is set in an occupied country, has as its hero Frank Friedmaier — a thug who kills for fun and arranges the rape of a young woman who loves him.
Eventually Friedmaier is captured by the occupying forces, tortured and killed, but not before his silent suffering has earned him redemption.
Eugene Malou and Frank Friedmaier are far more interesting than the people by whom they are condemned: the fact that they come to sticky ends is Simenon's fig-leaf, his nod in the direction of conventional morality.
He is much fonder of his criminal characters than of law-abiding citizens like Eugene Malou's stolid elder son, Edgar —‘a big effeminate chap and perpetually earnest’.
Simenon never grew out of an adolescent attraction to crime, and he provides the reader with a vicarious opportunity to share his inverted moral code within the safe confines of a novel.
His ‘insights’ into human nature are a jumble of cliches, and his novel about a serial killer, Maigret tend un piege (Maigret Sets a Trap), parrots those popular myths on the subject which have obstructed just about every police inquiry since the case of Jack the Ripper.
Patrick Marnham, though a diligent chronicler of the events of Simenon's life, is equally soft on the books and the man; the biography might have been written by Inspector Maigret himself, with his motto of ‘understand, and do not judge’ as its guiding principle.
This does not matter too much, for the unblinkered reader could hardly miss the fact that Simenon was singularly dislikeable, addicted to excess and casual brutality.
Born in Belgium in 1903, he easily acquired the sexual habits which were to lead to his eventual boast to have slept with 10,000 women — 8,000 of them prostitutes.
One morning, one his way to work as a young reporter on the Gazette de Liege, his eye was caught by a magnificent negress in a brothel window.
Strapped for cash, he hurried inside and bartered for sex by handing over the silver watch given him by his sick father.
Having acquired a wife, Tigy, in 1923, he claimed he was nevertheless ‘obliged’ to have sex with four other women every day.
When the household took on a maid, Simenon began an affair with her which lasted 15 years before his wife found out.
The maid, Boule — she was originally called Henriette, but Simenon made a habit of re-naming the women in his life — was required to fillet live sardines which Simenon then swallowed raw.
Later, in New York, Simenon took up with Denyse Ouimet, a French Canadian.
The four of them — Simenon, Denyse (re-named Denise), Tigy and Boule — lived together in an exhausting menage a quatre until Denise became pregnant and Simenon demanded a divorce.
When this second marriage broke down in 1963, Simenon was already having an affair with another maid, Teresa Sburelin, with whom he lived for the rest of his life.
Marnham records the unusual theory put forward by Simenon's son John that his father's sexual appetite ‘may have been a consequence of the family's acute sense of smell’— the latter being essential apparently, in order to feel sexual desire.
I am not qualified to comment on the biological accuracy of this notion, but it does seem to overlook a number of other explanations — that Simenon's obsessive promiscuity was fuelled by large doses of misogyny, for example.
Nor am I convinced by Marnham's defence of Simenon against the charge of anti-Semitism — that he was simply ‘politically inexperienced and intellectually naive’.
As a young reporter in his native Liege, Simenon wrote 17 articles on le peril juif, and he was not unduly perturbed during the war when a German production company turned one of his novels into half of an anti-Semitic double bill.
A more inquiring mind might also have drawn a different conclusion from the most peculiar episode in the book, which concerns the death in Liege in 1922 of a young man called Kleine.
Kleine and Simenon were members of a group of young sensation-seekers called La Caque (herring barrel), until the day Kleine was found hanging by his own scarf from the doorknocker of a church after a night of heavy drinking.
Simenon by his own admission, helped put the inebriated man to bed the night before and was one of the last people to see him alive.
No-one ever explained how Kleine, who was too drunk to walk, managed to string himself up early the following morning.
Years later Simenon put La Caque into a Maigret novel, characterising its members as so jaded by drink, sex and drugs that murder was the obvious next step.
This reader, for one, would be jolly interested to know whether Georges Simenon had an alibi for the rest of that night in 1922.
Joan Smith's novel ‘A Masculine Ending’ is dramatised tonight on BBC 1.
Books: FAVOURABLE REFERENCE
Which work of reference in their field do professionals turn to most often?
This week, the art dealer Richard Green
BY RICHARD GREEN
FOR 40 years, I have been dealing in a wide variety of paintings ranging from Old Masters to French Impressionists, Dutch Romantics to modern British pictures.
From my earliest days, my interest in the Old Masters has frequently led me to consult Hofstede de Groot's A Catalogue Raisonne of the Works of the Most Eminent Dutch Painters of the Seventeenth Century which includes the work of such household names as Rembrandt and Frans Hals, Johannes Vermeer and Jacob van Ruisdael among some 40 major Dutch artists.
Published at the beginning of the century it comprises 10 volumes, although only the first eight have been translated into English.
De Groot travelled exhaustively throughout Europe visiting museums and private col lections, exhibitions and salerooms.
Paintings which he in spected personally have their titles printed in bold capitals, distinguishing them from those known primarily through books and hearsay, whose titles ap pear in lower-case.
Works traditionally ascribed to the masters but considered by de Groot to be incorrect, have been omitted, for as the author stated: ‘it is less unpleasant for the private collector to have his pictures passed over in silence than to have them mentioned and definitely described as false’.
Although many of the paintings have changed hands several times since the book was published, it remains an invaluable companion for collectors, dealers and students.
Books: Sultan of sleaze reformed
Lou Reed's lyrics amount to little more than self-indulgent nastiness, says Tony Parsons
BY TONY PARSONS
LOU REED became famous for taking rock music into dark, uncharted waters.
While all the other Sixties groups crooned of peace and love, Reed and his band, the Velvet Underground, paid homage to hard drugs, weird sex and decadence of every description.
Songs like Heroin, Venus in Furs and Sister Ray firmly established Lou as the sleaziest bard on the block.
More recently Lou has cleaned up his act and started setting the world to rights.
So imagine his delight when President Vaclav Havel presented him with a slim volume of Reed's lyrics hand-printed and translated into Czech.
‘There were only 200 of them,’ Havel reportedly told Reed.
‘They were very dangerous to have.
People went to jail and now you have one.
Keep your fingers crossed for us.’
While I am sure we are all keeping our fingers crossed for the fledgling states of Eastern Europe, it is exceptionally hard to see how a group of dissidents could draw inspiration from the lyrics of Lou Reed.
Did Reed's I Wanna Be Black raise their spirits when all seemed lost?
Was Heroin the song they sang to keep fighting the good fight?
When that heroin is in my blood And that blood is in my head Thank God that I'm as good as dead.
And what dreams of a better tomorrow could these victims of the Communist jackboot have dreamt after a reading of Reed's celebration of sado-masochism, Venus in Furs?
Kiss the boot of shiny, shiny leather Shiny leather in the dark Tongue the thongs, the belt that does await you Strike dear mistress and cure his heart.
Just the thing to bring down the evil empire.
Perfect for a singalong on the barricades.
In recent years, most notably on the album New York, Reed has swapped the hypodermic needle for the wagging finger.
Now he has stopped taking drugs and started sitting around watching a lot of television.
His songs today bemoan the rotten state of the world — Aids, police violence, the homeless, his ex-manager — these are now grist to his mill.
He no longer celebrates putting lethal narcotics into his body but instead complains about Americans dumping battery acid in rivers.
It's a little rich coming from the former sultan of sleaze.
Between Thought and Expression collects Reeds lyrics since the Sixties and reflects both sides of his work, the early celebrations of wickedness and the newer social commentary.
Giving up drugs, drink and whips has instilled a terrible self-righteousness in the man.
We were sitting watchin' the news, the world's in a mess The poor and the hungry, a world of distress Herpes, Aids, the Middle East at full throttle Better check that sausage before you put it in the waffle.
Deep, Lou.
I think I preferred him when he was stoned.
One of the most disgusting things about this ragbag of a book are Reed's smug little footnotes.
‘I had 24 shock treatments when I was 17,’ he notes at one point.
And, ‘I was one of the first Medicare patients.
A drug I shot in San Francisco froze all my joints.’
Sometimes he is just plain offensive.
‘I loved after hours bars.
It's where I first saw someone beaten to death.’
If anyone finds inspiration in this foul, self-indulgent dross, then my heart goes out to them.
The Lou Reed that emerges from this pathetic book is a self-satisfied boor when he is intoxicated, a self-righteous booby when sober.
Some gibbering old fool sitting all alone drooling on his shirt Some senile old fart playing in the dirt.
You are, Lou, you are.
Books: Horse play Max Davidson on a study of bookies and betting
BY MAX DAVIDSON
A Licence to Print Money by Jamie Reid Macmillan, £17.50 UNTIL I read this absorbing and informative book, I regarded bookmakers as apple-cheeked philanthropists to whom it was a positive pleasure to hand my 50p on Grand National day.
Jamie Reid has lifted the scales from my eyes.
His tour d'horizon of the gambling fraternity unveils a dog-eat-dog world in which the likes of Cheltenham Tony and Pretty Boy Burton vie with each other to relieve the likes of you and me —‘mugs, losers and tourists’— of our money.
Serious gamblers, Reid points out, don't dart in and out of high-street betting shops in their lunch hours, but go racing: on-course betting is untaxed.
In loving detail, right down to the rancid smell of burnt onions from hamburger vans, Reid describes three days spent at the races with his charmingly unsavoury friends A. J. Kincaid, John Moynahan and the Major.
At Cheltenham, they recoup early losses with a late hat-trick of winners; at Brighton, they come badly unstuck; and at Redcar they pull off a major coup, smuggling suitcase-loads of money on to a 7–1 shot past the eagle eye of the bookies.
Reid's role in this coup is not to put money on the eventual winner but to back other horses in the race, thus distracting the bookies' attention and stopping them pulling their usual trick which is to depress the winner's official starting price by similar last-minute shenanigans.
It's not cricket, but it's all hugely enjoyable and Reid's enthusiasm for his favourite vice is infectious.
His elucidation of the finer points of betting is also excellent.
Between these race-going tales the book charts the growth of gambling from modest and sleazy origins into a multi-million-pound industry and, if some of the material here is rather stodgy, top-heavy with facts, there are enough exotic characters on view to hold the attention.
Gambling may not be everyone's cup of tea, but A Licence to Print Money is a far more attractive shop-window for the sport than the sober plate-glass faades of Ladbroke's and William Hill.
Books: Ancestor worship
Marguerite Yourcenar's subtle, melancholy memoirs are praised by Geoffrey Strickland
BY GEOFFREY STRICKLAND
Dear Departed: A Memoir by Marguerite Yourcenar tr by Maria Ascher Aidan Ellis, £18 MOST OF us, as we grow older, become explorers of the past.
We may be appalled by what we find, but there is also consolation in discovering even trivial aspects of the lives of parents and ancestors whose histories we identify with our own.
We know little, after all, of the present and much even of the most mundane existences is lived in the imagination.
It is now fashionable, however, in universities, to question whether life is ever lived anywhere other than the imagination.
The so-called science of narratology tells us that all we ever do is tell stories about ourselves whose truth is no more than their plausibility and consistency with each other.
Proust, the most admired of all novelists among academics, appears to be saying just that when he writes that ‘only true paradises are those one has lost’.
The late Marguerite Yourcenar was also an admirer of Proust and she relates the history of her mother's family in Dear Departed in a way which recalls Proust's fidelity to our actual thinking about the past and to the sheer coincidences by which past and present can seem to illuminate one another.
She differs from Proust, however, in dwelling on the reality and hence irredeemable transience of the past.
Yourcenar (an anagram on the family name of Crayencour) was not an academic, but as one of France's most highly-regarded novelists, she was the first woman to be elected to the French Academy.
Her best known novel, Memoirs of the Emperor Hadrian, is a work of scholarship and fiction, but, unlike the narratologists, she believed in the truth of history and the often melancholy tone of her writing lies in her regret that the dead have no more truthful memorial than that which the living can provide.
She would have especially wanted to know more of her own mother, whose story is told in the final chapters and who died in 1903 of peritonitis when the author was 10 days old.
As an emancipated woman of the 20th century, much of whose life was spent in New England, Yourcenar feels compassion for those whose lives were thwarted by what she calls the philistinism of 19th-century Catholicism, that of her Belgian ancestors in particular.
The book teems with a Flemish profusion of detail.
Memorable especially are the Victorian rectitude of her mother's grandfather, a public-spirited and popular governor of Hainaut and the introverted idealism of his nephew, Octave Pirmez, still regarded as the most distinguished Belgian essayist of his time; and Remo, whose anguished pursuit of justice and truth through Germany and Greece ended with his sublime and absurd suicide listening to Tannhauser on his musical box.
None of the highly civilised heroes of Yourcenar's history and fiction is as sympathetically drawn as these two aristocrats who were not allowed to grow.
Although very occasionally incomprehensible, Maria Ashcher's translation captures the elegance and subtlety of the original.
Geoffrey Strickland is Reader in French at Reading University.
Books: A miasma of ignorance
Noel Malcolm contemplates the disease-ridden days when doctors didn't have a clue and did more harm than good
BY NOEL MALCOLM
Miasmas and Disease: Public Health and the Environment in the Pre-industrial Age by Carlo Cipolla, tr by Elizabeth Potter.
Yale, £16.95 The Fourth Horseman: A Short History of Epidemics, Plagues and Other Scourges by Andrew Nikiforuk.
Fourth Estate, £14.99 THE first fascination of studying history comes from seeing how similar the past is to the present: politics has always been politics, religion has always been religion, and so on.
But the second (and, for me, the greater) fascination comes from discovering the strangeness of the past.
Nowhere is this strangeness more apparent than in the history of medicine.
Go back a few hundred years and look around: there are politicians squabbling for power, priests saving souls, etc.
All is as it seems, and as it should be.
But the doctors?
They talk like doctors (in bits of Latin), they have illegible handwriting, they undergo years of training, they refer to medical textbooks.
The whole profession functions much as it does today, but with one crucial difference: most of what they believe is nonsense.
This has the unfortunate consequence that they are much more likely to kill their patients than to cure them.
Until the early 19th century, the basic principles of medicine had barely advanced beyond the theories of the ancient Greeks.
Most serious diseases were thought to arise from ‘miasmas’, in other words, vapours or smells (in some theories, fine clouds of sticky atoms) which affected the balance of ‘humours’ in the body.
And so the way to counteract the disease was to rid the body of its ill-balanced humours by means of blood-letting, laxatives or emetics — the three standard methods by which patients were hastened to an early death.
Yet although these medical theories were wrong, they weren't altogether irrational.
Doctors had little reason to suspect the real carriers of disease, fleas for plague and lice for typhus: diseases came and went, but the fleas and lice were always there.
But doctors did notice that the epidemics usually happened in the hot months of the year; and that was when the miasmic smells from primitive or non-existent sewerage were at their worst.
Carlo Cipolla's Miasmas and Disease illustrates these points in minute and narrow-ranging detail.
Whoever suggested the grandiose title and subtitle of this book was looking down the wrong end of a microscope.
This is not a book about the whole topic of miasmas and disease, and it certainly does not cover the entire ‘pre-industrial age’: it is a study of a single collection of reports by doctors and public health inspectors in early 17th-century Tuscany.
The attraction of the book is precisely the narrowness of its focus.
Long extracts from the inspectors' reports conjure up the smells of the 17th century in sickening detail: the open graves, the streets piled high with faeces, the butcher's shop ‘full of all kinds of filth, excrement, guts and other muck’, and so on.
The inspectors responded with orders for sluicing and cleansing and ventilating.
They must have done some good (Cipolla points out that their principles were the same as those of the great 19th-century sanitary reformers such as Sir Edwin Chadwick), and yet there seems to be no way of telling from the surviving evidence whether lives were saved as a result.
In the end, this is a book without a conclusion — despite its charts, its statistical tables and its thickets of notes, it offers little more than a collection of historical raw material.
Raw enough, that is, to give the reader an authentic whiff of the past.
If, on the other hand, there are readers who are more interested in laughing at the past than in understanding it; if they find disease and human suffering good for a giggle as well; if they think that a sort of free association of ideas is a good substitute for historical explanation; and if they are unperturbed by gross defects of style and grammar, then they will enjoy Andrew Nikiforuk's The Fourth Horseman: A Short History of Epidemics, Plagues and Other Scourges.
Mr Nikiforuk finds medical history funny, but not quite funny enough; so he peps it up with his own very special kind of wince-making metaphors and similes.
We start off with bacteria (which ‘look different than other creatures’).
The world's first living creature ‘was a bacterial cell which breast-stroked across the planet's Archean murk’.
Bacteria are very clever: not only do they practise breast-stroke, but they can also ‘order up genetic information from other cells, with the same ease that human beings order take out pizza’.
The bacteria which produce leprosy are stylish as well as clever: ‘Leprosy can dress the infected in as many different looks as an Italian fashion designer.’
Leper houses were common in the Middle Ages: ‘Nearly every village and burg had one — rather like a Holiday Inn or a Sleep Cheap Motel.’
Very similar, when you come to think about it.
Venereal diseases are stylish too.
Mr Nikiforuk informs us that they ‘take their names from the busiest of all Roman goddesses, Venus…
The VDs weren't part of her arsenal, but she would have appreciated their style.
Like rich tourists the VDs have historically travelled in bacterial or viral safaris.’
I cannot say what that last sentence signifies except that, as is apparent elsewhere in the book, Mr Nikiforuk dislikes rich people.
(After all, it was ‘the rich’ who, he tells us, ‘routinely flaunted quarantines and other regulations’.)
But I can say this: gonorrhoea would appreciate his style.
Books: The sorrows of love and the joys of political hate
Ian Hamilton on the correspondence of W. B. Yeats with his muse, Maud Gonne
BY IAN HAMILTON
The Gonne-Yeats Letters: 1893–1938 ed by Anna MacBride White and A. Norman Jeffares Hutchinson, £25
I had a thought for no-one's but your ears, That you were beautiful and that I strove To love you in the old high way of love, That it had all seemed happy…
W. B. YEATS's obsession with Maud Gonne engendered several fine poems of yearning and regret, and is now thought of as one of literature's great loves.
In reality, the relationship was a strained and sometimes comical mismatch, a 50-year-long saga of crossed purposes — with Yeats doing all the suffering and Maud forever striving to keep him at arm's length.
It never actually ‘seemed happy’ to either of them, ever.
When Yeats first laid eyes on Maud Gonne, in 1889, ‘the trembling of my life began’, he said, ‘I had never thought to see in a living creature so great beauty…it belonged to famous pictures, to poetry, to some legendary past.’
When he got to know her a bit better, he was further excited by her strength of will, her independence, her commitment to the Irish nationalist cause, and — best of all, he reckoned — her utterly straight-faced enthusiasm for his explorations of the Celtic spirit-world.
Theirs would be a union of questing souls; they would voyage together into fairy realms.
For Maud Gonne, the prospects were not quite so thrillingly clear-cut.
She liked Yeats well enough, and although poetry meant little to her, she could see that he was destined for great things.
With his help, she might learn how to develop and direct her psychic powers.
But that was it: she never saw him as a likely husband or lover.
He was a dreamer, dithering and peaceable: Ireland would not be saved by such as he.
By the time she met Yeats, Maud had already lived a little.
Unknown to him, she had a French lover, and a child.
She had also acquired a solid grounding in revolutionary politics and in France had worked for the Boulangist cause.
When this failed, she ditched the lover, and announced that she was ready to devote her know-how to the Irish struggle.
She had had her fill of personal relationships.
From now on, she told Yeats, romantic passion would be taking second place to political commitment.
This was bad news for the poet, who until his late twenties had never ‘touched the lips of woman’, but he did his best to play it her way, listening dutifully when she told him that their spiritual relationship would be damaged ‘if I came to you in sin.
Did you not yourself say that our love must be holy?’ or when she pointed out that his ‘lovely poems’would have been less lovely if she had not pro vided ‘the unrest and storm that made them possible’: ‘Beloved I will pray with my whole strength that suffering and temptation may be taken from you as they have been taken from me and that we may gain spiritual union stronger than earthly union could ever be.’
And of course if he found it hard to handle the ‘absolutely platonic friendship’ she was offering, ‘then you must have the strength and courage to give up meeting me’.
And so it went on for the first 14 years of their friendship.
Yeats watched, with an appalled fascination, as she threw herself into ‘a joyous and self-forgetting condition of political hate’.
For him, Ireland was best served by deep cultural transformation; for her, the first requirement was for bombs and bullets — the satanic British had to be got rid of.
For a bit, she tried to turn Yeats into a warrior, and he tried to turn her into a high priestess of the Celtic mysteries — and thus, of course , into a ‘moderate’.
It was soon evident, however, that ‘we will never change each other 's politics.
They are too deeply rooted in our natures’.
An observer of the couple once said of Maud Gonne that ‘the first resolute man of action she meets will have her at his mercy’, and so it proved.
After having wooed her in the old high way for most of his young manhood, Yeats was horrified when she suddenly decided to marry the revolutionary hard-man John MacBride.
She had given her kisses to a clown, he wrote, and was much gratified when MacBride turned out to be a drunken bully.
Maud admitted her mistake, and enlisted Yeats's help in the ensuing legal squabbles, but she continued to defend her motives: in spite of everything, she preferred the idea of MacBride to the idea she had of Yeats.
Post-MacBride, Yeats revived his suit and, according to Yeatsians, he and Maud did sleep together once, c 1907.
To judge from Maud's letters — as we have to, since most of Yeats's were destroyed — the relationship thereafter was tinged with resignation on both sides, with Yeats proposing marriage every so often but not being greatly upset when he was once again turned down.
Over the years, Maud's politics got busier and fiercer, as his became more tentative and abstract.
For art's sake, Yeats held on to the myth of his high, unrequited love (he even proposed marriage to Maud's daughter when the child grew old enough to look just like her mother did, so long ago).
For friendship's sake, Maud tried to keep off political subjects and urged him to stick to his poems and visions.
As with all friendships that endure, the danger areas were established and agreed on, without rancour.
When Yeats eventually did marry, in 1917, his wife Georgie was made aware that she was strictly second-best.
During his honeymoon, Yeats was addressing heart-broken verses to his lost love — who by this time was an amalgam of Maud and her daughter.
But Georgie then pulled a master-stroke by revealing that she had a talent for automatic writing.
Through her, Yeats was able to interrogate the spirit-world about his relationship with Maud.
The answers Georgie brought back were ‘ellipitcal’, but they served.
From this point on, Maud's hold over Yeats was decisively weakened — he kept in touch with her, in the real world, but any intense contacts had to be achieved through Georgie.
Being one-sided, the interest of this correspondence depends somewhat on what one thinks of Maud.
More pressingly, it depends on how much one knows or cares about the detail of Irish nationalist politics or about the practicalities of occultism.
Many scores of pages are devoted to these topics and the general reader will need to keep a bookmark in the footnotes.
For those whose chief concern is for Yeats, the book will of course make him seem shadowy and self-deluding, but it will also testify to his conscientiousness and loyalty.
By the end, we can easily see why Maud Gonne never wanted him to be wholly rid of his obsession.
Books: Unreliable reports about Princess Diana
Moira Shearer on a very unladylike biography of the future Queen
BY MOIRA SHEARER
Diana in Private: The Princess Nobody Knows by Lady Colin Campbell Smith Gryphon, £15.99 DIANA IN PRIVATE is a nasty little book.
Sub-titled The Princess Nobody Knows, it is intended to reveal all about the Princess of Wales but, instead, reveals a great deal about the author, a woman of monumental snobbery and a rare talent for bitchy innuendo.
A self-confessed gossip columnist, she writes under her former married name of Lady Colin Campbell — to me her first vulgarity.
Her writing is hard to describe adequately.
She seems to confuse the royal family with God — capital letters surge across her pages, even for the definite article when it's in proximity with royalty — as in ‘The Queen and The Prince’.
This misplaced sycophancy is compounded by a mass of aristocratic name dropping.
Complicated family inter-connections are all trotted out in pointless detail, designed, presumably, to show just how very ‘in’ is Lady Colin Campbell.
Her worst mistake is in the matter of her sources.
The majority of this book consists of quotations from informants but, because of the derogatory nature of many entries, she cannot give names.
This is both unpleasant and, in my view suspect,— who are these people and did they say everything that appears in print?
It is just too easy to write, ‘a famous and aristocratic connection of the Royal Family’; ‘a famous socialite’; and the idiotically phrased, ‘a possessor of one of the greatest titles in the land’.
Many things can be said in conversation which assume a different weight when used, verbatim or otherwise, on the printed page.
Diana, for instance, is quoted as saying: ‘I just love it when I arrive somewhere and everyone is waiting with their tongues hanging out.’
And she loves ‘seeing everyone drool’.
And here's a typical example of Lady C. C.'s way with quotation marks:’‘I fall in love quickly’, Prince Charles once said while speaking about romance and marriage.
He might also have said ‘My hormones insist that I fall in love regularly.
I don't like being without a woman for long.’
’ Another source provides the startling information that ‘there weren't many virgins in Charles's generation.
He fucked most of them’.
The author is a past mistress of gushing praise to lull the reader into tabloid deification, then the quiet slipping in of neat doses of vitriol to tarnish her subject and titillate us.
Diana veers between a gentle, sweet, ‘wonderful’ creature and a competitive, jealous gold-digger: Prince Charles ricochets from a sensitive, cultured, thinking man to one who is abominably selfish, randy and mean.
The ‘sources’ give chapter and verse for everything, pre and post marriage: her ambition, his indecision, the clothes, rows, sexual proclivities, confidants et al.
It is abysmal that a gossip writer should use spiky chit-chat from anonymous donors to make money and notoriety for herself.
Perhaps the royal family itself must take some blame for the manic British obsession with its affairs.
The monarchy is no longer aloof, mysterious and unapproachable as in earlier days, yet — in spite of marriage to commoners, children at boarding schools and slightly self-conscious walk-abouts — its till wraps itself in protocol and panoply.
This uneasy halfway house is fair game for the worst excesses of journalism.
Books: PAPERBACKS
A HISTORY OF THE MIDDLE EAST by Peter Mansfield Penguin, £6.99 WITH the Cold War over, the Middle East has become the main theatre of international rivalry: North against South, Western secularism against Islamic fundamentalism, Jew against Arab
Peter Mansfield, a distinguished British commentator on the Middle East, sketches its history from the Sumerians to Napoleon's invasion of Egypt in 1798 and takes a more detailed look at events thereafter, right up to the Gulf War.
He is illuminating both on the causes of the Arab-Israeli divide and on the competition within the Islamic world between two poles of development: the secular democracy adopted by Turkey under Ataturk and the Islamic state introduced by Khomeini in Iran.
Mansfield rightly concludes that most Arabs would like to live in a more tolerant society under efficient modern governments.
The West could do worse than to base its policy towards the Middle East on that aspiration.
Simon Scott Plummer IMMORTALITY by Milan Kundera Faber, £5.99 MILAN KUNDERA achieved fame as the best of the Czech dissident writers, banned in his own country.
Since 1981 he has lived in Paris and this is his first ‘French’ novel, set in a fashionable Parisian intellectual world where the principal characters sit a health club discussing this and that, with the author, from time to time, joining in.
Outside in the street student protest marches wander aimlessly by.
There is a death which is eventually explained and some rather complicated love-affairs.
But these are all secondary to the flow of talk, which is at times brilliant and, rather less often, impossibly pretentious.
THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS by James Fenimore Cooper Everyman, £5.99 IT IS a great pity that James Fenimore Cooper's novel of the American Frontier should have been, for the most part, consigned to the children's shelf.
Most young readers, and I was one of them, were bored by the seeming ponderousness of so much of the narration and probably gave up too soon to grasp the understanding of the American Indian mind it offers and the rapport that can be achieved with an understanding white man, here the legendary ‘Hawkeye’.
The actual story of Franco-Huron duplicity, Mohican heroism and British obstinacy allied with female pluck becomes addictive, even exciting, particularly in the pursuit of the villainous Magua.
Cooper invented the Western and, so it is claimed, the sea story, as well as creating the ‘Leatherstocking’ tales, set in upstate New York, of which this is the best.
In many ways, his books, written in the first three decades of the last century, were before their time.
TOM DRIBERG: His Life and Indiscretions by Francis Wheen Pan, £6.99 IT IS more than likely that Tom Driberg, brilliant journalist, sometime communist, long-time Labour MP, briefly a life peer and cottage-cruising homosexual, would have approved of this biography of himself.
He would have appreciated the slightly snide tone, on occasions not unlike his voice when he was the columnist William Hickey, with its happy rubbishing of Driberg's detractors.
The tone is affectionate but realistic.
Driberg could be a monster, totally unreliable but in Wheen's opinion never a traitor.
He left an unfinished autobiography which offended many.
Some of these might, I am sure, change their opinion as Wheen fills in the gaps and rounds off an account of a long career that began in 1920s aesthetic Oxford and finished in a heart attack in a London taxi almost 50 years later.
AIR AND ANGELS by Susan Hill Mandarin, £3.99 THE natural choice to be the next head of his Cambridge College, a bachelor philosopher in his fifties, sees a 15-year-old girl standing on a bridge and instantly, desperately falls in love with her.
She, lately returned from India, has known much sorrow and can instantly understand this love when she eventually suspects it.
The result of this sharing of feelings can only be disastrous.
A penny novelette plot you might think, but Susan Hill deals with the themes of love and jealousy with such delicacy and such understanding of what might happen but never does that this, her first novel for 16 years, is equal to her best.
THE OXFORD BOOK OF APHORISMS ed by John Gross Oxford, £6.99 APHORISMS in the post-Johnsonian sense of ‘a short pithy statement containing a truth of general import’ are verbal successes that everyone strives for and few achieve, as Thoreau said, and John Gross here quotes, ‘A perfectly healthy sentence is extremely rare.’
Gross has happily classified some 3,000 under various headings: Self-Love (’ To love oneself is the beginning of a life-long romance’— Oscar Wilde); Love, Jealousy, Libido (’No woman so naked as one you can see to be naked underneath her clothes’— Michael Frayn); Secrets (’There is something about a cupboard that makes a skeleton terribly restless’— anon) and Criticism (’In some cases taking up the trade of critic is only an embittered form of renunciation’— Albert Guinon).
Enough said.
There is, however, plenty to be discovered in this delightful bedside book.
David Holloway
Books: REVIEW OF REVIEWS
BY WILLIAN STARTLE
Dunster by John Mortimer Viking, £14.99 Crimson by Shirley Conran Sidgwick & Jackson, £14.99 Riot, Risings & Revolution by Ian Gilmour Hutchinson, £25 JOHN MORTIMER is a sufficiently venerable figure to attract good notices on bad days as well as good.
Reviewing Dunster in the Financial Times, Isabel Quigly described the book as ‘masterly’ and Boyd Tonkin in New Statesman and Society thought it purred along ‘like a vintage but comfily upholstered limo’.
But David Holloway in The Daily Telegraph was put off by the author's ‘inalienable cynicism’ and Nicci Gerrard in the Observer damned it as ‘a competent novel that Mortimer can pull of without really trying’.
Both Clive Anderson in The Sunday Times and Andro Linklater in The Spectator declared it suitable light reading for a summer holiday.
Nobody has any qualms about putting the boot into Shirley Conran and most reviewers of Crimson did so con brio.
Nicci Gerrard in the Observer reckoned Conran had cribbed the plot from King Lear and indicated her preference for the original, which was hardly biting, but Ruth Dudley Edwards in The Independent (’ bilge’) and Moira Shearer in this paper (’high-flown twaddle’) didn't mess about and Julie Burchill in The Spectator (’truly appalling book…) was predictably excoriating.
In The Sunday Times D. J. Taylor used the book as a launching-pad for an examination of the state of English fiction.
Although Crimson had ‘the grace of a musk ox with a musket’, was it actually any worse than Graham Swift?
A fair question.
After a conspicuously bland general election campaign, Riot, Risings and Revolution, Ian Gilmour's study of politics and violence in the 18th century, served as a salient reminder that things were not always thus.
Mark Archer in the Financial Times thought he had written ‘a marvellous account of a much misunderstood age’.
E. P. Thomson in The Guardian, Jeremy Black in The Times and Paul Langford in this paper also give it the thumbs-up.
William Startle
Books: Mozart the Catholic intellectual
Michael Kennedy investigates the best of the recent music books
BY MICHAEL KENNEDY
Mozart and the Enlightenment: Truth, Virtue and Beauty in Mozart's Operas by Nicholas Till Faber, £30 Richard Strauss's Elektra by Bryan Gilliam Oxford, £35 Stockhausen by Michael Kurtz tr by Richard Toop Faber, £25 NICHOLAS TILL's Mozart and the Enlightenment is no mere postscript to last year's commemoration of the bicentenary of Mozart's death.
It is one of the most substantial (371 pages) reconsiderations of the man and his music to have been published for some time and, although it is not easy reading, it is a stimulating book which opera producers in particular should keep handy.
It is also a much-needed corrective to the view of Mozart propagated by the play — and more especially the film — Amadeus as a dirty-minded, rather silly idiot who for some obscure reason was divinely inspired as a composer.
True, the scatological content of many of his letters encourages this view, but since when were intellectualism and a dirty mind mutually exclusive?
For Mr Till presents us with an intellectual Mozart, linking him with Rousseau and Voltaire, Goethe and Schiller.
He reveals him to us through the operas, which ‘lay at the core of Mozart's life as a thinking artist’ and on which Mr Till has worked as a producer.
His starting-point is La finta giardiniera which he regards, perhaps arguably, as a descendant of Richardson's novel Pamela and also, unarguably, as the first time we hear, dramatically, Mozart's individual voice.
Nevertheless, the heart of the book is the discussion of the three great operas with librettos by da Ponte — Don Giovanni, Le Nozze di Figaro and Cosi fan tutte — and Die Zauberflote.
The panoply of scholarship Mr Till unfolds in his analysis of the relationship of words to music, bringing in most of the Enlightenment philosophers and writers, is awe-inspiring, as is his knowledge of the reforms of Emperor Joseph II and the whole contemporary Viennese scene.
One of his most significant points is that Mozart chose to join a Roman Catholic masonic lodge when the Pope had banned freemasonry.
Mozart's Catholicism has not always received sufficient attention and Mr Till's response to it perhaps undermines some of his other convictions in showing us a Mozart whose genius as a composer was spontaneous rather than intellectual.
I wonder if Mozart would recognise himself as Mr Till's Mozart, but he would be immensely flattered.
Not much new to be said about Richard Strauss's Elektra at this date you might think, but you would be wrong.
The American scholar Bryan Gilliam's monograph delves deep into the opera's origins by the closest analysis yet undertaken of the sketchbooks at the composer's home in Garmisch and elsewhere.
These shed fascinating light on Strauss's working methods.
It is already known that Strauss worked to a system of keys associated with particular characters and situations, but Professor Gilliam identifies his primary concern in Elektra as ‘establishing a sense of motivic continuity in the orchestral line’, thus lending extra point to Strauss's description of Salome as ‘a symphony in the medium of drama’.
No less Elektra, composed a year or two after Salome.
Strauss's annotations of Hofmannsthal's libretto are discussed in detail, as is the harmonic structure of the opera which Gilliam identifies as tonal, thus supporting others' views that Strauss's next opera, Der Rosenkavalier, was not such a change of tack as it is often represented to be.
The book is a major contribution to the Strauss bibliography and is written, thank goodness, with exemplary clarity.
It is difficult to remember that Strauss in 1908 was regarded by many in a similar light to Stockhausen today.
Michael Kurtz's biography is an interim report and highly favourable to its subject.
There is little point, anyway, in writing a book about music and a composer one dislikes.
Mr Kurtz admits few blemishes either in man or music.
But here is the first full account of Stockhausen's childhood in the war — his mother, a depressive, was a victim of the Nazis'’ euthanasia policy’— and of his gravitation towards Darmstadt as the centre of world music in the immediate post-war years.
Less is said about his recent life and his marriages.
Discussion of the music is astonishingly lucid.
But it is too early for a balanced assessment of Stockhausen's place in 20th-century music.
Twenty-five years ago he was enthroned as the guru of the avant-garde; today he is isolated, some would say megalomaniac.
What happens next?
Books: What Russians want to read now
Trevor Fishlock investigates the changing tastes of the readers recently freed from the grip of the Soviet censors
BY TREVOR FISHLOCK
CRIME and punishment, crime and sex, crime and violence.
Russians are enjoying a reading boom following the collapse of the Soviet order and the best-sellers are hard-boiled thrillers by hard-boiled writers like Mickey Spillane, Raymond Chandler and Dashiel Hammett.
The exploits of private eyes Mike Hammer, Philip Marlowe and Sam Spade are eagerly devoured by a traditionally book-hungry population.
Any book with an American look on its cover, a trilby, a turned-up collar, a gun and a mean expression, is snapped up on the rapidly growing street markets.
Thrillers by British writers like Ian Fleming and Frederick Forsyth are also eagerly sought.
There is a huge appetite for the popular crime and spy fiction that never existed in heavily censored Soviet times.
Translators are working hard to keep up with the demand.
Almost anything Western has cachet but the crime stories the Russians call krimmies are top of the list.
Most of these books are sold from stalls set up on pavements, in public squares and near metro stations in Moscow, St Petersburg and elsewhere.
Since the decree by President Yeltsin authorising freedom of trade to encourage the infant market economy, small-scale traders of all kinds have set up businesses.
Booksellers are in the vanguard and many of them simply cannot get enough books to meet demand.
Many publishers prefer to deal with the street booksellers rather than the formal bookshops because they are better business: they pay more, are more commercially motivated and are closer to the public.
Crime is not the only big seller.
Books about sex, illustrated guides to love-making, are also popular and are still considered as novelties in a society where such books have rarely been seen before and where sex was a taboo subject.
Many of these are now professionally translated and produced and are supplanting the pirated, crudely photocopied sex books and pamphlets that appeared in the latter part of Gorbachev's rule.
Religious books, too, are in great demand.
It was not all that long ago that you could see young men discreetly selling Bibles on the streets and they would melt away when the KGB, the enforcers of the atheist state, appeared.
Today the booksellers are at the heart of a Bible boom.
Russians are filling in some of the gaps in their lives by seeking out anything that was forbidden or hard to get in Soviet times.
Alexander Solzhenitsyn's books, for example, are selling well on the street stalls; so are the works of Mikhail Bulgakov and the poet Osip Mandelstam.
Many Russians are hoping that publishers will also bring out cheap editions of the Russian classics, the works of Tolstoy, Dostoyevksy, Gogol, Turgenev, Pushkin, among many others.
While these were not banned, they were not always easy to get, partly because state publishers had to use much of their manpower and paper ration churning out millions of volumes of turgid Party-approved prose and the works of Lenin.
They were also difficult to find because people stole them from libraries or tore out chapters.
But the deeply-ingrained Russian reading habit does not depend entirely, or even largely, on books.
Demand for a good long read has traditionally been fed by periodicals and literary journals of all kinds which carry long stories, essays, poetry or serialised novels.
In Soviet times the best of these bravely pushed forward the frontiers and angered the authorities.
One of them broke the ban on Boris Pasternak's work by publishing Dr Zhivago, a clear indication of the more permissive atmosphere of Gorbachev's reign.
The journals remain cheap and popular, but demand is so great that they are bought mostly by subscription, hardly ever from a news stand.
The most popular newspapers, too, are bought in this way: there is both a hunger for information and a shortage of paper.
A Lithuanian friend, brought up in the Soviet Union and now studying in Britain, told me that one of her problems is coping with choice.
‘I stand in a British book shop with my mouth agape.
I really need some guidance about modern authors.
My recent discovery is Milan Kundera: of course, I knew of him but his books weren't available in Lithuania.
I am catching up on George Orwell, too, and reading Solzhenitsyn.
He was unobtainable.
‘I read Dr Zhivago eight years ago, an English edition a friend found in Yugoslavia.
Books travelled in a literary underground in those days.
We read photocopies of banned works.
Sometimes you could only have them for a day or two before passing them on.
There were fashions, crazes.
Suddenly everyone was talking about One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest and a copy passed from hand to hand.
There was a time when The Thorn Birds was the craze.
People paid 25 roubles to have it for one night.
‘We congregated at certain bookshops and talked a lot about books.
Those of us who studied English had a background in Shakespeare, Dickens, Hardy, Swift.
Galsworthy was a set book: I felt I knew the Forsyte Saga by heart.
I read Yeats, Dylan Thomas, Ezra Pound, Tennesse Williams and Harold Pinter.’
A Russian friend, educated in St Petersburg, said that the staples of her English studies were Great Expectations, Tess of the D'Urbervilles and Vanity Fair.
She read Alice in Wonderland.
The Catcher in the Rye ‘was obligatory’ and she later read Shaw, Maugham, Hemingway and Fowles.
She first read Solzhenitsyn during a study trip in England and took some copies back with her.
For her, too, reading in the Soviet Union had the excitement of the underground — forbidden fruits.
‘We passed books around, swapped the names of authors, discussed the latest writing in the literary magazines.
Nevertheless, we felt we were missing something, that we were excluded from a wider world.’
The new reading freedom, she said, is stimulating, but part of it is a huge wave of cheap crime and sex novels, a far cry from the stories by the Western crime writer Russians know best: Agatha Christie, with all those tales of capitalists murdering each other in country houses.
‘It is understandable, after the years of repression, that people are drawn to anything Western, modern and glamorous.
But we were brought up to read good literature, to be great readers and I hope we don't lose our traditions.’
The Arts: The madams who wrestle with their girls
Now that the shouting's over, A. N. Wilson assesses the broadcasters who brought the election to us,
BY A N WILSON
NOWADAYS, the only serious opposition facing senior politicians at election time comes from the television interviewers.
The election meetings are largely staged.
Apart from those of us who can afford to throw eggs, the electorate has little chance to do battle with our would-be lords and masters.
Jeremy Paxman, Brian Walden, Robin Day, David Frost and the Brothers Dimbleby go into the ring on our behalf.
Have they provided prize-fights, or has it all been like all-in wrestling, where the heaves and grunts and assaults have seemed stagey and contrived?
During this election, I think that we have been particularly ill served by the star interviewers.
I do not believe that it is entirely their fault, because they almost certainly have producers and controllers who tell them what they may or may not discuss.
Thus it was that we had some very palpable hits, but no real engagements.
Take the case of nice Mr Major.
Jonathan Dimbleby got Mr Major to concede, at a later stage of the campaign, that it was not impossible for Mr Kinnock to form an administration with a minority in the Commons.
Hardly earth-shattering stuff, but it was thought to have been a gaffe, and interviewers clock up politicians' gaffes the way fur-traders hang up the tails of skunks.
David Dimbleby got John Major to admit that Nigel Lawson had warned the Cabinet of the calamitous consequences of the Poll Tax.
Jeremy Paxman, more skittishly, gave the PM a wigging for smiling.
And Brian Walden occasionally allowed Mr Major to speak.
But they all accepted the Conservative agenda for debate.
None of them really grilled Mr Major about Maastricht.
None of them got him to justify our membership of the ERM, which is, as everyone knows, the cause of our high interest rates.
No one got him to expand on his Irish policy, just as no one got Mr Kinnock to say whether he followed the Tory policy on Ireland (whatever that is) or the policy of the last Labour Conference which calls for a United Ireland.
Nor did any interviewer get Mr Kinnock or Mr Major to talk about immigration.
The reason for all this reticence is, of course, that such questions are extremely important, and therefore divisive.
If a politician has, or says he has, an opinion about ERM or about Ireland or about immigration, he stands to lose as many votes as he gains.
Much safer for him to say that he approves of better education and better health-care for all.
The failure of any of the interviewers to ask the politicians about these dangerous and difficult matters made them all seem like collaborators in the politicians' games.
By the end of three weeks, I had stopped dabbling with metaphors from the rigged wrestling match.
I was beginning to think of the bordello.
The madam might occasionally slap the girls or call them rude names, but in the end she wants the customers to buy at least one of them.
Had the interviewers encouraged in our minds the right attitude towards the politicians — total scepticism — we might have been less interested in watching their interminable television programmes.
And then where would Jeremy and Brian and David and Jonathan have been?
We all, of course, have our favourite interviewers, depending on what we consider the interviewer's function to be.
Viewers nave enough to suppose that the interview is a means by which the electors might arrive at the truth would prefer the tried and trusted methods of the Brothers Dimbleby.
David D. is always well briefed, usually good-humoured, though he was looking a little frayed by the small hours of Friday.
He managed to behave as if the politicians were fallible beings whom we hoped against hope to take seriously.
If, however, you regard political interviews as a species of fairground entertainment, you will probably prefer something a little more colourful.
I have a tremendous weakness for the demon king, Brian Walden.
Voice, mannerisms, facial expressions, are all wholly repulsive.
He uses the skewer.
He kebabs his victim on the end of a spike and then turns it round and round over the flames.
He is a one-question man.
He asked Neil Kinnock about his plans to tax the middle-income bracket not once, not twice, but over and over again for an hour.
All the victims — Mr Salmon, Mr Kinnock and Mr Major — were done to a T, with chopped peppers and barbecued sauce, by the time Walden had finished with them.
Paddy Ashdown outwitted him, though, by asking all the questions himself.
Walden kept asking Paddy about PR.
Paddy would reply: ‘That's a perfectly fair, no, but my dear Brian!
That's a perfectly fair question, but let me ask you this.
Who has the guts to take the fair decision, the tough decision, to offer to put an extra penny on income tax to pay for education?’ etc etc.
Well done, Des Wilson, or whoever it was who taught the tiresome Paddy this trick.
But now it's all over.
During election night itself, we were reminded of what a splendid performer Robin Day is.
During the campaign, he was put out to grass with three old political warhorses, Denis Healey, Norman Tebbit and Roy Jenkins, who provided a rather genial breakfast-time alternative to the Old Devils.
For the final countdown, however, it was only proper to dispatch young Paxman to South Wales, to put Walden back in his ferret-cage, to give Dimbleby some swingometers to play with, and to entrust the real bluster, the real cut and thrust, to the greatest pro of them all, Sir Robin.
The Arts: All I want is a room in Soho
Legendary gallery owner Kasmin is putting his West End gallery on the market and moving on.
John McEwen reports
BY JOHN MCEWEN
JOHN KASMIN, or ‘Kasmin’, as everyone calls him, has come up with the ultimate solution to the art slump.
Faced, as far as he can see, with a future of minimum inflow and maximum outflow, he has decided to sell his gallery at 22 Cork Street as an art object.
From May 1 we are invited to come and buy ‘A Cork Street art gallery, no premium, low rent, 19-year lease’.
London without a Kasmin Gallery?
It seems impossible.
This, after all, was the gallery which launched and still represents David Hockney, which pioneered the now compulsory bare, all-white space.
‘It may be age,’ he says, ‘but I'm rather drawn to adversity and I like a good wash-out; but nothing happens here except a steady loss of money.
I pay the rent, the salaries, the insurance, this, that and the other, and meanwhile I'm having to sell stuff at great losses.
Even this morning I've had to sell a first-rate Hockney print for £6,500, which cost £5,540 seven years ago, which with the cost of money represents a loss of about £5,000.’
Kasmin's career personifies the post-war evolution of the art market, from the romantic picaresque of the Fifties, through the fanciful Sixties, the grim Seventies, hypermanic Eighties and the burst bubble, as he prefers to see it, of the Nineties.
His life has measured the ups and downs as faithfully as a seismograph.
He was born in Whitechapel on September 24, 1934.
His father, when health allowed, worked in the family business of garment and related Jewish factory trades, but from 1938 this business was moved to Oxford, where the young Kasmin suffered inordinately from the cold.
‘I went back not long ago, and it was still the coldest place on earth.’
The relationship with his father was equally disagreeable.
His father longed to have a sports star as a son, but Kasmin was too small.
Even so, he did his best, becoming an expert coxswain and taking up Olympic weight-lifting.
But it only made things worse.
His father, who once appeared in the Evening Standard as Spurs' Number One fan, did not consider such suspicious activities as sport, so one day when he was 17 Kasmin decided to get as far away from home as possible, and fled to New Zealand.
There he made a clean sweep with the past by changing his surname from Kaye to Kasmin and launching himself on a career as a poet.
It turned out there was a military call-up in New Zealand, which he avoided by feigning epileptic fits (a device he subsequently found described in The Confessions of Felix Krull, by Thomas Mann), but which had the beneficial effect in his case of getting him placed on national assistance, an invaluable windfall for a poet.
It was in New Zealand, where he stayed for three and a half years, that he first entered the world of Bohemia and found himself getting on best with artists.
‘We were really the New Zealand equivalent of the Californian ‘Beats’.
It was ‘us’ against two million of ‘them’.’
This refusal to fit in with the system continued when he returned to London, having jumped ship after a series of incidents — chopping down the house of someone's aunt; being technical supervisor on a failed bank robbery — had made him somewhat too conspicuous to the New Zealand authorities.
He worked his passage home as a steward and fetched up at Tilbury with £30 wages, which was soon augmented by £46 10s left to him in his absence by his grandfather.
With this he faced the world, soon gravitating to Soho and the French pub, where he spent his last pennies.
It was through the French pub that he met the gallery owner, poet and denizen of Bohemia, Victor Musgrave.
Musgrave's Gallery One, two tiny sackclothed wall rooms in Soho, remains Kasmin's romantic ideal.
‘It was like a cafe, with people dropping in all the time.
It had all the things one likes about art galleries.
I didn't care then if the art was all that good or not.’
He was soon running errands for half a crown a day, sleeping on a board over the bath and doing Musgrave a favour by playing the toyboy to his wife.
It proved a hilarious menage.
‘Victor didn't like men.
He had this conviction that the world was made up of women who were successful and women who were failures — in other words, dressed up as men.
As a consequence his sex life was extremely complicated.’
THE business worked by magic — until Musgrave donned his only clean suit, the infallible sign that he was off on a call to Lord Glenconner or Sir Michael Culmne-Seymour, who used to bail him out to the tune of £50 or £100.
‘The great thing was that there was hardly any money in contemporary art in those days.
You knew for a fact that anyone in that world was there for a genuine reason, either because he couldn't get a job doing anything else — which was probably the best reason — or for the love of it.
It was never to make a living, because there was no living to be made.
There was something to sex, too, in those days.
We were all mad on girls in suspender belts.’
This all changed, though, when Kasmin went to Crete and there, in a monastery, decided to return to diurnal reality and marry a young, properly brought-up Bloomsbury girl, named Jane Nicholson.
He decided to take a salaried job in a posh West End gallery and within a year had landed the directorship of the Marlborough Gallery's contemporary art venture, the New London Gallery in Albemarle Street.
Until the opening of the Marlborough galleries had tended to treat artists in a patronising way, as underlings.
Shows were granted as personal favours; the artists were inclined to use the tradesmen's entrance and not encouraged to meet clients.
Frank Lloyd, the co-founder of Marlborough, changed all that.
He treated his established artists as professional associates, entering into legal contracts and paying them a regular income in advance against sales.
He also introduced business efficiency.
Kasmin remembers the whole staff being sent to see the Elizabeth Taylor film Butterfield 8, because it demonstrated the operation of a filing system so well.
It was while Kasmin was at Marlborough that he met David Hockney.
At the New Contemporaries Exhibition in 1961 he and his wife bought Hockney's Doll Boy for £40 and invited him round to tea —‘black hair, crew-cut, frightfully shy, I arrived late.
He was standing there with Mrs Kasmin as she tried to give him tea.
Couldn't talk to ladies, absolutely speechless.
Terrified of women.
She didn't know how to make the poor chap feel at home.
I could see he didn't have a bean.’
He tried to take Hockney on at Marlborough, but Harry Fischer, his boss, would have none of it.
‘I will not have this dreadful art in the gallery,’ he would say with genuine exasperation.
‘David became ‘David Hockney’ when he went to America and came back with blond hair and a great new self-confidence and a much more declared homosexuality.
This was the very beginning of the new glossy magazines and the Sunday supplements.
David became a Sunday Times colour magazine figure almost as soon as he received his gold medal at the Royal College dressed in a gold lame jacket with a gold lame shopping bag.’
Kasmin had more success with Fischer over the promotion of Francis Bacon.
An average Bacon painting at that time cost £1,000, a price Fischer thought too high to improve on, but Kasmin felt was too cheap.
He persuaded a friend he had made through the gallery, Sheridan Dufferin, then an undergraduate at Christchurch, to go a good deal higher, and it worked.
In the mid-Eighties, when Bacons were selling for half a million dollars, he did it again by selling a Bacon Pope belonging to Dufferin for over $1 million.
In 1961 Kasmin opened his own gallery in New Bond Street with the backing of Dufferin, fresh down from Oxford.
Hitherto galleries had been living-rooms presenting pictures as ‘adjuncts to polite living’, but Kasmin had fallen for the new American abstract painting and wanted the clean New York look to go with it — the neutral, bare, well-lit space demanded by the strictures of the art.
He also introduced the Marlborough stipend system — but, unprecedently, for untried artists.
Sales were split 50–50 and a set fee was advanced per month on the legal basis of a three-year agreement.
Hockney was the odd man out in Kasmin's stable of abstract artists, and resented by some of them as a result.
But it was Hockney who attracted the publicity.
Hockney was easy to sell to the English, but it was the Belgian bourgeoisie who proved the best buyers of the bulk of the gallery's art, the abstract colour-field paintings.
‘God knows why, perhaps because it rains there all the time.’
Even so, two cash injections were required from Dufferin to keep the gallery afloat.
George Weidenfeld was the only person Kasmin decided to stop selling to.
‘He would take things on loan but he could never make up his mind.
Then one day I discovered that he was borrowing them to show off at his dinners and returning them the next morning.
Mind you, I was pretty out of order at some of his famous parties, out-drinking George Brown and all those Labour ministers that he was courting at the time.’
In the late Sixties, Kasmin swallowed his pride and set off as a travelling salesman on behalf of the gallery to America, travelling the States with a bagful of transparencies, finding out who was interested in art from the local museums, and visiting people who didn't get to New York.
People were more sedentary then, and he had the field to himself, no one having done it before.
He sold his American artists as well as the English ones, and it proved a successful ploy.
But Dufferin, now married to his cousin, Lindy Guinness, was beginning to tire of the avant-garde, and in 1972, when the lease ran out, the gallery closed, with a stylish party at The Savoy.
The art world too was changing.
‘Greed came in for the first time.
One of the things I most remember about 1971 was my favourite artist, Kenneth Noland, deciding that he wanted his annual income to pass through the million-dollar barrier.
I was unable to pay more than the $100,000 I had just forked out for his British rights, so he sold Leslie Waddington a batch too.
It became apparent about this time that the economy was also slowing down.’
None of Kasmin's artists wanted to leave, except Noland, ‘whose work had gone off anyway,’ so he moved into a smaller space in Clifford Street.
‘I must confess I hadn't participated in any giant financial coups.
It was Pop Art which had shot up, and I had always been very anti-Pop.
They had always been friends of mine, but I never wanted to defend their work.
Warhol was utterly and completely worthless for me from the word go, something in the history of fashion perhaps but nothing to do with art whatsoever.
And many were worse.
Johns was always liked, but it was ironic, and irony never interested me in visual art the way that it did in literature or the theatre.
I liked the painterly side, the tradition of Matisse, but not the witty Duchamp approach — one might even say the homo side — to art.
‘Nowadays, David might reasonably be thought a part of this, but at that time he too seemed to be running out of steam.
He's always been surrounded by people who think everything else he does is marvellous, but one of the points of our relationship has been that I've always criticised his work, and for me those double portraits of the Seventies came perilously close to Photo-Realism.’
IT WAS a turbulent time in the art world, and for Kasmin personally.
His marriage ended, he was distracted by love, and for a while at the time of the oil crisis it was hard to make a sale, but towards the end of the Seventies and into the Eighties, things picked up.
An anti-capitalist, anti-American phase passed, and painting and objects were once more the fashion.
‘It was in the late Seventies that we got guys like Saatchi, who looked at art calmly and coldly and treated it as an industry.
Exactly the same thing had happened in pop music and now it happened to art — hype, control, block-buying.
It developed into a bubble, and holders — people who bought for business reasons — began to outnumber users, those who looked at it and got something out of it.
‘Even Kasmin Ltd diversified enormously from 1985–90 into antiquities, neolithic, ancient Eskimo, tribal art and so on.
I had no doubt the bubble would burst; it was only the timing I got wrong!
It reached a point where a number of people's art collections began to be more valuable than the businesses that had allowed them to buy in the first place.’
Now he feels it is time to withdraw.
‘I've always seen dealing as making other people look at what I'm enthusiastic about.
In other words, having a space open to all, where you're a bit of a showman and hope someone else likes it as much as you do.
But to tell the truth, for a long time I've been slightly lost as a dealer.
David hardly paints for sale any more — it's opera, camera, fax and camcord, which hardly helps me pay my rent, and Frank Stella, whose work I admire more than anyone's, makes these enormous aluminium, what I call floor reliefs, that are very hard to sell.
‘Also, I used to be an up-market wino and after nine months’ sobriety, I realise what I'm doing at present is not very fulfilling.
It would have been nice to go into partnership with my son Paul, but he deals in what used to be called the avant-garde, the most difficult stuff to sell, and wants to be in New York.
‘No, I think I'll call myself a collector, an amateur.
Perhaps I'll make a profession of being an amateur.
But I'll probably come full circle and take a room in Soho.
I like somewhere to go to in the morning.
By the way, I'll be putting 50 of Hockney's best prints up for auction at Sotheby's at the end of June.
They'll be bargains, I can assure you.’
The Arts: In the beginning was the word
John Gross on ‘Pygmalion’, ‘Reflected Glory’ and ‘The Beggar's Opera’
BY JOHN GROSS
PYGMALION is Bernard Shaw's finest play.
Not the one in which he aimed highest, but the one in which his inspiration is most fully sustained; the one with the strongest dramatic thrust; the only one in which you truly care about the fate of the characters.
By conventional standards, it is true, the inconclusive ending is a cheat, but it is the right ending nonetheless.
Tantalising unfulfilment is part of the play's emotional burden.
At one level it is very much a play about sexual attraction and frustration.
This is something which Howard Davies's production at the Olivier Theatre signals in its closing moments.
Our last glimpse of Henry Higgins shows his mother gazing down at him, a worried look on her face.
Some of Mr Davies's other innovations are less satisfactory.
But the production as a whole is a very good one — quite good enough to convey the play's power as well as its wit.
Its most unarguable successes are in the main supporting roles.
Robin Bailey's benevolent Colonel Pickering and Michael Bryant's florid, ginger-haired Doolittle are as good as you would expect; Alison Fiske gets more comedy out of Mrs Pearce, the housekeeper, than any performance I have seen.
Gillian Barge is splendid as Mrs Higgins — as splendid as her Burne-Jonesy gowns and her frizzy Pre-Raphaelite hair.
By contrast, Frances Barber's Eliza and Alan Howard's Higgins both take a little getting used to.
Miss Barber, in particular, rather overdoes the early cockney scenes.
But she comes into her own at the not-bloody-likely tea party; and by the end, she has achieved just the right blend of poignancy and pride.
As for Alan Howard, you begin by expecting something a bit more overbearing (irrelevant memories of Rex Harrison, perhaps).
But he soon wins you over, and it is not long before you start feeling that his casual manner conveys Higgins's narcissism to a well-pronounced T.
The production itself (sponsored by Digital Equipment) makes exceptionally bold use of the Olivier's revolving stage.
Some of its fluid cinematic effects are highly successful, others are distractingly off-key: a non-Shavian sequence in which Eliza and Freddy Eynsford-Hill spend the night scurrying all over London, for instance, and a display of flashes and bangs and madly revolving loudspeakers as Eliza starts wrecking Higgins's language laboratory.
William Dudley's sets, on the other hand — beginning with his spectacular Covent Garden colonnade — are uniformly excellent.
The music by Dominic Muldowney is no more than pleasant, but it effectively fulfils its main purpose, which is to keep at bay recollections of Lerner and Loewe.
Ronald Harwood's Reflected Glory, at the Vaudeville Theatre, is the tale of two brothers from Manchester who have come south to seek their fortune.
Alfred is a prosperous restaurateur; Michael a successful playwright.
They have not spoken to each other for the past 10 years.
As boys, they were generally able to patch up their quarrels with a joky song-and-dance routine (’ Me and My Shadow’).
As young men, they managed to avoid falling out over the tendentious terms of their father's will.
It was art — or rather Michael's habit of putting the family and its idiosyncrasies straight into his plays — that finally came between them.
Pure betrayal, as far as Alfred is concerned.
Now Michael has lured Alfred down to the small theatre that he runs.
He thinks that he wants a reconciliation, and up to a point he does; but what he hopes most of all is that Alfred will give his blessing to the new play he has written — a drama of sibling rivalry called Brother Mine.
Alfred will have none of it.
He threatens to take out an injunction; but Michael persuades him that, before making up his mind, he should at least come back and watch a rehearsal.
Which he duly does — with his solicitor in attendance, and with a good deal of heckling.
Whose side are we supposed to be on?
Is Alfred doomed to survive only in the reflected glory of Michael's reputation, or is Michael's writing merely a pale reflection of Alfred's extrovert figure?
(Alfred has a robust appetite for life; Michael is mollycoddled and plagued with gastritis.)
Mr Harwood constructs a neat cat's cradle of ironies and he keeps you guessing until almost the last minute about how the fraternal conflict is going to resolve itself.
It cannot be said, on the other hand, that he goes very deep or that we can ever take the idea of Michael's art very seriously.
The comedy is much too broad for that; but at its own level, it is bright and entertaining.
Albert Finney brings four-square authority to the part of Alfred, so much so that the audience is in danger of overlooking the subtleties of Stephen Moore's performance as Michael — his plaintive vanity, the show of modest perplexity with which he explains that the situations in his plays just somehow turn out to have universal significance.
The other outstanding performance is by Nicky Henson, who is on first-rate form as the actor who finds himself having to impersonate Alfred in Alfred's presence.
Elijah Moshinsky directs with a light touch (though not always quite as light as it should be), and Saul Radomsky's tongue-in-cheek sets are a constant source of pleasure.
There is a particularly welcome parody of the current theatrical mania for sloping floors.
DR JOHNSON thought that The Beggar's Opera was written ‘only to divert’, without any particular moral purpose.
There is something to be said for such a view.
John Gay's masterpiece is one of the blackest indictments of human nature in the repertoire and one of the most enjoyable.
In the past, it has sometimes been unduly prettified by directors, but today there is rather more danger of excessive uglification, of overdoing the grimness.
By and large, John Caird's new production at the Swan Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon, strikes the right balance.
Dummy corpses dangle aloft, to remind us that Tyburn Tree was no joke; but Caird and his cast also do justice to the element of pure burlesque, to Gay's elegance and panache, to the swing and snap of the dialogue.
(’ One may know by your kiss that your gin is excellent.’)
There are some strong performances.
Susan-Jane Tanner as Mrs Peachum, is a toothy, 18th-century caricature come to life.
Alan Cox doubles entertainingly as the disconsolate Beggar and the overworked Filch.
David Burt, as Macheath, is a convincing cock-of-the-walk, even if the ideal Macheath ought to be more debonair.
I was less happy with Ilona Sekacz's score.
The delightful tunes are all there, but some of them are taken too slowly, and some of the settings are either lachrymose or slurred.
All very contemporary, but I found myself hankering for the crisp definition of the old Frederick Austin arrangement.
Caird also goes in for a few unnecessary stunts, such as having two of the ladies of the town played by men in drag.
Still, his production brings one of the treasures of the English stage back into circulation, and its overall liveliness far outweighs any flaws.
It seems set fair to become one of the RSC's big box-office successes.
William Gaminara's Back up the Hearse and Let Them Sniff the Flowers, at the Hampstead Theatre, is an example of what is by now a well-established genre — a play about the cut-throat world of a group of salesmen.
This time they are peddling water-filters, but the product is a second-rate consideration.
The things that count are the jargon, the backstabbing, the phoniness, the pervasive insecurity.
As long as he sticks to the office itself, Mr Gaminara paints a convincing and often-mordantly amusing picture.
He is helped by some good performances, too, especially from Danny Webb as the cleverest and most conscience-racked of the sales force.
But when he tries to draw a larger moral (an arraignment of the Thatcherite Eighties, needless to say) he slips into soft-headed nostalgia for the wonderful lost world of Communist ideals.
OVER the last two weeks special couriers have been delivering mysterious brown paper packages to literary editors around London.
The packages proved to contain the paperback of Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses, published by a unidentified consortium in order to protect those responsible from any grim repercussions.
Those scanning the paperback for any textual changes have been able to find only one.
The hardback edition contained a fulsome dedication to Rushdie's then wife, his fellow writer Marianne Wiggins.
But since it was published she and Rushdie have split, amid all too public accusations from Ms Wiggins that her former husband was crazed with vanity and insincere about his ‘conversion’ to Islam.
It is not surprising therefore that the paperback makes no mention of Wiggins.
Instead the book is ‘dedicated to the individuals and organisations who have supported this publication’.
C ONGRATULATIONS to Andreas Whittam-Smith, Editor of the Independent who has been named Arts Journalist of the Year in the BP Arts Journalism awards for his newspaper's coverage of the Pop Art Show at the Royal Academy.
The jury were particularly impressed by the amount of space that the Independent devoted to the exhibition.
This, they felt, was symptomatic of the paper's commendable interest in and support of, the arts.
Quite so.
But it may also have had something to do with the fact that the Independent co-sponsored the exhibition.
If it was idiotic of the BP jury to make the award to such an obviously vested interest, it seems even odder that Mr Whittam-Smith, who places such store on journalistic integrity, should have seen fit to accept it.
THERE is a good deal of embarrassment in Paris over l'affaire de la Musee Jacquemart-Andre.
The Museum is a modest establishment which normally attracts an average of between 15 and 20 visitors a day.
However, it sprang to prominence last year when an inventory of its contents revealed that 325 artworks had gone missing.
The police were called in, the museum's curator-in-chief, Mme Lydie Huyghe, was sacked and then indicted for ‘complicity in embezzling public funds’.
A second inventory was then ordered to see if anything else had gone missing, and Mme Huyghe's disgrace looked to be complete.
The only trouble was that in the course of compiling the second inventory the missing artworks were found in a cupboard in one of the museum's corridors.
It seems that one of Mme Huyghe's predecessors put them there sometime after the Second World War and then forgot all about them.
Charges have now been dropped but there is still some doubt as to whether Mme Huyghe will be reinstated.
Having been cleared of theft, she is now being blamed for the museum's low attendances.
T HOSE with a vested interest in rubbishing the Prince of Wales's new Institute of Architecture by tarring it with the brush of eccentricity will have a field-day when they learn that the founder of the international chain of Hard Rock Cafes, Isaac Tigrett, is to sponsor a Russian student to attend the Institute for five years beginning this autumn.
Tigrett, who sold the Hard Rock chain and set up the charitable Rama Foundation, falls readily into the cranky crackpot mould: he is even married to Maureen, former wife of Ringo Starr who has been supporting his friend George Harrison's Natural Law Party.
But unlike most of his critics, Tigrett's achievements include the building of a hospital in the Indian town of Puttaparti, which offers free treatment for the poor.
The hospital was designed by Dr Keith Critchlow, who is the Prince's Institute's director of research.
The lucky student will be chosen by competition to be held in Russia during the summer.
THERE was a 100 per cent turn-out on election night on Thursday at the Duke of York's Theatre in St Martin's Lane.
The entire audience rushed out into the street half-way through the performance of Death and the Maiden, when the auditorium began filling up with smoke.
The two stars, Juliet Stevenson and Bill Paterson, were taken aback when the audience began muttering during their harrowing portrayals of a torture victim confronting the man who may have been her tormentor.
When the 850 patrons then rose en masse and made for the exits, the actors wondered what they'd done wrong.
‘When they began whispering I thought we were boring them,’ said Stevenson.
In fact, an electrical fault had started a fire in a room above the auditorium.
‘Bill and I were left on stage gaping as they all got up and made for the exits.
Then we noticed the smoke everywhere.
I've never been in a fire in a theatre before — thankfully they're almost unheard of.
We all waited outside in St Martin's Lane for 55 minutes, and to my surprise about 99 per cent of them came back in for the finish.’
The Arts: Life-force breaking out all over
John McEwen on ‘Rediscovering Pompeii’
By JOHN MCEWEN
FOR ITS latest exhibition, Rediscovering Pompeii, the Accademia Italiana has isolated some pertinent quotations by the famous.
Most to the point is Stendhal: ‘I shall say nothing of Pompeii: it is the most astonishing, most fascinating, most entertaining thing I have ever come across; only there can one get to know the ancient world.’
If this was true for Stendhal at the beginning of the 19th century, it remains so for increasing numbers of us at the end of the 20th.
Pompeii is the most popular archaeological site in Europe, currently attracting two and a half million people a year, and the present exhibition has already drawn an audience of nearly three-quarters of a million in the USA and Sweden.
No wonder the Accademia has been rearranged in anticipation of a siege; although on the bleak day I went there was no need to queue.
What makes Pompeii so special was the manner of its end.
On the morning of August 24, 79 AD it was a flourishing Roman town going about its daily business, but within hours it lay suffocated by a 20 ft layer of volcanic waste which would preserve it from robbers and vandals until its excavation in the mid-18th century.
When this came it represented the first archaeological exploration ever conducted, a landmark in man's self-consciousness.
It is therefore entirely appropriate that today Pompeii still represents the cutting edge of archaeological research and development.
This latest exhibition is not merely an update of the one many will remember visiting at the Royal Academy in 1979, but a transformation.
The revolution has come about through the application of computer science.
Touch-operated computer terminals are placed at strategic points allowing us, quite literally, to have the ancient world at our fingertips.
In most shows ‘hands-on’ technology tends to be a token feature; either over-subscribed or out of order.
But at Rediscovering Pompeii there are enough screens to satisfy demand, and a technician is in regular attendance.
Objects come to symbolise the tips of icebergs of information.
Confronted with a bronze picture, we can locate its image on the relevant computer screen and, having read its precise history, proceed to learn about tableware in general, the social system of Pompeii, and even the precise recipes of the time.
This ability to summon up images, both photographic and diagrammatic, and explanatory texts within a matter of seconds is quite hypnotic, and very much in line with the television mind-set of the computer generation.
Traditionalists may huff and puff and say there is nothing like the real thing; aesthetes may deplore the destruction of mystery; but for most of us it proves as enthralling as exploring a maze.
The 200 objects, however, should certainly not be underestimated.
Many are very fine, and some may even prove disconcerting.
The Romans had numerous divinities, whose worship was tolerated by the cultivated classes as a social benefit and practised by the masses as a matter of spiritual necessity.
Pompeii lay in verdant, wine-growing country and so gave special prominence to Venus, goddess of fecundity, Hercules and Bacchus.
The image of the phallus was not lewd to them but a daily reminder of abundance, happiness and the generative power of the life force.
Phalli, rather than hands or fingers, pointed the direction of their streets, and were used as door-knockers and in all manner of other decorative ways.
Worn as an amulet they even warded off the evil eye and, in a more generalised form, are still carried for this purpose by Italians today.
The large and unmistakable clay phallus for insertion in a wall is one of the first things to greet us as we enter the exhibition.
Some delicate glass tubes or ‘balsamaria’ are placed in teasing proximity.
‘Are those condoms?’ came an anxious inquiry.
The sophistication of Pompeians is conveyed by such practical objects — tweezers, a drill, skillets, a colander, pruning-hooks, chisels, clamps, hydraulic valves.
Life then was much as it is now.
Dice were exactly the same; there is even a fragment of a wall bearing electoral slogans, which prove to be more civil than ours: ‘I ask you to elect Holconius Priscus duovir.
He is worthy of holding office.’
There is a magnificent bronze food-warmer with handles attached to either side of the body by strigilated shafts in the form of the most elegantly fashioned hands, and a brazier patinated a stunning azure.
There are bracelets minutely fashioned as serpents.
Among several outstanding pieces of sculpture, some of it imported from Greece and elsewhere, is a pair of dramatic marbles, in each case showing four dogs attacking a buck.
The pieces show two stages of the drama.
The first is more intense, with the buck putting up a spirited resistance; in the second its lolling tongue and gentler stance suggest that it is about to succumb.
The two pieces are impressively realistic and, apart from a missing muzzle on one of the bucks, in an almost flawless state of preservation.
But undoubtedly the two show-stoppers are pictorial.
The Nymphaeum, a glass-paste mosaic bordered with shells, and the even more spectacular Room (oecus) with Garden Paintings — three sizeable walls covered with an elaborate fresco of birds and plants, with additional figurative panels and decorative heads.
Both of these ebullient works testify to the natural world as a paradise: a fact emphasised by the accuracy of the painter, whose easily identifiable plants and birds derive from different seasons and regions and could never have co-existed in reality.
It is rare to find such a large and well-preserved painting from classical times, and it shows, as one might expect, that classical painters were as skilled as the sculptors, whose often unsurpassed work has understandably survived in greater abundance.
Nothing, of course, can compare with the haunting experience of visiting Pompeii itself, where the work of bringing the town back to life continues.
But Rediscovering Pompeii is still a powerful reminder that the old can be as shocking in its familiarity as the new in its novelty.
‘Rediscovering Pompeii’, Accademia Italiana, 24 Rutland Gate, SW7 until June 21 (sponsor IBM)
The Arts: A look on the bright side of life
Paul Ryan discovers that there's more to the photographs of Robert Doisneau than mere fascination with kissing and nostalgia
By PAUL RYAN
IF Henri Cartier-Bresson is the most admired of the older generation of French photographers, Robert Doisneau (who will be eighty this week) is the most loved.
Although his contribution to photography is grounded in his 60 years of documentary work, Doisneau is still best known for his shot of two young lovers kissing in front of the Hotel de Ville in Paris.
That image, shot in 1950, is one of the world's best-selling posters.
As a result, there is a popular misconception of Doisneau as a gentle nostalgia merchant with simple tastes and an old-fashioned style.
But there is a good deal more to him than that, as a new exhibition at Oxford's Museum of Modern Art reveals.
Doisneau was born on April 14, 1912 in the Parisian suburb of Centilly, a town which is far less picturesque than its name suggests.
During his childhood, the area was the site of several tanning factories which emptied their waste products into the River Bievre.
He still retains an affection for the place, perhaps because it was there that he first encountered the inspiring sight of human beings at odds with, and frequently overcoming, an unpromising environment.
The son of a working-class family, Doisneau developed an early interest in art and was apprenticed as an engraver for a time before he ‘escaped’ to work for the sculptor and photographer, Andre Vigneau.
He encouraged his young assistant to study photographic technique in the manner of the great perfectionist, Edward Weston, and he also passed on an appreciation of the beauty of everyday objects.
In his lunch breaks Doisneau pored over books on photography, and at weekends he set off alone with a heavy wooden camera and tripod to capture the first of the ‘personal’ photographs that would be the basis of his life's work.
In 1933, the Hungarian exile, Brassai, published his album of photographs, Paris By Night, and Doisneau recognised at once that beauty could be found in his own workaday surroundings.
By now he was married and needed to earn a living so, after leaving Vigneau, he took a job at the Renault factory in Billancourt.
He stayed for five years — photographing cars and production lines — before being dismissed for habitual lateness (he had dallied once too often taking pictures on the way to work).
Finding himself on the streets, Doisneau felt completely at liberty, and he has remained there ever since.
Doisneau is a small, bird-like man with mischievous eyes and a gleeful laugh.
His present celebrity is a fairly recent phenomenon, and he insists that it has not really affected him, although he acknowledges that his appearances on television shows and in magazine profiles have somewhat robbed him of the anonymity which still clings to his ‘invisible’ friend, Cartier-Bresson.
He describes himself as a ‘false witness’ to his times in that he chooses to depict, for the most part, scenes of unexpected joy and pleasure in the midst of lives which might, at first sight, appear bleak and colourless.
‘I've always been interested in the light comedy of life, so I've created my own world,’ says Doisneau.
‘It's pleasant and charming, it's the world I would like to live in.
But don't think for a moment that I'm duped by my own little lies.’
There is a special innocence in Doisneau's photographs of children, especially during the years when he was working with a twin-lens reflex camera held at waist level.
Carried by so small a man, the camera's lens would often be no higher from the ground than a child's eye and he could approach them on their own level.
But such innocence is only part of the story.
There is also a degree of ambiguity in Doisneau's finest pictures which allows them to be interpreted in a variety of ways.
A prime example of this is the fate of Au Cafe du Chez Fraysses which the painter R. B. Kitaj once named as his favourite photograph.
This picture shows a couple standing at a bar.
A very pretty young woman, smiling shyly, her eyes dipped and her hand extended to touch the stem of a wineglass, is being warmly appraised by a burly, middle-aged man in a hat and overcoat.
When the shot was first used editorially, illustrating a story on alcoholism, the man wrote a furious letter to Doisneau's agency, Rapho, in which he revealed himself to be a respected professor at the Sorbonne.
He received an immediate apology, but a few weeks later the picture turned up again — this time accompanying a feature on prostitution in Paris.
This was too much for the professor and Doisneau was ordered by a French court to destroy the original negative.
Only two prints remain, one of them in the Permanent Collection of the New York Museum of Modern Art.
The demise of the picture-based magazines caused Doisneau real financial hardship which has only recently been alleviated by the boom in poster and postcard reproductions.
Even that has been a mixed blessing.
Young photographers aiming at the poster market have taken to copying his style.
Two years ago, an advertising agency plastered the Paris Metro stations with posters featuring kissing couples for a soft drink promotion.
Outraged Doisneau fans were mortified to find out that Doisneau himself had taken the pictures, fulfilling one of the commercial assignments which still occupy much of his time.
He continues to surprise.
There are several pieces among his work which reveal his technical expertise — experiments with collage and distorting lenses — as well as many which are unexpectedly savage in their satire.
Beneath his charm, there is the steeliness of the survivor.
He is not at all nostalgic, but he mourns the loss of friends like the poet, Jacques Prevert.
(’ Each time I take a good picture, I ask myself who can I show it to…but there are fewer people left.’)
But he makes new friends easily, and it was Prevert who once related the most revealing anecdote about Doisneau and his commitment to his accomplices.
In 1958, Doisneau was photographing a shepherd and his flock when a lorry careered out of control, killing a number of sheep and the shepherd's two dogs.
‘Did you take any photos?’ asked Prevert.
‘No,’ replied Doisneau, ‘I consoled the shepherd.’
In Prevert's words: ‘It was as if life, in a snapshot, had made a portrait of Doisneau.’
Robert Doisneau's pictures are shown at the Museum of Modern Art, Oxford, from Saturday until July 19
The Arts: A Night To Remember
By JULIET STEVENSON
When I was 15 I saw doing Richard II for the RSC at Stratford, and I instantly fell into the grip of an obsession.
I went up there from school six times to see it.
It was like an illness.
Once after hitching up there, I waited around in the car park until I saw him coming out — and I'm ashamed to say I followed him home.
Although I was doing Shakespeare for A-level I had never seen any of his plays performed on stage.
In John Barton's production Richardson and Richard Pasco were alternating as Richard and Bolingbroke.
Richardson was extraordinarly charismatic, dressed in very tight trousers and thigh-length boots — which may have had something to do with my infatuation — and he characterised Richard as a man of great vanity, constantly picking up a mirror and checking himself in it.
Gradually you saw this self-absorbed monarch stripped down of all his trappings, until a wonderful scene when he was kneeling on the ground staring at his reflection, and suddenly he shattered the mirror against his foreheard.
But above all what obsessed me was Richardson's way of speaking Shakespeare.
Shakespeare doesn't really exist until his words are spoken out loud.
And when the language of Shakespeare lives in the mouth and bloodstream of an actor, as it does with Richardson, it's the most sensual, exciting experience you can have in theatre.
Shakespeare is a bit like rap.
The language has an insistent rhythm, but the better a rapper is the more they break away from it, tease it, play with it.
I eventually screwed up the courage to write to Richardson, pretending to be a drama student wanting advice.
Actually I'd never thought of being an actress.
He wrote back kindly, warning me against this infuriating profession.
All that mattered to me, though, was his signature, his handwriting, the fact that he'd licked the stamp.
Juliet Stevenson is in ‘Death and the Maiden’ at the Duke of York's Theatre
The Arts: On a Pan-American flight to childhood
Christopher Tookey on ‘Hook’, ‘The Doctor’, ‘Final Analysis’ and other new releases
By CHRISTOPHER TOOKEY
STEVEN SPIELBERG is too popular with the public to find much favour with critics.
His latest, Hook (U), has attracted the year's worst reviews and biggest audiences.
As in the case of last year's most successful film, Robin Hood, Prince of Thieves, I find myself on the side of the audiences.
Peter Banning (Robin Williams) is an American attorney turned corporate pirate, who won't find time for his children (Charlie Korsmo and Amber Scott) and sees no irony in accusing them of childishness.
He is impatient when they think they see a scary man at the window.
He doesn't believe his wife's 92-year-old grandmother, Wendy (Maggie Smith), when she assures him that he used to be Peter Pan.
He treats a visit from Tinkerbell (Julia Roberts) as a hallucination, and a return to Neverland as an inconvenience.
‘Is there a pay-phone around here?’ he demands in the middle of the most spectacular pirate-set in Hollywood history.
Not even the abduction of his children by Captain Hook (Dustin Hoffman) and his scurvy sidekick, Smee (Bob Hoskins), can shake Peter's scepticism.
Only with difficulty does this Pan-American champion yuppie regain his imagination and conquer his fear of flying.
It's not hard to see why critics hate the film.
In trying to amuse children and grown-ups, it contains scenes which will displease both.
At two and a quarter hours it will test the bladder control of the average child, and some scenes could and should have been shorter.
There are moments of glutinous sentiment.
When Peter's little daughter sings an excruciating Leslie Bricusse lyric about being all alone, there will be many a dry eye-patch in the house.
John Williams's score is overblown self-parody.
There's something demeaning about Spielberg's attempts to incorporate modern American youth culture: the Lost Boys' rapping and skateboarding, more than anything, will prevent this movie from becoming a timeless classic.
Other elements are just naff: the mermaids look like crosses between Las Vegas showgirls and My Little Ponies, and the lair of the Lost Boys resembles a rejected set for Starlight Express.
The critics' favourite accusation that Neverland looks like a theme park is fair, though hardly a criticism — most children and adults enjoy Disneyland, and the movie is no more garish than The Wizard of Oz, a great children's film which has been rendered critically respectable by age.
It would be wonderful, no doubt, if modern children were captivated by an Edwardian, very English sequel to Peter Pan, designed perhaps in the style of Arthur Rackham, but Spielberg is unashamedly trying to create a modern movie that will appeal to all colours and nationalities.
He has made an understandable decision to Americanise the story, just as Disney did with European fairy-tales like Pinocchio and English classics such as The Jungle Book.
Despite its faults, Hook is a marvellous family film.
The special effects are first-rate, as are the main performances.
Robin Williams has precisely the driving, egomaniacal but mischievous quality which makes him believable as a grown-up Peter Pan.
Dustin Hoffman is splendidly and surprisingly Old Etonian as Hook, with facial expressions reminiscent of Terry Thomas and a drawl which suggests close study of Jeremy Irons and Alan Rickman.
Maggie Smith and Bob Hoskins excel, and lend a much-needed British integrity.
Behind the film's highly coloured faade, too, lies an almost Barrie-esque darkness.
Where Barrie tortured himself with Victorian fears about his own adult sexuality, Spielberg flagellates himself for Sixties selfishness and Eighties careerism (Spielberg himself is one of the baby-boom generation, and divorced).
In the film's most inventive touch, Hook tries to avenge himself on Peter Pan by becoming a second and better father.
Hook tells Peter's children that their parents hate them: ‘Before you were born, they were happier: they were free!’
Home is defined by Hook as ‘that place of broken promises’.
The whole film could, in fact, be seen as the nightmare of a middle-aged divorce whose children are being brought up by another man.
More positively and movingly, it is a patently sincere celebration of fatherhood.
This is particularly ironic, since the other dark theme which pervades the Barrie novel and stage-play is a fear of father figures.
It's no accident that Hook in the stage-play is traditionally doubled with the Darling children's father.
The screenwriters — Jim V. Hart, Malia Scotch Marmo and Nick Castle — cleverly stand Barrie's attitude to fatherhood (probably motivated, so the literary critics tell us, by his own impotence) on its head.
The sequel arises from Hook's Barrie-esque determination to usurp another man's family, and from the modern man's fear of the child within himself.
A distaste for the child within us — and particularly within Spielberg — is the unattractive undertone which can be detected beneath virtually every hostile review of Hook.
I'm unashamed to report that I enjoyed it a lot, and I'm sure I would have loved it as a child.
Spielberg's first and last shots are of children open-mouthed with wonder.
His film is dedicated to achieving that generous-spirited end.
He succeeds.
In The Doctor (12), young Charlie Korsmo is cast again as a small boy ignored by his father.
This time, dad is a casually callous surgeon (William Hurt), who finds himself being operated on within his own hospital.
Predictably he is exposed to a series of character-forming reverses, but these are astonishingly tame.
The level of incompetence, humiliation and overcrowding is remarkably low — at one point Hurt throws a wobbly about having to share a room for one day with one other person.
The film is, in fact, noticeably coy about the shortcomings of the American medical system.
Randa Haines's direction shows the TV-movie-of-the-week competence she showed in her debut, Children of a Lesser God.
Robert Caswell's writing seldom rises above soap opera.
Where the film scores is in a fine performance by William Hurt, unobtrusively excellent cinematography by John Seale, and typically sensitive set design by one of the unsung heroes of the British film industry, 71-year-old Ken Adam.
At Play in the Fields of the Lord (15) is certainly a spectacular feat of film production, bravely shot in Amazonia by Hector Babenco, whose previous success was Kiss of the Spider Woman.
It's a liberal epic in the tradition of The Mission and Black Robe, about Christian insensitivity towards indigenous people.
As entertainment, though, it's not up to much.
The best efforts of Tom Berenger (as an American Indian who ‘goes native’ in the Amazon) and Aidan Quinn (as a well-meaning missionary) are sabotaged by an unwieldy screenplay, adapted by Babenco and Jean-Claude Carriere from Peter Matthiessen's huge novel.
The film is bogged down in exposition for the first hour, remains plodding, and shifts uncertainly between protagonists.
Despite the three-hour length, the descent of Kathy Bates's character into madness is so abrupt as to be risible.
Final Analysis (15) is a glossy psychological thriller by one of America's most talented but apparently mindless directors, Phil Joanou, whose debut was the flashy gangster movie, State of Grace.
It's an unimaginative, misogynistic rehash of Body Heat, with Richard Gere and Kim Basinger substituting inadequately for William Hurt and Kathleen Turner.
British audiences may derive enjoyment from laughing at the psychobabble, wincing at the plot contrivances and gaping at the crashingly obvious phallic symbolism, but the movie as a whole goes off at half-Hitchcock.
Percy Adlon's Salmonberries (12) is an untypically meandering and dreary tale of friendship between a half-Eskimo lesbian foundling (k. d. lang) and a middle-aged woman from Berlin (Rosel Zech).
The inaction shifts from Alaska to Berlin, and the soundtrack — derivative of Moanie Joni Mitchell in her ‘Blue’ period — says it all.
Meet The Feebles (18) is a smutty satire on the Muppet show, written and performed by the same New Zealanders who made the enjoyably gross sci-fi romp, Bad Taste.
The result is so infantile, feeble and unfunny that I left after 50 minutes — and you should see some of the rubbish I've endured to the end.
The Arts: Second class with honours
Michael Kennedy on Rossini celebrations and ‘Guillaume Tell’
By MICHAEL KENNEDY
IT IS not a classless society for composers.
Compare the riches lavished last year on Mozart on the bicentenary of his death with the more restrained celebration of Gioachino Rossini, who was born 200 years ago.
Yet the Italian should perhaps be grateful for a more discriminating anniversary review of his achievements in place of the flood of notes and words which almost submerged Mozart's genius.
An encouraging aspect of the Rossini celebration is the wider view of his art which has opened up in the past quarter of a century.
A composer who — to exaggerate only a little— was principally remembered for Il Barbiere di Siviglia is now seen as the author not only of other fine comic operas but also of serious operas such as Tancredi, Otello, Maometto II and, of course , Guillaume Tell.
Audiences have discovered what comes after those exhilarating overtures which kept the operas' names alive in the world's concert-halls.
His sacred music, songs and string sonatas have been recorded and testify to the breadth of his artistry.
In various cities of Europe and America this year there will be performances of Otello (Chicago), Armida (Minneapolis), Semiramide (New York Met) and Tancredi (Salzburg).
London the other week had a concert performance of Le Siege de Corinthe, and at the Queen Elizabeth Hall today there is one of Ermione: its first British performance.
La gazza ladra goes into Opera North's repertory later this month.
Welsh National Opera staged Le Comte Ory last year, but ENO has so far managed only a flaccid revival of its Barber.
Covent Garden's Il Viaggio a Reims in July is eagerly awaited, and Buxton Festival is doing L'Italiana in Algeri later that month, with Jane Glover conducting.
There is one astounding omission from this list — could it be that Glyndebourne forgot the anniversary?
Having inundated us with Mozart last season, it has not a note of Rossini this summer.
And this in a house which, under Vittorio Gui in the 1950s, played a pioneering part in the Rossini revival.
It has a shorter season this year, its last in the present theatre while work progresses on the new building to open in 1994.
Yet it is still staging two new productions out of five, Britten's Peter Grimes and Tchaikovsky's The Queen of Spades.
Since Death in Venice is also to be performed, would it not have been better to keep Grimes for the new house and to have included a Rossini opera as a nostalgic as well as topical reminder of golden evenings?
Meanwhile, the Royal Opera has marked the occasion by reviving its 1990 production of Guillaume Tell, thus providing London's opera-goers with the chance to hear two large-scale French operas by Italian composers which are based on plays by Schiller.
If Verdi's Don Carlos (at the Coliseum) is the greater work, it owes more to Rossini's example than to anything by Meyerbeer.
The Tell performance I attended — at Covent Garden on Monday — hung together musically far better than it did two years ago.
Some, no doubt, would have preferred John Cox to have ‘made it relevant to today’ by setting his production in contemporary Croatia, perhaps, with Kalashnikovs in place of crossbows.
But bravely, and I think rightly, he and his designer Robin Wagner kept to a naturalistic setting with trees, boats, ravines and a medieval town square.
It looks good.
Updating this legendary story would have made it ridiculous — not that this has ever deterred some of our intrepid producers — for its crux is the shooting of the apple on young Jemmy's head (brilliantly staged), and how do you get round that?
(The writer of the surtitles, however, manages a reference to ‘a safe house’ for a fleeing patriot.)
A picture-book setting, to be effective today, requires convincing acting by the principals to justify it.
While the baritone Gregory Yurisich's superbly sung Tell was a commanding figure, wholly believable as the focus of patriotic Swiss revolt against the Austrian oppressor, the American tenor Chris Merritt as Arnold and the soprano Jane Eaglen as Princess Mathilde never for a moment suggested romantic ardour.
Neither has a sylph-like figure, and in their love-duet in Act II they resembled the engravings one sees of the singers of a century ago.
On the other hand, Merritt's singing this time justified his reputation as an exponent of this bel canto Heldentenor role.
He still had intonation problems, but his ‘Asile hereditaire’ aria was at last all that one had been led to expect, and he was mightily impressive in the Act II trio with Yurisich and Roderick Kennedy as Furst.
I wish I could be more enthusiastic about Jane Eaglen's Mathilde, especially as I was so disappointed by her Scottish Opera Brunnhilde.
This is potentially a glorious voice — one senses that instinctively — but to my ears it is at present just a voice, an instrument.
All the great ‘voices’ were and are personalities too; one is always conscious of the human being behind the voice.
From Miss Eaglen I have not yet experienced that personal involvement with what she sings which would make it more than an impressive exercise.
There was a hint of what, one hopes, will eventually mature in her lovely contribution to the trio in the last scene with Patricia Bardon's lustrous Hedwige and Linda Kitchen's sweet and boyish Jemmy.
The biggest single contribution to the raised level of this production comes from the conducting of Michel Plasson.
There are longueurs in Act I, but he skilfully deflects attention from them by a deft account of the ballet music and by letting us admire the much improved state of the Royal Opera chorus.
Much of the orchestral playing was colourful and poetic, notably the horn-calls and pizzicato strings in Act II which call up nocturnal mystery and tension with such magical economy.
The finales to Acts III and IV were both properly dramatic and stirring; altogether, it was conducting that revealed the intrinsic nobility and breadth of vision of Rossini's imperious farewell to the world of opera.
The Arts: Twinkling in a pot of treacle
Nicholas Dromgoole on a Kirov gala and Mikhail Baryshnikov
By NICHOLAS DROMGOOLE
WHAT a delightful coup by the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, to open its doors to the Maryinsky Theatre, St Petersburg, in a Royal gala celebrating the Russians' renaming both the theatre and its city with their original title.
Peter Ustinov introduced a very grand programme of opera and ballet, asking who could be better qualified than himself since he was ‘conceived in the one city (St Petersburg) and born in the other (London)!’
Not only that, but his great-great-uncle had been the architect who designed the Maryinsky in the first place.
It was election night, but he reminded us that while ancient Greek and Roman culture survived, nobody now knew the results of a single election in either ancient Greece or Rome.
Beaming in avuncular fashion, he then ushered in the cultural festivities.
In the first half, I began to be ashamed for ballet.
The opera selections gave us extracts from a range of impressive composers, attractively sung.
For the ballet, we had a polonaise and mazurka from Paquita danced by the Theatre's famous ballet school, very similar to that danced by our own Royal Ballet school, the youngsters neither better nor worse, but a slightly strange choice for an adult gala.
What was really difficult to stomach was Larisa Lezhina and Farukh Ruzimatov in the Diana and Actaeon pas de deux.
This was really vulgar, outdoing even the Bolshoi, and just as there is a difference between melodrama and drama, so there is an equal chasm between what Petipa originally intended and the way these two dancers vulgarised and exaggerated every step.
Of course they are wonderful technicians, but this was turning dance into an athletics display, with art almost entirely out of sight.
So during the interval I felt distinctly apologetic.
Fortunately in the second half the dance perked up.
Who would have thought we would be watching the Kirov (as they used to be) performing a pas de deux from Antony Tudor's The Leaves are Fading?
Even if Altynai Asylmuratova is not Gelsey Kirkland, she and her partner, Konstantin Zaklinsky, managed very stylishly.
A pas de deux from Swan Lake was of course de rigueur, and splendidly danced by Julia Makhalina and a superbly romantic-looking Andris Liepa.
Three children dancing a twee version of a pas de trois from Nutcracker introduced another treacly, sentimental note, but not for long.
We then had a rousing Le Corsaire pas de deux, with Elvira Tarasov and Igor Zelensky dancing just as Ruzimatov should have done in the Diana and Actaeon, with technical bravura but putting the choreography and music first, and themselves only as the servants of dance as an art.
Both seemed to have difficulties with the stage, and slipped and tripped here and there, but they were so magnificent that nobody minded in the least.
The final dance item was a grand pas from Paquita, not the version we are accustomed to, but looking, if anything, even more authentic, and danced very much in the grand manner it deserves.
Whenever the corps de ballet came on stage, they reminded us that tradition and dance accomplishment are very much alive and well in St Petersburg.
Although the feet do not stretch and point in the way we still care about in the West, the dancers do not just move from position to position; they dance in a long poem of fluently musical movement that is classical ballet's chief claim to fame.
St Petersburg is justly famous as one of the centres of this art form, and we were lucky to have the chance to welcome such a noble display in London.
At Sadler's Wells one of the Kirov's defecting stars, Mikhail Baryshnikov, was displaying his middle-aged talents in contemporary dance with the new company he founded in America, the White Oak Dance Project.
Baryshnikov is one of the world's outstanding dancers and performers, and watching him in anything is a privilege.
It is no use bemoaning the sad fact that his days as a brilliantly athletic virtuoso in classical ballet seem to be over.
Time inevitably moves on.
What is fascinating is to see his mastering a new style and technique, and still managing to rivet our attention as of old.
I only managed to see the second programme when still perhaps a little punch-drunk from over-exposure to Bournonville at the Copenhagen festival, but I relished the four examples of choreography by Mark Morris and Lar Lubovitch, particularly when they showed off Baryshnikov.
Unfortunately Paul Taylor's Oz displayed far too much of the Taylor whimsy, a brand of humour that simply does not cross the Atlantic.
Since it was not danced by Baryshnikov either, it had almost nothing to recommend it.
Not that the rest of the company were not excellent in their contemporary way.
It was simply an unfortunate choice of repertory.
Still, it was heartening to see that Baryshnikov, now that he is running a company of his own, was applying the wisdom taken for granted in ballet, but still to be learned in too many American contemporary companies: that it is dangerous to make up a mixed programme using the work of only one choreographer.
Not even Balanchine always survives this test, and lesser creators ignore it at their and our peril.
The Arts: High art and on to the next disc
By David Sexton
COME, tell me how you live, and what it is you do!’
The White Knight underlined this central question by shaking the aged man from side to side, until his face was blue.
Most interviewers these days show less commitment.
Sue Lawley, for example, on Desert Island Discs (Radio 4, Sunday) is vapidity itself, or, put it another way, elocution alone seems to use up all her mental energy.
Last week she had the good fortune to have as guest the great art historian Sir Ernst Gombrich.
A fine comedy resulted, as the high culture of pre-war Vienna was reduced to eight discs, one book (Goethe's poems), one luxury (a bath-tub), and responses to such questions as ‘What should a person going into an art gallery for the first time look for?’
Sir Ernst rose above the dopey format.
For one thing, unlike many sportier guests, he was able to choose recordings that, while functioning as mementos, were also excellent in themselves.
Bach's Prelude in C Major was movingly played by his mother; Beethoven's String Quartet No 12 was performed by family friends, the Busch Quartet; Mozart's Jeunehomme Concerto with his pal of 70 years, Rudolf Serkin, at the piano…
For another, Gombrich was unfailingly courteous and informative, without, however, going so far as to make his interviewer sound good.
One of Sue Lawley's most expressive devices in Desert Island Discs is to punctuate any particularly emotive testimony with a tremulous moment's pause, followed smartly by a record request.
Here was a classic example.
Gombrich sombrely recalled hearing about Auschwitz while working at the BBC Monitoring Service during the war: ‘They claimed at that time — I remember that as if it were yesterday — they claimed that at least five million people had been killed, and I remember a colleague of mine coming to me to check this figure, because it seemed impossible.
And I said, yes, it is impossible.
But it happened to be true.’
After a decent pause, or, put it another way, a pause of two seconds, Lawley responded, as it were feelingly yet firmly: ‘Record number five’.
Life must go on, and eight records makes for a tight fit in a 40-minute programme.
The Poet Laureate, Ted Hughes, was less sympathetic in Poet of the Month (Sunday, Radio 3).
He is happy to write about the monarchy because he believes royalty is ‘the point where divine qualities become ordinary human qualities’.
If you get rid of royalty, he remarked, ‘what you've actually done is to pull the root out that draws up the energies in your ordinary personality from whatever is beneath your personality’.
He has ‘a nostalgia for the palaeolithic world’, he confessed.
‘That was a world I would have quite liked to live in,’ he added.
If only we could fix it for you, Ted…
Also out of this world was the subject of another excellent Soundtrack documentary, Benjamin Creme (Thursday, Radio 4).
Mr Creme believes Christ has already come again — came a few years ago actually — and is now residing in the Asian community in London, waiting for a more receptive attitude from the press before He shows Himself on worldwide television, when ‘He won't actually speak, but His thoughts, His ideas, His call to humanity, will take place silently, telepathically.’
The reporter, Mick Brown, followed this story with exemplary tact, or, put it another way, as if it had never struck him that he was talking to loonies.
A Mr Patel made mystical predictions.
‘What's going to happen has already happened in space,’ he announced.
‘Will John Major leave office?’ asked Mick Brown smartly.
‘He has got to, he has got to,’ confirmed the seer.
A Colombian journalist, now living in Hampstead, described the Christ she was once privileged to view: ‘It was a face that was a golden-bronze sort of colour, with very large dark eyes that were very luminous, and very high cheekbones and a longish face and he also had a beard,’ she said reverently.
Mr Brown's respectful reception of these corkers made me wonder what he looks like.
On the short side, I decided: somewhat plump no doubt, balding probably, but with a notably trusting and ruddy face and, as I see it, eagerly darting eyes.
With his feeling for tall stories he's a radio natural, though.