

Capital traffic faces a marathon hurdle
by Christy Campbell and Chris Evans
POLICE are braced for a traffic nightmare today as more than half a million sports fans converge on London for today's marathon and the League Cup final.
The match is due to kick off this afternoon at Wembley Stadium, less than two miles from the scene of the Staples Corner blast early on Saturday.
The marathon passes close to the City bomb zone.
Both events will go ahead amid tightened security.
At Staples Corner, an estimated 100lb of explosive carved a crater 4ft deep and 15ft wide in the road, weakening the supports of two flyovers.
Police on the scene predicted that it would be months before the capital's vital traffic gateway to the north was back to normal.
A six-mile stretch at the southern end of the M1 was shut yesterday and may remain closed all today.
A two-mile section of the triple-lane North Circular Road and the Brent Cross shopping complex were also sealed off.
The Edgware Road underpass will stay closed all weekend.
In the City, numerous roads around the blast site at St Mary Axe remained cordoned off last night.
London Transport has diverted City buses and the 112 bus along the North Circular is also affected.
Liverpool Street Underground and main line stations re-opened yesterday morning, but Aldgate remained shut.
British Rail said Fenchurch Street would remain closed throughout today.
Trains from Shoeburyness and Tilbury are being re-routed to Liverpool Street.
Police have advised the expected 90,000 Nottingham Forest and Manchester United soccer fans converging on Wembley to expect long delays and to reach the stadium via the A40 and M40.
Emergency signing will guide diverted traffic.
Department of Transport engineers last night were assessing damage to the two flyovers which feed traffic from the M1 on to the A406 North Circular Road and the A5 Edgware Road.
The bomb exploded directly beneath the northbound lanes of the Edgware Road flyover, destroying supports.
Police thought the flyover would have to be demolished.
The North Circular flyover, which runs over the Edgware Road bridge, also was damaged.
The first of the 35,000 runners in the London Marathon will head along Lower Thames Street, close to the City blast site, at about 11.05 this morning.
The organisers expect 500,000 spectators to line the route from Blackheath to Westminster Bridge.
ADT, the race organisers, said last night that the race route would not be altered because of the blast.
Are action men playing with danger?
by Anthea Hall
GRAEME Souness's triple heart bypass and the reminder last week that former Wimbledon champion Arthur Ashe had undergone a similar operation have prompted the question: do athletes overtax their hearts?
How could such an affliction strike down the Liverpool manager, a 38-year-old fitness fanatic, who was playing in midfield for Scotland and Liverpool only two years ago?
And how was it possible for a man with cardiac problems to win the greatest tennis crown of them all at Wimbledon in 1975?
Is exercise now joining the lengthening list of things that are bad for you after all?
Ashe, now 48, underwent a quadruple bypass operation after a heart attack at the age of 35.
It is disturbingly easy to think of sportsmen with cardiac problems: Coventry manager and former England coach Don Howe, now 56, had a bypass operation less than four years ago.
Tony Barton, former Northampton manager, said of the heart attack he suffered: ‘The fact that you are physically fit, like I was in 1984 and Graeme is now, has no bearing on things.’
Jock Stein, former manager of Scotland, and David Longhurst, the York City striker, both died of heart attacks; the Dutch coach of Barcelona, Johan Cruyff, was given a double heart bypass operation after collapsing; and only last month West Hartlepool's rugby union lock forward, John Howe, collapsed and died on the pitch.
On the eve of today's London marathon, despite reassurances from cardiac experts that exercise has always been and still is beneficial to health, there are questions about heart disease among sportsmen and women that prompt further research.
Until the late 1950s, medical advice to people with heart problems and high blood pressure was to rest.
But it has since been recognised that this was wrong and that what is termed ‘sub-maximal’ exercise is beneficial to health, protects against heart attacks and is an important aid to recovery after them.
This is because reasonable exercise reduces the level of blood fats and increases the level of high-density lipoproteins that clear cholesterol out of the blood.
Experts explain that exercise cannot cause heart disease or a tendency to accumulate cholesterol, both of which are genetically determined characteristics and cannot be ‘brought on’ by external factors.
Nor, by the same token, can they be ‘cured’ by external factors.
Heart experts never tire of pointing out that Winston Churchill started life as a frail premature baby, went on to smoke, drink heavily and eat to the point of obesity, but lived to a great age, whereas Nathan Pritikin, inventor of the Pritikin diet, died a premature death despite being obsessed with health.
But if the cases of Souness and Ashe demonstrate that super-fitness cannot overcome natural genetic disadvantages, do they also illustrate something more sinister: that over-fitness can damage your health?
Would either of them have avoided bypass surgery if they had not been top athletes?
According to Greg McLatchie, director of the National Sports Medicine Institute at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and consultant surgeon at the Hartlepool General Hospital, it might have worked either way.
Their fitness might have protected them, but the stress of competitive sport could have been damaging.
What we did not know, he said, was the effect of strenuous exercise combined with the wrong kind of stress.
‘According to the latest research in the United States, it is not just stress that is bad for you.
It is stress causing hostility and aggression that is now thought to contribute to cholesterol deposits in arteries.’
Mr McLatchie said that the big question in sport was that the effects of maximal exercise were unknown.
‘Famous research on American longshoremen, who worked 14 hours a day loading ships, and who smoked and drank as well as sweating their guts out, showed they were at low risk from cardiac problems and that severe exercise can protect against heart disease.
But most people are not capable of exercise at this level,’ he said.
‘We also know that in squash players, sudden exercise can produce abnormal heart rhythms which can cause death.’
John Davies, medical director of the Harley Street Sports Clinic, said that football managers were in a uniquely stressful position.
‘They are totally reliant on results — a manager is only as good as his players.
They are got at from every angle, from the board of directors, the crowd and the players, and are in a no-win situation.’
Divers sink into war graves row
by Amit Roy
BRITISH sub-aqua divers are being warned not to desecrate what the Japanese say are their biggest war graves in the South Pacific.
The plea, from Japanese war veterans' groups, comes as a diving team from Bristol begins an expedition in Truk Lagoon today to chart the wreckage of the Japanese 4th Fleet, which was destroyed by the Americans in February 1944…
The remains of thousands of servicemen, along with at least 60 warships and 250 aircraft, lie in water between 30ft and 160ft deep.
Truk forms part of the Eastern Caroline Islands, 2,000 miles south-east of Japan.
Travel arrangements for the Bristol team were made by Regal Diving, of Sutton, Cambridgeshire, which advertises its £2,000-a-head package with the slogan: ‘Dive the legendary ghost fleet of Truk Lagoon.’
Japanese veterans' groups protest that the diving shows disrespect to their war dead.
They are pressing their government to stop the diving and turn Truk into a war grave.
Andrew Telford, owner of Regal Diving, said: ‘Perhaps we could have a compromise and dive only where there are no human remains.
In Britain, you are not allowed to dive at all if a ship is a war grave.’
But the Japanese attitude to other countries' war graves is not winning them any friends.
A Japanese television company recently sent a reporter to take secret underwater film of ships in Pearl Harbor considered war graves by the Americans.
The problem for the Japanese is that Truk is a profitable destination for American travel companies and is part of the Federated States of Micronesia, a US protectorate, which does not consider the site a war grave.
As the Bristol team explores Truk Lagoon today, its members will adhere to the British code for divers: ‘Look, don't touch.’
42,000 tons of rubble fail to make a splash
by Robert Tilley in Munich
THE hanging rock of Switzerland's Urnersee has finally fallen.
But it wasn't the big splash feared by locals living along the shores of the lake.
The 42,000-ton rock, which had threatened to plunge into the lake and inundate the opposite shore with a huge wave, was blown up by Swiss army explosives experts.
People who had been living in the shadow of the rock breathed easily again.
But for hundreds of sightseers who took up vantage points in the nearby mountains and on the main deck of an Urnersee pleasure boat, it was the disappointment of the year.
Paying passengers who clung to the railings of the MS Waldstatten as the explosive charges were detonated felt scarcely a ripple as debris dropped into the water.
The bows of the boat rocked as gently as a baby's cradle.
The decision to dynamite the rock, using five tons of explosives, was taken last week after it was found to be moving at an accelerated rate.
A Doomsday watch had been kept on the great slab of rock — nearly the size of a football pitch — ever since workers discovered a fault in the face of the mountainside above the N-2 highway in February.
A few days after the discovery, local authorities received a call from a woman claiming to be a clairvoyant.
She warned them the rock would tumble into the lake before preparations could be completed for dynamiting it.
The highway — the area's only direct access to the regional capital Schwyz — was closed and has now been cut completely by the rock fall.
A 300-yard tunnel is being drilled through the mountainside to connect the two halves of the severed road again.
Closing the road meant that motorists driving from Sisikon to Schwyz at the northern end of the lake — a distance of only six miles — faced a 60-mile detour.
Yesterday, there was a subdued mood of anti-climax on the shores of the Urnersee as the locals began clearing the debris and prepared to welcome the holidaymakers who would face nothing more dangerous now than the perils of the twisting lakeside road.
The alpine peace of the picturesque corner of Switzerland had been restored.
You could hear a pebble drop now.
Cricket: Essex Man wants to be a winner again
Peter Deeley on the start of the domestic season
THE DOMESTIC cricket year gets off to its time-honoured start tomorrow with the 1991 county champions Essex making the short journey to Lord's for the campaign's curtain-raiser.
This time, there is a break with tradition, an England A XI providing the opposition instead of the MCC for the four-day game.
Now that Essex Man has demonstrated his backing for one winning team, the Conservatives, the men of Essex will be keen to show that they, too, deserve the people's support for a second term at the head of the Championship table.
None more so than captain Graham Gooch who, although he could not deliver the Government the fillip of a World Cup win, appeared alongside another cricket-loving leader, John Major, at one of his election rallies.
Gooch, now 38, continues to hint that the end of his playing career may be round the corner but would dearly like to complete this summer the double of a Test series win over Pakistan and Essex's sixth championship title, having been around when all the other five were won.
Essex have Australian Test player Mark Waugh back on their books this season, in place of Salim Malik, who will be on duty with the tourists.
Waugh spent three seasons at Chelmsford, from 1988 to 90 and, in his final year, scored more than 2,000 runs at an average of more than 77.
Martyn Moxon captains the England A side, who are drawn from the party who recently returned from the Caribbean tour, with Hugh Morris as his deputy.
Apart from the incentive the match will offer to Test aspirants such as Surrey's Darren Bicknell and Warwickshire's Tim Munton, the selectors will have a chance to assess the current form of Devon Malcolm and Mark Ramprakash, who are still on the threshhold of England places.
Yesterday Essex were taken to the last over by first-class newcomers Durham before securing a four-wicket win in a 50-over friendly at Chelmsford.
Durham scored 212 for nine, and Essex were struggling in reply.
But Nicholas Knight and Don Topley got the target down to six off the last over, and Knight hit the first ball into the crowd.
Motoring: Jaguar buck the trend
I AM not sure that the XJ220, costing £400,000 and capable of 200mph, represents the most suitable symbol for Jaguar in these recessionary times.
The world has changed since the long, low silver engineering prototype was unveiled at the 1988 British Motor Show and Jaguar's then chief executive, Sir John Egan, decided that they should try to find a way to build it, as the ultimate supercar to outdo Ferrari and Porsche.
One of Egan's last gestures before Ford took over Jaguar at the end of 1989 was to give the go-ahead for a limited production of 350 XJ220s.
The development was entrusted to JaguarSport, a company they jointly own with Tom Walkinshaw Racing who ran the Le Mans-winning Jaguar racing team.
Prospective owners were required to put down an initial deposit of £50,000, which seemed fair enough when they had received 1,400 applications and at a time when the prices of exclusive cars were rising to the stratosphere.
Delivery of the first one was scheduled for 1992.
Over the last few months, those who have paid up have been given the VIP treatment at JaguarSport's purpose-built factory at Bloxham, near Banbury, where the first production XJ220s are now under construction.
JaguarSport expect to complete 150 cars this year, and the remaining 200 next year.
Seven XJ220 prototypes have been tested all over the world.
They have lapped the 14-mile Nurburgring circuit 40 seconds quicker than any other production car and recorded 212 mph on the speed bowl at Ford's proving ground in Texas.
The Jaguar XJ220, with its 540 bhp 3.5-litre twin-turbo V6 engine, is Britain's fastest-ever production car, as well as the most expensive.
But not for long.
The ‘F1’ road car being developed by the World Champion racing team, due to be revealed next month, promises to overtake the super-Jag in speed and price.
Snooker: Davis in six-hour training routine
By Joe Lancaster
STEVE DAVIS has been practising six hours a day during the build-up to the Embassy World championship, such is his determination to win his seventh title.
He has not won it since he demolished John Parrott in 1989 — and he has shown a total commitment and desire to lift the trophy at the Crucible Theatre in Sheffield on May 4.
Although two lean years by his standard followed, Davis, 34, still reached two world semi-finals.
Elation returned after 27 months' drought when he won his first ranking tournament at the Mercantile Credit in Bournemouth last January.
Those dark days are behind him and psychologically he is stronger.
He says: ‘The will to succeed came through in those two years.
I never wilted and was proud of my fighting qualities when I was looking for survival and happy for any form of success.
‘This season has been far better.
Now I am looking to win.
The world championship is the ultimate; any top player to lose at the Crucible can consider it a failure.’
Prowess at the game is not enough.
An iron constitution is required for 19 to 34-frame matches.
He will need to keep his eye on the ball during an opening match against rookie Peter Ebdon.
Davis is not taking it for granted.
‘The Crucible is awesome.
I still get butterflies coming down the steps to the tournament table.
‘I have a dress rehearsal the day before my match, walking into an empty arena.
Then, prior to my game, go to the gents, clear my head and feel ready for an appearance.
Times are changing, but I cannot see anybody stopping the world-ranked top four.’
Scotland's Stephen Hendry, 22, the world No 1, declares: ‘There is nobody I fear at Sheffield.
Provided I am focused 100 per cent, I will win it.
‘When I lost the crown last year, it was the worst feeling of my life.
Winning the world championship is one of the main ambitions of the season, but being No 1 is more important to me; it shows a player for his performances over a year, as opposed to two weeks.’
A bookmakers' 2–1 favourite, he first confronts Stephen Murphy, of Dublin, three years a professional but raw to the aptly-named Crucible.
A second-round possible clash against Thai James Wattana on the road to the 35-frame final spread over two days, and worth £150,000, could be a pitfall.’
Jimmy White has been world No 2 and three times a finalist.
His Embassy build-up flopped last week from an early Irish Masters defeat after winning both the British and European crowns.
Title-holder Parrott peaked early at Dubai and Preston's UK Championship, but has been unpredictable.
Technical advice from fellow Lancastrian John Spencer helped to land last year's title and he is again in his corner.
Athletics: Stalling tactics prevail on road
By Peter Hildreth
THE IAAF have sidelined a recommendation that long distance road races, including the marathon, should be added to the list of events at which official world records are ratified.
Lack of time has been cited as a possible reason why a new set of criteria put before the world governing body's council in Tokyo last year failed to come up for discussion.
The criteria by which marathon times would become acceptable for ratification as world records were drafted by the IAAF's own road running committee in response to a call for change many think is overdue.
For it remains a curious anomaly that although the marathon has been the classic test of long distance endurance throughout nearly a century of Olympic history, the fastest timings have never enjoyed the status of world records.
Instead, the lesser designation of ‘best performances’ has been employed, mainly due to the difficulty of standardising courses.
John Disley, course director of the first 11 London marathons, says: ‘Because road running has become so much more important in recent years — in some countries even more important than track and field events — it seems to be sensible for world records to be ratified.’
Steve Brace, top British starter in today's ADT London marathon, also makes a point about cash bonuses.
‘At Boston, for example(an A to B course rather than an out-and-back course) in a year when there is a strong following wind, they're going to set phenomenal times.
This doesn't seem a fair way of qualifying for the huge incentives on offer for a record.’
One of the new criteria, which would rule out Boston, New York and London as races with world record credentials, is that the start should not be further away from the finish than 30 per cent of the total distance run.
A second would make it irregular for the start to be higher or lower than the finish by a factor of more than one metre for every kilometre of the distance.
Boston, which drops 139 metres between start and finish, again fails.
However, Rotterdam, scene of the three fastest marathons, qualifies, as does Chicago, the venue for the British record of 2hrs 07mins 13secs by Steve Jones.
Anticipating approval by the IAAF, which did not materialise, the governing bodies of both the UK and US decided last year to accept the new criteria as the basis for ratifying national records.
Paradoxically, the world governing body lags behind two of its member federations in implementing a measure recommended by its own specialist committee.
The reason for this could be that the course for this year's Olympic marathon in Barcelona fails the two main criteria.
And the IAAF, reluctant to embarrass the host nation, are reserving the problem for a future agenda.
Golf: An uphill struggle mastering the 18th
Chris Plumridge with an assessment of the unfamiliar side of a familiar course
AS THE only course which stages a major championship every year, Augusta National has become as familiar to golfers as the lay-out of their own home.
Due to the extensive television coverage practically every hole on the course, and certainly all those on the second nine, can be conjured up in the mind's eye, even when the tournament is long over.
What television cannot do is convey the rise and fall of the holes and show how undulating the land is.
What the camera cannot reveal is when you set off on the second nine from the 10th tee, by the time you reach the green you have travelled nearly 60 feet downhill.
As you pick your way through the minefield of the remaining holes, you are gradually working your way uphill, until finally you arrive on the 18th tee.
This hole, which runs parallel to the 10th, is not that long (420 yards), but that downhill run of nearly 60 feet now has to be traversed in the opposite direction.
Again, the camera flattens this perspective and the steepness of the incline is reduced to the viewer.
To the player it is all too real and even from the prime position in the middle of the fairway he can barely pick out the top of the flag amid the brightly-coloured hues of the spectators.
The 18th at Augusta is the sort of hole the professionals would rather not have to play.
After hours of learning to hook the ball from the tee, when they get to the 18th the ideal shot is a fade.
If this is achieved, then the fact that the ball is pitching into an upslope means there's very little run.
Then they are playing a semi-blind second shot to a long narrow green, where deft perfection is crucial.
Is it, therefore, a great finishing hole or does it simply feed off the pressure of the Masters?
Jack Nicklaus thinks it is the latter.
‘It's not a great finishing hole,’ he says.
‘But it yields a lot of bogeys and the pressure of playing in the Masters adds to the notoriety.’
Tom Watson believes that if it were located in the middle of the course, it would not be as difficult.
Craig Stadler, as befits someone whose fuse appears permanently primed, sums up the hole more succinctly: ‘It's a pain in the ass.’
In 55 Masters, more than a dozen have been won, lost or extended into play-offs on the 18th.
Four times it has been birdied for a one-stroke victory, the most impressive being Sandy Lyle's wonderful second shot from sand in 1988.
Other players have less fond memories of the 18th.
Watson could be the owner of four Masters titles instead of two if he had parred the hole in 1978 and last year.
In 1978, Gary Player had birdied the hole for a 64 to set the target, but Watson, needing a par to tie, hooked from the tee and his second shot scuttled off the left edge of the green from where there is little chance of getting down in two more.
In 1991, Watson was primed from the lead with Jose-Maria Olazabal and Ian Woosnam and overdid the fade from the tee.
From the right-hand group of trees, he went into the front left-hand bunker.
The bunker shot nearly pitched in the hole, but finished 30 feet away from where he three-putted for a six.
Olazabal was another who found the 18th a peak too far.
His tee shot lacked the necessary left-to-right spin and finished in one of the two fairway bunkers.
From there, he was bunkered by the green and took three more to hole out.
That five was to haunt him for many months afterwards.
On the other hand, Woosnam scorned the perils of the fairway bunkers and simply blasted his tee-shot over them, a carry of 270 yards.
These bunkers were constructed in 1966 for the express purpose of preventing Nicklaus from taking this route.
But even if they are carried, the second shot becomes fraught with danger.
Woosnam only had an eight iron to the green but with a target just 49 feet wide, the difficulty lay in keeping the ball on the green.
He managed to hold the ball on the putting surface and, two putts later, the last one from six feet, he was on his knees in triumph, or was it supplication?
Agony and ecstasy are ever present on the 18th.
In 1960, Arnold Palmer birdied the hole to win but the following year took a duffer's six to lose; Hubert Green missed a putt of three feet to tie in 1978; Ed Sneed wilted in 1979, taking a bogey five when a par would have won; Greg Norman needed a par to tie with Nicklaus in 1986 but succumbed to a blocked second shot; Larry Mize birdied the hole in 1987 to force a play-off with Severiano Ballesteros and Norman, which Mize won.
It is a fair bet that at the conclusion of this year's Masters, the 18th will again have played a decisive role in the outcome.
For most players it will be an uphill struggle but for someone, it will represent the summit of his career.
Golf: Australians threaten old order
Ian Ridley on a serious challenge to Ryder Cup rivalry at Augusta's golfing showpiece
IT WAS supposedly a new instalment for a new golf season of the United States v Europe rivalry that the Ryder Cup brought so sharply into focus.
Nobody told the Australians, though.
While all the leading players at the Masters have been asked about the prospects of the US regaining a title won by the British in the last four years, the Australians have been quietly asserting themselves.
In the first round, there was Wayne Grady, the US PGA champion in 1990, leading their six invitees with a 68.
Craig Parry and the little-known — in Europe — Steve Elkington also broke 70.
In the second, Parry, the Australian Masters champion, made his move for the joint lead with his 66.
Going in to yesterday's third round, Ian Baker-Finch, Greg Norman and Elkington gave Australia four in the top 13, only one of whom — Woosnam — was European and seven of whom were American.
The other player was Fulton Allem of South Africa.
Grady slipped with a 75 but made the cut, as did Roger Davis with a splendid 68 to retrieve his position after a first round of 77.
‘No one from Australia has won the Masters,’ Parry noted.
‘The first to win it will be remembered for a long, long time.’
He liked the sound of it as he said it.
He also recalled as an eight-year-old, 18 years ago, getting up at five in the morning to watch the event on television at his home in Sunshine, Victoria.
‘I used to practise my putting when the ads came on,’ he said.
For his participation on the European tour these dys, he has based himself at Bagshot, in Surrey.
His caddy this week is Andy Prodger, the Englishman who caddied for Nick Faldo when he won the Masters in 1989.
Parry's hero as an Australian?
‘It's hard to get past Greg Norman,’ he said.
Norman, of course, had his chance to win the Masters in 1987 but took five at the 18thand then lost in a play-off to the native Augustan Larry Mize.
‘It's just nice to be at Augusta for the weekend,’ he said alluding to his more recent efforts here.
Norman was also runner-up in 1986.
Other Australians to have finished second have been Jack Newton (1980), Bruce Crampton (1972) and Jim Ferrier (1950).
Elkington, meanwhile, is probably the least known of the contingent.
The 29-year-old from Sydney first came to the United States in 1981 for the world junior championship and won it.
‘Golf is improved so much all over the world,’ says Baker-Finch, the Open champion who followed his first round of 70 with a 69, ‘and the Aussies have a lot of potential.’
None has yet advanced at Augusta the idea that there should be a Ryder Cup-style event to include the Australians, though the theory has been voiced before.
The four tours team event in Japan in the Autumn isn't the same.
Much more of what Augusta has seen so far, though, and the Australians will be laying down challenges again to the United States and Europe.
After the War on the Shore of Kiawah Island, they might offer to host something like a Bold Boast on the Gold Coast.
Squash: Devoy test next for Jackman
By D J Rutnagur
HAVING taken her revenge on Sue Wright, the English girl who beat her last year, world champion Susan Devoy of New Zealand will be challenged by Cassie Jackman, England's No 5 and world junior champion, in the semi-finals of the Hi-Tec British Open Championships, at Wembley, today.
Jackman upset seedings to qualify and convincingly beat the fourth-seeded Michelle Martin of Australia.
Devoy knows what to expect from Jackman who played an excellent match against her in the Leekes Welsh Classic two months ago.
Jackman has played Martin twice in the last eight months and lost both times, but Jackman was buoyed by the fact that she had taken a game off her on each occasion.
Martin was nervous and inhibited.
Only in the third game did she give free rein to her flair and Jackman was thrown off her stride by the abrupt increase in pace.
But Jackman had the strokes and strength to respond to the challenge and her counter-offensive in the fourth game swung the balance back.
There were times during the other quarter-final when a repeat win for Wright over Devoy seemed possible.
For all her technical excellence and her standing in the game's history — seven times British Open champion and three times world champion — the New Zealander can become nervous.
Martine Le Moignan, the England No 1, reached the semi-finals for the ninth time in 10 years beating Australian Liz Irving.In the men's event, Australia's Rodney Martin and Jansher Khan, the top seed, qualified to meet in the semi-finals.
Jansher did not concede more than three points in beating Tristan Nancarrow.
England were assured of a place in the final when Lisa Opie, the holder, beat the second-seeded Australian, Robyn Lambourne in four games.
She meets her old rival, Miss Le Moignan.
Yachting: Hopes rise for Olympic chances
By David Pelly
BRITISH Olympic yachting received a welcome shot in the arm in the French Olympic classes regatta at Hyeres.
There were highly satisfactory British performances in the men's and women's Lechner sailboards, the men's and women's singlehanded dinghies, the men's 470, and the Soling keelboat.
The Flying Dutchman results were erratic, but certainly much improved, and there is now a real battle for the Olympic place between Will Henderson, Adrian Stead and Roger Tushingham.
The British Olympic yachting team, which a week ago was an unknown quantity, has now come into sharper focus with three representatives chosen, and others emerging.
Lawrie Smith won the Soling position without needing to compete in a match-race play-off.
Shirley Robertson has taken the slot in the Europe dinghy while Penny Way was pre-selected for the woman's Lechner sailboard.
The remarkable performance by Barrie Edgington, who was second in the men's Lechner sailboard, makes him an almost certain choice, and Stuart Childerley looks unbeatable in the Finn.
Men's Lechner. — no race yesterday.
Women's Lechner. — no race yesterday.
Racing: Tertian in limelight after Lion's success
By J A McGrath
FRENCH TRAINER Andre Fabre's lightning visit to Newbury ensured he has the 2,000 Guineas favourite in his yard — but curiously it is not Lion Cavern, the courageous winner of the Singer & Friedlander Greenham Stakes.
The new Guineas favourite is Tertian, a Newmarket winner last season, and now as low as 11–2 for the colts' classic on May 2.
Lion Cavern, on the other hand, is 12–1 for the race with Ladbrokes, while Hills quote him 6–1 ‘with a run.’
Anthony Stroud, racing manager for Lion Cavern's owner Sheikh Mohammed, says no decision on a Guineas run will be made until Wednesday, when Steinbeck and Wolfhound step out at Newmarket.
Fabre, obviously delighted with Lion Cavern's winning reappearance, commented: ‘The ground will have a bearing on our decision.
He wouldn't like it bone hard.’
Then, in obvious reference to arch-rival Francois Boutin's post-race comments concerning Arazi last week, Fabre said with a mischievious grin: ‘Lion Cavern was only 62 per cent fit today.’
Fabre confirmed that Tertian will go straight to the 2,000 Guineas, in which he will be ridden by Pat Eddery for Khalid Abdullah.
Lion Cavern came from last in a race run at a slow early pace, to get up in the finalstrides and score by a head from long-time leader River Falls, with Swing Low a further length away third, and Rodrigo de Triano failing to run on in the final furlong and weakening for fourth.
Richard Hannon is eager for revenge with River Falls and Swing Low and was lamenting the fact that he had instructed Walter Swinburn to hold up Swing Low in the early stages.
‘It will be a different story at Newmarket,’ said Hannon.
‘I should have told Walter to let him go.’
Rodrigo de Triano clearly needed the run and is still on target for the 2,000 Guineas, for which he is now a top-priced 7–1.
Michael Stoute, who trained one of last season's toughest horses, Rock Hopper, has found a worthy successor in Saddlers' Hall, who romped home with the Lanes End John Porter Stakes.
Although Saddlers' Hall, runner-up to Toulon in last year's St Leger, did not defeat strong opposition, it was more the way in which he achieved this victory that impressed and he is certain to be a force later in the season.
‘He is a May 26 foal and I always thought he'd be a better four-year-old,’ said Stoute, who has pencilled in the Coronation Cup at Epsom, on June 4, for the colt.
‘He will have one race before then, but I have yet to decide where,’ said the trainer, adding: ‘He is a much stronger horse now and I am sure that one and a half miles is his best distance.’
Saddlers' Hall was sent into the lead by Pat Eddery two furlongs out and annihilated his opponents, sprinting clear to score by 10 lengths.
Hannon received encouragement for his Derby hope Assessor when Beyton landed the Burghclere Stakes for Bruce Raymond.
The winner is the regular work companion of Assessor, a 33–1 chance for the Ever Ready Derby and due to reappear in the Thresher Classic Trial at Sandown Park later this month, which is also the target for Robert Sangster's River Defences (also 33–1 for the Derby), an impressive winner of the Compton Maiden Stakes.
River Defences was the middle leg of a 899–1 Sangster hat-trick, offering the Isle of Man-based owner some consolation for Rodrigo de Triano's eclipse.
Captain in charge
CAPTAIN DIBBLE, a novice who finished fifth in last month's Sun Alliance Chase, belied his inexperience when landing the William Hill Scottish National at Ayr.
Ridden by Peter Scudamore, Nigel Twiston-Davies's seven-year-old took over from the ill-fated Combermere at the 13th of the 27 fences and, staying on strongly approaching the last, drew clear of the top-weight Dalkey Sound to record an impressive eight-length victory.
Off The Bru, a 200–1 chance, was six lengths back in third, with Gee Armytage, on her father's Merry Master, fourth.
Scudamore said: ‘This has paid us dividends for our gamble in running him in a big handicap for the first time.
He really wants the mud to show his best, but I have to say that this ground helped him get the trip.’
There was a sad sequel when Combermere, who was in third place at the time, shattered a hind leg on landing over the penultimate fence and had to be destroyed.
Germans revitalising monster mash syndrome
By RUSSELL DAVIES
THE CASE of World Athletics versus All Credibitity has now reached such a pitch of mealy-mouthed, farcical dithering that some of us in the public gallery are considering leaping into the well of the court and making a noisy scene.
We are beginning to think that the proceedings are expressly designed not to produce a verdict, and especially not a guilty one.
The worst of it is that one cannot yet express a proper anger about the state of things, since it is just about possible that the Frauleins Krabbe, Breuer and Moller are innocent of any serious wrongdoing (if that's the right term) in the affair of the Uniform Urine.
You would have to be a professional cobbler-up of sit-coms to give much credence to the available scenarios, but just in case, I suppose they are that: a) the tests were so incompetently performed that even a baboon's sample would have produced the same reading as was clocked by the three athletes identically; b) the three runners were having a joke at the testers' expense; c) the German trio was deliberately testing the vigilance of the drug monitors at a relatively out-of-the-way venue, for reasons of their own; d) that the samples were not urine at all but a draught of refreshing Lucozade, tested in error.
I don't think there's any point in thinking up any more daft plot-lines, since we're already in Monty Python country.
The four-year ban imposed on the runners, and then summarily quashed by the legal arm of Germany's athletic federation, the DLV, had seemed about right.
Perhaps some forgiving souls might protest that former East German athletes had faced a particular difficulty in giving up the bad habits imposed on them by the success-seeking machine of the old Communist regime, and that it would be unfair virtually to close off their future just because they hadn't yet properly learned another way of doing things.
All right then, three years.
Maybe even two years, to give them time to sort themselves out in advance of the next Olympics.
But not four months, which has been the German authorities' second-thought suggestion, arrived at without the benefit of further evidence — which, indeed, on the general admission of all parties, does not exist.
When considering why the DLV underwent this very swift and conspicuously awkward change of heart, we are once again thrown back on the resources of the imagination.
Perhaps they are sheepish about the efficiency or integrity of their testing systems, and unwilling to have them exposed to the public scrutiny that would follow if the banned athletes chose to take the matter further in law.
Perhaps the internal strains within the authorities of a newly-reunited Germany — and the demands of public opinion in the old East — make any punitive measures against ex-Easterners peculiarly uncomfortable to promote at this time (and Krabbe's coach has been widely fingered as a luminary in East Germany's old chemically-enhanced Sportkulur.)
Then again, it is always possible they tokenised the ban a) because they felt they could get away with it; b) because the stars involved are too big to lose (especially the photogenic Krabbe) from the firmament of German sport; c) because if it could all be made to look like a mistake, world athletics might look that much cleaner; d) because they feared a backlash from the disenfranchised trio, in the form of wholesale revelations about the extent of drug use in athletics, both in Germany and all over the world; and e) arising perhaps out of D, they don't feel like visiting a heavy punishment on their own girls, when there are many others the world over who are equally deserving of banishment.
This time we have by no means exhausted the resources of invention, but these possibilities contain perhaps enough plausibility to be getting on with.
When the DLV states that there are ‘holes in the chain of evidence’ that condemned the runners, it is prevaricating.
It means that there are holes in the DLV's willingness to connect up the evidence and enforce the conclusions it generates.
My guess is that the German authority is waiting to be forced by outside opinion to reimpose some form of genuine, serious ban; but that it will do so only at a price — that of an assurance from other major national authorities that they will actively target specific drug-suspects under their own jurisdiction, proceeding upon information they may already possess but have chosen not to ‘activate’.
This is very much in line with hypotheses d) and e), outlined above, and means that if a proper ban is reconfirmed, there could suddenly be a lot more bans where this one (nearly) came from.
If drug tests are not very soon standardised, properly funded, and universally applied — and the probity of the testers themselves rigorously monitored — then it will all be too late.
There is already a feeling in some people's minds that in athletics, as in so many other aspects of life, what can be done with the human body will be done, and that we might as well let them get on with it.
What cares the international television audience, runs the argument, if every single sprinter in an Olympic Final line-up is standing there positively humming with artifical stimulants?
He is there to perform, so let's accept that he (or she) will take whatever risks with his body he deems appropriate to the importance in his own life of winning the prize.
We don't ask a Hollywood actor whether his latest blockbusting performance was fuelled by cocaine or booze (though to be told that it was is mildly titillating), so why should we care how unorthodox were the preparations that preceded the athlete's explosion off the blocks?
If sport carries on combining with showbiz at the present rate, this dingy logic will eventually be hard to resist.
Some athletes will die when over-stimulation and over-exertion get into too tight a spiral, but since when did death deter sports fans?
If you look at, say, American TV wrestling, you can already see in it a strutting prediction of the showbiz-sports of the future, where drug-enhanced body-sculpture plays a part both in the athletic demands of the spectacle and in the personality-selling which is its true purpose.
Bulging plastic models of these faked-up Wrestlemania monsters are going very well at this moment, in our toyshops.
Would you care to see real athletes, Olympic competitors, packaged in the same way?
The alternative is to try to hang on, for as long as we can, to a form of athletic competition in which the participants at least claim to be just the same as the rest of us, only better-built by nature.
If there is a point to saluting the winner of a race, it is ultimately to celebrate his good fortune in being given the natural attributes to do what he does; and to thank him for the excitement of the spectacle he provides in devoting all his concentrated effort to showing he's the best.
Rugby Union: Richmond spring back in top style
By DEREK MARSHALL
Roundhay3, Richmond50MARTIN LIVESEY, Richmond's free-scoring outside-half, cast off any doubts about his fitness by leading his club's impressive surge back into Courage League Two at the first attempt.
He set up the first try with a fine break after 11 minutes, for Lloyd to round off the move with an impudent dummy.
Then he provided the springboard for the second with a long, perfectly-judged touch kick.
When Roundhay failed to control the ball at the subsequent line-out, Foster thrust his way over.
By half-time Richmond were sure of the victory they needed to clinch promotion, and Livesey had added three conversions and two penalty goals.
Roundhay were never in it, though Breakwell kicked a 12th-minute penalty.
Richmond's back-row was especially impressive, and Hudson, a lively forager, thoroughly deserved his first-half try, after Roundhay had failed to kill a loose ball.
The supremacy of the Richmond forwards was further emphasised by the concerted drive which swept lock-forward Lewis over.
But Roundhay's chances were not helped when Barry Willis had to be helped off with a leg injury.
Richmond scored further tries through Jonathan Willis, Hutton (2) and Cooper, and Livesey added three more conversions to bring his personal haul to 18 points.
Roundhay: I McNelly; J Holroyd, I Melia, N Longden, R Pentith; D Breakwell, A Turton; R Kemp, N Lineham, D Hayle, G Thompson (capt), V Wilkinson, S Bainbridge, B Willis, A Gibb.
Richmond: J Hoad; M Hutton, C Lloyd, R Rydon, P Greenwood; M Livesey, J Willis; J Foster, S Miller, K Boroevich (capt), J Lewis, D Cooper, P Della-Savina, M Hudson, D Sole.
Rugby Union: West Hartlepool are promoted
By John Pargeter
West Hartlepool7, Wakefield0 STILL deeply saddened by the death on the field of their England B international, John Howe, two weeks ago, West Hartlepool had every intention of winning this League Two match in their bid for promotion.
After struggling in the first half when playing into the wind, they made certain later; then came the news that Newcastle Gosforth's defeat at Bedford had given West Hartlepool promotion.
Yet Wakefield gave them a hard time throughout.
They had slightly the better of the first half but a poor pass to Sleightholme lost one chance and then Sleightholme could not touch down a useful kick by Maynard, Stabler getting there first.
Stabler had three chances to put West Hartlepool ahead with penalty kicks but failed, though one struck an upright.
Again early in the second half he was just wide, but after 49 minutes he did succeed when not only did Wakefield collapse a scrum but they were also offside.
West Hartlepool increased their lead after 58 minutes when Mitchell, the alert and sprightly hooker, burst through at speed for a fine try, leaving the opposition flat-footed.
Scully, Wakefield's experienced scrum-half, gained 50 yards in a magnificent run; but when he released the ball it was dropped and their last hopes faded.
West Hartlepool: K Oliphant; G Evans, C Lee, P Hodder, D Cooke; J Stabler (capt), J Wrigley; P Lancaster, S Mitchell, P Whitelock, J Dixon, P Robinson, P Pook, P Evans (S Cassidy 42), A Brown.
Wakefield: R Liley; M Harrison (capt), P Maynard, B Barley, J Sleightholme; S Townend, D Scully; R Burman, T Garnett, R Latham (S Whiteside 40), P Wood, R Bramley, N Hargreaves, M Price, J Griffiths.
Rugby Union: Orrell blow as Davies lands last-gasp drop
By JOHN MASON
Wasps13, Orrell12 HUW DAVIES, the former England back, prised open the Courage League championship with the last kick of a fraught match at Sudbury.
A spectacular dropped goal from 45 yards by Davies took Wasps to the narrowest of victories over title-chasing Orrell, who came to London in third place and with a match in hand.
Cruelly, the winning points stemmed from the only mistake made by Dewi Morris, England's Grand Slam scrum-half.
Throughout he had kept Orrell, beaten only once previously in the League this season, on course to maintain their title challenge.
Indeed, with barely five minutes remaining Orrell led 12–10.
It was in the final seconds that Morris hurried a clearing kick to touch which fell tantalisingly short.
Had it carried, the match would have been over.
Instead, Pilgrim and Bates circled perilously close to the touchline to keep the ball in play.
Davies, away to the right, shouted for possession, kept control of a fading pass and dropped for goal.
For a fraction the ball wavered in flight, Davies running a few paces as if in pursuit to help the ball on its way.
Suddenly, he jumped high in the air, referee Steve Griffith signalled that the kick was good, blew his whistle for time and that was that.
Orrell, having led 9–0 at half-time, could scarcely believe their eyes.
Defeat in the final second had, in all probability, pushed the Courage title back into the grasp of Bath, England's leading club.
It was a double blow, too, for Morris.
He, above all, had kept his head when colleagues were losing theirs.
He scored the Orrell try and at all times his canny persistence had Wasps on the back foot.
But Orrell did themselves less than justice and such was their nervous frustration that Hynes, the loose head, and flanker Ashurst were publicly warned by referee Griffith.
Not that Wasps have any cause to be smug.
They back-chatted Mr Griffith to such an extent that he reversed a penalty award to them close to the posts.
Strett, Orrell's goal-kicker, did not have the happiest of matches, but he put over that penalty goal.
Strett also converted the try by Morris, who capitalised on what the pack had started for an opportunist try at the posts.
At that stage Orrell, though without Heslop, who retired with badly bruised ribs after half an hour, looked set for another useful win.
But Wasps pegged away and when Ashurst was careless with his feet, Pilgrim kicked the penalty goal.
The Wasps' try came from Oti — a welcome return to something resembling known form when he was first to a clever chip by Pilgrim, whose second penalty goal eased Wasps ahead 10–9 with seven minutes left.
Strett won several medals with his second penalty goal — a pressure kick if ever there was one — to make it 12–10 but missed a final chance to add to the lead.
Wasps ran the ball back and, though losing the line-out, the quick-thinking Davies dropped for goal to snatch the most unlikely of victories.
Orrell: S Taberner; N Heslop, S Langford, M Fielden, P Halsall; M Strett, D Morris; M Hynes, M Hitchen, D Southern (capt), R Kimmins, C Cusani, N Ashurst, D Cleary, P Manley.
Referee: S Griffiths (N Midlands).
Rugby Union: Nottingham fight off predators to keep hopes alive
By JOHN REASON
Nottingham18, Northampton9 THE vultures circling over the Midlands waiting to indulge in some juicy recruitment if Nottingham are relegated are still not sure which way to fly for their meal.
With Matt Greenwood and Martin Pepper in tremendous form on the flank and with Stuart Potter scything through to score the decisive try of the game, Nottingham put a considerable dent in Northampton's hopes of winning League One.
Nottingham also dreamt of achieving a miraculous escape from relegation.
Their points difference is vastly better than Rugby's who are standing alongside them at the bottom and surely there was no way that a team as disadvantaged as Rugby could beat a team as talented as the Harlequins.
The dream lasted five minutes.
Then Nottingham learned that Rugby had indeed beaten Harlequins so now the Beeston club have to draw or win at Orrell in their last match on April 25 and Rugby have to lose at Leicester.
Northampton did not cheer up much either, because though Orrell lost to Wasps they know that if Bath win their home match against Saracens Bath will triumph on points difference.
That now looks the likeliest outcome.
Who goes down is another matter.
Rugby will not get any change out of Leicester, but it is just possible that Nottingham are now so fired up that they might escape with the point they need at Orrell.
With the eternal and infernal Beeston breeze behind them in the second half Nottingham certainly put in a tremendous finish against Northampton.
They missed a few kicks at goal but they nailed Northampton to their line and worked up such a storm that they had them scurrying all ways.
Even Shelford could not work them out of that one.
Twice Nottingham set themselves to push Northampton over their line.
That in itself was an extraordinary development, because Nottingham had struggled in the scrum late in the first half and Northampton had dominated with nine successive put-ins in the second half.
But back Northampton went and though they held the first Nottingham surge they could not stop the second and scrum-half Hughes dived over on the left to score a try which earned a standing ovation.
Gregory converted it too and Northampton knew they were dead and buried.
They had heard ominous sounds of the gravedigger just after half-time when they led 9–3.
Northampton did win a scrum against the head on their line but they could not escape and a ferocious tackle by Pepper knocked Foale backwards as he tried to drive from a scrum.
The power of the hit dislodged the ball and Gregory gleefully dropped a goal.
That brought Nottingham within range and in no time they produced a broadside which knocked Northampton sideways.
Hindmarch won a line-out and the powerful Potter went pumping past three defenders to score a try.
The vultures would like to get their beaks into him.
Gregory converted the try and as he had also kicked a penalty goal early in the match Nottingham were on their way.
In a different context so were Northampton.
Steele kicked an early penalty goal and the last of a series of raking diagonal kicks down the wind forced Kilford into touch near his line.
That enabled Northampton to set up a five-yard scrum and they pushed Nottingham over their line to score a try touched down by Shelford.
Steele converted.
With the breeze as strong as it was that lead never looked enough.
Nottingham: W Kilford; R Byrom, S Potter, C Jones, M Walker; G Gregory, J Hughes; M Freer, J Hudson, A Jackson, C Gray (capt), D Hindmarch, M Greenwood, M Pepper, J Wilby.
Northampton: B Ward; F Packman, M Dawson, R MacNaughton, H Thorneycroft; J Steele, D Elkington; G Baldwin, J Olver (capt), G Pearce, M Bayfield, J Etheridge, S Foale, R Tebbutt, W Shelford.
Rugby Union: Rugby stun Quins for crucial win
WHILE Nottingham were upsetting Northampton, fellow League One relegation strugglers Rugby staged a magnificient second-half revival to defeat Harlequins 29–20.
Quins led 20–7 at the break, but Rugby scored 22 points in the second half to record their second league win.
Full-back Mark Mapletoft contributed 17 points, including a try, with other touchdowns from winger Eddie Saunders, No 8 Mark Charles and a penalty try after David Pears was adjudged to have deliberately knocked forward a pass.
Quins had started in top gear with Will Carling ripping through the Rugby midfield for the opening try.
They dominated the first half adding further tries through winger Gavin Thompson and Pears, who also landed two penalty goals.
Saracens completed a clean sweep over rival London clubs by defeating London Irish 27–9.
Brian Davies, the scrum-half, scored two of the four tries with the others coming from Martin Gregory and replacement David Choules.
Ben Rudling kicked 11 points.
London Scottish, the League Two champions, lost their unbeaten Courage record this season at Waterloo, 22–15, where Ian Aitchison kicked 14 points.
Away from the Leagues, Leicester achieved a club record when defeating Liverpool St Helens 100–0.
Alan Hodgkinson, the father of Simon, has launched an unofficial fund to help Gary Rees, the Nottingham flanker, who faces a charge of grevious bodily harm after an incident against London Irish in January.
Hodgkinson senior says Rees faces possible bankruptcy and raised more than £1,000 during Nottingham's match against Northampton.
The RAF defeated the Army 18–6 at Twickenham which means this season's Inter Service tournament ends in a 10th triple tie.
Rugby Union: New rules make scouting a positive option for clubs
John Reason on the mounting dilemma facing the game as the demand for success continues to grow
WHEN A CLUB as great as Cardiff fall on times as hard as they are now it is easy to understand why they ask New Zealand's John Hart if he could take over as coaching director and why they have asked Australia's Alec Evans the same question.
Whether Evans, now 54, and who has suffered serious heart problems, is of an age and whether he has the constitution to undertake such a demanding task is another matter.
As Australia's forward coach, Evans did great work when he helped Alan Jones but the season before last he could not complete his coaching contract with the Gordon Club in Sydney because of his illness.
Gordon did not renew his contract, either.
They thought the risk too great.
No doubt Cardiff feel that they have to be seen to be doing something to restore both their fortunes and their credibility and that the something should be suitably dramatic.
But the coaching ground in New Zealand is probably more fertile.
Glenn Ross is proving that with his present work at Northampton and Maurice Trapp, the Englishman who coached Auckland for five years, is another with a proven track record.
Auckland lost only five games while Trapp was in charge.
Admittedly, in recent years, top coaches such as‘Chalkie’ White at Leicester and Alan Davies at Nottingham has provided a focus and created a centre of excellence which has attracted players but I am not so sure that the same parameters still apply.
When White and Davies were building their castles in the Midlands, the game was still mostly amateur.
It is not now.
Other considerations prevail.
That is why ‘Dusty’ Hare will not find it easy to wave a magic wand at Nottingham in his new paid position of director of rugby.
He has only to look at what happened to Colin McFadyean at Bristol and Malcolm Lewis at Nuneaton to see that the job has far more snakes than ladders.
It is quite evident that in some areas farming has become a distinctly precarious occupation but, in exchanging the effects of the EC's Common Agricultural Policy for the need to produce results in a rugby field, Hare may find that he has jumped out of the frying pan into the fire.
His greatest asset, of course, is that as a man he is so well liked.
Everyone will wish him well.
Also as both a rugby player and as a cricketer he played the game with distinction at first-class level.
He is fortunate, too, that at Nottingham he has such a deep well of rugby knowledge to help him.
Neil Mantell is already in the front line of the club's coaching efforts and Hare should waste no time in giving Peter Cook and Gary Rees their call-up papers.
Both have the technical knowledge to make a considerable impression as coaches.
The snag is, though, that coaching directors, no matter how eminent they are, do not win matches.
Only players win matches.
That is why Rugby Union nowadays would probably do just as well if the game built a system of scouting such as Rugby League has had for 100 years.
You have only to look at Northampton to see the truth of this.
Glenn Ross has done wonders with a player like fly-half John Steele but the man who has put Northampton on the map almost single handed is unquestionably Wayne Shelford.
What a player.
Or perhaps I should say, a player and a half.
Now if the protracted labour and gestation period ever does give birth to a new set of regulations governing player registration in England, the likes of Shelford will not be able to play in the rugby competitions in this country.
I cannot imagine that either Shelford or any of the other overseas itinerants would be prepared to live in this country for all but 45 days a year in order to qualify to play.
When last read, the new regulations now being hatched quite rightly make the process of requalifying just as unattractive and that will drop the entire issue firmly back into the lap of player recruitment within this country, with all that entails.
It will also challenge clubs like Nottingham — and perhaps even Cardiff — to become as effective as Saracens have been, not only in finding and developing new young talent, but in building such good relations with the junior clubs in their area as to make this process acceptable to both sides.
In the meantime I suspect that the Rugby Union will soon have to acknowledge that they are not nearly far enough down the road with their new registration legislation to have a hope of implementing it on May 1.
It may be that August 1 would now have to be a more realistic target date.
I hear that there might be some quite spectacular player migrations from that period, notably in the Midlands.
Consequently, as the stakes become bigger and bigger in the playing of the game, the scruples will become smaller and smaller when it comes to the back-alley work of player recruitment.
All the Home Unions would do well to recognise this and they would do even better to persuade the International Board to take effective control of the player migrations betwen the two hemispheres.
For instance, what the Harlequins are doing with Troy Coker at the moment may be legal but it bears no relation to what the law should be or to what it should be seen to be.
And make no mistake.
The clubs will wriggle like eels to try to get round whatever restrictions are formulated so the punishments for transgressions of the regulations have to be just as clearly defined as the crimes, and in their application those punishments have to come down as decisively as a guillotine.
Schools Rugby: Scots bow to English rule
Scotland 0, England 28 SCOTTISH Schools could not match the skill and strength of their English counterparts in the international at Balgray.
The visitors had overwhelming superiority in the set scrums and line-out and outstanding backs in their scrum-half and captain, Andrew Gomarsall, and full-back Jonathan Ufton.
The Scots competed well but in attack, had to rely mainly on some good running by centres Cameron Murray and Craig Joiner.
Ufton put England ahead with an eighth minute penalty goal and added a superb 40-metre drop goal 10 minutes later.
Gomarsall raced away from a maul to score an excellent solo try in 22 minutes and some fine handling produced a touchdown for left-wing Tim Stimpson three minutes later.
Ufton went in for England's third try in 49 minutes and then flanker Robert Leach touched down from a five-metre scrummage, Stimpson converting.
With four minutes to go, Stimpson dived over for his second try in the right-hand corner.
Rugby Union: Edwards calls tune as Wigan clinch latest championship
By Michael Crossley
Wigan50 Bradford Northern8 TO THE acclamation of their ecstatic supporters, Wigan triumphantly paraded the Championship Trophy around Central Park after this formality of a victory over relegation-haunted Bradford Northern had confirmed a third successive Stones Bitter title for this peerless team.
It is yet another record sequence for the club which dominates the rugby league scenario so completely.
Wigan may have begun the season with uncertainty in losing four out of their first nine games but, once they got into their stride, there was no stopping them.
Amazingly they have not lost a league game since the beginning of November, and after lifting the Championship, their eyes are now on a third successive double with the Challenge Cup looming at Wembley next month.
Victory was all too easy in this lopsided match and if this had been a boxing contest it would have surely been stopped after barely a quarter of the game had elapsed.
Wigan began so explosively that they had raced into a 34–0 lead within a mere 20 minutes as they ran in six memorable tries.
Then, presumably, feeling they had done enough, particularly with Wembley and the forthcoming Australasian tour on most of their minds, they relaxed until producing a late second-half flourish.
The match was a a personal triumph for Wigan's Test half-back Shaun Edwards; for in collecting his 18th medal he became the most decorated player in the club's history, overtaking the late and great forward of the post-war years, Ken Gee.
Edwards, who is still only 25, marked the occasion with four tries, including a remarkable hat-trick in the space of only 15 minutes, in that irresistible opening barrage.
They all came as a result of his marvellously intuitive support play, the best stemming from a masterly dummy by his scrum-half partner, Andy Gregory, in only the second minute.
What a relief for Great Britain that Gregory has agreed to tour and gone back on his original decision to retire from the international scene.
Winger Martin Offiah, whom the Central Park fans have clearly taken to their hearts after his world recordtransfer, scored two tries in glorious demonstrations of his devastating pace.
With a little more steadiness he could even have had another three.
He hit the flag on one occasion and then dropped the ball when he went over later on.
The third missed opportunity could have been the try of the season after Botica broke brilliantly from his own line and beat man after man but Offiah could not hold his pass on halfway with no-one between him and the Bradford line.
Botica's scintillating running earned him the Man of the Match Award and he ended with a points haul of 18 with seven goals and a try when he swooped and fly-kicked on a wayward Northern pass which had gone to ground 40 yards out.
Wigan's New Zealand captain, Bell, now playing as well as ever in his long career, scored two tries, the last bringing the house down on the stroke of time when he raced from halfway before touching down…
Receiving the Championship Trophy brings to a conclusion a memorable week for Wigan, who earned the distinction of having a record 13 players selected for the tour this summer.
For Bradford Northern, this overwhelming defeat puts them perilously close to relegation with only two games remaining and now with a much inferior points scoring record compared with Salford with whom they are level.
They gained consolation tries through that old Central Park favourite, winger Henderson Gill, and scrum-half Summers, the former Headingley rugby union player.
Their tourist forward Fairbank and old campaigner Hobbs took advantage as Wigan relaxed by contributing some rugged runs but the team lacks an attacking edge.
Bradford Northern: Wilkinson; Francis (Green 19), Anderson, Hallewell (Grayshon 14), Gill (Hallewell 61); Summers, Iti; Hobbs, Noble, Hamer, Powell, Medley, Fairbank.
Referee: C Morris (Huddersfield).
Rugby Union: Cornish seeking May day to remember
Matthew Dale reports on the staying-power of Redruth's veteran loose-head prop
JOHN MAY, Cornwall's answer to Jeff Probyn, often thinks about retirement.
‘At 37, I feel the knocks more,’ he confesses.
‘Whereas I would play twice over a weekend, it now takes me until Tuesday to get over a match.’
However, the prospect of Saturday's ADT County Championship final against Lancashire has banished, for the moment at least, any notions of quitting.
‘I couldn't bear to go to Twickenham knowing that it would be my last game,’ he said.
‘There is already enough pressure without that.’
Such a gritty attitude is typical of the veteran Redruth prop, who looks after a flock of 530 sheep and a small herd of beef cattle on his holding close to Padstow on Cornwall's windswept Atlantic coast.
Teammates joke about his indifferent attitude to training but his performance in last year's final again Yorkshire, when the Cornish front row dominated the scrum, provided ample evidence of his strength and fitness.
‘I ride a mountain bike around the roads and my wife, Sandra, will drag me out even if I am shattered,’ he says.
‘Farming keeps me fit too.
I lifted five tons of bagged fertiliser today alone.’
Despite Cornwall's strong rugby traditions, May is not from rugby stock.
‘I used to play quite a lot of football,’ he explains, ‘but all I was really good at was knocking the opposition over as a last-ditch defence.’
After switching codes at the age of 11 when he moved to senior school, he began life as a flanker and it was not until 1973, when he had been playing for seven years, that he moved to tight-head prop.
A member of the Wadesbridge Camels side from the age of 13, he was finally given the opportunity to play for Redruth in 1982.
‘I was 27 then.
I thought I would have a go at senior rugby for a season, then pack it in.
I've been there ever since.’
Faced with competition for the tight-head position following the arrival at Redruth of Richard Keast in 1983, May elected to switch to loose-head.
It was a move that clearly suited him for the following season he was picked for the county squad.
Keast, 10 years May's junior, has a great respect for his front-row colleage.
‘John has a terrific calming influence on the team, being that bit older than most of the lads,’ he says.
‘He is so laid back about it all.
He is very easy-going but he won't take any messing once he is on the pitch.
He always comes up with the goods on the day.’
Rugby Union: Llanelli increase Cardiff's misery
By DAVID GREEN
Llanelli22, Cardiff6 LLANELLI, despite some fragile handling, duly won their Heineken League One match at Stradey Park against struggling Cardiff, who nevertheless fought hard and had more of the game than the score suggests.
Cardiff had an early scare when Boobyer broke clear down the left.
Wintle got back to intercept Boobyer's pass to Proctor, but was dispossessed and Ieuan Evans crossed on the right before being recalled for an earlier knock-on.
Poor passing gave Cardiff several reprieves, but something had to give and in the 15th minute, Julian Williams sent Lewis over from a five-yard scrum, Stephens adding the conversion.
Cardiff came back strongly, however, and a series of drives by Kawulok and Sedgemore took them almost to Llanelli's line.
Then they unaccountably scorned three easy points, when Llanelli's centres strayed offside, by deciding to tap a penalty.
But Cardiff continued to threaten, Hill being tackled into the corner flag after good work by Hall and Wintle, who shortly afterwards was released by Moore on the short side and was only prevented from scoring by Stephens's fine cover tackle.
On the stroke of half-time, Roy fell offside at a midfield ruck.
Moon tapped the penalty and tapped again when Cardiff failed to retreat 10 yards.
Julian Williams set up the ruck, and Stephens sent Nigel Davies over, Stephens converting.
The scoreline of 12–0 flattered Llanelli, who were struggling to contain Kawulok and Roy at the line-outs.
However, Cardiff's backs were not quick enough collectively to evade the home side's conscientious cover.
When a Cardiff attack broke down inside Llanelli's 22, Moon secured possession and sent Boobyer away.
The promising centre touched down after an 80-yard gallop.
Ieuan Evans also outpaced Cardiff's cover from 50 yards out and Stephens added the goal points.
But Cardiff's persistence was rewarded with an injury-time try by Jeffreys which Rayer converted.
Rugby Union: Bridgend bow before Ball and six-try Neath
By EDWARD BEVAN
Neath34, BridgendL6 NEATH, with a try count of six to one, produced an outstanding performance to end Bridgend's title aspirations and support their team manager's conviction that they will not lose another league game this season.
Bridgend threatened briefly and Bradshaw scored the game's opening try in the fifth minute.
A dummy scissors from David Thomas deceived the opposition and the full-back came into the line at speed to score near the posts, Howley converting.
The try was the signal for Neath's pack to take control and lay the foundations for victory.
Revelling in the perfect conditions, Neath replied immediately to Bradshaw's score with a counter-attack from the half-way line.
Ball chipped ahead, regathered and scored an excellent individual try.
Ball then kicked a penalty before Neath extended their lead with a try from John Davies.
Bridges broke on the narrow side of a lineout and Davies was driven over by his pack in the corner.
Ten minutes before half-time, Bridgend had to rearrange their back row when Owain Williams, their most influential forward, left the field with a leg injury.
Lloyd moved to No 8 with Budd switching to the open side.
Ball kicked another penalty shortly before half-time to extend the lead to 14–6.
Then Thorburn was injured in the opening minute of the second period and was replaced by Bird.
Midway through the second half, Neath went on the rampage scoring another three tries in only eight minutes.
Bridges initiated the first, his break being well supported by Andrew Thomas who crossed in the right-hand corner.
Neath then won a ruck in Bridgend's 22 and after Laity had committed two defenders, Barclay had a clear overlap to the corner.
Bridgend were now in disarray and poor tackling allowed Thomas to score his second and Neath's fifth try.
The home side ended the game in style with Martin Morris scoring the final try in injury time.
Ball converted to take his match haul to 14 points.
Referee: C Simmonds (Taffswell).
Rugby Union: Jones' late try keeps Gwent honours even
JOHN PERKINS, the Pontypool coach, got off the players' bench at Rodney Parade to have a ‘quiet word’ with some rowdy fans during his side's 10–10 draw with Newport.
It was the second time this season that the two Gwent sides had finished all-square, and that was the only sign of any lingering bitterness from the earlier match.
At Pontypool Park, when the teams drew 7–7, Dean Oswald, the Pontypool No 8, was sent off, and there were claims that Kevin Moseley, the Newport lock, had been assaulted by a fan.
Martin Jones, Pontypool's bits and pieces player, was the star for the visitors, kicking two penalties and crossing for a try two minutes from time to level the score.
His efforts matched tries by Jonathan Westwood and Glen George, one of which Richard Jones converted.
Alas his final touchline conversion attempt drifted narrowly wide.
Ebbw Vale rocketed into the Division Two promotion race with a 28–20 victory over Dunvant.
Once again their schoolboy outside-half Jason Strange played a key role by kicking 16 points to help his side move into third place with a game in hand.
Leaders South Wales Police remain top despite their 28–16 defeat at Abertillery, but Aberavon strengthened their hand in second place with a 31–15 win over Cross Keys.
Scottish Comment: McHarg still banging the exiles drum
Reg Prophit on some surprising choices in the squad for Australia
ALASTAIR McHARG, the celebrated Scotland lock, capped 44 times from 1968 to 1979, has been sounding off in all directions over the small number of his London Scots chosen for the coming Scottish tour of Australia.
There are, in fact, two ‘exiles’— scrum-half David Millard and lock forward Damian Cronin, lock-forward — in the 30-strong squad, with two others, Paul Burnell and Derek White, unavailable through injury and retirement, respectively.
Four other Anglos — Neil Edwards (Harlequins), Chris Gray (Nottingham), Peter Jones and Ian Smith (both Gloucester)— will be catching the plane from Edinburgh on May 22 for the eight-game tour, including two Tests.
McHarg, 47, the former West of Scotland warhorse, pinpoints the merits of such London Scots as Mark Appleson, full-back, Fraser Harrold, centre, and Rob Scott, an 18 stone lock, formerley of Selkirk.
In particular, ‘Big Al’, one of Scotland's all-time great jumpers, is surprised at the omission of Appleson in favour of the veteran Peter Dods, 34, who is due to retire after the tour.
He makes a good point there, though I would have preferred Craig Redpath, the swashbuckling Melrose full-back, as back-up for Gavin Hastings.
McHarg's thinking is, doubtless, based on the on-going success of London Scottish, who have been promoted to Division One of the Courage Leagues.
It is a success story, however, based on all-consuming fitness, perhaps rather than the individual brilliance of the aforementioned tour candidates.
After all, an Anglo-Scots XV, including no fewer than 12 London Scots, lost 18–12 (try-count 4–1) to Edinburgh while the Anglos, fielding nine of McHarg's men, crashed 32–4 (try count 7–1) to the President's XV at Murrayfield.
Admittedly, these were early days in the season, before the tough training schedule at Richmond had beefed up fitness levels.
With Scotland's team manager Duncan Paterson stressing the vital importance on a tour of flexibility, I applaud the selection of several fast-rising, as yet uncapped, young men.
Most notable are Gregor Townsend (Gala), stand-off or centre, 19 this month and when 18 Scotland's youngest ever B-international; Derek Bain (Melrose) 20, centre; Kenny Logan (Stirling County) 20, full-back or wing; and Stuart Reid (Boroughmuir), 22, a blind-side breakaway or No 8.
Rugby Union: Llanelli increase Cardiff's misery
By DAVID GREEN
Llanelli22, Cardiff6 LLANELLI, despite some fragile handling, duly won their Heineken League One match at Stradey Park against struggling Cardiff, who nevertheless fought hard and had more of the game than the score suggests.
Cardiff had an early scare when Boobyer broke clear down the left.
Wintle got back to intercept Boobyer's pass to Proctor, but was dispossessed and Ieuan Evans crossed on the right before being recalled for an earlier knock-on.
Poor passing gave Cardiff several reprieves, but something had to give and in the 15th minute, Julian Williams sent Lewis over from a five-yard scrum, Stephens adding the conversion.
Cardiff came back strongly, however, and a series of drives by Kawulok and Sedgemore took them almost to Llanelli's line.
Then they unaccountably scorned three easy points, when Llanelli's centres strayed offside, by deciding to tap a penalty.
But Cardiff continued to threaten, Hill being tackled into the corner flag after good work by Hall and Wintle, who shortly afterwards was released by Moore on the short side and was only prevented from scoring by Stephens's fine cover tackle.
On the stroke of half-time, Roy fell offside at a midfield ruck.
Moon tapped the penalty and tapped again when Cardiff failed to retreat 10 yards.
Julian Williams set up the ruck, and Stephens sent Nigel Davies over, Stephens converting.
The scoreline of 12–0 flattered Llanelli, who were struggling to contain Kawulok and Roy at the line-outs.
However, Cardiff's backs were not quick enough collectively to evade the home side's conscientious cover.
When a Cardiff attack broke down inside Llanelli's 22, Moon secured possession and sent Boobyer away.
The promising centre touched down after an 80-yard gallop.
Ieuan Evans also outpaced Cardiff's cover from 50 yards out and Stephens added the goal points.
But Cardiff's persistence was rewarded with an injury-time try by Jeffreys which Rayer converted.
Soccer: Moment of brilliance by Cantona lifts Leeds
By COLIN MALAM
Leeds United3, Chelsea0 LEEDS returned to the top of the First Division yesterday with a sudden scoring explosion that masked a deeply unconvincing performance.
For most of this game they looked more like men at the end of their tether than a team ready to make a final, confident push for the title.
Rod Wallace put Leeds ahead early in the second half but their inability to strike any kind of attacking rhythm obliged them, and the Elland Road faithful, to live on their nerves until Lee Chapman and Eric Cantona both scored in the final three minutes.
Those two goals made sure of a victory that carries Leeds back above Manchester United by a single point.
But the Mancunians, without a game because of today's Rumbelows Cup final against Nottingham Forest at Wembley, now have two games in hand again.
Fixture congestion may well nullify that advantage but Leeds' real hope must be that yesterday's scoring flourish will settle their nerves and give them the confidence to believe they are fully capable of winning all of their remaining four League matches.
Cantona's goal, a minute before the end, was calculated to do exactly that.
Profiting from Strachan's quick throw-in, the big French international striker turned a Chelsea defender inside-out and then juggled the ball up cleverly for a rising shot into the roof of the net.
‘When I'm old and grey,’ said Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson afterwards, ‘and people talk about great individual goals, I'll be privileged to say I was there when Eric Cantona scored this one.
It was a very special goal, and he has got a special talent.’
Which made it all the harder to understand why Wilkinson had not begun with Cantona in the side on a summery day that seemed ideally suited to his ball-playing skills.
Seemingly, the Frenchman's ineffectiveness in the startling 4–0 defeat at Manchester City had something to do with the decision.
In the event, Leeds chose to play a rather strange formation in which McAllister operated at right-back and Speed was anywhere but where he is most effective, on the left flank.
Batty was magnificently constructive throughout but things refused stubbornly to gel up to the interval.
The first half was dreadfully stodgy and matters were not improved by the refereeing of Neil Midgley, one of the League's most senior referees.
On this occasion his display was an infuriating mish-mash of inconsistency and questionable judgment.
Midgley booked five players — Strachan and Hodge of Leeds and Le Saux, Clarke and Wise of Chelsea — all but one of them for minor offences.
Clarke was the luckiest player on earth not to be sent off for the clearest professional foul imaginable on Strachan after 69 minutes.
It was a case of two against one as Strachan and Wallace broke away with only Clarke between them and Beasant.
Strachan knocked the ball past Clarke and was following it when the Chelsea defender deliberately brought him down.
Worse still, Midgley then booked Hodge, presumably for questioning the leniency of the decision.
Clarke had also seemed fortunate not to concede a penalty when he wrapped his legs round Wallace's as the Leeds striker broke clear through the middle on to Strachan's clever return pass after only 16 minutes.
Little wonder Chelsea substituted him soon after his booking.
Chapman inspired Leeds's first goal, 10 minutes into the second half, with a first-time, back-heeled pass on the touchline.
It released Strachan for a pull-back that Wallace switched from right foot to left before beating the sluggish Beasant with a mis-hit shot into the bottom corner.
Wilkinson finally responded to the pleading of the crowd and sent on Cantona for Wallace with only six minutes remaining.
He responded first by contributing to Leeds' second goal, scored by Chapman three minutes from the end after his first shot had come back to him off a post, and then with that spectacular coup de grace.
Soccer: Coton is the pick
By TIMOTHY COLLINGS
TWO splendidly taken goals in the second half capped a relentless and determined team performance which lifted Sheffield Wednesday closer to a place in Europe next season, writes Timothy Collings.
Hirst, after 55 minutes, and Worthington, after 87, struck the decisive goals, but it was the all-round display — and Coton's goalkeeping for City — which must have impressed the watching England manager Graham Taylor.
City failed to produce one worthwhile shot and owed everything to the extraordinary reflexes of their goalkeeper.
Coton twice saved almost miraculously in the first half when both Pearson and Hirst were frustrated by the woodwork as Wednesday's mixture of pace, strength and rapid teamwork overwhelmed the visitors.
Hirst opened the scoring with his 20th goal of the season when he latched on to Palmer's pass and outpaced the City defence.
Worthington volleyed the second three minutes from time from a Nilsson cross after a short-corner routine.
Soccer: Buoyant Bryson
By DON HARDISTY
Everton 0, Sheff Utd 2
SHEFFIELD United's remarkable climb up the First Division continued at the expense of Everton, who are moving just as rapidly in the opposite direction, writes Don Hardisty.
A spell of seven games without a win has seen the Goodison club tumble from seventh to 16th place in a month and, Beardsley apart, they rarely looked likely to trouble the supremely confident United, beaten only once in their last eight games.
By contrast to Everton's lightweight attack Deane was a massive and formidable leader for the visitors.
He was unlucky when Southall got in the way of his 28th-minute drive at point-blank range, but within seconds United were ahead.
Hodges cut in from the right and crossed for Bryson, and though he was off balance, he looped a header over Southall.
Keown, an important part of Everton's defence, was off the field for treatment to an eye injury when Gayle's long ball enabled the veteran Cork to score his first goal for United since his move from Wimbledon.
Soccer: Top billing for Merson
By PAUL NEWMAN
Arsenal 4, C Palace 1 IT WAS billed as the Ian Wright Show, but the Arsenal striker had to settle for a supporting role as Paul Merson stole the top honours, writes Paul Newman.
On the day Wright, awash with goals since his £2.5 million move across London, came face to face with his former Crystal Palace colleagues it was left to Merson to emphasise that Arsenal are playing like champions a little too late to worry Manchester United and Leeds.
Merson, so impressive for England in Czechoslovakia last month, scored a hat-trick, the second goal resulting from a superlative piece of skill, as Arsenal stepped up their pursuit of a UEFA Cup place by extending their unbeaten run to 13 matches.
Palace shocked Arsenal by taking a ninth-minute lead through Coleman, but Wright set up Merson's first two minutes later with nice work on the right and Arsenal's third for Campbell, a left-foot volley, in the 16th minute.
In between Merson curled in a brilliant second from the edge of the box and completed the scoring in the 63rd minute.
Soccer: Red-faced Liverpool
By WILLIAM JOHNSON
Aston Villa 1, Liverpool 0 THE LATEST in a string of goalkeeping errors by the colourful but controversial Bruce Grobbelaar consigned Liverpool to a depressing defeat at Villa Park, venue of their FA Cup semi-final replay against Portsmouth tomorrow, writes William Johnson.
Grobbelaar allowed a tame, low shot from Tony Daley to creep under his body and inside the far post to maintain Villa's recent encouraging run after an embarrassing sequence of six matches without a goal.
Daley's 66th-minute decider was one of few moments of excitement though, once in front, Villa could easily have sealed their victory with two more goals in the ensuing five minutes.
Olney, Villa's gangling striker, must still be wondering how he failed to score when following up his header against an upright from Richardson's free-kick.
The ball bobbled along the goal-line for what seemed an eternity before Olney screwed it wide.
Villa hit the framework again almost immediately when a Richardson corner struck the far post.
Soccer: FTC banking on European Cup scoop by satellite
Colin Malam reveals an imminent Euro-bid and the possibility of a deal with Football League remnants
FULL-TIME Communication, the satellite television company which has offered English football £500 million over 10 years, are also bidding for the glamorous final stages of the European Cup.
Jim Cadman, one of the two businessmen who have launched FTC, says: ‘We are talking to UEFA at the moment.
The negotiations are at an early stage, but they seem extremely interested in what we have to offer and have given us plenty of encouragement.’
Cadman, whose company is backed by overseas investors and a bank of ‘international repute’, claims that money has not yet figured in the talks and declines to discuss the size of the FTC bid.
However, it is believed to be in the region of £15 million a year for the world-wide rights, plus a percentage of profits over and above that figure.
UEFA will need to rake in as much money as possible to satisfy powerful clubs used to making their own lucrative television deals.
Silvio Berlusconi's AC Milan, for instance, will not be ecstatic about the governing body's plan to centralize the sale of its club competitions to the TV companies.
If FTC's bid does guarantee UEFA a minimum of £15 million a year, it will work out at £1.25 million a game for the 12 matches in the eight-club, mini-league series, an experiment in making money that is certain to be continued next season, Premier League clubs will be glad to know.
This is another bold move by a British company move by a British company who cannot be accused of lacking ambition.
There are signs, too, that their enterprise could result soon in the signing of a pivotal deal with the rump of the Football League: the present Second, Third and Fourth Divisions.
Those hitherto unfashionable and, in TV terms, unwanted clubs are essential to FTC's expansive plans for a 24-hour channel devoted exclusively to football.
Without the volume and geographical spread of games offered by the other 70 Football League clubs, the channel would be a non-starter.
FTC could probably make the idea work without coverage of the 22 Premier League clubs or the European Cup mini-leagues, but it would be impossible to do so without the co-operation of the Football League clubs unloaded by the Premier League as, ironically, an impediment to their progress.
‘The prerequisite for a 24-hour football channel is signing a contract with the Football League,’ admits Jim Cadman.
‘It would be the cornerstone of the channel.’
But he also stresses the importance FTC attach to doing a deal with the Premier League as well.
The reality is that they need to get their hands on as much first-class football as they can to fill that much air time.
They aim to finance it by attracting a minimum of one million households paying £10 a month each for access to the football-only channel.
It would be transmitted on the Astra satellite used by BSkyB.
With 3 million dishes already sold, a minimum of one million households is not an unreasonable initial target and they are after five million in the long term.
The beauty of the idea is that it need not be exclusive to succeed.
In other words, FTC would be quite happy to share coverage of the game with the BBC and ITV, so long as there was give and take.
Live coverage is not a serious problem since most of FTC's output would be recorded.
The flexibility of the FTC offer may enable the Football League to do a combined deal with another TV company, possibly ITV.
For the time being, however, Trevor Phillips, the League's commercial director, is playing his cards close to his chest.
‘I'm talking to everybody,’ is all he will say about his negotiations with the TV companies.
It looks as if agreement with someone is near, though, because Phillips hopes to have a deal ready for presentation to a vital meeting of the Second, Third and Fourth Division clubs at Walsall on April 27.
With the growth of the satellite and cable networks, negotiating a television contract these days is a much more complex matter than it was when BBC and ITV were the only bidders.
‘It's not as simple now as signing a contract with somebody,’ says Phillips.
‘It's not as black and white as it used to be.
It's more important for me, than for the Premier League, to get the right balance between cash and exposure.
We'll need as much exposure as possible in the first couple of years, but it worries me that there's no independent ‘father figure’ capable of speaking for the whole game and making sure it doesn't ‘do a snooker’.‘
Balance is likely to be elusive.
With BBC TV and BSkyB joining forces to rival ITV's £20 million a year bid for Premier League games, and another mysterious, well-funded satellite company lurking in the background, English football's value to TV is now ‘beyond the wildest dreams of any club chairman in the land,’ says Jim Cadman.
So as you watch Manchester United and Nottingham Forest battle it out on the box in the Rumbelows Cup final this afternoon, be aware that technological advances and television's equivalent of the newspaper circulation war are about to transform coverage of the game beyond all recognition.
It could be the saving of English football — or, as Trevor Phillips has hinted, its downfall.
By Jack Rollin
RANGERS' fourth successive championship seems assured after their 2–1 win over Dundee United at Tannadice, which also set up a Premier Division scoring record.
They need three points from the last four games to be certain of retaining the title.
But Hearts, hoping for runners-up position and a place in Europe, were held to a goalless draw by St Mirren.
Two fine saves by St Mirren goalkeeper Les Fridge checked Hearts but were unable to prevent his team being relegated.
Rangers made the breakthrough five minutes into the second half.
United's defence stopped expecting an offside flag but Alexei Mikhailichenko was allowed to continue and put Rangers ahead.
Jim McInally equalised on the hour with a powerful volley but Rangers sealed the points and clinched a new Premier scoring record of 92 goals when John Brown scored seven minutes later.
Celtic beat St Johnstone 3–2 to move in behind Rangers.
They led through a Steve Fulton goal at half-time and looked to be cruising when Charlie Nicholas struck a second a minute after the interval.
Ian Redford pulled one back for St Johnstone with a header but Nicholas scored again after 75 minutes to restore Celtic's two-goal cushion.
However, Saints were not finished and Redford scored a second goal for Saints after 88 minutes.
First-half goals by Brian Grant and Paul Kane gave Aberdeen a 2–0 win over Motherwell.
Hibernian lost an early goal then hit back to beat Falkirk 3–2.
Paul Smith put Falkirk ahead after five minutes but Brian Hamilton, Graham Donald and Tommy McIntyre gave Hibs a 3–1 interval lead.
Falkirk's hopes were crushed when Richard Cadette was ordered off four minutes before the interval, but Crawford Baptie scored a late goal for them.
Airdrie also bounced back to beat already doomed Dunfermline 3–2 and secure Premier League survival.
Derek McWilliams and Davie Moyes scored before Airdrie missed a penalty on the half-hour, Andy Rhodes saving Jimmy Boyle's kick.
Boyle, Sammy Conn and a Davie Kirkwood, making no mistake from the spot, scored for Airdrie in a strong second-half rally.
Soccer: Bazeley blasts Dalglish
By Christopher Davies
Watford2 Blackburn1 TWO goals by Darren Bazeley gave Watford their sixth win in seven games and further dented Blackburn's hopes of an automatic promotion spot to the First Division.
Kenny Dalglish has spent over £5 million on eight players to strengthen Rovers this season, but there was little evidence of improvement as they slumped to their fourth successive defeat.
Blackburn may have good players but whether they have a good side is questionable.
In contrast, Watford's teamwork and crisp passing made them look by far the better side on view at Vicarage Road.
Watford did simple things well and in Bazeley had the sort of finisher Dalglish must have yearned for.
Bazeley put Watford ahead with the sort of strike every player dreams of.
Gibbs's free kick in the 42nd minute was only half cleared by Hendry and Bazeley volleyed over Mimms from the angle of the penalty box.
Their joy was short-lived.
A minute later a long ball by Hendry was flicked on by Shearer and Wegerle beat Dublin to stab the ball past James.
The decisive goal came after 57 minutes when Holdsworth's centre was missed by Mimms who was under pressure from Nogan.
Bazeley accepted the chance to score from the loose ball.
Those who believe goalkeepers are overprotected will be happy, but the referee had given a free kick earlier for a less demanding challenge on Mimms.
Blackburn have won only one of their last 10 games and Dalglish says all that is missing is the bounce of the ball.
But the team who led the table with an eight-point lead over the third-placed club in February and had two games in hand are surely lacking more than the rub of the green.
Unless they get back to their winning ways Rovers could even miss the play-offs.
This was Watford's best home performance of the season and manager Steve Perryman maintains his team have the talent — they simply lack consistency.
Soccer: Ipswich stride nearer Premier
By Charles Whebell
Ipswich3 Newcastle2 IT IS still mathematically possible for Ipswich to miss out on a place in the Premier League next season, but with five games left against teams from the bottom eight only a fool would bet on it.
This win leaves Ipswich 10 points ahead of their closest rivals and needing only two victories from those games to guarantee second place, but defeat for Newcastle has left Kevin Keegan's men tottering precariously on the brink of sliding into Division Three.
For a long time it looked as if Newcastle were going to leave with the three points they so desperately needed and it was the visitors who drew first blood.
Having subdued the home team's initial pressure Newcastle began to come more into the game and took the lead after 16 minutes with an excellent goal from their leading scorer Peacock.
He picked the ball up on the edge of the Ipswich penalty area, turned and struck a wonderful left-footed shot over the rooted Forrest and into the top corner of the net for his 18th goal of the season.
Although enjoying the bulk of the possession Ipswich had to wait until the 29th minute before forcing Wright to make his first save, Zondervan hitting a long-range shot which the Newcastle goalkeeper tipped over.
From the resulting corner the ball fell to Goddard, whose shot appeared to be going wide of goal.
However, the ball struck Ranson on the hand and though referee Alf Buksh was unsighted it was clearly seen by linesman Madgwick.
As he did in midweek against Wolves, Whitton stepped up to score from the spot.
It should have been just the incentive Ipswich needed to take control of the game but instead it was Newcastle who went in at half-time leading.
Two minutes from the interval a perfect through ball from Sheedy enabled Peacock to beat the offside trap.
Forrest came sprinting from his goal but Peacock was too quick for him and clipped the ball into the net for his second goal of the game.
Ipswich were as lethargic at the start of the second half as they had been for the majority of the first and on the hour, in an attempt to liven them up, Lyall brought off Milton and Goddard to introduce Palmer and Johnson.
The two fresh players gave the East Anglians more urgency and nine minutes after their introduction Ipswich were level.
Wright conceded a corner after tipping over Johnson's header and Wark rose unmarked to head home the equaliser.
Three minutes later Ipswich went ahead.
A superb ball from Whitton sent Palmer away and he drew Wright from his goal before unselfishly squaring the ball for Kiwomya to sidefoot into an empty net.
Newcastle, however, refused to lie down and put Ipswich under heavy pressure in the last 10 minutes.
Soccer: Tottenham ease relegation fears
By Sue Thearle
QPR1 Tottenham2 GORDON DURIE struck a well executed but unlikely winner to guide Tottenham to First Division safety in a pulsating London derby.
Durie scored with just over 10 minutes remaining to complete a remarkable comeback by Tottenham, who had trailed and been outplayed for prolonged spells.
But it was a harsh result for Queens Park Rangers who, despite all their possession and smart passing, finished the game with 10 men when defender Alan McDonald was dismissed for his second bookable offence.
Bradley Allen set the tone in the first minute when he hit the post after Spurs goalkeeper Ian Walker had flapped at Wilson's cross.
Rangers streamed forward, and went close several times before the woodwork again came to Tottenham's rescue, denying Sinton in the 16th minute.
It was little more than Rangers deserved when they took the lead 10 minutes later when the impressive Sinton played a delightful one-two with Holloway before scoring with a rasping drive.
Top-scorer Lineker hit the bar on 52 minutes following good work from Walsh while, at the other end, Sinton also found the crossbar with a looping shot.
Paul Allen cleared off the line from Peacock's header as Rangers pressed but Wilson returned the compliment for Rangers when he cleared Lineker's shot off the line.
However, Tottenham drew level on 71 minutes after Durie's powerful run allowed Walsh to slip the ball to the unmarked Gray to score his first goal for the club.
And the visitors took the lead eight minutes later when Durie surged through the home cover to beat Stejskal with an angled shot.
Soccer: Rush double a revelation for West Ham
By Martin Smith
West Ham4 Norwich0 BILLY BONDS'S bold decision to swing the axe on some of his more complacent players had the desired effect as West Ham recorded their biggest League win of the season.
It was West Ham's first victory for nearly 2½ months, but was not enough to lift them from the bottom of the First Division.
It may, however, take the sting out of a planned walk-out by supporters during the second half of Tuesday's home match against Southampton.
The return of Alvin Martin, 33, who will be given a free transfer at the end of the season, for his first match in 16 months, shored the defence, while Matthew Rush, in attack for only the fourth start of his career, was a revelation.
Indeed, with Rush scoring two of West Ham's four, his first goals for the club, the question of why he had not been tried earlier was of paramount interest.
His two goals before half-time were of similar construction.
On each occasion Ullathorne conceded unnecessary corners and Rush rose unmarked to head in Bishop's kicks from the right.
He was centrally positioned in the six-yard box when he headed the first after 15 minutes; the second, eight minutes before half-time, he met equally powerfully at the far post.
Norwich, despite a long injury list, were a disappointment.
Fox, with a header, and Beckford, with a shot Miklosko parried on his line, might have pulled them back early in the second half before West Ham twice exposed the right flank of their defence.
Thomas ran through and was pulled down as he rounded Walton, Dicks scoring with the penalty after 72 minutes.
Eight minutes later Keen played Slater through and his square pass was rammed home first time by Bishop.
Norwich have now lost six of their last seven matches and they, too, are starting to look anxiously at developments in the relegation zone.
Soccer: Tottenham ease relegation fears
By Keith Farnsworth
Oldham5 Luton1 OLDHAM'S Graeme Sharp hit four goals and Mike Milligan one to seal Oldham's best win of the season against relegation candidates Luton at Boundary Park.
Oldham struck three goals in a seven-minute spell in the last 10 minutes to condemn David Pleat's side to their 14th away defeat.
Sharp's opening goal came after 11 minutes in controversial circumstances.
Chamberlain appeared to have collected Ritchie's high cross from the left but lost the ball under the Sharp's challenge.
Sharp's subsequent header went across the line and counted despite furious protests from the goalkeeper.
Though Harford levelled on the rebound for Luton after 25 minutes after Varadi had hit the bar, Sharp restored Oldham's lead within the minute, pouncing to side-foot home Adams' low ball into the goalmouth.
Luton had their chances after that, but lacked finish, with Harford once desperately close with a splendid header and Oldham always threatened to add to their tally.
Oldham's superiority was not confirmed until the 80th minute when Sharp completed his first treble since his summer move from Everton: Chamberlain blocked Ritchie's effort, and the Scot pounced on the rebound.
Three minutes later Sharp was denied by Chamberlain, but Milligan seized on the loose ball to score.
After 87 minutes Luton's woe was complete as Sharp headed in a cross from Bernard, who had just been denied by another splendid stop from Chamberlain.
Soccer: Cambridge slip, Leicester and Charlton stay on course
By CHARLES CARRICK
Sunderland 1, Charlton 2 SUNDERLAND'S agonising slide into relegation danger continued with their fifth consecutive League defeat, writes Charles Carrick.
The FA Cup finalists are on their way to Wembley but they cannot reproduce their knockout form in bread-and-butter Second Division matches.
Charlton leapfrogged into a top six play-off place thanks to two late goals from Robert Lee and full-back Scot Minto.
But they were gifted the points by a Sunderland side who failed to take the chances on offer.
Victory gave Charlton their 11th away League win, but it hardly looked likely when captain Gary Bennett headed Sunderland ahead after 56 minutes.
But then Sunderland suffered two crucial defensive lapses inside six minutes.
A mistake by Anton Rogan, after 70 minutes, let in Lee, who played a one-two with David Whyte before slotting home the equaliser.
Then Brian Mooney, playing his first senior game for nearly a year, was dispossessed on the edge of the penalty area and Minto gleefully scored the winner.
Soccer: Rush double a revelation for West Ham
By Dave Horridge
Notts County1 Coventry0 A BIZARRE goal two minutes from time against fellow-strugglers Coventry gave Notts County their first win in 16 games, though they must still be in grave danger of relegation.
Both teams's lack of scoring power always threatened a goalless draw and there was little to suggest the deadlock would be broken for most of the match.
But then a 20-yard drive from substitute Thomas was deflected off Sansom into the opposite side of net goalkeeper Ogrizovic was guarding.
It was doubly ironic for Coventry who in the previous few minutes had attacked with more conviction than at any time throughout the game.
In the 74th minute Furlong forced Cherry to make the first serious save of the match, and soon afterwards the goalkeeper had to turn a shot from Flynn round a post.
Then Furlong was just wide with a shot-on-the-turn from 12 yards and Coventry's supporters were justified in expecting their first win in five games — and only the third of Don Howe's reign.
In the 14 previous games under his management, Coventry had drawn eight, five of them goalless, and another point would have edged them closer to safety.
After their previous performances against Arsenal and Sheffield Wednesday, it was surprising to see Coventry on the defensive early in the game as County went close through Williams, Wilson and Devlin.
However, the game became a dreary affair until a minute before the interval when Atherton misjudged a bounce to let in Wilson, who shot over the bar.
That did nothing for County's confidence, but they gradually began to exert a control that promised them at least a draw until Sansom's unlucky deflection.
As Mr Howe said: ‘People say you make your own luck but you cannot legislate for something like that.’
Soccer: Cambridge slip, Leicester and Charlton stay on course
By HENRY MORTON
Leicester 3, Barnsley 1 A SECOND successive Gary Mills penalty helped Leicester City to victory and took them well into the promotion play-off frame after an awkward encounter at Filbert Street, writes Henry Morton.
Having hit a winner from the spot in the crucial 3–2 victory over FA Cup finalists Sunderland in midweek, he struck again to spark his team's rise into third place in the Second Division table.
The play-off frame is the target but Brian Little's men are now in sight of an automatic place thanks to the coolness of Mills in a job left vacant by David Kelly's move to Newcastle.
From outside bets to reach the play-offs, Leicester are now poised to break into the top two.
But Mills warned: ‘We cannot take anything for granted.’
How true, for Leicester could not even take yesterday's three points for granted until the end.
They came back from a surprise David Currie opener to level in the second half through Steve Walsh.
But while Mills put them ahead, the game was not safe until Tommy Wright's clincher three minutes from time.
Soccer: Cambridge slip, Leicester and Charlton stay on course
By BRIAN MARSHALL
Wolves 2, Cambridge 1 CAMBRIDGE United's bid to gatecrash the Premier League received a distinct setback at Molineux, writes Brian Marshall.
John Beck's unfashionable team have turned the derided ‘long ball’ game into something of an art form, but their aerial bombardment of the Wolves goal failed to bring them the victory that would have enhanced their promotion prospects.
Cambridge looked anything but promotion contenders and they were flattered by the final scoreline.
Wolves' Steve Bull squandered a host of chances.
The Cambridge substitutes, Paul Raynor and Steve Claridge, combined to set up the opening goal after 64 minutes for Mike Norbury.
The shock of falling behind sparked Wolves into life and they were level nine minutes later when the former Doncaster midfielder Mark Rankine scored his first goal for Wolves with a powerful header from Ashley's centre.
Wolves were very much in the ascendancy after that.
Andy Mutch netted his fifth goal in four matches to win the game in the 82nd minute.
Soccer: McStay the mainstay as Celtic aim for Europe
By Bob Ferrier
Celtic3 St Johnstone1 CELTIC overpowered St Johnstone and remain on course to salvage something from an indifferent season.
Not until the second half did Saints show any of their best style and even when it came it was never sustained.
By contrast Celtic had a goal in hand for much of the match and put together many passages of the passing game which has been such a feature of recent matches.
In the first 20 minutes Celtic had five scoring efforts, one of them scrambled home by Creaney but rightly given offside, while St Johnstone failed even to reach Celtic's penalty area.
The Saints competitive season is already over while Celtic have hopes of European football next season but they are by no means certainties to achieve this.
Apart from them having to win each one of their remaining matches their fate rests largely with Hearts who yesterday suffered a goalless draw at home to St Mirren.
Celtic should be encouraged by the form of Paul McStay, who orchestrated their dominance in this match and clearly has not lost his zest for the game after a long winter injury.
For all McStay's skills Celtic found it frustrating to cope with St Johnstone's packed and well-marshalled defence.
They broke through after 36 minutes when a poor clearance fell to Fulton, 25 yards out, and he hit a thundering volley into the roof of the net.
This brought Saints out of their shell and they forced a series of corners that a scrambling Celtic only just survived.
In the first minute of the second half Celtic fashioned a stunning goal.
Boyd's cross from the left was flicked in by Nicholas.Saints broke immediately and Redford soared to head home Maskrey's cross.
Nicholas slipping and sidestepping deftly, set up Creaney for a close range shot which Hamilton one-handed, just turned round.
Then with 77 minutes gone Nicholas scored when Hamilton failed to hold Creaney's shot.
Three minutes from the end Saints had the last word when Cherry's powerful drive squirmed out of Marshall's hands trickled in at the post.
Celtic: Marshall; Morris, Boyd, Fulton (McNally 81), Mowbray, Whyte, Galloway, McStay, Creaney, Nicholas, Collins.
St Johnstone: Hamilton; Treanor, Baltacha, Cherry, Inglis, Redford, Turner, Davis, Wright, Maskrey (Arkins 72), Curran.
Referee: B McGinlay (Balfron).
Soccer: Aberdeen show revivalist spirit
By Hamish Mackay
Aberdeen2 Motherwell0 ABERDEEN's revival is firmly on course but their £400,000 signing of Finland international striker Mixu Paatelainen has yet to produce the goals their cultured football deserves.
The team are still in transition as Willie Miller settles in as manager.
He has publicly demanded the commitment he showed as probably the finest player in the club's history.
That commitment was evident as early as the 14th minute when international midfielder Jim Bett struck a vicious drive from the edge of the penalty area.
It took a wicked deflection but goalkeeper Thomson brought off a superb save.
However, two minutes later Aberdeen went ahead when Brian Grant picked up a Gillhaus pass and drove the ball home from 16 yards.
Motherwell took 27 minutes to create their first chance when Chris McCart carved out an opening for Joe McLeod, but the striker hesitated long enough to allow Brian Irvine to block the effort.
That move apart, Motherwell did not seem interested in the match and it was no surprise when the Dons went further ahead in the 36th minute.
Bett's corner was only partially cleared and Paul Kane blasted a shot through a ruck of players.
The crowd of 7,000 — Aberdeen's lowest of the season — had little to enthuse over in a drab second half in which Aberdeen had several excellent chances but displayed their old failing of not converting demonstrable outfield superiority into goals.
Aberdeen: Snelders; McKinnie, Winnie, Grant, Irvine, Wright, Jess, Bett, Kane, Gillhaus, Paatelainen.
Motherwell: Thomson; Nijholt, McKinnon, Martin, Jones, McCart, McLeod, Dolan, Gardner, Angus, Cooper.
Referee: W Crombie (Edinburgh).
Soccer: Hearts lacking in guile and goals
By Roy Maclean
Hearts0 St Mirren0 NOBODY anticipated a classic at Tynecastle and Hearts, needing to pick up both points to stay within sight of Premier Division leaders Rangers, and the doomed St Mirren duly lived up to expectations.
There was no doubting Hearts' superiority in this goalless affair.
They pressed three-quarters of the way but, in a dreadfully untidy encounter, looked a pretty guileless lot as they battled in vain to beat Les Fridge in the St Mirren goal.
With their captain and inspiration, Roy Aitken, suspended, Saints seemed to have come prepared to fight a rearguard action.
Most of the scrappy first half saw them sit back and prevent the dominant but over-elaborate Hearts from scoring.
Although they went close several times, a combination of sloppy finishing and good goalkeeping kept them out.
In the seventh minute, just after Broddle had been booked for a tackle on Derek Ferguson, Ian Ferguson had cruel luck with a header that hit the post.
Then, from a McKinlay free kick, McPherson forced Fridge to make a spectacular, one-handed save.
Things continued to go Hearts' way and a Crabbe cross let Ian Ferguson in again for a back-header that Fridge just managed to collect under the bar.
After the interval Saints were obliged to return to defence but, with Hearts as inept as ever in their build-up and finishing, Tynecastle's smallest crowd of the season, 6,200, were already resigned to a goalless draw.
Hearts: Smith; McLaren, McKinlay (Snodin 63), Hogg, Mackay (Bannon 45), McPherson, Crabbe, D Ferguson, I Ferguson, Millar, Robertson.
St Mirren: Fridge; Wishart, Beattie, McGowne, Broddle, Manley, Stickroth, Lambert, Torfason, Hewitt (Kinsey 78), Elliott (McWhirter 45).
Referee: D Syme (Rutherglen).
Soccer: Rogan's icing on the cake
Ian Stevenson on the Northern Ireland scene
SUNDERLAND defender Anton Rogan is almost certain to be included in Northern Ireland's squad for the April 28 World Cup qualifying tie against Lithuania at Windsor Park.
Rogaan, despite consistently good performances for former club Celtic and Sunderland, has been left out by manager Billy Bingham since the European Championship match with Yugoslavia in Belgrade a year ago for what he called a ‘breach of discipline’— arguing with a linesman.
Now he will return to the fold as a key figure in the Group 3 series against Spain, Denmark, Republic of Ireland, Latvia, Albania and Lithuania.
His major role in getting Sunderland to the FA Cup Final has galvanised a merited comeback.
‘If it does happen then it will be the climax of a great season for me,’ said Rogan.
‘I was always proud to play for my country and I'm baffled why I should have been omitted in the first place, for the linesman incident was trivial.
I don't suppose I'll ever know the answer.’
Bingham has had a number of options available over the last year but always contended that Rogan, irrespective of his omission, was still very much part of the set-up.
‘I'm playing at centre-half for Sunderland.
That's the position I prefer but I'm happy enough with a midfield role for Northern Ireland,’ said Rogan, who has made 18 international appearances.
There is still, however, a possibility he could play at centre-back against Lithuania as Gerry Taggart is under treatment for a hamstring injury.
Northern Ireland's squad, to be announced on Thursday, won't vary much from that which lost 1–0 to Scotland at Hampden Park in February with Kevin Wilson (Notts County), Iain Dowie (Southampton) and Colin Clarke (Portsmouth) requiring a goal to break the Irish international scoring record as the strikers.
That means no call-up for free-scoring Jimmy Quinn (Bournemouth).
Soccer: Fear returns to haunt us as managers carry the can
Bob Ferrier on a bad week for the men in the hot seat
IT HAS not been the best of weeks for managers, a thought with which Graham Souness might agree.
Jim Fleeting, the ebullient manager at a Kilmarnock club hungrier than most for promotion, offered himself to the fraternal elbow of big brother Bobby, the club chairman, and resigned.
Alex Macdonald, the hard-nosed manager of Airdrie, refused to apologise for his team's performance in a midweek match against Hibs in Edinburgh any more than he had done after that bewildering semi-final against Hearts at Hampden.
And Iain Munro, lately of Dundee, who hopes to be back in the game soon, left with his wife and family for Florida and an early annual holiday.
After three-and-a-half years at Rugby Park, Fleeting decided that last week's 3–1 defeat by Partick Thistle had effectively closed the door on Kilmarnock's hope of promotion to the Premier Division this season.
When I spoke to him back in the winter Jim Fleeting indicated that he was driven by fear, the fear of failure.
His story illustrates the price of failure in the Scottish game.
That price is too high and it may be destroying what is left of the game.
Confronting the fact from the other side is Alex Macdonald, the Airdrie manager whose team seem bent on a place in the Guinness Book of Records with 100 bookings in a season.
They have already reached 90 and is bottom of the B and Q Fairplay League.
His policy seems to be to stop the opposition at all costs from establishing any kind of rhythm and hope that two quick and nimble forwards in Alan Lawrence and Owen Coyle can snatch whatever chances may come their way.
They achieved this splendidly in the Scottish Cup semi-final and since Hearts allowed it to happen to them we had a memorably ghastly match.
When Airdrie went to Easter Road this past week, there were seven bookings and two Hibs players were ordered off.
Airdrie won the match.
Macdonald's pronouncement on it?
‘We didn't come here to entertain Hibs supporters.’
Ye Gods, shades of Don Revie and his early Leeds United teams!
Why then did Airdrie go to Easter Road?
Macdonald was ready for that one too: ‘It's all about getting points for us.’
Airdrie's behaviour this season has been distasteful.
But taking the objective Macdonald view in this first season back in the Premier Division, survival was his first concern for Airdrie, the avoidance of relegation for a club which in realistic terms has no money to buy quality players, crowds averaging less than 5,000 and a creaking, obsolute stadium.
Iain Munro, who resigned from management of the Dundee club earlier this year, a victim of progressive subversion, has a clear insight into all of this.
He has taken his early holiday, incidentally, to be on hand at the end of the season for the merry-go-round in football employment which usually comes in the summer.
In 20 years in the game on both sides of the border, under top managers and representing Scotland at every international level as well as captaining the Scottish League XI, he knows the game backwards.
He said: ‘You have to give Alex Macdonald some credit.
He realised Airdrie had to survive.
There is something wrong with a system that analyses failure in such a drastic way.
The difference between success and failure is marginal, but if a club goes down, managers lose their jobs, players lose their jobs, the club loses a million pounds.
We've got to find a better way.
‘The unpredictability of the game is a problem.
If it was predictable, if it was perfect, it would be boring.
Managers work with people who are flawed — every player is flawed, there is no such thing as the perfect player.
As a manager I try to give people respect.
‘People say he's a nice guy.
In any walk of life that would be a compliment.
In football its an affliction like leprosy.
Managers repeat themselves to players, preach principles to players and principles don't change.’
But for the sake of the old game in Scotland let's hope that Airdrie, on Tuesday night, can be the exception to that rule.
Soccer: Wilkinson's men cut in front as United take Wembley diversion
By Jack Rollin
LEEDS manager Howard Wilkinson has renewed his optimism about winning the championship following his team's 3–0 win over Chelsea, which planted them back at the top, a point ahead of Manchester United who have two games in hand.
Leeds had won just one of their previous five games, but goals from Rod Wallace, Lee Chapman and a memorable effort from Eric Cantona put a smile back on Wilkinson's face.
He said: ‘This was the acid test for us.
If we were going to cave in it would have been today.
So it was an especially good performance for us after losing at Maine Road last week.
‘There's obviously all the pressure and all the talk about who is going to win the championship.
We got turned over last Saturday but I thought we showed great character out there today.’
Wilkinson added: ‘When I am old and grey I will tell people that I was there when Eric Cantona scored that goal against Chelsea.’
Manchester United wait on Bryan Robson's decision on his fitness for the Rumbelows Cup Final against Nottingham Forest today, and hope to use the match to launch them on the final leg of their title procession.
They are out to avenge last season's defeat by Sheffield Wednesday and Steve Bruce says: ‘It would be nice to erase that memory.
‘Forest play football the way it should be played and that will suit us.
We can win it and spend the last three weeks of the season trying to clinch the big one.’
There were mixed fortunes for tomorrow's FA Cup semi-final replay teams.
Liverpool's Rob Jones expects to be fit after failing to re-appear in the second half of the 1–0 defeat against Aston Villa because of a calf injury.
Mark Wright, John Barnes, Ian Rush and David Burrows were all missing as Liverpool crashed to their second defeat in four days.
Stand-in Liverpool manager Ronnie Moran said: ‘The other four lads who were missing today managed to train this morning and have a good chance of facing Portsmouth.’
Portsmouth manager Jim Smith was in better mood after the 2–0 win over Grimsby.The Fratton Park boss rested Colin Clarke, Alan McLoughlin and kept Darren Anderton on the bench for the visit of Grimsby.
He said: ‘I gambled today and we were fortunate to get away with it.
But we'll need fresh legs on Monday and we tried to protect as many as we could.’
A delighted Arsenal manager George Graham saluted his side's 4–1 win over Crystal Palace and said: ‘We could have scored more goals, perhaps even eight’.
Paul Merson hit his first hat-trick in the bid for a possible UEFA Cup place.
It was Arsenal's 13th consecutive match without defeat, but Graham said: ‘I've seen Merson play better than this, from an all-round point of view.
But this time he got the goals and they were all of high quality.’
West Ham supporters are being urged to stage a second half walk-out during the match against Southampton on Tuesday night in the continuing protest at the club's bonds debenture scheme.
‘You can't say we didn't try other ways,’ the supporters' protest group said.
‘We have had red balloons, sit-downs, stand-ups, pitch invasions, red cards, directors abused, no bonds sold, an FA charge and claret and blue balloons.
We have been ignored.’
Rugby Union: Orrell blow title chances
HUW DAVIES (right), Wasps' stand-off, landed a 47-yard drop goal with the final kick to beat Orrell 13–12 and ruin their chances of winning the Courage rugby union championship.
The lead changed hands three times in the final seven minutes; England scrum-half Dewi Morris failed to end the match when he missed a touch kick and when the ball was delivered back to drop-kick expert Davies, Orrell's apparent victory was transformed into misery.
Battling Nottingham turned the table upside down with a priceless 18–9 win against Northampton that could keep them in division one and deny their visitors the championship.
Bath are now title favourites; they won 21–13 at Rosslyn Park to replace Northampton at the top.
Soccer: Euro-soccer bid
By COLIN MALAM
FULL-TIME Communication, the satellite television company who have offered English football £500 million over 10 years, are now bidding for the glamorous final stages of Europe's premier competition, the European Cup.
There are also signs that FTC could soon sign a deal with the rump of the Football League, those clubs left over after the formation of the new Premier League.
This is seen as essential to FTC's plans for a 24-hour channel devoted exclusively to football because of the volume and geographical spread of games offered by the other 70 Football League clubs.
Golf: Faldo on move, Woosnam slips
Champion hit as four shots frittered away US MASTERS GOLF Michael Williams at Augusta
By MICHAEL WILLIAMS
NICK FALDO stirred himself at last in the Masters at Augusta National yesterday when a third round of 68 made him five under par for the tournament before a storm caused a three-hour delay that had a disastrous effect on defending champion Ian Woosnam, who had been sharing the lead with Craig Parry.
When play resumed, Woosnam promptly dropped four shots in two holes with double bogeys at both the fourth and fifth as Raymond Floyd, now in his 50th year, went to the front with Fred Couples, both standing on 10 under par after eight holes.
Nevertheless Faldo looked as if he could be in the hunt after all with his total of 211 for the 54 holes with Bernhard Langer and Corey Pavin.
It was only over the last six holes that Faldo put a spurt on.
He was still level par for the round after leaving the 12th green but then had his second successive eagle at the 13th with a five-iron to 15 feet.
Faldo also made birdies at both the 15th and 16th and putted better than he had on either of the first two days.
It had, he said, been an uphill struggle for, though he was swinging well, he kept being a ‘yard out’ with his shots to the green and that made the putting very difficult.
Steve Richardson also moved up with a 70 in the company of Jack Nicklaus, who beat him by a shot, the difference being at the 18th, which Richardson three-putted despite only a wedge for his second shot.
His aim now, he said, is to break 70 today with the chance of making the top 24 for an automatic place next year.
Severiano Ballesteros also had a 70 for a total of 213 but he must have been kicking himself for it included a seven at the 13th.
Colin Montgomerie lost a little ground with a 73, Jose-Maria Olazabal made up nothing with a 72 while David Feherty fell away with a 77.
It is better, I am inclined to think, never again to listen to a word a professional golfer tells you.
Take Ian Woosnam, who, if I turn my notebook back a week, I find saying such things as: ‘I am not in the groove at all.
Nothing feels right.
I'm thinking of sending an SOS to Bob Torrance [his coach].
‘I have some new clubs; maybe the shafts are too stiff.
All I will be doing [at the Masters]is making up the numbers.’
And then the following day, as the Freeport-McMoran Classic ended in New Orleans: ‘Send for Bob?
It would be a waste of time, much too expensive.
Nothing he can do.
I have just got to sort it out for myself but I've got nothing to work on.
If I knew the answer I would put it right.
Right now I feel like a 24-handicap golfer.’
His mood was no less exasperated on arrival at Augusta National.
‘If I wasn't defending, I would be on the next plane home,’ he said.
Even after his first round of 69, Woosnam was still maintaining that he had not been looking forward to playing, that it had not done much for his confidence and that he was still very nervous with the putter in his hand.
Yet 24 hours later this same Ian Woosnam, who a year ago followed in the footsteps of Sandy Lyle and Nick Faldo by winning the Masters at Augusta National, was threatening to do so again, until the thunder and lightning affected his revival early in the third round.
A 24-handicap golfer?
Some 24.
Even Woosnam was having to admit he now felt more like ‘plus 24’ as with rounds of 69 and 66 he matched exactly Craig Parry, of Australia, leading Fred Couples by a stroke and Raymond Floyd and Ted Schulz by two.
One is inclined to assume that Woosnam had laid a false trail.
As defending champion he had wanted to remove as much expectation as possible, hoodwinking the little army of British writers who hang on to his every word into believing that he really could not hit his hat with a banjo.
Or was it as devious as that?
After all, Woosnam had said one day that Phil Ritson, a grey-haired South African coach, had from a distance spotted something amiss with his swing on the practice ground, offered some advice and then drifted away again.
Woosnam put his revival down to the fact that he ‘really loves this place, the atmosphere, the lot.
It's really got me going again’.
There was no argument about that, for he had played stunningly well without in any way murdering the par fives, which one would normally expect to have been his strength.
In two days he had made birdies at only the 15th twice and the second once.
The 13th, the shortest of them all, and the eighth, the longest of them all, had both yielded him nothing.
At the same time, however, he had not taken a six either.
Parry's thrust for the title had been predicted by a growing number of people, as, too, had been the challenge of Couples, who has been in wonderful form.
Everyone, I am sure, will have been delighted to see Sandy Lyle making the cut for the first time since he won in 1988.
All manner of Masters records were broken over the first 36 holes.
Thirty-five players beat par in the first round and there were also more rounds in the 60s than ever before — 18.
The average of 72.06 was also the lowest.
On the second day 47 players beat par with another 18 again scoring in the 60s for the first time.
The par-or-better rounds on Friday rose to the new heights of 54 and the average was further improved to 71.69.
By then the number of sub-par totals was 48 with another six on par or better.
The cut fell on 145, one over par, and consequently 63 of the original field of 83 made it under what is known as the ‘10-stroke rule’— anyone who is within 10 shots of the leader, on the theoretical grounds that it is still possible to win from there.
No-one wore a bigger smile than Ken Schofield, executive director of the PGA European Tour.
Never before had there been as many as nine of his members in a Masters field and every one of them made the cut.
‘We do not have too many Woosnams,’ said Mr Schofield, ‘but we do have a lot of Fehertys and Montgomeries and for them to have survived one of the greatest tests is testimony to how strong we are becoming.’
He is hopeful, therefore, that notice will have been taken this side of the Atlantic, not only by Augusta National at the Masters, but also by the United States Golf Association, who are the governing body of the American Open, and the United States PGA, with a mind to the PGA Championship.
There must, Mr Schofield firmly believes, be greater opportunity at major championship level, not only for Europeans but also for players from other countries.
Cricket: Imran England tour doubt
By IMRAN KHAN
PAKISTAN captain Imran Khan (left) said yesterday that he could miss this summer's tour to England because of a shoulder injury.
The all-rounder, who hurt his shoulder during Pakistan's World Cup campaign, said he will not tour England if he has to have an operation.
He said he would wait another week to see if the injury healed and then make a decision — if he steps down, leading batsman Javed Miandad may lead the team.
Imran, 39, said he was not very optimistic at the moment because the injury ‘has not improved at all since I played the World Cup final’.
He ruled out the idea of travelling just as batsman.
‘I will go as an all-rounder,’ he said.
‘But if I am not fit it effects my batting, bowling and fielding.’
City: Fresh £282m Lloyd's shock
by Robert Tyerman
THREE more Lloyd's syndicates, with a combined capacity of £282 million, are poised to announce they cannot close their 1989 accounts and will have to ‘run them off’, exposing names to a stream of claims without premiums.
Lloyd's is braced to announce a 1989 market loss this summer of between £1.5 billion and £2 billion, though current prospects are much brighter.
Lloyd's deputy chairman Richard Hazell's £155 million Syndicate 190, hit by pollution claims, is contemplating going into ‘run off’, though ‘no decision may be made for some time’, says underwriter John Weatherall.
Rodney Lissenden, underwriter for Cuthbert Heath's 100-year-old £77 million Syndicate 404, is also considering this step.
Michael Meacock, underwriter for the £47 million Syndicate 727, a pre-1914 syndicate also facing pollution claims, has decided to keep 1989 open.
Meacock is in dispute with Eagle Star over £1.7 million of reinsurance claims.
Outhwaite names' champion Peter Nutting is to head a new working party to co-ordinate syndicate action groups.
But he is feared by militants to be considering adopting Lime Street-inspired suggestions of a cap on members' losses of 100 per cent of their underwriting capacity.
Even that implies payments of £500 million on 104 open syndicates and many will resist it given suspected irregularities.
The Trinity insurance group, now in liquidation, has written to policyholders warning they are now without cover.
Premiums will be returned if money is available.
The Policyholders' Protection Board is considering the implications.
City: Fresh £282m Lloyd's shock
by Robert Tyerman
THREE more Lloyd's syndicates, with a combined capacity of £282 million, are poised to announce they cannot close their 1989 accounts and will have to ‘run them off’, exposing names to a stream of claims without premiums.
Lloyd's is braced to announce a 1989 market loss this summer of between £1.5 billion and £2 billion, though current prospects are much brighter.
Lloyd's deputy chairman Richard Hazell's £155 million Syndicate 190, hit by pollution claims, is contemplating going into ‘run off’, though ‘no decision may be made for some time’, says underwriter John Weatherall.
Rodney Lissenden, underwriter for Cuthbert Heath's 100-year-old £77 million Syndicate 404, is also considering this step.
Michael Meacock, underwriter for the £47 million Syndicate 727, a pre-1914 syndicate also facing pollution claims, has decided to keep 1989 open.
Meacock is in dispute with Eagle Star over £1.7 million of reinsurance claims.
Outhwaite names' champion Peter Nutting is to head a new working party to co-ordinate syndicate action groups.
But he is feared by militants to be considering adopting Lime Street-inspired suggestions of a cap on members' losses of 100 per cent of their underwriting capacity.
Even that implies payments of £500 million on 104 open syndicates and many will resist it given suspected irregularities.
The Trinity insurance group, now in liquidation, has written to policyholders warning they are now without cover.
Premiums will be returned if money is available.
The Policyholders' Protection Board is considering the implications.
Fashion: Taking Strides Rise above the current confusion over hemline height and take the two-legged option.
Trousers of all kinds are back in a big way, says Hilary Alexander; now, you only have to worry about width
BY HILARY ALEXANDER
WHILE hemlines hang in the balance, the fashionably correct can keep a foot in both camps.
Step forward trousers, whose sudden success is a direct result of designer indecision over skirt lengths.
You can remove the confusion neatly by removing the skirt.
Then, all you will have to worry about is the width of your trouser legs.
The stretch revolution of the Eighties relegated trousers to fashion's sidelines.
Then, the message was all about freedom, flexibility and legs, bared to the thigh in pelmet skirts, streamlined in skin-tight Lycra, or flashing in black opaque tights.
Trousers' triumphant re-emergence ushers in a new type of androgynous sexiness, a quirky mix of the severe and the sensual — a lace camisole under a double-breasted trouser suit, or a glimpse of fishnet under a trouser cuff.
Think Annie Hall and Annie Lennox; Marlene and Garbo.
The imagery is fuelled by designers, who have exercised to the hilt their fantasies of women dressed as men.
From Sicilian wide-boys and regency rakes, to upright City chaps and downright nasty mobsters, the inspiration is as varied as a Hollywood archive.
Marks & Spencer has turned Brooks Brothers (which it owns) into ‘Brooks Sisters’, with a women's range of classic gilt-buttoned navy blazers, grey flannels and front-pleated pinstripes.
The look is rescued from male parody with ruffle-fronted dandy shirts or lace-collared cavalier blouses.
At the chic northern shop, Pollyanna of Barnsley, owner Rita Britton is selling every style of trouser from Romeo Gigli's narrow-leg stretch silk shantung to Jean Muir's linen and silk-jersey palazzo pants.
At Harrods, the dressy, multi-purpose trouser has virtually replaced black leggings as the easy summer option.
‘Everyone wants cigarette pants with the little side split,’ says the store's fashion consultant Vanessa de Lisle.
Less compromising are Brideshead-style ‘bags’: cream-spotted navy, with an elasticated waist in Donna Karan's DKNY collection; navy silky viscose and cuffed at the 11-inch ankle in C'Est Comme Ca.
The trouser suit — soft and flared at Agnes b, sharp and strong in Georges Rech's Synonyme collection — needs minimum accessories: simply add a white T-shirt.
When trousers are the starting point of an outfit, play with accessories such as waistcoats, ties, even a Gossard Wonder Bra.
THE LATEST THING
Cheer up — get plastered!
Alice Hart-Davis finds a way to keep the wrinkles at bay when the going gets tough
BY ALICE HART-DAVIES
IT HAD to happen.
After a decade of being made to feel that you were somehow lacking as a person if you didn't manage to cram thrice-weekly workouts into your schedule, it was high time that a good reason not to exercise emerged.
Turn your thoughts, for a while, from matters political towards sunny California and its body-beautiful people.
Here, in the gymnasia and exercise studios, they are now worrying not so much about the effects of heavy-duty exercise on their bodily contours, but with the havoc it is wreaking on their faces.
All the tortured expressions that register on the face while the body is in the throes of an aerobic workout, so the theory runs, end up by leaving their mark in the form of — there's no other word for it — wrinkles.
One way to ward off these unwelcome little indicators of stress would seem obvious — immediately give up the exercise that brings them on, and reach for a stiff, hugely relaxing drink.
But if you persist in going for the burn, you can do as the Californians, and add to your kitbag a packet of small pieces of adhesive-backed plastic called Frownies.
This is how they can help.
You stick a Frownie on the parts of the face you are most likely to screw up in pain — the forehead, the outer end of the cheekbones — so that when your face starts to contract, you will realise it is happening, and relax your features into a seraphic, line-free mask.
It sounds a desperate measure; but if it's happening in California, it can only be a matter of months before it takes off here.
In fact, why stop at frown-prevention while you're working out?
Why not wear the things the rest of the day too?
After all, as Deborah Hutton, health editor of Vogue, put it: ‘If you're the sort of person who frowns, even if you do wear these things for an hour while you exercise, you'll carry on frowning for the rest of the day after you've taken them off.’
If you are inclined to take Frownies seriously, and wish to be well ahead of the game, you need look no farther than Clare Maxwell-Hudson's office in north London, where the notion that anti-frown plasters are a new idea from the USA met with shrieks of incredulity.
Many years ago, before aerobics was invented, Clare, the well-known natural beauty and massage guru, expounded her theory that keeping a serene face was the best bet for a wrinkle-free future.
Her idea was to stick a piece of Sellotape between your eyebrows for an afternoon to make yourself aware of how often you frowned, so that you would know to do it less.
To this end, she created her Anti-Frown Plasters (aka Able-Labels).
I stuck one on my forehead for an afternoon, received a good many curious stares from colleagues, and got the giggles.
I felt I was more in danger of laughter-lines than a creased brow.
If you want to try them, you can buy them from Clare for a small consideration which will be donated to charity.
But would she recommend wearing them while you exercised?
‘Oh, I think it's a very good idea,’ she says, ‘because one frowns when one concentrates, and it becomes habitual; so if one is reminded about it, it helps.
No one wants to have a frown.’
Serious attempts to gauge the likelihood of an outbreak of Frownie-wearing in London's health clubs have been greeted only by hoots of laughter.
No one among the instructors or instructees at London's trendy Pineapple Dance studios had heard of these things, or thought the idea would catch on.
‘But the dance classes here are such fun,’ said a spokesman, trying to keep a straight face, ‘that we really don't think we need any of these Frownies.’
His remarks brought to mind a particularly tough circuit-training class, Terry's Power Hour, that used to be much in vogue at Battersea's Metropolitan Club.
Terry's winning touch as a trainer was to wait until his devotees were in extremis on their final set of 50 press-ups, then announce sweetly, ‘Don't forget to smile.’
He had a point, though I can't say I appreciated his little joke at the time.
You use more than 44 muscles to frown, and only 14 to smile.
So keep the the plaster-spotted faces of the fanatics in your mind as you exercise, and you'll laugh so much the wrinkles won't have a chance.
Food and Drink: The harmony of a Thai quartet
Glynn Christian reveals the essence of Asia's finest cuisine on the eve of Songkran
BY GLYNN CHRISTIAN
TOMORROW is not a good day for Thai aquaphobes.
April 13 is Songkran, the Thai New Year, and traditional celebrations include a great deal of water throwing.
In the morning young people sprinkle their elders with water to bring well-being and continued longevity.
In the afternoon, ritual becomes outrage and entire buckets of water are thrown at all and sundry.
Still, it's pretty hot in Thailand right now, and after such a special New Year lunch, who would care?
A good Thai meal will be so beautifully balanced and so crammed with flavour and texture that it both satiates and stimulates.
Thailand is the only country in south Asia to have resisted colonisation and thus has a cohesive language and religion, plus a unique culinary palette.
Thai food is far more interesting than Chinese or Indian, for the huge and accessible range of ingredients makes it potentially more elegant and surprising — in Thailand they are said to eat more than 250 raw ingredients in their yam (salads, and pronounced ‘yum’) alone.
Properly, a Thai meal offers a balance of the five flavours identified in a 3rd-century-BC Chinese poem, The Summons of the Soul — bitter, salt, sour, sweet and hot.
The centrepiece will be rice, fragrant in the south, more glutinous in the north.
Chopsticks were never part of Thai culture; a spoon and fork replace hands these days.
In a properly balanced meal, only one dish should be really hot although chilli/cayenne may be present in others — much as we in the West indiscriminately use black pepper.
Such hotness will be almost imperceptible to those who eat chilli every day, and the notion that Thai food must sear the mouth to be authentic is a misunderstanding.
If you are not a regular eater of such food, insist firmly that the chilli content is severely reduced.
Then you will be served a dish which tastes to your palate the way the hotter dish would to a seasoned Thai tongue.
This is true even when you eat Royal Thai food.
Royal Thai food is not an entirely different cuisine, in the way we have home cooking and haute cuisine.
It consists of pretty much the same dishes found in simpler households, but will be made with more expensive ingredients, made smaller and more delicate, with almost no chilli, and served in particularly exquisite porcelain, silver and gold.
The range of flavours expected in a Thai meal should be spread over a choice of textures, too.
Thus, your central bowl of rice is probably accompanied by a soup, a curry, a fish dish, a side dish of a cooked vegetable, and an uncooked yam.
The accompaniments will include a chilli sauce or sliced chillies and the ubiquitous fish sauce — nam pla.
Used as a savoury flavouring and salt source, nam pla is regarded with great suspicion and, often, revulsion, by Occidentals.
It is indeed based on the putrefaction of fish, but this is true of many other sauces throughout history.
Unlike the much more difficult dried shrimps and dried shrimp pastes of the Thai kitchen, nam pla does not taste in the least bit fishy.
It is also exceptionally useful in the Western kitchen, rather like a less assertive Worcestershire sauce.
Even though there are excellent books and many stores which import ingredients direct, it remains a daunting task to prepare much of the Thai repertoire in domestic kitchens.
Yet there are ingredients that are especially interesting to use by themselves.
For me, the signature flavours of Thai cookery are coriander leaf and root, lemon grass and kaffir lime leaf.
Of course, there are also the dried shrimp pastes, green curry paste, ginger and galingale, lotus and a thousand others.
But that quartet seems responsible to a greater or lesser extent for the flavours most people like.
Coriander looks like flat leaf parsley, but when bought in bunches usually has some of the root attached.
The leaf is exceptionally useful in adding unexpected pungency and aroma almost anywhere we might use parsley.
Coriander leaf is the most widely used flavouring in the world.
A puree of garlic, coriander root and black pepper is an important flavouring base, especially useful as a marinade.
I have found this even more useful if you add some leaf and if the garlic is first poached to gentleness.
After expressing the cooked garlic from its skin, puree it with a little vegetable oil, raw coriander root and leaf, plus black pepper.
The greenery-yallery mush makes a terrific flavour to smear under or over the skin of poultry, in which to steam or microwave fish or to marinate prawns before grilling.
I have also used it under the skin of a loin of pork and stuffed it into tunnels made with a sharpening steel through legs of lamb.
The best use for this paste is as a substitute for tomato on pizza.
I top it with uncooked, unshelled prawns that have been marinated in grated fresh ginger and lime juice.
When the pizza has cooked and the prawns turned a proper shocking orange-pink, I sprinkle on extra lime juice and finely sliced lemon grass.
Lemon grass is increasingly available in supermarkets.
It adds a slightly sweet citric flavour that is close to lemon balm in many ways; use it wherever you would normally use lemon or lime.
Remove any dry outer leaves, cut off the top third or more and lightly bruise the fleshy base.
The most sophisticated cooks use lemon grass whole or coarsely cut when preparing the stock for a soup or sauce and remove it when the dish is almost complete, replacing it with fine slices to focus and refresh the flavour.
I use lemon grass on salads wherever you would normally use chives; it gives even more refreshment and does not affect any wine you might drink.
An important complement to lemon grass is kaffir lime leaf, the leaf of the tree that produces a wrinkly lime.
You generally need to remove the thick spine before finely shredding the leaf.
It's wonderful — richer and more unctuous — in stuffings or to flavour sauces where you would normally use lemon or lime.
In Thai cookery, none of these ingredients is used alone; indeed one of its special tricks is to offer a spectrum of variations on the same flavour.
Thus to make a wonderful stock base for poaching or a clear soup, water would be highly flavoured with lemon or lime juice, plus lemon grass and kaffir lime leaf.
The more finely sliced the ingredients the stronger the flavour.
Simmer with plenty of fish sauce, of course, and perhaps some fresh ginger slices, and then remove them and throw in finely sliced lemon grass and kaffir lime leaf.
Although hard to buy beyond specialist shops, kaffir lime leaf offers such a depth of flavour that I find it hard not to reach for it whenever I cook.
To these savoury Thai ingredients I would add just one other — mali or jasmine essence — to use in rice puddings, in custards or simply in whipped cream for raspberries or strawberries.
Happy Songkran.
Food and Drink: Roll up for a saucy lamb
By Josceline Dimbleby
EASTER remains almost the best time for a family gathering; far less demanding than Christmas, and more cheering, with the rest of spring and summer to look forward to.
Lamb, representing the innocence of Christ, is traditionally eaten at Easter.
It can be cooked with a variety of seasonings, so I vary the accompaniments such as stuffing and sauces each year.
Another bonus at this time of year is edible flowers.
A green salad can be enhanced by primrose and violet heads, and they make appealing decorations for a cake.
You can dip each flower in whisked egg white, then into caster sugar and leave on baking parchment overnight in an airing cupboard to make crystallised flowers for cakes, ice-creams and fruit fools.
MARINATED SHOULDER OF LAMB STUFFED WITH LEEKS AND CHICKEN LIVERS, WITH GREEN AND RED SAUCE 4–4½lb/1.8–2kg shoulder of lamb, boned but not rolled juice of one lemon 2 tbsp sherry vinegar 3 tbsp olive oil 8oz/225g chicken livers 3 medium leeks 2oz/50g fresh breadcrumbs 2 tsp pink peppercorns 1 medium egg black pepper For the sauce 1 small red pepper 4oz/100g spinach good handful fresh mint 2 tsp cumin seeds ½ pint/300ml double cream 1 tbsp sherry vinegar salt, black pepper The night before, lay the boned lamb flesh side upwards in a large shallow dish or roasting pan.
Mix the lemon juice with the sherry vinegar and olive oil and season well.
Smear this mixture all over the lamb, cover with cling film and leave the meat in a cool place to marinate overnight.
To prepare the stuffing, chop the livers finely and put into a bowl.
Wash the leeks, chop finely and add to the livers.
Add the breadcrumbs and peppercorns and season.
Whisk the egg lightly and stir into the other ingredients.
Lay several pieces of string across a board; put the lamb on top of them, skin side downwards.
Reserve the marinade juices.
Spoon the stuffing onto the middle of the meat, then draw the meat up into a loose roll.
Tie together with the string.
Heat the oven to Gas 8/450F/230C.
Put the meat into a roasting pan, join-side down, smear with olive oil and sprinkle with salt.
Pour the reserved marinade juices into the roasting pan around the lamb.
Cook in the centre of the oven, basting now and then.
After 20 minutes, turn down the heat to Gas 4/350F/180C and cook for another 1¼–1½ hours.
Then turn off the heat and ‘rest’ the joint in the oven with the door ajar for 25–30 minutes.
While the meat is resting, make the sauce.
Cut the pepper in half, discard the seeds and stem and chop the flesh into small cubes.
Wash the spinach, pull off the stalks and chop the leaves.
Chop the mint finely.
Pour off as much excess fat from the roasting pan as you can, but none of the juices; pour these into a saucepan and return the meat to the turned-off oven.
Add the chopped pepper and the cumin seeds to the saucepan and bubble gently over a medium heat for 8–10 minutes until the pepper is soft.
Stir in the cream gradually and bring up to bubbling again.
Add the chopped spinach and mint and bubble for a minute or two until the spinach is soft.
Remove from the heat, add any more juices that have seeped out from the meat, stir in the sherry vinegar and season to taste.
Remove string carefully.
(Serves 8–10.)
SAFFRON AND CURRANT BISCUITS 2 tbsp cream or milk generous pinch saffron strands 6oz/175g butter 2oz/50g icing sugar 6oz/175g self-raising flour 2oz/50g fine semolina 4oz/100g currants Put the cream or milk and the saffron into a saucepan, bring just to bubbling point and then leave to cool, stirring once or twice so that the saffron infuses well.
Whisk the butter and icing sugar, then whisk in the saffron cream.
Make sure no saffron strands are left on the whisk.
Add the flour, semolina and currants and stir into the batter with a wooden spoon.
Using floured hands, gather the dough into a ball.
Roll out on a floured board to ¼in/5mm thick and cut into rounds.
Place on lightly buttered baking sheets and bake at Gas 5/375F/190C for 8–10 minutes until pale brown; leave to cool on the tray.
Food and Drink: Roll up for a saucy lamb
By Josceline Dimbleby
EASTER remains almost the best time for a family gathering; far less demanding than Christmas, and more cheering, with the rest of spring and summer to look forward to.
Lamb, representing the innocence of Christ, is traditionally eaten at Easter.
It can be cooked with a variety of seasonings, so I vary the accompaniments such as stuffing and sauces each year.
Another bonus at this time of year is edible flowers.
A green salad can be enhanced by primrose and violet heads, and they make appealing decorations for a cake.
You can dip each flower in whisked egg white, then into caster sugar and leave on baking parchment overnight in an airing cupboard to make crystallised flowers for cakes, ice-creams and fruit fools.
MARINATED SHOULDER OF LAMB STUFFED WITH LEEKS AND CHICKEN LIVERS, WITH GREEN AND RED SAUCE 4–4½lb/1.8–2kg shoulder of lamb, boned but not rolled juice of one lemon 2 tbsp sherry vinegar 3 tbsp olive oil 8oz/225g chicken livers 3 medium leeks 2oz/50g fresh breadcrumbs 2 tsp pink peppercorns 1 medium egg black pepper For the sauce 1 small red pepper 4oz/100g spinach good handful fresh mint 2 tsp cumin seeds ½ pint/300ml double cream 1 tbsp sherry vinegar salt, black pepper The night before, lay the boned lamb flesh side upwards in a large shallow dish or roasting pan.
Mix the lemon juice with the sherry vinegar and olive oil and season well.
Smear this mixture all over the lamb, cover with cling film and leave the meat in a cool place to marinate overnight.
To prepare the stuffing, chop the livers finely and put into a bowl.
Wash the leeks, chop finely and add to the livers.
Add the breadcrumbs and peppercorns and season.
Whisk the egg lightly and stir into the other ingredients.
Lay several pieces of string across a board; put the lamb on top of them, skin side downwards.
Reserve the marinade juices.
Spoon the stuffing onto the middle of the meat, then draw the meat up into a loose roll.
Tie together with the string.
Heat the oven to Gas 8/450F/230C.
Put the meat into a roasting pan, join-side down, smear with olive oil and sprinkle with salt.
Pour the reserved marinade juices into the roasting pan around the lamb.
Cook in the centre of the oven, basting now and then.
After 20 minutes, turn down the heat to Gas 4/350F/180C and cook for another 1¼–1½ hours.
Then turn off the heat and ‘rest’ the joint in the oven with the door ajar for 25–30 minutes.
While the meat is resting, make the sauce.
Cut the pepper in half, discard the seeds and stem and chop the flesh into small cubes.
Wash the spinach, pull off the stalks and chop the leaves.
Chop the mint finely.
Pour off as much excess fat from the roasting pan as you can, but none of the juices; pour these into a saucepan and return the meat to the turned-off oven.
Add the chopped pepper and the cumin seeds to the saucepan and bubble gently over a medium heat for 8–10 minutes until the pepper is soft.
Stir in the cream gradually and bring up to bubbling again.
Add the chopped spinach and mint and bubble for a minute or two until the spinach is soft.
Remove from the heat, add any more juices that have seeped out from the meat, stir in the sherry vinegar and season to taste.
Remove string carefully.
(Serves 8–10.)
SAFFRON AND CURRANT BISCUITS 2 tbsp cream or milk generous pinch saffron strands 6oz/175g butter 2oz/50g icing sugar 6oz/175g self-raising flour 2oz/50g fine semolina 4oz/100g currants Put the cream or milk and the saffron into a saucepan, bring just to bubbling point and then leave to cool, stirring once or twice so that the saffron infuses well.
Whisk the butter and icing sugar, then whisk in the saffron cream.
Make sure no saffron strands are left on the whisk.
Add the flour, semolina and currants and stir into the batter with a wooden spoon.
Using floured hands, gather the dough into a ball.
Roll out on a floured board to ¼in/5mm thick and cut into rounds.
Place on lightly buttered baking sheets and bake at Gas 5/375F/190C for 8–10 minutes until pale brown; leave to cool on the tray.
Food and Drink: Ideals in good taste
Save the planet, but don't forget flavour, says Simone Sekers
BY SIMONE SEKERS
EVEN in these less affluent times, there are those who are happy to buy expensive, muddy carrots instead of bright orange ones at half the price, or an expensive piece of beef instead of a cut-price special offer.
Is it the magic word ‘organic’ which appears alongside the higher price tag that triggers this Pavlovian response, or do we weigh up the pros and cons of organic versus inorganic produce before we buy?
Are we looking for freshness and flavour, or are we happy to forgo these for the headier feeling that longevity might be achieved if we avoid imbibing pesticide residues.
Add to this the possibility that by eating organic produce we might be filling the cornfields with poppies once again and I suspect that mere flavour often takes a back seat.
It might seem churlish to ask for flavour as well as the chance to save the planet, but it used to be there before the planet needed saving.
Then we all started demanding cheap food and the first thing to be sacrificed, along with the freedom of a chicken to scratch for worms, was flavour.
Mass production meant rushing to produce as much as possible as quickly as possible.
Pesticides dealt with pests, weedkillers with weeds, hybridisation with the fact that some varieties were axed in favour of those which speedily produced more, rather than those that produced fewer, or less, but of better quality.
Now that we have been offered the choice and the opportunity to buy produce that hasn't been sprayed or hybridised, it does seem reasonable to expect that flavour will return.
But has it?
Many a blindfolded tasting panel has failed to spot the difference between the apple grown without pesticides and that which has.
Since flavour is an emotive as well as a factual quality, it is hard to pin down.
My husband always maintains that white wine tastes better when drunk outside — by which he actually means that if he is in the open air he is relaxed and therefore more capable of enjoying anything.
Similarly, any carrot is going to do you some good, but those grown without the aid of pesticides could be said to do you even more good — the extra glow imparted by this thought naturally infuses a carrot salad.
But seriously, can we count on expensive organic meat being tender and tasty, organic eggs being fresher, organic cheese encapsulating all the flavour of those flowery meads?
The answer is, as usual, that it all depends.
It depends on the breed of animal, how well it has been dealt with before its death, and whether it has been hung properly.
Any good old-fashioned butcher will tell you that beef and lamb must be hung, in a cold store, for at least a week to 10 days.
Cut short that hanging time and the meat will be tough and flavourless, regardless of its pedigree and upbringing.
Modern methods of butchery militate against this; drenching freshly slaughtered carcases in water means that they spoil more quickly, and weight-loss achieved as the meat hangs means less profit.
A more gentle upbringing means that the animal has more time to build up the reserves of fat necessary to lubricate the meat.
But if the breed has been chosen for its low-fat characteristics this won't happen, however organically it has been reared.
Such distinctions are even more noticeable with cheese.
About a year ago I was sent an organic semi-soft cheese made in Wales.
It was pleasant but had I been blindfolded I would not have been able to tell the difference from its cheaper, non-organic counterpart.
I said so, and was chastised by its producer.
But the fact is that organic cheese is fine, but unpasteurised organic cheese, with all the flavour not purged by pasteurisation, is far finer.
Obviously, organic does signify better, or at the least an improvement, but the buyer must beware.
Organic vegetables are of little use if their leaves are yellowing, their vitamins and minerals long departed.
Organic meat needs experienced butchery and not a quick swipe with the band saw before being instantly packaged — so go to a butcher who buys his meat on the hoof from a farmer who isn't into organics just for the sake of profit.
And decide whether you want your cheese unpasteurised as well as organic, in order to get the most for your money.
Hard work, but worth it for the feeling that you might be helping producers to realise that there is a discerning market out there, and not one that reacts blindly to the word ‘organic’.
Thorson's Organic Consumer Club, subtitled Food You Can Trust, is edited by David Mabey and Alan & Jackie Gear (£4.99).
Food and Drink: Best of the ‘green’ wine
Lucy Bailey recommends specialists with the most fruitful ecologically sound lists
BY LUCY BAILEY
THE OTHER day Bruce Kendrick of Haughton Fine Wines found a barefoot customer dangling a pendulum over the wines in his shop.
Whether or not her swingometer led her to an appropriate purchasing decision, he hasn't heard; in fact, she was dowsing only the organic wines, so it wasn't a completely random process.
Fortunately for this particular hippy, she picked a merchant with a well-earned reputation for consistently high quality, because since the early Seventies a bewildering number of organisations have sprung up with the intention of guaranteeing a wine's organic credentials.
In France, which has more than 200 registered organic producers (over half the world's total), there are 16 associations, each with a different set of rules.
Whether you prefer the commonsense approach of the largest, Nature et Progres, group (a bit like our Soil Association) or the literal looniness of Rudolf Steiner's Biodynamic disciples, who only prune and pick during certain lunar and stellar cycles and seem to persuade their slugs to die, is up to you.
What they all have in common is a basic commitment that the vines should have been cultivated without the use of chemical fertilisers, pesticides, fungicides or herbicides (except for a few age-old things like Bordeaux mixture), and the wine made without chemical additives or agents — apart from a few natural and/or traditional substances.
But a new EC directive is in danger of denying our support for some of the most exciting organic wines.
From July 22, EC Directive 2092/91 comes into force, making it an offence to describe a wine as organic unless it has been approved by a governing body, itself approved by the EC.
All the established associations are expected to meet the criteria, and so earn their members the right to call themselves organic.
The trouble is that some of the very best ‘independent organic’ wine-makers (who can be some of the strictest and most idealistic) such as Aime Guibert of Mas de Daumas Gassac or Franois Perrin of Chateau Beaucastel (widely available), have chosen not to join any association.
These are the sort of people whose wines deserve to do well (and do) entirely on their merits, and I would like to be allowed to put my faith in wine merchants such as the Kendricks or Simon Loftus of Adnams when they tell me which of their wines are eco-friendly.
Unfortunately, there is still a depressing number of poor quality certified organic wines around.
Organic methods have their risks and demand a great deal more work and care than conventional alternatives.
In the hands of a skilled and passionate wine-maker, however, they are positively an advantage: no chemical fertilisers mean lower yields, which means better concentration, and in general being ‘natural’ should mean more of the personality of the grape, terroir and wine-maker comes through.
If you want to drink authenticated green, go to a specialist.
Recommended merchants and wines include: Haughton Fine Wines (0270 74537).
Voted as Best Organic Wine Merchant 1991 by the Which?
Wine Guide, it doesn't have and never has had an exclusively organic list (120 out of 350, with 40 of those ‘independent’).
Its latest star acquisition is the UK agency for the legendary Mas de Daumas Gassac, where the dry climate and mistral wind makes organic viticulture naturally easier to maintain.
The estate was organic from its beginning in the Seventies, with a large proportion of the wonderful Herault wild herb garrigue retained as habitat for pest predators.
From a crazy catholic mixture of grape varieties (Cabernet Sauvignon, Malbec, Merlot, Syrah, Cabernet Franc, Pinot Noir and Tannat are all in the '90), Guibert of Mas de Daumas Gassac produces a spectacular red that needs at least 10 years' cellaring.
The '90 has just been bottled and is a huge, thick, brooding but surprisingly velvety mixture of blackberries, molasses, Pontefract cakes and garrigue herb flavours (available in May, £11.24; Adnams (0502 724222) has the '88 at £11.25; Vintage Roots the '88/'89 at £11.65).
The Mas de Daumas Gassac Blanc is equally thrilling (Viognier, Chardonnay, Petit Manseng, Muscat, Marsanne, Roussane and Bourboulenc in the '91), with a beautiful finish (from May, £15.70; Adnams has the '90, a slightly different blend, at £15.10); finally, its '91 (unfiltered) Rose Frizant (£5.95 in May).
Other organic wines from Haughton include: Red: Coteaux d'Aix en Provence, Les Baux, Mas de Gourgonnier Reserve du Mas '85, Nature et Progres (£8.95, also Organic Wine Co — 0494 446557 — £8.35); Bandol, Chateau La Rochere '89, ‘independent’; no sulphur used at all, a wonderfully exuberant explosive mouthful of cherry fruit, herbs and spices (£7.20).
Vintage Roots (0734 401222).
An enthusiastic organic-only company that ‘will probably drop any wines that don't get the EC seal of approval’, which is a shame, but it has a very strong list of certified wines.
Safeway.
The supermarket with the biggest commitment to organic wines (14 on the list at the moment), it also sponsors the Organic Wine Challenge.
Red: Domaine Richeaume Cabernet Sauvignon '89, Cotes de Provence classic clarety Cabernet (£7.99, Vinceremos, £8.79).
White: Millton Vineyard Gisborne Chardonnay 90, New Zealand Chardonnay (£8.99, Vintage Roots, £8.99; Vinceremos has the '91 at £7.99).
Food and Drink: Growers find a market force
Caroline Stacey on a new development for the fans of additive-free produce
BY CAROLINE STACEY
THE FARMER and the customer should be friends.
It grieves organic farmers like Brian Tustian of Brackley, Northamptonshire, to see how much their produce has been marked up by the time it reaches the shops.
And customers are equally reluctant to pay a premium for knobblier — but ideologically and chemically purer — fruit and vegetables, or for meat and poultry from organically reared livestock.
As a result, neither side benefits from the effort put into organic farming.
According to the Soil Association — the largest body of organic farmers, of which Tustian is a member — although sales of organic produce have increased overall because there is more of it in the shops (much of it imported), the recession also means that some of it lingers on the shelves for longer.
Since organic farming is more costly than its chemical cousin, by the time the food reaches the shops it can seem excessively expensive.
But in a welcome departure from the impersonal world of the supermarket, with its individually cling-filmed organic vegetables, the farmer and shopper will soon come face to face.
On Sunday April 26, Britain's first organic food market starts trading at Spitalfields in east London.
Its customers will be able to buy a range of home-grown organic produce at prices lower than those normally charged for conventionally farmed food.
Brian Tustian is one of the organic farmers who have responded enthusiastically to an arrangement that bypasses wholesalers and sells straight to the public.
The idea is based on a system that works well in France, where supermarkets have less of a stranglehold on food supplies and there is a tradition of small farm-ers taking their produce to town.
The entrepreneurial Elizabeth Taylor (no relation) read an article about organic markets in France, les Marches Biologiques, and wondered why we didn't have any here.
She asked organic producers if they would be interested in a market and received enough positive responses to go ahead.
In a fortnight's time she hopes to have 40 different organic producers and suppliers under one roof.
Spitalfields, once a wholesale fruit and vegetable market, has been taken over as a leisure venture with around 200 stalls selling crafts and bric-a-brac plus sporting attractions in a covered area larger than Covent Garden.
The organic food stalls will be there on Sundays and, eventually, if there is enough interest from customers and caterers, may become a daily fixture.
‘Farmers like to see things going from the farm straight to the table,’ said Elizabeth Taylor.
‘But they've never had a market designed especially for them.
In creating one she has inadvertently made a move towards alternative methods of selling that could have great significance for organic farming.
The Soil Association sees this development in more political terms, as possibly changing the relationship between consumer and producer.
‘Part of the organic ethic is to shorten the chain and look at ways of bringing consumers and producers back together,’ said its spokesman Patrick Holden.
‘The market concept is a very exciting example of that.’
Brian Tustian, who has farmed organically for five years is looking forward to the opportunity of dealing with his customers personally: it gives him a chance to put the case for organic produce himself, and he can cope better with the variable quantity of his supplies at a market.
His hens, although merrily producing eggs now, do not lay to order as battery hens can.
He'll be selling his Grade 1 eggs for about £2 a dozen — £1 less than eggs from organically reared hens usually cost, and at about the same price as the supermarkets charge for non-organic free-range hens' eggs.
He expects to have organic chickens for £1.25 per lb and pork for £1.20 a lb.
Ian Pardoe, a Herefordshire fruit farmer, is taking the last of his apples to the market.
He specialises in the older, rare varieties of apple: Ashmead's Kernel, Blenheim Orange, Lord Lambourne, Kidd's Orange, Idared, George Cave and Worcester Pearmain.
Pardoe is delighted by the prospect of going to market, although he's reluctant to undercut the small shops who for years have kept the organic movement going.
It is also easier to introduce customers to unusual varieties of apple, which may not always look as glossy and appealing as those we've become used to, but taste far superior.
‘It's more and more difficult to sell the fruit to supermarkets because they're almost asking for the impossible,’ he said.
Rhubarb, and later plums, will also be sold on Pardoe's stall at Spitalfields.
The Organic market comes at a time when the term organic is coming under scrutiny.
Both Tustian and Pardoe are among the 600 farmers who are approved by the Soil Association, the largest organic farming body in Britain, whose main criterion is that certified produce must be grown on soil that has been free from artificial additives for at least two years.
The number of farmers certified by the Soil Association has increased by 30 per cent in the past year.
But as organic farming burgeons, so greater controls on the use of the word are to be introduced.
From July, all organically produced food must be certified under EC regulations.
This is intended to remove confusion about what constitutes organic and to stop abuse of the word.
In practice, the main organic bodies meet European Community requirements and will continue to use their own symbols.
It may be years, if ever, before the symbols of the three largest organisations, the Soil Association, Organic Farmers & Growers or the Scottish Organic Producers' Association, are superseded by an EC symbol.
Anyone who wants to visit the Spitalfields Market will find that all the producers are Soil Association-approved — thus organic by EC standards too — and that finally, the price of greater purity should not be prohibitive.
Out and About: Willing to be Weekley changed
By Byron Rogers
ONCE a year in this village men open the door to let the ghosts in.
There is nothing unique about this; men are compelled by law to do it in almost every English village, and it is not a matter of one ghost or two, but a whole rout of them — quiet chaps in cowls, roaring boys in ruffs, ladies in farthingales.
They have two things in common: in life they were rich, and in death wary.
Those who must let them enter do not like the work, for they fear what sidles in at the same time — the jealousies, the old rows and the suspicion of old fraud.
For that door, once opened, is not easily closed.
Look, here they come: a duchess and her daughter, a London haberdasher who died on the eve of the Civil War, a squire whose ancestors threw people out of their houses to make way for sheep.
The duchess apart, little is known of their lives or even what their connection was with this village, but they should have left us £3,000 a year in charities.
Still, we do not come close to one local village which was left a field, the rents from which for centuries provided the poor with half-a-dozen sacks of coal; but then the village sold its field to a property developer.
It now has a cricket pitch, which is of county standard; and when the village's older inhabitants go to town they are ferried in taxis.
They do not like to talk about such things to strangers.
But then people can live in a village and not know anything about their own charities.
The notices go up, inviting applications which no longer refer to ‘the poor’; and if you read these, you assume it to be some quaint custom, as I did before I heard how much was involved.
Three grand goes a fair way among the widows and apprentices, particularly as nobody can remember the last time there was an apprentice in the village.
‘We had a woman apply once,’ said a former trustee.
‘This chap pointed out that she couldn't be a widow, as she'd never married.
But we overruled him.’
Some funds have now been diverted to further education, so you get £20 as an encouragement if you make the local sixth form.
Get to the second year and you get £30.
But should you become an undergraduate, the encouragement comes through the roof (there has been one recent award of £200).
Parish Clerk Weekley, that man of power and aerial photographs, is pushing for a further diversion to include free eye-testing for the old, and has written to local doctors advising them of this.
The doctors have not replied.
‘Very difficult to select the poor now,’ said Mr Weekley.
Of course you could once, when they knew their place (’ The poor will long remember /The kind repast they did enjoy /On the 24th of September’).
You could also spot the widows then, for they were obliged to wear the initials of the duchess's daughter on their breasts; no initials, no charity.
The duchess was the Duchess Dudley, a unique figure as the only Life Peer before the creations of Harold Wilson.
Charles I made her this out of guilt at the wrong done to her husband, Robert Dudley, son of Elizabeth I's Earl of Leicester, whom a conspiracy had robbed of legitimacy and titles.
Dudley, after years of trying to get redress by law, went off to the Continent in a huff (and a fancy woman) where the Emperor created him a duke and overlooked the fancy woman.
King Charles, not to be outdone, then made the abandoned wife a duchess, the title to die with her.
She owned farms locally and spent her life worrying about Christian slaves in Turkey, for on her death she left the farms to pay for their ransom.
Only time passed, and 150 years later men began to suspect there might not be any Christian slaves left, because the Midlands solicitor charged with administering the estate seemed an extremely rich man.
There was an inquiry, and the village poor, next in line in the Will, came out of the small print.
But that is the trouble with such charities.
People forget — until one day somebody realises a farmer is paying a rent established 30 years ago, and then all hell is let loose in the sleepy meeting in the back room of the pub.
‘And what about the six plum puddings of Blatherwick?’ cries James Carr, novelist and local historian.
Mr Carr discovered that these should be distributed every Christmas, and wrote letters, to which he did not receive an answer.
‘And why is a duke's brother living in an alms house while his wife runs an art gallery in another?’
Mysteries, all of them mysteries.
And why does Parish Clerk Weekley not receive his quarter loaf every Sunday as is his right under Haberdasher Cleeve's Will?
Who is eating Weekley's bread?
Come to that, why does no photograph of this man come out, except when taken from the air?
This is how they end, all those deals done hurriedly long ago in some canopied bed, a quill pen scratching the vellum.
In mystery and a can of worms.
Out and About: A fine show of flower power
Margot Bishop travels to Holland and falls under the spell of the greatest floral festival on earth
By MARGOT BISHOP
DRIVING from The Hague, you have arrived when the word Floriade is spelt out in flowers alongside the motorway.
Then you see an express train apparently coming out through the embankment while a gigantic head capped with flowers revolves high above and you realise it will be an amazing day.
Floriade (at Zoetermeer until October 11) is an international festival of gardening held in The Netherlands only once every decade, when every aspect of the world of horticulture is on display to amuse, inform, surprise and delight.
The basic design of the 200-acre triangular site follows the classic pattern of the patte d'oie, or goosefoot, but each axis is different.
One is a 1,200m carpet of flowers planted in spring with 250,000 blue, yellow and white pansies nodding their heads vigorously in the slightest breeze.
Later these will be replaced by annual bedding plants and wildflowers to make a tapestry of colour throughout the summer until the Floriade closes in the autumn.
Most foreign visitors will probably take the southern route along the waterway to the international gardens where the British Garden has a prime position.
The design is very formal, dividing our two-thirds of an acre in to four separate gardens.
From the roofed gateway, a paved terrace leads to the Summer Garden past a perfect lawn to the orangery.
Clever planting will give continuous colour from April to October; outstanding in spring are the bright yellow leaves of Valeriana phu Aurea and the deep rich blue pulmonaria flowers among the hellebores, pansies and tulips.
The blue and yellow theme will be carried through the summer by lobelias, marigolds and dahlias.
Of course there is a Rose Garden with British-raised hybrid teas and floribundas, Sanders White climbing over the arches and Rambling Rector and Goldfinch covering the arbour.
Lavender circles the sundial, new varieties of scabious edge the beds, and the shrub roses are underplanted with pink and white bulbs and perennials.
The sound of a fountain guides visitors to the raised pool surrounded by dark weeping hollies with splashes of light from white variegated Ilex aquifolium Argentea Marginata, white flowered campanulas and silver-leaved artemisias.
The fourth section is the Kitchen Garden with an avenue of Ballerina fruit trees, trained cherries and golden-leaved hazels.
Space has been found for vegetables, herbs, a greenhouse and even the garden shed.
Sponsorship has raised about £300,000 for the British Garden, which should have a good chance of winning the competition.
The first prize for the best foreign garden is a mere £1,000 — but immense prestige.
Very different in style, yet just as beautiful, is the £1 million Japanese Garden.
A stream, at first made of smooth pebbles, flows between granite rocks whose harsh lines are softened by prostrate conifers.
Later the stream becomes pure clear water widening into a pool.
The colour and texture of foliage is an essential part of the design, with many rare plants.
Prunus mume Pendula stands beside Cornus kousa above clipped azaleas and many varieties of pieris, daphnes and tree paeonies.
Tall bamboos wave above dwarf species, and a display of bonsai trees is backed by shrubs.
Mature evergreen trees, such as Ilex crenata, have been trained and clipped into formal shapes which look as if a green cloud is floating on each branch.
The central vista is a high dyke leading to an observation tower where visitors can spiral up 75m for a bird's-eye view of the site and — on a clear day — Rotterdam and the North Sea.
This is the highest point of the Floriade, while the lowest is some 4.5m below sea level because the whole festival has been built on reclaimed land.
When Floriade closes, some of the plantings will remain and part of the site will be used for new town expansion Meanwhile in the giant flowerbeds more than 400 varieties of tulips, daffodils and hyacinths will flower, to be followed by annuals, then dahlias and chrysanthemums.
Twenty thousand perennial plants will bloom, including those in a display explaining how to use colour in the garden.
The Dutch nurserymen have planted a Green Valley with rhododendrons, conifers, acers and heathers spiked with lilies and unusual bulbs.
Amid all this colour, 8,000 ferns provide restful green backgrounds, and the way in which some have been planted is particularly interesting — tucked into the crevices of dividing walls.
No flower show is complete without its fruit and vegetables, so there are demonstration plots showing how to grow cabbages, carrots and cucumbers both outside and in the greenhouse.
Here you can discover the latest developments in commercially grown mushrooms, asparagus and chicory on a grand scale, and watch how to cook them in the culinary theatre.
The model orchard shows how apples and pears were grown in the 1950s compared with modern methods, and the strawberries look as mouthwatering as always.
Even when it rains there is still plenty to see.
One fully automatic greenhouse is filled with flowering and foliage pot-plants; round the perimeter carnations, alstroemerias and freesias are being grown for cut flowers using the latest cultivation techniques.
Gerberas are growing in rockwool, and each plant has its own life-support line connected to a central tube through which food and water are dispensed.
Another greenhouse has been landscaped to show succulents and cacti in a natural setting.
But biggest and best is the enormous indoor ‘Exposarium’ where 13 different exhibitions will be staged — from the display of bulbs and orchids when it was opened by Queen Beatrix last Thursday through to roses in July and lilies in September.
The greatest flower show in the world is how the organisers describe the result of their 10 years planning and planting — and rightly so.
Further information from the Netherlands Board of Tourism, 25–28 Buckingham Gate, London SW1E 6LD (071–630 0451).
Out and About: NATURE NOTES
By Austin Hatton
THE SKY was still pink in the east, with rifts of blue between grey clouds, when the rooks returned to their ancestral nesting place in a scattering of trees.
Dusky wings flapped overhead.
Then the familiar clamour of bickering voices that will last for months began.
By daybreak each nest, an untidy blotch against an opalescent sky, had its clangorous pair, old partners together once more after leading separate lives foraging with the jackdaws on the coastal fields since autumn.
For some of us, the homecoming of the bare-faced crows marks, more than anything else, the progress of the year: more than the sparrow's egg that fell from a nest in the guttering of a barn's roof; or, for that matter, the arrival of the hive bees to jostle around the gold gorse flowers; more than the toad crawling to the pond in which he was spawned; or the squeak of a hungry pipistrelle bat venturing out of hibernation on a warm, wet evening.
To others, for whom the signals of the year are equally important, progress is marked by that dramatic change in the lifestyle of the jays, the feathered brigands of many splendoured tints who are, for most of the year, the vocally irritable members of the crow family, shrieking at each other and at any intruder in their territory.
Now, suddenly, a jay looks down from a hiding place in a lichened oak and slips away without breaking the silence: stealthy, cunning, typical of the inveterate egg thief.
Because both he and his mate are mobbed as pillagers whenever they are spotted by other birds, the jay realises that reticence is essential for the safety of the expected brood.
So all through the anxious days of incubation until the dull-plumaged infants are fully fledged, he and the hen move about without even a whisper.
A morning comes, though, after 21 days as a Trappist, on which, with a noisy family trailing him, he screams again in the leafy sanctuary of the treetops.
It is indicative, too, when a mistle thrush changes his tune, forgets to repeat his challenging spring song and slips down self-consciously into the lower boughs of a larch to all but whisper a softer, lazier, persuasive serenade.
Though a diligent search of the green mist that is starting to hide the larch branches fails to find a listening hen, he presumably knows what he is doing.
Out and About: Turning up new leaves
There's more to garden colour than flowers alone, says Robert Pearson
By ROBERT PEARSON
A SUCCESSION of flowers is the life-blood of most gardens but the foliage of trees and shrubs, together with perennials and grasses, can give colour and texture throughout the year.
Plants that give us both outstanding flowers and foliage are usually the first choice.
But I would not make this a necessary condition when designing a border, since to do so would be to deny oneself the pleasure of many first-rate foliage plants.
Among the perennial plants that perform a dual role to perfection is the goat's beard, Aruncus dioicus, a 4ft-6ft tall perennial of which I am especially fond.
This throws up a wealth of stems furnished with palish green leaves, comprised of lance-shaped leaflets, above which rise erect plumes of minute flowers, closely packed along the stems like pearls.
By happy chance I gave this a backdrop of an old hardy-hybrid rhododendron with mauve flowers, and underplanted it with ground-covering, spotted-leafed pulmonarias (lungworts).
These are such a delight in spring, and they too can be included as handsome and outstanding examples of dual-role perennials.
I particularly like the pulmonarias with spotted leaves such as Pulmonaria officinalis Sissinghurst White, whose nodding flowers of pure white so perfectly complement the silver-spotted leaves, and P. saccharata Leopard with pink flowers and spotted leaves.
All these plants do extremely well in light shade and the aruncus is very adaptable to different conditions.
Although it has been grown here for more than a century, the low-growing variety A. dioicus Kneiffii is, surprisingly, less well known.
It is half the height of the parent and quite a treasure, especially for small gardens.
For those who like variegated-leafed plants, another shade-loving perennial with good foliage and flowers is Brunnera macrophylla Dawson's White (which used to be known as Variegata).
The myriad, very pretty blue, forget-me-not flowers in spring and the largish heart-shaped leaves with creamy-white markings make an alluring combination.
The recently introduced variety, Hadspen Cream, is equally lovely.
These are also good ground-cover perennials, but need a moist fertile soil in a lightly shaded position sheltered from wind.
However, as we begin the fourth year of low rainfall (an understatement in my area) and severe watering restrictions, these brunneras are no longer ideal for my garden.
A Japanese aristocrat, which I first came across many years ago in a Berkshire woodland garden, is Kirengeshoma palmata, with large, lobed, vine-like leaves on dark 3ft stems.
Then, in September, come the pale yellow, semi-pendant, shuttlecock-like flowers.
Unfortunately, it does not succeed on limey soils but otherwise it needs the same conditions as the brunneras.
A number of nurseries are offering it now, and you are likely to find it on the plant stalls of plantsmen's gardens open to the public.
The most beautiful, large, deeply cut, fresh green leaves of Paeonia lutea ludlowii are borne on a rather stiff-stemmed shrub, about 5ft tall and wide, with cup-shaped, bright golden-yellow flowers in May-June.
With me it has done well not only in a sheltered, sunny position (the best conditions) but also in a place where it has only a few hours of direct sunshine each day.
Sunshine and a well drained soil are recommended.
Its native habitat is south-east Tibet and the botanists now call it P. delavayi ludlowii.
For years I grew the honeysuckle Lonicera japonica Aureoreticulata on a west-facing wall, and its small oval leaves, heavily veined with deep yellow, gave me great pleasure.
I write in the past tense because I lost it in an arctic spell of weather and for some inexplicable reason have yet to replace it.
The leaves are evergreen or semi-evergreen since they can be heavily defoliated in severe winters.
It can climb to 25ft-30ft, and through summer to October it has rather insignificant pale cream flowers with excellent fragrance.
If you like bright foliage, then try to find space for the showy ornamental grass Arundinaria viridistriata with its longitudinally striped leaves in bright yellow and green.
The canes, which grow up to 5ft tall, are bright green to purplish in colour.
A very stylish and fashionable plant.
Travel: Snakes alive out on the Worm's Head
Martin Symington braves high winds and assorted reptiles on the Gower Peninsula
By MARTIN SYMINGTON
WITH my head back, chest out, palms flattened and arms outstretched into a crucifixion position, I balanced on my toes and leaned forwards into the Atlantic gale.
For a few seconds the sheer force of the wind supported my weight before I stumbled into a lull between squalls.
Then I picked up a pebble and flung it out to sea; it rose straight up into the air and landed on the ground a few yards behind me.
I was on Worm's Head — a long, narrow island joined to the tip of the Gower Peninsula in South Wales by a rocky causeway.
This was my first stop on a circular walk round the peninsula's exposed western extremity.
The moment I had reached the Rhossili car park at the start of my walk, I realised that the mildness of this sunny spring day was being blown to bits out on Worm's Head.
Before leaving the village I consulted a chart outside the coastguard station, which confirmed that I had five hours before high tide; this would give me time to get to the end of Worm's Head and safely back onto the cliffs without danger of being stranded.
I strode off along a grassy cliff-top path peppered with stunted gorse bushes, towards the grey lookout tower where a mounted wall-exhibition explains that this stretch of coast is a designated Nature Reserve on account of its abundant birds, wildlife and rare limestone rock formations.
To my right was the endless sandy sweep and white surf of Rhossili Bay, curving for miles round to the distant headland of Burry Holms.
The wind howled above the background roar of the sea.
I licked my lips and could already taste the salt; my hair was whipped into a cone.
From the tower I climbed carefully down to the causeway and walked amid screeching seabirds to the end of the island, where the foaming water was groaning and pounding dramatically into a wide gash in the rock, known as the Blow Hole.
This is where I performed my gravity-defying experiments with the wind before returning to the cliff-top in the company of a couple of other walkers who, like me, were thoroughly enjoying these extraordinary conditions.
I continued along a path over the bluffs following a waymarked nature trail, where the main animal life seemed to be a few pregnant sheep blowing about dangerously close to death on the rocks below.
At Mewslade Bay a mile or so on, I turned left along a track to the village of Pitton, abruptly leaving this raw, rocky coastline for a palpably tamer farmland atmosphere of fields, grazing cattle and styles.
I was even sufficiently sheltered from the wind to notice the fresh, grassy smell of the cabbage crop I was crossing.
Ten minutes later I was having a snack in the bizarre Gower Reptile Exhibition Centre in Pitton; here you can feast on delicacies such as pies, beans, chips or cake and pay £1.50 to go into a small room to admire a collection of tropical frogs, snakes, giant lizards and so on.
While I waited for my hamburger to grill, the proprietor offered to photograph me, with my own camera, fondling a chameleon.
I began to feel slightly uneasy about the lunch I'd ordered.
Relieved to be out in the open again, I looked for the route up onto the giant hump of Rhossili Down above the village.
From the Outdoor Pursuits Centre at the end of a lane, several footpaths and sheep tracks meander up the rock-strewn hill, which was scattered with blooming thickets or scrambled egg-yellow gorse swaying in the wind.
On my way up I passed a rough structure of moss-coated stone about a foot high, enclosing a spring and shallow pool, marked on my map as Talgarth's Well.
The moisture seeping out had streaked the hillside with a vivid green line; just feet from me, a correspondingly green snake slithered silently across the wet patch.
A harmless grass snake, I concluded, although I must admit that the proximity of the Reptile Centre did make me a touch more circumspect than usual as I made for the summit.
The spectacle from The Beacon at the top of the Down was fantastic.
At just under 650 feet, this is the highest point on the Gower, commanding views over the entire peninsula, and as far as St Govan's Head on the edge of Pembrokeshire.
The drop down to half-moon Rhossili Bay below me was almost sheer, and the sea was striped with shimmering blue and white as endlessly long parallel lines of surf moved in slow motion towards the expanse of sand, on which I could just make out a few figures as tiny specks.
The continuous background roar seemed to come from every direction.
The track along Rhossili Down's ridge top was rough and rocky, with a wild west sort of feel to it as a few hardy-looking cattle wandered about at will on the humped and pitted pastures to the right, which my map indicated are the remains of neolithic burial chambers.
On either side of the steep trail down again, at the end of the hill, grazing ponies lined the track — presumably filling in time between summers, when they earn their living giving children rides up and down the beach.
At the bottom was a large, almost deserted caravan park which, being private property, I had to skirt round to find a track through the rolling scrub-dotted dunes that fringe the beach all the way to Burry Holm.
This, like Worm's Head, is an island headland joined to the mainland by a causeway; but the tide was now too far in for me to cross.
Instead, I made my way back along the sand, watching some evidently exhilarated surfers.
Encased in dry-suits, they struggled out into the bay to come crashing in on their boards.
Before climbing a steep, stiff staircase back up the cliff to Rhossili, I paused to watch the waves licking at the oak ribs of the Helvetia — a Norwegian coaster driven aground in 1887, whose remains are still half buried in the sand.
Travel: What to do if St Trop is ‘de trop’
Avril Groom and her family sidestep the mayhem of August on the Cote d'Azur
By AVRIL GROOM
PEACE and tranquillity on the Cote d'Azur in August?
It seemed a daft notion as we hurtled west along the motorway from Nice with Porsches and Ferraris whistling past our ears.
And an even remoter possibility as we baked in a toll queue vibrating with the beat from umpteen cassettes and radios.
But when you have young children and are tied by school holidays, needs must.
At the St Tropez/St Maxime exit the Porsches peeled off, to growl and purr their way south.
We headed for the hills, northwards — and what a difference a mile makes.
There was traffic on the N555 to the Draguignan, but it was mild and unthreatening.
Our easily found gite at Trans-en-Provence was about half a mile from this road.
Up an abrupt conical escarpment dotted with modern but pleasant villas was an olive-scattered plateau and as much tranquillity as you could wish for.
The houses were widely spread and the little road connecting them went nowhere, dwindling finally into the maquis.
In the sultry haze of late August, the only noises were the cicadas, the splash of the children in the pool and the rumble of thunder away over the Gorges du Verdon.
Here we plotted how we might keep the peace when venturing beyond the wrought-iron gates.
One way was to avoid the popular tourist spots and enjoy instead those ordinary aspects of Provenal life which francophile Brits find so fascinating.
The nearby village of Trans is a charming if undistinguished little place, ignored by passing traffic.
Narrow streets lead to a quaint bridge over the River Nartuby and a tiny square with a pretty little baroque mairie and a pizzeria with its terrace built round an antique fountain.
Apart from the sacrosanct hours from midday until two, the main street is quietly busy, with queues at the two boulangeries for each fresh batch of baguettes, petanque players under the plane trees, and, on Sundays, a tiny but comprehensive market.
Just watching provides hours of fun.
Avoiding the crowded tourist sites still leaves much to see.
We visited the atmospheric and sturdy 12th-century Abbaye du Thoronet in the heat of the day, when the low-arched cloisters, massive chapel and medieval granary were dark and cool and most of the tourists were at lunch.
We shared the quaint, steep lanes of the old citadel of Les Arcs with two cats and one other British family.
This little-known town also boasts a charming hotel, the Logis du Guetteur, built under the citadel tower, and a wonderful market (chic Provenal printed fabric at £5.50 a metre and the ingredients for a four-person lunch of sardines, shrimps and giant prawns for less than £3).
Our hilltop villa proved a great vantage point for the spectacular storms that, after a few days, cleared the air and allowed Provence to shine in her brilliant colours, as if a gauze veil had been lifted.
Then, as we drove down the steep little hill we could see the sea glinting, for the coast at Frejus was about 12 miles distant.
We had deliberately chosen a villa with easy access to the sea, but the children preferred their own pool.
Anything worth having in the South of France costs money, but some things are much better value than others.
The children's menu was good value in our local restaurant, a converted olive-mill called Le Moulin de la Gardiole, where steaks cooked with herbs, perfect chips, salad and a big cornet of blue ice-cream cost £5.50.
Good value also was a day at the private Plage de la Cannelle at St Maxime.
The purse was £30 lighter by the end, but we had our own sunloungers and parasols on an uncrowded and immaculately manicured beach, a pedalo ride, numerous drinks and a light lunch for four, in situ.
The one tourist trap we fell into was St Tropez.
There we discovered the £7.50 hamburger meal, flower-selling girls with Chanel handbags and wealthy exhibitionists who apparently enjoyed being part of a human zoo, preening themselves on their extravagant yachts while the hoi-polloi stared up from the quayside.
St Tropez these days is a circus and we made the mistake of eating with the elephants.
It wasn't a bad meal, but it was a rip-off and the service was appalling.
We should, as our French guest realised but was too polite to say, have eaten in lovely hilltop Gassin where vine-hung terrace restaurants offered menus gastronomiques and very chic settings for around £20 per head.
It must be packed at times, but in the honey-gold light of early evening its narrow, car-free streets were hauntingly empty.
Yet it is under six miles from St Tropez; in Provence in August the distance between perfect peace and perfect mayhem really is as small as this.
Travel: Take eggs, cream, butter…
Keith Jenkins forgets about cholesterol on a Normandy cookery course
By KEITH JENKINS
SALT!
More salt,’ urged our French tutor-chef.
We were adjusting the seasoning in a salmon terrine, and had nervously added what we thought to be the appropriate amount.
‘Why do the English not like salt?’ asked Eric Chevalier, chef at the beautiful Auberge du Val au Cesne, just south of Yvetot, where we were under his instruction on a Normandy Cookery Break.
We tried to explain the national concern over heart disease, and the medical advice to avoid excess salt.
‘Ah, le coeur,’ mused the phlegmatic Eric, ‘en Angleterre, peut-etre vous avez raison; en France, tant pis!’
The accompanying Gallic shoulder-shrug was classic.
So we compromised, and added a soupon more salt before the fausses rillettes de saumon went into the fridge for overnight solidifying.
Unknowingly we had sampled (and enthusiastically approved) this speciality the previous day when we were invited to lunch on the large covered terrace.
We were given an assiette composee of smoked salmon, pate de campagne, melon, avocado, and crudites, and the fausses rillettes of fresh and smoked salmon with chives, egg yolk, yogurt and lemon juice.
The 300-year-old Auberge is a solid, timbered house surrounded by woods and fields.
The delightful gardens, at their best in the late August sunshine, were home to peacocks and hens, cockerels, a caged canary, a goat that kept the grass trim in a neat semi-circle around the tree to which it was tethered, several dogs and a sizeable cattery — stars of which were some blue-grey Abyssinians.
A couple of new arrivals snuggled under their mother's long, silky fur.
Crossing the garden became a frequent pleasure as the five comfortable apartments, named after French regions — ours was Bordeaux — are in a recently converted timbered building 30 yards or so from the house.
No complaints here: the TV and shower were both in good working order; and what an attractive, peaceful place to stay — only 45 minutes' drive from Dieppe, and handy for visits to Rouen or Le Havre.
The proprietor, Jerome Carel, is rightly proud of the set-up, and is particularly pleased with the new terrace, which is protected from the road by the house and allows an overflow from the restaurant.
How Eric copes with the numbers it can accommodate is a mystery, but it was the mysteries of his talent we were there to learn.
My wife and I were lucky to have Eric all to ourselves.
The two-day introductory course is designed for two to four people at a time, though more can be accommodated at Jerome's other restaurant in Yvetot itself.
The intermediate and advanced courses take place at the Auberge.
A little French is useful as neither Eric nor Jerome speaks much English, but it is not vital: Jerome's colleague Dominic speaks good English, and will translate.
On the first afternoon, Eric demonstrated the three dishes we were to make.
It all looked so simple.
After the rillettes came turkey escalopes in cider, Calvados and inevitably, this being the heart of Normandy, cream.
Then tarte tatin.
Nervous though we were, it did turn out to be reasonably straightforward — but this was after all the beginners' course and the ingredients had been prepared; even the chives had been chopped.
Two moments caused brief distress.
First, the curt instruction to make a mayonnaise ‘a la main’, though this proved much easier than expected when Eric started us off with three egg yolks and a healthy dollop of strong French mustard (tip of the year for this amateur chef) before adding the first drop of oil.
Then the pastry for the tarte, again all mixed by hand, would not lift off the board — which was the only time Eric had to come to the rescue.
After that, even flambeeing the Escalope de Dinde Vieille Henriette was a piece of cake.
The more serious test came that evening when, having lunched out on a huge cote de boeuf, we were unexpectedly presented with the full fruits of our labours at dinner.
Never has the Norman hole been so necessarily, or slowly, bored as on that evening when the trou Normand of Calvados between courses did its work.
Whisper it not at the British Heart Foundation, but we knew that, as well as the salt, into that dinner had gone a dozen eggs, a couple of pints of cream, half a pound of butter, a quarter-pound of sugar and about half a pint of Calvados.
Tant pis!
Pass the port, someone…
Travel: Butterflies drink at your brow From sublime to adventurous…
Paul Forster soaks up the peace of a Malaysian island,
By PAUL FORSTER
ANYBODY travelling to south-east Asia will inevitably pass through Singapore.
Those bound for Australia or New Zealand by air will find themselves re-fuelling here at least, and it makes sense to stop and rest.
Singapore is a famously good place to shop and eat, and recent shifts of attitude by both government and tourism chiefs have made it more interesting and attractive.
But it is no longer cheap — and palm-fringed beaches, tropical languor and all that goes with them are in decidedly short supply.
Yet the Malaysian island of Tioman, 20 miles off the east coast of the peninsula, offers little else.
The only local event of note is the shooting here of the 1958 classic film South Pacific.
It is a high recommendation for a tropical island; but don't let the title confuse your geography.
Reaching Tioman from Singapore used to be either a complex business of bus, taxi and boat, or a frustrating one of scarce seats on very small aeroplanes.
Now, a slick and capacious catamaran leaves Singapore's Finger Pier at 7.40 every morning and arrives at the island roughly four hours later.
Tioman, some 12 miles long and six (tapering to two) across, feels surprisingly big.
It is heavily forested and three peaks rise to over 3,000ft.
A sparse population — about 1,500 — and a dream-like absence of speed boats and motor cars conspire to a remarkable silence and calm.
Tioman's greatest attraction is the almost total lack of anything to do.
There are clean beaches, scattered only with worn shards of coral, to lounge on and a tepid sea to flop into.
Otherwise, there are really only three possible excursions.
Jet-lag is quickly confused by indolence here.
First, there's the stroll along the mile-and-a-half of surfaced road joining the island's only hotel to the one-horse airport at Tekek, the main village.
The hotel runs a mini-bus and a jeep; the only other possible traffic are burbling 70cc motorcycles.
Tekek's hub is its pier, rooted in a cluster of little cafes serving fish, omelettes, noodles and rice.
On either side, arranged along the lip of the beach, A-frame hutches and variously-sized garden sheds offer cheap accommodation.
There's a neat green-shuttered police post, a neat blue-shuttered school, a gloss-cream ‘clinic’, a squat mosque, and a hundred-odd simple wooden houses on short concrete stilts.
Market day is the high point of the week.
Nine stalls sell respectively coconut milk, bananas, rice and dried fish, steamed sweetcorn, fried chicken, lurid plastic toys, clothes and household utensils — tin-openers and toothpaste, plastic bowls and Dettol — nothing unnecessary.
From Tekek, it's possible to walk over the island to Juara village.
Coconut and banana trees quickly give way to a dim still forest.
A couple of rubber trees bleed white latex into little plastic cups, and then tumbled boulders, giant ferns, lianas, ants and a million other living things take over.
This is the tropical rainforest you have heard so much about, and here it is remarkably accessible and in pretty good shape.
It looks an exquisite mess, but push through the vegetation bordering the path and the undergrowth clears.
Suddenly the scale becomes that of a cathedral, and it's not fanciful to put the spirituality of the place in the same category.
Everything has its purpose.
Let it be and it will last for ever.
At the halfway point of the walk a waterfall serves as a life-saving cold shower and then it is all downhill.
Small monkeys catch your eye with spooky recognition.
Pause for a moment and scores of butterflies will settle to feed off your perspiration.
At Juara, there's a welcome breeze, a choppy sea and very little else.
If Tekek seemed sleepy, Juara is comatose.
There are 40 houses, a similar number of beachfront shelters and a couple of bamboo cafes.
The ramshackle bus-boat back to Tekek around the northern tip of the island takes three hours, the same as the walk.
With sea eagles soaring overhead, the forest dipping into the sea and turquoise flying-fish skipping in the wake, it is possible to imagine any idyllic fecund system running from the highest tip of the forest to the bottom of the shallow sea.
The third possible excursion, to Tulai island (also known as Coral island), a mile north-west of Tioman, does nothing to dispel this dream.
A hired mask and a snorkel is all that is needed to experience a busy underwater world.
If there is any instant antidote to stress, strain and long-distance flights, this is it: to drift like a long-winged bird over a strange and beautiful planet.
The only hotel on the island, the Tioman Island Resort, has tried unnecessarily to add to this with television, tennis and a nine-hole golf course (the 2ft iguanas are apparently harmless).
When I first came to Tioman 10 years ago, the hotel was an intimate place of 70 rooms.
Now it has 200 and by the end of the year there will be close to 400.
But it is not an unpleasant place, low-rise, with most rooms in verandah-ed cottages overlooking garden courtyards.
Of an evening, you might find yourself subjected to an ‘American Food Promotion’ and a honky-tonk Filipino band, but the food is better and more varied than anywhere else on the island and a dependable supply of cold beer is essential.
Many of the multifarious visitors — American families, Swedish couples, young professionals from Singapore and Kuala Lumpur — dress, in a tropical sort of way, for dinner.
On a Saturday night I even saw some jewels.
But a far better early evening occupation is to watch the sky slip from pink through mauve to deepest purple and reflect on what you're missing: the shop-till-you-drop malls of Singapore or another long night on the Jumbo.
Travel: Bringing a hotel to book
By Gill Charlton
Q: We paid for our holiday in Paphos, Cyprus, in January, but 36 hours before we were due to leave our tour operator, Saga Holidays, rang to tell us the Roman Hotel in Paphos was double-booked and to offer us the first week at another hotel which was, in our opinion, inferior.
We reluctantly cancelled our holiday and we have been offered a full refund.
But we are still unhappy to have lost our holiday for something that seemed out of our control.
At what point do tour operators firmly reserve their hotel accommodation?
Surely hotels should be held to contract when payment has been made in full by clients?
Renshaw Lee, Alton, Hants.
A: Unfortunately there has been a major problem with overbooking among Cypriot hoteliers.
A Saga Holidays spokeswoman has told us that Saga contracted rooms with the Roman Hotel a year ago for this season.
As well as sending the hotel an updated booking position each month, Saga sent a final rooming list four weeks before your departure, confirming the names of clients taking up their allocation of rooms at the hotel.
Everything seemed in order until a week before your departure when the hotel contacted Saga to say it was overbooked and couldn't accommodate Saga's clients.
Saga says it tried to force the hotel to honour the contract, but it refused.
When there was no further hope, Saga contacted you and offered the best alternative it could find at short notice and, as that was not acceptable, refunded your money in line with their contractual obligations to you.
The problem is that if a hotel reneges on its contract with a tour operator, there is little else the tour operator can do other than take legal action for breach of contract.
Saga informs us that it has written a letter of complaint to the Minister of Tourism for Cyprus, and that the hotel will not be in next year's brochure.
Obviously this action-after-the-event does not compensate you for your lost holiday, but the hotel ultimately decides whose bookings it will honour in such situations, and sometimes it seeks to maximise its profit rather than honour contractual obligations.
Let's hope it receives a stiff fine for behaving in this cavalier way.
Q: We should like to spend a holiday touring Scotland but, as neither of us drives, we are thinking of joining a coach tour.
We are not keen to go with one of the large companies.
Is there an alternative?
Laurence Green, Middlesbrough…
A: Classique Tours of Paisley (041 889 4050) runs fascinating tours taking in the Hebridean Islands, Royal Deeside or the Borders, using comfortable, small, classic buses, many dating back to the 1950s and 60s.
Unlike the big coach operators these are not glorified shopping trips and, because the coaches are small (carrying up to 24 passengers), they can reach the places that larger 48-seater coaches can't.
Accommodation is in good guesthouses and small family-run hotels.
The eight-day Grand Hebridean Tour costs from £465 half-board.
All departures are from Glasgow.
Q: We are planning to spend a week in New York in May, but good hotels seem rather expensive.
Where can we find out about guesthouses or renting an apartment?
John Wills, Southampton.
A: Colby International (051–220 5848) specialises in this sort of request.
It acts as British agent for a large number of New Yorkers offering bed and breakfast in their own homes, and can also find apartments — from studios to three-bedroom flats — many privately owned.
All the accommodation is inspected and contracted by Darren Colby.
B & B in a private home with own bathroom costs $70–90 a night.
Studios sleeping two people cost $90 a night (three-night minimum stay) in mid-town Manhattan.
Q: I have heard that you can reach many places in the world as passengers on cargo ships.
Where can we find more information on this?
Laura Craddock, Maidenhead.
A: There are two agencies specialising in cargo-cruising, whether it's a one-way hop to New York or a round-the-world trip.
The ships range from Geest's ‘banana boats’ to container ships carrying up to 50 passengers (4–12 is the usual number) in comfortable accommodation.
Meals are usually taken with the officers.
The Strand Cruise Centre (Charing Cross Shopping Concourse, The Strand, London WC2N 4HZ, 071–497 0078) offers destinations including Australia and South America.
Gray Dawes Travel (Dugard House, Pear Tree Road, Stanway, Colchester CO3 3EN, 0206 564084) is good for America and the Caribbean.
Write to Gill Charlton, Travel Desk, The Sunday Telegraph, 1 Canada Square, Canary Wharf, London E14 5DT.
Travel: Island hoppers start here
MALAYSIA: On the west coast, Penang is the largest and most developed of the islands, with attractive beaches and an interesting history (it is the oldest British settlement in Malaysia).
Further north, the Langkawi islands are remote and less developed, and to the south lies the popular resort island of Pangkor, readily accessible from the mainland and often crowded during weekends and holidays.
Tioman is the largest east-coast island, its smaller neighbours are mostly little-developed with unspoilt beaches.
Numerous tour operators offer pre-arranged or tailor-made packages: Tradewinds (071–731 8000) will combine island beach holidays with mainland tours by coach, self-drive or chauffeured hire car.
Other specialists include: Magic of the Orient (071–937 5885); Asian Affair Holidays (071–439 2601); All Seasons Tours (081–900 0227).
THAILAND: Phuket is the most developed of Thailand's islands, with accommodation in all price brackets.
Following fast on its heels is Ko Samui, once a hippy paradise, now with several resort hotels.
Less developed — as yet— are smaller islands such as Koh Phi-Phi, accessible by ferry from Phuket.
In addition to the Asia specialists mentioned above, Airwaves (081–875 1188) and Premier Holidays Asia (0223 311103) offer holidays on the above islands.
INDONESIA: Bali is by far the most touristy of the Indonesian islands.
Silverbird Travel (081–780 1511) organises tours to less-visited islands, and will book Indonesian island cruises.
Coromandel Travel (081–995 3642) tailor-makes packages to quieter resorts in Bali — and to most of the other Indonesian islands.
Also try: Tours to Remember (0904 659966), Explorers Tours (0753 681999) and Indonesian Express (071–491 4469).
PHILIPPINES: Philippine Fantasy (0773 580405) has a good range of pre-arranged or tailor-made tours, and the Jetset Tours' (061–953 0920) brochure has an informative section on the Philippines.
In addition, many major tour operators include tours of Far Eastern islands in their long-haul programmes.
Among them: Bales (0306 876881); Hayes and Jarvis (081–748 5050); Kuoni (0306 740500), Silk Cut Faraway Holidays (0730 65211); Thomas Cook (0733 332255); Thomsons (081–200 8733).
Travel: All this — and toasted sandwiches while the earth moves for Neil MacLean riding a water buffalo on the Philippine island of Mindanao
By NEIL MACLEAN
THE VIEW from the top of the water buffalo was not a steady one.
Every muscle on his great wide beefy back seemed to move in a different direction.
The heavy rope through his nose pulled me off balance.
Every few minutes my saddle, a thin nylon sack, would slide alarmingly forwards.
Each time he nodded his fat grey head, the twin curved horns arched menacingly towards me like scimitars.
And when the great beast stopped to answer a call of nature, I felt as if I was sitting astride Mount Pinatubo.
The earth moved; fortunately I didn't.
‘Good,’ said Paternas.
‘You've got the hang of it.’
He slapped the water buffalo on its massive rump and we headed down towards the beach.
It was warm already.
The sun had flooded Dapitan Bay with a pale yellow, buttery light.
In the shallows several men were pushing what looked like triangular bamboo ploughs through the water.
‘They are collecting small fish,’ said Dodo Dolatalyas, the foreman on the farm and my buffalo chaperone.
‘To fill the fish ponds.’
An outrigger pumpboat chugged out to sea intent on bigger fry: tanguigue fish, lupalupa and marlin.
Further along the shore a few beachcombers were bunkered down, husking washed-up coconuts for copra; others collected shellfish.
After about half an hour's unsteady plodding along the sand, leaving dinosaur hoofprints and a small steaming roundabout in the middle of the beach, my buffalo turned back for home, slotted a few heads of corn into his cheeks by the way of reward and let me dismount.
I felt as if I had just given birth.
My back was like a mangled corkscrew, my legs like chicken wishbones.
‘Breakfast time,’ said Mrs Bajamunde.
I was staying with a Filipino family on Mindanao, one of the southernmost of the 7,000 Philippine islands, two hours' flying time from Manila, in a place called Dapitan City in the province of Zamboanga del Norte.
Dapitan is really only an honorary city — with just one bank, one cinema, three blacksmiths, two petrol stations and five firemen (the last fire was in 1980), it is more like a small country town.
From the central grassy plaza, a handful of streets lead towards the sea, inland, and across either side of the loop in the Liburan river, which effectively makes the poblacion, the city proper, an island.
There are few cars or jeepneys in Dapitan City — no Philippine traffic jams here — just taxi tricycles (trishaws) going round and round the plaza at a leisurely pace, looking for business.
The Bajamunde farm was about 10 minutes — 15p, with a tip — along the coast by trishaw, an undemanding trip (even for the driver), through a long avenue of palms beside the beach.
Paternas Bajamunde had welcomed me warmly.
He was a small, wiry, fit-looking 70-year-old; ‘pure Filipino’, he said and his features certainly seemed geographically correct, midway between Malaysia and Japan.
He was one of the chief councillors of the town, owner of the farm where I was staying, owner of one of the seven cars in the city and with a thumb in several lucrative businesses (a bakery, a copra concern and the handmade brick factory).
He was an intelligent man but he had not travelled far, and we spent hours sitting on the verandah talking about our different cultures — he was fascinated by the idea of social security, the nuclear family, double-decker buses and cricket — while above us dark silhouettes of geckoes scurried across the strip lights.
His wife and the kitchen maid (every middle class Filipino household has a maid) would bring us food.
Deciding what to feed me was clearly a problem for Remedios Bajamunde.
After much thought, she had concluded that Western tastes meant toasted sandwiches, so every meal now consisted of toasted sandwiches.
Eventually she believed my protests that I would prefer Filipino fare; it appeared — embotedo, lumpia, bulabula — all in a toasted sandwich.
Their farm was one of the biggest in the district, growing mung beans, mangoes, jack fruit, durians, guavas, papayas and, of course, coconuts.
‘Ninety per cent of the people here rely in some way on coconuts to make a living,’ said Paternas.
They had livestock as well: pigs, chickens, goats and — the sine qua non of Filipino farming — a couple of water buffaloes, known as carabao, to do the ploughing.
He also kept fighting cocks, 20 of them, in a pen not far from my room.
An alarm clock was superfluous.
A tour of Dapitan City was as slow as a royal walkabout.
‘Hello Joe, where are you going?’ would stop me every 50 yards (unless you wear a turban they are convinced you have come from the US).
The friendliness was overwhelming and a small crowd would gather around me every time I stopped to talk or watch a game of sipa — a bit like tennis only played with your feet and a ball covered in rubbery tendrils.
When I paused to read the memorial to Jose Rizal, hero of the revolution, I turned round to find about 50 little children in a semicircle watching me open-mouthed.
I sat down; they sat down.
I walked over to the grassy map of Mindanao; they followed.
Over by the volleyball court a crowd of older children gathered to look at postcards of Scotland (always an icebreaker, particularly if you can find a picture of someone in a kilt).
They were astonished to hear that in Britain it costs more than £3 to go to the cinema (a Filipino obsession), when it costs only 3p in Dapitan, and to learn that teenage girls in Britain could go on a date with their boyfriends without a chaperone; something disapproved of on Mindanao).
I found it depressing that they all had ambitions to go to Manila to look for work when they were older — taking a one-way ticket from the garden of Eden to Sodom and Gomorrah.
The capital is a sad, grimy, vice-ridden place, quite unlike the innocence and friendliness of the real Philippines, in places such as Dapitan.
‘I would not have the slightest objection to living the rest of my life here,’ said Jose Rizal.
It was not hard to understand why — even viewed from the top of a carabao.
TV Choice: The trumpets shall sound
By SEAN DAY-LEWIS
FOR NINE months in 1741–42, Handel lived in Dublin.
A console he played on is preserved, without its organ, at St Michael's Church.
A chair on which he is claimed to have parked his splendid bulk during rehearsals is kept at the Mansion House.
Otherwise there is no trace, and no commercial exploitation, of the long visit.
Only the historic fact that he gave the Irish capital the first public performance of what would become the most popular of all oratorios.
Played at the New Music Hall, Fishamble Street 250 years ago tomorrow.
The live anniversary performance of Messiah by George Frederic Handel (C4, Monday: 8.30–11.40 pm) will be given some way from down-at-heel Fishamble Street at the Point Theatre.
The first playing was dedicated to various charitable purposes.
The 1992 performance, to be marketed for audio and video use, will benefit the Planet 24 company of producer Tony Boland and Bob Geldof.
Handel wrote his Messiah in under a month and directed its premiere from the organ.
At the Point Theatre tomorrow, conductor Sir Neville Marriner will content himself by waving his arms about.
His interpretation is discussed in a short interval documentary.
Marriner and his Orchestra and Chorus of the Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields favour modern instruments.
But the style is far removed from the monster Messiahs, with huge choirs and muddy orchestral accompaniments, still favoured until the middle of this century.
Marriner will ensure that the words are clearly heard, the instrumental parts all count and that the rhythms are springy.
He also has strong soloists: Anne Sofie von Otter (contralto), Michael Chance (alto), Sylvia McNair (soprano), Jerry Hadley (tenor) and Robert Lloyd (bass).
The tradition of good music on Good Friday is well maintained, though the Passions of J S Bach are again conspicuous by their absence.
The centrepiece is Harrison Birtwistle's Gawain (BBC2: 2.45–6.00 pm), the innovative opera that brought full frontal male nudity to the Royal Opera House last year.
The harsh musical style will not set you humming but it does illustrate the original medieval poem Sir Gawain and the Green Knight with force.
An alternative to this new work is Mozart's Requiem (C4: 2.15–3.20 pm), with the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra and Chorus conducted by Colin Davis.
During the evening there is a Cardiff performance of Rossini's Stabat Mater (BBC2: 7.25–8.30 pm) with Rafael Fruhbeck de Burgos conducting the BBC Welsh Symphony Orchestra and Chorus.
A pity that this clashes with Music for a Dying King (C4: 7.00–8.00 pm), a Tony Scull documentary exploring the religious music of baroque composer Franois Couperin.
It ends with Leon de Tenebres No 3 for Louis XIV.
Sean Day-Lewis 
FILM CHOICE Love and nothing but
By ALAN STANBROOK
THIS EASTER there is a short season of films by the French director Bertrand Tavernier.
It includes The Undeclared War on Saturday and Life and Nothing But on Easter Monday, but the best is These Foolish Things (BBC2, Good Friday: 10.00–11.45 pm).
This was the film that tempted Dirk Bogarde back to the cinema after a 13-year absence.
It affords him a wonderfully mellow role as a dying man reunited with his family in his beloved south of France in the last weeks of his life.
His daughter is played by Jane Birkin, the bilingual singer and actress, and one of the characteristic features of the film is the way the dialogue slips in and out of the two languages as if it were the most natural thing in the world.
And so for these characters it is.
Tavernier was determined to avoid the convention of co-productions in which a polyglot cast all speak dubbed American.
The English title picks up a thread running through the film in which the characters quote from the lyrics of the song, linking it with their own lives; the French title is Daddy Nostalgie.
Both catch the film's elegiac mood, bathed in southern sunshine but overhung with impending death.
It is a film in which little seems to happen yet everything changes.
Estranged people confront and bury old grievances and learn to recognise their love and need for each other.
It's a simple, but powerfully affecting message.
Tavernier is sometimes wrongly bracketed with the ‘new wave’ of film-makers who came to the fore in the Sixties.
But his roots go back farther.
He acknowledges Jean Renoir as his model.
By chance, one of that director's most sumptuous movies, The Golden Coach, is on Channel 4 on Saturday (1.00–2.55 pm).
Renoir began in the inter-war years as a realist and a humanist like Tavernier.
But he was also the son of the painter and colour was in his genes.
Later in life he made a trilogy of films about the theatre, of which The Golden Coach is one of the most ravishing.
Taken from a one-act play by Prosper Merimee, it is set in 18th-century Peru and focuses on a company of travelling players performing in the tradition of the commedia dell'arte.
The exuberant Camilla (Anna Magnani) is their star attraction.
The film is as artificial as a Mozart opera or Goldoni play but behind the artifice lies a generous salute to love, life and theatrical illusion.
Camilla has three lovers, each offering a different future: a viceroy (luxury), a matador (passion) and a philanthropist (a quiet conscience).
Find out for yourself how she chooses between them.
And marvel (if Channel 4 has secured a good print) at nephew Claude Renoir's colour photography — assertively scarlet and cobalt for the players, decoratively pastel for the court.
True to their forbear, the Renoirs make colour and the moods it can convey almost the leading character in the film.
Alan Stanbrook 
Pick of the Day
By SEAN DAY-LEWIS
A CAMBRIDGE answer to Oxford's Inspector Morse arrives in the unlikely little and large shapes of detective dons Dr Bridget Bennet (Imelda Staunton) and Dr Loretta Lawson (Janet McTeer).
They are indeed a couple able to avoid anything that could be construed as A Masculine Ending (BBC1: 7.45–9.20 pm).
This screen thriller, dramatised by Alma Cullen from the first of Joan Smith's novels about them, ends with the two heroines happy in each other 's feminine company.
Tall Loretta is supposed to pursue masculine endings of a linguistic kind as a London University academic but she is easily diverted to Bridget's base at St Mark's, Cambridge, and to discussions of one kind and another in Paris.
It seems that Paris is the second home for St Mark's staffers.
When a don fails to return at the start of term, the shock at the discovery of his body in a Parisian church is well contained in the cloisters.
Can the death be due to academic greasy-pole climbing?
Is it more to do with the deceased Dr Puddephat's sex life?
The friends decide on their own investigation.
While Bridget mostly concentrates on deconstruction at the Cambridge end, Loretta finds her way through the delight and danger offered by ‘dishy’ student Jamie Baird (Greg Wise).
The sleuths are in more danger with every discovery they make.
It is as well that they are under the protection of feminine writers as well as director Antonia Bird and co-producer Moira Williams.
Pick of the Day
By LINDA O'CALLAGHAN
PRIMO LEVI gave each chapter of his autobiographical ‘micro-history’, The Periodic Table, the title of a chemical element.
David Burke reads a slightly abridged version of ‘Iron’ on Reading Aloud (Radio 4: 8.40–9.00 pm).
Levi tells of the bond between himself, a Jew, and, Sandro, a fellow chemistry student and loner, as Fascism's iron hand grips Europe.
Levi is drawn to the truths of science as an antidote to Fascist lies; Sandro gets to the core of things by climbing mountains.
Together they embark on a perilous ascent.
Sandro was to die fighting in the Resistance.
‘It's a hopeless task to dress a man in words, make him live again,’ ends Levi.
Not so, as is movingly proved.
Way of the World: Are We All Guilty?
THE other day, as I was walking along the main street of a small town in Buckinghamshire, meditating, as so often, on time and chance, and in particular on the various chances which had combined to bring me there, I suddenly heard a loud crash, followed by urgent shouts and the desperate revving of a car.
I had hardly time to see that a car had been driven up to a shop window and was now rapidly reversing out of it when two young men wearing stocking-masks and bundled up in thick clothing, making them unidentifiable, came rushing into the street, each swinging a bag of loot.
Quickly they piled into the car, which sped noisily and dangerously off through the quotidian traffic.
The people standing about had evidently supposed, just as I had (for, however unwilling, we are all children of our illusion-ridden time), that the whole thing was part of a story being filmed for television.
Seeing a big hole in the jeweller's shop window, we realised it was not.
‘You can't believe it, can you?’ said one woman bystander wonderingly.
And indeed the well-drilled professionalism and ‘split-second timing’ of the raid was quite impressive.
‘Did anyone get the number of their car?’
Everybody present, including myself, had got it.
But as several people, well acquainted with the technicalities of robbery from innumerable television programmes, pointed out patronisingly: ‘Don't bother.
They always change cars.’
When a police car arrived, one man hopefully pointed out a few spots of blood on the pavement, mentally drawing a chalk circle round them and marking off the area with official police tape.
‘That'll interest the forensic all right.’
Disappointingly, the policemen took no notice of the blood, but drove off in the direction the robbers had taken, with what result I cannot say.
The general feeling was of mildly pleasurable excitement.
‘You can't believe it, can you?’ the woman said again.
But as we talked the matter over, I thought I heard, in the background, a droning unbodied voice explain that the robbers were young, socially deprived victims of the Thatcherite era of greed and exploitation, not to be blamed for acquiring, by unorthodox means, some of the luxury goods they had heard of from capitalist advertisers who had wickedly aroused their consumerist aspirations.
And another droning unbodied voice, further spoiling our simple enjoyment of this little scene from provincial life, was saying nastily: ‘You've seen nothing yet.’