

Test for breast cancer ‘could save thousands’
By Our Health Services Staff
SCIENTISTS have developed a test designed to detect the most lethal form of breast cancer in women and enable doctors to provide more effective treatment.
The Cancer Research Campaign said yesterday that if a trial, to begin next year, is successful, up to a third of 15,000 victims a year could be saved.
The test picks out a protein made by a defective gene, the presence of which indicates the patient has the fastest-moving type of cancer.
Doctors will be able to tailor their treatments with greater accuracy, and women with less lethal cancer can be spared debilitating chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
The defective gene is a version of the tumour-suppressor p53 gene.
Scientists believe the suppressor gene can be inactivated by tobacco, viruses, pollution or diet.
As well as using the presence of an aberrant p53 gene as a marker for rigorous treatment, doctors think it will be possible to develop drugs to block its activity.
The test was developed by Prof Gordon McVie, scientific director of the campaign, at Dundee University in a five-year, £6 million project.
He said last night: ‘Until now we have not had a real marker which would tell a cancer cell from a normal cell.’
Prof McVie said that he expected drugs to counter rogue genes could be available within seven years.
The development was the ‘most exciting discovery of the last decade’ because it opened up new treatment avenues.
The rogue p53 gene was also thought to play a large part in lung, stomach and bowel cancer.
That meant the discovery could help treatment across the range of the most common cancers, said Prof McVie.
Premature birth ‘can lower IQ’
By Our Health Services Correspondent
Babies born several weeks prematurely grow up to have a lower IQ on average by the ages of seven to 10 than children born at full term, according to research reported yesterday.
They were still within the normal range of intelligence, however, and some babies born as much as 12 weeks early end up at the top of the class 10 years later, according to findings announced by Dr Leonora Harding, of Aberdeen University, to the British Psychological Society.
Science: EVOLUTION
JOHN BURDON Sanderson Haldane, the centenary of whose birth was celebrated last week in a conference at the Science Museum, looms ever larger in the pantheon of evolutionary biologists.
He was justly celebrated in his day as a populariser of science, as a polemicist for socialism and pacifism, and as a possesser of an inventive mathematical mind.
Far from being eclipsed after his death in 1964, his work has attracted ever more attention.
Much of the history of evolutionary theory since then, including ‘intragenomic conflict’, has consisted of rediscovering Haldane's insights and those of his contemporary Sir Ronald Fisher.
John Maynard Smith, who was Haldane's pupil, says his most remarkable piece of foresight was the suggestion in 1941, 12 years before the structure of DNA was elucidated, that genes would replicate semi-conservatively, that is, by a molecule splitting in two and each half making a mirror image of itself.
Haldane also saw that there must be evolutionary conflicts between different levels of selection, that what was good for the individual might not be good for the species, what was good for a male might not be good for a female, and, above all, what was good for a gene might not be good for an individual.
The theory of intragenomic conflict suggests that the resolution of conflicts among genes has shaped many of the basic features of life, such as the existence of two sexes.
He also left a tradition of mathematical biology that flowered in the game theory of John Maynard Smith and the kin-selection theory of Professor Bill Hamilton, now of Oxford University.
Science: Selfish genes vs the common good Matt Ridley explains intragenomic conflict — the latest way of explaining a biological paradox
By MATT RIDLEY
THERE ought to be a law against it.
Intragenomic conflict in the commonwealth of genes.’
Claims to have found new mechanisms of evolution are common in the press, but they rarely make it into respectable science journals.
Yet in May, the most august of all such journals, the Proceedings of the Royal Society, will carry a paper claiming to have identified a new evolutionary force.
‘Intragenomic conflict’, one of the trendiest fields in biology, is not some anti-Darwinian mysticism, but an ultra-Darwinian and somewhat cynical view of how genes compete.
To understand the ideas that Laurence Hurst of Oxford University is championing, consider the case of Robert Maxwell.
All you need to know about Maxwell is that if everybody behaved as he did, the economy would soon collapse in an explosion of selfish parasitism.
And yet his motives were not unique; in a capitalist economy everybody is out to get money.
As Adam Smith observed, from individual greed come growth and prosperity for all, so long as there are sanctions against those who would profit by theft and mechanisms to ensure that all can share in the prosperity.
Hence the paradox that Hurst and others think evolution shares.
The economy consists of individuals seeking prosperity, yet most of its laws and many of its customs are about social harmony.
Regulations about auditing pension funds hinder profitability, but without them nobody would get a fair pension.
In just the same way, evolution consists of genes spreading at each other 's expense, but many, perhaps most, genetic mechanisms are about enforcing common interest of groups of genes over the selfish ambitions of the few.
There are regulations, laws and red tape.
Only recently have biologists, mainly at UCal and Oxford, begun to piece together what happens when selfish genes come into conflict with the common interest of all the genes in the creature they inhabit.
Among the mechanisms that may have evolved to resolve genetic conflicts are sex, Mendelian genetics, the existence of two sexes, the rarity of hermaphroditism and the equality of the sex ratio.
Donal Hickey at the University of Ottawa suggested a decade ago that sex — by which he meant the entirely puzzling need to mix the genes of different individuals while reproducing — first happened because certain genes selfishly forced their possessors to do it.
A gene is stuck in the same lineage without sex.
With it, it can move horizontally.
Hurst cites the case of a slime mould in which, during sex, a gene within a little device called a mitochondrion causes its owner to fuse with mitochondria from the other parent and thus spreads to all the mitochrondria in the offspring.
Sex having been invented this way (and later used to help the individual to develop disease resistance and the species to evolve more quickly) a new problem arose: when an egg and a sperm fused during sex, a battle ensued between them to monopolise the resulting offspring.
This was quickly resolved by the two sets of genes agreeing to merge and run the cell jointly and then draw straws for the chance to enter each egg or sperm.
But this joint venture between the two parents' genes worked only for the main genes within the nucleus of a living cell.
In mitochondria, where a secondary set of genes exists, war between the parents' contributions resulted.
This was solved by the nuclear genes enforcing their preference for peace through unilateral disarmament.
Two sexes were invented, one of which, the male, agreed to leave all its mitochondria behind.
That is why sperm are strip-searched before being allowed into the egg.
The invention of male and female was therefore a solution to a genetic conflict.
And it, too, caused a problem.
Mitochondrial genes are in a dead end in males.
Not surprisingly, those of them that tried to reverse this fate have sometimes prospered.
There is a wasp in which bacteria force male wasps to change sex and thus hitch a ride into the next generation of wasp.
There are many plants in which male tissue is simply killed by mitochondrial genes.
Such ‘feminising’ factors have been foiled by two other inventions, that of separate sexes (many animals and some plants have abandoned hermaphroditism, perhaps because half the hermaphrodites were feminised and it therefore paid the remainder to turn into pure males) and genetic sex determination.
Instead of determining the sex of your children yourself, as bees, crocodiles and other creatures do, you leave it to a genetic lottery between X and Y chromosomes.
This has always seemed an oddly important decision, the sex ratio of your children, to abandon to chance.
Surely those who retained control over it would do better?
Answer — not if they end up with no males.
Genetic sex determination is like a sleeping policeman laid across the road — inconvenient for everybody, but necessary to stop the selfishness of the few.
Hurst summarised it this way: ‘Much of the evolution of genetical systems is internally driven’, as a reaction to a series of conflicts generated by solutions to previous conflicts.
In the same way, an economy's laws record a history of solutions to problems of monopoly and theft and then of solutions to the loopholes and opportunities those first laws opened.
Matt Ridley is writing a book on the evolution of sex.
Science: Blunting Aids scissor action
By ROGER HIGHFIELD
ONE OF a new generation of Aids drugs is being tested on patients.
The only one of its type currently under clinical development, it disrupts the molecular equivalent of scissors — an enzyme that snips proteins to make the virus.
Phase I clinical trials have been carried out on healthy volunteers to evaluate the way the drug is absorbed and its potential toxicity.
‘It is extremely well tolerated,’ said Dr Joe Martin of Roche Products in Welwyn Garden City.
Phase II trials on Aids patients are now under way in Britain, France and Italy to assess its efficacy.
Though a wide range of anti-Aids drugs is under development, this drug is targeted against an enzyme that is the major focus of research by drug companies.
‘It works in a distinctly different way from AZT, for instance,’ Martin told the meeting in Southampton.
Code-named Ro31–8959, it targets an enzyme in the Aids virus called proteinase, which plays a crucial role in the construction of the Aids virus in an infected cell by cutting up proteins into viral components.
‘There are eight known cuts it carries out,’ said Prof John Kay of the University of Wales College of Cardiff, who carried out some of the work in collaboration with Roche.
‘That snipping is absolutely essential to allow the final virus to assemble.’
By studying regions of the proteins the proteinase cuts, they have come up with a small molecule that can block this scissor action.
The body uses proteinases to break down food but the trials have shown they are unaffected by the drug.
Prof Kay said: ‘It does not touch any human enzymes at all.’
Science: Bug helps hunt for drugs
A SALT-LOVING bacterium may become a major ally in the effort to develop new drugs.
Drugs, like hormones, act on special switching sites in the body called receptors.
By finding the structure of these receptors, scientists can develop new drugs that turn them on or off.
But it has proved costly and difficult to isolate receptors.
Now a team at the Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry in Germany, working for Prof Dieter Oesterhelt, has found they could harness a salt-loving bacterium, called halobacterium, to mass produce receptors.
Up to 80 per cent of the membrane of a halobacterium consists of bacteriorhodopsin, the light receptor it uses to carry out photosynthesis.
Now Prof Oesterhelt's team is trying to persuade the halobacteria to mass-produce human receptors instead.
Prof Oesterhelt said that bacteriorhodopsin could be of use in its own right, in a prototype ‘biological computer.’
It could, in theory, be used as a switch that could outperform the electronic equivalent in many cases.
Though a long term objective, biological switches are already under test.
Science: Leech link to heart disease
THE blood-sucking ability of the leech is helping to develop a new family of drugs to treat heart disease.
Prof Robert Huber, winner of the 1988 Nobel prize for chemistry, told the meeting that experimental drugs had arisen from new understanding of how the leech prevents its meal from coagulating with a substance called hirudin.
Anticoagulant drugs safe enough for long term use to help prevent heart disease are under development by almost every drug company, Huber said.
The first of a new family of drugs based on the leech has been developed thanks to a key piece of understanding provided by Huber's team at the Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry in Germany.
By measuring the scattering of X-rays by hirudin, when linked to a key blood coagulation factor called thrombin, his team deduced its structure down to the last atom.
It turns out that the business-end of thrombin, called the active site, is plugged by the hirudin, preventing blood clotting.
This understanding will enable drug companies to design drugs to mimic the anti-coagulant action of hirudin without the side-effects that affect conventional anticoagulants, such as bleeding.
‘It turns out that pieces of hirudin have different inhibitory properties with different side-effects,’ Huber said.