

£¾m Fuseli sale
An album of 58 drawings by the Swiss-born artist Henry Fuseli, bought by a London couple 15 years ago, sold for £748,440 at Christie's yesterday.
The owners had expected about £300,000.
Retuning blow for Channel 5
By Jane Thynne, Media Correspondent
THE LICENCE for Britain's fifth television channel may never be awarded if applicants cannot provide a convincing plan for retuning the three million video recorders likely to suffer interference, the Independent Television Commission said yesterday.
It was issuing the final invitation to apply for Channel 5 — the last national terrestrial television station likely to be set up in Britain — after a three-month delay caused by technical problems.
The chief one is the interference caused by its broadcasts, which will go out on the frequency of channel 37, to which many domestic VCRs and some satellite receivers are tuned.
If it begins transmitting, millions of homes could find interference ranging from small, wavy lines to total picture distortion whenever they used their VCR, the ITC said.
The cost of retuning the VCRs and satellite receivers involved is estimated at between £50 million and £200 million, to be borne by whoever wins the licence.
Many people will also need new aerials to receive the service.
The Channel 5 licence is expected to be awarded in early November and be on air at the latest in 1995.
Despite the retuning problems, and the estimated £30 million required to build new transmitters, several major media groups have already expressed interest.
They include Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian media magnate, whose programming partner, Channel X, yesterday promised ‘hard news and personality-based current affairs’.
Others understood to be interested are Time Warner, the world's largest media company, TV-am and Thames, two of the losing ITV franchisees, CLT, owners of Radio Luxembourg, and Five TV — a consortium led by Mr Moses Znaimer, a Canadian television operator.
‘We're not guaranteeing that we will award the licence, or that it will be a success — it's a commercial risk,’ said Mr David Glencross, ITC director general.
According to the application document, only homes which do not want to receive Channel 5 will be legally entitled to have their VCRs retuned free of charge by the licencee, who will have to settle the problem within three weeks of receiving a retuning request.
To ease the new channel's birth, the ITC has decided it need not achieve any more than 30 per cent coverage of the country in its first year.
Bids for the channel, which will be funded by advertising and possibly subscription, must include proposals for national and international news, current affairs, children's and religious programmes.
The licencee must also pick a selection of other programme categories such as drama, light entertainment and sport.
BBC advertising is urged in ‘bombshell document’ Jane Thynne examines the leaked proposals of 15 internal taskforces on the corporation's future
By JANE THYNNE
THE BBC's most radical reappraisal of its future, with options of introducing advertising, cutting 10,000 jobs and creating a new Asian radio network, was described by unions yesterday as ‘a bombshell document’.
The confidential reports, leaked by the unions, were compiled by 15 internal ‘taskforces’ charged with considering the BBC's prospects as it gears up for the public debate over renewing its royal charter in 1996.
The BBC staff union Bectu called the recommendations a ‘secret agenda’ by which the BBC hoped to pre-empt public debate about its size and role by ‘drastic job cuts’and reducing essential resources.
As part of the process, the BBC also commissioned a confidential report to show how much it could make from broadcasting commercials to supplement the licence fee.
The report is the first sign that the BBC is considering seriously that advertising could become a reality after its charter expires.
According to the report, if BBC TV took just two minutes of commercials per hour, it could earn £334 million by the end of the decade.
Some conclusions include: BBC The Standard Setter: Stringent criticism of management for allowing programme quality to slip.
‘The BBC as presently managed is over-stretched and quality is already being compromised.’
BBC The Entertainer: Light entertainment included ‘too many tired formulae’.
Many minority sports should be dropped and Radio 5 end its current broadcasts of a mix of sport, education, young people's programmes and the World Service.
BBC And The Communities: There was a ‘worrying difference between the world portrayed by television programmes alone — dominated by young white men — and the real world where more than a fifth of the population is retired, and more than half are female’.
Targets should be established for employing ethnic minorities and disabled people, and monitoring of the number of screen appearances by women and minorities.
An Asian radio network should start this year.
The BBC Providing Our Services: Staff could be cut by up to 10,000 by 1996 through contracting out services and introducing the new internal market system called Producer Choice — under which producers choose between using individual BBC departments or buying in services from outside.
Departments, including costume and design, have started to operate the system, in which they cost their own services and sell themselves to BBC programmes.
BBC Governors Advisory Groups and Licence Payers: The annual See For Yourself programme should be axed in favour of a report sent to all 20 million licence holders.
Late payers should pay ‘penalty surcharges’.
BBC The Employer: The charter clause ensuring union recognition should be deleted in favour of more direct negotiations with employees.
BBC And Independent Programme Makers: Independent production should rise from 25 per cent to about 40 per cent of TV programmes.
BBC The Information Provider: A 24-hour radio network should be established, reducing Radio 4's news content.
BBC The Educator: Secondary schools' radio programmes should end and the Open University production facility should close.
The BBC's International Role: The charter should be amended to carry a specific guarantee of editorial independence from Government.
The BBC As Cultural Patron: BBC orchestras should move from full ownership to independence through a declining subsidy over five years.
This proposal was recently rejected by Sir Michael Checkland, the Director-General.
The BBC's Regional Role: English regional TV should be exclusively news and current affairs.
The recommendations are now being distilled into a single report to be ratified by the BBC Governors in May.
According to Bectu, however, the recommendations, coupled with the introduction of a BBC internal market, still constituted a ‘double whammy’ of up to 10,000 job losses from the 25,000 workforce — a figure Sir Michael has denied.
The new internal market system, under which departments such as film crews, graphics, make-up and props now compete with non-BBC suppliers, was a ‘lethal weapon’, said Mr Tony Lennon, Bectu's joint president.
In one instance, a stock of thousands of BBC props had been sold off this year for £75,000 yet the BBC later spent £1,100 renting just three items back for a few weeks.
BBC unions are planning a one-day walk-out in the week the governors meet to agree the taskforce reports.
Media Comment: Alternative to the wasteland
By Brenda Maddox
THE requirements for applying to run Britain's new Channel 5 were issued yesterday.
They are low, so low that they can hardly be called a threshold — more a ramp, with a sign over it begging ‘Please, please walk up’.
Ostensibly, the licence, or franchise, for the new channel will be awarded on the same basis as the recently auctioned franchises for ITV.
That is, it will go to the highest cash bidder who presents a sound business plan plus the prospect of programmes of a certain minimum quality.
But the criteria are much more relaxed than those set for ITV.
The new channel will be obliged, at the start, to offer only half an hour a day of news and only an hour a week of current affairs.
(Of ‘high quality’, mind you.)
The Independent Television Commission does suggest that Channel 5 might offer local television to individual cities at certain times of the day, and that it might wish to base itself outside London, but only if it chooses.
The ITC has its reasons for such mealy-mouthedness.
It knows that Channel 5 faces such formidable technical and financial obstacles that it will be lucky to get on the air at all.
George Russell, head of the ITC, has described the potential new service as a disaster, a shambles, and a nightmare.
I hope Channel 5 succeeds, for just one reason.
Four channels are not enough.
All of us have at one time or another contributed to the Great Bores of Today, with our moans of the other night when we sat down to watch television and ‘there was nothing on’.
Of course, satellite dish homes get more than four channels, and those with cable get dozens.
But most people do not have a dish, and according to the projections of Continental Research, will not have one by the end of the century.
(In the year 2000 the number of homes with either cable or satellite is expected to be just over 10 million.)
As Britain has 22 million homes with television, this means that for the foreseeable future the majority will be stuck with the terrestrial four channels.
That is too meagre a ration of choice for a country that spends the equivalent of nearly a full day out of every week of its life in front of the set.
The problem with Channel 5 is that it is not lying empty, like a new motorway just waiting for somebody to cut the ribbon.
It occupies the stream of airwaves that most homes use for their videos and personal computers.
To avoid interference with these, and ordinary reception as well, most of the videos will have to be retuned, and ‘paying for it [retuning]is now part of the quality threshold’, Russell said in a speech last week.
Even then, to receive Channel 5 many viewers will need a special aerial, at their own expense, if they live in the right parts of the country.
Channel 5 will never reach much more than 70 per cent of the population, missing out, for technical reasons, much of the South.
Transmission problems are only the beginning.
The real challenge will be to attract an audience and advertisers against formidable rivals.
Next year Channel 4 will start to sell its own advertising, and there will be three new national radio networks, desperately seeking commercials.
‘Oh, ye of little faith!’ is the retort I hear from those who view all of Channel 5's problems as opportunities.
They see part of the key to success in clever ideas for retuning, which are secrets as closely guarded as the recipe for Coca Cola.
ONE CONSORTIUM, Five TV, hopes that the imagined problems will be so great as to discourage competition and that all potential investors (who include The Daily Telegraph) will accrete to its application and that the ITC will be left with a choice of one.
Even one may be too many.
The ITC says it may possibly award none at all.
So bleak are the prospects that I heard one media journalist muttering that the ITC ought not to be advertising the franchise at all.
But why not?
What are market forces for?
Investors are not children or lemmings.
At the very least, a Channel 5 might convince the Government that perhaps the BBC does not need to take advertising just yet.
At best, it might offer local television worthy of the name.
Any alternative to the daily 6.30 pm wasteland called Your Region Tonight would be a cultural gift to the nation.
Wednesday Matters: The agony of being my father's son IN THE WINGS
Richard Olivier, the youngest son of Lord Olivier, is struggling to establish his identity.
Robert Dunkley reviews his progress
BY ROBERT DUNKLEY
WHEN Laurence Olivier died in 1989, his family closed the door of the study and hid the key.
The room has remained untouched, its files and papers in the same neat piles the actor had left them in.
Now, six months after an American biographer, Donald Spoto, did a hatchet job on Olivier, accusing him of having a homosexual affair with Danny Kaye, the key is to be removed from its resting place.
In an effort to put the record straight, the Olivier family has decided to open the room — and those filing cabinets — to an official biographer.
Similarly, Richard, Olivier's son by his third and last wife, Joan Plowright, has decided to talk about his unusual relationship with his father and his own involvement with the Men's Movement, which uses dance, drumming and storytelling to try to compensate for absent fathers.
But for his longer hair and dark stubble, Richard, 30, could pass for a cigarette card image of his father.
‘Whoever we choose as an official biographer must be someone connected with the theatre, because the theatre was my father's church,’ he says.
‘It was his religion.’
Spoto's book hurt, he admits.
‘There is no one to sue if someone libels the dead,’ says Olivier Jnr, sipping a bottle of Carlsberg in the garden of the Chelsea Arts Club, just a short bike ride from his Fulham home.
‘What hurt most was that the allegations are untrue.
I know from conversations with my father, and his close homosexual friends whom he would have confided in, that they are unfounded.’
But Laurence Olivier did not find fatherhood easy.
Richard was born in 1961, when Olivier was 54 and already acclaimed as one of the world's great actors.
The demands of Hollywood and the stage were great, compounded in 1962 when Olivier was appointed director of the National Theatre.
In his memoirs, Confessions of an Actor, Olivier relates that there was a conflict between his business, artistic and domestic life and admitted he ‘slipped over the edge’ in allowing the demands of his job to outweigh the importance of his family.
Not that his son condemns him for this, blaming instead the way Olivier Snr was brought up by a cold domineering father, a priest who put church before family, and his own dedication to fulfilling his professional promise.
‘In fact I feel sorry for Dad,’ says Richard.
‘He would make tremendous efforts, like running to catch the last train back when I was two months old, and waking me up at 11 o'clock at night to spend time with me.
He was a very physical person and I recall as a child lying on his chest.
I know he loved me, but he was never sure that his father loved him.’
The Men's Movement to which he has turned speaks much of the ‘wound’ which fathers inflict on their sons.
Richard's own wound came, he says, at the age of seven, when Olivier was diagnosed as having cancer.
‘At the time I was beginning to need his teaching, but he was ill and we all thought he was going to die,’ says Richard.
‘I think part of me shut down because he was unavailable and I was terrified of him dying and leaving me alone.’
In his teens, with his father's health deteriorating, Richard was taken to Hollywood to be his ‘personal assistant’.
He recalls: ‘It was great fun at 14 to walk around film sets with Gregory Peck.
It was a boy's dream.
‘The fact that I was needed by him in that setting was actually very attractive, because I was important.
I was the one who would help him back to bed, I was the one who would read lines to him in the morning before he went on the set.’
Looking back, for all its glamour, he sees the period as yet another stage in a deprived childhood.
‘It was a sensitive masculine experience, not a tough masculine experience.
There was no outlet for raw masculine energy.
I always had to be polite and caring.’
Not only was he unable to play with his father, put on loud music or bring friends home, he also became aware of an emotional gap which meant that he could never raise the topics of girls or male friends.
‘He tried to communicate but couldn't find the language,’ Richard says.
‘He was purely intuitive and had difficulty expressing himself.
That is why he never took up any of the opportunities to teach that he had in his later life.’
After returning to England and continuing his education at Bedales, the co-educational boarding school in Hampshire, Richard went to America to read drama at UCLA.
It was the idea of his father, who had first seen the university in 1932.
At the age of 75, Olivier visited Richard to see a play he was directing and attended a midnight student production he had put on in a Hollywood garage with other students.
‘He still made tremendous efforts, but he could never get up the courage to criticise what I was doing, which was what I longed for,’ says Richard.
‘I longed for him to say ‘Don't do this’ but all he would say was ‘Wonderful’.
Never a word of constructive criticism.
I think he was frightened to give it for fear of hurting me.’
According to the Men's Movement, second only to the father is the older male who will help teach a young man what it means to be a man and help remove him from his father's influence.
In Richard's case one of these older men was the late Tony Richardson, the film director, with whom he later worked in California.
‘One of the problems is that these older men don't understand their roles and younger men feel let down and betrayed,’ says Richard.
‘Because my father had been absent I immediately wanted him to become my father, but of course he couldn't be.’
For the last 18 months of his father's life, partly for professional reasons, Richard returned to England with his Canadian-born wife Shelley, a holistic health consultant, and cared for his father, weaning him off drugs through homoeopathic remedies, acupuncture and massage.
As Olivier's health deteriorated it was his wish to become the perfect family man, to have his family around him.
Growing up in the shadow of Olivier had already left its mark on Richard professionally.
Although he had once thought about going on stage he has opted instead for directing.
‘I was always very self-conscious as an actor.
I felt people were looking at me with my father in mind.
It may have been complete rubbish, but that's what I felt.’
His latest play, David Henry Hwang's M. Butterfly, which began its national tour in Bath this week, attracted him because it deals with the questions of sexual roles and masculine/feminine identity which he has been exploring through his men's group for the past 18 months.
‘Since the late Sixties,’ says Richard, ‘the women have become more active and have been standing up for themselves, as is only right, but men have become more passive.
We hear about the sensitive New Age man who stays at home and changes nappies — but, actually, I don't think these men are any more satisfying to women than any other male role model for the past 2,000 years.’
Now a father with a boy aged four and a girl of two, he has, he says, been making professional sacrifices in order to avoid the mistakes made in his own upbringing.
Nevertheless, he is currently working with his mother on outlines for two documentaries, one on the psychology of dance and another on the pre-Christian origins of Christmas.
In addition, with a don at the University of Sussex, he is putting together a book on the experience of being European.
This means exploring Celtic and Norse myths to build up an indigenous mythology to balance those of Indian and African origin imported via the United States.
A national network for those wanting to join the Men's Movement is another of his projects.
Leaving the Chelsea Arts Club he unlocks his fluorescent green mountain bike, which has a child's seat on the crossbar.
‘It's for Troy.
He loves to ride in front of his father.
I must go now to pick him up from school.’
M. Butterfly by David Henry Hwang is playing at the Theatre Royal, Bath, until the end of this week.
The contact number for the Men's Movement is 0903 814866.
The Arts: Falling in love again
BY RICHARD LAST
STAND by to have your cockles warmed.
Or, rather, to hear how your cockles would have been warmed, had you tuned into 40 Minutes (BBC2) on the subject of geriatric romance.
When I read the blurb, I thought: Oh, Lord, another dose of sentimental do-gooding.
Frankly, I expected Philippa Lowthorpe's film about love among the over-65s to come out like a cross between Esther Rantzen at her drippiest and Coronation Street at its dopiest.
All creaking knees-ups and zimmer-framed doubles entendres, calculated to make the more orderly elderly turn back to their knitting and cocoa in confusion.
It wasn't like that at all.
It was — I shall not bother to avoid the adjective — lovely.
It was sensitive, beautifully and imaginatively photographed, and not even remotely patronising.
It treated its subject not as some kind of jokey aberration, but as a normal if slightly unexpected development of the weird and wonderful adventure we call Life.
Ms Lowthorpe was, admittedly, greatly helped by her varied and likeable cast.
There were Feliks and Dorothy, still handsome at 75 and 70, who met at a tea dance in 1946 and married 40 years later.
When Dorothy, a former nurse, claimed, ‘We're crazy about each other, I think of him every waking moment,’ you believed every word.
There were Iris and Michael, both just over 70, whose marriage had been held back by his being a divorced Irish Catholic.
So they became — he blushed — lovers.
‘I shouldn't use the word at my age but, hell, that's what it was.’
There were Fred, aged 70, and Betty, aged 66, who embarked on a trial relationship in defiance of the prevailing belief that sex is only for the under-35s.
They were all hearteningly well preserved and twinkling with renewed well-being, and none more so than Jim, 87, and Mary, 91, who met in an old people's home and scandalised the staff by taking naps on the same bed, before deciding to make honest pensioners of each other.
Now they live within yards of where Jim once ploughed the Shropshire fields with horses.
No doubt, Ms Lowthorpe had stacked the odds by going for couples who looked as young as they clearly felt.
But they were all real people, and Not at Their Age was describing real experience.
If the BBC don't schedule a repeat, I shall wave my stick at them until they do.
Thames's equally well-meaning programme, Adoption — All for the Sake of the Children (ITV), fell down because it was not about real people, only about actors pretending to be real people.
They played out with sincerity the traumas of a couple going through rigorous assessment for adoptive parenthood, and of a single father, widowed and with a prison conviction, coming to terms with the loss of his children.
The adoption agency's officers and Norfolk social workers were real, and doing their best to treat their fictional clients as case histories.
But however cleverly simulated the emotion, simulated it remained.
TV should stick with fact, or with fiction; not try to make an uneasy alliance of the two.
I suppose you could claim the ‘guests’ in Noel's Addicts (BBC1), the Beeb's latest jeu d'ecran for young Edmonds, as real, though a very saucy vicar's wife who collects Victorian knickers and an American fire chief who finds houseroom for up to 1,000 snakes push the word near its limits.
All good, endearing fun for Edmonds addicts, but he really should watch those elaborate studio sets.
One day, he'll get lost.
RICHARD LAST
The Arts: GALLERY ROUND-UP
BY MARTIN GAYFORD
POPPET GREEN, in whose studio Basil Seal wakes up at the beginning of Evelyn Waugh's Put Out More Flags, was, we learn, a remarkably silly girl.
She was also a painter.
‘Eighty years ago her subjects would have been knights in armour, ladies in wimples and distress…now, in 1939, they were bodiless heads, green horses and violet grass, seaweed, shells and fungi’, all executed in the style of Dali.
In other words, Poppet Green was a British Surrealist.
And as we can see from British Surrealism (at the Mayor Gallery, 22a Cork Street, London W1, until May 22) she was representative of the rank and file of that movement.
There is usually something amiably silly about Surrealism, and particularly its British offshoot.
A ‘surrealist object’ like Conroy Maddox's Cloak of Secrecy (1940)— consisting of the bottom half of a shop-window dummy, a plaster lobster and a bit of lace curtain — is irresistibly preposterous.
In time, such things have acquired a period charm.
There was, however, a more significant side to Surrealism as this entertaining show documents.
A number of significant figures were caught up in it for a while — the sculptor F. E. McWilliam, Tristram Hillier, John Tunnard.
We can see from the latter's evocative landscape, Figure with Birds, that, in Britain at any rate, Surrealism served to refresh the romantic imagination.
Which was no doubt why it was important not just to the artists in this show, but also to others like Paul Nash, John Piper and Henry Moore.
Romanticism was brought up to date in a different way by the Scottish painter Joan Eardley (1921–63), whose paintings and drawings are at the Mercury Gallery, 26 Cork Street, London W1 (until May 9).
Eardley's work comes in two parts.
First, there was the social realism of the Glasgow slums.
Here the model was Van Gogh.
Occasionally, the figure subjects wobble on the edge of sentimentality.
On the other hand, the two pictures entitled Glasgow Tenements are topographical studies as atmospheric as anything by Piper.
But the best of Eardley's work are the landscape oils she painted in the final decade of her life.
Looking quickly at paintings such as Pounding Foam or A Winter Sea, you might think they were expressionist works by Jackson Pollock or Willem de Kooning.
But look longer, and the clotted paint, drips and splatters of Pollock, the slashing strokes of de Kooning, resolve into piled up waves and dark shore — a subject for Turner.
I think Eardley was — with the Cornishman Peter Lanyon, who also died cruelly young — the most important British landscape painter to appear since the Second World War.
Another aspect of the incredibly resilient romantic tradition is re-examined by the young artist Richard Kenton Webb, whose latest work is at the Benjamin Rhodes Gallery, 4 New Burlington Place, London W1 (until April 25).
With Webb, it is not Turner but the sublimely mountainous paintings of James Ward and Caspar David Friedrich who come to mind.
The rocky heights seem to speak of the presence of the Deity.
For a painter in the 1990s to attempt this sort of transcendent landscape is rather startling, and, frankly, I am not at all sure that it comes off.
Some of the new work is uncomfortably stagy, some of the colour disquietingly lurid.
None the less, it is an interesting enterprise.
Webb is an artist to watch.
MARTIN GAYFORD
The Arts: How I was exposed in 3½ hours
Nick Thomas admits he is no oil painting, so he was surprised to be asked to pose for a portrait.
He got more than he bargained for
BY NICK THOMAS
WHEN I told a colleague that an artist wanted to paint my portrait, his reaction was one of thinly veiled envy.
‘Why on earth should anyone want to paint you?’ he asked.
Nettled, I explained that I have what is known as an angular form, and this apparently makes me an entertaining subject.
But I took the point, for I am neither an institution nor an area of outstanding natural beauty.
At least my friend didn't think I was vain enough to commission the work myself.
But then, few people are.
According to the Royal Society of Portrait Painters, which has just celebrated its centenary, of the thousand-odd portraits undertaken professionally each year, hardly any are commissioned by their subjects.
Most are ordered by friends or relatives as an original (and costly) gift for a special birthday or anniversary, and a fair number by institutions and companies to honour retiring luminaries.
The National Portrait Gallery habitually commissions portraits of notable figures for its collection, and, of course, members of the Royal Family are painted regularly, providing a time-lapse documentary of themselves and of the fashions of their age, both in clothes and in painting.
For anyone considering commissioning a portrait, for whatever reason, the choice is wide.
The RSPP has only 39 members, but its annual competition for artists under 35 attracts more than 500 entries in a vast variety of styles.
Do you want oils or watercolour?
Would you prefer a traditional pose or a fantasy setting?
Would you like a scrupulously faithful ‘photographic’ likeness or something which delves into the soul of the subject?
And how much are you prepared to pay?
Portraits — decent ones — come in at anything from £200 to £40,000.
So it is worth thinking about in advance.
As much to assist the artists as the public, both the National Portrait Gallery and the RSPP run free informal advisory services (by appointment), enabling prospective patrons to form some idea of the style they are looking for, and receive some strictly-off-the-record advice about probable fees.
They can then approach an artist directly, more confident that they are not wasting anyone's time.
Both bodies must take some credit for the fact that dissatisfaction with a finished product is rare, and refusal to pay unheard of.
In modern times there is only one celebrated instance of a subject's displeasure at an artist's likeness: that of Sir Winston Churchill with his portrait by Graham Sutherland which, tragically, ended up in the fireplace.
It was an 80th-birthday present from past and present members of the Lords and Commons — and apparently far too accurate for comfort.
So, right at the start, I promised not to burn my portrait, no matter what it looked like.
But, as it happens, I took no advice at all before embarking on what turned out to be a disturbing exploration of my own personality.
I met Jane Toler at a party, and, homing in on my angularity of form, she asked me to sit for her.
Thrilled and flattered, I said yes.
Jane studied at Hornsey College of Art and worked in publishing and journalism before deciding to paint full-time.
She works in oils and, among other things, paints about a dozen portraits a year, charging £400 upwards.
She paints and entertains her sitters at home in her Battersea flat, surrounded by examples of her own and other people's work.
If they decide they don't like what she does, they have plenty of time over tea to say so before the painting begins.
A happy working relationship is vital, and Jane and I quickly arrived at joint decisions about the project, choosing the clothes I would wear — light jacket, dark blue shirt and jeans — and deciding against the use of corny props ‘appropriate’ to my profession, such as books, a typewriter, or a bottle.
Later, during the December cold snap, when I thought the clothes were finished, I made the mistake of switching to my warmest trousers.
A corduroy pair in livid crimson, they are horrid to behold but a joy to paint, and were immediately transferred to the canvas.
As Jane explained, ‘in oils nothing is irrevocable’.
THE first thing to go on to the canvas was a sketch in grey wax crayon, which mixes happily with the oils, whereas graphite would turn to gritty soot.
I gathered that this would be a bad thing.
We talked as we went along, but Jane's conversation became increasingly vague and absent-minded as she concentrated on the work in hand.
Still, I wondered how anyone could find sitting for an artist boring.
Clearly this artist was going to keep me fully entertained as she peered alternately at me and my picture, producing a range of squints, pouts and grimaces that Rowan Atkinson might envy.
After the sketch came the paint — black paint, and a lot of ‘turps’ to water it down and divide the picture into blocks of light and shadow.
Then began the detailed work on the face and hands, the most taxing phase for both artist and subject.
After that, the colour tones of flesh and clothing were finalised.
Last came the background — a mirror, a candle and a swathe of yellow wall — for which my presence was not required.
At the end of five 40-minute sittings my portrait is finished.
So what do I think of it?
Well, it's me all right.
I can find no errors of shape, proportion or poise — full marks for accuracy.
However, the grim, vulnerable face staring out of the canvas reveals a side of me which undoubtedly is real enough, but one which I'm sure Jane has never seen.
This is unsettling, and makes me realise that for those three and a half hours I have been the still and passive object of her intuition as well as her technical skill.
I hardly know the woman, but she seems to know me inside out.
It is as though I have spent those motionless hours on her sofa in the hands of a hairdresser, hypnotist and clairvoyant combined.
I'm shaken, but deeply impressed, and — now that the shock has worn off — delighted.
I have only one query.
Angularity might be all well and good, but do I really look that thin?
Jane cocks an eyebrow and says that, if anything, she has fattened me up.
And Adam Hinton, the photographer, called on for an impartial view, agrees — blast him.
The Arts: Piping up for Spielberg's Peter Pan
Britain's film critics savaged Hook, the $70 million reworking of Barrie's Neverland story, but what do children think of it?
Elizabeth Grice finds out
BY ELIZABETH GRICE
THERE is a small, but famous, children's playground in central London, where adults are forbidden to enter unless accompanied by a child.
If a similar prohibition had been made to all film critics entering Hook, I doubt whether the reviews of Steven Spielberg's Peter Pan adventure would have been half so bilious.
It would have been hard to sit there smouldering with scorn while all around children were bouncing about delivering their verdict of unrestrained approval.
The gang of six I took to see Hook the other day all loved it.
They were aged between five and nine.
The film lasts two hours and 15 minutes.
No one asked about an interval, or ice-creams, or a lavatory.
True, the older children found it necessary to close their eyes during the ‘soppy bits’— to blot out the vision of Peter Pan (Robin Williams) and Tinkerbell (Julia Roberts) kissing, for instance— but that was a small price to pay, they thought, for a decent story of revenge, piracy and adult idiocy.
All the children knew J. M. Barrie's Peter Pan, either in book or cartoon form.
They did not share the critics' dismay that bumptious Mr Spielberg should have borrowed that nice Mr Barrie's little boy, allowed him to grow up as an awful Dad, and then sent him back to learn a few lessons in Captain Hook's theme-park paradise.
Adults forget that most children really do want to grow up, if only to exact their own small revenges.
My group actually thought that the return of Peter Pan made a better tale than Barrie's original.
But the film brought the critics out in spots.
‘An over-inflated balloon of a film,’ said the Times, oblivious to the fact that this is how modern children like their fantasies.
‘The only poverty is in its imagination,’ sniffed the Independent.
‘Duff,’ said Time Out.
‘What he [Spielberg]has done on screen,’ said Hugo Davenport on these pages, ‘is to reduce the Neverland to the lowest common denominator of American junk culture.
The film is brash, forced, overblown and soulless.’
Maybe so, but hands up those under 12 who don't want to see it again.
Not that enthusiasm is unreserved.
The pre-teen Critics' Forum in Row H demolished John Napier's whimsical island of snow-capped peaks as if it were papier mache being assaulted by a blowtorch.
Talk about the multi-million-dollar set went like this:
James: It wasn't all that realistic.
The mountains looked like a bit of old cardboard.
Like Euro-Disney.
Tyrone: Yes.
There should have been real mountains, or no mountains at all.
Stefan: It was a million light-years away from our planet.
James: It wasn't Neverland, more like Babyland.
Fiona: And the place where the Lost Boys had their tree-house was a bit babyish too.
They had other reservations, mostly of the sort that critics like to introduce when they have enjoyed something hugely but need to sound credible.
‘Captain Hook should have been more evil,’ suggested Tyrone Campbell, senior member of the forum.
True.
Dustin Hoffman as Hook looked more like a Regency fop than a serious kidnapper.
He was, as Zina Smith, five, pointed out, just a horrible old man who badly needed a Mum.
His malice-rating was dismal.
James Dawe, eight, objected to a pointless underwater scene where the adult Peter Pan was besieged by three mermaids, each bestowing a lingering kiss.
‘It suddenly turned into a James Bond film.’
No detail escaped them.
They watched enthralled and motionless as a window-catch in the shape of a hook jiggled in the wind, and then flew open, letting in Hook the abductor to make off with Peter Pan's two children.
They debated about whether it was right for Tinkerbell to look such a ‘raggedy’ fairy: should she have worn a dress?
They wondered whether Hook could have escaped his seemingly fatal encounter with a mechanical crocodile in this film, and make yet another comeback.
These were not the concerns of children who thought Spielberg's film a flop.
They rocked in their seats to see how easily adults can be discomfited.
They cheered when Peter's wife threw his incessantly chirruping portable phone out of the window.
Some were even prepared to make allowances for the fact that Peter had been an appallingly neglectful father.
‘He couldn't help it,’ said one eight-year-old.
‘He'd got business.
He was a lawyer, so he couldn't get to everything.’
The Arts: A nasty habit
BY CHARLES SPENCER
DARIO FO's The Pope and the Witch at the Comedy offers one of the most dismal of all theatrical experiences: an entirely unfunny farce.
It's zany, it's irreverent and it's brimful of right-on attitudes, but I found it virtually impossible to raise a smile, never mind a laugh.
For devout Catholics the experience is likely to be even worse, for this is a show that combines gratuitous offensiveness with maximum tedium.
Fo has a ludicrously inflated reputation in Britain — largely, I suspect, because he combines his left-wing views with an anarchic humour.
He's the madcap Italian Marxist, the man who proved that agit-prop can be fun, and there's no doubt that his best-known play, Accidental Death of an Anarchist (1970), contains moments of true farcical delirium.
But for those who don't share his views, the crude sloganeering keeps getting in the way of a good time.
And in The Pope and the Witch, the comedy is so puerile and shambolic that there's never any risk of having a good time anyway.
This may not be entirely Fo's fault.
The adapter, Andy de la Tour, used to be one of the unfunniest comedians on the alternative cabaret circuit, a chap with a black hole where his sense of humour ought to be.
Little seems to have changed in the intervening years.
His satire remains as belligerently unappealing as ever.
The action begins in the Vatican papal apartments, where all the cardinals use mobile phones, the head of security is a Mafia hood from the Bronx, and Pope John Paul II (Berwick Kaler, who looks nothing like the real pontiff) is suffering from acute paranoia.
For reasons too tedious to relate, the Pope is taken in hand by a natural healer (Frances de la Tour, looking rather fetching in her disguise as a nun) and, after receiving an involuntary shot of heroin in her drug rehabilitation centre, he undergoes a Pauline conversion.
He issues an encyclical saying hard drugs should be made cheaply available to addicts to cut out the mobsters, and insists that every child ought to be a wanted child.
‘The condom is not the devil's raincoat,’ he declares.
Meanwhile the Vatican is to give all its wealth to the poor.
But the corrupt Cardinal Stillaci isn't having any of this, and with many a dark reference to Roberto Calvi and John Paul I, devilish plans are hatched to bump the Pope off.
It's hard to describe just how wearisome all this is in performance.
There's none of the rigorous logic and choreographed confusion of real farce, and director Jude Kelly labours under the mistaken impression that if the characters rush around and shout a lot, then they are bound to be funny.
Berwick Kaler gives a peculiarly charmless performance as the Pope, Frances de la Tour is wasting her time as the witch, and one wonders why the producers thought it was worth transferring this dismal exercise to the West End from the West Yorkshire Playhouse.
Is it a flop?
Is the Pope a Catholic?
CHARLES SPENCER
The Arts: Down with lofty art
The BBC is launching a new, youth-oriented arts programme to challenge the high-falutin' style of its own Late Show.
Steve Clarke reports
BY STEVE CLARKE
THE debate about how BBC Television covers the arts enters a new phase tonight when BBC2 launches a new show deliberately intended as a rival to The Late Show and its laid-back coterie of cultural commentators.
A word of advice though: the alternative will not be particularly lofty.
Artrageous!, which is to be given a six-week pilot run, will be presented by 22-year-old Jason Rebello, a boy wonder jazz pianist who is Britain's answer to Herbie Hancock.
The show is custom-built by Janet Street-Porter's rapidly expanding youth and entertainment empire and is aimed squarely at people under the age of 25 who might have difficulty identifying an Andy Warhol, never mind a Renaissance masterpiece.
Notwithstanding this, the BBC also hopes that older viewers who have had their powers of endurance tested once too often by The Late Show's cold-blooded eclecticism, may welcome an audience-friendly arts magazine.
Whether they do depends on how easily they can adapt to the relentless street cred, visual gimmickry and ubiquitous dance rhythms generally essential to the Street-Porter school of programme-making.
Artrageous! does have the advantage of being screened at the civilised hour of 7.30 pm, long before the post-Newsnight wasteland.
The perennial question for television executives is: how on earth does one make arts programmes interesting to an audience with little or no enthusiasm for the arts?
These days The Late Show, with its format of lengthy film reports, studio interviews and performances, can only muster an audience of about 400,000 (up from an all-time low of 300,000 in October 1990).
Most of these (excluding the odd insomniac) must be reasonably committed to the programme's curiously shifting agenda but, with these kind of viewing figures, and an annual budget of about £4.5 million, it is easy to understand why The Late Show has caused such widespread resentment in the BBC.
(The BBC refuses to say how much it is spending on Artrageous!.)
The director-general, Michael Checkland, once publicly reprimanded The Late Show's producers, reminding them that most licence-fee payers had never heard of — let alone visited — the Groucho Club.
To get away from the metropolitan elitism that The Late Show is still trying to live down, Artrageous! kicks off tonight with a location report from Bradford on sculpture.
Bristol, Seville (The Late Show, I suspect, would have chosen Barcelona), Glasgow, Birmingham and London will feature in subsequent weeks.
‘The Late Show is too difficult for the audience we hope to reach,’ says the new programme's producer, Lindsay Shapero, who thinks he can attract an audience of at least one million.
‘People between 15 and 24 wouldn't watch it.
The Late Show is very good for those who know about the arts, but our main audience know nothing.
Young people are ill-served by arts programmes.
There isn't anything for them.’
At 30, Shapero is one of the older people behind Artrageous!(excluding Street-Porter, who celebrates her 46th birthday this year).
Without exception, the show's directors are all under 30, as are most of the contributors, and Jason Rebello looks barely old enough to order a drink.
Rebello's precocious musicianship is well known among jazz lovers (he toured with Weather Report while still in his teens).
Heaven knows whether he has it in him to take on the legacy of Melvyn Bragg in the 21st century, but he will give Artrageous! the hip image a youth-oriented arts programme needs to convey.
‘Jason is extremely intelligent,’ Shapero says.
‘He's not some groovy-looking person we've picked out for the sake of it.
He's actually involved in the arts.’
Unfortunately, Rebello will only perform once during the series (in tandem with the singer Jocelyn Brown), although Artrageous! apparently intends to spend more time covering demanding music like opera and jazz than pop or rock.
The programme's brief is to embrace literature and architecture as well as less demanding subjects such as fashion, video and film.
But there must be a danger that style will triumph over substance and that Artrageous! will repeat some of The Late Show's shortcomings, and end up looking as though more thought has gone into the studio design than the content of the items.
In principle, an arts programme geared towards a young adult audience is an excellent idea, but why is it necessary to dress it up to look and sound like a pop video?
‘Young people are brought up in the age of the video, so they can assimilate television that is cut quickly to a good musical beat, whereas older viewers would think, ‘Oh God, it's too fast and I can't stand all that dreadful loud music’,’ Shapero says.
‘You've got to have glue to stick your show together properly and the graphics and the music are the glue.
Without them it would fall to pieces.’
‘Artrageous!’ will be shown on BBC2 at 7.30 pm for six weeks starting tonight
The Arts: Five Guys stung by an anti-British backlash
BY MICHAEL PYE
CAMERON Mackintosh knew what was coming when he opened Five Guys Named Moe on Broadway last week.
Americans think they own the musical, and Mackintosh has been much too successful, producing Cats, Les Miserables and Phantom of the Opera.
The backlash has begun.
First, Frank Rich of the New York Times announced that Crazy for You — a glitzy new Gershwin review, quite without personalities — had grabbed the musical back from the British.
He could hardly like Moe, another British musical.
He found the jokes, the ‘party-or-die audience participation’ and even the use of chicken feathers all too British.
He called the show ‘a British tourist's view’ of black American music.
Told that the show's creators are black American musicians, Rich said they'd spent too long in London.
Mackintosh hardly had time to notice the notices, on his way to open Les Miserables in Manchester, England, and then on to Tokyo for Miss Saigon.
But he did say: ‘I don't understand the backlash.
The British musicals are simply here because people like them.’
He doubted whether audiences cared much about the origins of a show.
And he added: ‘If I were an American, I would be saying thank goodness there have been some musicals to keep Broadway alive for the last 10 years.’
OUR Manhattan street is lovely, unfortunately: the trees laced together, the federal-style houses and the white-painted church.
This is why, coming home with the supermarket bags, we get barked at by second-assistant-directors and told to keep quiet and keep out of sight.
Our street is irresistible to movie-makers.
So we've mixed feelings now that the New York unions have settled their year-long dispute with Hollywood producers.
The big studios boycotted Manhattan for seven months last year, months of wonderful peace.
Almost as many movies were made here, but ‘shooting days’ were down by half; independents on small budgets can't afford to waste time.
Now we could face a summertime flood of movie-making.
And we're trying to remember how much New York needs the inconvenience.
Big movies, like TV series, help talent to stay in the city despite the pull of West Coast work; they keep the city alive.
We just wish they would double-park their caravans on some other Manhattan street.
NEW YORK hasn't been kind to Nigel Kennedy; critics are suspicious of his taste for rock, jazz and a large audience.
When he plays Sibelius with the New York Philharmonic tomorrow, a rare appearance here, they expect at best a draw.
They forget that New York has to share the blame for ‘the Nige’, although he's obstinately unfamous here.
In New York, as a student at the Juilliard School, Kennedy first played jazz violin with Stephane Grappelli and liberated himself, he says.
And in New York, aged 15, he learnt about money and audiences, the hard way: before he had headlines and arenas, you could catch Kennedy playing violin for small change, on Fifth Avenue.
THE coming attractions at the Metropolitan Museum include a gallery hung, from top to bottom, with a permanent show of empty picture frames.
Now this is not just a scholar's whim, or, worse, a bit of conceptual art; this is serious chic.
Since the 1980s art boom, frames have sometimes fetched a million dollars.
Museums catalogue them as carefully as paintings.
Laurence Kanter, curator of the Met's Robert Lehman collection, concedes ‘it would be too pompous to hang frames as we hang pictures’.
But the gallery is his ‘gesture of desperation’ to make people see the subtle carvings, the magnificent gilt of frames, from the 15th century onwards.
And he's unrepentant about the oddity of empty frames in a fine-art museum.
‘We can,’ he says defiantly, ‘show a silver place-setting without serving dinner.’
Leading Article: Economies in peril
WESTERN analysts have been too complacent in supposing that the Japanese government, with its seemingly firm economic grip, can handle the consequences of several years of speculative boom.
So far the Finance Ministry has done a good job by letting off steam in a controlled and orderly way, but it is hard to stop the process of deflation once it has gained momentum.
There is now a risk that the weight of bad debt in the financial system will cause a further downward spiral of asset prices.
A stabilisation package earlier this month, which cut the discount rate to 3.75 per cent, has failed to halt the market slide.
The Nikkei index has fallen by 60 per cent from its peak, and is now testing the 17,000 level.
If the Nikkei falls much further it will eat into the assets of the main Japanese banks, which depend on equity holdings for almost half their capital base.
That would cause a severe credit crunch.
The Japanese government still has some scope for measures to prop up the financial system, so there is little likelihood of a meltdown comparable to the American banking collapse in March 1933.
But it remains to be seen how Japan's culture responds to a collapse in asset values.
There may yet be an outbreak of panic.
Difficulties at home have already caused a sharp fall in Japanese investment abroad.
If the Japanese continue to pull out of the international bond markets they will deprive the global economy of much-needed capital.
This would be manageable if the rest of the industrial world were taking steps to compensate, by making more credit available.
The United States is certainly doing this.
The US discount rate is now down to 3.5 per cent, the lowest level for a generation.
But the European economic bloc is failing to address its international responsibilities.
Indeed, it is persisting with exorbitantly high interest rates.
This monetary squeeze, which is already retarding recovery, could tip the world economy into a depression.
The root of the problem is the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Most EC countries are either in recession or are scraping along the bottom with chronic low growth and rising unemployment.
Yet membership of the ERM means that few can take the appropriate action to stimulate their economies.
Some, such as Italy and Spain, are seeing their industry devastated as inflation raises costs and erodes competitiveness.
The ERM prevents them from letting their currencies float downwards to adjust.
Britain and France are forced to maintain real interest rates of six or seven per cent at a time when domestic conditions call for rates of one or two per cent.
We are paying the price, indirectly, for the reunification of Germany, which has fuelled inflation and pushed up German interest rates to the highest levels since the war.
With hindsight, it is clear that, by joining the ERM in October 1990, Britain chose the wrong moment to fix the pound to the Deutschemark.
A fixed exchange rate system works only if the anchor currency is stable.
German rates should start to come down later this year, when — and if — the Bundesbank believes that inflation is under control.
But any improvement is likely to be much too slow.
Given the anomalous circumstances of Germany, it is clear that there needs to be some form of general realignment within the ERM.
Either Germany should revalue upwards to give the rest of us some breathing room or Britain, France and Italy should combine in a joint downward realignment.
Alas, our European partners have so far been unwilling to take any such initiative.
For some, it seems, maintaining parity within the ERM has become a test of virility.
Unless statesmanship is shown in Europe, we could all face a protracted and unnecessary slump.
Leading Article: Dismal search for fairness
SIR — I wonder if I might add a recommendation of my own to George Walden's perceptive comments on alleged bias in television (article, April 13).
Others may have shared my depression at the spectacle of party activists of various political persuasions sitting, stopwatch in hand, to measure the amount of time given to their views compared with those of their opponents.
It is apparently assumed that the contents of current affairs programmes can be neatly listed in three columns, headed respectively Favourable to Us, Favourable to Them and Neutral.
Human perceptions of fair play do not, alas, work that way.
In practice, those with established political views will have no difficulty in recognising comments with which they disagree and putting them promptly in the Favourable to Them column.
Comments which reflect their own opinions, however, will frequently appear to be such obvious common sense that their rightful place is clearly in the Neutral column, not the Favourable To Us one.
As a result, the completed exercise often seems to point to a lack of proper balance.
This is the only plausible explanation I have found, in a lifetime spent in television, for the fact that a single programme can be simultaneously attacked from both ends of the political spectrum for bias in the opponents' favour.
I certainly share Mr Walden's hopes that David Mellor, whose new Cabinet post includes responsibility for broadcasting, will not allow his judgment to be swayed by those who, no doubt feeling the strain of the election campaign, now relish the prospect of a little BBC-bashing to relieve their feelings in the run-up to the renewal of the Corporation's Charter.
Mr Mellor has never been given proper credit for showing sufficient resolution during the passage of the Broadcasting Bill to persuade his colleagues that ITV deserved to have its future determined by something more subtle than a contest to see who could stuff the most pound notes into a brown envelope earmarked for the Treasury.
As a result, at least some of the Bill's dire consequences were mitigated.
Mr Mellor is no soft touch, as those within the industry who had to negotiate with him quickly discovered, but he is accessible to reason, and that is itself a great advance on what had been experienced before.
The Corporation remains, as it has always been, the prime defender of broadcasting freedom and standards.
It has a hard fight ahead, one that the nation cannot afford to see the BBC lose.
DAVID PLOWRIGHT Wilmslow, Ches
Letter to the Editor:Composers' right to complain
SIR — I agree with Louise Denny (letter, April 6) that this is not the time for composers and other music copyright holders to be spineless.
When I joined the Performing Right Society in 1979, I received a booklet which clearly stated its history, policy and working.
Under ‘What are the advantages of membership?’
I found:
‘…the impracticability of individual copyright holders administering their performing rights effectively means that membership of a performing right society is the only way in which composers, songwriters and music publishers can adequately protect their rights and receive what is due to them for the public use of their work.’
With the effective removal of a huge percentage of licensed venues in the United Kingdom from the list of places where royalties were once automatically eligible for collection, how can a composer now feel that his rights are ‘adequately protected’?
The flat rate of £75 that Miss Denny mentions will not automatically be paid to all composers.
They will have to prove to the Society that at least 15 minutes of their music has been played each year — fine enough for those who write lengthy pieces, but much more difficult for those who are at heart and in practice miniaturists.
These new regulations were made with no real reference to the membership as a whole.
Yes, we members have to abide by the current by-laws, but these have made me lose much confidence in the Society.
Its logo bears the words ‘Giving music its due’— I thought that meant that composers would receive theirs, too.
FRANK BAYFORD Enfield, Middx
Peterborough: Cheap oil
THE portrait painter Andrew Festing yesterday unveiled the first in a series of four pictures of the Queen Mother.
It is another accomplished work by the artist (who appeared in the BBC's documentary on the Queen's 40th anniversary).
But is he charging enough?
Received opinion in the art world is that he could command tens of thousands for each portrait.
Yet, as he disclosed yesterday, he prefers to stick to about £3,000 per commission.
‘Friends are always telling me to put my prices up, but I enjoy painting people, like bishops, who couldn't necessarily afford very much more,’ he said.
‘The Queen Mother is the most wonderful sitter.
The Queen is very relaxed, but not as chattery as her mother.’
Among those admiring the portrait yesterday at the Royal Society of Musicians was Sir Yehudi Menuhin, the septuagenarian fiddler.
‘I was on my way to Rome, but I wanted to buy some new shoes in London.
It is the best place for handmade pumps.’
I admired his silk suit.
‘Tsch!’ he retorted.
‘If I had a choice I would just wear a dhoti like they do in India.
It would be very comfortable, but they'd be surprised to see me like that at the Queen Elizabeth Hall.’
Peterborough: Beyond Hope
THE gregarious David Hope, Bishop of London, is diversifying into tabloid newspapers.
Bored with the custom of the bishop's Easter letter, Hope has replaced it with a tabloid, just out.
On the racy side, it features a column by the Dad's Army vicar, Frank Williams, an interview with the 6ft 7in prison chaplain of Wormwood Scrubs (headline: ‘Big job for a big man’) and some cartoons which poke fun at other denominations.
The editorial features are interspersed with advertisements for funeral directors, plumbers (all those crumbling vicarages…) and one for Coutts, the diocese's banker.
The Rev Rob Marshall, editor, hopes to include racing tips and sports news in future issues.
‘We made a £1,000 profit on our first issue,’ he says.
‘Advertisers were pretty willing, even though the recession has hit clerical outfitters — vicars tend to change their black shirts less often these days.’
Marshall's main headache is dealing with unsuitable contributions.
‘The clergy are incapable of writing in a popular style,’ he complains.
‘One article arrived at 2,000 words long.
I cut it down to two paragraphs.’
A record £66,000 for Titanic signals
By Georgina Adam
THE world record for Titanic memorabilia was beaten at Christie's South Kensington yesterday, when a collection of signals from the doomed ship fetched £66,000 against an estimate of £8,000 to £10,000.
The previous record was £8,250 paid in 1988 for a watercolour of the ship.
The sale marked the 80th anniversary of the sinking of the White Star liner off Newfoundland, on the night of 14/15 April, when more than 1,500 passengers and crew perished.
A six-lot collection of 448 signals from the archives of the Marconi company, which had been acquired by the vendor, John Booth, in 1989, made over £90,000.
Afterwards, Mr Booth showed his delight by distributing chocolate bars to auction room patrons.
Among the signals was the dramatic distress call ‘Sinking wants immediate assistance’(sic) sent by the Titanic to the Baltic, which had earlier warned of icebergs in the area.
This lot, which included 85 signals, was the subject of a dramatic battle between a telephone buyer and a disappointed underbidder, who left Yorkshire at 3am to attend the sale.
The buyer was not identified, but is thought to be a private collector.
A collector and ‘consultant’ Gavin Littaur bought a survivor's letter for £2,640.
The only item in the Christie's sale to have been on the ship at the moment of sinking, it was written by Mrs Esther Hart and tucked into her husband's jacket.
He put the jacket around his wife and daughter Eva on the lifeboat.
Eva Hart, now 87, is one of the few remaining Titanic survivors.
The sale totalled £138,369, four times the estimate, with nine per cent bought in.