

Peterborough: Fo pas
A COUPLE of Hail Marys might have been in order as the first-night audience left Dario Fo's Vatican farce, The Pope and the Witch, which opened at the Comedy Theatre, London, on Monday.
As my colleague Charles Spencer describes on our arts pages, Frances de la Tour and Berwick Kaler spent an acrobatic night undermining Catholicism, but not to universal delight.
Dario Fo sent a fax message from Italy giving his blessing to the production.
‘I don't really understand all this Italian,’ said Kaler, who played a paranoid John Paul II, as he tried to decipher it afterwards.
‘I do hope the audiences will cheer up a bit.
It's an attack on the Vatican, not Catholicism, you know.’
A pantomime dame, Kaler's normal attire is bloomers and a wig, rather than papal robes.
‘My next show is Babes in the Wood, in York,’ he said.
In the audience I found an appreciative Dave Allen, the comedian.
‘It's a whopping great satire,’ he said, ‘and I wasn't at all offended.
I went to be entertained.
I'm a great fan of Dario Fo.’
Way of the World: Roman thoughts
HOLY Week is a time when many people look around for devotional reading, and I suppose we should be grateful to the Observer for drawing attention to a ‘dirty’ book on sex for Catholics which has been written by the 30-year-old retiring editor of the Catholic Herald and a friend.
Called Catholics and Sex, it consists of endless complaints about restrictions on sexual behaviour imposed by the Catholic church.
It does not seem to take into account that many people may be quite grateful to have restrictions imposed on their sexual behaviour, while others can perfectly well get on with what they want to do and keep quiet about it.
You can't please everyone all the time, but the Catholic church has not done too badly, over the years.
I was less impressed by a news story in the Sunday Times announcing that the Pope is cracking down on sinners for Easter week: ‘The Pope has ordered priests in the confessional box to clamp down on sin as churches prepare for the traditional Easter rush of sinners seeking forgiveness this week,’ it announced knowingly.
Any news story announcing a crackdown is suspect, usually the product of an unattributable briefing by some politician.
The organisation of the Catholic church is not to be confused with that of the Ministry of Transport or police department.
Popes lack the machinery to administer crackdowns.
They can only issue briefs, bulls, encyclicals and the occasional definition.
I hope the drivel which appeared in the Sunday Times was not the result of a Vatican briefing, because it would be a terrible thing if the Holy See went the way of Westminster and Liverpool.
All that is most sensible and clearheaded in the Catholic church will meet in Rome on May 17 to celebrate the beatification of Mgr Josemaria Escriva (1902–1975) who founded Opus Dei, the unecstatic religious movement which may yet save Christianity from the sex therapists.