

Insurers may seek aid for terror costs
By Richard Savill and Karen Cooper
COMMERCIAL Union, whose London headquarters was devastated by last week's IRA bomb in the City of London, yesterday raised the possibility that the insurance industry might seek Government help to cover terrorist damage on the mainland.
At its annual meeting, hastily relocated from the severely damaged Baltic Exchange building, Mr Nicholas Baring, chairman, said in response to a question from a shareholder that such a possibility would be looked at very carefully.
A spokesman said later: ‘If the Commercial Union does decide to take any action we will first of all seek the views of other insurers.’
It is only in Northern Ireland that the Government indemnifies companies against terrorist damage.
Insurance policies in England, Scotland and Wales normally include cover against bomb explosions.
Meanwhile, Christiana Carter, eight, whose 15-year-old sister Danielle was killed by the bomb, has been allowed home after treatment for cuts to her face.
Six other victims, including Sara Sadoo, seven, who has had an eye operation, remain in hospital.
The Corporation of London said that Friday's blast, which killed three people and injured 91, had badly affected 100 buildings, leaving 10 with major structural damage.
Up to 200 others suffered minor damage.
Worst hit were the Baltic Exchange, which has been shored up to make it safe, and the Chamber of Shipping, which is partially collapsed.
Police are organising meetings for City security staff and the public as part of increased anti-terrorist measures.
Pay rises sinking to level of inflation
By Roland Gribben Business Editor
PAY settlements in manufacturing industry are now only slightly ahead of inflation, after halving over the last year, according to revised figures released yesterday by the Confederation of British Industry.
Deals concluded in the first quarter averaged 4.3 per cent, slightly down on the earlier estimate of 4.5 per cent , but closer to the current four per cent inflation rate.
The level of settlements is well down on the eight per cent recorded in the first quarter a year ago.
The latest CBI figures suggest settlements are levelling out after falling to 4.2 per cent in the final three months last year.
But the employers' organisation says the rate of manufacturing pay rises is overstated because of the number of pay freezes.
One in six firms has deferred settlements for up to six months because of the profits squeeze produced by recession, and more are planning a freeze.
Productivity growth in manufacturing in the first quarter at 3.8 per cent was higher than the same period a year earlier, but down on the five per cent improvement in the final three months of last year.
Sir John Banham, CBI director general, said settlements were now running at levels compatible with expected productivity improvements.
‘This reduces the threat of inflation, helps competitiveness and will ultimately prove good for jobs,’ he added.
Employees may get pick of the perks
By Our Business Editor
COMPANIES are considering adopting a ‘cafeteria’ approach to benefits to allow employees to choose perks from a ‘menu’of items, the Confederation of British Industry said yesterday.
They believe company benefits, including pay, pensions, company car, health care and subsidised housing should be more flexible.
There is concern that benefits may not be effective in recruiting, retaining and motivating employees.
An article in the CBI's Employment Affairs Report says: ‘Individuals can better assess the benefit package that suits them than can their employer.’
Younger employees wanted money and benefits such as subsidised housing, ‘flashy’ company cars and help with child care.
Older employees wanted recognition, health care and good pensions.
Employers were now being forced to reassess whether traditional packages meet the expectations of employees.
For some leading executives, the cost of benefits can amount to 50 per cent of salary.
The cost of private medical insurance is rising well above the rate of inflation, while compensation specialists doubt whether firms get ‘value for money’ from incentives.
Firms said that tax complexity and administrative problems were the major hurdles in the path of extending freedom of choice.
The current tax regime encouraged pensions, share options and subsidised meals, but discouraged company loans, cars and petrol.
Gold articles lose glitter
The number of gold articles hallmarked in the first three months of this year fell by 12 per cent compared with the same period last year, according to the Assay offices.
British-made goods were hit particularly hard, accounting for only 1,815,670 of the 2,863,302 articles hallmarked — a drop of 14.1 per cent.
Media and Marketing: If Kinnock had been a teabag POLLS APART
Market research is much better at commerce than politics, says Philip Kleinman
BY PHILIP KLEINMAN
THE political opinion pollsters, along with Neil Kinnock, are deemed to have lost the election.
But although upset by the discrepancy between what voters told them and the way they actually behaved, the pollsters do not admit defeat.
They say their findings are not intended to be taken as predictions, rather as snapshots of public opinion at a particular time (though they are quick to claim credit when their ‘snapshots’ coincide with the final result).
Nevertheless, even if they did not get it wrong, their discomfiture is a matter of concern for the whole market research industry, of which political opinion polling accounts for a small but very visible part of an estimated UK turnover of more than £300 million.
A post-mortem is now in progress.
Bob Worcester, chairman of Mori, says: ‘It is important to know what happened, not just for the sake of the pollsters but for that of the research business and the marketing decisions that depend upon confidence in the data that market research provides.’
He makes the point that predicting what people will do is always harder than measuring their current behaviour.
The Market Research Society has set up a panel of four experts, including two academics, to investigate.
They will examine the way election polling was done and factors that may have influenced the findings, such as the declining proportion of people willing to answer interviewers' questions.
Most commercial market research is concerned simply with measuring consumption patterns, and that requires far less accuracy than political research.
It covers brand shares, new products, customer satisfaction and the lucrative area of corporate image (research into what investors, potential employees and the public think of a company).
In such research, exact statistics of public attitudes are of small importance.
What matters is to identify problems and opportunities.
Advertising campaigns are deeply researched, often via small discussion groups, both before and after they are launched.
Results must be handled with care.
The classic Heineken campaign (’ Refreshes the parts other beers cannot reach’) scored an initial thumbs-down before becoming a popular success.
To calculate sales of rival grocery brands, AGB has a ‘Superpanel’ of several thousand households that use computer terminals to record their purchases.
(They used to have special dustbins in which they stored all used packaging, to be collected and counted by AGB researchers.)
Some clients use research surveys mainly as a publicity tool, an easy way to get a newspaper headline, as an insurance company did with a Gallup survey on the cost of raising children.
To establish the audience (and its socio-economic composition) for television programmes, the Broadcasters' Audience Research Board has installed special sets and hand-held key pads known as ‘people meters’ in homes up and down the country.
Newspaper and magazine readership is measured by written questionnaires.
But market research is concerned not only with measurement of consumption: some of the industry's most striking successes (as well as a few flops) have been about prediction.
Take, for example, the case of the round teabag, a commercial victory that owed almost everything to research.
Seven years ago Lyons Tetley called in the Mass Observation research agency (a WPP subsidiary) to help determine whether there was any future in an idea it had for differentiating Tetley teabags from those of competitors.
The wheeze was simple: to change their shape from square to round.
Mass Ob gave specially produced round-bag samples to 300 people to try in their homes.
About 60 per cent said they preferred them, many claiming that the tea tasted better — even though the content was exactly the same as the square.
Results of a second test six months later were almost precisely the same, but Tetley feared that the success of the round bags depended only on a novelty value that would wear off.
It wanted to be sure this would not happen.
MASS Observation tackled the challenge with its Sharescale technique.
A panel of households was recruited, all of which agreed to buy their tea through the research firm for three months.
Interviewers visited them weekly with catalogues of brands and prices.
During this time they were also shown a reel of commercials for different brands, including one for Tetley round bags.
During the first two weeks of the operation the price of the test brand was lowered to encourage a trial purchase.
Round teabags sold extremely well in this test.
If novelty was part of their appeal, that appeal did not diminish, as the very length of the test demonstrated.
This conclusion was reinforced by the results of qualitative research.
This took the form of small, specially recruited discussion groups of tea-drinkers.
During the discussions, many participants said they could not accept that round teabags were in any way superior.
But, when subsequently given samples to try, they responded favourably.
On the strength of this, Tetley embarked on an 18-month factory retooling programme.
The next stage again involved research, to determine the best way of selling the rejigged brand.
This time Mass Ob recruited four Sharescale panels, each of about 200 households.
All were given a 20p-off coupon to buy round teabags, and members of three panels also received free samples, of four, eight and 16 teabags respectively.
The most positive response came from the 16-bag group, whereupon Tetley began a mass distribution of 16-bag samples and money-off coupons in the South.
Its share of the regional teabag market rose from 11 to 15 per cent.
In 1990 round teabags were launched nationally, and are now the market leader, with 21.7 per cent of total sales.
There are less happy stories, such as the lawsuit brought by Beecham in 1987 against Saatchi & Saatchi's American research subsidiary, Yankelovich Clancy Shulman.
Beecham claimed it had lost $24 million because of‘significant errors’ in an over-optimistic YCS forecast, based on a Laboratory Test Market study, of the prospects for Delicare Cold Water Wash.
The case was settled out of court.
The Japanese, champions of new product development, spend far less than the British on hiring market researchers, relying instead on information obtained by their own managers who get out and talk to dealers and customers.
Some in the industry believe Britain will follow suit.
All market research, even the Japanese kind, assumes that people reply truthfully to questions.
Those investigating the election fiasco will certainly wish to dispel the notion that Britons have learnt to lie to the woman with a clipboard and ballpoint pen.
Way of the World: Slaves to software
I SEE that hysteria about the two bombs in London last weekend is prompting police and security services to press once again for national identity cards which will be compulsory at all times and forgery-proof.
It was the same sort of hysteria after the Hungerford massacre which persuaded a weak and inexperienced Home Secretary to give the police unfettered discretion to bully, terrorise and generally make a nuisance of themselves among law-abiding sportsmen.
Of course there is no such thing as a forgery-proof identity card.
If it were merely a handful of Irish psychopaths against us, they might be foiled by a piece of pasteboard with a photograph and some numbers stamped on it.
But the IRA can call on a large part of the combined resources of New York, Boston and Tripoli.
Every terrorist or criminal will have all the identity cards he wants.
One effect on the rest of us will be that we cause ourselves endless trouble by losing them.
A great army of civil servants will be needed to administer the system, adding nothing whatever to the wealth or gaiety of the nation.
But the chief objection is much worse.
By allowing ourselves to be forced to carry these cards for the convenience of the state, we will be acknowledging that we are at the disposition of the state and its computers.
At the touch of a button, the metallic strip on an identity card will surrender every scrap of information about us stored by any government department, as well as whatever ‘confidential’ and uncheckable information may have been collected by secret means.
Even with nice Mr Major as Prime Minister I feel we should resist it with all our energy.
Nobody knows who will succeed him.
City: Paper £3.1bn for Midland
By Richard Northedge
HONGKONG & Shanghai Banking Corporation yesterday detailed the terms of its £3.1 billion takeover of Midland Bank-but the 385p per share offer is below expectations and the market believes Lloyds Bank is considering a counter-bid.
Midland shares were the most actively traded on the stock market and fell 7 to 365p on announcement of the all-paper terms compared with the 400p which Lloyds is believed to be prepared to pay.
Midland's shares were knocked by the Kuwait Investment Office's surprise decision to sell its 10 p.c. stake in Midland at 362p a share through stockbroker Hoare Govett.
City investors accepted shares on condition that all could be placed but by last night potential buyers had been found for only about half the stake.
John Aitken of stockbroker County Natwest said: ‘There must be a chance that Lloyds will be tempted in.
I do not believe that they would be put off by a hostile bid not being ‘good-form’.’
Midland chief executive Brian Pearse admitted: ‘There has been quite a lot of conjecture about a merger with another leading clearing bank in the United Kingdom.
The reality is, it is most unlikely that such a merger would be allowed on competition grounds and we believe that a referral to the authorities would be likely to attract great uncertainty to our customers and staff.’
A Lloyds merger would mean considerable redundancies, but Mr Pearse added: ‘More important, such a merger would not deliver the real advantages of a merger with an overseas bank.’
Midland and Hongkong banks are complementary rather than overlapping, he said: together they would create a group with 3,300 offices in 68 countries with combined assets of £145 billion.
The offer, being made through Hongkong's British-registered HSBC Holdings, comprises one HSBC share and 100p of HSBC bonds for each Midland share.
The bidder, which already owns 14 p.c. of Midland, will become resident in Britain for tax purposes and will be listed in London as well as Hong Kong, replacing Midland in the FT-SE 100 index.
Midland investors will keep the 1.7p promised final dividend and they can elect to change the ratio of bonds and shares received.
Unusually, the merged banks' first interim dividend will be paid without deduction of tax.
Mr Pearse said: ‘Do not think that we have not been fighting for the price of Midland shares that we have just received.
There were times when we wished that there had been a cash element but it is not sensible for any bank to pay out cash at this time.
The Hong Kong bank would not pay any cash.’
In Hong Kong, chairman William Purves said: ‘No bank wants to pay out cash unless it has to.
If we paid cash, we might have had to go to shareholders for a rights issue.’
The bank defended the terms saying they are a 50 p.c. premium over Midland's price before last month's bid proposal, 27 p.c. above net asset value and will give an income 442 p.c. better than Midland's reduced dividend.
See City Comment
City:
NICHOLAS Baring (above), chairman of Commercial Union, told the annual meeting yesterday there had been minimal disturbance to the insurer's services following the IRA bomb last Friday.
‘We will not be knocked off course by this,’ he said.
The company, which made a pre-tax loss of almost £69m in 1991, foreshadowed a ‘steady’ improvement in results this year from the hard-hit general insurance sector as industry capacity falls and increases in premium rates gather momentum.
The shares were up 1 to 426p.
City: Imro fines bank on trust breaches
By Duncan Hughes
MIDLAND Bank has been fined and ordered to pay costs totalling about £250,000 by the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (Imro) for breaching its duties as trustee of six funds managed by the French-owned unit trust company Dumenil.
A two-year investigation by the regulatory watchdog has resulted in the highest total fine and costs imposed on a member company.
A separate inquiry is believed to be still continuing into the other trustee, Coutts, which was responsible for the remaining five unit trusts.
Dumenil, which offered predominantly specialist single European market trusts, had dealings in its funds suspended in November 1989 because of pricing errors and administrative problems and was ordered to wind up its trusts the following year.
A hearing by Imro's investigation committee on February 18 found that Midland Bank had failed to take reasonable care in monitoring of the managers' pricing of the units.
Midland also admitted failing to supervise the fund managers to prevent them concentrating their stock holdings too narrowly and that it failed to maintain a register of the holders of six of the trusts or the amount of their holdings.
A spokesman for Midland said: ‘They are technical rule breaches that happened three years ago.
At that time the industry was having difficulties adjusting to the new rules imposed by the Financial Services Act.’
City: Bank of England lead regulator role
By Hugo Gurdon in Hong Kong
THE colony's commissioner of banking will continue to regulate Hongkong & Shanghai, but the Bank of England will supervise Midland and be the enlarged group's lead regulator.
The means that Hongkong & Shanghai's top management will leave the colony and move to London next year.
Hongkong & Shanghai chairman and chief executive William Purves will become City of London-based, but insisted yesterday his bank remains committed to Hong Kong.
He said: ‘The authorities in China have nothing to fear.
Of course, we have no intention of doing anything to damage confidence here.’
He yesterday revealed the bank's inner reserves.
These include £1.2 billion of property surpluses plus £460m of surpluses on investment — reduced by £144m because of the fall in value of its Midland shares — plus a previously secret £1.1 billion.
As well as boosting the bank's capital, these inner reserves would have added £242m to Hongkong & Shanghai's disclosed £465m of profit last year.
But the bid is estimated to cost £190m, requires a £200m one-off provision against British tax, and dilutes earnings.
The bank issues 85 p.c. of the colony's banknotes and runs the local clearing house — roles which an official from the Bank of China recently said are incompatible with regulation from London.
Mr Purves said he intends retiring next year, but might stay longer if asked to by the board.
He also hinted the chairman and chief executive posts might be split.
City: LUI arms gain more time
By Sonia Purnell
LITIGATION by more than 150 American claimants has forced the provisional liquidators of four subsidiaries of London United Investments, the collapsed insurance company, to seek protection from the American courts.
Cork Gully, appointed provisional liquidator of Kingscroft, El Paso, Lime Street and Mutual Reinsurance, has won a temporary freezing order on all their American assets and a stay on all litigation.
Cork now has a month's breathing space to consider how best to distribute the companies' funds to creditors.
Ian Bond, the liquidator, said yesterday: ‘Without the order, we were concerned that some litigants would have won summary judgment in their favour without us being able to defend ourselves properly.
We could have been bound to pay enormous sums of money if we had lost.’
It is understood Cork is in dispute with a number of American firms of lawyers over unpaid fees, which the lawyers claim run into many millions of dollars.
The lawyers are refusing to hand over details of all the litigation until they are paid in full.
Gross claims against the four companies, before recoveries from reinsurance, are estimated to top $2 billion.
City: Demand on Norwich Union
By Karen Cooper
INSURER Norwich Union, which has provided about £200m in guarantees for members of Lloyd's of London, is having to pay as Lloyd's draws down the funds of members on loss-making syndicates.
A spokesman said more cash calls were expected over the next few months as members become faced with increasing demands from agents to meet large losses.
‘We are honouring them,’ he said.
He said Norwich had faced calls on 60 of the 1,200 so-called ‘property-backed’ guarantees it has provided to Lloyd's members.
He did not know how much had been paid but believed it was less than £50m.
The guarantees, usually secured against the member's house or some other asset, can be drawn down by Lloyd's if demands to provide money for paying insurance claims have not been met.
Norwich Union said yesterday, however, that it had stopped providing the guarantees last December.
The right of Lloyd's to draw on such funds is at present being challenged in the commercial court by more than 800 members led by solicitor Michael Freeman.
The agents are not calling the funds until the litigation is decided.
City: L'Oreal rules out Nestle bid
By Mary Brasier in Paris
THE head of French cosmetics giant L'Oreal yesterday ruled out any bid for control of the company by shareholder Nestle before 1994.
L'Oreal, a powerful symbol of corporate France, has become a target of speculation after the £1.6 billion bid for Perrier, another national asset, by the Swiss food company.
Under an agreement which has at least two years to run, Nestle has a 49 p.c. interest in the holding company which owns L'Oreal with the rest in the hands of the founding family.
Lindsay Owen-Jones, the Welsh president of L'Oreal, said he saw no changes in the balance of control.
The company yesterday announced a 19.7 p.c. increase in net profit to £208m, despite the recession and the impact of the Gulf war during the first half of its financial year.
Mr Owen-Jones said it had been a particularly difficult year in Britain where sales had fallen 12 p.c. compared with a worldwide increase of 10 p.c.
L'Oreal is lifting its dividend 10 p.c. to 87p.
The company said sales so far this year are up by 16 p.c. and it is forecasting a further profit rise in 1992.
City: Michelin posts £100m loss
MICHELIN, the world's largest tyre maker, which sounded a warning of the depths of recession when it plunged £527m into the red last year, yesterday surprised the market with an operating profit throughout 1991.
Although the company is still in the red with a net loss of £100m, the outcome was only half as bad as some analysts had expected.
Michelin turned a 1990 loss of £113m on operations into £78m profit.
Michelin is axing 16,000 jobs and has spent £460m on restructuring in the last two years.
The company says it is continuing to rely on cost-cutting and internal improvements to restore profits, rather than any upturn in demand for tyres.
Sales volumes barely moved last year but Michelin says price rises of 10 p.c. in Europe have failed to puncture its market share.
The company has stabilised debt at £2.8 billion last year and will begin cutting its borrowings in 1992, 12 months ahead of schedule.
City: Surprise leap of 1pc in output
AN unexpected 1 p.c. rise in manufacturing production in February raised hopes that manufacturers were beginning to climb out of recession and caught economists by surprise yesterday.
However, with the underlying trend showing production flat and the official government figures notoriously volatile, economists cautioned that the rise could turn out to be a blip.
Most economists expect that the first real signs of an upturn will not appear until second-quarter figures are available.
Another set of official statistics showed the price of industrial products was slightly higher last month, although not high enough to affect forecasts of a continuing decline in consumer inflation.
Output prices were rising at an annual rate of 4½ p.c. last month, against 4.4 p.c. in February.
The 0.8 p.c. rise in the index between the two months was largely due to changes in excise duty in the Budget.
Leaving aside food, drink and tobacco, industrial prices rose only 2.9 p.c. over the year and 0.6 p.c. in the last three months.
But with input prices, measured by the cost of materials and fuel, up by only 0.1 p.c. last month on an annual basis industrial inflation pressures remain negligible.
City: Auditors doubt MGM ability to keep going
By Jonathan Confino in New York
THE future of Hollywood studio MGM-Pathe was in doubt yesterday after independent auditors questioned whether it can continue as a ‘going concern’.
The warning came after the film maker's parent Pathe Communications unveiled a $353m loss for 1991.
MGM, which made such classics as Gone With the Wind and The Wizard Of Oz, has been in turmoil ever since being bought by controversial Italian financier Giancarlo Parretti last year.
Mr Parretti has now been removed from the company by his banker Credit Lyonnais, which lent more than $1½ billion to his group of companies.
MGM is already in default on its loans, which are secured on its assets, and needs additional capital from Credit Lyonnais to fund operations.
MGM's auditors Peat Marwick also highlighted the risk that litigation could result in large damages the company has not made full provisions for.
Heather Goodchild, entertainment analyst at credit ratings agency Standard & Poor's, said yesterday: ‘MGM's films just aren't working, their debts are running away and they have major problems in their corporate structure.’
She added: ‘The company needs a great deal more support from the bank and Credit Lyonnais can make a very good case for not offering that lifeline’.
City: Hammerson £45m buy in Moorgate
By Bruce Kinloch
HAMMERSON, the United Kingdom's third largest property company, indicated its long-term confidence in property investment yesterday by acquiring two central London properties from Prudential Corporation for about £45m.
News of the purchases came as Sydney Mason, chairman, announced a 21 p.c. fall in pre-tax profits from £70.7m to £55.5m for 1991.
He also revealed a drop in net assets of almost £2 a share from 832p to 637p.
Net rental income of the group increased by 4 p.c. to £114m, while interest payable rose by £3.3m to £78.8m, but £32.1m was capitalised.
Earnings per share are down from 31p to 20.5p, the dividend is maintained at 20.5p with a final payment of 17p on June 16.
Net borrowings at the December 1991 year-end totalled £824m with gearing increased to 78 p.c. of shareholders' funds, against 54 p.c. for 1990, reflecting both capital expenditure and the fall in the value of group properties.
It is significant that the unoccupied space in Hammerson's portfolio amounts to only 8 p.c., the bulk of which is overseas; in the British portfolio, there is no significant level of empty properties, and most are well let to tenants of undoubted covenant.
The properties bought by Hammerson are the long leasehold interest in 21 Moorfields, London EC2, which offers medium-term redevelopment possibilities, and the freehold of 32–33 St James's Square, London SW1, in which Hammerson owns the leasehold interest and there are significant marriage values.
The shares closed 6 lower at 326p.
City: Gas development agreed
By Roland Gribben
DEVELOPMENT of huge gas reserves in the northern and central North Sea moved a stage further yesterday with an agreement by a British Gas-led group to exploit three discoveries with reserves of one trillion cubic feet at an estimated cost of about £800m.
Production from the newly-named Armada complex is due to start in late 1996 with peak output of about 300m cubic feet a day of gas condensate — a mixture of gas and light oil — from the Maggie and Howard field, and two other discoveries, Drake and Hawkins.
The discoveries straddle five licence blocks and form a key part of an extensive development programme that will substantially increase gas production in the North Sea by the end of the century.
Investment of between £4 billion and £5 billion is forecast in a series of developments focused round a pipeline network expected to carry 1.2 billion cubic feet of gas a day to Teesside.
A group headed by Chevron and Conoco is investing £2 billion in developing the difficult Britannia complex; an Amoco-led consortium is spending £1.5 billion on the Everest and Lomond fields and the new pipeline; and the new Armada project is provisionally estimated by County NatWest Woodmac to involve investment of almost £800m.
British Gas has been swiftly building up its interests in the new developments to build up a new earnings stream and gain access to supplies.
It has a 45 p.c. interest in the Armada reserves, according to provisional estimates.
Armada is about a fifth of the size of the company's biggest asset, the Morecambe field, which has a potential production capacity of 1.8 billion cubic feet a day.
City: Scot Met in red at halfway
SCOTTISH Metropolitan Property tumbled from a £2.72m profit to a £840,000 pre-tax loss in the six months to mid-February, dented by 57 p.c. jump in interest charges to £10.3m, and compensation of £201,881 to former managing director Gordon Milne, and former development director Paul Birch.
Rental income rose 16 p.c. to £11.3m, but the interest bill, after capitalising £860,000 against £5½m, rose as a result of the completion of the group's remaining developments.
Scott Cairns, promoted from within to fill the role vacated by Mr Milne, aims to lift Scottish investment from 63 p.c. to 70 p.c., and increase the retail content at the expense of offices, which account for 55 p.c.
The interim dividend is being cut from 2.53p to 1½p on August 17, but the board intends maintaining last year's 4.4p total.
City: Wrangle over Heron bonds
NONE of the lead managers of the bonds issued by Heron International on the international markets is legally empowered to represent the holders in talks with the property company over its financial restructuring plans.
However, Credit Suisse, host to a meeting in Zurich on Monday of the institutions which arranged the 11 issues, said yesterday they had agreed to ‘co-ordinate their efforts for the benefit of bondholders’.
The bonds were issued under a number of different jurisdictions, including Switzerland, Germany, France and the United Kingdom.
Credit Suisse said that although it had been decided that none of the managers could represent the bondholders, it would be advising them and providing them with information.
Gary Klesch, the American financier, has been asked by some bondholders to act on their behalf in the refinancing negotiations.
City: FR Group paying more
FR GROUP, the aviation and defence equipment group where Michael Cobham is the chairman, is lifting its payment to shareholders from 6.37p to 6.69p, with a 4.35p final on July 3, after overcoming a dip in the first half to increase its profits from £21.3m to £21.4m pre-tax in 1991.
The shares improved 6 to 214p.
City: Sage 44pc profits lift to £4.3m
THE shares of Sage Group jumped 31 to 484p yesterday after the Newcastle-based accounting software supplier unveiled a 44 p.c. rise in pre-tax profits to £4.34m for the six months to end-March.
The performance benefits from a £1.4m contribution from DacEasy, the Dallas-based software business acquired in a £9½m deal.
David Goldman, chairman, said the group's United Kingdom software sales rose by 16 p.c. despite difficult market conditions and that Sage continues to trade ahead of internal targets, with profits in the first half 62 p.c. up on the corresponding period.
The interim dividend is being lifted from an adjusted 2.7p to 3.02p on June 18.
City: UK against Eurobank boost
By Antonia Feuchtwanger in Budapest
LYNDA Chalker, reappointed as Minister for Overseas Development despite losing her Wallasey seat at the election, yesterday backed United States Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady's opposition to new funds for the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development whose annual meeting in Budapest ended yesterday.
Jacques Attali, the bank's president, said on Monday he wanted money to convert eastern Europe's defence companies to civilian use and reorganise inefficient state-owned industry.
He was given authority only to investigate the issue.
Mrs Chalker echoed Mr Brady's comments when she told the bank's board yesterday: ‘It is not clear to me that new facilities are needed to enable the bank to address this problem [of defence conversion].
Its mandate already gives it a prominent role in this area.’
The British view is that Mr Attali's plan to spend new money lacks detail.
Japan is also unsympathetic.
The German finance minister and governor Theo Waigel showed some limited support for Mr Attali's plan to close 16 nuclear power stations in eastern and central Europe for safety reasons.
City: Isle of Man to peg its tax rates
By Matthew Doull
THE Isle of Man will remain a corporate tax haven, following the finalisation of the island's budget yesterday by the country's treasury minister Donald Gelling.
The standard rate of income tax in the two-tier system stays at 15 p.c. and the top rate, which also applies to companies, remains at 20 p.c.
Mr Gelling told the Tynwald, the island's 1,013 year-old, 35-member parliament: ‘It is a budget of consolidation and stability, a budget for future growth and development, a budget for optimism and faith in the future.’
To attract more businesses, the maximum fees for company registration were cut from £50,000 to £5,000 and a 10 p.c. rebate on employers' national insurance contributions was introduced.
As announced in October, tax on fund managers' fees is to be reduced from 20 p.c. to only 5 p.c.
Island authorities are keen to take advantage of their position as a self-governing Crown protectorate to attract offshore investment funds.
At the same time, the protectorate's authorities want to maintain high standards of financial propriety with strict rules.
A year ago, a depositor protection scheme was introduced to parallel Britain's arrangements, and, at the beginning of this year, a plan to license fund managers came into effect.
City: C & W set for joint venture with Russians
CABLE & Wireless is poised to move into the Russian telecommunications market through a joint company with Intertelecom, the country's only long-distance and international operator.
The new company, Metropolitan Communications, will initially study the feasibility of modernising services within the ‘golden ring’ of major towns around Moscow, St Petersburg and Tyumen Oblast, Russia's main oil zone.
Cable said yesterday the company would eventually upgrade and operate the long distance and international communications systems.
The World Bank is expected to be involved in arranging finance for the study and for modernisation.
City:
NATIONAL Westminster Bank is about to apply for planning permission to redevelop a 1¼-acre site it owns in the prime central core of the City within yards of the Bank of England.
The triangular site, bounded by Old Broad Street and Threadneedle Street, is reckoned to be one of the best properties in the City.
A leading City property investor said yesterday: ‘Well-designed buildings in this area do not stay empty long — there is always strong demand.’
Properties in the NatWest venture include 40–53 Threadneedle Street and 1–18 Old Broad Street, which are considered among the best addresses in the City.
The plans, adopted by NatWest, and which will go on show to the public after Easter, have been designed by the Fitzroy Robinson Partnership, a firm of architects which was responsible for many of the high-quality buildings in the City.
The aim is to allow full public access to the site.
Many of the properties included in the NatWest proposals are listed, either as Grade II or Grade II* buildings.
The elevations of these, and in many cases the interiors, will be preserved.
The plans include the provision of 230,000 sq.ft of high specification offices, plus 22 shops, and a restaurant and wine bar.
The bank already owns or occupies several building nearby, plus much of the adjacent site, which includes the NatWest tower.
City: Cautious optimism over O&Y debt plans
By Fred Langan in Toronto
THE plans for restructuring the C$14.3 billion (£6.84 billion) debts of the Olympia and York property company have met cautious acceptance from lenders.
Steve Miller, chief financial adviser to vice-chairman Paul Reichmann, said arrangements would be finished ‘hopefully within weeks, but realistically months’.
The lenders are to meet again today.
‘The banks have seen it is containable, that the problem will eventually go away,’ said a Canadian lending banker.
‘If you look at the reaction of the Canadian bank stocks, that's going to tell you everyone is happy,’ he added.
The shares, especially those of the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce and the Royal Bank of Canada, dropped on news of the liquidity crisis at Olympia and York but rose yesterday.
Although bankers seem to have some optimism, even members of the Reichmann family say the debt restructuring will be a long haul.
‘It'll take some time, not today,’ said Mr Reichmann following the briefing of bankers in Toronto on Monday afternoon.
The lenders are being separated into country groups — Britain, the United States and Canada — and then separated again into separate projects.
One Toronto investment dealer said: ‘They are trying to isolate their good properties from the bad, refinancing them on a separate basis.
I don't know if the bankers will go along with it.’
Mr Miller said of a C$450m loan due last month on O&Y's 68-storey Scotia Plaza building in central Toronto: ‘The bankers have not agreed to extend or to push O&Y into default on that loan.’
City Comment: Midland merger starts the banking ball rolling
THE Midland Bank, like the girl in the story, agreed the principle and all that remained to be fixed were the terms.
Now its Oriental admirer has made an acceptable offer and the match is made, barring only the appearance of another admirer with more money.
The merged bank will be a colossus.
By stock market value it becomes Britain's biggest and second in Europe only to Deutsche Bank, leaving Union Bank of Switzerland and Barclays trailing.
It can afford global ambitions.
But global expansion has been an expensive objective for banks: they lent vast sums on poor terms to borrowers who could shop around for money, starting in Japan.
HongMid possibly thinks that, now that the Japanese banks have abandoned their role as lender of first resort and some of the borrowers are not the forces they were, global banking might make sense again.
Here at home, banking for business is not an overcrowded market — although painfully short of creditworthy companies — but banking for people has more than enough suppliers with the building societies chasing the same customers.
Retail banking ties up capital and property and staff in large numbers and in the wrong places.
It is overdue for change.
Midland has tried hard to break the ties, and with its First Direct branchless banking service it has moved ahead of the market, but it needed time and resources and luck.
Now it has them.
But to get them, Midland's board has put a price on its business, and is left with no defence against a bidder prepared to offer more.
Deutsche once thought about bidding, thought not, and now has a last chance to think again.
Lloyds has made a clandestine but vigorous pass at Midland and still thinks it is in with a chance and can outbid Hongkong if it can make savings through ruthless high street rationalisation — in effect, putting two banks' business through one's network.
It would give the two similarly-sized banks about 21 p.c. of the bank market — still less than Barclays has, but a stiff early test of Michael Heseltine's competition policy.
A Lloyds bid would surely go to the Monopolies Commission, and might drag Hongkong's bid with it — just as Standard Chartered's bid accompanied Hongkong's to the commission a decade ago.
Perhaps Lloyds should look elsewhere.
There is plenty of choice, starting with TSB in the high street, and there might even be NatWest.
But after the 1960s merger which created NatWest, Lloyds' own plan to merger with Barclays was blocked.
It would hate to see Midland go, then be blocked again now.
It needs a safe partner and if global ambitions make sense again, it could renew its interest in Standard Chartered, this time asking nicely.
The upheaval in British banking has only started.
City Comment: No excuses for Taylor Woodrow
TAYLOR Woodrow's reputation as the most cautious and prudent of Britain's major building contractors is in tatters.
It jumped headfirst into the 1980s property boom and is now paying the price: the ebbing tide has revealed not only severe recession damage, but also gaping holes which should have been plugged years ago.
Now that last year's results are out, it is no surprise that the board hustled chairman Peter Drew into retirement just three weeks ago.
The company has taken a £47m hit above the line and another £23m below.
Between those two lines of the accounts there is virtually nothing but disaster.
At the top of the boom the group's worldwide housing business made only £35m; in 1991 it wiped out years of British housebuilding profits by writing off £25m against just one housing estate — the St Mary Abbots luxury development in Kensington.
Donning the hairshirt which is handed to incoming chairmen, Colin Parsons admits that there were also too many excursions outside the core businesses and too little attention paid to costs.
But he is making no excuses for Taylor Woodrow's stubborn perseverance with the American contracting business which lost £12m last year and is being closed at a cost of £24m.
Not before time the contracting arm is to take a more ‘risk-averse stance’ to new tenders.
Last year it was forced to make over £28m of provisions on contracts for the Channel tunnel, Denmark's Storebaelt Bridge and EuroDisney.
Operating profits almost halved anyway but the provisions turned an £83m pre-tax profit into a £2.7m loss.
There is no surplus from which to pay a dividend, but when directors asked for £162m of new capital through a rights issue at this time last year, shareholders were promised an unchanged final 7.64p, so they should receive it on July 1.
Those shares were offered at 200p, even after a 9p rise yesterday the market price is only 129p and a savage dividend cut looks inevitable this year.
For the next couple of years at least the shares will be supported only by assets, which despite the fall in values are still worth 25 p.c. more than the share price.
City Comment: The Rothschild connection
THE Rothschild connection at the Treasury was reinforced last night with the appointment of Tony Nelson as one of two junior ministers who will do the legwork for Chancellor Norman Lamont and his Chief Secretary Michael Portillo.
Mr Nelson, the 43-year old member for Chichester, comes straight into government as the Treasury's new Economic Secretary with responsibility for keeping Customs and Excise in order, replacing the elevated Gillian Shephard.
He overlapped with Mr Lamont at the House of Rothschild, spending 1969 to 1973 at the merchant bank before advising Lord Weinstock at General Electric Company.
However, in parliamentary terms Mr Nelson has been long waiting for a call from a prime minister offering jobs.
Stephen Dorrell, 40, an unimpressive former junior health minister, takes over the Financial Secretary job left vacant when Francis Maude lost his seat last week.
He looks most likely to inherit the City regulatory mantle that will be transferred from the Department of Trade.
But John Redwood, the brash corporate affairs minister tipped to transfer from Trade to Treasury, bringing regulation with him, has been shunted to the new Trade Secretary's old environment department.
Perhaps the Prime Minister (with his Standard Chartered schooling) considered that a third Rothschild man at the Treasury would have been just too much.
City: Whitbread deals ‘not tied’
By Karen Cooper
WHITBREAD yesterday denied that the 12 deals it is finalising to lease more than 1,000 pubs to regional brewers and pub chains go against government orders, aimed at loosening the big brewers' tie.
Its comments follow a fresh warning by Sir Gordon Borrie, director-general of Fair Trading, that he will take action against long-term beer supply agreements set up between the big brewers and pubs leased to others.
A Whitbread spokesman said its deals, which he said do not include supply agreements, were different from the one between Allied Lyons and Brent Walker.
‘We know our leasing deals are within the letter and spirit of the law as we will have no influence over the purchase of beer for the pubs,’ he said.
West Country pubs group J A Devenish said yesterday it had leased 115 pubs from Whitbread for eight years.
Last week Shepherd Neame said it had leased 60 pubs.
The brewers have until November to free up thousands of pubs by selling them or leasing them free of the tie.
Whitbread said the lessees of its pubs can keep buying its beer but have no obligation to do so.
City: Wall St hits record after IBM results
WALL Street roared to a new record yesterday on the back of better-than-expected first quarter profits at computer giant International Business Machines and hopes of lower interest rates.
The Dow Jones index jumped more than 50 points before losing some of its gains to close up 36.23 points, or 1.1 p.c., at 3306.13.
The advance was also aided by pent-up demand following Monday's shutdown of Chicago's futures exchanges in the wake extensive flooding in the city's financial district.
IBM, which announced a major restructuring after plunging into the red last year for the first time in its history, made an after-tax profit of $595m in the three months ending March.
Retail sales in America dropped 0.4 p.c. last month, the worst decline in seven months.
City: Hanson deal
HANSON, the Imperial Tobacco-to-Jacuzzi conglomerate, has sold the Australian construction and property interests of its recently-acquired subsidiary Beazer to B&B Asia for A$32½m (£14½m).
The sale to B&B Asia, a Hong Kong-quoted company controlled by German construction group Bilfinger and Berger, includes a 50 p.c. stake in a Brisbane development project and retirement homes from which Beazer will receive A$8m when they are sold by their new owners.
City: Better Boot
BUCKING the trend in the construction sector, Henry Boot & Sons, the Sheffield-based building contractor, developer and housebuilder, pushed pre-tax profits on from £6.36m to £6.77m in 1991, despite a slip in turnover from £131m to £130m.
With earnings up 21 p.c. to 91.9p a share and £14.6m of net cash under its belt, the group is lifting the dividend total from 25p to 27p, with the payment of a 19½p final on May 22.
City: UTA review
UNIT Trust Association chairman Barry Bateman announced a review of the association's objectives and constitution at its annual meeting yesterday.
Some of the association's 128 companies, with £50 billion under management, speculated this might mean closer co-operation with the Association of Investment Trust Companies (AITC).
But the AITC said ‘a merger is not on the agenda’.
City: Alcan losses
ALCAN Aluminium, the Canadian aluminium giant, saw pre-tax losses rise from US$10 to US$39m (£22m) in the first quarter of the year, following a US$110m dip in sales to US$1.84 billion (£1.04 billion).
City: ICI project
ICI's pharmaceutical company in America is investing $24.7m (£14m) at its Newark, Delaware, complex to handle production of Merrem, an injectible drug said to be capable of treating sepsis and infections contracted by people taking leukaemia treatment.
City: Alexander dives
ALEXANDER Workwear tumbled from a £5.3m profit to a £500,000 pre-tax loss last year, after charging £1½m (£1.3m) of exceptional rationalisation costs.
A 1.8p final dividend on June 26 sees the total cut from 5p to 3.6p.
City: Birse slides
THE shares of Birse Group tumbled 24 to 43p yesterday after the construction and property concern warned it was likely to record a loss for the year to end-April and intended passing the final dividend.
The company said the results are likely to include an £8½m exceptional loss resulting from the appointment of administrative receivers to its client, Quietwater, with which it had a contract to build a hotel and leisure complex on a golf course development in Essex.
City: Greycoat changes
GEOFFREY Wilson, executive chairman of property company Greycoat, will become non-executive from August 1.
Richard Guignard, finance director, becomes managing director finance, while Peter Thornton, joint managing director, becomes managing director property.
City: French offer
FRENCH engineering company AFE has made an agreed 45p a share cash offer for Cronite, valuing the troubled metal reclaimer and casting manufacturer at £7.3m.
AFE, which is quoted on the Paris bourse has received acceptances for 15 p.c. of Cronite's shares.
City: Laird cash call
LAIRD Group, is making a £41.4m one-for-five rights issue at 220p to invest in acquisitions and the expansion of its motor components businesses.
It announced a 27 p.c. fall in profits to £28.4m for 1991 but the first quarter of 1992 showed a ‘significant recovery’.
Earnings per share fell from 24.4p to 17½p but dividends are up 0.2p to 10.2p with a final of 6.2p payable June 10.
Letter to the City Editor: Independent route to tax benefits
SIR — With the introduction of independent taxation we thought it best to share our investment income equally so that both of us would be entitled to the full allowances.
My pensions from former employers, together with income from investments, brings me into the age allowance scale, while my wife receives a reduced state pension based on my contributions together with building society interest, which alone would not cover the allowances.
All the advice we have read assumes that the wife will claim a refund of tax on her low income, rather than share a husband's income so as to take full advantage of allowances.
Are there disadvantages in sharing income to benefit from allowance, rather than for a wife to claim a refund of tax paid on interest or dividends when her income is insufficient to take advantage of the allowances in full?
MG Kent TN4 8XP THE difficulty faced by many younger pensioners is that the husband's income derives mainly from occupational pensions and this cannot be transferred to the wife.
There are advantages in transferring the investments to your wife altogether so that the income arises to her if she has spare allowances, or if you are in the age allowance trap and she is not.
If your wife's total income is less than her personal allowance she can apply to have the building society interest paid gross, so that tax will not have to be reclaimed.
The only real difficulty if all of the savings are your wife's would be that, if she dies before you, the money will be frozen until probate of her will, which could cause temporary problems.
Cash in a joint account is not frozen when one party dies.
Letter to the City Editor: Implications of starting a trust
SIR — On coming into £40,000 I decided to put it into a trust for my grandchildren, to be paid out as each reaches the age of 24 years.
There seems to be a divergence of opinion on the tax position.
It appears that income tax is payable annually at 35 p.c. with no allowances and there is some sort of capital tax every five or 10 years.
MR Dorset DT6 5JD
THE 35 p.c. income tax rate applies to discretionary trusts and accumulation and maintenance settlements.
If your trust deed gives the grandchildren certain rights and does not allow the trustees to favour one over the other then only the basic rate of 25 p.c. should apply.
The 10-year charge is an inheritance tax levy on the value of the assets in a discretionary trust at each tenth anniversary and also on a capital payout.
ANSWERS supplied by chartered accountants Grant Thornton in association with The Daily Telegraph.
Grant Thornton are authorised by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales to carry on investment business.
This information is for guidance only.
Money-Go-Round: Justice for JP over disability claim INSURANCE
Victory in battle for compensation
By Duncan Hughes
AFTER paying disability insurance premiums for six years, a 55-year-old part-time magistrate's claim was refused because he failed to apply within 60 days of leaving his job.
But Alec Taylor, who worked for Michelin Tyres for 27 years, gained a £600 backdated payment after he decided to fight the insurance company for compensation.
Mr Taylor said he was encouraged to ‘dig in his heels’ after reading an article in Money-Go-Round about the successful fight of Annette Price whose home insurance claim was refused because insurers queried the locks on her front door — despite the fact that the burglars had entered and left by a window.
Mr Taylor had to resign on December 31, 1990, after heart trouble led to four coronary by-pass operations.
Mr Taylor, of Preston, who had both insurance and his mortgage with Cheshire Building Society, had forgotten about the cover until he received a letter from the society 11 months after his early retirement.
After the society refused his application he also failed in attempts to have his case taken up by the Building Societies Association and the insurance ombudsman.
Mr Taylor, who has two children, Patrick, 24, and Jennifer, 21, spends part of his retirement as a voluntary Justice of the Peace.
He said: ‘I undertook work as a Justice of the Peace because I think I have a highly developed sense of fair play.
I like to see the right thing being done.
In my own case no one can be expected to remember every fine detail of matters they have undertaken.
It angers me that an insurance company attempted to kick us in the teeth when all we were trying to do was protect ourselves.’
On November 28 last year Mr Taylor received a letter from the society confirming his monthly premiums of £2.50 for a monthly benefit of £50.
Within 25 days of receiving the letter he completed an application for cover — endorsed by his doctor and employer — claiming the benefit.
But in a letter dated January 7, the claim was rejected because it had not arrived within 120 days of his leaving Michelin.
In later correspondence the society reduced the exemption period to 60 days.
The company has since admitted this was a mistake.
The society told him in a letter: ‘We would advise that as you retired from work in December of last year, you are no longer eligible for cover under this policy.
We would advise that the policy has therefore been cancelled and a full refund of premiums for 1991 has been made to your mortgage account.’
Disability insurance is usually sold by the lender at the time a mortgage is taken out and provides cover in the event of the borrower being involved in an accident or developing a sickness which prevents them from continuing their mortgage payments.
Most societies offer the cover with differing benefits, premium rates and periods allowed to make claims.
For the Halifax, Britain's biggest building society, there is no exemption period if the claimant with their policies can prove they were covered during the time of the accident or sickness.
Abbey National, the second biggest mortgage lender, said claims for their cover must be made within four months.
A spokesman for Cheshire Building Society said: ‘We try to apply policies as best as we can but we do not have the right to vary conditions.
Policies have their conditions and we try to make them as user friendly as possible but if people do not read conditions it is difficult for us to say we will ignore those conditions.’
He recommends policyholders familiarise themselves with the conditions of their cover.
Questor Column: RMC a firmer mix in Germany
Edited by Marc Popiolek
THE severity of the recession in construction is sorting out the men from the boys in the industry.
RMC, the ready-mix concrete and aggregates group, is definitely one of the adults, keeping its balance thanks to a sensible policy of international diversification.
Germany outstripped Britain for the first time as the largest contributor last year.
Reunification and immigration have resulted in a massive housing programme and profits at the various RMC businesses rose 26 p.c.
Other international interests — from France and Spain to the Irish Republic and Israel — chipped in an unchanged but welcome £69.3m.
In this country RMC poured a fifth less ready-mix, an extremely steep decline.
Compared with the peak year of 1989, volumes are down 35 p.c.
RMC attacked costs here but profits, coming from the Great Mills DIY chain, Hales waste business and Thorpe Park amusement centre as well as building materials, plunged three fifths to £34.9m.
In 1989 it made £132m here and only £58m in Germany.
Group profits were £167m before tax, down 23 p.c.
Higher taxes and minority earnings in Germany drove earnings per share down a sharper 38 p.c. to 36p.
But interest payments were a healthy six times covered and the final dividend, payable on June 1, inches ½p up to 13.4p for a total of 20p, 1.8 times covered.
The finances of RMC are not in any way stretched.
Investing heavily in eastern Germany and more cautiously in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, it expects another good showing from Germany in 1992 as housebuilding progresses despite economic slowdown.
For Britain the group is cautious, expecting little if any relief.
Hoare Govett's Donald Anderson predicts a same-again profit of £170m and earnings of 37½p.
At 606p, up 18 yesterday, the yield is 4.4 p.c. and the forward multiple 16.
That may look fancy but RMC is well-led and in two or three years time should make decent money in Britain again.
Questor Column: Farnell keeps up pace of growth
FARNELL Electronics has confounded the doubters and increased earnings per share yet again in the recessionary 12 months to February 2, giving it 26 years of uninterrupted growth.
ESD, the electronic components distributor bought from Northern Telecom last July, accounted for the tiny rise in earnings per share to 16½p (versus 16.3p) on a fall in pre-tax profits to £32.7m (£33.8m).
The company is celebrating with an increase in the final dividend, payable on July 6, to 3.2p (3p) making a 5 p.c. rise in the full-year payment to 5.8p.
During the seven months of its inclusion, ESD added £5m at the operating line, a £1½m benefit to profits after financing charges on the cash paid.
Henry Elstone, finance director, summed it up yesterday when he declared that at £61m it had been a bargain.
A drop in the tax charge from 37 p.c. to 33½ p.c., thanks in part to some windfall factors, helped earnings too.
The core distribution business, providing a kind of mail order service in components, put in a firm performance, thanks to improved margins on the many small orders people make in a recession, and reduced losses at a new German start-up.
The manufacturing side, however, suffered a near-two thirds drop in profits to £2½m.
The question for investors now is whether the shares, excellent performers through the recession, can keep up the pace in a recovery.
ESD has potential, manufacturing should recover and there is no reason to suppose Farnell should not be successful in Germany, although it is still early days.
On a prospective multiple of 16 at 302p, assuming £38m pre-tax profits this year, the shares are about where they should be.
City Diary: Heseltine: president self-elected
MICHAEL Heseltine, the Trade Secretary, has made his first decision in the new office.
He has told civil servants at the DTI to address him henceforth as president rather than as the traditional Secretary of State.
He apparently wishes the official title of Secretary of State for Trade and Industry to be dropped in favour of the archaic President of the Board of Trade.
The old ship logo of the board was revived last year.
The last Trade Secretary to use it was Lord Cockfield, but his successor in 1982, Cecil Parkinson, abandoned it completely.
However, even Cockfield regarded it only as a courtesy title.
‘Staff in the department all find it highly amusing, particularly as it's his first act in the job,’ says a DTI insider.
‘Now we have a Prime Minister and a President.
Is this some sort of bloodless coup?’
City Diary: Odd case of the missing directors
HANSON'S four newest directors are missing from the group's advertisement in the Arthur Andersen Corporate Register of British companies and their directors.
Publication date for the directory was last month and the editorial listing for Hanson appears to be up to date.
But the company's own advert two pages away does not mention director Christopher Collins, who joined last May, or non-executives Simon Keswick, David Hardy and Jonathan Scott Barrett, appointed last September.
‘Thank you for pointing this out,’ says Collins.
‘Perhaps their deadline was too early.’
The directory's advertising sales manager, Andrew Parsons, disagrees.
‘We sent them a fax of the entry in late December,’ he claims.
‘We had no response.’
A FREUDIAN slip by Jacques Attali, president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, at the Bank's annual meeting in Budapest yesterday.
Speaking of the environmental problems hitting eastern Europe, Attali referred to the pollution of underground waters ‘par les Anglais’.
Following a roar of laughter, he quickly corrected this to ‘les Engrais’ -fertilisers.
City Diary: Trials and tribulations
THE Roux brothers' former restaurant in Old Bailey, renamed Le Sous Sol after they sold it in 1989, is in administrative receivership.
Under the Rouxs, it was called Le Gamin and became known for inexpensive but elegant food in cramped surroundings.
It was bought by former sandwich bar owner Harry Haddad, who also owned the wine bar next door, Harry's Bar (no relation).
‘I built the business up after I bought it but as the City went down everything else went down with it,’ mourns Haddad, who spent £600,000 buying and refurbishing Le Gamin.
Harry's Bar has gone too and joint receiver Lee Manning, of Buchler Phillips, says the pair will fetch ‘hundreds of thousands, not millions’.
City Diary: Old Blue Eyes pasta sell-by date
OLD Blue Eyes has failed where Slightly Younger Blue Eyes continues to thrive.
Frank Sinatra was told at the weekend that the four pasta sauces named after him are being withdrawn.
Produced by Armanino Foods of Distinction, they suffered from the reluctance of cash-strapped shoppers to pay for premium brands last year.
‘In the last six or eight months, sales really deteriorated,’ says chief executive William Armanino.
Meanwhile, Paul Newman's Marinara sauces and dressings continue to do well, though well established before the recession.
City Diary: Bank error in his favour
THERE is at least one satisfied customer as a result of the strike at Ireland's four main banks, now into its second week.
A man was observed on the steps of one of the banks in Dublin's College Green last week, waving a new cheque book and jeering at the pickets.
The pickets, though, were unimpressed.
‘They'll never last doing that sort of thing,’ remarked one.
‘We've been refusing that man a cheque book for months but he just went inside and someone from senior management, who hasn't been behind a counter for years, just hands one over without a thought.’
City Diary: Bigger and better in Texas
DALLAS lawyer Bryan Garner has started a contest to find the worst examples of legal writing in Texas.
A brief filed with the Texas Supreme Court said: ‘For the purposes of paragraph (3), an organisation described in paragraph (2) shall be deemed to include an organisation described in section 501(c) (4),(5), or (6) which would be described in paragraph (2) if it were an organisation described in section 501 (c)(3).
The Market: Takeovers once more talk of the town
By PAUL MURPHY
IT was almost like old times yesterday.
First, Hongkong & Shanghai Bank came out with disappointing takeover terms for Midland Bank (paper worth 378p a share) triggering the obvious suggestion that spurned partner Lloyds Bank will produce a better, possibly cash-based offer.
Then the Kuwait Investment Organisation put 60m Midland shares up for grabs through brokers Hoare Govett, at a discount rate of 362p.
Hoare could attract takers for only about 30m, the placing was abandoned and another attempt will be made today once dealers have an indication of how Hongkong Bank's share price has faired overnight in the Far East.
Yesterday, the market was left with the impression that Midland might not be worth quite as much as analysts had hoped and the shares were marked back 7 to 365p.
Lloyds closed down 5 at 390p.
Frustrated in that sector, speculators turned to every other potential bid target in sight, even taking the chance to roll out a few genuinely new stories, presumably cooked up on one of those many idle dealing days during the election campaign.
Over lunchtime, both Kwik Save and Nurdin & Peacock were pumped up remorselessly, gaining 15 to 568p and 12 to 166p respectively.
Tarmac, the hottest bid tip recently, added 10 to 135p ahead of year-end figures today, when all eyes will be on the dividend payment.
Then came the Ranks Hovis McDougall story.
S G Warburg was rumoured to be pushing the stock, citing an imminent takeover.
Sources at the investment bank said it was doing no such thing, although the shares neverthe less ended the session 6 ahead at 227p.
There is a consensus in the City that the Ranks Hovis management lacks both panache and strategic direction.
And while profit performance remains poor, few pundits were willing to suggest a likely predator.
Perhaps the most entertaining tale came late afternoon, with anonymous telephone calls stating that a nosey employee of Marks & Spencer (down 1 at 329p) having been called in to deputy chairman Clinton Silver's office, saw a piece of paper suggesting the retailer was set to bid the debt-laden supermarket group, Asda (off ½ at 31p).
‘Total utter rubbish,’ came the denial from Mr Silver's boss, Sir Richard Greenbury.
Away from these pockets of excitement, business was relatively quiet and dealers found themselves frustrated in attempts to drive the FT-SE 100 index convincingly beyond the 2600 level.
Although early day weakness among the leaders, inspired by profit takers, evaporated after a series of small ‘buy side’ programme trades, generate any genuine investment interest was poor.
An eventual 9.5 point gain on the Footsie to 2600.5 was mainly due to a strong early-session bounce on Wall Street.
However, the fact that the futures contract for June settlement continued to trade at a 26-point premium to ‘fair value’(23 points — the notional premium for buying all Footsie stocks now, but not paying for two and a half months) indicates that most pundits see the market making further headway after Easter.
Six weeks ago, life was going swimmingly for holders of BM Group.
The shares were coasting along at above 400p and looking like going better after a string of tipsters recommendations.
Then a client of brokers Robert Fleming appeared, aggressively selling a large line of stock.
Market makers took fright, presuming someone knew something they did not, and the price tumbled 30 p.c.
Late last week dealers decided things had gone far enough.
On Monday, the shares jumped 30p, squeezing out a few short position takers and pushing the price on another 24 to 370p.
Former engineering group Sunleigh held at 8p as the company announced a take-up level of just 11½ p.c. for its recent open offer.
The balance of the new issue, raising money to buy unquoted racing dingy specialists Gavel Securities, will go to institutional placees.
Shareholders nodded-through the acquisition and capital raising on Monday and the deal is due to be completed tomorrow, giving Sunleigh a new role in life as a leisure company.
With sterling continuing to gain ground against both the dollar and the German mark, vindictive traders again spent their time picking on stocks with high overseas earnings.
Guinness, in particular, was in the frame, down 13 at 588p by the close.
Allied-Lyons continued to react to the Office of Fair Trading's shot across the bows of the brewing industry on Monday, the shares reversing 16 to 606p.
Among the oil stocks, Shell was hit by a broker's downgrading, losing 6 to 462p.
There was a panic in Aviva Petroleum, with a rumour about the company's Colombian interests knocking 40 p.c. off the share price at one stage.
It closed down 38 at a sickly 111p.
Gilts dealers reported signs of indigestion in early trading, although demand picked up later in the session and, in the absence of any new demands from the government broker, longer dated issues managed to end the day about £⅛ better.
The Market:
Capita Group, the management services company best known for collecting poll tax and operating TV licence detector vans but which makes most of its money operating computers for local authorities, has been given a new lease of life by John Major's re-election.
Yesterday, the stock stood at 298p as the annual report and accounts were sent to investors.
The market expects a jump in profits from £3.4m to £4.2m pre-tax this year and news of further contract awards, together with a few senior management appointments, is expected soon.
Born through a £340,000 management buyout five years ago, the company is now capitalised at £45m.
Property: The frustrated architects just waiting for a call
Conditions are perfect to commission individual house designs
By TOM ROWLAND
HOMES built by their proud owners tend to be ghastly, says the president of the Royal Institute of British Architects.
The low standard of design — generally weak pastiches of past styles or contemporary ranch houses — has prompted the RIBA to designate this week Individual Homes Week.
It should also drum up more work for a profession that has been badly hit by the recession.
It is hard to understand why the RIBA has to promote the idea of employing architects to design individual homes — only the British seem to resist architect involvement.
In America and most other West European countries, young architects generally cut their teeth by designing and building houses for private clients.
In Britain it is unusual, and few see the houses they have designed actually built.
Richard MacCormac, the recently installed president of the RIBA, would like to see an end to the British passion for period houses.
It wasn't always this way, he points out.
The Georgians and the Victorians chose to live in contemporary buildings.
Now there seems to be little demand for good design, and little chance of getting planning permission when a client who wants quality is found.
‘The taste of the British in housing is like the taste of the British in food in the Fifties,’ MacCormac says.
‘We lag behind the Continent, and ours is not a very visual culture anyway.’
Two main factors stand in the way of adventurous design, MacCormac believes: ‘In the inner cities, the cost of land has been so high that individual homes have not been economic; in the country, local planning committees are one of the big barriers.
They are often composed of people who have no taste.’
But fashions change, and economic pressures mean that more new houses are likely to be designed by architects in the next few years.
Sites will be easier to find on the edges of existing settlements as low-grade agricultural land is made more easily available for development.
Building costs have nosedived.
At the same time speculative builders will be reluctant to slide back into the nightmare of the late Eighties, when they had huge land banks which were decreasing in value by the month secured on loans that were costing more.
Buyers were nowhere to be seen.
So many locations that would before have been snapped up by the professionals will be available to the amateur.
And with land prices set to fall further, the opportunities will be there in plenty.
MacCormac believes that rural councils will allow more innovative designs to go through as more such houses are built in the cities.
Much existing self-build is stodgy and dull.
Now that it is a more viable way of getting the best possible house, young design talent could quickly transform domestic building.
MacCormac has designed only one private house, a low glass and wood structure in Blackheath, an area of London with some startlingly good modern buildings.
Looking in from the street is a great pleasure, the eye being led through interesting vistas of rooms and courtyards within.
Employing an architect need not be tremendously expensive, he claims.
‘The architect has to have his fee, but it will usually account for no more than 10 per cent of the building cost.’
Property: Helpful hints on doing it your way DIY REVOLUTION
Tom Rowland on the first Daily Telegraph Individual Homes Show, which is to be held in Birmingham this Easter weekend
By TOM ROWLAND
THIS YEAR nearly 20,000 houses will be built by the people who are going to live in them.
Up to 50 times that number will be renovated or extended by their owners.
It used to be called the ‘self-build movement’, and the wearing of beards and open-toed sandals was close to compulsory.
Its little brother, DIY, required devotees to worship power drills and cover any exposed wall with glazed tiles.
In recent years, a quiet revolution has been taking place as technical changes and new marketing methods for a vast range of home products have increased consumer choice and introduced alternative ways of home building.
More people have decided that the only way to get the house they want to live in is to become more involved in its construction.
This can mean commissioning an architect to manage a building project from scratch, leaving the day-to-day technicalities to professionals — or, at the extreme, laying every brick and nailing every joint yourself.
Many homeowners with DIY skills get the professionals in to do the tricky bits and supply the labour, or save money by managing the project themselves.
Obviously, the more DIY, the more money saved.
But that isn't always the incentive that drives the do-it-yourself home builder: it can also mean being able to afford the things you really want.
For example, little luxuries may cost more to install, but can actually reduce fuel bills.
Continental-style pressurised hot water systems in place of the conventional header tank, underfloor heating instead of radiators, condensing boilers in place of standard designs quickly pay for themselves.
Ecologically sound materials, such as natural fibres for fabrics, damp courses that breathe with the building and plant-based paints are increasingly in demand, even if they add to the cost.
All this — and a great deal more — has been put under one roof at the first Daily Telegraph Individual Homes Show, to be held at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham over Easter.
No matter what you want for your home, from a high technology water system to a scrolled Edwardian radiator made from original castings, it should be there.
There is a certain elegance in having a state-of-the-art, pressurised hot water tank feeding a big round shower head that could be straight out of the Savoy.
The show is full of such contrasts, possibly the most striking being the demonstration of spinning crown glass, next to ultra-modern titanium low-energy glass displays.
You can hire an architect or get advice on digging drains.
You can buy an off-the-peg timber frame house or discover how to design and build your own house of stone.
It will be the biggest and best show of its kind to be staged in Britain.
There will also be a free daily programme of seminars covering finance, finding land, planning and design, project management and energy efficiency.
The Daily Telegraph Individual Homes Show opens at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham at 10.30 am on Saturday April 18.
It will run until 6 pm each day over the bank holiday, and to 5 pm on Tuesday.
Property: Men with lots to smile about
By CHRIS PARTRIDGE
DESPITE the continuing property slump, auction houses reported booming business at their March sales.
Allsop's auction was a record sell-out, with all but two of 111 lots sold for a total of £6.3 million, and other auction houses reported successful sales with average prices well above the guides.
The success of the auctions is certain to convince many building societies that this may be one of the best ways to unload the vast numbers of repossessed properties they hold.
The Halifax, which has been experimenting with auctions for several months, had no fewer than 82 repossessed houses and flats in the sale.
It sold every one, raising a total of £3.6 million.
Kayersbridge Farm in Hurst, Berkshire, was making its second appearance at auction: auctioneer Gary Murphy had sold it in December for £262,000 to a bidder who failed to come up with the money.
At the second attempt the bidding rose to £280,000, Murphy commenting as he tapped the gavel: ‘Prices seem to be appreciating rapidly in Hurst!’
He must be hoping that the new buyer will complete this time.
Star turn was a graveyard watchman's cottage in Drury Lane, in London's Covent Garden, previously featured on this page.
The guide price was £85,000, but furious bidding pushed it to £127,000.
At Edwin Evans, James Coker reported a brisk sale last month, selling 60 per cent of the lots for a total of £2 million, with a considerable number of those remaining being sold to underbidders.
Coker's joke lot, a former gents' lavatory with river views in Putney, was sold to a private buyer for £7,500.
‘The good stuff and the cheap stuff sold well, with only the properties in the middle sticking,’ Coker says.
An odd feature was the popularity of tenanted houses, bought as investments.
In Northumberland, property auctions are rare, according to local surveyors George F. White, whose sale last month was packed.
Eighty-five per cent of the lots were sold either under the hammer or by private negotiation.
Prices ranged from £32,000 for a railway cottage in typical British Rail condition (terrible) to Togston Hall at £200,000.
The price for the first seems high and for the second low for a house with six acres and a lodge, but it used to be the headquarters of British Coal's opencast mining subsidiary, which cannot have done it any good.
Surprises send Jackpot soaring
By John Oaksey
A MEMORABLE Lester Piggott triumph (on Fylde Flyer in the Abernant Stakes) and a somewhat controversial Pat Eddery defeat (on Alhamad in the Constant Security Maiden Stakes) played crucial parts in the survival at Newmarket yesterday of a £195,497 Tote Jackpot pool.
A pool of close to £300,000 is expected this afternoon when the card looks anything but straightforward.
Just a few more upsets like yesterday's and the Tote's all-time record of £½ million could be in danger.
With Alhamad already 25–1 for the Derby and Henry Cecil in all-conquering form, it was hardly surprising that Prince Faisal's Slip Anchor colt should start an odds-on favourite, the ‘banker’ for many Jackpot permutations.
They looked pretty secure when he and Eddery went clear a furlong out.
The champion jockey had been waving the whip in his left hand and when he put it down inside the last furlong, I must say that the clear impression from behind my glasses was that he thought the race was over.
If so, he was wrong — but so, it seems, was I.
At the inquiry, called by the stewards after Willie Carson had driven Iywaan home along the rail, Eddery explained that Alhamad had been hanging badly left throughout the last half-mile.
He also told the stewards that he knew Carson was coming and that Alhamad ‘had no more to give.’
The explanation was accepted and the Jackpot permutations were gone beyond recall.
A much more glorious surprise was achieved on Fylde Flyer by Piggott after he and the rest of the Abernant Stakes field had been kept waiting in a cold, damp wind while Snaadee took his own unconscionable time about wandering down to the start.
The Rowley Mile was certainly no place for a scantily-clad 56-year-old, but needless to say in Piggott's extraordinary case it made not the slightest difference.
Fylde Flyer, on whom Piggott was deputising for Jack Berry's injured stable-jockey John Carroll, was still lifted home with the old familiar magical rhythm and skill.
George Duffield, only 10 years younger than Lester, did his energetic best on the well-backed runner-up Case Law.
But they were up against history and another well-backed Jackpot candidate went down.
Garah, who split a pastern last year, overcame a slow start to win the Stetchworth Maiden Stakes.